Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/reviews/starfest.html 
July 1997, Volume 1, Number 1 
pp. 15-16 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 1997, ISSN 1094-3501                                                                                                                                                17 
REVIEW OF STAR FESTIVAL 
Program title: Star Festival (version 1.0 for Macintosh) 
Distributor: Botticelli Interactive 
104 South Street, Boston, MA 02111 
Phone: (617) 695-1960 
Fax: (617) 695-1962 
Program information: http://www-japan.mit.edu/starfest/ 
Download a demo: http://www.botticelli.com/downloa d.html 
E-mail: StarFest@botticelli.com 
System requirements: Mac 68040 or higher, System 7.1 or later with Japanese 
Language Kit installed, or Kanji Talk 7.1 or later, 
QuickTime 2.5 (included), 16 MB RAM, 4X CD-ROM 
driver preferred. 
Price: US$150.00 (S/H: $5.00) 
Reviewed by Tomo Yanagimachi, University of Minnesota 
 
I was at the Association of Teachers of Japanese annual meeting in Boston in 1994 when a group of 
Japanese language instructors from MIT demonstrated a prototype of a multimedia CALL program which 
impressed everyone present. After a few years of waiting, the commercial version of the program has 
finally become available as Star Festival (hereafter SF), a culture and language CD-ROM for learners of 
Japanese as well as for a general audience with no background in the language. 
SF differs from most other Japan- or Japanese-language-related software currently available on the 
market in that it includes an important but often neglected feature of successful language and culture 
learning: authentic linguistic and cultural materials are presented in context. SF revolves around 20 
episodes which chronologically document MIT Professor Shigeru Miyagawa's (executive producer of SF) 
return to his home town, Hiratsuka, Japan, after 30 years' absence. He visits the train station, his 
childhood house, neighborhood stores, fish markets, and the family graveyard, before his stay culminates 
in the final episode on the Tanabata Star Festival in the town. Each episode consists of a beautifully 
produced documentary video clip with an English commentary, the professor's old family pictures, and 
culture and history notes. Some episodes also include an interview with local people, with Japanese and 
English subtitles. Each episode is so well integrated into the main theme of the software and so highly 
contextualized that you easily get immersed in the stories, and even start to feel as if you were making the 
journey with the professor. 
Another advantage of SF is that its authentic audio and visual materials provide users with opportunities 
to interact with real language, people, and culture. The software's high sound and image quality also work 
well to increase the level of authenticity and presence. SF can give users a virtual homestay experience, 
Reviewed by Tomo Yanagimachi Review of  Star Festival 
 
Language Learning & Technology 18 
with the host family telling interesting about their life and history, showing you around the town; and 
introducing you to local people who speak in authentic language. 
The software, unfortunately, also has a few drawbacks. First, I found it strange to find culture and history 
notes on items like hara-kiri and Mt. Fuji; these items are not just culturally stereotyped but also have no 
direct relevance to the theme of the episodes in which they are presented. A more focused selection of the 
entries should have been made, rather than trying to cover and present too many facets of Japanese life 
and history superficially. Culture notes in many episodes are, however, nicely interwoven with the theme 
of each episode. 
 
One example is the "Fruit Shop" episode where 
users encounter an interview with an owner-wife of 
a fruit shop and then given culture notes through 
the written narratives of the professor's mother on 
items like "working in the family business" and 
"the role of daughter-in-law" in the Japanese 
family. 
If every culture note were presented this way, users 
could easily relate what they are learning to an 
immediately available person, making learning 
more meaningful and effective. 
Another drawback of SF is its not so user-friendly 
control panel. Although some users might like its 
futuristic, Star Trek-like design. I personally had a hard time figuring out how to get into the episodes that 
I wanted to look at. Furthermore, no alphabetic or thematic list of all the culture notes or search functions 
are given, so users have to go into each episode and look for particular items there. However, these 
drawbacks are relatively minor and are far outweighed by SF's advantages. 
Given SF's major theme and extensive explanations of various aspects of Japanese culture and history, the 
software is especially recommended for pre-college level instructors who want to introduce these aspects 
to their students. It is also possible to use the program's documentary film clips and interviews as 
materials for language skills activities in intermediate to advanced-level college classes. 
In summary, the arrival of Star Festival not only provides learners who are interested in Japanese 
language and culture with an effective study tool, but also shows language instructors what multimedia 
CALL programs can potentially offer the language teaching profession. 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Tomo Yanagimachi has been involved in the Technology and L2 Learning, as well as the Less 
Commonly Taught Languages (LCTL) projects at the Center for Advanced Research on Language 
Acquisition (CARLA) of the University of Minnesota the past three years. He recently finished his 
dissertation on the acquisition of "zero pronoun use" by learners of Japanese. He will start teaching in the 
Japanese program of the University of Wisconsin, Madison in Fall, 1997. 
E-mail: yana0001@tc.umn.edu 
