Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num2/news/
January 1998, Volume 1, Number 2
pp. 16-19
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference)
Copyright © 1998, ISSN 1094-3501 16
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS
This page includes announcements from the organizations sponsoring LLT. More complete listings of
announcements can be found from the Applied Linguistics Virtual Library, the Agora Language
Marketplace, and the Centre for Language Teaching and Research's International Conference Schedule.
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource
Center (NFLRC)
Each year, the NFLRC offers intensive summer institutes for foreign language professionals. The 1998
NFLRC Summer Institute,  Advancing Language Immersion Education: Pacific Perspectives &
International Applications, is taking place from July 6 through July 24, 1998. Immersion educators
representing all languages and instructional contexts, including indigenous, heritage, and foreign language
immersion, are encouraged to apply. Application deadline: February 20, 1998. For more information, visit
our website.
Recent publications from the Hawai'i NFLRC include the popular Chinese Language Video Lessons for
Classroom Use (text plus videos). In Fall 1997 we added the following to our collection of materials for
less commonly taught languages: Authentic Tagalog Video, Nah, Baca! Authentic Indonesian Readings
(Vol. 1), and Intermediate Reader in Technical and Scientific Japanese. Check out the rest of our
publications -- you'll find technical reports, research notes, language teaching materials (text, video, CD-
ROM), and online articles.
Michigan State University Center for Language Education
and Research (CLEAR)
CLEAR sponsors summer institutes which provide foreign language educators opportunities to
collaborate on projects such as materials development and integrating technology into the classroom.
Summer 1998 institutes include: Writing in the Foreign Language Classroom, Content-Based Instruction
and Business Language Materials Development, CALL Materials Development for Less Commonly
Taught Languages, and Technology and the Internet in Foreign Language Instruction. Information and
applications for these institutes are available from the CLEAR office and on CLEAR's webpage.
Resources available from CLEAR in 1998 include: Pronunciación y Fonética, a series of CALL lessons
designed to improve Spanish pronunciation; Chinese CALL materials for business language and
language/culture; a tutor's manual for teaching African languages "on-demand"; an Interactive Video-
Based Training Module on "In-House" Test Development; a promotional video for use in secondary
schools -- Foreign Languages: Doors to Opportunities; tutorial software targeting pragmatic knowledge of
German; tasks for Communication and Grammar in Japanese; tasks for Communication and Grammar in
Thai.
News From Our Sponsors
Language Learning & Technology 17
Apprentissage des Langues et Systèmes d'Information et de
Communication (ALSIC)
ALSIC (Language Learning and Information and Communication Systems) is an electronic journal in
French for researchers and practitioners in fields related to applied linguistics, didactics,
psycholinguistics, educational sciences, computational linguistics, and computer science.
The journal gives priority to papers from the French-speaking community and/or in French, but it also
regularly invites papers in other languages so as to strengthen scientific and technical exchanges between
linguistic communities that too often remain separate. The editorial board of ALSIC invite you to contact
them for any prospective contributions at the following electronic address: alsic@lib.univ-fcomte.fr.
Australian Technology Enhanced Language Learning Consortium (ATELL)
ATELL is sponsoring the Inaugural WorldCALL Conference: "CALL to Creativity," to be held at The
University of Melbourne, Australia, from July 13-17, 1998. The objective of the conference is to promote
and develop national and international networks for CALL research and practice. With more than 500
delegates expected and interest levels already high, WorldCALL will offer unprecedented access to
innovators, educators, and entrepreneurs in the field. Contact WorldCALL for further details, or by e-
mail.
Center for Advanced Research on Language Acquisition,
University of Minnesota (CARLA)
CARLA is the coordinating office for a number of grant-funded programs devoted to research and
program development in the areas of second language teaching, learning and assessment. Currently our
projects encompass computer adaptive testing, language and culture research, second language
articulation, immersion education, and teacher training in technology.
CARLA also maintains a database listing 300 languages taught in North America, and sponsors listservs
for teachers of less commonly taught languages. To share the latest research and program opportunities
for foreign language and ESL teachers, CARLA sponsors annual summer institutes and publishes a series
of working papers.
News From Our Sponsors
Language Learning & Technology 18
Computer Assisted Language Instruction Consortium
(CALICO)
Since its inception in 1983, CALICO has served as an international forum for language teachers who
want to develop and utilize the potential of advanced technology to support their teaching and research
needs. Through its Annual Symposia, Special Interest Groups (SIGs),  CALICO Journal, CALICO
Monograph Series, CALICO Resource Guide, and numerous other publications, CALICO provides both
leadership and perspective in the ever-changing field of computer-assisted instruction.
The strength of CALICO derives from the enthusiasm, creativity, and diversity of its members. It
comprises language teachers and researchers from universities, military academies, community colleges,
K-12 schools, government agencies, and commercial enterprises. To learn more about CALICO activities
and how to participate in them, visit the CALICO homepage at http://www.calico.org.
European Association for Computer Assisted Language
Learning (EUROCALL)
EUROCALL is an association of language teaching professionals from Europe and worldwide aiming to:
• Promote the use of foreign languages within Europe
• Provide a European focus for all aspects of the use of technology for language learning
• Enhance the quality, dissemination, and efficiency of CALL materials
We also disseminate information via the ReCALL Journal and other publications, organise special interest
meetings and annual conferences, and work towards the exploitation of electronic communications
systems. For those involved in education and training, EUROCALL provides information and advice on
all aspects of the use of technology for language learning.
Forthcoming EUROCALL conferences:
• EUROCALL 98, Leuven, Belgium, 10-12 September 1998
• EUROCALL 99, Besançon, France, 16-18 September 1999
For full details, contact us at:  http://www.hull.ac.uk/cti/eurocall.htm.
International Association for Language Learning Technology
(IALLT)
Established in 1965, IALL is an organization of professionals in a variety of fields who are committed to
supporting and extending language learning, teaching, and research through the use of technology. Its
members include directors and staff of language labs, resource or media centers and grant projects,
language teachers at all levels, developers and vendors of hardware and software, and interested others.
IALL offers a software database, LLTI listserve (Language Learning and Technology International), and
publications such as IALL Journal, IALL Lab Design Kit, and IALL Lab Management Manual. Contact
Tom Browne for IALL publications or Ed Dente for membership information.
