Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num2/article1/
January 1998, Volume 1, Number 2
pp. 23-40
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference)
Copyright © 1998, ISSN 1094-3501 23
INPUT VS. OUTPUT PRACTICE IN EDUCATIONAL SOFTWARE
FOR SECOND LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
Noriko Nagata
Department of Modern and Classical Languages
University of San Francisco
ABSTRACT
This paper presents an experiment concerning the relative effectiveness of computer assisted
comprehension practice and production practice in the acquisition of a second language. Two
computer programs were developed: (a) an input-focused program providing students with
explicit grammatical instruction and comprehension exercises and (b) an output-focused program
providing the same grammatical instruction together with production exercises. The results of the
study show that the output-focused group performed significantly better than the input-focused
group for the production of Japanese honorifics and equally well for the comprehension of these
structures. The study supports Swain's argument that there are roles for output in second language
acquisition that are independent of comprehensible input.
INTRODUCTION
There is increasing interest in the use of computer-assisted language instruction, for obvious reasons. The
extensive exercises and drills required in second language instruction place significant demands on class
time, and students must wait for feedback on their exercises until the instructor corrects them. Computer-
assisted language instruction, in conjunction with contemporary natural language processing technology,
holds out the promise of unlimited, immediate feedback pinpointed to the specific grammatical errors
made by the student (Nagata, 1993, 1995, 1996, 1997b). But, even though it is technologically feasible
for a computer to provide individualized grammatical feedback, there remains an important empirical
question about how the exercises should be formatted to optimize their instructional effectiveness in
promoting different sorts of competence for different types of target structures. Several such studies have
been performed.
Doughty (1991) compares three kinds of computerized instruction, in which all subjects were presented
the same reading texts on the computer, but the rule-oriented instructional group received explanations of
the grammatical rules in relative-clause constructions, the meaning-oriented instructional group was
encouraged to focus on both the content and structure, and the control group was merely exposed to the
reading texts. While both the rule-oriented instructional group and the meaning-oriented instructional
group improved equally well in relativization ability and significantly better than the control group, the
meaning-oriented instructional group performed best in comprehending the reading texts.
N. Ellis (1993) performed a computerized experiment to compare the effectiveness of explicit (Rule),
structured (Rule & Instances), and implicit (Random) programs to teach the soft mutation construction in
Welsh. The Rule group and the Rule & Instances group received instruction in grammatical rules, but
only the Rule & Instances group was shown how each rule applied to two instances of vocabulary.
Afterward, all three groups were presented Welsh phrases on the computer screen and were asked to type
in the appropriate English translation for each phrase. The Rule & Instances group performed best on
well-formedness judgments and the Random group performed worst.
DeKeyser's study (1995) employed a computer program to compare explicit-deductive instruction with
implicit-inductive instruction. Both the explicit-deductive group and the implicit-inductive group were
Noriko Nagata Input vs. Output Practice in Educational Software…
Language Learning & Technology 24
presented pictures with corresponding sentences in Implexan (a miniature linguistic system) on the
computer, but only the explicit-deductive group was provided explanations on Implexan grammatical
rules. The grammatical rules included two types: straightforward ("categorical") rules and fuzzy rules
("prototypicality patterns" that cannot be completely reduced to an abstract rule). On the final production
test, the explicit-deductive subjects performed significantly better than the implicit-inductive subjects for
the straightforward rules, while no such advantage was observed in the fuzzy rules1.
Robinson's study (1996) employed computerized instruction to teach both simple and complex structures
of English, under several conditions. All subjects were presented the same target sentences on the
computer, but, for example, the rule-instructed subjects were asked metalinguistic questions regarding the
sentences, the rule-search subjects were asked if they identified any rule in the given sentences, and the
implicit subjects were instructed to memorize the target sentences. The rule-instructed subjects performed
significantly better than the rule-search subjects and the implicit subjects for the simple structure on the
grammaticality judgment test. The rule-instructed subjects also outperformed the other groups for the
complex structure although the difference was statistically significant only between the rule-instructed
subjects and the rule-search subjects.
Nagata's study (1997a) employed a computer program providing fill-in-the-blank exercises to practice
Japanese particles. Two types of feedback were implemented: metalinguistic feedback (explaining
metalinguistic rules in response to particle errors) and English translations (providing English equivalents
to the Japanese particles). The results of the study suggest that ongoing metalinguistic feedback is more
effective than first-language translation feedback in producing the Japanese particles.
This paper presents a new study investigating the relative effectiveness of production (output) exercises
and comprehension (input) exercises presented and graded by personal computers. Although the target
structures are Japanese honorifics, the results should interest anyone concerned with computer-assisted
language instruction (CALI) and the role of input and output practice in second language acquisition.
THE STUDY
Theoretical Background
Many studies have investigated the role of input in second language acquisition (e.g., Ellis, R., 1981;
Faerch & Kasper, 1986; Gass & Madden, 1985; Krashen, 1980, 1985, 1987; Loschky, 1994; Sharwood
Smith, 1993; White, 1987). It seems that the role of output has received less attention. According to
Krashen (1987), "comprehensible input"2 and the affective state are the true causes of language
acquisition. On this hypothesis, production exercises would be relevant to language acquisition only
insofar as they lower affective barriers or provide additional comprehensible input. VanPatten and
Cadierno (1993a, 1993b) examined the effects of two types of instruction, traditional instruction and
processing instruction, in both interpreting and producing Spanish object pronouns in OVS and OV order.
The traditional instruction involved grammatical explanations and output practice, while the processing
instruction involved grammatical explanations and comprehension practice. These two kinds of
instruction were also different in the grammatical information provided3 and the instructional approach
adopted.4 The result of their study indicates that the processing group performed significantly better than
the traditional group on comprehension post-tests and equally well on production post-tests. VanPatten
and Cadierno conclude that "instruction is apparently more beneficial when it is directed at how learners
perceive and process input rather than when instruction is focused on practice via output," (1993a, p. 54;
1993b, p. 240).5
Swain (1985, p. 248), however, argues that "there are roles for output in second language acquisition that
are independent of comprehensible input," (see also Swain and Lapkin, 1995). The results of her study
(1985) indicate that sixth-grade French immersion students perform similarly to native speakers on those
aspects of discourse and sociolinguistic competence which do not rely heavily on grammar for their
Noriko Nagata Input vs. Output Practice in Educational Software…
Language Learning & Technology 25
realization but their grammatical performance is not equivalent to that of native speakers (p. 251). The
immersion students in her study received enough comprehensible input, but their "comprehensible
output"6 was very limited. Swain conjectures that producing the language, as opposed to simply
comprehending the language, may force the learner to move from semantic processing to syntactic
processing, thereby facilitating more grammatical competence. Swain also refers to the phenomenon of
individuals who can understand a language and yet can only produce limited utterances in it: a ninth-
grade immersion student said, "I understand everything anyone says to me, and I can hear in my head
how I should sound when I talk, but it never comes out that way," (p. 248). This indicates that
comprehension does not necessarily transfer to production.
DeKeyser and Sokalski (1996) replicated Van Patten and Cadierno's study using two different target
structures: the Spanish direct object clitics (the same structure used in Van Patten and Cadierno's study)
and the Spanish conditional, which is more complex and difficult to produce. DeKeyser and Sokalski's
study eliminated extra variables by providing the same grammatical instruction and exercise content, so
the comparison was entirely between comprehension practice and production practice. The results of the
immediate post-test show that for object clitics, the input practice group performed better in the
comprehension tasks and the output practice group performed better in the production tasks. For the
conditional, the output practice group outperformed the input practice group in both the production and
the comprehension tasks. These differences faded in the long term, however. The results indicate that "the
relative effectiveness of production versus comprehension practice depends on the morphosyntactic
complexity of the structure in question as well as on the delay between practice and testing" (DeKeyser
and Sokalski 1996).
The present study investigates the relative effectiveness of comprehension and production practice in the
acquisition of Japanese honorifics, both formally and conceptually complex structures of Japanese.7 The
following describes the Japanese honorific system briefly.
The Japanese Honorific System
Japanese honorifics (keigo) have traditionally been sub-classified into respectful words (sonkeigo) and
humble words (kenzyoogo).8  The use of honorifics depends on the notions of "out-group" and "in-group."
The distinctions between "out-group" and "in-group" may be understood in terms of differences in rank,
age, affiliation, intimacy, and so forth. Typically, the "out-group" includes the speaker's superiors (e.g.,
teachers, supervisors, etc.) and the "in-group" includes the speaker and the speaker's family members or
subordinates (e.g., assistants, secretaries, etc.). Japanese honorifics are used in both spoken and written
contexts. There are irregular and regular honorific verbal forms. The regular, respectful form of a verb is
constructed using the fixed pattern "o + verb stem +  ni narimasu."9 This form is used when an out-group
person is the subject who performs the action in a sentence (e.g., Sensee ga kono hon o o-kaki-ni-
narimasita (respectful), 'My teacher wrote this book'). The regular, humble form of a verb is arrived at
using the pattern "o + verb stem + simasu." This form is used, for example, when the speaker or the
speaker's in-group member is the subject who performs the action in a sentence and an out-group person
is the object/direction/goal of the action (e.g., Sensee ni o-ai-simasu (humble), 'I will meet my teacher').
The irregular honorific forms are not arrived at by these patterns and must be memorized for each verb
(e.g., Sensee ga irassyaimasu (respectful), 'My teacher will come'; Watasi ga mairimasu (humble), 'I will
come').
In short, a speaker needs to choose honorific forms depending on who the subject of the sentence is, on
who the object of the sentence is, on whom the speaker is talking to, and so forth.10 Verbs may take
regular honorific forms, irregular honorific forms, or both regular and irregular honorific forms. Japanese
honorifics are fairly complicated structures which represent a major hurdle for second-language learners
of Japanese.
Noriko Nagata Input vs. Output Practice in Educational Software…
Language Learning & Technology 26
Subjects
Fourteen students in a second-semester Japanese course at the University of San Francisco participated in
this study. The students were paired based on the scores they obtained on the mid-term exam and were
randomly divided into two groups,11 so that the two groups had no significant difference in the level of
achievement in the course, prior to the experiment (t = 1.07, p = 0.324).12 Each group consisted of three
males and four females. The students' first language was English, except for one student in the input-
focused group whose first language was Korean but who was also fluent in English.13
Materials
Two computer programs were developed in HyperCard (these programs are called BANZAI:
HONORIFICS). One is an input-focused program which provides explicit grammatical instruction
together with comprehension exercises and the other is an output-focused program which provides the
same grammatical instruction augmented by production exercises. Macintosh computers were used in this
experiment. The target structures, Japanese honorifics, were new to the students. Four lessons of grammar
notes and exercises were implemented in both programs.14 The grammar note includes
grammatical/conceptual descriptions of the Japanese honorific system accompanied by examples. The
exercises include five types of tasks, in order to develop the learners' comprehension or production skills
through word-level, sentence-level, and paragraph-level practice. Appendices A, B, C, D, and E describe
the five types of comprehension and production exercises respectively.
Figure 1 illustrates one of the type 3 comprehension exercises, as presented on the computer screen.
Every exercise in the input-focused program provides the students with a choice of three answers .15
Suppose a student clicks #1 or #2 to answer the question in Figure 1 (the input-focused program). He/she
is informed that "O-KAKI-NI-NARIMASITA is a respectful form, so the subject who performs the action
in the sentence should be an out-group member (e.g., superior)."16 (Capitalized Japanese words are
presented on the computer screen in the Japanese kana and kanji writing systems). If #3 is selected, the
student is informed that the answer is correct and a Japanese pronunciation of the correct answer is
provided.
Noriko Nagata Input vs. Output Practice in Educational Software…
Language Learning & Technology 27
Figure 2 illustrates one of the type 3 production exercises as it appears on the computer screen. The
output-focused program involves the same sentence used in the input-focused program, but the exercise is
to "produce" the sentence. For example, the student is asked to type a sentence in the box at the bottom of
the screen and push the "Check Answer" button to check whether or not his/her response is correct. The
program uses a Japanese word processor so that the students can type their responses in the Japanese
writing system.17 The correct answer for this question is something like Sensee ga o-kaki-ni-narimasita,
'My teacher wrote it.' If the student types Sensee ga o-kaki-simasita, he/she is informed that "O-KAKI-
SIMASITA is a humble form, but the subject who performs the action in the sentence is an out-group
member (e.g., superior). Use a respectful form."18 If the student in the output-focused group fails to
provide a correct response three times, an "Answer" button appears. Pressing the "Answer" button
provides the student with the correct answer. If the student types a correct response, he/she is informed
that the answer is correct and a Japanese pronunciation of the correct answer is provided. In short, both
the input-focused program and the output-focused program provide the same content of exercises with on-
going grammatical feedback in response to the learners' correct and incorrect answers. Both programs
also provide a "Grammar" button to open the grammar note which the students read at the beginning of
the session and a "Vocabulary Hint" button to see the list of words used in each exercise.
A pilot study was conducted with two third-semester Japanese students. The result of the pilot study
indicated that comprehension exercises require less time for the students to complete than the production
exercises. In order to equalize the total instructional time for both groups, the input-focused program
provided more exercises than the output-focused program.19 Through four computer sessions
(approximately one hour per session), the students in both groups received 137 exercises.20 In addition,
the input-focused group received 130 more exercises.21
Procedure
The students in both groups participated in four one-hour computer sessions over the course of two
weeks: one group received the input-focused program and the other received the output-focused
program.22 In each computer session, the input-focused group spent five to seven minutes reading a
grammar note (i.e., a short text describing the grammatical structures on the computer), and then
Noriko Nagata Input vs. Output Practice in Educational Software…
Language Learning & Technology 28
proceeded to the comprehension exercises. The output-focused group also first spent five to seven
minutes reading the same grammar note, and then moved to the production exercises.
A questionnaire was administered at the end of the last computer session. On the questionnaire, the
students were asked to rate 23 items on a 5-point scale (1 strongly disagree, 2 disagree, 3 undecided, 4
agree, and 5 strongly agree) and to write comments about the computer program.
Two days after the last computer session, the students took an achievement test in their usual classroom.
The achievement test included both comprehension and production tasks similar to the ones provided in
the computer sessions. The comprehension tasks consisted of a total of 21 questions (in which 4 questions
were of exercise type 1, 4 questions of type 2, 7 questions of type 3, 2 questions of type 4, and 4 questions
of type 5). The production tasks consisted of a total of 20 questions (in which 9 questions were of type 2,
7 questions of type 3, 2 questions of type 4, and 2 questions of type 5).23 The achievement test was not
conducted on the computer because only the output-focused group used the Japanese word processor and
it was suspected that if the production tasks were performed on the computer, the input-focused group
might have difficulty in typing Japanese on the Japanese word processor. It was also optional whether to
use Japanese or roman characters to write the answers. A perfect score on the comprehension tasks was
42 and that on the production tasks was 43. The following scoring system was used for the achievement
test. For the comprehension tasks, 2.0 points were deducted for any incorrect choice. For the production
tasks, points were deducted according to the relative importance of errors in the given questions. For
example, 1.0 points were deducted for an incorrect or missing verb (although when the error was on the
verbal forms such as using humble for respect, plain for honorific, perfective for imperfective, or negative
for affirmative, only 0.5 points were deducted), and 0.5 points were deducted for other incorrect or
missing words/particles and for incorrect word order. A spelling mistake also resulted in a 0.2 point
reduction. The students' scores were converted into percentages.
After the students took the achievement test, they were away from class for one week during the
university's spring break period. The students in both groups were asked to write a one-page letter about
what they did during the break to the teacher using honorific forms. After they submitted the homework,
the homework was corrected and returned to them. A week after the spring break, the students were
assigned another one-page written assignment to translate English conversations to Japanese. The
conversations were between a teacher and a student, so to translate them use of appropriate honorific
forms was required. In the following class, the students practiced oral conversations on the basis of this
homework for about thirty minutes. During the rest of the course, no more special activity was provided
regarding honorifics.
A month after the computer sessions, the students took a retention test. The retention test consists of
comprehension tasks (4 questions of exercise type 1, 3 questions of type 2, and 5 questions of type 3) and
production tasks (7 questions of type 3) which were all provided on the achievement test. Fewer questions
were given on the retention test than on the achievement test because the retention test was administered
together with the written final exam, so space was limited. The retention test focused on sentence-level
comprehension and production tasks. The perfect score on both the comprehension tasks and the
production tasks was 24. The retention test followed the same scoring system used in the achievement
test. The students' scores were converted into percentages.
A week after the retention test (i.e., five weeks after the computer sessions), the students took an oral
conversation test involving Japanese honorifics. In the oral conversation test, each student performed
conversations together with the instructor and the tutor of the Japanese course for about 5 minutes. The
students were asked ten questions such as whether they came to school yesterday, what they did, whether
they met their friends or teacher, what the teacher did, etc. The conversation was recorded and graded
based on ten sentences that the students were supposed to produce using honorifics. A perfect score on the
Noriko Nagata Input vs. Output Practice in Educational Software…
Language Learning & Technology 29
oral test was 14. The oral test followed the same scoring system used for production tasks on the
achievement test. The students' scores were converted into percentages.
ANALYSIS
The two-sample dependent t-test (the paired two-sample t-test) was applied to examine whether there is a
significant difference between the input-focused group and the output-focused group in their scores on the
achievement test, the retention test, and the oral test. All statistical analysis in this study employed two-
tailed t-tests.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Table 1 shows the means and standard deviations of the two groups for the comprehension tasks and the
production tasks on the achievement test, and the results of the corresponding t-tests. The results of the
achievement test show that there is no significant difference between the two groups in the
comprehension tasks, while the difference between the two groups in the production tasks is statistically
significant at the 0.002 level, favoring the output-focused group. The results suggest that given the same
grammatical instruction, output-focused practice is more effective than input-focused practice for the
development of skill in producing Japanese honorifics and is equally effective for the comprehension of
these structures.
Table 1: The results of the comprehension tasks and the production tasks on the achievement test (scores
out of 100)
Achievement test Input group Output group T-test
Mean SD Mean SD t Sig of t
Comprehension tasks 92.4 9.0 95.2 3.8 1.15 NS
Production tasks 72.3 16.1 85.4 13.4 5.67 0.002
Figure 3 presents the means of the two groups for each type of comprehension tasks (type 1 through type
5) on the achievement test. The scores for each type of comprehension task were converted into
percentages. The result shows that there is no significant difference between the two groups for each type
of comprehension task.
Figure 3: The result of each type of comprehension task on the achievement test (scores out of 100)
Figure 4 presents the means of the two groups for each type of production task (type 2 through 5) on the
achievement test. (As noted, type 1 tasks were omitted, due to time considerations and their similarity to
type 2 tasks.) The scores for each type of production task were converted into percentages. A significant
Noriko Nagata Input vs. Output Practice in Educational Software…
Language Learning & Technology 30
difference was found in types 3 and 4 (p < 0.001 for type 3 and p < 0.05 for type 4), but not in types 2 and
5. Type 2 production tasks asked the students to fill in the blank with a verbal predicate (as illustrated in
example (4) in Appendix B). This type of question involves only production of a verb form, while type 3
production tasks require full-sentence production (see example (6) in Appendix C). Therefore, type 3
production tasks involve more complex syntactic processing than type 2 tasks. Type 4 production tasks
are also more complex than type 2 tasks because they require the students to read the text and to revise
verbs with appropriate honorific forms when necessary (see example (8) in Appendix D). In this type of
task, the learners need to understand discourse context and to recover some unstated subjects and objects
from context in order to determine appropriate honorific forms. The results suggest that when more
complex syntactic and discourse processing is involved in production tasks, it becomes more difficult for
learners to apply their learning from comprehension exercises directly to the production tasks. Type 5 is a
semi-production task because the students were presented a few Japanese sentences orally and were asked
to dictate them, which is different from constructing sentences by themselves. For this task, an oral cue
was provided three times for each sentence, and the students were given enough time to write down each
sentence. Since the nature of the task was half receptive, this might be one reason the input-focused group
performed as well as the output-focused group in type 5 production tasks.
Figure 4: The result of each type of production task on the achievement test (scores out of 100)
The retention test results (Table 2) are consistent with the achievement test results: there is no significant
difference between the two groups in the comprehension tasks, while the difference between the two
groups in the production tasks is statistically significant at the 0.02 level, favoring the output-focused
group.24 The result of the oral conversation test (Table 3) also exhibits a statistically significant
difference, favoring the output-focused group (p < 0.02).25 These results indicate that given the same
follow-up written assignments and oral conversation practice, output-focused practice is more effective
than input-focused practice in the long term in both written and oral production of Japanese honorific
sentences.
Table 2: The results of the comprehension tasks and the production tasks on the retention test (scores out
of 100)
Retention test Input group Output group T-test
Mean SD Mean SD t Sig of t
Comprehension tasks 88.1 11.6 96.4 4.5 1.62 NS
Production tasks 74.4 15.9 84.8 16.2 3.18 0.02
Noriko Nagata Input vs. Output Practice in Educational Software…
Language Learning & Technology 31
Table 3: The result of the oral conversation test (scores out of 100)
Oral conversation test Input group Output group T-test
Mean SD Mean SD t Sig of t
Oral production 68.8 19.3 83.2 11.0 3.29 0.02
Table 4 presents the means and standard deviations of the ratings for each item on the questionnaire (1
strongly disagree, 2 disagree, 3 undecided, 4 agree, and 5 strongly agree). The result of the questionnaire
shows that both groups had very positive attitudes toward the computer program, regardless of whether
they received the input-focused program or the output-focused program. The ratings for items 3, 9, 18, 19,
20, and 21 show some differences between the two groups, although the differences are not statistically
significant.26 The reason item 3 ("I didn't have technical problems when working on the program,") was
rated 0.9 lower by the output-focused group might be related to the fact that the output-focused group
used the Japanese word processor and the students often hit the wrong keys to edit their responses (e.g., to
go forward or backward in the text, delete a character, convert kana to kanji, etc.). The output-focused
group also rated item 9 ("The processing of feedback is fast enough.") 1.3 lower than the input-focused
group did. This is reflected by the fact that the output-focused program took a much longer time to return
feedback than the input-focused program, especially for type 3 of exercises (i.e., sentence production
exercises) because the output-focused program involved a more complex analysis of the student's
response. On the other hand, item 18 ("The CALI exercises help me practice Japanese by myself.") and
item 21 ("I want to practice Japanese using this type of CALI exercise on a regular basis.") were rated 0.8
higher by the output-focused group than by the input-focused group, and item 19 ("I find the CALI
exercises interesting.") and item 20 ("The CALI exercises help me concentrate on studying Japanese.")
were rated 0.5 higher by the output-focused group than by the input-focused group. The students in the
output-focused group appear somewhat more enthusiastic about the computer exercises they received than
the students in the input-focused group.
Noriko Nagata Input vs. Output Practice in Educational Software…
Language Learning & Technology 32
Table 4: The questionnaire on the computer program
Noriko Nagata Input vs. Output Practice in Educational Software…
Language Learning & Technology 33
On the questionnaire, the students were also asked to write their impressions of the computer program.
All students (except for one in the input-focused group) expressed that they like the computer program.
One student in the output-focused group commented that "this program taught us in two weeks what
would have taken about a month otherwise." In fact, the computer program provided intensive, systematic
lessons regarding different forms of Japanese honorifics, which would take several months in any
conventional Japanese textbook. This type of computer program may be efficient for teaching complex
grammar and developing the learner's grammatical competence.
CONCLUSIONS
The present study employed computer software to provide various types of comprehension and
production tasks and examined the relative effectiveness of comprehension and production practice in the
acquisition of Japanese honorifics. The results of the study suggest that given the same grammatical
instruction, output-focused practice is more effective than input-focused practice for the development of
skill in producing Japanese honorifics and is equally effective for the comprehension of these structures.
Increased effectiveness of production practice over comprehension practice was observed in both written
and oral production. The analysis of different types of exercises suggests that the relative advantage of
production practice may be greater in tasks involving complex syntactic processing than in tasks requiring
less syntactic processing. The results support Swain's argument that there are roles for output in second
language acquisition that are independent of comprehensible input.
The present study focused on the acquisition of Japanese honorifics. Even though Japanese honorifics
represent relatively complex structures of a second language, it might still be too early to infer any
general conclusion from these findings. The relative effectiveness of input and output practice in second
language acquisition may depend on the types of target structures, as suggested by DeKeyser and
Sokalski (1996), and on the kinds of tasks the students are required to perform. The author is now
expanding this research, addressing these issues.
The questionnaire results indicate that the students in both groups had positive attitudes toward the
computer program they used. Based on such positive reactions, the author has developed computer
software covering seventeen lessons, following the output-focused approach.27 The new programs are
BANZAI: NOMINAL MODIFIER (consisting of two lessons on Japanese nominal modifiers),
BANZAI: CONDITIONAL (consisting of two lessons on Japanese conditional expressions), BANZAI:
(consisting of two lessons on Japanese causative expressions), and BANZAI: SENTENCE MODIFIER
(consisting of two lessons on Japanese sentence modifiers). These programs have been successfully
implemented in the language curriculum at the college-level. Continuing research on the relative
effectiveness of different exercise formats will help to guide the development of the next generation of
computer-assisted language instruction software.
NOTES
1. DeKeyser reports that the fuzzy rules were learned better by the implicit-inductive subjects than by the
explicit-deductive subjects, but he also notes that the results regarding the fuzzy rules should be treated
with caution, due to the small data set and the lack of statistical testing.
2. "Comprehensible input" is defined by Krashen as input containing i+1, where i is the acquirer's current
level and i+1 is structure a bit beyond the current level.
3. Only the processing group was informed that language learners often misinterpret NVN sequences
(1993a, p. 232); the processing group practiced OVS sentences but the traditional group did not (1993b,
p. 53); and so forth.
Noriko Nagata Input vs. Output Practice in Educational Software…
Language Learning & Technology 34
4. The processing instruction adopted the "meaning-form connection" approach (Terrell, 1991), which
encourages the learners to understand the concepts and meanings underlying the grammatical forms, but
the traditional instruction followed a more mechanical, paradigmatic presentation of grammatical forms.
5. Cadierno (1995) extended the study using Spanish past tense verb morphology and obtained results
similar to those in VanPatten and Cadierno (1993a, 1993b).
6. According to Swain, "comprehensible output" means "output that extends the linguistic repertoire of
the learner as he or she attempts to create precisely and appropriately the meaning desired," (Swain, 1985,
p. 252).
7. Krashen discusses the relative complexity of a target structure in terms of formal and
functional/conceptual complexity (1987, pp. 97-98), so the term "complexity" in the present paper
includes both formal and functional/conceptual complexity of a structure.
8. The description of the Japanese honorific system in this paper is based on Clancy's (1985) study,
"honorifics and late acquisition of L1 Japanese", the in-group and out-group concepts are from Jorden's
textbook (1987), the honorific usage is provided by Simon's grammar notes (1987) and Mizutani and
Mizutani's textbook (1977), and by discussions with Kyoko Suda (Instructor of Japanese, University of
San Francisco).
9. There is another regular, respectful verb form, "V-(r)areru," but this study focuses on the form "o +
verbal stem + ni narimasu." The romanization used in this paper is an adaptation of the Shin-kunrei-shiki
'New official system'  (Jorden, 1987).
10. The concepts of in-group and out-group also shift depending on context. For example, when a speaker
belongs to Company A and talks to a person who belongs to Company B, the speaker uses a humble form
to describe not only his or her own action but also the actions of other members in Company A (including
the speaker's superior) because all members in Company A are now members of the speaker's in-group
when speaking to a person in a different company (out-group). Since the students in this study were still
at an elementary level and were introduced to Japanese honorifics for the first time, the situations in
which the students were instructed to use honorifics in the program were mostly limited to a school
situation (in which a student talks to his or her teacher or talks about the teacher with other people), or a
company situation (in which an office worker talks to his or her superior or talks about the superior with
his or her colleague). Examples of out-group/in-group shift were not included in the program.
11. The student who obtained the highest score and the student who obtained the second highest score on
the mid-term exam were paired and were randomly assigned to one of two groups. The same pairing
system was applied until the last two students (the students with the two lowest scores) were paired and
randomly assigned to one of two groups.
12. The two-sample dependent t-test (the paired two-sample t-test) was applied to examine whether there
is a significant difference between the input-focused group and the output-focused group in their scores
on the mid-term exam. See Glasnapp and Poggio (1985) for a description of the t-test for correlated
samples. The mean score of the input-focused group on the mid-term exam was 86.9 (SD = 11.6) and that
of the output-focused group was 88.2 (SD = 9.3).
13. One might argue that since Korean has its own honorific system, the student with a Korean
background may have had an advantage in learning Japanese honorifics. However, the Korean student is
included in the input-focused group in this study, so this argument strengthens the result, since the output-
group actually performed better than the input-group. A statistical analysis was also performed to check
the results when the Korean student (in the input-focused group) and the student paired with the Korean
student (in the output-focused group) were excluded from the study.  The results were still significant,
favoring the output-focused group.
Noriko Nagata Input vs. Output Practice in Educational Software…
Language Learning & Technology 35
14. In order to reduce the lexical load, the computer programs employed only vocabulary that had been
introduced before (except for four nouns such as katyoo, 'section chief', butyoo, 'department chief', etc.,
and two verbs, yomimasu, 'read' and hanasimasu, 'talk', which were new).
15. The input-focused program employs the multiple choice format because it is typically used for
comprehension exercises. However, multiple choice exercises may not necessarily capture the
pedagogical benefits of all types of comprehension exercises. Some other question formats (such as
asking learners to translate the target language into their first language by themselves) will be included in
a future study.
16. The input-focused program stores a feedback message corresponding to each response to a multiple-
choice question, so when the student selects a number, the corresponding message is provided.
17. The Japanese word processor works in the following way: the students type roman letters on the
alphabetical keyboard and these roman letters are converted to katakana, hiragana, and kanji.  (Katakana
and hiragana represent Japanese syllables, so they are phonetic descriptions. Katakana are used to write
words borrowed from English or other foreign languages. Hiragana are used mainly to write particles and
grammatical inflections in verbs, adjectives, and adverbs. Kanji represent both sound and meaning.
Japanese sentences are normally written with a mixture of hiragana, katakana, and kanji.) For
homonymous words with the same romanization, the students obtain a list of kanji for the word and are
asked to select the kanji that he/she thinks are appropriate.
18. The output-focused program analyzes the learner's response using a pattern matching technique: the
program stores correct words, phrases, sentences, and anticipated errors for each question, and checks
whether these items are found in the learner's response.  (No parsing technique is involved in this study.)
The program also stores feedback messages corresponding to correct answers and anticipated errors, so if
the learner's response matches a correct answer or an anticipated error, a corresponding error message is
provided. Anticipated errors include missing words/particles, incorrect/incomplete verbal forms, and
incorrect Japanese writing systems.
19. Giving more exercises to the input-group also strengthens the result if the output-group performs
better than the input-group, which is indeed the case.
20. Among 137 exercises, 41 exercises were of type 1, 45 of type 2, 35 of type 3, 8 of type 4, and 8 of
type 5.
21. Among 130 additional comprehension exercises, 66 exercises were of type 1, 22 were for auditory
comprehension of spoken honorific verbs (a combination of type 1 and type 5), 41 were for auditory
comprehension of spoken honorific sentences (a combination of type 3 and type 5), and one was of type
4. The additional exercises for the input-focused group were intended to review comprehension of
honorific verbal forms and to practice auditory comprehension of honorific sentences. Consequently, type
1, type 3, and type 5 tasks were mostly added for the input-focused group.
22. The first computer session focused on the irregular respectful forms and the irregular humble forms,
the second computer session included the regular respectful form "o + verbal stem + ni narimasu", the
third computer session introduced the regular humble form "o + verbal stem + simasu", and the fourth
session reviewed all kinds of honorific sentences practiced in the previous sessions.
23. Different numbers of questions were drawn from the various question types on the achievement test. It
should be kept in mind, however, that questions of different types could vary in the time and amount of
work required to complete them. In particular, time constraints limited the number of type 4 questions that
could be administered.  Development of a more principled measure is an important topic for future study.
Noriko Nagata Input vs. Output Practice in Educational Software…
Language Learning & Technology 36
24. Type 3 production scores exhibit the largest difference between the two groups on the achievement
test, and the retention production test included only type 3 tasks. The t-score might have been lower if
other types of tasks were included in the retention test.
25. When multiple t-tests are performed on a series of null hypotheses, the probability of committing at
least one type I error (i.e., the probability of mistakenly rejecting the null hypothesis) may be higher than
the significance level employed in each of the tests. To achieve a significance level of alpha for the
conjunction of the null hypotheses, it suffices to divide the significance level of each of the individual
tests by the number of tests performed (Galambos & Simonelli 1996). Accordingly, suppose we select a
significance level of 0.05 for the present study as a whole and perform t-tests for the mid-term exam, the
comprehension achievement test, the production achievement test, the comprehension retention test, the
production retention test, and the oral conversation test. In this case, the significance level of each test
becomes 0.008 (0.05 divided by 6). Only the production achievement test is significant at the 0.008 level.
The tests that fail at this corrected significance level may nonetheless be regarded as heuristic indications
for future study with a larger sample size.
26. P = 0.179 for item 3, p = 0.111 for item 9, p = 0.194 for item 18, p = 0.410 for item 19, p = 0.277 for
item 20, and p = 0.334 for item 21.
27. The new programs are BANZAI: NOMINAL MODIFIERS (consisting of two lessons on Japanese
nominal modifiers), BANZAI: CONDITIONALS (consisting of two lessons on Japanese conditional
expressions), BANZAI: CAUSATIVES (consisting of two lessons on Japanese causative expressions),
BANZAI: SENTENCE MODIFIERS (consisting of two lessons on Japanese sentence modifiers),
BANZAI: GERUNDS (consisting of three lessons of Japanese expressions with verbal gerunds),
BANZAI: VERBAL DIRECT STYLE (consisting of three lessons of Japanese expressions with direct-
style verbs), and BANZAI: GIVING AND RECEIVING (consisting of three lessons of Japanese giving
and receiving expressions). Anyone who is interested in the programs may request them from the author
(nagatan@usfca.edu).
REFERENCES
Cadierno, T. (1995). Formal instruction from a processing perspective: An investigation into the Spanish
past tense. The Modern Language Journal, 79 (2), 179-193.
Clancy, P. M. (1985). The acquisition of Japanese. In D.I. Slobin (Ed.), The cross linguistic study of
language acquisition (Vol. 1, The data). Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
DeKeyser, R. (1995). Learning second language grammar rules: An experiment with a miniature
linguistic system. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 17 (3), 379-410.
DeKeyser, R., & Sokalski, K. (1996). The differential role of comprehension and production practice.
Language Learning, 46 (4), 613-642.
Doughty, C. (1991). Second language instruction does make a difference: Evidence from an empirical
study of SL relativization.  Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 13 (4), 431-469.
Ellis, N. (1993). Rules and instances in foreign language learning: Interactions of explicit and implicit
knowledge.  European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 5 (3), 289-318.
Ellis, R. (1981). The role of input in language acquisition: Some implications for second language
teaching. Applied Linguistics, 11 (1), 70-82.
Noriko Nagata Input vs. Output Practice in Educational Software…
Language Learning & Technology 37
Faerch, C., & Kasper, G. (1986). The role of comprehension in second language learning. Applied
Linguistics,  7 (3), 257-274.
Galambos, J., & Simonelli, I. (1996). Bonferroni-type inequalities with applications. New York, NY:
Springer.
Gass, S., & Madden, C. (1985).  Input in second language acquisition. Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Glasnapp, D. R., & Poggio, J. P. (1985). Essentials of statistical analysis for the behavioral sciences.
Columbus, OH: Charles E. Merrill Publishing Company.
Jorden, E. H. (1987). Japanese: The spoken language, part 1. New Haven & London: Yale University
Press.
Krashen, S. D. (1980). The input hypothesis. In J. Alatis (Ed.), Current issues in bilingual education (pp.
144-158). Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
Krashen, S. D. (1985). The input hypothesis: Issues and implications. London: Longman.
Krashen, S. D. (1987). Principles and practice in second language acquisition. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.
Loschky, L. (1994). Comprehensible input and second language acquisition: What is the relationship?
Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 16 (3), 303-323.
Mizutani, O., & Mizutani, N. (1977). An introduction to modern Japanese. Tokyo: The Japan Times.
Nagata, N. (1993). Intelligent computer feedback for second language instruction. The Modern Language
Journal, 77 (3), 330-339.
Nagata, N. (1995). An effective application of natural language processing in second language
instruction. CALICO Journal, 13 (1), 47-67.
Nagata, N. (1996). Computer vs. workbook instruction in second language acquisition. CALICO Journal,
14 (1), 53-75.
Nagata, N. (1997a). The effectiveness of computer-assisted metalinguistic instruction: A case study in
Japanese. Foreign Language Annals, 30 (2).
Nagata, N. (1997b). An experimental comparison of deductive and inductive feedback generated by a
simple parser.  System, 25 (4), 515-534.
Robinson, P. (1996). Learning simple and complex second language rules under implicit, incidental, rule-
search, and instructed conditions. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 18 (1), 27-67.
Sharwood Smith, M. (1993). Input enhancement in instructed SLA. Studies in Second Language
Acquisition,  15 (2), 165-179.
Simon, M. E. (1987). Supplementary grammar notes to an introduction to modern Japanese, part 2.
Center for Japanese Studies, The University of Michigan.
Swain, M. (1985). Communicative competence: Some roles of comprehensible input and comprehensible
output in its development. In S. Gass & C. Madden (Eds.), Input in second language acquisition (pp. 235-
253). Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (1995). Problems in output and the cognitive processes they generate: A step
towards second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 16 (3), 371-391.
Terrell, T. D. (1991). The role of grammar instruction in a communicative approach. The Modern
Language Journal,  75 (1), 52-63.
Noriko Nagata Input vs. Output Practice in Educational Software…
Language Learning & Technology 38
VanPatten, B., & Cadierno, T. (1993a). Explicit instruction and input processing. Studies in Second
Language Acquisition, 15 (2), 225-243.
VanPatten, B., & Cadierno, T. (1993b). Input processing and second language acquisition: A role of
instruction.  The Modern Language Journal, 77 (1), 45-57.
White, L. (1987). Against comprehensible input: The input hypothesis and the development of second
language competence.  Applied Linguistics, 8 (2), 95-110.
APPENDIX A: Type 1 Comprehension and Production Exercises
The first type of exercise focuses on single-verb comprehension or production. The following illustrates
one of the type 1 comprehension exercises. For the sake of illustration, English translation is provided in
square brackets under each Japanese word in this paper, but such translation is not provided in the
computer exercises.
(1) A comprehension exercise - type 1
 
In this exercise, the students are asked to choose an appropriate interpretation of the given verb o-kai-ni-
narimasu, 'buy (respectful),' including the unstated subject of the sentence. In Japanese, the subject and
object of a sentence are often dropped, so that a single verb functions as a sentence. (The unstated subject
is indicated in the parentheses in each choice.) This is a comprehension exercise because the English
translation selected by the student indicates his/her comprehension of the Japanese sentence provided.
The correct answer for the above question is #3. Choice #1 and #2 are incorrect because the subject of o-
kai-ni-narimasu, 'buy (respectful),' should be an out-group member (e.g., a superior). The output-focused
program involves the same verb in the following production exercise:
(2) A production exercise - type 1
Give a Japanese equivalent to the following verb.
(My supervisor) will buy it.
The output-focused program asks the students to produce Japanese, according to the cue provided.  The
correct answer for (2) is o-kai-ni-narimasu,'buy (respectful)').
Noriko Nagata Input vs. Output Practice in Educational Software…
Language Learning & Technology 39
APPENDIX B: Type 2 Comprehension and Production Exercises
The second type of exercise provides a conversation using honorifics or plain forms. For example, the
input-focused program asks the student to interpret the relationship between the two speakers (or between
the speakers and the subject/object in the sentence) in the given conversation:
(3) A comprehension exercise - type 2
The correct answer for question (3) is # 1. The same conversation is used for a production exercise in
which the student is asked to fill in the blank with an appropriate verb (either plain or honorific):
(4) A production exercise - type 2
The correct answer for question (4) is mairimasu, 'come (humble).
APPENDIX C: Type 3 Comprehension and Production Exercises
The third type of exercise includes comprehension or production practice involving full sentences. The
input-focused program provides the following sort:
(5) A comprehension exercise - type 3
The correct answer for question (5) is # 3. The same sentence is used for a production exercise:
(6) A production exercise - type 3What would you say in Japanese if you were in the following situation.
Use honorifics if the situation is appropriate.
Your boss is going to London on business. Ask him when he will return to America.
The correct answer for question (6) is Itu Amerika ni o-kaeri-ni-narimasu ka, 'When will you return
(respectful) to America?'
Noriko Nagata Input vs. Output Practice in Educational Software…
Language Learning & Technology 40
APPENDIX D: Type 4 Comprehension and Production Exercises
The fourth type of exercise presents a text for the student to read or revise. For example, the input-focused
program provides the following text to interpret:
(7) A comprehension exercise - type 4
 
The correct answer for question (7) is # 3. The same text is used for a production exercise, but the verbs
in the text are presented with the plain forms and a student is asked to revise the text using appropriate
honorific forms:
(8) A production exercise - type 4
 
Question (8) includes four plain verbs, in which the first three verbs should be replaced with their humble
forms and the fourth verb should be replaced with its honorific form. One might say that this type of
exercise involves comprehension of the text. However, the text is presented using non-honorific forms, so
the target structures (honorifics) are not used for comprehension. That is, the target structures (honorifics)
are not the ones to comprehend but the ones to be produced.
Noriko Nagata Input vs. Output Practice in Educational Software…
Language Learning & Technology 41
APPENDIX E: Type 5 Comprehension and Production Exercises
The fifth type of exercise uses oral cues. The input-focused program presents orally a short story
(consisting of a few Japanese sentences) and asks the student to interpret it. The oral cue provided in (9) is
as follows: Sensee wa kooen de haikingu o nasaimasita 'My teacher did hiking in a park'; Sore kara,
Nihonmati no resutoran de osusi to osake o mesiagarimasita 'Then, he had sushi and sake at a restaurant
in Japan Town.'
(9) A comprehension exercise - type 5
Ms. Brown talked to her colleague. Choose a number which corresponds to what she said.
1. Ms. Brown went hiking in a park. Then, she had sushi and sake at a restaurant in Japan Town.
2. Ms. Brown's teacher went hiking in a park. Then, he had sushi and sake at a restaurant in Japan Town.
3. Ms. Brown's teacher went on a picnic in a park. He didn't go to a restaurant in Japan Town.
The correct answer is #2. The output-focused program also presents the same story orally, but the task is
to dictate the story:
(10) A production exercise - type 5
Ms. Brown talked to her colleague. What did she say? Make notes on paper first, and then type it in the
box.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am grateful for the anonymous reviewers' helpful and constructive comments. I also thank Robert
DeKeyser at the University of Pittsburgh and Kevin Kelly at Carnegie Mellon University, for their
valuable comments on drafts of this paper. I am also grateful for the assistance of the CIT laboratory
(Center for Instruction and Technology) at the University of San Francisco.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Noriko Nagata (Ph.D., University of Pittsburgh) is an assistant professor and the director of the Japanese
program at the University of San Francisco. She has developed a series of computer programs for
Japanese instruction, including a parser-driven Japanese tutor. She has published a number of articles on
the effectiveness of computer programs in second language acquisition.
E-mail: nagatan@usfca.edu
