Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/ortega/default.html 
July 1997, Volume 1, Number 1 
pp.82-93 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 1997, ISSN 1094-3501 79 
PROCESSES AND OUTCOMES IN NETWORKED CLASSROOM INTERACTION: DEFINING 
THE RESEARCH AGENDA FOR L2 COMPUTER-ASSISTED CLASSROOM DISCUSSION 
Lourdes Ortega 
University of Hawai'i at Manoa 
ABSTRACT 
The present paper focuses on the use of one networked technology, namely synchronous 
computer-mediated interaction, in the second language (L2) classroom. The scope is intentionally 
limited to research concerned with evaluating the potential benefits of computer-assisted 
classroom discussion (CACD) in terms of second language acquisition (SLA) theory. The 
findings stemming from the existing body of L2 research on CACD are critically examined and a 
number of methodological suggestions are offered for future research on CACD. It is suggested 
that in addition to analyzing language outcomes by means of well-motivated measures of L2 use 
and L2 acquisition, a multiplicity of data sources be used in CACD research, so as to be able to 
document the processes learners actually engage in when interpreting and carrying out CACD 
tasks. A process- and task-driven research agenda for L2 CACD is proposed with the ultimate 
goal of describing the nature of language, learning, and interaction fostered in networked 
synchronous communication and to ascertain which features of CACD may or may not be 
relevant to the processes involved in second language acquisition. 
NETWORKED CLASSROOM INTERACTION AND SECOND LANGUAGE LEARNING 
From drill-and-practice software, to word-processing programs, to network and hypertext software, the 
gradual integration of technology in classrooms over the last twenty years has tended to mirror the 
technological developments and limitations of each computer era as well as, more importantly, the 
theories of learning and instruction developed by scholars and construed in teachers' actual practices. 
Thus, the introduction of networked technologies in education coincided with a shift in education from an 
interest in cognitive and developmental theories of learning to a social and collaborative view of learning 
(cf. Hawisher, 1994). 
Since the early 1990s, national and international networks, on the one hand, and local area networks 
(LANs), on the other, have been widely used for instructional purposes within social and critical 
education approaches. The use of electronic mail, bulletin boards, or discussion lists on worldwide 
networks such as the Internet enables learners and teachers to access and share information in a time- and 
space- independent fashion. By contrast, the instructional use of LANs, which link computers in a 
laboratory or a classroom to each other, has introduced the possibility of real-time, synchronous, many-to-
many written discussion by a whole class or by smaller groups within the class (Warschauer, 1996b). 
Both technologies underscore a view of learning as a collaborative act that happens in a social and 
political context, with learners and teacher working together in the new medium of networked interaction. 
Some scholars have suggested that the era of hypertext and networked communication that started 
burgeoning in the mid-1990s signals the need for an expanded view of literacy: Computers can no longer 
be seen as a surrogate of the teacher or an intelligent tool in the hands of the student, but as a new 
medium that has changed the ways in which we write, read, and possibly think (Selfe, 1989). Without 
committing to such a radical analysis of the role of technology on literacy practices, I would agree with 
Herring (1996), Selfe and Hilligoss (1994), and others that we need research on computers and education 
that not only extols the pedagogical and social virtues of computer technology but also determines exactly 
Lourdes Oretga Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 80 
in which ways language, learning, and interaction have been transformed by the use of networked and 
hypertext technologies in our classrooms. In the case of L2 classrooms in which CACD has started to be 
used, the crucial question from an SLA perspective is in what specific ways CACD may or may not be 
relevant to the processes involved in second language learning. 
Computer-Mediated Discussion in the Language Classroom 
The use of networked computers for the purpose of large group discussions in language educational 
contexts began with hearing impaired students learning L1 composition at Gallaudet University (Batson, 
1988). The software application for computer-assisted classroom discussion (CACD) which is most 
widely used in foreign language classrooms is the Daedalus Integrated Writing Environment (Daedalus 
Inc., 1989) and its application InterChange. This software was developed in the 1980s in the English 
Department at the University of Texas at Austin by Fred Kemp, a scholar in composition studies, and 
colleagues. Social theories of writing instruction that emphasize the collaborative nature of meaning and 
writing were at the core of the Daedalus software as it was intended to be used in composition classes (see 
Barker & Kemp, 1990; and for a discussion of the concomitant social epistemic theory of writing, see 
Berlin, 1987). In foreign language classes, Daedalus began to be used also in the University of Texas at 
Austin in the early 1990s, but the orientation was more on target-language practice than on the 
development of writing skills. In the last six years, a small number of FL studies (and most recently ESL 
studies) have reported on the use of InterChange/Daedalus in CACD in various FL classes in universities 
in the United States, typically for general classroom discussion purposes rather than in connection with 
L2 writing instruction. 
How does CACD work? During a typical Daedalus/InterChange session in the computer lab, each student 
sits in front of a computer terminal and is free to type in messages that can be sent by clicking on the 
"send" button on the screen. Sent messages appear on the upper half of all individual screens, displayed in 
the order in which they were sent and automatically identified with the name of the sender. All class 
members can read each other's comments at their own pace by scrolling up and down the sent-messages 
window, and they can write messages at their own leisure without interfering effects (freezing, etc.) from 
incoming messages. 
Among the many different types of CALL activities available for second language instruction, CACD 
stands as a promising area for research in second language learning and teaching for several reasons. For 
one, conducting class discussions on a computer network entails meaningful use of the target language 
and forces teachers and students away from treating language as an object rather than as a medium of 
communication (e.g., Colomb & Simutis, 1996). Not only is CACD a communicative CALL activity in 
Underwood's (1984) sense, but it can promote a task- and interaction-driven approach to L2 learning and 
teaching which is the backdrop to concrete proposals for curriculum design superseding traditional 
communicative approaches (e.g., analytic and Type B syllabi as outlined in Wilkins, 1976, and White, 
1988, respectively; see also detailed discussion of procedural, process, and task syllabi in Long & 
Crookes, 1993). The communicative investment and the meaningfulness and relevance achieved in many 
CACD discussions appear to provide for a context in which opportunities for language development are 
enhanced, since students are motivated to stretch their linguistic resources in order to meet the demands 
of real communication in a social context. In brief, the CACD environment appears to be optimal for 
devising CALL activities that facilitate and promote comprehensible output (Swain, 1985) within a 
holistic, process- and task-oriented approach to the L2 curriculum (Long & Crookes, 1993). Other 
benefits of CACD associated with language learning that have been repeatedly singled out in the FL 
literature are: 
Lourdes Oretga Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 81 
o Learners are able to contribute as much as they want at their own pace and leisure; consequently, 
they tend to perceive CACD as less threatening and inhibiting than oral interactions and produce 
a high amount of writing, with all students participating to a high degree and all producing 
several turns/messages per session. 
o Because of the interactive nature of the writing, learners are expected to engage in a variety of 
interactive moves on the computer and to take control of managing the discussion. 
o Learners make use of the available opportunity to take time to plan their messages and edit them. 
In this way they engage in productive L2 strategies and processes. 
o Learners have exposure to a substantial amount of comprehensible input which is produced by 
peers of a similar level and shared background. 
o Learners get a considerable amount of reading practice in addition to writing practice. Because of 
at least two tasks (writing and reading) competing for the learner's investment, reading skills 
practiced may tend to be holistic (reading for the gist) and meaning-driven. In addition, learners 
are expected to be motivated to read because of an authentic sense of interactive audience 
provided by CACD. 
These putative advantages of CACD have been anecdotally illustrated in the FL pedagogical literature 
(e.g., Chavez, 1997; Cononelos & Oliva, 1993; Nicholas & Toporski, 1993; Oliva & Pollastrani, 1995). 
Impressionistic documentations of the first attempts at using CACD in the L2 classroom (e.g., Beauvois, 
1992, and Kelm, 1992) have opened the way to a small body of more recent research that suggests 
computer-mediated synchronous discussion affords a novel medium for L2 interaction that is perhaps 
inherently competence-expanding (Chun, 1994; Kern, 1995; Warschauer, 1996a). 
From a more general pedagogic viewpoint, certain features of CACD can also have a great impact on 
subverting the traditional roles enacted by teachers and students in classrooms. This may foster critical 
changes in well-established pedagogical practices (e.g., Cooper & Selfe, 1990; Cummins & Sayers, 1990; 
Warschauer, 1996b) which may also affect the amount and quality of the language used and, hence, of the 
learning processes in the L2 classroom (Kern, 1995). However, more and more voices in the education 
and technology literature are acknowledging that it is not computers per se that can be beneficial or 
harmful, but the use we put them to (Barton, 1994). Indeed, the newest technologies can be made to serve 
the most traditional pedagogies, and the philosophies of language teachers can shape the uses of 
technology within the language curriculum so as to preserve a rather behavioristic view of language 
learning, as Warschauer (1997) has recently documented. 
CACD IN THE L2 CLASSROOM: WHAT DO WE KNOW SO FAR? 
Three areas of electronic synchronous communication have been the focus of most CACD research to 
date: (a) CACD has an equalizing effect on participation; (b) it increases learner productivity in terms of 
overall amount of language and/or ideas produced; and (c) the language produced in electronic 
synchronous discussions can be expected to be more complex and formal than in face-to-face discussions, 
without losing the interactive nature of oral language. These three dimensions of CACD are the object of 
much anecdotal discussion and enthusiastic advocacy in the FL literature. However, empirical evidence in 
support of these characterizations of CACD needs to be drawn from a sound theoretical motivation within 
our field (see Doughty, 1987, for an early call on this area, and Chapelle, 1996): I would like to argue 
here that the benefits of CACD in the L2 classroom need to be evaluated not only from a pedagogical 
standpoint but also in light of our most current knowledge about how languages are learned. This can be 
done by examining how second language performance and, tentatively, second language learning are 
shaped by particular features of synchronous electronic discussion as a new environment for L2 
interaction. 
Lourdes Oretga Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 82 
CACD as an Equalizer of Participation Structures 
Accounts of the use of CACD in L1 and L2 classrooms identify equality of participation as one of the 
most pervasive and beneficial effects of using electronic synchronous discussion in L1 writing instruction 
(Hartman, Neuwirth, Kiesler, Sproull, Cochran, Plamquist, & Zubrow, 1991), FL instruction (Beauvois, 
1992; Kelm, 1992; Kern, 1995), and ESL instruction (Sullivan & Pratt, 1996; Warschauer, 1996a). 
The more equal participation pattern in electronic discussions may be attributed partly to the reduction of 
static and dynamic social context cues in computer-mediated communication (Hartman et al., 1991; 
Warschauer, 1996b), and partly to the absence of oral interaction constraints such as fear to interrupt or of 
being interrupted, need to manage the floor and the transfer of speakership, and need for interlocutors to 
co-orient to the production of sequentially relevant discourse (e.g., Schenkein, 1978). Additionally, in L2 
CACD learners need not be concerned with pronunciation issues, which often require a high degree of 
attention and monitoring in the oral mode and may inhibit efforts at oral communication in the target 
language. The consequences are: (a) interactants are less apprehensive about being evaluated by 
interlocutors, and thus more willing to participate at their leisure; and (b) they are less affected by wait 
time, turn-taking, and other elements of traditional interaction, enabling them to participate as much as 
they want, whenever they want, with opportunities for contribution being more equally distributed among 
participants. 
The effect of this equalizing power of synchronous electronic discussion is threefold. First, the traditional 
figure of the teacher as authority source and expert is subverted in that the role of the teacher during the 
electronic discussion is that of a mere participant (see Kern, 1995, and Warschauer, 1997). Hence, the 
teacher cannot dominate the floor and do most of the talking, and he or she cannot direct and redirect the 
development of the topic, pose display questions, nominate students as next speakers, or evaluate 
individual student's contributions, all of which is the norm in traditional teacher-fronted L1 and L2 
classrooms (e.g., Cazden, 1988; Chaudron, 1988; McHoul, 1978; Sinclair & Coulthard, 1975). Second, 
and as a result of this change in teacher role, control of and responsibility for the electronic discussion is 
arguably incumbent on the students who are afforded the opportunity to engage in self-generated, 
personally relevant communication involving a wide range of moves, functions, and meanings that may 
be facilitative in the development of communicative competence and overall language proficiency (Chun, 
1994). 
Third, all speakers share the floor more equally, and students that do not normally participate much in 
traditional classroom discussion seem to dramatically increase their participation in the electronic mode. 
Naturally, a more democratic and equitable participation in electronic discussions can in turn foster 
counterhegemonic pedagogies (Cooper & Selfe, 1990; Cummins & Sayers, 1990; but see Barton, 1994, 
Olson, 1987, and Warschauer, 1997, for caveats). This last aspect of the equalizing effect of electronic 
discussions has been the focus of many studies in L1 education literature, which present consistent 
evidence of increased participation on the part of so-called poorer performing students (Hartman et al., 
1991), female students (Flores, 1990; Selfe, 1990), and shyer students (Bump, 1990). 
In the FL literature, the small body of studies concerned with CACD seems to provide support for an 
equalizing effect of electronic discussion on participation patterns. Kern (1995) conducted a within-
groups quasi-experimental comparison of both a traditional whole-class discussion and an electronic 
discussion in two intact French classes, concluding that electronic discussion effects a radical change in 
the proportion of teacher versus student language production and that teacher discourse becomes less 
authoritative and less dominant. Chun (1994) undertook a descriptive study of the language produced in 
regular CACD sessions in a German class over a two semester period. She provides information 
concerning the ratio of teacher-output versus student-output, the proportion of student-initiated and 
Lourdes Oretga Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 83 
teacher-initiated messages, and the directionality of contributions produced in electronic synchronous 
discussions. Chun's descriptive approach is important in that she not only substantiates in her analysis an 
increase in learner production coupled with a decrease in teacher-centered discourse, but she also 
identifies concrete advantages of more democratic and equitable participation in terms of potential learner 
development in discoursal, interactional, and functional competence. 
In their impressionistic accounts of electronic synchronous discussions involving Portuguese and French 
learners, Beauvois (1992) and Kelm (1992) report increases in the participation pattern of shy students 
and low-motivated, unsuccessful language learners, whereby the same students were perceived by their 
instructors as less willing to participate in oral discussions led by the teacher. Most of the cited studies 
also elicited information on students' impressions and evaluations of CACD and found that students 
themselves identified an increase in participation (and production) as one of the benefits of engaging in 
electronic discussions in the target language. 
Although these studies provide some useful descriptive information, a methodological and conceptual 
problem within their comparisons obscures the interpretation of the findings. 
Namely, evidence of an equalizing effect in participation seems to be sought solely by focusing on 
comparisons between traditional teacher-led classroom discussions and whole-class electronic 
discussions, whether the comparison is experimental (Kern, 1995) or assumed as a frame of reference 
(Beauvois, 1992; Chun, 1994; Kelm, 1992). However, it is justified to hypothesize that group size and 
equality of participation are negatively related in traditional oral interactions and positively related in 
computer-assisted interactions, and that the benefits of electronic over non-electronic interactions will 
increase with the size of groups (Gallupe, Bastianutti, & Cooper, 1991). In other words, the positive 
equalizing effect of the electronic mode will be accentuated when comparing larger groups, as in 
comparisons of teacher-fronted, whole-class discussion with whole-class electronic discussion. 
On the other hand, face-to-face discussions in communicative L2 classrooms are often conducted in small 
groups rather than as a whole class. Thus, in addition to whole-class comparisons, a more informative 
approach to investigating the equalizing effects of CACD in L2 classrooms would be to compare 
electronic versus non-electronic small group interactions of equal size, and to compare the relative effects 
in participation patterns when group size is equally reduced or increased in both modes. Two studies of 
electronic-assisted communication in ESL classes (Sullivan & Pratt, 1996; Warschauer, 1996a) are the 
only ones to date that have adopted such an approach and included comparisons of small group 
interactions in the oral and electronic modes. Both studies provide further evidence of a clear change in 
participation structures and a substantial increase in the amount of participation afforded to individuals in 
electronic classroom discussions. 
Sullivan and Pratt (1996) studied both whole-class discussions and four-member group interactions in two 
ESL writing classes: one traditional (oral) class and one class that used the software InterChange, both of 
which were taught by the same teacher over the course of a semester. In the large-group-discussion 
comparison between groups, as in previous FL studies, Sullivan and Pratt focused on the proportion of 
teacher "talk" and student language production and confirmed the radical change in student/teacher 
participation structures in CACD already documented in the literature. Of particular interest, however, is 
the between-groups comparison of electronic and non-electronic peer response in four-member groups. 
Sullivan and Pratt's analysis of the quality of interactions here suggests that face-to-face oral discussions 
were dominated by the author of the essay discussed, whereas there was no one individual dominating the 
floor in the same type of discussions on the computer. As a result, the researchers claim, the quality and 
efficacy of peer suggestions for revision increased in the electronic mode. 
Lourdes Oretga Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 84 
Warschauer (1996a) undertook a within-groups, counterbalanced comparison of open-ended discussions 
in face-to-face and electronic discussions by four small groups of four students each. He calculated the 
ratio of total words produced by speaker per total amount of words produced by the group and concluded 
that three out of the four groups showed greater equality of participation in the electronic discussion. 
More research is needed that compares participation patterns of face-to-face versus electronic small group 
discussions, carefully controlling group format as well as other task features so as to increase the validity 
of the experimental comparisons. 
CACD Increases in Language Output and Learner Productivity 
In close parallel to changes in teacher/learner participation patterns and equitable sharing of the floor 
among individual participants, another possible advantage of electronic synchronous discussions is an 
increase in the amount of participation per individual, that is, an increase in learner productivity. In the L1 
literature on electronic interaction, productivity of ideas (e.g., Gallupe, Bastianutti, & Cooper, 1991) and 
provision of practice (e.g., DiMatteo, 1990, 1991) have been general concerns, especially in relation to 
uses of synchronous electronic discussion for the teaching of composition. More specifically, 
collaborative and process-oriented approaches to writing point at the interest of discerning whether 
electronic discussions are an efficient way of increasing the volume of new ideas generated 
collaboratively by participants and the number of suggestions for revision and edition produced by peers 
(see Hartman et al., 1991; Sullivan & Pratt, 1996). 
Quantity of linguistic production (rather than quantity and quality of ideas) has been of central interest in 
the FL literature on CACD because of the immediate implications for L2 learning in relation to SLA 
theory. Under a skills-based view of language acquisition, in addition to exposure to relevant input and 
implicit or explicit presentation of language points, productive practice in the target language is posited to 
be a facilitative if not necessary condition for L2 development (e.g., Ellis, 1980). A more precise 
formulation of this position is Swain's (1985) comprehensible output hypothesis, that predicts a crucial 
role for language production in L2 development on the grounds that meaningful use of a learner's 
linguistic resources "pushes" interlanguage development by forcing the learner to map function-to-form 
and meaning-to-form relationships in light of particular contexts of language use. The tentative finding 
that can be gleaned from the literature is that CACD may provide for an instructional context that 
generates opportunities for (communicative) practice of the target language and opportunities for 
(meaningful) learner output to a significantly greater degree than more traditional arrangements in the L2 
classroom. 
Kern (1995) found that students had from two- to three-and-a-half times more turns and produced two to 
four times more sentences and more words in the InterChange discussion than in the oral discussion. He 
used several rough measures of language productivity (length of learner output in terms of number of 
words, sentences, and turns) that are difficult to interpret because of the lack of controlled comparisons 
with face-to-face language production under equivalent conditions (such as number of participants, plus 
or minus teacher participation, etc.). Comparisons of total learner language production in the electronic 
and non-electronic mode are not reported in Warschauer (1996a). The remaining studies provide indirect 
support for an increase in learner language production in the electronic mode by attesting to the drastic 
reduction of teacher talk in favor of student production (particularly Sullivan & Pratt, 1996). 
There is also anecdotal evidence that backsliding into the L1 is minimized in electronic discussion 
(Beauvois, 1992; Kelm, 1992; Chun, 1994; but see Kern, 1995). The caveat should be raised here that it is 
difficult to establish links between the amount of language produced and the relative time that was 
actually invested in it (i.e., composing messages) because of the individual freedom in electronic 
discussions to allocate time and effort to several tasks, such as reading others' messages, editing and 
Lourdes Oretga Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 85 
revising one's own contribution before sending it, and so forth. In addition, the quantity angle in analyses 
of CACD discourse does not provide any indication of the extent to which the output in question is 
competence expanding: sheer amount in practicing what is already known well may not be relevant from 
a language development viewpoint (Chapelle, personal communication, May 1996). 
Quality of Linguistic Production in CACD 
This is arguably the area of CACD of most interest for evaluating electronic synchronous discussions and 
establishing links with L2 development and overall language ability gains. However, very little is known 
partly because of the scarce research that is available and partly because of the lack of theoretically 
motivated approaches that guided the few existing language analyses. 
It has been suggested that interactional written discourse resulting from electronic communication is 
linguistically different from both traditional written and oral discourse (e.g., Ferrara, Brunner, & 
Whittemore, 1991; Yates, 1996; this is the assumption in Chun, 1994, and Kern, 1995), but the extent of 
those differences and the implications for language learning are yet to be elucidated. As Beauvois (1992) 
rightly points out, we do not exactly know the extent to which CACD promotes practice of different 
language skills, such as writing, "conversing," or reading. Furthermore, the discoursal status of language 
produced in electronic interactions seems difficult to determine. Kern (1995) found that the average turn 
length was similar in both the electronic and non-electronic condition, although simpler, shorter messages 
tended to elicit more responses than complex, longer ones in the electronic mode. Along the same lines, 
Kelm (1992) characterized the interactive quality of discourse in CACD as similar to the flow of real 
conversation, impressionistically estimating that "nearly every computer comment ends with a direct 
question or a tag question to invite feedback" (p. 445). 
Warschauer (1996a), by contrast, reported that exchanges on the computer were longer but the level of 
interaction was lower "with people expressing their own ideas as opposed to directly answering 
questions" (p. 10). Overall characterizations and comparisons are complicated by the intervening factor of 
individual "styles of discussing" in the electronic mode (Chun, 1994, p. 21) that result in some learners 
contributing with short messages that are closer to oral language, while other learners may produce 
longer, more substantial turns that stand closer to the written language. Ultimately, it would seem that a 
learner's perception of the communicative context and interpretation of the task at hand in CACD has an 
impact on whether the language produced by each individual participant more closely resembles written 
or oral discourse in terms of both linguistic complexity and degree of interactiveness. 
Chun's (1994) study provides the most detailed analysis to date regarding interactional features of the 
discourse of CACD. Chun was interested in examining interactive and functional features of learner 
discourse that would link CACD to the development of communicative competence (as defined in Canale 
& Swain, 1980) and "interactional competence" (following Kramsch, 1986). She found that CACD 
fostered discoursal moves such as: (a) topic initiation, own- and other-topic expansion; (b) interactional 
moves such as clarification requests, comprehension and confirmation checks; and (c) repairs in case of 
misunderstandings. Thus, her claim that a great variety of functions and interactional moves will be 
effected when learners engage in electronic discussions was supported. However, Chun did not employ 
the analytical tools developed in SLA work on interaction and negotiation of meaning (see Long, 1996, 
for an overview of interactionist theories and research); her analysis of discoursal categories draws on the 
general pedagogical ESL and FL literature. Consequently, not much can be said as to whether the type of 
interaction resulting from CACD affords learners with the relevant kinds of opportunities for negotiation 
of meaning that have long been established as conducive to interlanguage development. 
Lourdes Oretga Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 86 
The analyses of syntactic complexity conducted by Chun (1994), Kern (1995), and Warschauer (1996a) 
yielded somewhat conflicting results that only partially support the hypothesis of a greater complexity of 
the interlanguage produced in electronic discussions. In their studies, Chun (1994) and Kern (1995) found 
that CACD learner output showed a higher proportion of simple sentences over complex ones. In 
addition, Kern reports a lower density of complex structures in the InterChange discussions compared to 
the oral whole-class discussions. In conflict with these results, Warschauer (1996a) compared the 
coordination index (i.e., syntactic complexity) and the type-token ratio (i.e., lexical range) of the language 
produced in CACD and face-to-face small group discussions and found that both measures, but especially 
the coordination index, yielded higher values for the electronic mode. Ad hoc measures such as 
morphosyntactic range have been used (Kern, 1995) with positive results for electronic discussions that 
may be biased by confounding differences in total length between conditions. Obviously, a wider range of 
well-motivated measures of syntactic complexity and lexical range is needed in further studies if the 
linguistic quality of learner interlanguage in electronic discussions is to be assessed and compared to 
learner output in more traditional oral and written tasks. 
NEW DIRECTIONS FOR RESEARCH IN CACD 
CACD and Language Outcomes from an SLA Perspective 
As can be surmised from the discussion above, at least two aspects of production need to be separately 
investigated. First, in order to evaluate the potential of CACD for second language learning and language 
development, the interlanguage produced over time in electronic discussions needs to be analyzed in 
terms of quantitative measures of syntactic complexity, lexical range, accuracy, and writing fluency. 
Accuracy has not been investigated, under the unanimous assumption that CACD fosters a focus on 
meaning and, hence, probably results in lower degrees of accuracy (Beauvois, 1992; Kelm, 1992; Kern, 
1995). Pellettieri (1997) investigated the provision of negative feedback in dyadic tasks using ytalk, a 
synchronous written environment somewhat similar to InterChange, and found that morphosyntactic 
aspects of learner output were the target of negotiation and correction moves and that L2 learners seemed 
to pay attention to form during the electronic exchanges. Indeed, the issue of focus on form and accuracy 
within CACD interactions stands as a promising area for empirical testing since potential greater 
opportunities for planning and monitoring in CACD may affect interlanguage accuracy in complex ways 
(Crookes, 1989; Ellis, 1987; Ortega, 1995), especially when considering the fact that electronic 
interactions allow learners to allocate attentional resources and use various metacognitive strategies 
according to individual learning styles and learner orientations to communication. To my knowledge, 
there is no study that addresses the issue of fluency in writing in CACD. It is worth noting that "fluency" 
in L2 electronic written discussions (also related to the issue of overall language productivity) may 
involve the investigation of variables such as typing and computer skills, writing apprehension, and 
learner attitudes towards computers (see Sullivan & Pratt, 1996) that have long been of interest to 
educational researchers in the L1 literature (e.g., Hartman et al., 1991). 
A second crucial area in need of further investigation concerns qualitative and quantitative analyses of 
interactional features of CACD discourse that are thought to be relevant in SLA processes and conducive 
to IL development. These features include but are not limited to interactional modifications of input that 
result from negotiation of meaning (clarification requests, comprehension and confirmation checks, 
repairs, self- and other-repetitions, elaborations, expansions), recasts and other forms of corrective 
feedback, and incorporation of others' input in learner output. Recent empirical evidence seems to 
confirm the comparability of task-based electronic and face-to-face interactions when these are carried 
out in dyads (Pellettieri, 1997), but we do not know how "many-to-many" interactions conducted with the 
aid of the computer constitute, resemble, or differ from face-to-face dyadic and small group task-based 
Lourdes Oretga Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 87 
interactions that have been widely investigated in SLA interactionists' studies (e.g., Day, 1986; Gass & 
Madden, 1985; see also Gass & Varonis, 1994; Long, 1996; Long & Sato, 1984; Varonis & Gass, 1985). I 
suspect the lack of adjacency between relevant turns and the loss of chronological information (cf. Werry, 
1996), both essential when analyzing oral interactional discourse, are two main factors that hinder reliable 
analyses of important features, such as interactionally modified input and incorporation. In spite of the 
technical advantages that CACD offers in terms of collecting linguistic data at a minimal effort (being a 
text-based activity that can be easily stored and displayed for inspection), this methodological problem 
may render the application of well-established SLA interactionist analysis to electronic synchronous 
discussions more problematic than initially expected. 
Finally, it has been suggested that learners' intake of relevant features of the interactionally modified 
input (assuming such modifications are found to occur in electronic interactions) may be more easily 
perceived and more memorable because they occur in text form (Warschauer, 1996b, 1997). Depending 
on the varying receptive language abilities of individual students, visual information may be processed 
faster and more easily than aural information and is, in any case, amenable to repeated inspection, acting 
as a built-in external memory aid (Gallupe, Bastianutti, & Cooper, 1991). Thus, an unexplored but 
promising research venue in CACD is to investigate the impact of electronic, text-based interactions on 
SL noticing and awareness (Schmidt 1990, 1993, 1994). 
Communicative Competence and Language Skills in CACD 
Related to the need to determine the discoursal status of the language produced in CACD is the need to 
ascertain the impact of CACD on the development of various components of commmunicative 
competence and of the different language skills (i.e., writing and reading) (Beauvois, 1992; Kern, 1995). 
Indeed, it is unclear what aspects of communicative competence and language ability are being fostered in 
CACD and which may be hindered. 
Specifically, the nature of the linguistic output produced and the extent to which interaction relevant to L2 
learning is involved in CACD remain to be determined. As discussed earlier, the existing studies on 
CACD in L2 classrooms have at best attempted to explore electronic interactive discourse in comparison 
with more traditional oral and written modes of language use; they have done so by examining linguistic 
outcomes alone, and this often with an unfortunate lack of theoretical motivation in the analyses. It would 
seem more fruitful to concentrate our research efforts on documenting not only differential language 
outcomes with well-motivated SLA categories and units of analysis, but also learner perceptions and 
behaviors as they interact with the features of a given CACD task in shaping language performance. 
Arguably, a learner's perception of the communicative context and interpretation of the task at hand have 
a profound impact on the extent to which written or spoken discourse and writing or reading skills are 
practiced and developed in CACD. Without determining particular learners' uses of language and 
communication in well-defined CACD settings, we cannot ascertain the validity of otherwise interesting 
suggestions regarding SL learning and teaching, such as whether CACD promotes the integrated 
development of writing and reading skills (Kern, 1995), whether transfer from CACD communication 
skills to the oral mode may be expected (Chun, 1994; Beauvois, 1992), and whether CACD may 
constitute an ideal bridge from spoken interaction to written composition (Warschauer, 1996a) or from 
text-supported discussion to free oral expression in the target language (Kern, 1995). A sensible approach 
to investigating any of these questions will entail: (a) the careful, unobtrusive documentation of the actual 
processes learners engage in during CACD sessions; (b) well-motivated measures of language 
performance and development; and (c) comparisons of learners' behavior and task outcomes when 
previously identified relevant features and parameters of CACD activities are manipulated. 
Lourdes Oretga Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 88 
Individual Differences in CACD 
Many other aspects of electronic class discussions are unknown to teachers and researchers, although 
some recent studies have started to address them. For instance, affective variables such as attitudes toward 
writing with computers and computer-anxiety may play a role in individual differences in learner 
performance and achievement in CACD (Sullivan & Pratt, 1996; see also Hartman et al., 1991), as may 
learner aptitude and experience in typing and computer skills. Research on individual differences and 
CACD to date has focused on personality, attitude, and motivation. Beauvois and Eledge (1996) studied 
the attitudes of university students toward using Daedalus/InterChange in two third-year French 
conversation and composition sections and found that both extroverted and introverted students (as 
measured by the Meyers-Briggs Type Indicator personality test administered at the beginning of the 
semester) perceived CACD to be beneficial linguistically, affectively, and interpersonally (as manifested 
in a three-dimension exit survey and interview). 
Meunier (1997) followed a similar survey approach with three third-year French and two third-year 
German composition classes using CACD over the course of one semester. Her research encompassed 
questions mostly regarding personality (again, using the MBTI questionnaire), and situational and task-
related motivation (including language-based and computer-based anxiety, risk-taking, and sociability, as 
well as intrinsic and extrinsic motivation). She also considered gender and teaching styles among 
potential factors affecting learner attitude towards CACD. Meunier concluded that CACD fostered highly 
positive attitudes regardless of the learners' initial motivation and computer background (see also 
Warschauer, 1996c), and that certain personality types may be more prone than others to experience 
specific types of anxiety on CACD (e.g., Sensing learners may be prone to language- and accuracy-
related anxiety while Feelers may be more sensitive to communication- and flaming-related anxiety). 
Interestingly, Meunier noted how the teaching styles of the five instructors involved in the study affected 
learners' attitude and motivation towards CACD: lower motivation rates were obtained in classes where 
the instructor exercised tight control over the computer-mediated exchanges (i.e., by monitoring and 
structuring students' contributions during the CACD sessions), or where the electronic discussions were 
occasional and poorly integrated into the overall course. 
Hopefully, future studies can further explore such classroom-related questions. However, research in this 
direction must enhance the confidence and interpretability of findings by ensuring the sample size is 
adequate for survey-type investigations of this kind, by documenting and monitoring classroom processes 
(e.g., teaching styles) and attitude changes throughout the semester, and by establishing direct links 
between self-reported attitude and perceived benefits, on the one hand, and linguistic outcomes, on the 
other. In addition, in-depth qualitative investigations are crucial to document posited attitudinal changes 
towards the foreign language and culture brought about by the use of CACD over time (Beauvois, 1992) 
and to explore the possible impact of CACD on learner motivation and learner identity (Warschauer, 
1996c; 1997). 
Another promising research area concerns the use of learner strategies. In particular, metacognitive 
strategies such as planning and monitoring, which are considered to play an important role in second 
language performance and acquisition (see Crookes, 1988, for a review of both), seem to be greatly 
fostered in CACD. As Kelm (1992) rightly describes, "students can read comments at their own pace, 
type their responses at their leisure, and wait to send messages only when they are completely satisfied 
with what they have written" (p. 44). All of this is possible without the dangers of being interrupted, 
making interlocutors become bored or impatient, receiving physical or verbal evaluative signs from the 
audience, or forgetting one's own ideas while waiting for an opportunity to take the floor. Moreover, 
unlike many other CALL activities (e.g., drill-and-practice software, simulation games, intelligent 
tutorials on grammar) that also allow for considerable flexibility and self-pace, electronic synchronous 
Lourdes Oretga Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 89 
discussion remains a collaborative, interactive, and time- and space- bound activity, as most oral 
communication is. Since many-to-many electronic synchronous discussions lessen the communicative 
stress otherwise involved in on-line communication tasks (Anderson, Brown, Shillock, & Yule, 1984; 
Givón, 1979; Horwitz & Young, 1991), planning opportunity seems to be greater in electronic discussions 
than in face-to-face oral tasks. 
Likewise, monitoring is possible in computer-assisted discussions because of the freedom to revise and 
edit a message at will before sending it to all participants, with the methodological advantage that many 
software applications for synchronous written communication allow the automatic record of all keys 
typed, including backspaces, deletions, and so forth (e.g., Condon & Cech, 1996; Pellettieri, 1997). The 
area of monitoring is in need of careful research in computer-mediated communication, since conflicting 
demands of the particular context and differing attitudes towards accuracy (that may depend on learners' 
particular orientation towards the task, on personality differences, on teaching styles, etc.) may 
differentially affect individual monitoring behavior (cf. Meunier, 1997) and, hence, accuracy of the 
output. In addition to planning and monitoring, resourcing (see O'Malley, Chamot, Stewner-Manzanares, 
Kupper, & Russo, 1985) is also greatly facilitated by the assistance of the Thesaurus, and the spelling and 
grammar checks, all of which are available for users of the Daedalus/InterChange software at any time 
during the CACD session. Although the existing literature has identified the potential benefits of using 
CACD in relation to enhanced opportunities for strategy use, and particularly for planning and monitoring 
(Kern, 1995), no research has been done in this area. 
A methodological consideration is in order here. Presumably, most of the overt manifestations of 
monitoring and resourcing behaviors can be described by examining non-linguistic moves that the learner 
performs on the computer, (e.g., deleting, cutting and pasting, selecting the grammar or spelling check, 
selecting the Thesaurus). Planning, on the other hand, is a metacognitive strategy that covers a complex 
range of cognitive and metacognitive psycholinguistic processes which are difficult to inspect through 
observation and recording of overt behavior only (Crookes, 1988; Ortega, 1996). Hence, a premise to this 
direction of CACD research is to collect data from sources other than the linguistic output of learners (i.e., 
the CACD automatically-produced transcripts), by means of techniques that can record reliable 
information on what overt and covert behaviors learners engage in in the process of computer-assisted 
interaction. Specifically, empirical descriptions of preferred learner strategies fostered by CACD 
activities would involve documentation of learners' moves interacting with the computer program, self-
reported accounts of learner strategies and attentional focus, and observational data collected by the 
researcher in the course of the electronic discussion. 
"INSIDE THE BLACK BOX" OF CACD: CONCLUDING REMARKS 
In this review, I hope to have argued how, ultimately, CACD constitutes yet another potential "black box" 
in L2 classroom-based research (Long, 1980) if task processes and task conditions are left outside the 
scope of inquiry. The following methodological and theoretical recommendations for future research on 
CACD in L2 classrooms have been suggested: 
Comparisons of the participation patterns and the language and discourse produced in traditional 
classroom discussions versus electronic synchronous discussions need to ensure that task features and 
context variables, particularly group format and size, are truly comparable. 
CACD studies which focus on participation patterns and amount and quality of linguistic output will be 
most useful when well-motivated and well-established categories and measures are employed for the 
analysis of language and interaction. Specifically, multiple outcome measures and comparisons of 
accuracy, communicative ability, fluency, and so forth in CACD will need to be motivated in SLA theory 
Lourdes Oretga Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 90 
if links with L2 learning are to be established. Assuming that methodological problems in the analysis of 
non-sequential and asynchronous language data as recorded in the InterChange transcripts are not 
insurmountable, reliable measures of interactionally-modified input and learner incorporation of that input 
are crucial in elucidating the role of interactions produced in CACD for SLA. 
Rather than focusing on the overall benefits of CACD per se or on general differences between electronic 
and face-to-face discussions, research needs to move toward explaining how CACD can be used in ways 
that may have differential consequences for L2 learning by principled manipulation of the array of 
activity types and task configurations which CACD environments allow. Chapelle (1996) has developed a 
framework for the description and classification of CALL tasks which is based on an integration of 
seminal research in systemic linguistics (Halliday, 1978; Halliday & Hasan, 1989), work on pedagogical 
language tasks by Breen (1987), and more generally the underpinnings of interactionist SLA theory 
(Long, 1996). Other possible classifications for language tasks have been proposed in the literature and 
could be equally used for the motivation of research designs on CACD tasks (e.g., Pica, Kanagy, & 
Falodun, 1993; and Skehan, 1996). 
The combination of observation, self-report data collected through questionnaires and think-aloud 
protocols, and computer-collected data (of both linguistic outcomes and non-linguistic moves) will 
enhance the internal validity of the studies (cf. Jamieson & Chapelle, 1987) and will enable a more 
accurate assessment of the ways in which CACD fosters self-regulatory learning and communication 
strategies and of the impact of such strategies on SL performance in the electronic mode. Establishing 
links between self-reported and observed behaviors and linguistic outcomes should be a priority in this 
type of CACD research. 
CACD studies need to document and monitor not only processes and outcomes during the CACD 
sessions, but also other aspects of classroom learning (e.g., teaching style, degree of integration of CACD 
tasks into the syllabus, etc.) that seem to affect the ways in which learners interpret and perform CACD 
tasks. 
The most promising aspects of networked communication seem to derive from the potential degree of 
freedom accrued by CACD to L2 learners in terms of choices, priorities, and attentional demands in the 
completion of tasks, while preserving the collaborative, interactive, and time- and space-bound nature of 
most oral communication. For teachers and researchers alike, this same flexibility underscores the need to 
engage in fruitful and systematic inquiry which helps elucidate the relative impact of relevant features of 
CACD on learner L2 performance and L2 acquisition. To this end, more research is needed on the nature 
of language, learning, and interaction fostered in networked synchronous communication in L2 
classrooms. 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Lourdes Ortega is a doctoral candidate in Second Language Acquisition at the University of Hawai'i. She 
has published in Modern Language Journal, Spanish Applied Linguistics, and several edited volumes. Her 
research interests focus on interlanguage development, task-based interaction, and SLA research methods. 
E-mail: lortega@hawaii.edu 
 
Lourdes Oretga Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 91 
REFERENCES 
Anderson, A., Brown, G., Shillock, R., & Yule, G. (1984). Teaching talk. Strategies for production and 
assessment. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Barker, T. T., & Kemp, F. O. (1990). Network theory: A postmodern pedagogy for the writing classroom. 
In C. Handa (Ed.), Computers and community: Teaching composition in the twenty-first century (pp. 1-
27). Portsmouth: Boynton/Cook. 
Barton, E. L. (1994). Interpreting the discourses of technology. In C. L. Selfe & S. Hilligoss 
(Eds.), Literacy and computers: The complications of teaching and learning technology (pp. 56-75). New 
York: MLA. 
Batson, T. (1988). The ENFI project: A networked classroom approach to writing instruction. Academic 
Computing, 2, 32-33. 
Beauvois, M. H. (1992). Computer-assisted classroom discussion in the foreign language classroom: 
Conversation in slow motion. Foreign Language Annals, 25(5), 455-464. 
Beauvois, M. H., & Eledge, J. (1996). Personality types and megabytes: Student attitudes toward 
computer-mediated communication (CMC) in the language classroom. CALICO Journal, 13, 27-45. 
Berlin, J. A. (1987). Rhetoric and reality. Writing instruction in American colleges, 1900-1985. 
Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press. 
Breen, M. P. (1987). Learner contributions to task design. In C. N. Candlin & D. Murphy 
(Eds.), Language learning tasks. Lancaster practical papers in English language education, Volume 7 
(pp. 23-46). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall International. 
Bump, J. (1990). Radical changes in class discussion using networked computers. Computers and the 
Humanities, 24, 49-65. 
Canale, M., & Swain, M. (1980). Theoretical bases of communicative approaches to second language 
teaching and testing. Applied Linguistics, 1, 1-47. 
Cazden, C. B. (1988). Classroom discourse: The language of teaching and learning. Portsmouth, NH: 
Heinemann. 
Chapelle, C. A. (1996). Computer applications in applied linguistics. University of Iowa. Manuscript in 
preparation. 
Chaudron, C. (1988). Second language classrooms. Research on teaching and learning. Cambridge/New 
York: Cambridge University Press. 
Chavez, C. L. (1997). Students take flight with Daedalus: Learning Spanish in a networked 
classroom. Foreign Language Annals, 30, 27-37. 
Chun, D. M. (1994). Using computer networking to facilitate the acquisition of interactive 
competence. System, 22(1), 17-31. 
Lourdes Oretga Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 92 
Colomb, G. G., & Simutis, J. A. (1996). Visible conversation and academic inquiry: CMC in a culturally 
diverse classroom. In S. Herring (Ed.), Computer-mediated communication: Linguistics, social, and 
cross-cultural perspectives (pp. 203-222). Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Condon, S. L. & Cech, C. G. (1996). Functional comparison of face-to-face and computer-mediated 
decision making interactions. In S. Herring (Ed.), Computer-mediated communication: Linguistics, 
social, and cross-cultural perspectives (pp. 65-80). Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Cononelos, T., & Oliva, M. (1993). Using computer networks to enhance foreign language/culture 
education. Foreign Language Annals, 26, 525-534. 
Cooper, M. M., & Selfe, C. L. (1990). Computer conferences and learning: Authority, resistance, and 
internally persuasive discourse. College English, 52, 847-869. 
Crookes, G. (1988). Planning, monitoring, and second language development: A review (Technical 
Report #4). Center for Second Language Classroom Research, Social Science Research Institute, 
Honolulu: University of Hawai'i. 
Crookes, G. (1989). Planning and interlanguage variation. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 11, 
367-383. 
Cummins, J., & Sayers, D. (1990). Education 2001: Learning networks and educational 
reform. Computers in the Schools, 7(1/2), 1-29. 
Daedalus Inc. (1989). Daedalus Integrated Writing Environment. [computer program] Austin, TX: 
Daedalus Group. 
Day, R. (Ed.). (1986). Conversation in second language acquisition: Talking to learn. Rowley, MA: 
Newbury House. 
DiMatteo, A. (1990). Under erasure: A theory for interactive writing in real time. Computers and 
Composition, 7(S.I.), 71-84. 
DiMatteo, A. (1991). Communication, writing, learning: An anti-instrumentalist view of network 
writing. Computers and Composition, 8(3), 5-19. 
Doughty, C. (1987). Relating second-language acquisition theory to CALL research and application. In 
W. F. Smith (Ed.), Modern media in foreign language education: Theory and implementation (pp. 133-
167). Lincolnwood, IL: National Textbook Company. 
Ellis, R. (1980). Classroom interaction and its relation to second language learning. RELC Journal, 11, 
29-48. 
Ellis, R. (1987). Interlanguage variability in narrative discourse: Style shifting in the use of the past 
tense. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 9, 1-20. 
Ferrara, K., Brunner, H., & Whittemore, G. (1991). Interactive written discourse as an emergent 
register. Written Communication, 8(1), 9-33. 
Lourdes Oretga Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 93 
Flores, M. (1990). Computer conferencing: Composing a feminist community of writers. In C. Handa 
(Ed.), Computers and community: Teaching composition in the twenty-first century (pp. 107-139). 
Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. 
Gallupe, R. B., Bastianutti, L. M., & Cooper, W. H. (1991). Unblocking brainstorms. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 76, 137-142. 
Gass, S., & Madden, C. (Eds.). (1985). Input in second language acquisition. Rowley, MA: Newbury 
House. 
Gass, S. M., & Varonis, E. M. (1994). Input, interaction, and second language production. Studies in 
Second Language Acquisition, 16, 283-302. 
Givón, T. (1979). From discourse to syntax: Grammar as a processing strategy. In T. Givón 
(Ed.), Discourse and syntax. Syntax and semantics (pp. 81-109). New York: Academic press. 
Halliday, M. A. K. (1978). Language as social semiotic. The social interpretation of language and 
meaning. London: Edward Arnold. 
Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1989). Language, context, and text: Aspects of language in a social-
semiotic perspective. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Hartman, K., Neuwirth, C. M., Kiesler, S. , Sproull, L., Cochran, C., Plamquist, M., & Zubrow, D. 
(1991). Patterns of social interaction and learning to write: Some effects of network technologies. Written 
Communication, 8(1), 79-113. 
Hawisher, G. E. (1994). Blinding insights: Classification schemes and software for literacy instruction. In 
C. L. Selfe & S. Hilligoss (Eds.), Literacy and computers. The complications of teaching and learning 
technology (pp. 37-55). New York: MLA. 
Heritage, J. C. (1989). Current developments in conversation analysis. In D. Roger & P. Bull (Eds.), 
Conversation: An interdisciplinary perspective. Clevendon, Philadelphia: Multilingual Matters. 
Herring, S. (Ed.). (1996). Computer-mediated communication: Linguistic, social, and cross-cultural 
perspectives. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Horwitz, E., & Young, D. (1991). Language anxiety: From theory and research to classroom 
implications. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall. 
Jamieson, J., & Chapelle, C. (1987). Working styles on computers as evidence of second language 
learning strategies. Language Learning, 37, 523-544. 
Kelm, O. R. (1992). The use of synchronous computer networks in second language instruction: A 
preliminary report. Foreign Language Annals, 25, 441-545. 
Kern, R. G. (1995). Restructuring classroom interaction with network computers: Effects on quantity and 
characteristics of language production. The Modern Language Journal, 79, 457-476. 
Lourdes Oretga Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 94 
Kramsch, C. J. (1986). From language proficiency to interactional competence. The Modern Language 
Journal, 70, 366-372. 
Long, M. H. (1980). Inside the "black box": Methodological issues in classroom research on language 
learning. Language Learning, 30, 1-42. 
Long, M. H. (1996). The role of the linguistic environment in second language acquisition. In W. Ritchie 
& T. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 413-468). New York: Academic Press. 
Long, M. H., & Crookes, G. (1993). Units of analysis in syllabus design: The case for task. In G. Crookes 
& S. M. Gass (Eds.), Tasks in a pedagogical context: Integrating theory and practice (pp. 9-54). 
Clevendon: Multilingual Matters. 
Long, M. H., & Sato, C. J. (1984). Methodological issues in interlanguage studies: An interactionist 
perspective. In A. Davies, C. Criper, & A. Howatt (Eds.), Interlanguage (pp. 253-279). Edinburgh: 
Edinburgh University Press. 
McHoul, A. (1978). The organization of turns at formal talk in the classroom. Language in Society, 7, 
183-213. 
Meunier, L. (1997). Personality and motivational factors in computer-mediated foreign language 
communication (CMFLC). Unpublished manuscript, The University of Tulsa. 
Nicholas, M. A., & Toporski, N. (1993). Developing "The Critic's Corner": Computer assisted language 
learning for upper-level Russian students. Foreign Language Annals, 26, 469-478. 
Oliva, M., & Pollastrini, Y. (1995). Internet resources and second language acquisition: An evaluation of 
virtual immersion. Foreign Language Annals, 28, 551-563. 
Olson, C. P. (1987). Who computes? In D. W. Livingstone (Ed.), Critical pedagogy and cultural 
power (pp. 179-204). South Hadley: Bergin. 
O'Malley, J. M., Chamot, A. U., Stewner-Manzanares, G., Kupper, L., & Russo, R. (1985). Learning 
strategy applications with students of English as a second language. TESOL Quarterly, 19, 557-584. 
Ortega, L. (1995) Planning and second language oral performance. Unpublished master's thesis, 
University of Hawai`i. 
Ortega, L. (1996). Planning and second language oral performance: The state of the art. In C. Reeves, C. 
Steele, & C. Wong (Eds.), Linguistics and language teaching: Proceedings of the Sixth Joint LHS-
HATESL Conference (Technical Report #10) Honolulu: University of Hawai`i, Second Language 
Teaching & Curriculum Center. 
Pellettieri, J. (1997). Negotiation in cyberspace: Critical perspectives on network-based interaction and 
second language acquisition. Manuscript in preparation, University of California at Davis. 
Pica, T., Kanagy, R., & Falodun, J. (1993). Choosing and using communication tasks for second language 
instruction. In G. Crookes & S. Gass (Eds.), Tasks and language learning: Integrating theory and 
practice (pp. 9-34). Clevendon, England: Multilingual Matters. 
Lourdes Oretga Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 95 
Schenkein, J. (Ed.). (1978). Studies in the organization of conversational interaction. New York: 
Academic Press. 
Schmidt, R. (1990). The role of consciousness in second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 11(2), 
129-158. 
Schmidt, R. (1993). Awareness and second language acquisition. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 
13, 206-226. 
Schmidt, R. (1994). Deconstructing consciousness in search of useful definitions for applied 
linguistics. AILA Review, 11, 11-26. 
Selfe, C. L. (1989). Redefining literacy: The multi-layered grammars of computers. In G. E. Hawisher & 
C. L. Selfe (Eds.), Critical perspectives on computers and composition studies (pp. 3-15). New York: 
Teachers College Press. 
Selfe, C. L. (1990). Technology in the English classroom: Computers through the lens of feminist theory. 
In C. Handa (Ed.), Computers and community: Teaching composition in the twenty-first 
century. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. 
Selfe, C. L., & Hilligoss, S. (Eds.). (1994). Literacy and computers. The complications of teaching and 
learning with technology. New York: The Modern Language Association of America. 
Sinclair, J. M., & Coulthard, R. M. (1975). Towards an analysis of discourse: The English used by 
teachers and pupils. London: Oxford University Press. 
Skehan, P. (1996). A framework for the implementation of task-based instruction. Applied Linguistics, 17, 
38-62. 
Sullivan, N., & Pratt, E. (1996). A comparative study of two ESL writing environments: A computer-
assisted classroom and a traditional oral classroom. System, 29, 491-501. 
Swain, M. (1985). Communicative competence: Some roles of comprehensible input and comprehensible 
output in its development. In S. M. Gass & C. G. Madden (Eds.), Input in second language 
acquisition (pp. 235-253). Rowley, Mass.: Newbury House. 
Underwood, J. (1984). Linguistics, computers, and the language learner. Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
Varonis, E., & Gass, S. (1985). Non-native/non-native conversations: A model for negotiation of 
meaning. Applied Linguistics, 6, 71-90. 
Warschauer, M. (1996a). Comparing face-to-face and electronic discussion in the second language 
classroom. CALICO Journal, 13, 7-25. 
Warschauer, M. (1996b). Computer-mediated collaborative learning: Theory and practice (Research 
Note #17). Honolulu: University of Hawai'i, Second Language Teaching & Curriculum Center. 
Warschauer, M. (1996c). Motivational aspects of using computers for writing and communication. In M. 
Warschauer (Ed.), Telecommunication in foreign language learning: Proceedings of the Hawaii 
Lourdes Oretga Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 96 
symposium (pp. 29-46). Honolulu: University of Hawai'i, Second Language Teaching & Curriculum 
Center. 
Warschauer, M. (in press). Online learning in sociocultural context. Anthropology & Education 
Quarterly. 
Warschauer, M. (1997). Electronic literacies. Manuscript in preparation, University of Hawai'i. 
Werry, C. C. (1996). Linguistic and interactional features of Internet Relay Chat. In S. Herring 
(Ed.), Computer-mediated communication: Linguistics, social, and cross-cultural perspectives (pp. 47-
63). Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
White, R. V. (1988). The ELT curriculum. Design, innovation, and management. Oxford: Basil 
Blackwell. 
Wilkins, D. A. (1976). Notional syllabuses. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Yates, S. J. (1996). Oral and written linguistic aspects of computer conferencing. In S. Herring 
(Ed.), Computer-mediated communication: Linguistics, social, and cross-cultural perspectives (pp. 29-
46). Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
 
 
