Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/emerging.html 
July 1997, Volume 1, Number 1 
pp. 5-8 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 1997, ISSN 1094-3501 7 
EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES 
Real-time Audio and Video Playback on the Web 
Bob Godwin-Jones  
Virginia Commonwealth University 
 
Contents: 
 From Downloading to Streaming 
 Standards and Players 
 Language Sites 
 Instructional Uses 
 Resource List 
o Streaming Formats and Sample Sites 
o Developer's Corner 
From Downloading to Streaming 
For many of us interested in language teaching and technology, our first visit to the Web back in the 
pioneer days of 1993-94 was a revelation, even with the painfully slow rendering of pages supplied 
by early Mosaic. Here was a networked medium which displayed not only text with accented 
characters (unlike e-mail) but also graphics, and--so crucial to our needs--even allowed incorporation 
of audio and video files. And it did so in a non-proprietary, cross-platform format! This seems so 
commonplace to us today that it's hard to realize how tremendous a benefit the standards-based, 
multi-platform compatibility of the Web has been to us in language and technology. It has largely 
made our platform wars and battles over authoring tools irrelevant, while providing a means to reach 
out to everyone, not just the chosen few who share our cyber-religious platform convictions. 
At that time and until recently, the only way to access audio and video files on the Web was to 
download them temporarily to the local computer, a process which could take some time depending 
on the size of the file. Of course, this process is handled transparently by the browser: a helper 
application or the browser itself plays back the file once it has been received in its entirety. Web 
delivery of multimedia files solved a problem for our language lab at VCU and undoubtedly for 
others as well, namely that of how to store digital audio and video clips temporarily on users' 
machines, without having to manually delete or replace them before each new group of students 
comes in for Spanish, French, or German class. 
"What once were virtues now are vices." Today this feature of the Web--the ability to access 
downloadable multimedia files--is seen as problematic. Our give-it-to-me-now mentality needs the 
audio and video to play immediately, not to download first and then play. In fact, Web technology has 
evolved to the point that this kind of real-time delivery (called "streaming") of audio is a reality, even 
over a modem connection. Initial audio quality was that of a cheap AM radio, but the latest players 
feature near CD-qualitystereo (over a fast connection). A number of radio stations, both in the U.S. 
and abroad are now "web-casting" their programs. Many special events and conference presentations 
are being delivered live over the Web in streaming format. 
Video streaming has not yet reached the same level of maturity and performance. Real-time video 
provides a small playback window and delivery tends to be choppy and erratic and especially painful 
over a modem connection. Given the enormous volume of visual and graphic information needed to 
Roberrt Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Real-time Audio and Video … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 8 
transmit and synchronize video, it's not surprising that reliable streaming video over the congested 
Internet is a tremendous technical challenge. Progressive Networks recently introduced 
their RealVideo streaming technology, which offers a significant improvement in quality. As 
compression technologies evolve and network bandwidth increases (for example through the new 56k 
modems), video broadcasting over the Web should steadily improve in quality and performance. 
Standards and Players  
There is not yet a single standard for delivery of streaming audio and video over the Web. Currently 
the major formats are StreamWorks, Vivo, VDO, and RealAudio/RealVideo, the latter being the most 
widely used standard. With all available standards, the quality of the delivered files varies 
considerably and is dependent on such factors as the speed of your Internet connection, the capability 
of your computer and the location of and traffic to the site where the file is located. Even under 
optimal conditions, playback is not instantaneous. Typically there is a short "buffering" process 
before playback during which enough of the file is downloaded for it to begin playing. While that 
section is playing, the rest of the file is downloaded in the background in order to allow for 
continuous play. Techniques have been developed to allow a kind of pseudo-streaming of formats that 
normally require initial downloading before playback; this is now possible with QuickTime audio and 
video. 
How the audio or video file is delivered to you on the Web varies with each product, but the basic 
approach is the same. You download the player software to your computer from the company making 
the player (it's best to go direct to the source and get the latest version), run the installation program 
(or follow the instructions to install the player manually), and then re-start your Web browser. The 
streaming formats listed here all come with free players for both Windows and Macintosh computers. 
Some Mac players are for PowerPC Macs only; some Windows players are for Windows95 only. 
They typically require Netscape Navigator 2.0 or higher or Microsoft Internet Explorer 3.0 or higher. 
Most players work as external "helper applications" to your Web browser, but some also can function 
as "plug-in" applications, in which the controls (and in the case of video, the picture) are seamlessly 
integrated into your browser window, rather than being displayed in an external window. 
The player (or plug-in controls) allow the user to play, stop and pause the file, and in most cases also 
jump ahead or back. With streaming formats it is possible to have usable audio files which are quite 
long in length--some on the Web are an hour or longer--and still have it possible for the user to 
navigate through the file asdesired. With downloaded audio files (in au, aiff, or wav formats), that 
kind of length would not be practical since it would take too long to download over the Internet and 
would also require too much temporary storage space on the local PC. Streaming formats are 
compressed much more than other sound or video formats and thus are easier to receive and to store. 
Language Sites 
There is a wealth of streaming audio materials available on the Web in a great variety of languages. 
Unfortunately, not all sites use the same streaming technology; this makes it necessary to make sure 
you have the appropriate player for the site you are visiting. Most will let you know what technology 
they are using and will offer some assistance, but this varies greatly from site to site. The links to sites 
in the Resource List below are intended as examples, they do not represent by any means the full 
extent of offerings in any language. Only technologies for which they are a good number of sites 
offering audio or video in languages other than English are listed. Some sites now offer files in more 
than one streaming standard. 
Roberrt Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Real-time Audio and Video … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 9 
The major European languages offer the richest variety of streaming audio and video. For French 
there is access to radio stations such as Europe 1 or RTL (FranceLink) as well as to news 
from Canada or Tunisia; Regional French news broadcasts are also available, offering a different 
perspective from the national services. Germany's ARD re-broadcasts on the Web its most popular 
TV news shows and the Deutsche Welle service offers a variety of radio 
transmissions; Swiss and Austrian programs are also available. Spanish speakers can tune in to radio 
broadcasts and news from a great diversity of countries including Spain, Mexico, and a number of 
South American countries (including Colombia, Guatemala, Peru, Chile, Ecuador, Uruguay, 
and Venezuela). News is available in streaming format for Italian and Portuguese 
(from Portugal and Brazil). 
Swedish news is available, as is Norwegian, Icelandic, and Finnish. Live radio is being Web-cast 
from Romania, the Czech Republic, and Hungary. You can tune in to Polish broadcasts from Chicago 
(also Bulgarian, Serbian and Russian). Non-European languages are represented as well, with news 
broadcasts from countries such as Israel, Taiwan, Ind ia, Korea, Indonesia, and Japan. The Web offers 
a compelling showcase for regional languages to reach a wider audience--streaming audio is 
available, for example, for Catalan and Cornish. For ESL students, the Timecast server features a 
wide range of sites of potential interest and also allows subscription to a "daily briefing" in user-
selected areas. 
Instructional Uses 
What does this technology offer us as language teachers? The most obvious and direct benefit is the 
availability of authentic language materials in a multimedia format. For language teachers, audio and 
video are not fancy add-ons but provide direct access to the discipline's "content"--human 
communication in all its linguistic and cultural diversity. Streaming technologies provide up-to-date, 
even live, information in an on-demand, easy-to-use format. It's not difficult to imagine building 
lesson plans on the basis of student visits to some of the sites listed above. An interesting benefit is 
that while many sites have alternative English versions of their Web pages, most have only target 
language audio and video (an exception is the current Web hit Calling Bill Gates from Germany). 
One practical concern about basing assignments on such sites is whether the targeted links will still be 
active when students visit the sites. Most of the streaming files can not be cached locally, as is the 
case with HTML files or graphics (or traditional audio). In the case of RealAudio, there is a 
commercial version of the player (RealPlayer Plus) which allows saving and local playback of "real" 
audio and video files. 
Besides having students use language material from target cultures, it is also possible for instructors 
to put their own audio or video materials in streaming format on the Web. How this is done depends 
on the particular product used. For most, it is necessary to save the audio or video file in a proprietary 
format and then upload it to a Web server or to a proprietary media server. For RealAudio, for 
example, an already digitized sound file in au, aiff or wav format is "encoded" into Progressive 
Networks' "ra" (RealAudio) format using either a (free) stand-alone encoder or a plug-in to programs 
such as SoundEdit 16 (Mac) or SoundForge (Windows). In the case of some streaming formats, users 
then link directly to that new sound file. In the case of RealAudio, the user links instead to a "meta" 
file which contains a pointer to the sound file, which is typically delivered from a proprietary 
RealAudio server. Alternatively, RealAudio files can also be streamed from a standard Web server. 
An interesting instructional possibility with RealAudio or RealVideo is "synchronized multimedia." 
While a sound or video file is played, a kind of slide show is shown in the browser window, 
displaying a series of Web pages containing text and/or graphics which complement or illustrate the 
Roberrt Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Real-time Audio and Video … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 10 
audio content. In fact, entire lectures, complete with lecture notes or slides, can be delivered in this 
way. This kind of presentation is also possible through Macromedia's Shockwave plug-in technology. 
For content developers, there are in fact a variety of interesting approaches to incorporating real-time 
audio or video with interactive Web functionality through JavaScript or Java. 
 
Resource List 
Streaming Formats and Sample Sites  
StreamWorks  
Player and info: Xing Technology 
Directory of sites: StreamWorks Sites 
  
Sample sites: 
FranceLink - Links to a number of French radio programs 
La Megaestacion - A San Juan, Puerto Rico radio station (Spanish) 
Yonhap Television News - Korean news 
 
Vivo 
Player and info: Vivo Software 
Directory of sites: VivoActive Video Gallery 
  
Sample sites: 
Italia on-line (Italian) 
Tokyo Broadcasting system (Japanese) 
ONTV-sverige (Swedish) 
 
VDO 
Player and info: VDOnet Corporation 
Directory of sites: VDOGuide 
 
Sample sites: 
ARD - Erstes Deutsche Fernsehen (German) 
Polish news from Chicago - Also links to Bulgarian, Serbian and Russian broadcasts 
FR3 - Regional TV newscasts (French) 
 
RealAudio and RealVideo 
Player and info: Progressive Networks 
Directory of sites: Site Guide 
 
Sample sites: 
Radio-Canada Nouvelles - All-news Web site in French from the CBC 
Tunisia National Radio (ERTT) - News, music and sports in French and Arabic 
Der Spiegel - Links to German multimedia resources 
Deutsche Welle - Rich source of news in German 
Swiss info - In German 
Portugal - Live radio programming in Portuguese from Lisbon 
Brazil - News in Portuguese from Rio de Janeiro 
Roberrt Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Real-time Audio and Video … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 11 
Radio COPE From Madrid (Spanish) 
Colombia - From Bogota (Spanish) 
Uruguay - News and information from Montevideo (Spanish) 
Radiodifusion Argentina al Exterior - From Buenos Aires (Spanish) 
Segundo Informe de Gobierno - From Mexico City (Spanish) 
Venezuela - News and music from Caracas (Spanish) 
Latin News - From Chile, Ecuador and Peru (Spanish) 
Emisoras Unidas - News, sports and entertainment radio station in Spanish from Guatemala 
Hungary - Live news, talk and music programming from Budapest (Hungarian) 
Czech Republic - Multilingual daily news and information about the Czech people 
Croatia - News in Croatian 
Romania - Live radio broadcasts from Bucharest (Romanian) 
RADIO X 97.7 - In Icelandic from Reykjavik 
Swedish Radio - From Stockholm 
Norway - News and information in Norwegian from Oslo 
YLE Radionews - Hourly news broadcasts in Finnish (Helsinki, Finland) 
Taiwan - Music and news in Chinese 
Syahreza's Radio Station - Pop music and news from Jakarta, Indonesia (Indonesian) 
All India Internet radio - Music and news 
Israel - News broadcasts in Hebrew and English 
Ad Newodhow: The Cornish News Service - News from Cornwall (Cornish) 
Catalan - News and talk show programming from Barcelona (Catalan) 
 
Developer's Corner 
  
RealAudio Content Creation Guide - Getting started with RealAudio file creation 
Synchronized multimedia - Sending audio or video with timed slide show 
R ealAudio and JavaScript - Controlling playback of audio (or video) with JavaScript 
Educational Resources - Some sites using RealAudio and RealVideo in instruction 
VivoActive Producer 2.0 - Information on creating Vivo audio or video streaming 
StreamWorks Server FAQ - Frequently asked questions about using the StreamWorks server 
VDOLive Tools - How to create VDO files from QuickTime 
 
Shockwave Director - Pointers to information on streaming with Shockwave 
QuickTime - Information on pseudo-streaming QuickTime movies 
 
SoundForge - Commercial sound editor for Windows 
SoundEdit 16 - Commercial sound editor for Mac 
 
