Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/brown/default.html 
July 1997, Volume 1, Number 1 
pp.44-59 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 1997, ISSN 1094-3501 36 
COMPUTERS IN LANGUAGE TESTING: 
PRESENT RESEARCH AND SOME FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
 
James Dean Brown 
University of Hawai'i at Manoa 
ABSTRACT 
This article begins by exploring recent developments in the use of computers in language testing 
in four areas: (a) item banking, (b) computer-assisted language testing, (c) computerized-adaptive 
language testing, and (d) research on the effectiveness of computers in language testing. 
The article then examines the educational measurement literature in an attempt to forecast the 
directions future research on computers in language testing might take and suggests addressing 
the following issues: (a) piloting practices in computer adaptive language tests (CALTs), (b) 
standardizing or varying CALT lengths, (c) sampling CALT items, (d) changing the difficulty of 
CALT items, (e) dealing with CALT item sets, (f) scoring CALTS, (g) dealing with CALT item 
omissions, (h) making decisions about CALT cut-points, (i) avoiding CALT item exposure, (j) 
providing CALT item review opportunities, and (k) complying with legal disclosure laws when 
using CALTs. 
The literature on computer-assisted language learning indicates that language learners have generally 
positive attitudes toward using computers in the classroom (Reid, 1986; Neu & Scarcella, 1991; Phinney, 
1991), and a fairly large literature has developed examining the effectiveness of computer-assisted 
language learning (for a review, see Dunkel, 1991). But less is known about the more specific area of 
computers in language testing. The purpose of this article is to examine recent developments in language 
testing that directly involve computer use including what we have learned in the process. The article will 
also examine the dominant issue of computer-adaptive testing in the educational measurement literature 
in an attempt to forecast some of the directions future research on computers in language testing might 
take. 
CURRENT STATE OF KNOWLEDGE ON COMPUTERS IN LANGUAGE TESTING 
In reviewing the literature on computers in language testing, I have found four recurring sets of issues: (a) 
item banking, (b) computer-assisted language testing, (c) computer-adaptive language testing, and (d) the 
effectiveness of computers in language testing. The discussion in this section will be organized under 
those four headings. 
Item Banking 
Item banking covers any procedures that are used to create, pilot, analyze, store, manage, and select test 
items so that multiple test forms can be created from subsets of the total "bank" of items. With a large 
item bank available, new forms of tests can be created whenever they are needed. Henning (1986) 
provides a description of how item banking was set up for the ESL Placement Examination at UCLA. 
(For further explanation and examples of item banking in educational testing, see Baker, 1989, pp. 412-
414, or Flaugher, 1990.) 
While the underlying aims of item banking can be accomplished by using traditional item analysis 
procedures (usually item facility and item discrimination indexes; for a detailed description of these 
James Dean Brown Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 37 
traditional item analysis procedures, see Brown, 1996), a problem often occurs because of differences in 
abilities among the groups of people who are used in piloting the items, especially when they are 
compared to the population of students with whom the test is ultimately to be used. However, a relatively 
new branch of test analysis theory, called item response theory (IRT), eliminates the need to have exactly 
equivalent groups of students when piloting items because IRT analysis yields estimates of item difficulty 
and item discrimination that are "sample-free." IRT can also provide "item-free" estimates of students' 
abilities. Naturally, a full discussion of IRT is beyond the scope of this article. However, Henning (1987) 
discusses the topic in terms of the steps involved in item banking for language tests and provides recipe-
style descriptions of how to calculate the appropriate IRT statistics. 
Several other references may prove helpful for readers interested in more information on IRT. In language 
testing, Madsen and Larson (1986) use computers and IRT to study item bias, while de Jong (1986) 
demonstrates the use of IRT for item selection purposes. (For readers who want more technical 
information on applications of IRT to practical testing problems in general education, see Lord, 1980; 
Hambleton & Swaminathan, 1985; Andrich, 1988; Suen, 1990; Wainer & Mislevy, 1990; and Hambleton, 
Swaminathan, & Rogers, 1991.) 
I am not saying that item banking is without potential problems. Green (1988) outlines some of the 
problems that might be encountered in using IRT in general, and Henning (1991) discusses specific 
problems that may be encountered with the validity of item banking techniques in language testing 
settings. Another serious limitation of IRT is the large number of students that must be tested before it can 
responsibly be applied. Typically, IRT is only applicable for full item analysis (that is, for analysis of two 
or three parameters) when the numbers of students being tested are very large by the standards of most 
language programs, that is to say, in excess of one thousand. Smaller samples in the hundreds can be used 
only if the item difficulty parameter is studied. 
Minimal item banking can be done without computers by using file cards, and, of course, the traditional 
item analysis statistics can be done (using the sizes of groups typically found in language programs) with 
no more sophisticated equipment than a hand-held calculator. Naturally, a personal computer can make 
both item banking and item analysis procedures much easier and much faster. For example, standard 
database software can be used to do the item banking, (e.g., Microsoft Access, 1996; or Corel Paradox, 
1996). For IRT analyses, more specialized software will be needed. The following are examples of 
computer programs that can be used for IRT analysis: TESTAT (Stenson, 1988), BIGSTEPS (Wright, 
Linacre, & Schulz, 1990), and PC-BILOG (Mislevy & Bock, 1986). Alternatively, the MicroCAT Testing 
System (1984) program can help with both item banking and IRT analyses. BestTest (1990) is another 
less sophisticated program, which can be used in both item banking and test creation. An example of a 
software program specifically designed for item banking is the PARTest (1990) program. If PARTest is 
used in conjunction with PARScore (1990) and PARGrade (1990), a completely integrated item banking, 
test analysis, and record-keeping system can be set up and integrated with a machine scoring system. 
Indications have also surfaced that computers may effectively be used to assemble pre-equated language 
tests from a bank of items (see Henning, Johnson, Boutin, & Rice, 1994). 
Computer-Assisted Language Testing 
Tests that are administered at computer terminals, or on personal computers, are called computer-assisted 
tests. Receptive-response items-including multiple-choice, true-false, and matching items-are fairly easy 
to adapt to the computer-assisted testing medium. Relatively cheap authoring software 
like Testmaster (1988) can be used to create such tests. Even productive-response item types-including 
fill-in and cloze-can be created using authoring software like Testmaster. Unfortunately, the more 
James Dean Brown Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 38 
interesting types of language tasks (e.g., role plays, interviews, compositions, oral presentations) prove 
much more difficult to develop for computer-assisted testing. 
However, advancing technologies have many potential ramifications for computer-assisted language 
testing. Brown (1992a) outlined some of the technological advances that may have an impact on language 
teaching and testing: 
Consider the multi-media combinations that will be available in the very near future: CD-ROM 
players working with video-image projectors, and computers controlling the whole interactive 
process between students and machines for situations and language tailored to each student's 
specific needs....Consider the uses to which computer communications networks could be put. 
What about scanners and hand-writing recognition devices? Won't voice sensitive computers and 
talking computers be valuable tools in the language media services of the future? (p. 2) 
The new technologies such as the CD-ROM and interactive video discussed in Brown (1992a) do make it 
possible for students to interact with a computer. Hence, no technical reason remains why interactive 
testing like role plays, interviews, compositions, and presentations cannot be done in a computer-assisted 
mode. Naturally, the expense involved may impose some limits, and the scoring will probably continue to 
involve rater judgments (thus, further increasing the expense involved). But at least, the logistics of 
gathering the language samples can now be simplified by the use of computer-assisted testing procedures. 
Two consequences may evolve from the current advances in technology: (a) the sophistication of existing 
computer hardware and software tools will continue to grow, and (b) the cost of the technology will 
continue to drop (eventually to within reach of all language programs). Hence, the possibilities for 
developing productive-response computer-assisted language tests will definitely increase. 
But, why should we bother to create computer-assisted language tests at all? Aren't they really just a 
sophisticated version of the paper-and-pencil tests that they will probably be modeled on? Two primary 
benefits can be gained from computer-assisted language testing: 
1. Computer-assisted language tests can be individually administered, even on a walk-in basis. Thus 
group-administered tests and all of the organizational constraints that they impose will no longer 
be necessary. 
2. Traditional time limits are not necessary. Students can be given as much time as they need to 
finish a given test because no human proctor needs to wait around for them to finish the test. 
No doubt, cheating will arise, but such problems can be surmounted if a little thought and planning are 
used. 
Given the advantages of individual, time-independent language testing, computer-assisted testing will no 
doubt prove to be a positive development. Consider the benefits of a writing test administered in a 
computer laboratory as the final examination for an ESL writing course. Such a computer-assisted test 
would be especially suitable for students who had been required to do all of their writing assignments in 
the course on a PC. In such a course, it would make imminent sense to allow the students to do their final 
examination writing samples on a computer and turn in the diskette at the end of the testing period (or 
send the file by modem or network to the teacher). Under such circumstances, the testing period could be 
quite long to allow time for multiple revisions. Of course, logistical problems will crop up, but they can 
no doubt be overcome with careful planning. In fact, the literature indicates that computers can be an 
effective tool for teaching writing (Neu & Scarcella, 1991; Phinney, 1991). Why not also use it as an 
effective tool for testing writing (see for example Reid, 1986)? 
James Dean Brown Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 39 
Computer-Adaptive Language Testing 
Computer-adaptive language tests are a subtype of computer-assisted language tests because they are 
administered at computer terminals or on personal computers. The computer-adaptive subtype of 
computer-assisted tests has three additional characteristics: (a) the test items are selected and fitted to the 
individual students involved, (b) the test is ended when the student's ability level is located, and, as a 
consequence, (c) computer-adaptive tests are usually relatively short in terms of the number of items 
involved and the time needed. As Madsen (1991) put it, "The computer-adaptive language test (CALT) is 
uniquely tailored to each individual. In addition, CALT is automatically terminated when the examinee's 
ability level has been determined....The result is a test that is more precise yet generally much shorter than 
conventional paper-and-pencil tests" (p. 237). 
A clear description of how to develop computer-adaptive language tests (CALTs) is provided in Tung 
(1986). (For descriptions of more general computer-adaptive test [CAT] development in educational 
measurement, see Kaya-Carton, Carton, & Dandonoli, 1991, as well as Laurier, 1991; 1996.) CALT 
development relies very much on item response theory. While the computer-adaptive language test is 
taking place, the computer typically uses a combination of item response theory and the concept of 
flexilevel tests (Lord, 1980) to create a test specifically designed for the individual student taking it. 
The flexilevel procedures roughly determine the general ability level of the student within the first few 
test questions. Then, based on item response statistics, the computer selects items which are suitable for 
the student's particular level and administers those items in order to get a more finely tuned estimate of 
the student's ability level. This flexilevel strategy eliminates the need (usually present in traditional fixed-
length paper-and-pencil tests) for students to answer numerous questions that are too difficult or too easy 
for them. In fact, in a CALT, all students take tests that are suitable to their own particular ability levels-
tests that may be very different for each student. (Readers interested in further information on computer-
adaptive language testing should see Larson & Madsen, 1985, and for a discussion of both positive and 
negative aspects, see Canale, 1986.) 
One example of the actual development of a CALT is the Montgomery County Public Schools project 
which is described in Stevenson and Gross (1991). Madsen (1991) describes another example of a CALT 
which was applied to students at Brigham Young University in Utah for testing reading and listening 
abilities. The Madsen (1991) study indicates that many fewer items are necessary in administering 
computer-adaptive language tests than are necessary in pencil-and-paper tests and that the testing time is 
correspondingly shorter. For example, the CALT in Madsen (1991) used an average of 22.8 items to 
adequately test the students in an average of 27.2 minutes. The comparable conventional reading test used 
in the study required 60 items and 40 minutes. 
Educational Testing Service (ETS) is providing considerable leadership in the area of what they are 
calling computer-based tests. That organization is already offering the GRE and PRAXIS as computer-
based tests in 180 countries. In 1998, a computer-based version of the TOEFL examination will be 
released in North America and selected countries abroad, though paper-and-pencil versions will continue 
to be used until computer delivery is available. 
Because of recent efforts to develop computer-based versions of the TOEFL, some of the research at ETS 
has focused on the effects of computer familiarity on TOEFL test performance. For instance, Kirsch, 
Jamieson, Taylor, and Eignor (1997) (based on a computer-familiarity scale discussed in Eignor, Taylor, 
Kirsch, & Jamieson, 1997) indicates that, in general, computer familiarity is related to individuals' 
TOEFL scores. At the same time, Taylor, Jamieson, Eignor, and Kirsch (1997) indicates that, after 
students participate in a computer-based testing tutorial, there is no meaningful relationship between 
James Dean Brown Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 40 
computer familiarity and individuals' TOEFL scores. (Readers interested in more information on the new 
TOEFL developments can contact TOEFL Programs and Services, P.O. Box 6155, Princeton, NJ 08541-
6155, use e-mail: toefl@ets.org, or visit their web site: http://www.toefl.org. Readers interested in more 
details about computer-adaptive testing in general would benefit from reading the educational 
measurement "primer" on the topic: Wainer, Dorans, Flaugher, Green, Mislevy, Steinberg, & Thissen, 
1990. For a fairly technical book on the subject, see Weiss, 1983.) 
Effectiveness of Computers in Language Testing 
Educational Testing Service (1996) claims the following advantages for their new computer-based 
TOEFL: 
1. Further enhancements to test design before 2000 
2. Greater flexibility in scheduling test administrations 
3. Greater standardization of test administration conditions 
4. Portions of test individualized to examinee ability level 
5. Inclusion of writing with every test administration 
6. Examinee choice of handwriting or typing essay 
7. Ability to record multiple aspects of examinee test-taking behavior 
8. Platform for future innovations in test design and services (p. 5). 
Judging by what they are claiming, at least portions of this new computer-based test will eventually be 
computer-adaptive. 
Brown (1992b) looked in more detail at both the advantages and disadvantages of using computers in 
language testing. That discussion will be expanded next. 
Advantages. The advantages of using computers in language testing can be further subdivided into two 
categories: testing considerations and human considerations. 
Among the testing considerations, the following are some of the advantages of using computers in 
language testing: 
1. Computers are much more accurate at scoring selected-response tests than human beings are. 
2. Computers are more accurate at reporting scores. 
3. Computers can give immediate feedback in the form of a report of test scores, complete with a 
printout of basic testing statistics. 
4. IRT and computer-adaptive testing allow testers to target the specific ability levels of individual 
students and can therefore provide more precise estimates of those abilities (see Bock & Mislevy, 
1982). 
5. The use of different tests for each student should minimize any practice effects, studying for the 
test, and cheating (for discussion of an IRT strategy to help spot such cheating, see Drasgow, 
Levine, & McLaughlin, 1987). 
6. Diagnostic feedback can be provided very quickly to each student on those items answered 
incorrectly if that is the purpose of the test. Such feedback can even be fairly descriptive if 
artificial intelligence is used (for more on such uses of artificial intelligence, see Baker, 1989, pp. 
423-425, or Bunderson, Inouye, & Olsen, 1989, pp. 398-402). 
Among the human considerations, the following are some advantages of using computers in language 
testing: 
James Dean Brown Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 41 
1. The use of computers allows students to work at their own pace. 
2. CALTs generally take less time to finish than traditional paper-and-pencil tests and are therefore 
more efficient (as found for CALTs in Madsen, 1991, and for CATs in Kaya-Carton, Carton, & 
Dandonoli, 1991, and Laurier, 1996). 
3. In CALTs, students should experience less frustration than on paper-and-pencil tests because they 
will be working on test items that are appropriate for their own ability levels. 
4. Students may find that CALTs are less overwhelming (as compared to equivalent paper-and-
pencil tests) because the questions are presented one at a time on the screen rather than in an 
intimidating test booklet with hundreds of test items. 
5. Many students like computers and even enjoy the testing process (Stevenson & Gross, 1991). 
Disadvantages. The disadvantages of using computers in language testing can also be further subdivided 
into two categories: physical considerations and performance considerations. 
Among the physical considerations, the following are some of the disadvantages of using computers in 
language testing: 
1. Computer equipment may not always be available, or in working order. Reliable sources of 
electricity are not universally available. 
2. Screen capacity is another physical consideration. While most computers today have overcome 
the 80 characters by 25 lines restrictions of a few years ago, the amount of material that can be 
presented on a computer screen is still limited. Such screen size limitations could be a problem, 
for example, for a group of teachers who wanted to develop a reading test based on relatively 
long passages. 
3. In addition, the graphics capabilities of many computers (especially older ones) may be limited, 
and even those machines that do have graphics may be slow (especially the cheaper machines). 
Thus, tests involving even basic graphs or animation may not be feasible at the moment in many 
language teaching situations. 
Among the performance considerations, the following are some of the disadvantages of using computers 
in language testing: 
1. The presentation of a test on a computer may lead to different results from those that would be 
obtained if the same test were administered in a paper-and-pencil format (Henning, 1991). Some 
limited research indicates that there is little difference for math or verbal items presented on 
computer as compared with pencil-and-paper version (Green, 1988) or on a medical technology 
examination (Lunz & Bergstrom, 1994), but much more research needs to be done on various 
types of language tests and items. 
2. Differences in the degree to which students are familiar with using computers or typewriter 
keyboards may lead to discrepancies in their performances on computer-assisted or computer-
adaptive tests (Hicks, 1989; Henning, 1991; Kirsch, Jamieson, Taylor, & Eignor, 1997) 
3. Computer anxiety (i.e., the potential debilitating effects of computer anxiety on test performance) 
is another potential disadvantage (Henning, 1991). 
What Issues Have Already Received Attention? 
Judging by the first half of this paper, language testers know a great deal about computers in language 
testing. For instance, we know: 
James Dean Brown Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 42 
1. How to use an item bank to create, pilot, analyze (with item response theory), store, manage, and 
select test items for purposes of making multiple test forms. 
2. How to create more imaginative computer-assisted language tests that take advantage of the new 
technologies. 
3. How to build computer-adaptive tests that will (a) help us select and fit items to individual 
students' abilities, (b) help us know when to end the test when the student's ability level is found, 
and hence, (c) help us build computer-adaptive tests that are relatively short in terms of number 
of items and time. 
4. How effective computers are in language testing, including the advantages (in terms of testing 
and human considerations) and disadvantages (in terms of physical and performance 
considerations). 
At the same time, language testers have a great deal to learn about computers in language testing, as I will 
explain next. 
FUTURE DIRECTIONS: COMPUTER-ADAPTIVE LANGUAGE TESTING 
Most of the research cited so far has been practical in nature. In my view, research on computers in 
language testing will inevitably become more technical, complex, and detailed. Drawing on the wider 
literature of the educational testing field, I found that the educational measurement literature on using 
computers in testing developed very much like the language testing literature has (for an overview of 
these developments, see Bunderson, Inouye, & Olsen, 1989). However at this point in time, researchers in 
educational measurement have developed well beyond the practical questions of how to item bank, how 
to definitions and distinguish between computer-assisted and computer-adaptive testing, and how to 
measure the effectiveness of computers in testing. In short, they are now addressing considerably more 
technical, complex, and detailed issues. 
Examining the types of concerns that have arisen recently for educational testers may therefore point the 
way for future research on computers in language testing and provide a basis for researchers in our field 
who would like to begin studying these issues. Because of length constraints, I will narrow my 
exploration to recent concerns about computer-adaptive testing in order to illustrate how at least one 
strand of research points to the future for language testers. The discussion will be organized into three 
categories--CALT design issues, CALT scoring issues, and CALT logistical issues--under subheadings 
that pose the central questions that seem to be the focus of research into computer use in educational 
testing. All of these questions will be directed at computer-adaptive tests, as are the studies in the 
educational testing literature. 
CALT Design Issues 
A number of CALT design issues need to be addressed by language testers before we can be fairly sure 
we are using such tests responsibly, including at least the following questions: How should we pilot 
CALTS? Should a CALT be standard length or vary across students? How should we sample CALT 
items? What are the effects of changing the difficulty of CALT items? How can we deal with item sets on 
a CALT? 
How should we pilot CALTs? The problem that must be addressed here is caused by the fact that CALTs, 
because of their adaptive nature, may be different for every student. In classical theory tests, the 
examinations were the same for every student. Hence, a single examination could be piloted, item 
analyzed, revised, and then validated during the operational administration. In contrast, a new CALT is 
James Dean Brown Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 43 
created each time a student takes the test (for a quick overview of this process, see Baker, 1989, pp. 425-
426). 
In educational testing circles, the strategy that is used to overcome the piloting problem is called 
simulation. Using item response theory, testers can simulate the answers of typical students based on the 
pilot responses of real students. By simulating such responses in various combinations and for different 
test lengths, researchers can study the probable characteristics of the test under many different conditions 
and lengths (as shown in Eignor, Way, Stocking, & Steffen, 1993). To my knowledge, no such simulation 
studies have been done in the language testing context. 
Should a CALT be standard length or vary across students? One of the advantages of computer-
adaptive testing is that the test can be tailored to each student's ability levels. Such tailoring results in a 
test that may be more efficient at some levels of ability, requiring fewer items to reliably estimate the 
students' abilities, but less efficient at other levels, requiring more items to do a reliable job. The issue that 
arises then is whether the test should be the same length for each student or of different lengths tailored to 
each student's ability. 
Stocking (1987) indicates that the tailored strategy resulting in different lengths may produce biased 
scores for students who end up taking short versions. If the test is made to be relatively long for all 
students, even for those students who will be taking the "short" versions, no such biases may surface. 
However, if the test is short for all students, it may be preferable to use the same length test for all 
students. These important length issues have yet to be investigated for CALTs. Perhaps they should be. 
How should we sample CALT items? Traditional tests, in order to be theoretically valid, are often 
designed on the basis of clearly developed test specifications to sample different knowledges or skills that 
make up a particular domain. Because CALTs will typically be shorter than traditional tests, testing all of 
the specifications may be impossible. Items could be randomly selected from all the possible 
specifications. However, if CALTs are short for only some students, a better strategy might be to develop 
a sampling algorithm that takes into account the issue of specification sampling by keeping track of which 
specifications have been sampled for a given student and selecting the remaining items in a way that best 
fulfills the rest of the test specifications. Such a scheme might even take into account the relative 
importance of the various specifications. Naturally, any such scheme should be based on research-
research that has yet to be conducted in relation to CALTs (for related research in CAT, see Stocking & 
Swanson, 1993; Swanson & Stocking, 1993). 
What are the effects of changing the difficulty of CALT items? Bergstrom, Lunz, and Gershon (1992) 
found that altering the difficulty of CAT items slightly raises the number of items that are necessary to 
test students with adequate precision, but otherwise has little affect on the estimation of their abilities. 
They did so by studying the responses of 225 students on a medical technology examination. No such 
study has been conducted on language tests to my knowledge. Is there a relationship between item 
difficulty and test length on a CALT, but little effect on ability estimation in language testing? And if 
both sets of results are the same in language testing as in the education literature, what difficulty level 
would be ideal in terms of language test length and precision of measurement in relation to the level of 
language proficiency of the students? 
How can we deal with item sets on a CALT? A problem that occurs whenever item banking is done, even 
for paper-and-pencil tests, is how to deal with item sets (sets of items determined by reading or listening 
passages, or sets of items based on item formats, topics, item contents, etc.) Good reasons may exist for 
keeping certain items together and even for ordering them in a certain way. Wainer and Kiely (1987) call 
these sets of items "testlets." (Wainer et al., 1990, also discuss testlets, as did Sheehan & Lewis, 1992, 
James Dean Brown Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 44 
and Bunderson, Inouye, & Olsen, 1989, p. 393-394, 398, refer to them as "reference tasks," while 
Boekkooi-Timminga, 1990, explores a related concept she calls item clustering.) 
Unfortunately, using item sets, or testlets, may result in a selection of test items that are not maximally 
efficient from an IRT perspective. Since such item sets often occur in language tests, especially in 
academic reading and lecture listening tests, the issue of item sets is an important one in language testing. 
Hence, investigations should be conducted into the best strategies to use in dealing with CALT item sets, 
as well as on the relative effectiveness of item sets as compared to independent items. Research might 
also be profitable on the ordering of items within sets, and indeed, the ordering of items throughout a 
CALT. 
CALT Scoring Issues 
A number of CALT scoring issues also need to be addressed by language testers before we can be fairly 
sure we are using such tests responsibly, including at least the following questions: How should we score 
CALTS? How should we deal with CALT item omissions? How should we make decisions about cut-
points on CALTs? 
How should we score CALTs? A number of alternative methods have been explored in the educational 
literature including at least the following: 
1. Raw scores (a simple sum of the number of correct items) 
2. Weighted raw scores (in which some items count more than others) 
3. Scaled scores (e.g., the TOEFL, which is equated across forms; for an explanation of scaling and 
equating CATS, see Dorans, 1990; for studies using the techniques, see Mazzeo, Druesne, 
Raffeld, Checketts, & Muhlstein, 1991; O'Neill, Folk, & Li, 1993; Schaeffer, Steffen, & Golub-
Smith, 1993) 
4. Any of the above (1-3) corrected for guessing (as discussed for CATs in Stocking, 1994) 
5. Any of the above (1-3) based on polytomous (as opposed to dichotomous) scoring (for a study of 
this issue on CATs, see Dodd, De Ayala, & Koch, 1995) 
6. Any of the above (1-4) scores referenced to a conventional test (as described for CATs in Ward, 
1988; Wainer et al., 1990), especially when a CALT is first introduced to replace an existing 
paper-and-pencil test 
7. Any of the above (1-4) scores referenced to a set of anchor items (anchor items are typically a set 
of items that all students take along with the rest of the test). 
Research on which method works best for which purposes when interpreting CALT scores would be very 
beneficial. Also, when using IRT for the development of CALTs, language testers must grapple with 
explaining the scoring methods in non-technical terms so that students and teachers can understand the 
results. Hence, CALT research might profitably focus on how to best convey such IRT scoring 
information to lay people. 
How should we deal with CALT item omissions? On traditional tests, especially those scored with a 
correction for guessing, students can and do omit items if they are not able to answer them. However, on a 
CALT, problems arise if the students omit one or more items. How should testers deal with such 
omissions? Wainer et al. (1990, pp. 236-237) chose to not allow for omissions on their CATs; the 
students simply could not go on to the next item until they had answered the one in front of them.Another 
strategy would be to allow omissions but assume that omitted items are wrong. If that strategy was 
followed, what would be the effect of such a wrong item on the estimation of the items that should 
follow? 
James Dean Brown Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 45 
Other problems may arise if students are allowed to omit items. For instance, if omitted items are not 
scored, students can manipulate the test by skipping items until they find items they can answer correctly. 
According to Lunz and Bergstrom (1994), such students would receive undeservedly high scores. Another 
problem is that students can simply omit all items and get a good look at all of the items in the item bank. 
This would have important implications for item exposure (as discussed below). Another possibility is 
that students at different language proficiency levels might omit items in different ways. Hence, omission 
patterns would be linked to language proficiency as measured on such a test and would become a source 
of measurement error. All of these issues related to item omissions on CALTs need to be researched and 
resolved in one way or another. 
How should we make decisions about cut-points on CALTs? The literature on deciding cut-points is 
often referred to as standards setting (for a review, see Jaeger, 1989, pp. 491-500). Reckase (1983) has 
suggested the use of the sequential probability ratio test (SPRT) for making pass-fail decisions in adaptive 
and other related tests. The SPRT was originally developed by Wald (1947) as a quality control device, 
but both Reckase (1983) and Kingsbury and Weiss (1983) show how the SPRT can be applied to adaptive 
tests as well. Lewis and Sheehan (1990) suggested using Bayesian decision theory for making 
mastery/non-mastery decisions on a computerized sequential mastery test. Du, Lewis, and Pashley (1993) 
demonstrated the use of a fuzzy set approach for the same purpose. The SPRT and other methods just 
described should all be considered in terms of how well they help with test constuction and decision 
making on CALTs. 
CALT Logistical Issues 
In addition to the important logistical issues raised by Green (1990), which included system, hardware, 
human, and software issues, at least three CALT logistical issues need to be addressed by language 
testers: How can we avoid CALT item exposure? Should we provide item review opportunities on a 
CALT? How can we comply with legal disclosure laws when administering CALTs? 
How can we avoid CALT item exposure? Item exposure occurs when students see any given item. Since 
exposure means that other students who might take the test in the future may know about the exact 
content of those items which have been exposed, such items should not be used again. In traditional tests, 
large numbers of students are tested on one day with a relatively small number of items, all in one 
exposure. Thus, even though the items could not be used again, they were used rather efficiently to test a 
large number of students. However, on a CALT, even though each student gets a different test form, 
unless there is an infinite number of items, whatever items are in the item bank will be exposed rather 
quickly. If the test is administered on a daily walk-in basis at a computer lab, for instance, all items in the 
bank could be exposed within a matter of days without having tested very many students. In addition, as 
discussed above, particularly in a situation were item omissions are permitted on a CALT, students can 
simply omit all items and get a good look at all of the items in the item bank. Naturally, such wholesale 
item exposure would have important implications for test security. The steps that can be taken to slow 
down the process of item exposure are to: 
1. Have a very large item bank with a wide variety of difficulty levels to meet all item specifications 
desired in the test 
2. Have the computer select a number of items which might come next (rather than a single item) 
and then randomly select from among those possibilities (as in McBride & Martin, 1983). 
3. Have the computer select the next item based on complex probabilistic models like those 
discussed in Stocking (1992), Stocking and Lewis (1995a; 1995b). 
4. Use simulation studies to estimate the efficiency of different sized item banks in minimizing 
exposure, then stay within whatever size limits those studies suggest. 
James Dean Brown Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 46 
5. Circulate item banks, or sub-banks, through different testing sites. 
6. Constantly change the items in an item bank by adding new items and eliminating old ones 
(especially those most likely to have been exposed). 
7. Monitor the functioning of items within the item pool by keeping track of students' item 
performances, and identify items that appear to have been exposed 
Clearly, studies should be conducted into the relative effectiveness of strategies for dealing with CALT 
item exposure. 
Should we provide item review opportunities on a CALT? In traditional paper-and-pencil testing 
situations, students who have time remaining at the end of the test can go back and review earlier items. 
Given the fact that CALT algorithms select the next item based on previous item performances, allowing 
students to go back and review items would undermine the theoretical nature of the test. Lunz, Bergstrom, 
and Wright (1992) indicate that this is not a big problem for CATs, but what about CALTs? 
Wainer (1992) suggests that very testwise students could use reviewing as a way of manipulating the test 
and gaining an unfair edge. The degree to which these item reviewing issues are important to CALTs is 
yet to be determined. (For a fuller explanation of testing algorithms in CATs, see Thissen & Mislevy, 
1990.) 
How can we comply with legal disclosure laws when administering CALTs? New York state has so-
called "truth in testing" disclosure laws dating back to 1979 that require that standardized tests 
administered in the state be made available to examinees for inspection within 30 days of the 
administration. Naturally, with today's communications technology, if a test must be disclosed in one 
state, it might as well be disclosed in all states and around the world. That requirement does not cause 
undue problems for paper-and-pencil tests which can be administered to tens or even hundreds of 
thousands of students in a one month period. However, a problem arises from the fact that a relatively 
large item bank is necessary for CALTs. To disclose the entire item bank of a CALT every 30 days, or 
even to disclose to students only those items they took, would be very costly in terms of development 
time and manpower to produce, pilot, analyze, and distribute new items. Currently, the New York 
legislature is considering laws (SO3292-C or A5648-C) that will continue the basic requirements of the 
1979 law, but be updated to more reasonably fit with the new CATs and the logistics involved (see 
Lissitz, 1997). However, in the interim, research should be conducted into the best strategies for 
developing new item banks and for phasing out old ones and disclosing them publicly. 
CONCLUSION 
The purpose of this paper is to examine recent developments in language testing that directly involve 
computers. In the process, I have looked at what language testers have learned in the specific area of 
CALT and found substantial information on: 
1. How to use an item bank 
2. How to use new technologies 
3. How to build computer-adaptive tests 
4. How effective computers are in language testing. 
Next, I examined the educational testing literature for ideas on what directions future research on 
computers in language testing might take, focusing on the dominant issue of computer-adaptive testing 
and found that future research might benefit from answering the following questions: 
James Dean Brown Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 47 
1. How should we pilot CALTS? 
2. Should a CALT be standard length or vary across students? 
3. How should we sample CALT items? 
4. What are the effects of changing the difficulty of CALT items? 
5. How can we deal with item sets on a CALT? 
6. How should we score CALTS? 
7. How should we deal with CALT item omissions? 
8. How should we make decisions about cut-points on CALTs? 
9. How can we avoid CALT item exposure? 
10. Should we provide item review opportunities on a CALT? 
11. How can we comply with legal disclosure laws when administering CALTs? 
However, I would like to stress that the computer-adaptive testing involved in the above 11 questions is 
only one stream of computer-related research in education, psychology, and related fields. Important 
development and research are also going on in areas like: (a) testing in intelligent teaching systems, (b) 
testing using the Internet, (c) handwriting and speech recognition, (d) analysis and scoring of open-ended 
responses (like compositions and speech samples), and (e) alternative psychometric models for analyzing 
the results of the more complex information that can be gathered using computer-assisted response 
analysis. (Readers interested in exploring these issues further might start by reading Alderson, 1991; 
Bejar & Braun, 1994; Burstein, Frase, Ginther, & Grant, 1996; Corbel, 1993; Jamieson, Campbell, 
Norfleet, & Berbisada, 1993; Mislevy, 1993, 1994; Powers, Fowles, Farnum, & Ramsey, 1994.) 
Naturally, through all of our computer-related research efforts, professional quality language testing 
should continue to be our goal, and such testing should continue to adhere to the Standards for 
educational and psychological testing (American Psychological Association, 1985) agreed to by the 
American Educational Research Association, American Psychological Association, and the National 
Council on Measurement in Education for all educational and psychological tests. Special guidelines have 
also been published (American Psychological Association, 1986), which interpret the above Standards in 
terms of how they should be applied to computer-based testing and score interpretations (see also Green, 
Bock, Humphreys, Linn, & Reckase, 1984). In keeping with those two sets of guidelines, ongoing 
research must also be conducted on the reliability and validity of each and every CALT that is developed 
in the future.1 
 
Notes 1 The reliability issues for CATs are addressed in Thissen, 1990; the validity issues are addressed 
in Steinberg, Thissen, & Wainer, 1990; and reliability and validity were studied together in McBride & 
Martin, 1983, and Bennett & Rock, 1995. 
 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
James Dean ("JD") Brown, Professor on the graduate faculty of the Department of ESL at the University 
of Hawai'i, has published numerous articles on language testing and curriculum development. He has 
authored books on language research methods (Cambridge), curriculum development (Heinle & Heinle), 
and testing (Prentice-Hall), and edited a book (with Yamashita) on language testing in Japan (JALT). 
E-mail: brownj@hawaii.edu 
 
James Dean Brown Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 48 
REFERENCES 
Alderson, C. J. (1991). Innovation in language testing: Can the microcomputer help? Language Testing 
Update, Special Report No. 1. 
American Psychological Association. (1985). Standards for educational and psychological 
testing. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
American Psychological Association. (1986). Guidelines for computer-based tests and 
interpretations. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
Andrich, D. (1988). Rasch models for measurement. Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 
Baker, F. B. (1989). Computer technology in test construction and processing. In R. L. Linn Educational 
measurement (3rd ed., pp. 409-428). London: Collier Macmillan. 
Bejar, I., & Braun, H. (1994). On the synergy between assessment and instruction: Early lessons from 
computer-based simulations. Machine-Mediated Learning, 4, 5-25. 
Bennett, R. E., & Rock, D. A. (1995). Generalizability, validity, and examinee perceptions of a computer-
delivered formulating-hypotheses test. Journal of Educational Measurement, 32, 19-36. 
Bergstrom, B. A., Lunz, M. E., & Gershon, R. C. (1992). Altering the difficulty level in computer 
adaptive tests. Applied Measurement in Education, 5, 137-149. 
BestTest [Computer software]. (1990). Chicago, IL: WiseWare. 
Bock, R. D., & Mislevy, R. J. (1982). Adaptive EAP estimation of ability in a microcomputer 
environment. Applied Psychological Measurement, 6, 431-444. 
Boekkooi-Timminga, E. (1990). A cluster-based method for test construction. Applied Psychological 
Measurement, 14, 341-354. 
Brown, J. D. (1992a). Technology and language education in the twenty-first century: Media, message, 
and method. Language Laboratory, 29, 1-22. 
Brown, J. D. (1992b). Using computers in language testing. Cross Currents, 19, 92-99. 
Brown, J. D. (1996). Testing in language programs. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Bunderson, C. V., Inouye, D. K., & Olsen, J. B. (1989). The four generations of computerized educational 
measurement. In R. L. Linn (Ed.), Educational measurement (3rd ed., pp. 367-407). London: Collier 
Macmillan. 
Burstein, J., Frase, L., Ginther, A., & Grant, L. (1996). Technologies for language assessment. Annual 
Review of Applied Linguistics, 16, 240-260. 
James Dean Brown Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 49 
Canale, M. (1986). The promise and threat of computerized adaptive assessment of reading 
comprehension. In C.W. Stansfield (Ed.), Technology and language testing (pp. 29-45). Washington, DC: 
TESOL. 
Corbel, C. (1993). Computer-enhanced language assessment. In G. Brindley (Ed.), Research Report 
Series 2. Sydney: National Centre for English Language Teaching and Research, Marquarie University. 
Corel Paradox 7.0 [Computer software]. (1996). Ottawa, Ontario, Canada: Corel Corporation 
Dodd, B. G., De Ayala, R. J., & Koch, W. R. (1995). Computerized adaptive testing with polytomous 
items. Applied Psychological Measurement, 19, 5-22. 
Dorans, N. J. (1990). Scaling and equating. In H. Wainer, N. J. Dorans, R. Flaugher, B. F. Green, R. J. 
Mislevy, L. Steinberg, & D. Thissen (Eds.), Computerized adaptive testing: A primer (pp. 137-160). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Drasgow, F., Levine, M. V., & McLaughlin, M. E. (1987). Detecting inappropriate test scores with 
optimal and practical appropriateness indices. Applied Psychological Measurement, 11, 59-80. 
Du, Y., Lewis, C., & Pashley, P. J. (1993). Computerized mastery testing using fuzzy set decision 
theory. Applied Measurement in Education, 6, 181-193. 
Dunkel, P. (1991). The effectiveness research on computer-assisted instruction and computer assisted 
language learning. In P. Dunkel (Ed.), Computer-assisted language learning and testing: Research issues 
and practice (pp. 5-36). New York: Newbury House. 
Educational Testing Service. (1996). TOEFL: Announcing computer-based testing. Princeton, NJ: 
Educational Testing Service. 
Eignor, D., Taylor, C., Kirsch, I., & Jamieson, J. (1997). Development of a scale for assessing the level of 
computer familiarity of TOEFL examinees. Unpublished ms. Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service. 
Eignor, D. R., Way, W. D., Stocking, M. L., & Steffen, M. (1993). Case studies in computer adaptive test 
design through simulation (Research report # 93-56). Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service. 
Flaugher, R. (1990). Item pools. In H. Wainer, N. J. Dorans, R. Flaugher, B. F. Green, R. J. Mislevy, L. 
Steinberg, & D. Thissen (Eds.), Computerized adaptive testing: A primer (pp. 41-63). Hillsdale, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Green, B. F. (1988). Construct validity of computer-based tests. In H. Wainer & H. I. Braun (Eds.), Test 
validity (pp. 77-86). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Green, B. F. (1990). System design and operations. In H. Wainer, N. J. Dorans, R. Flaugher, B. F. Green, 
R. J. Mislevy, L. Steinberg, & D. Thissen (Eds.), Computerized adaptive testing: A primer (pp. 23-40). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Green, B. F., Bock, R. D., Humphreys, L. G., Linn, R. B., & Reckase, M. D. (1984). Technical guidelines 
for assessing computerized adaptive tests. Journal of Educational Measurement, 21, 347-360. 
James Dean Brown Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 50 
Hambleton, R. K., & Swaminathan, H. (1985). Item response theory: Principles and 
applications. Boston: Kluwer-Nijhoff. 
Hambleton, R. K., Swaminathan, H., & Rogers, H. J. (1991). Item response theory. Newbury Park, CA: 
Sage. 
Henning, G. (1986). Item banking via dBase II: The UCLA ESL Proficiency Examination experience. In 
C. W. Stansfield (Ed.), Technology and language testing (pp. 69-77). Washington, DC: TESOL. 
Henning, G. (1987). A guide to language testing: Development, evaluation, research. New York: 
Newbury House. 
Henning, G. (1991). Validating an item bank in a computer-assisted or computer-adaptive test. In P. 
Dunkel (Ed.), Computer-assisted language learning and testing: Research issues and practice (pp. 209-
222). New York: Newbury House. 
Henning, G., Johnson, P. J., Boutin, A. J., & Rice, H. R. (1994). Automated assembly of pre-equated 
language proficiency tests. Language Testing, 11, 14-28. 
Hicks, M. (1989). The TOEFL computerized placement test: Adaptive conventional 
measurement. TOEFL Research Report No. 31. Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service. 
Jaeger, R. M. (1989). Certification of student competence. In R. L. Linn (Ed.), Educational 
measurement (3rd ed., pp. 485-514). London: Collier Macmillan. 
Jamieson, J., Campbell, J., Norfleet, L., & Berbisada, N. (1993). Reliability of a computerized scoring 
routine for an open-ended task. System, 21, 305-322. 
de Jong, J. H. A. L. (1986). Item selection from pretests in mixed ability groups. In C. W. Stansfield 
(Ed.), Technology and language testing (pp. 91-108). Washington, DC: TESOL. 
Kaya-Carton, E., Carton, A. S., & Dandonoli, P. (1991). Developing a computer-adaptive test of French 
reading proficiency. In P. Dunkel (Ed.), Computer-assisted language learning and testing: Research 
issues and practice (pp. 259-284). New York: Newbury House. 
Kingsbury, G. G., & Weiss, D. J. (1983). A comparison of IRT-based adaptive mastery testing and a 
sequential mastery testing procedure. In D. J. Weiss (Ed.), New horizons in testing: Latent trait test theory 
and computerized adaptive testing (pp. 257-283). New York: Academic Press. 
Kirsch, I., Jamieson, J., Taylor, C., & Eignor, D. (1997). Computer familiarity among TOEFL examinees. 
Unpublished manuscript. Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service. 
Larson, J. W., & Madsen, H. S. (1985). Computerized adaptive language testing: Moving beyond 
computer-assisted testing. CALICO Journal, 2, 32-36, 43. 
Laurier, M. (1991). What we can do with computerized adaptive testing...and what we cannot do! In S. 
Anivan (Ed.), Current developments in language testing (pp. 244-255). Singapore: Regional Language 
Centre. 
James Dean Brown Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 51 
Laurier, M. (1996). Using the information curve to assess language CAT efficiency. In A. Cumming & R. 
Berwick (Eds.),Validation in language testing (pp. 111-123). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Lewis, C., Sheehan, K. (1990). Using Bayesian decision theory to design a computerized adaptive 
mastery test. Applied Psychological Measurement, 14, 367-386. 
Lissitz, B. (1997). The New York standardized testing legislation. (p. 2). National Council on 
Measurement in Education Quarterly Newsletter (5)2. 
Lord, F. M. (1980). Applications of item response theory to practical testing problems. Hillsdale, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Lunz, M. E., & Bergstrom, B. A. (1994). An empirical study of computerized adaptive test administration 
conditions. Journal of Educational Measurement, 31, 251-263. 
Lunz, M. E., & Bergstrom, B. A., & Wright, B. D. (1992). The effect of review on student ability and test 
efficiency for computer adaptive tests. Applied Psychological Measurement, 16, 33-40. 
Madsen, H. S. (1991). Computer-adaptive testing of listening and reading comprehension. In P. Dunkel 
(Ed.), Computer-assisted language learning and testing: Research issues and practice (pp. 237-257). 
New York: Newbury House. 
Madsen, H. S., & Larson, J. W. (1986). Computerized Rasch analysis of item bias in ESL tests. In C. W. 
Stansfield (Ed.), Technology and language testing (pp. 47-67). Washington, DC: TESOL. 
Mazzeo, J., Druesne, B., Raffeld, P. C., Checketts, K. T., & Muhlstein, A. (1991). Comparability of 
computer and paper-and-pencil scores for two CLEP general examinations (Report #91-5). New York: 
College Entrance Examination Board. 
McBride, J. R., & Martin, J. T. (1983). Reliability and validity of adaptive ability tests in a military 
setting. In D. J. Weiss (Ed.), New horizons in testing: Latent trait test theory and computerized adaptive 
testing (pp. 223-236). New York: Academic Press. 
MicroCAT Testing System [Computer software]. (1984). St. Paul, MN: Assessment Systems. 
Microsoft Access 2.0 [Computer software]. (1996). Redmond, WA: Microsoft Corporation. 
Mislevy, R. J. (1993). Foundations of a new test theory. In N. Frederiksen, R. J. Mislevy, & I. I. Bejar 
(Eds.), Test theory for a new generation of tests (pp. 19-39). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Mislevy, R. J. (1994). Evidence and inference in educational assessment. Psychometrika, 59, 439-483. 
Mislevy, R. J., & Bock, R. D. (1986). PC-BILOG: Item analysis and test scoring with binary logistic 
models. Mooresville, IN: Scientific Software. 
Neu, J., & Scarcella, R. (1991). Word processing in the ESL writing classroom: A survey of student 
attitudes. In P. Dunkel (Ed.), Computer-assisted language learning and testing: Research issues and 
practice (pp. 169-187). New York: Newbury House. 
James Dean Brown Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 52 
O'Neill, K., Folk, V., & Li, M.-Y. (1993). Report on the pretest calibration study for the computer-based 
academic skills assessments of The Praxis Series: Professional assessments for beginning 
teachers. Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service. 
PARGrade 3.0 [Computer software]. (1990). Costa Mesa, CA: Economics Research. 
PARScore 3.0 [Computer software]. (1990). Costa Mesa, CA: Economics Research. 
PARTest 3.0 [Computer software]. (1990). Costa Mesa, CA: Economics Research. 
Phinney, M. (1991). Computer-assisted writing and writing apprehension in ESL students. In P. Dunkel 
(Ed.), Computer-assisted language learning and testing: Research issues and practice (pp. 189-204). 
New York: Newbury House. 
Powers, D. E., Fowles, M. E., Farnum, M., & Ramsey, P. (1994). Will they think less of handwritten 
essays if others wordprocess theirs? Effects on essay scores of intermingling handwritten and word-
processed essays. Journal of Educational Measurement, 31, 220-233. 
Reckase, M. D. (1983). A procedure for decision making using tailored testing. In D. J. Weiss (Ed.), New 
horizons in testing: Latent trait test theory and computerized adaptive testing (pp. 237-255). New York: 
Academic Press. 
Reid, J. (1986). Using the writer's workbench in composition teaching and testing. In C.W. Stansfield 
(Ed.), Technology and language testing (pp. 167-188). Washington, DC: TESOL. 
Schaeffer, G., Steffen, M., & Golub-Smith, M. (1993). Introduction of a computer adaptive GRE General 
Test (Research Report # 93-57). Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service. 
Sheehan, K., & Lewis, C. (1992). Computerized mastery testing with nonequivalent testlets. Applied 
Psychological Measurement, 16, 65-76. 
Steinberg, L., Thissesn, D., & Wainer, H. (1990). Validity. In H. Wainer, N. J. Dorans, R. Flaugher, B. F. 
Green, R. J. Mislevy, L. Steinberg, & D. Thissen (Eds.), Computerized adaptive testing: A primer (pp. 
187-231). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Stenson, H. (1988). Testat: A supplementary module for SYSTAT (version 2.0). Chicago, IL: SYSTAT. 
Stevenson, J., & Gross, S. (1991). Use of a computerized adaptive testing model for ESOL/bilingual 
entry/exit decision making. In P. Dunkel (Ed.), Computer-assisted language learning and testing: 
Research issues and practice (pp. 223-235). New York: Newbury House. 
Stocking, M. L. (1987). To simulated feasibility studies in computerized adaptive testing. Applied 
Psychology: An International Review, 35, 263-277. 
Stocking, M. L. (1992). Controlling item exposure rates in a realistic adaptive testing 
paradigm (Research Report # 93-2). Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service. 
Stocking, M. L. (1994). An alternative method for scoring adaptive tests (Research Report # 94-48). 
Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service. 
James Dean Brown Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 53 
Stocking, M. L., & Lewis, C. (1995a). Controlling item exposure conditional on ability in computerized 
adaptive tests (Research Report #95-24). Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service. 
Stocking, M. L., & Lewis, C. (1995b). A new method of controlling item exposure in computerized 
adaptive tests (Research Report #95-25). Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service. 
Stocking, M. L., & Swanson, L. (1993). A method for severely constrained item selection in adaptive 
testing. Applied Psychological Measurement, 17, 277-292. 
Suen, H. K. (1990). Principles of test theories. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Swanson, L. & Stocking, M. L. (1993). A model and heuristic for solving very large item selection 
problems. Applied Psychological Measurement, 17, 151-166. 
Taylor, C., Jamieson, J., Eignor, D., & Kirsch, I. (1997). Measuring the effects of computer familiarity on 
computer-based language tasks. Unpublished manuscript. Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing service. 
Testmaster [Computer software]. (1988). Zurich, Switzerland: Eurocentres. 
Thissen, D. (1990). Reliability and measurement precision. In H. Wainer, N. J. Dorans, R. Flaugher, B. F. 
Green, R. J. Mislevy, L. Steinberg, & D. Thissen (Eds.), Computerized adaptive testing: A primer (pp. 
161-186). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Thissen, D., & Mislevy, R. J. (1990). Testing algorithms. In H. Wainer, N. J. Dorans, R. Flaugher, B. F. 
Green, R. J. Mislevy, L. Steinberg, & D. Thissen (Eds.), Computerized adaptive testing: A primer (pp. 
103-134). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Tung, P. (1986). Computerized adaptive testing: Implications for language test developers. In C.W. 
Stansfield (Ed.), Technology and language testing (pp. 11-28). Washington, DC: TESOL. 
Wainer, H. (1992). Some practical considerations when converting a linearly administered test to an 
adaptive format (Research Report #92-13). Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service. 
Wainer, H., Dorans, N. J., Green, B. F., Mislevy, R. J., Steinberg, L., & Thissen, D. (1990). Future 
challenges. In H. Wainer, N. J. Dorans, R. Flaugher, B. F. Green, R. J. Mislevy, L. Steinberg, & D. 
Thissen (Eds.), Computerized adaptive testing: A primer (pp. 233-272). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Wainer, H. C., & Kiely, G. L. (1987). Item clusters and computerized adaptive testing: A case for 
testlets. Journal of Educational Measurement, 24, 185-201. 
Wainer, H., & Mislevy, R. J. (1990). Item response theory, item calibration and proficiency estimation. In 
H. Wainer, N. J. Dorans, R. Flaugher, B. F. Green, R. J. Mislevy, L. Steinberg, & D. Thissen 
(Eds.), Computerized adaptive testing: A primer (pp. 65-102). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Wald, A. (1947). Sequential analysis. New York: Wiley. 
Ward, W. C. (1988). The College Board Computerized Placement Tests: An application of computerized 
adaptive testing. Machine-Mediated Learning, 2, 217-282. 
James Dean Brown Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 54 
Weiss, D. J. (1983). New horizons in testing: Latent trait test theory and computerized adaptive 
testing. New York: Academic Press. 
Wright, B. D., Linacre, J. M., & Schulz, M. (1990). BIGSTEPS: General-purpose Rasch analysis 
program (version 2.00). Chicago, IL: Mesa Press.s 
 
 
