Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num2/article2/default.html
January 1998, Volume 1, Number 2
pp. 41-50
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference)
Copyright © 1998, ISSN 1094-3501 41
"TO GLOSS OR NOT TO GLOSS":
AN INVESTIGATION OF READING COMPREHENSION ONLINE
Lara L. Lomicka
The Pennsylvania State University
ABSTRACT
This pilot study investigated the effects of multimedia reading software on reading
comprehension. Specifically, the study aimed to explore how multimedia annotations influence
the level of comprehension. Twelve college students enrolled in a second semester French course
were instructed to think aloud during the reading of text on the computer screen. Participants read
the text under one of three conditions: full glossing, limited glossing, or no glossing. In addition,
a tracker was set up in the software to record the amount and type of glosses, and length of time
that each was consulted. The raw data clearly indicate an increase in the number of causal
inferences generated for students who had access to full glossing. Computerized reading with full
glossing may promote a deeper level of text comprehension. Pedagogical suggestions for second
language (L2) teaching and research will be discussed.
BACKGROUND
It started with the question "To gloss or not to gloss." Although the concept of glossing dates back to the
Middle Ages, it has been largely unexamined by researchers until late in this century. Recent literature on
glossing has provoked a controversial debate--one that remains problematic even today in foreign
language (FL) reading research. Traditionally, glosses provided a short definition or note in order to
facilitate reading and comprehension processes for L2 learners. Nation (1983) defined glosses as short
definitions; Pak (1986) refers to them as explanations of the meanings of words. Typically located in the
side or bottom margins, glosses are most often supplied for "unfamiliar" words, which may help to limit
continual dictionary consultation that may hinder and interrupt the L2 reading comprehension process.
Despite the perpetual debate, glossing remains a common and acceptable aid for many foreign language
text books (Davis, 1989). From the first question, "To gloss or not to gloss," emerges two opposing
questions: (a) "Does glossing improve L2 reading comprehension?" and (b) "Does glossing hinder
fluency in L2 reading?" (Lyman-Hager & Davis, 1996).
Findings thus far related to the relationship between glossing and reading comprehension have been
inconsistent (Jacobs, 1994). Johnson (1982) concludes that glossing may not promote a global
comprehension of the text. While readers may not be disrupted by glosses during reading, the use of
glosses does not necessarily increase reading comprehension (Pak, 1986). Jacobs, Dufon, and Hong
(1994) report findings from an experiment conducted with intermediate students studying Spanish:
Glossing did not significantly affect recall, but students with an above average proficiency in a second
language demonstrated a higher recall when using glosses. On the other end of the continuum, research
conducted by Davis (1989), Jacobs (1991, 1994), and Hulstijn, Hollander, and Greidanus (1996) tends to
support the use of glossing in L2 reading. Students who were able to consult glosses before reading or
during the reading process recalled more of the text than those without glossing aids (Davis, 1989;
Jacobs, 1991). Jacobs (1994) reports that third-semester students of Spanish with access to glosses
performed significantly better in the amount of the text recalled than students without access to glosses.
Hulstijn, Hollander, and Greidanus (1996) studied the influence of marginal glosses, dictionary use, and
the reoccurrence of unknown words on incidental vocabulary learning. Advanced students of French,
Lara L. Lomicka “To Gloss or Not to Gloss"…
Language Learning & Technology 42
under one of three conditions (Marginal Glosses, Dictionary Use, Control), read a short text that had been
"slightly adapted" (p. 329). Researchers found that incidental vocabulary learning is higher when L2
readers have access to the meanings of words through marginal glosses or through a dictionary.
Inconsistent findings in these studies may be due to differences in text type (modified, authentic), in level
(beginning, intermediate, advanced), and measures (cloze tests, recall protocols).
The issue of "to gloss or not to gloss" and the questions currently being investigated on glossing can be
taken a step further and approached from a different perspective with the advent of multimedia reading
software. Davis (1989) points out the use of multimedia annotations and emphasizes that hypertext is
"invisible and unobtrusive," allowing the user to consult as much or as little information as s/he desires
(p. 42). Jacobs (1994) also identifies the potential of glossing with computers for both learners and
researchers. Multimedia program annotations are not limited to textual information and can take the form
of video, sound, and pictures (Chun & Plass, 1996). Computer aided glossing can provide much more
than the "traditional" glosses (definitions, translations, and grammatical notes). Through hypermedia-
annotated text, readers will be able to approach the text more globally, rather than linearly (Martínez-
Lage, 1997). To achieve a more global understanding of the text, other multimedia annotations such as
images, sounds, cultural, historical and geographical references, and guiding questions could enhance
comprehension. Some recent research involving multimedia annotations includes: Une Vie De Boy:
Interactive Reading in French (Lyman-Hager, Davis, Burnett, & Chennault, 1993); Effects of Multimedia
Annotations on Vocabulary Acquisition (Chun & Plass, 1996);  Hypermedia Technology for Teaching
Reading (Martínez-Lage, 1997); and Computers and L2 Reading: Student Performance, Student Attitudes
(Davis & Lyman-Hager, 1997).
Lyman-Hager et al. (1993) examined vocabulary acquisition and student glossing choices for intermediate
level students studying French. Lyman-Hager et al. concluded that students who worked with the
multimedia program based on an excerpt from the story by F. Oyono, Une Vie de Boy, were better able to
retain vocabulary words than students who worked with non-computerized text. Two conditions were
used in this study: computerized reading and non-computerized reading. Both groups had access to
glosses; the computer group had access to multimedia annotations while the text group could consult
printed text with the same glosses. Immediately after reading the text, the subjects were asked to perform
a written recall protocol. A week later, an in-class vocabulary quiz of "critical" words in the story was
distributed following a class discussion.
In their article exploring multimedia annotations and vocabulary acquisition, Chun and Plass (1996)
present the results ofthree studies with students in their second year of German who used CyberBuch, a
multimedia application offering annotations through pictures, text, and video. Specifically, the goals of
their investigation include exploring incidental vocabulary learning, examining the effectiveness of
multimedia annotations, and investigating the relationship between look-up behavior and vocabulary test
performance (p. 185). Before working with the multimedia application, students were introduced to the
program and watched a video which provided an overview of the story. After reading the story and using
the multimedia annotations, students took a vocabulary test and wrote a recall protocol. Chun and Plass
report that the recall protocol for visual annotations (i.e., words annotated with text and pictures, text, and
video) was higher than for words annotated with text alone. While both Lyman-Hager et al. (1993) and
Chun and Plass (1996) investigated vocabulary learning through the use of recall protocols, some
researchers, such as Myers (1990), point out that recall or post-reading measures may be more
representative of a memory test used to simply "recall" knowledge (Myers, 1990).
Martínez-Lage (1997) provides examples of multimedia annotations from a project annotated through
Guided Reading (Herren, 1996). She implies the usefulness of multimedia annotations in that they can
"provide immediate access to textual, sound, and visual annotations" (p. 149). This immediate access is
not as intrusive as the steps required in looking up words in the dictionary. Unlike traditional glossing, the
use of images through multimedia annotations can be advantageous for readers (Chun & Plass, 1996;
Lara L. Lomicka “To Gloss or Not to Gloss"…
Language Learning & Technology 43
Martínez-Lage, 1997). Martínez-Lage suggests that student interaction with text facilitates understanding
because students learn not only about language, but learn with language, thus promoting active reading (p.
149).
Davis and Lyman-Hager (1997) investigated student performance and attitude regarding computerized L2
reading. Forty-two intermediate level students of French read a glossed excerpt from Une Vie de Boy on
the computer screen. After the reading, participants performed a recall protocol, a multiple-choice task,
and underwent an exit interview. Davis and Lyman-Hager found that even though different types of
glosses were available for student consultation, they tended to utilize primarily English definitions. The
interview revealed an extremely positive reaction by the participants toward the software.
In an attempt to advance toward a deeper-level understanding of L2 reading, Lyman-Hager and a team
from Penn State's Educational Technology Services developed the template-based shell known as GALT
(Glossing Authentic Language Texts). This shell was derived from an earlier text-based computerized
reading program by Davis and Lyman-Hager, Une Vie de Boy. Both Une Vie de Boy and GALT were
inspired by Bernhardt's (1991) model of L2 reading which attempts to account for the complexity of the
L2 reading process. This model defines reading comprehension as a result of multiple interacting factors:
word recognition (understanding individual word meanings), phonemic/graphemic decoding (recognizing
words through aural or visual characters), syntactic feature recognition (understanding grammatical
relationships), intratextual perception (linking statements to those that precede or follow), prior
knowledge (awareness of knowledge brought to text), and metacognition (awareness of reader's own
cognitive processes during the reading process) (Davis & Lyman-Hager, 1997). Davis and Lyman-Hager
carefully ex plain how the different interacting factors correspond with different types of multimedia
annotations. Students can click on words/expressions to obtain definitions in English or in the target
language (word recognition). To prevent phonemic/graphemic errors, readers use the pronunciation
feature in order to hear words or passages spoken by a native speaker. Further, students could access
grammatical notes and explanations to enhance textual understanding (syntactic feature recognition). In
an attempt to enhance global comprehension and to assist students in linking statements and ideas, readers
are able to click on a question control button (intratextual perception). Cultural knowledge is provided to
readers both during their reading (through a cultural reference control button) and in the introduction to
the text, to the author, and/or to the author's country of origin (prior knowledge). Finally, the tracking
device allows instructors/researchers to obtain a log of readers' strategies for gathering information
(metacognition). (For a more detailed description of the software, see Davis & Lyman-Hager, 1997;
Davis, Lyman-Hager, & Hayden, 1992; or Lomicka, Bradley, & Lyman-Hager, 1997).
In light of the research on glossing and multimedia annotations, it can be concluded that studies have
concentrated primarily on vocabulary learning, acquisition, and retention, and have only scratched the
surface of research involving computer-assisted reading comprehension and multimedia annotations.
Furthermore, recall protocols seem to have become the chief measure in glossing studies. Recall protocols
and other post-reading tests represent an "off-line" measure of the product of comprehension (Myers,
1990). Such "comprehension tests," as noted by Bernhardt (1991), are acceptable measures of reading
comprehension and "provide a purer measure of comprehension, uncomplicated by linguistic performance
and tester interference" (p. 200). However, even if the reader can answer questions or recall words, s/he
may not hold a coherent understanding of the text. According to some researchers (e.g., see Myers, 1990),
online measures of comprehension (reading processes and integration of text during reading), which
account for reading comprehension as it is occurring, may more accurately measure comprehension.
Although online comprehension has not been extensively explored in L2 research, it has been a widely
studied area for researchers in first language (L1) reading for quite some time. The assessment of online
comprehension is salient to L1 theories (Just & Carpenter, 1992; Trabasso & Magliano, 1996; Trabasso &
Suh, 1993; Whitney & Budd, 1996; Whitney, Ritchie & Clark, 1991). The explanation-based theory of
text comprehension (Trabasso & Magliano, 1996; Trabasso & Suh, 1993) proposes that successful
Lara L. Lomicka “To Gloss or Not to Gloss"…
Language Learning & Technology 44
comprehension hinges on the generation of causal inferences. A causal inference connects events in a text
at a local or global level, allowing for integration of the text, and leading to both comprehension and
coherence. According to the explanation-based theory, causal inferences indicate that the reader
understands the textual relationships of causality and of goal plans (Trabasso & Suh, 1993). Trabasso and
Magliano (1996) have identified different types of thoughts that may occur during the comprehension
process. Two types of thoughts consist of associations (information is retrieved from background
knowledge but not necessarily integrated into the text), and paraphrases (mere restatements of the text).
Trabasso and Magliano (1996) also distinguished two types of inferences: explanations (inferences that
causally link events in a text),and predictions (anticipation of future events or future consequences of a
focal event based on integration of prior text information and background knowledge).
Coupled with the fundamental role of causal inferencing in comprehension, L1 reading theories address
levels of mental representation of a text that occur during comprehension (Van Dijk & Kintsch, 1983).
Essential to textual understanding, these levels, as identified by Van Dijk and Kintsch, include: surface
level (linguistic processes), textbase level (propositional meaning of textual constituents), and situation
model (integration of textbase with background and other world knowledge). The situation model is
necessary for the generation of causal inferences and successful text comprehension (Zwann & Brown,
1996). The online generation of causal inferences, integrating prior text information and causal
antecedents across sentences with background and/or world knowledge, leads to the production of a
coherent situation model. This implies that comprehension is achieved at many different levels, not solely
at the textbase or surface level. The generation of causal inferences may be indicative not only of the
online construction of a situation model, but also of the achievement of a deeper comprehension of the
text.
Many studies endorse online measures to reveal causal inferences generated during reading (Ericsson &
Simon, 1984; Horiba, 1990, 1996; Kern, 1994; Olson, Duffy, & Mack, 1984; Rikard & Langley, 1995;
Trabasso & Magliano, 1996; Trabasso & Suh, 1993; Whitney & Budd, 1996; Whitney, Ritchie, & Clark,
1991; Zwann & Brown, 1996). Think-aloud protocols may offer a different approach to questions of
comprehension. During the procedure, participants are asked, after reading each sentence, to verbalize
their understanding of that sentence within the context of the story. Think-aloud protocols have been used
to show online causal inferences (Trabasso & Magliano, 1996; Trabasso & Suh, 1993), to reveal the
contents of working memory (Whitney, Ritchie, & Clark, 1991), to investigate the relationship between
memory and inferences (Trabasso & Magliano, 1996; Trabasso, Suh, Payton, & Jain, 1995), and to show
whether a coherent situation model is being constructed (Zwann & Brown, 1996). Rikard and Langley
(1995) offer recommendations for using the think-aloud procedure in L1 studies. They suggest careful
selection of recording equipment and students, as well as an adequate introduction to the think-aloud
process. "Thinking aloud" enables readers not only to focus their attention on what they read, but also
demands that readers devote more time to thinking about what they read (Kucan & Beck, 1997).
Zwann and Brown (1996) applied Trabasso and Magliano's think-aloud protocol to L2 reading to
investigate causal inferences with students studying French. They compared the number of causal
inferences generated during L1 reading by skilled and less skilled readers with the number of causal
inferences generated in L2 reading. Although the skilled readers could create a strong textbase, neither
group could construct a strong situation model. The application of L1 theories (causal inferences,
situation model) and of think-aloud to L2 research represents a salient contribution to the field of L2
reading. Zwann and Brown (1996) suggest that regardless of skill, it may be difficult for L2 students to
move beyond the textbase level because L2 readers focus on establishing a textbase and are strongly
affected by fluency level.
Both online assessment of comprehension and the exploration of the generation of a situation model have
been applied to L2 reading comprehension. However, since glossing and research involving multimedia
annotations have not traditionally used online methods to measure comprehension, L1 theories could be
Lara L. Lomicka “To Gloss or Not to Gloss"…
Language Learning & Technology 45
applied to L2 glossing in a similar manner. In this pilot study, an online assessment of L2 comprehension,
the think-aloud procedure, was utilized with three conditions: no glosses, traditional glosses, and
extended glosses. The generation of online causal inferences was explored, as revealed by the think-aloud
data in this study, to determine whether multimedia annotations aid online comprehension of a text.
Assessing online comprehension not only provides insights into the reader's comprehension process, but it
also more clearly reveals whether the glosses affect the generation of causal inferences and the
construction of a situation model.
For this pilot study, not only did the reader verbalize his/her understanding of the text after each sentence,
but he/she also vocalized reasons for choosing glosses. In addition to using the think aloud procedure, a
tracker incorporated into the software was used to determine the number and type of glosses consulted,
and the length of time glosses were consulted. Noblitt and Bland (1991) suggest that data from the tracker
can provide researchers with a "new tool for studying student learning" and can provide insights into
student learning levels: moving from the tactical to the strategic learning level (p. 130). Cubillos (1998),
also discussing the tracking feature, stated that "student logs and student records of all kinds can provide
teachers with unprecedented insights into their students' SLA processes" (p. 45). This measure allowed
for further specification as to where comprehension or miscomprehension occurred in the text and the
effect that each gloss had on comprehension.
In considering these prior studies, the following research questions surface:
1. Do multimedia annotations aid comprehension? If so, how? What is the relationship between type and
number of glosses consulted and the number of inferences generated?
2. Do multimedia annotations allow the reader to build a situation model? How do type and number of
glosses consulted compare with the level of comprehension achieved?
The answers to these questions could not only have strong pedagogical implications for glossing (i.e.,
whether they are effective for L2 students), but they also could hold strong implications for the use of
technology in the L2 classroom. By using the think-aloud procedure to determine why readers consult
certain glosses and whether glossing does aid their comprehension, this pilot study aims to further explore
the effectiveness of multimedia annotations on L2 reading comprehension.
METHODOLOGY
Participants
Twelve students enrolled in a second semester French course at the Pennsylvania State University
participated in this pilot study. The informants filled out a background questionnaire immediately after
giving their consent to participate. From the information provided on the questionnaire, twelve native
English speakers between the ages of 18 and 30 were selected to take part in this research.
Materials
Participants read an excerpt (first and last stanzas) from the poem Femme Noire by Léopold Senghor,
which had been annotated using GALT multimedia software by Travis Bradley and Lara Lomicka (1997).
Before reading the text, participants were provided with an introduction to reading in a second language,
to the GALT program, to Senghor, to Senegal, and to the poem itself.
Design
The participants were randomly assigned to one of three conditions comprised of four students each.
Those in condition A read the introduction and the text with no access to glosses. Participants in condition
B read the introduction and the text with access to "traditional" glosses (definitions in French and
Lara L. Lomicka “To Gloss or Not to Gloss"…
Language Learning & Technology 46
translations in English). Those in condition C read the introduction and the text with access to all glosses
(definition in French; images, references, questions, pronunciation, and translation in English).
Procedures
Participants were tested individually in a quiet computer lab. After reading through the series of
introductions, students worked through the poem at their own pace. Each participant received instructions
for the think-aloud procedure. The think-aloud scheme used in this study was based on the work of
Trabasso and Magliano (1996), and Zwann and Brown (1996). Participants were provided with a
demonstration of the think-aloud approach and were further given the opportunity to practice the
procedure with a short text. Specifically, participants were asked to "think aloud" in English while
working through the text. They were asked to think aloud about whatever came to mind during their
reading of the text, to vocalize which glosses they were using and justify their choice (for those using
glosses), and finally to voice their understanding of each line in the context of the poem at the end of
every 10 lines of the text. Students were able to move to any of the lines of the text during the experiment.
Their verbalizations were recorded on audiotapes. In addition to the think-aloud procedure, participants'
interaction with the software was logged using a tracking feature. The tracker recorded all clicks on the
controls, the type of gloss used, and the amount of time subjects spent consulting each gloss. The tracker
feature was used in this study as a way to map the different types of multimedia annotations that students
consulted.
DATA ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
Data from the think-aloud protocol were transcribed, divided into clauses (which served as the basic unit
of analysis), and entered into a spreadsheet program. The categorization pattern proposed by Trabasso and
Magliano (1996) was utilized, parsing clauses into paraphrases (mere restatements of the text),
associations (information is retrieved from background knowledge but not necessarily integrated into the
text), explanations (inferences that causally link events in a text), and predictions (anticipation of future
events or future consequences of a focal event based on integration of prior text information and
background knowledge). Two other categories were used in addition to Trabasso and Magliano's category
scheme--metacomments and evaluations--which were coined by Zwann and Brown (1996).
Metacomments represent not only the participants' lack of understanding of a word or sentence (Zwann &
Brown, 1996), but also comments about the text structure and the glosses. Evaluations consist of ethical,
moral, or affective statements based on the participants' integration of past events in the text such as:
"Hum. I feel better about that one."; "That changes the whole thing!"; or "Huh! Yeah! That is interesting!"
Whitney and Budd (1996) suggest that the segment classifications developed and utilized by Trabasso and
Magliano (1996) and Zwann and Brown (1996) will continue to remain useful.
Participants collectively generated 734 clauses (excluding metacomments), 154 (21%) of which were
explanations. In order to control for verbosity, metacomments were excluded from this calculation. This
study focused primarily on explanations; predictions were excluded in calculations since only two
predictions were generated out of 734 clauses. Two trained researchers individually categorized a sample
of 150 clauses. Interrater reliability was .91. The rest of the clauses were divided between the
tworesearchers and categorized. Disagreements were resolved through consensus. Statistical analyses of
the data indicated that there were no significant differences in the percentage of explanations generated by
each group. As displayed in Table 1, participants in condition A generated a total of 35 explanations out
of 160 clauses (21.7%), condition B generated 35 explanations out of 227 clauses (15.4%), and condition
C generated 84 inferences out of 347 clauses (24.21%). However, the raw numbers of explanations
suggest that, with a larger sample population, statistical analyses might be significant.
Lara L. Lomicka “To Gloss or Not to Gloss"…
Language Learning & Technology 47
Inference Statements
The three protocols illustrated in Appendix I, Tables 1-3 are representative of typical data generated under
each of the three conditions: condition A (no glosses), condition B (French and English definitions), and
condition C (all glosses). Vocabulary differences were apparent in data collected from all three
conditions. Participant 3 (cond. A) experienced frequent vocabulary problems which often resulted in
incorrect translation attempts. Despite these difficulties, participant 3 did generate a fair number of
explanations based on the little information gleaned from the text and from the introduction. Similar
vocabulary problems were experienced by participant 8 (cond. B), who was able to manage with less
difficulty with the aid of the French and English glosses. When encountering unglossed words, most
students were able to glean the meanings of unglossed cognates such as beauté. However, for the word
Eternel (" I tried to look up Eternel. I guess maybe it's a city."), participant 8 (cond. B) was surprisingly
unable to recognize this (unglossed) cognate. Although limited availability of glosses did serve as an
impairment, particularly for participants in conditions A and B, participant 12 (cond. C) also struggled
with certain words. Vocabulary difficulties occurred even with certain glossed expressions. This type of
difficulty is illustrated by participant 12's encounter with the word aigle as demonstrated in Appendix I,
Table 3. Although the English gloss revealed the meaning of the phrase, participant 12 did not make the
direct connection between the French word aigle and its English equivalent eagle without the assistance
of the image annotation.
Metacomments
A significant number of metacomments generated by the participants centered around glossing
procedures. Certain participants did not understand how to manipulate the glosses, others had difficulty
understanding the function of each gloss and how it could aid comprehension. Examples of
metacomments related to annotations or manipulation include: "I hit on the image for this one."; "All
right--next line!"; "Let's look it up."; or about reading strategies, "That helps me more [referring to the
French definition] cause with the English, I think you're trying to stay away from English in the
definitions here which is cool, 'cause we don't want to translate"; or even regarding specific control
buttons, "Line 6 is very clear now with the pictures." Although this pilot study focuses primarily on
inferences, the vast number of metacomments that were produced by the participants provides substantial
data for another in-depth study.
Tracker Data
Data from the tracker were tallied and incorporated in Table 2. For conditions B and C, the most
frequently consulted glosses included English and French definitions. Participants in condition B, limited
to French and English definitions only, consulted the French definitional glosses more frequently than the
English glosses. Even though participants in condition C did have access to six different types of
informational glosses, there was a strong preference for the traditional definitional glosses. Reasons for
this tendency will be further addressed in the discussion and conclusion sections. Contrary to participants
in condition B, those in condition C did consult the English glosses more than the French glosses. The
pronunciation gloss was highly consulted only by two of the participants and did not seem to directly
affect comprehension. The annotation providing grammatical explanations, although consulted
moderately, did not appear to directly aid students in developing a deeper level of comprehension because
inferences were not generated.
The question and reference glosses are potentially beneficial to the learners because they could lead to the
construction of a situation model. The question glosses, which were accessed by each person at least
once, seemed to assist readers in moving beyond the textbase (see Appendix II, Table 1 for an example).
However, participants may have consulted the question glosses because they wanted to ask or seek
answers to particular questions, or because the English and/or French definitional glosses were not
sufficient for comprehension. Regardless of the reason, after consulting the question glosses, students
Lara L. Lomicka “To Gloss or Not to Gloss"…
Language Learning & Technology 48
usually generated one or more inferences. The reference glosses, consulted less frequently, also appeared
to assist the student in moving beyond the textbase.
It appears that participants did not understand the relevance of the image gloss because it was consulted
by only one participant. Participant 12, the sole consultant of this gloss, at first did so "to see what it
would do." After several consultations however, participant 12 commented that the gloss did assist
comprehension: "These pictures are GREAT 'cause then I associate a picture with the word and hence I'm
not translating. I'm just going straight from images. So that really helps figuring out meaning." Appendix
III, Table 1 provides an illustration of the effects image glosses had on his comprehension. Although
these glosses seem to have assisted participant 12 in comprehending vocabulary words and generating
explanations, further research is needed in this area.
DISCUSSION
Think-aloud data, along with tracker data, seem to suggest that the major obstacle for this group of L2
readers may have been vocabulary. They seemed concerned primarily with an immediate construction of
a textbase. While some participants consulted the English and French glosses to determine simple word
definitions, others used annotations to verify hunches. Their use of the glosses was oriented toward the
goal of translation and paraphrasing in order to achieve a minimal level of comprehension. This tendency
is also evident in group C, where tracker data indicate that even with availability of all glosses the readers
chose the definition glosses first. These findings support the research of Lyman-Hager and Davis (1996)
who reported a strong dependence chiefly on English definitions. Lyman-Hager and Davis (1996)
suggested that the participants felt "the key factor in understanding the passage was accessing word
meanings in their native language" (p. 62).
Furthermore, the data suggest that the generation of explanations increases with the use of the question
and/or reference glosses. These two types of annotations would seem to aid the student most in the
construction of a situation model. However, as previously noted, the majority of the participants
concentrated uniquely on the English and French glosses. This could be the due to habit, or perhaps
students were satisfied with the construction of a textbase
 level. It could also be due to the fact that the participants did not understand the relevance of the other
glosses in helping them with the reading process.
The raw data gathered from the think-aloud protocol and from the tracker point to several noteworthy
tendencies. Multimedia annotations, as compared to no glosses or to traditional glosses, may have a
positive effect on comprehension and on the construction of a situation model. However, students at this
fluency level appear to use multimedia annotations primarily to construct a strong textbase and as a result
do not fully explore the potential resources available. Although research is needed before generalizations
can be made, the data show tendencies which merit further investigation in using multimedia reading
software. As Chun and Plass (1997) have suggested, further research that investigates the effect of
multimedia materials (such as audio, graphics, video, and images) on reading comprehension needs to be
conducted.
LIMITATIONS
Several limitations need to be pointed out in this pilot study. First, due to the small size of the sample
population, the results were not statistically significant. However, the data do suggest that replication with
a larger subject population may be significant. Second, the participants were not provided with an
extensive introduction to the types of informational glosses available, enabling them to understand how
each type could aid comprehension. Due to testing conditions, students did not have the opportunity to
explore the software and become comfortable with it prior to the experiment. Instructors would be
strongly encouraged to devote an entire class period to the introduction of such programs, so that both
Lara L. Lomicka “To Gloss or Not to Gloss"…
Language Learning & Technology 49
teachers and students are comfortable with the software and know how to use it. In addition, certain
vocabulary words in the glosses themselves were not understood by the participants, at times creating
additional frustration for the students. Furthermore, the introduction to the poem and to the author may
have provided too much information to the participants. Certain utterances generated chiefly by
participants in conditions A and B were strikingly similar to phrases in the introduction to the poem.
Finally, future studies should control for text effect where different types of texts, as well as text length,
would be tested.
Though the limited size of this study disallows broad generalizations, several pedagogical issues have
emerged which deserve further attention and research. First, this study suggests that instructors should
discuss the process of L2 reading comprehension with their students. Research could be conducted that
investigates what the concept of comprehension means and may entail for students. Many students
erroneously interpret comprehension as a process consisting of mere translation and paraphrasing.
Students seem to be generally satisfied with achieving a minimal level of comprehension via quick and
basic translation. If they are able to translate the words into their L2, then they assume they have
understood the text. In doing this, students often fail to achieve a global understanding of the text.
Martínez-Lage and Herren (1998) assert that "technology-based annotated texts present us with new
opportunities to assist our students in getting beyond the 'mechanical' aspects of the reading process and
to provide them with a means of developing good reading strategies" (pp. 146-147). In order to
demonstrate the complexity of the reading comprehension process, instructors could work through texts
with their students, constructing both textbase and situation models. In differentiating between these two
levels of representation, the process of co-construction could underscore the importance of moving
beyond translation and paraphrasing.
Additionally, further research should be conducted which examines instruction of software by the FL
teacher. Instruction, along with the use of activities involving group work and discussion (during, before
or after reading), may assist students in achieving a deeper level of comprehension. Since the data suggest
that informational glosses such as questions might aid students in generating inferences, an increased
number of interspersed questions could be incorporated into the software in order to aid the development
of a situation model. Questions could be answered in written form by the students or discussed during
small group activities. Reading and the effectiveness of multimedia annotations need to be adequately
explained by the instructor. Students who have only been exposed to traditional glosses may not
understand how other types of informational glosses could be used to enhance comprehension. Moreover,
this study could be replicated with a larger sample population, and with an increased number of texts. It
would also be interesting to compare results across languages and levels. A similar study could also be
conducted combining an offline measure, such as a recall protocol, with an online measure, such as the
think-aloud procedure. Future studies such as these will shed more light on L2 reading research involving
technology.
Although more research is needed, the data from this pilot study suggest that the use of multimedia
annotations may aid comprehension and the development of a situation model.
Although students are often accustomed to single word or phrase decoding, experience with multimedia
annotations can help to convey the necessity of moving beyond a simple text-base comprehension. The
increased integration of computers into FL curricula can facilitate more research on the relationship
between different multimedia annotations and comprehension.
Lara L. Lomicka “To Gloss or Not to Gloss"…
Language Learning & Technology 50
NOTES
1 The Standards for Foreign Language Learning define what students should know and be able to do in
foreign language education at different educational levels. These standards are intended to set up learning
goals and to help devise a curriculum to achieve these goals. To that end, the Standards are organized
around five main goals that focus on (a) communicating in the target language, (b) understanding the
target culture, (c) connecting with other disciplines and acquiring information through the target
language, (d) comparing the target language and culture with one's own, and e) being able to participate in
a global community (ACTFL et al., 1996).
2 The LINGUIST listserve is an online discussion list focusing on linguistic topics. It can be accessed by
sending an e-mail message to: LINGUIST-REQUEST@UNIWA.CC.UWA.OZ.AU; and including as the
first and only line in the body of your message: SUBSCRIBE LINGUIST.
3 Soc.culture newsgroups are online discussions dealing with country-related socio-cultural topics. Some
addresses for soc.culture groups are soc.culture.spain, soc.culture.latin-america, soc.culture.french,
soc.culture.german, and soc.culture.japan.
4 According to experts participating in the "1st International Congress of the Spanish Language"
(Zacatecas, Mexico, April 1997), in which Spanish speakers were encouraged to "conquer the
cyberspace," 90% of the Internet entries are in English, 6% in French and German, and 2% in Spanish
(Rico, 1997).
5 The samples are reproduced the way the students wrote them (except for the typographical features in
the Spanish language such as the "ñ," the inverted question and exclamation symbols, and the accent
marks, which could not be produced through the electronic medium, and were added by the researcher.)
6 After learning that a student of mine had started participating in chat rooms in Spanish, she was asked to
describe her experience, writing the following:
Being introduced to e-mail [in Spanish] was the event that catapulted me into the world of cyberspace.  I
was a child in the wading pool hoping that one day I could learn to swim like the "big people." E-mail
was the safest and most comfortable and familiar thing to me and the Internet and chat room were like the
"big people" pool. Being particularly interested in topics and conversations in Spanish, I soon was full of
just writing e-mail and wanted to do something more interactive. I decided to open up a [Spanish] chat
room.  In the beginning I only sat and watched the fluent speakers (or so I thought, fluent) type and
interact simultaneously and over time I became more comfortable and decided to go for full immersion
and actually type something and send it. After that first plunge, I decided that I could do it. Now talking
through the [Spanish] chat rooms is a regular routine for me. I now have met several native and non-
native speakers [of Spanish] from all over the world, for example California, Mexico, España, y otras
partes del mundo [sic]. Now I send to and receive e-mail from them. I have let go of the security blanket
and now my concept and understanding of the Spanish language and the culture of Spanish-speaking
countries is broadening. And to think that it all started with e-mail!
REFERENCES
Bernhardt, E. B. (1991). Reading development in a second language: Theoretical, empirical, and
classroom perspectives. Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing.
Blake, R. J. (1992). Second language reading on the computer. ADFL Bulletin, 24(1), 17-22.
Bradley, T., & Lomicka, L. (1997). Femme noire de Léopold Senghor [CD-ROM]. A l'aventure: An
introduction to French language and Francophone cultures. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Lara L. Lomicka “To Gloss or Not to Gloss"…
Language Learning & Technology 51
Chun, D. M., & Plass, J. L. (1996). Effects of multimedia annotations on vocabulary acquisition. The
Modern Language Journal, 80 (2), 183-198.
Chun, D. M., & Plass, J. L. (1997). Research on text comprehension in multimedia environments.
Language Learning & Technology, 1 (1), 60-81. Retrieved October 10, 1997 from the World Wide Web:
http://polyglot.cal.msu.edu/llt/vol1num1/chun_plass/default.html.
Cubillos, J. H. (1998). Technology: A step forward in the teaching of foreign languages. In J. Harper, M.
Lively, & M. Williams (Eds.), The coming of age of the profession: Issues and emerging ideas for the
teaching of foreign languages (pp.37-52). Boston: Heinle & Heinle Publishers.
Davis, J. N. (1989). Facilitating effects of marginal glosses on foreign language reading. The Modern
Language Journal, 73 (1), 41-48.
Davis, J. N., & Lyman-Hager, M. (1997). Computers and L2 reading: Student performance, student
attitudes. Foreign Language Annals, 30 (1), 58-72.
Davis, J. N., Lyman-Hager, M., & Hayden, S. B. (1992). Assessing user needs in early stages of program
development: The case of foreign language reading. CALICO Journal, 9 (4), 21-27.
Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. (1984). Protocol analysis: Verbal reports as data. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Herren, D. (1996). Guided reading: A hypermedia shell. Middlebury, VT: Green Mountain Mac.
Horiba, Y. (1990). Narrative comprehension processes: A study of native and non-native readers of
Japanese. The Modern Language Journal, 74 (2),188-202.
Horiba, Y. (1996). Comprehension processes in L2 reading: Language competence, textual coherence,
and inferences. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 18 (4), 433-473.
Hulstijn, J. H., Hollander, M., & Greidanus, T. (1996). Incidental vocabulary learning by advanced
foreign language students: The influence of marginal glosses, dictionary use, and reoccurrence of
unknown words. The Modern Language Journal, 80 (3), 327-339.
Jacobs, G. (1991). Second language reading recall as a function of vocabulary glossing and selected other
variables. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu.
Jacobs, G. (1994). What lurks in the margin: Use of vocabulary glosses as a strategy in second language
reading. Issues in Applied Linguistics, 4 (1), 115-137.
Jacobs, G., Dufon, P., & Hong, F. C. (1994). L1 and L2 glosses in reading passages: Their effectiveness
for increasing comprehension and vocabulary knowledge. Journal of Research in Reading, 17 (1), 19-28.
Johnson, P. L. (1982). Effects on reading comprehension of building background knowledge. TESOL
Quarterly, 16 (3), 503-16.
Just, M. A., & Carpenter, P. A. (1992). A capacity theory of comprehension: Individual differences in
working memory. Psychological Review, 99 (1), 122-149.
Kern, R. G. (1994). The role of mental translation in second language reading. Studies in Second
Language Acquisition, 16 (4), 441-461.
Kucan, L., & Beck, I. L. (1997). Thinking aloud and reading comprehension research: Inquiry,
instruction, and social interaction. Review of Educational Research, 67 (3), 271-299.
Lomicka, L., Bradley, T., & Lyman-Hager, M. (1997). Content with your content? Authoring and re-
authoring a cross- platform CD-ROM reader. In F. L. Borchardt, E. M. T. Johnson, & L. Rhodes (Eds.),
Proceedings of the CALICO 1997 Annual Symposium [CD-ROM]. Durham, NC: Duke University.
Lara L. Lomicka “To Gloss or Not to Gloss"…
Language Learning & Technology 52
Lyman-Hager, M., & Davis, J. N. (1996). The case for computer-mediated reading: Une Vie de Boy. The
French Review, 69 (5), 775-790.
Lyman-Hager, M., Davis, J. N., Burnett, J., & Chennault, R. (1993). Une Vie de Boy: Interactive reading
in French. In F. L. Borchardt & E. M. T. Johnson (Eds.), Proceedings of the CALICO 1993 Annual
Symposium on "Assessment" (pp. 93-97). Durham, NC: Duke University.
Martínez-Lage, A. (1997). Hypermedia technology for teaching reading. In M. Bush & R. Terry
(Eds.),Technology enhanced language learning (pp. 121-163). Lincolnwood, IL: National Textbook
Company.
Martínez-Lage, A., & Herren, D. (1998). Challenges and opportunities: Curriculum pressures in the
technological present. In J. Harper, M. Lively, & M. Williams (Eds.), The coming of age of the
profession: Issues and emerging ideas for the teaching of foreign languages (pp. 141-167). Boston: Heinle
& Heinle Publishers.
Myers, J. L. (1990). Causal relatedness and text comprehension. In D. A. Balota, G. F. d'Arcais, & K.
Rayner (Eds.), Comprehension processes in reading (pp. 361-375). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Nation, I. S. P. (1983). Teaching and learning vocabulary. Wellington: English Language Institute,
Victoria University.
Noblitt, J. S., & Bland, S. K. (1991). Tracking the learner in computer-aided language learning. In B. F.
Freed (Ed.), Foreign language acquisition research and the classroom (pp. 120-132). Lexington: Heath.
Olson, D. H., Duffy, S. A., & Mack, R. (1984). Thinking-out-loud as a method for studying real-time
comprehension processes. In D. Kieras & M. Just (Eds.), New methods in reading comprehension
research (pp. 253-286). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Pak, J. (1986). The effect of vocabulary glossing on ESL reading comprehension.. Unpublished
manuscript, University of Hawaii at Manoa.
Rikard, G. L., & Langley, D. J. (1995). The think aloud procedure: A research technique for gaining
insight into the student perspective. Physical Educator, 52(2), 93-97.
Trabasso, T., & Magliano, J. (1996). Conscious understanding during comprehension. Discourse
Processes, 21 (3), 255-287.
Trabasso, T., & Suh, S. (1993). Understanding text: Achieving explanatory coherence through online
inferences and mental operations in working memory. Discourse Processes, 16 (1-2), 3-34.
Trabasso, T., Suh, S., Payton, P., & Jain, R. (1995). Explanatory inferences and other strategies during
comprehension and their effects on recall. In R. F. Larch & E. J. O'Brien (Eds.), Sources of coherence in
reading (pp. 219-240). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Van Dijk, T. A., & Kintsch, W. (1983). Strategies of discourse comprehension. New York: Academic
Press.
Whitney, P., Ritchie, B., & Clark, M. (1991). Working memory capacity and the use of elaborative
inferences in text comprehension. Discourse Processes, 14(2),133-145.
Whitney, P., & Budd, D. (1996). Think-aloud protocols and the study of comprehension. Discourse
Processes,21 (3), 341-351.
Zwann, R., & Brown, C. (1996). The influence of language proficiency and comprehension skill on
situation model processing. Discourse Processes, 21 (3), 289-327.
Lara L. Lomicka “To Gloss or Not to Gloss"…
Language Learning & Technology 53
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am indebted to T. Danielle Blount for her help in conducting this study and for her numerous
contributions to the first draft of this manuscript. I am also very grateful to Carol Brown, Travis Bradley,
and Pat Shannon for reading and commenting on various drafts of this paper. Finally, I would also like to
thank the anonymous referees for their valuable comments and suggestions.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Lara Lomicka is Co-Director of Instructional Technologies at the Pennsylvania State University and a
Ph.D. candidate in Foreign Language Acquisition in the Department of French. She is interested in
classroom research and technology, and has been involved in several multimedia projects in French.
E-mail: lll132@psu.edu
