Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num2/net/
January 1998, Volume 1, Number 2
pp. 3-6
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference)
Copyright © 1998, ISSN 1094-3501 3
ON THE NET
Resources for Instructors and Learners of Less Commonly Taught Languages
Jean W. LeLoup
SUNY Cortland
Robert Ponterio
SUNY Cortland
If you are a teacher of English, French, German, and/or Spanish, you have probably noticed that,
comparatively, you enjoy many perks in the foreign language (FL) teaching world.  First, there are many
of you.  You can almost always find someone else that teaches your language to pair up with in a
conference session, to sit with at a regional FL luncheon, to commiserate and communicate with in your
own school district.  Second, you have relatively stable and sizable enrollments in many institutions of
learning and are generally considered to be the "norm" --  that is, most people are not surprised when your
language forms part of the school curriculum.  Third, you are frequently courted by textbook publishers,
and when considering a new text, you usually have a variety from which to choose.  Fourth, the Internet
has become a great new resource area for you, with thousands of pages of authentic materials and
resources at your disposal.
Such is generally not the case if you are a teacher of the Less Commonly Taught Languages (LCTLs). 
Finding a colleague who teaches the same language can be difficult in those conference sessions, regional
meetings, and forget about in your own district.  You are usually a majority of one, championing the
cause of  "those other languages." With a few limited geographical exceptions, most people look askance
when your language is proposed as an addition to the districtâs or the institutionâs curriculum.  As for
materials, "jet lag" or "time warp" might be terms that best describe the state of affairs, simply because it
is not in the financial interests of major publishers to invest in development projects for your language. 
Even web-based offerings of authentic materials are more limited because there are fewer sources.
The WWW is widely recognized by FL teachers as a rich source of current authentic materials that can
help make the language learning experience more interesting and rewarding.  Many FL professionals
around the world are preparing web-based materials for students of the aforementioned "commonly
taught" languages, but the LCTLs are not benefiting from the same quantity of production for several
reasons.  One is access to the technology necessary to develop such materials.  Much of this technology is
simply not readily available to teachers of LCTLs or potential producers of materials and resources in
these languages.  Another is numerical: the production and distribution of LCTL teaching materials do not
benefit from the economies of scale or the numbers of professionals that facilitate materials development
for languages such as English, Spanish, French, and German.  This leads to still another, which is
economic:  if the potential sales market is not large enough, the investment is not made. How, then, can
teachers of LCTLs move ahead in the arena of technology and, at the same time, use it to increase their
numbers, both in professional instructors and in language learners?
The Less Commonly Taught Languages (LCTL) Project of the Center for Advanced Research on
Language Acquisition (CARLA) at the University of Minnesota seeks to use the Internet to address these
challenges by helping teachers cooperate and by encouraging the study of LCTLs.
http://carla.acad.umn.edu/lctl/lctl.html
Jean W. LeLoup and Robert Ponterio On the Net: Resources for Instructors and Learners…
Language Learning & Technology 4
 
To that end, the LCTL page was created:
http://carla.acad.umn.edu/lctl/lctl.html
and it serves as a common meeting ground for all language teachers who share an interest in language
learning in general and in the study of LCTLs in particular.  The LCTL page offers several useful
resources for teachers of a large number of LCTLs.  The various sections of the page are detailed below.
Course Offerings for Less Commonly Taught Languages
The LCTL page has compiled a database of course offerings throughout the U.S. and Canada.  This
logical first link indicates where, in a given geographical region, instruction in a particular LCTL is
given.  User-friendly clickable maps enable the user to select an area in North America and locate tertiary
institutions where one can study any one of thirteen LCTLs.  In addition, a clickable alphabet provides
links to those LCTLs not included in the maps.  The database contains information on nearly 300
languages in total at some 2,000 institutions.  Location, levels offered, and a contact person are available
for the LCTLs.
Subscribing to a LCTL mailing lists
LCTL hosts six electronic discussion groups, one of which is for general dialog among teachers of
LCTLs; the remaining five are language-specific (for teachers of Celtic, Dutch, Hindi, Nordic, and
Polish). These lists can prove invaluable for the LCTL teacher who lacks professional support by virtue of
being a singleton in his/her institution, due to geographic isolation, or any number of job-related
situations.  Connecting and communicating regularly with professional colleagues is an excellent means
of professional development.  As announcements of sharable resources and materials, organized by the
LCTL project, will be made through these lists in the future, LCTL teachers will want to keep tabs on the
conversations on such fora.  Step-by-step instructions on subscribing are provided at this site.
LCTL Summit
The results of a survey, administered prior to the September, 1996 summit of LCTLs helds at the
University of Minnesota, are detailed here.  Participants responded to a series of three questions in each of
the following areas:  Enrollments and Communication, Teacher Education, Materials Availability, and
Delivery Systems.  Summaries of individual answers are provided in this summary report. The summit
aimed to involve teachers and administrators from around the US in discussions of issues common to
LCTL teachers and students and to propose solutions to common problems.
Technology Training Workshops
The LCTL Project has been involved in several initiatives designed to enhance the teaching and learning
of LCTLs through the use of computer and video technologies.   Descriptions of several of these projects
are available here.  One project entailed the development of web exercises in Hebrew; detailed
Jean W. LeLoup and Robert Ponterio On the Net: Resources for Instructors and Learners…
Language Learning & Technology 5
instructions for viewing them, along with downloading the requisite software, are included.   "The
Teacher Development: Focus on Technology" may be of particular interest to teachers as it offers a
rationale for the integration of technology in language classes as well as in language teacher preparation
programs.
The final offering of the LCTLs page is a listing of resources that include:
Less Commonly Taught Languages Organizations: a listing of LCTL organizations with contact
information for specific languages as well as LCTL teaching in general.
Experts Willing to Share Knowledge of Specific LCTLs:  an "Ask the Experts" page that provides names
and email addresses of people who have volunteered their time, talents, and expertise in a number of
different languages to answer questions that you might have.
How to find materials for teaching or learning LCTLs:  though not a formal collector or distributor of
LCTL materials, the project does offer here some suggestions for methods of obtaining these resources
that are frequently difficult to find.  Included are names and addresses of book stores and publishers that
specialize in the LCTL area.
Links for LCTLs on the World Wide Web:  this page offers a smattering of LCTL-specific links that are
considered good sources for culture and language information.  The five languages of the above-
mentioned discussion lists are included, as well as a few general sites.  This page is meant to be a jumping
off point for interested parties rather than an all-inclusive site; users are expected to branch out to other
related sites from here.
For the teacher of a LCTL, the LCTL page is an excellent place to begin exploring the WWW.  It is a
good outgrowth of a much needed project.  On several pages, site users are encouraged to add to the
extant database of information provided on these pages. One can do this by contacting
LCTL Project
Center for Advanced Research on Language Acquisition
1313 5th St. SE
Suite 111
Minneapolis, MN 55414
(612)-627-1872
fax: (612)-627-1875
e-mail: lctl@tc.umn.edu
Indeed, in this way, FL teachers can connect, communicate, and assist each other in developing
themselves, their materials, their enrollments, and general interest in the LCTLs.
Here are a few related WWW sites of interest to teachers of LCTLs:
• The UCLA Language Materials Project has an online Less Commonly Taught Languages
materials database.
• The Yamada Language Center is a site for language study at the University of Oregon with
information about more than 100 languages.
• The Human Language Resource Page, by Tyler Jones, has an extensive collection of resources
including many for Less Commonly Taught Languages (including Klingon).
