Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/chun_plass/default.html 
July 1997, Volume 1, Number 1 
pp.60-81 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 1997, ISSN 1094-3501 55 
RESEARCH ON TEXT COMPREHENSION 
IN MULTIMEDIA ENVIRONMENTS 
Dorothy M. Chun 
University of California, Santa Barbara 
Jan L. Plass 
University of New Mexico 
ABSTRACT 
Based on underlying theories of L2 reading comprehension and text comprehension with 
multimedia, and in light of the new tools and modes of information presentation that are now 
available, researchers have a variety of avenues for studying how people comprehend text in a 
second language with the help of multimodal instructional materials. In this paper we discuss how 
L2 reading research is focusing increasingly on the cognitive processes involved in reading, that 
is, the interaction of lower-level, bottom-up processes such as vocabulary acquisition with higher-
level, top-down processes such as activating prior knowledge. We combine this knowledge with 
current research on learning with multimedia, focusing on how learners integrate verbal and 
visual information, particularly with respect to the individual differences among learners that 
moderate, if not determine, learning processes. 
INTRODUCTION 
The process of reading and comprehending in one's native language (L1) is very complex, due to the 
myriad of factors that interact with each other in a non-linear and non-sequential manner. The issues and 
their accompanying complexity are further compounded when describing and understanding reading 
comprehension in a second or foreign language (L2). In facilitating L2 reading comprehension, the use of 
sound, pictures, and animated pictures or video in addition to text have played an important role in 
vocabulary acquisition and in overall text comprehension, and are unquestioned components of 
instructional materials for language learning (Chun & Plass, 1996a, 1996b; Cohen, 1987; Hanley, Herron, 
& Cole, 1995; Leow, 1995; Oller, 1996; Omaggio, 1979; Secules, Herron, & Tomasello, 1992). The 
possibility of an instructional use for these different modes of information on a computer raises questions 
concerning learning from media (Clark, 1994; Clark & Salomon, 1986; Kozma, 1991; Ross, 1994), and 
concerning the specifics of language learning with multimedia. 
Of special interest are questions regarding the difference in cognitive processes in learning from different 
sources, and regarding the effect of individual learner differences on learning from media. How does the 
process of comprehension of text differ from comprehension of pictures, and how does the combination 
of pictures and text affect comprehension? What effect do students' learning preferences, abilities, and 
cognitive styles have on the answers to these questions? This paper is concerned with the research 
regarding text comprehension in multimedia environments. We first summarize research results in L2 
reading comprehension and text comprehension with multimedia, and synthesize these findings into a 
model of L2 reading comprehension with multimedia. We then review the research questions currently 
asked by scholars working in the field and, based on the model proposed, derive new and more specific 
research questions. 
Dorothy M. Chun & Jan L. Plass Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 56 
L2 READING COMPREHENSION 
Historical Perspective 
From a historical perspective, our understanding of reading in a second or foreign language (L2) has 
changed considerably in the last several decades. In the mid- to late 1960s, reading was considered a skill 
for learners to acquire, mainly to reinforce the grammar and vocabulary being taught orally (e.g., under 
audiolingualism). In the 1970s researchers argued that greater importance should be placed on reading 
and advocated a psycholinguistic model or theory of reading (Goodman, 1967; Smith, 1971, 1979). 
During the 1980s the perspectives of Goodman and Smith were extended, and L2 researchers began to 
examine L1 reading research more closely (e.g., Bernhardt, 1991; Goodman, 1985; Smith, 1982). 
Currently, there are two overlapping approaches to viewing and describing reading that reflect, in part, the 
development of reading research. The first might be termed a "reading components" perspective in that 
reading is subdivided into skills and knowledge areas. This approach goes well beyond viewing reading 
as a simple collection of skills or knowledge in that it also focuses on the cognitive processes involved in 
reading in general. The second approach to describing reading is in terms of metaphors: The most 
prevalent metaphors in the literature are the bottom-up approaches, the top-down approaches, and the 
interactive approaches. Due to the fact that many of the current views of L2 reading have been shaped by 
research on L1 readers, this section first summarizes the main characterizations of L1 reading 
comprehension. The additional factors that come into play when dealing with L2 reading comprehension 
will be discussed next. Finally, a comparison of L1 and L2 readers in terms of cognitive comprehension 
processes will lead into the following section on text comprehension with multimedia. 
Reading Components Approach 
Briefly, the view of reading from a so-called "reading components" perspective proposes to subdivide 
reading into six general component skills and knowledge areas (as summarized by Grabe, 1991): (a) 
automatic recognition skills; (b) vocabulary and structural knowledge; (c) formal discourse structure 
knowledge; (d) content/world background knowledge; (e) synthesis and evaluation skills/strategies; and 
(f) metacognitive knowledge and skills monitoring. Some researchers rank these factors in terms of 
importance for the comprehension process. For example, Laufer & Sim (1985) posit the following factors 
in order of decreasing importance: knowledge of vocabulary, subject matter, discourse markers, syntactic 
structure. In essence, they find that vocabulary is most important, syntax least important. 
It is important to note that the above-mentioned skills are increasingly being described by cognitive and 
educational psychologists in terms of the processes that learners go through in developing such skills or 
knowledge. For example, the so-called "automatic recognition skills" that typically involve recognizing 
letters, characters, and words have recently begun to be recognized as important in L2 reading. Automatic 
lexical access involves lower-level processing and, in a fluent reader, requires little processing capacity 
(cf. Koda, 1992). 
With the shift in emphasis from a pure skills approach to a process approach, researchers turned to the 
comprehension research that formed a major domain of the field of cognitive psychology. Thus, most of 
the current views of L2 reading have been shaped by the solid and extensive body of research by 
cognitive psychologists on L1 reading comprehension (Grabe, 1991). There are a number of excellent 
reviews of the literature on L1 reading comprehension (e.g., Bernhardt, 1991; Grabe, 1991; Horiba, 1996; 
Swaffar, Arens, & Byrnes, 1991). As an overall description of the process of reading comprehension, 
Swaffar et al. state that "fluent readers synthesize textual subsystems (e.g., content, context, intent, 
language) into a larger metasystem of meaning" (p. 21) and that "in short, readers comprehend a text 
Dorothy M. Chun & Jan L. Plass Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 57 
when they construct a mental representation for incoming pieces of verbal information" (p. 22), see 
section "Text Comprehension with Multimedia." De Beaugrande (1982), among others, concludes that 
"what is in fact comprehended is not sentences, but conceptual content" (p. 180). 
One cognitive view of reading suggests that it is a process or set of ordered stages, consisting of a 
beginning state, an end state, and intervening transformations (e.g., Just & Carpenter, 1987). Some 
researchers believe that reading comprehension involves multiple cognitive processes that are 
hierarchically related to one another (e.g., Horiba, 1996). These processes (from recognizing letters, 
characters, and words, to analyzing the syntactic and semantic structure of clauses and sentences, to 
generating inferences) must take place in an orchestrated manner (Rayner & Pollatsek, 1989). However, 
neither the "hierarchy of processes" view nor the proposition that they take place in an "orchestrated 
manner" insists that the process be linear. Just and Carpenter (1980) define the process as a clearly 
nonlinear one. Readers are active in the selection of portions of the text for processing, and former 
portions of the text may inform latter ones, just as latter portions of the text may inform former ones 
through feedback. Similarly, other researchers believe that reading comprehension results from interactive 
variables that operate simultaneously rather than sequentially (Samuels & Kamil, 1984; Swaffar et al., 
1991). 
A second major approach to understanding the reading process is to describe it using metaphors. The 
three most common metaphors for describing the reading process are bottom-up processing, top-down 
processing, and interactive processing (cf. Samuels and Kamil, 1984; Silberstein, 1987; Swaffar et al., 
1991). These terms and metaphors are described below. 
Metaphoric Approaches 
Bottom-up processing models place primary emphasis on textual decoding. They can be seen as data-
driven and emphasize the priority of the text as input and, hence, lower-level processes such as letter and 
word recognition. In contrast, top-down models place primary emphasis on reader interpretation and prior 
knowledge. They are seen as concept-driven, in the sense that the text is "sampled" and predictions are 
made on the basis of the reader's prior syntactic and semantic knowledge (Goodman, 1967). Other models 
are more balanced in suggesting that linguistic knowledge from several sources (orthographic, lexical, 
syntactic and semantic) interacts in the L1 reading process (Rumelhart, 1977). Readers may also try to 
compensate for deficiencies at one level (e.g., word recognition) by relying more on a source at a lower or 
higher level (e.g., contextual knowledge) (Stanovich, 1980). Texts are described in terms of their 
linguistic properties, their content and organization, and whether or not they are authentic texts or 
discourse. Readers are described in terms of their linguistic competence, their background or world 
knowledge, and affective factors (e.g., learning styles, motivation) (cf. Swaffar et al., 1991). 
A third metaphor posits interactive processing in seeking to explain the reading process. The term 
interactive approaches can refer to two different conceptions: (a) to the general interaction between reader 
and text, that is, the reader makes use of information from his/her background or prior knowledge in 
(re)constructing the text information; and (b) to the interaction of many component skills that work 
together simultaneously in the process. "Simply stated, reading involves an array of lower-level rapid, 
automatic identification skills and an array of higher-level comprehension/interpretation skills" (see 
Grabe, 1991, p. 383; Williams & Moran, 1989). Interestingly, most cognitive psychologists stress the 
interaction-of-skills arrays whereas most L2 researchers stress the interaction between reader and text. In 
sum, an interactive approach to reading is one that takes into account the contributions of both lower-level 
processing skills (identification or decoding) and higher-level comprehension and reasoning skills 
(interpretation and inferencing). It is widely believed that comprehension results from these interactive 
variables operating simultaneously rather than sequentially. 
Dorothy M. Chun & Jan L. Plass Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 58 
Dorothy M. Chun & Jan L. Plass Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 59 
Reading Problem or Language Problem? 
We now turn to some of the main factors that influence L2 reading but that are not normally considered in 
L1 research, namely: (a) differences in background knowledge, that is, L2 readers start with a smaller L2 
vocabulary knowledge than L1 speakers possess when beginning to read in their native language, but L2 
readers start with greater world knowledge; (b) differences in language processing, that is, the transfer 
effects or interference from L1 to L2 on the orthographic, lexical, syntactic, and discourse levels (cf. 
Koda, 1993); and (c) differences in the social context concerning literacy, that is, expectations about 
reading and how texts can be used (Grabe, 1991). 1 
In considering the factors listed above, one of the most prevalent questions in recent research is: Is L2 
reading more a reading or a language problem? (cf. Taillefer, 1996). The question was first posed by 
Alderson (1984) who states it is both, "but with firmer evidence that it is a language problem, for low 
levels of foreign language competence" (p. 24). After a decade of research, the question of whether L2 
knowledge or L1 reading would be the better predictor of second language reading performance was 
revisited by Bernhardt and Kamil (1995). They note that the two hypotheses most commonly associated 
with L2 reading are in conflict because of the either/or nature of the question. The first hypothesis, 
initially termed the "short circuit hypothesis," now referred to as the Linguistic Threshold Hypothesis 
(LTH), states: In order to read in a second language, a level of second language linguistic ability must 
first be achieved. In other words, language is the key factor in reading. The second hypothesis is referred 
to in the recent literature as the Linguistic Interdependence Hypothesis (LIH), stating that: Reading 
performance in a second language is largely shared with reading ability in the first language. The idea is 
that once the ability to read has been acquired, it can be transferred to a second language. 
Bernhardt and Kamil (1995) reviewed studies since 1984, analyzed their own new data, and found 
considerable consistencies "in the amount of variance accounted for by first language literacy (upwards of 
20 per cent). However, linguistic knowledge is consistently a more powerful predictor (upwards of 30 per 
cent)" (p. 15). Based on the results of their study, they conclude that the question is not unambiguously 
answerable. They instead propose to restate the problematic and ask both: (1) How first language (L1) 
literate does a second language reader have to be in order to make the second language (L2) work? and 
(2) How much second language (L2) knowledge does a second language reader have to have to make the 
first language (L1) reading knowledge work? It then becomes important to consolidate both LIH and LTH 
in order to account more precisely for the remaining 50 percent of the variance in L2 reading that is yet to 
be explained. 
The apparent interdependence of L1 and L2 abilities leads to the question of how L1 and L2 readers 
compare in terms of cognitive comprehension processes (cf. Davis & Bistodeau, 1993). Are there two 
separate, yet parallel cognitive processes at work, or are there generic language, and more specifically, 
generic discourse processing strategies that accommodate both first and second languages? (Bernhardt, 
1991). Beginning L2 readers are thought to focus on low-level process strategies (e.g., word 
identification), whereas more proficient readers shift attention to more abstract conceptual abilities and 
make better use of background knowledge; that is, they use textual information to confirm and predict the 
information in the text (Coady, 1979). Recent evidence has in fact shown that L1 readers use much of 
their attention for higher level processes such as the generation of inferences and general knowledge 
associations, more so than L2 readers, who pay more attention to lower level processes (Horiba, 1996). 
In conclusion, although the broad goal of this paper is to better describe and understand the components 
and processes in text comprehension, it is not feasible to discuss in detail all of the factors and 
perspectives listed above. We will thus propose a model of the basic components and processes in L2 
reading as visualized in Figure 1, and acknowledge the numerous other moderating factors under the 
Dorothy M. Chun & Jan L. Plass Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 60 
rubric of individual differences (e.g., prior knowledge; learning preferences; spatial, verbal and linguistic 
ability). Our model focuses on the relationship between a micro- or lower-level component, vocabulary 
knowledge, and the macro- or higher-level component of propositional comprehension. It is hypothesized, 
first, that proficient readers utilize both bottom-up and top-down processing, and that successful 
comprehension is the result of an interaction and smooth transitions between both types of processing (cf. 
Coady, 1993; Silberstein, 1987; Swaffar et al., 1991), and second, that presenting information in multiple 
modes can facilitate the different types of comprehension processes. The latter will be discussed in more 
detail in the following section. 
TEXT COMPREHENSION WITH MULTIMEDIA 
Multimedia environments allow for the addition of visual and auditory information to a text in order to 
improve comprehension. In this section, we will first summarize the cognitive processes involved in text 
comprehension without these types of additional information. Based on the differences between 
comprehending text and comprehending graphics, we will then expand our model by identifying the 
function of multimedia information as aids to text comprehension. 
As discussed briefly in the preceding section, the process of text comprehension in the first language (L1) 
is described in current models as an active process of constructing mental representations of the text 
information. This involves first the construction of a mental representation of the text's linguistic surface 
structure, then the construction of a propositional representation of the semantics of the text, and 
eventually the construction of a mental model of the subject matter described in the text with the help of 
existing cognitive schemata (Carrell, 1984b; Johnson-Laird, 1983; Schnotz & Grzondziel, 1996; van Dijk 
& Kintsch, 1983). 
The term "propositional representation" is used to describe subject matter in a hypothetical mental 
language in single statements each of which is either true or false. A "mental model" is "a mental 
representation consisting of parts that interact with one another according to principle-based rules" 
(Mayer, 1993, p. 242). Examples for mental models are a mental model of a meteorological system or, in 
the case of literary texts, a mental model of settings, events, and characters in a novel. When reading a 
text, mental models are created based on propositional representations, using prior knowledge and 
experiences in the form of existing cognitive schemata (i.e., descriptions of typical objects and scenarios). 
The resulting mental model is a hypothetical internal quasi-object that represents subject matter based on 
a structural or functional analogy between the subject matter and the model. Like schemata, it also 
represents typical objects or scenarios. The mental model can then be used to derive new information 
regarding the subject matter. 
The difference between learning from text and learning from pictures results from the different types of 
representations of knowledge: Text represents information in symbolic structures of a language and is 
processed sequentially, that is, word by word or sentence by sentence (Schnotz, 1993; Schnotz & 
Grzondziel, 1996). Pictures, on the other hand, convey their information by means of a visuo-spatial 
structure (i.e., the spatial arrangements of the components of the picture), and thus represent the subject 
matter by employing an analogy based on common structural properties (Clement & Gentner, 1991; 
Gentner, 1983; Johnson-Laird, 1983; Schnotz, 1993; Vosniadou & Ortony, 1989) and encode information 
in parallel or simultaneously (Clark & Paivio, 1991). 
Schnotz (1993) argues that the construction of a mental model of subject matter is qualitatively different 
in learning from text and learning from images. He argues that "graphics, like mental models, possess also 
inherent structural properties used for their representational functions, which is not the case with text" (p. 
248). Consequently, while the construction of a mental model from text requires the construction of 
Dorothy M. Chun & Jan L. Plass Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 61 
propositional representations, which then have to be integrated into the mental model, the use of images 
"provides the possibility of a relatively direct construction of a mental model" (p. 248-249), since they, 
like mental models, employ analogies to represent the subject matter. In other words, text comprehension 
requires an indirect transformation between the symbolic representation of the text and the analog mental 
model, while the comprehension of an image requires establishing an analogy between the picture and the 
corresponding mental model. This bypasses the propositional representation of information altogether, 
and is thus assumed to be language independent. The question, then, is: How can we combine both types 
of representations to improve comprehension of a text? 
Multimedia Aids for Text Comprehension 
The model described above views text comprehension as the process of transforming a symbolic 
representation of information into a propositional representation, and then, based on cognitive schemata, 
into an analog mental model. How can these processes be supported by additional sources of information? 
Mayer (1984) names three types of aids for text comprehension: (a) aids for selecting information; (b) 
aids for building internal connections; and (c) aids for building external connections. Aids for selecting 
information serve mainly to focus the reader's attention on certain aspects of the target information and 
thus improve the chance that this information is processed. Following the proposed model, this would 
assure that a propositional representation of the information is in fact constructed. Aids for building 
internal representations are designed to support the reader's building of internal connections among the 
units of information presented, that is, organizing the presented information into a coherent structure of 
the logical relations among idea units in the text. This will help assure a coherent structure of the 
propositional representations, based on cognitive schemata. The third type of aids for text comprehension, 
aids for building external connections, are designed to help the reader build connections between the ideas 
in the text and an existing mental model, thus integrating these new ideas into the existing mental model 
(Mayer, 1984; Resnick, 1982). These aids support the construction and extension of the mental model 
based on the propositional representations. 
The introduction of aids in presentation modes other than text can be based on these three types of aids 
for text comprehension. Although the process of learning from different sources of information, using 
different types of representations of the subject matter, can engage the learner in qualitatively different 
cognitive processes, it is ultimately the function of the three different types of aids in the process of text 
comprehension that is of interest. For example, the integration of new information into the existing mental 
model can be supported with a concrete advance organizer (Ausubel, 1960; Mayer, 1984). This advance 
organizer could be presented either as text or as a video. Although the cognitive processes involved in 
comprehending the text are qualitatively different from those involved in comprehending the video, the 
function of the concrete advance organizer as support for the integration of information into the mental 
model remains unchanged, irrespective of the presentation mode. 
With the use of information in multiple presentation modes, the aids for text comprehension could 
conceivably be presented in textual form, in visual form, in auditory form, or in any combination of these 
presentation modes. It should be emphasized that the processing of the material is the focus of our 
investigation, not the stimulus material provided to the learner. While spoken text as an auditory form of 
presenting information is perceived by the learner through a different perceptual channel than a written 
text, it is like written text in using a symbolic representation of information, and thus involves similar 
cognitive processes of text comprehension. Visual information, on the other hand, is an analog 
representation of information that can be directly mapped onto the mental model by establishing an 
analogy between the visual information and the corresponding mental model (Gentner, 1983; Schnotz & 
Grzondziel, 1996). 
Dorothy M. Chun & Jan L. Plass Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 62 
Applying Mayer's (1984) aids for text comprehension to multimedia aids, Figure 2 extends our proposed 
model by proposing the different functions multimedia information can have to aid text comprehension: It 
can support the processes of selecting information, of building internal representations (organizing the 
presented information into a coherent structure), and of building external connections (integrating these 
new ideas into the existing mental model). 
In summary, learning from text and learning from pictures are qualitatively different ways of constructing 
mental models. While text comprehension is an indirect transformation between a text as a symbolic 
representation and the mental model as an analog representation, picture comprehension is a direct 
mapping of the picture as an analog representation onto the mental model as an analog representation by 
establishing an analogy between the visual information and the corresponding mental model (Schnotz, 
1993; Schnotz & Grzondziel, 1996). These qualitative differences can be used to aid text comprehension, 
namely, in supporting the processes of selecting information, organizing the presented information into a 
coherent structure, and integrating these new ideas into the existing mental model (see Figure 2; Mayer, 
1984). 
In the following section we will further describe our proposed model of text comprehension in 
multimedia environments by specifying the function of multimedia information to support the cognitive 
processes involved in text comprehension. 
Proposed Model of Text Compprehension in Multimedia Environments 
A number of models address the collaborative effects of spatial and verbal processes to enhance 
comprehension and recall. The model proposed here integrates and expands some of these existing 
models (cf. Figure 1). On a micro level, the enhancing effects of the use of verbal and nonverbal (e.g., 
visual) presentation modes of information on vocabulary acquisition can be interpreted in terms of dual 
coding (Paivio, 1971, 1986). The dual coding theory postulates the existence of two different storage 
systems for information--a verbal and a nonverbal system. Information in a symbolic representation is 
stored in the verbal system, information in a nonverbal, analog representation is stored in the nonverbal 
system. These systems are defined to be independent, allowing for additive effects in recall if information 
is coded dually (i.e., in both systems). 
In an extension of the dual coding theory to multimedia learning, Mayer and Sims (1994) found that the 
contiguous presentation of visual and verbal material made it more likely for the learner to build 
referential connections between the visual representation and the verbal representation in short-term 
memory, which resulted in better performance in transfer tasks than the successive presentation of the 
materials, especially for high-ability students. The advantages of storing information in two different 
systems are: (a) a more elaborate encoding, resulting in more retrieval routes to the material; (b) the 
possibility of storing more information in these two systems; and (c) the opportunity to store information 
in the optimal system for the specific type of information, for example, symbolically coded information in 
the verbal system, or information coded in an analog form in the nonverbal system (Kirby, 1993; Paivio, 
1971, 1986). 
On a macro level, text comprehension with multimedia can be interpreted with a generative theory of 
multimedia learning (Mayer, 1997). The generative theory of multimedia learning views the learner as 
knowledge constructor who actively selects relevant words and images from the information presented, 
organizes these words and images into coherent mental representations, and integrates the newly 
constructed visual and verbal representations with one another (Mayer, 1997). These cognitive tasks are 
based on cognitive abilities and cognitive styles of the individual that have an influence on the preference 
for using one type of information over another, and on performance when the learner is allowed to use 
Dorothy M. Chun & Jan L. Plass Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 63 
either visual or verbal information, or a combination of both, for learning. The apparent effect of 
individual differences on learning from different sources will be discussed later in this paper. 
In summary, we postulate that different cognitive processes are involved in micro level processing and 
macro level processing of multimedia information (cf. Figure 1). On a micro level (e.g., vocabulary 
acquisition), the presentation of visual information contiguously with verbal information results in the 
construction of referential connections between the verbal and the visual mental representations of the 
material, and the storage of the information in two different systems, a verbal and a nonverbal system 
(dual coding). On a macro level (e.g., overall text comprehension), visual information serves as an aid for 
text comprehension and functions as supplemental information that is added to the mental model of the 
text by mapping the analog visual representation onto the analog mental model. The visual information 
can aid in text comprehension in three different functions: (a) in selecting information, (b) in organizing 
the selected information into a coherent structure of propositions using cognitive schemata, and (c) in 
integrating these propositions into the mental model. Consequently, visual material to support vocabulary 
acquisition has to be designed differently from visual material to aid text comprehension, depending on 
the cognitive processes to be supported. It can be expected, however, that under some circumstances the 
use of different presentation modes of information can have deleterious effects in the processing of the 
information. This will be the issue of the following section. 
Deleterious Effects of Learning with Multimedia 
As described in the last section, studies have shown that collaborative effects of processing of verbal and 
visual information can enhance learning. Other studies, however, found that there can also be competitive 
effects of learning from different sources, such as task interference between modes of processing, the 
directing of attention, and learners' individual differences. 
Task interference can occur in complex tasks when the visual and verbal processes are not automated but 
require executive resources, and when they have to be executed under time pressure (Kirby, 1993). For 
example, when viewing a film in a foreign language, a learner may not have enough executive resources 
to comprehend the foreign language and all the visual information given. Similarly, information in 
different presentation modes that are perceived through the same channel can compete for perceptual 
resources (Mayer & Anderson, 1991). For example, an animation (visual presentation mode) may be 
accompanied by a text (verbal presentation mode). If both pieces of information have to be perceived 
visually, though, (e.g., when the text is printed), then the learner may have to split attention between both 
types of information, which may have deleterious effects on learning. However, Mayer and Anderson 
(1991) found that when the text information is presented as voice over, using a perceptual modality other 
than the animation, learning and transfer can be improved. 
When presented with both visual and verbal information, the learner may direct his or her attention to the 
type of information perceived as more important or more interesting, away from the other mode which 
may in fact contain more important information. This assumption on the part of the learner can for 
instance be based on interest, on the perceived demand characteristics of a source, or on the learner's 
perceived self efficacy in processing material from a particular source, and results in a different amount of 
invested mental effort (Kirby, 1993; Salomon, 1983; see Figure 1). 
Animated pictures, for instance, convey in addition to the visuo-spatial structure of static pictures 
information about the transformation of the structure over time. This can be seen as an aid to create 
dynamic, runable mental models of the information presented. The use of animated pictures or video, 
however, may lead to a lower amount of invested mental effort than the use of static pictures (Chun & 
Plass, 1996a; Salomon, 1983; Schnotz & Grzondziel, 1996). Salomon (1983) found that children invest 
Dorothy M. Chun & Jan L. Plass Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 64 
less mental effort in comprehending materials on television than they invest in materials in print, and 
perceive materials presented on television as shallower and less variable than materials presented in print. 
In a more recent study, Schnotz and Grzondziel (1996) compared learning from static pictures and 
animated pictures of time zones of the earth and found that learners who had access to the animated 
pictures did not perform better in questions requiring the use of mental simulations. They conclude that 
the use of animated pictures can result in a more superficial processing of the subject matter than the use 
of static pictures. Chun and Plass (1996a) found a similar effect for L2 vocabulary acquisition, where 
students who used the text and picture annotations scored higher on the follow-up vocabulary test than 
students who used text and video annotations. 
In the preceding sections of the paper we have repeatedly mentioned the moderating effects of individual 
differences on learning and performance. In the following section we will take a closer look at some of 
these learner variables that are especially related to text comprehension in multimedia environments. 
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES 
A large number of studies indicate that individual differences can have a moderating effect on L2 reading 
comprehension, as well as on learning from information presented in different modes. Salomon (1989), 
for instance, points out that text and pictures affect learning for the cognitive functions they can and do 
perform, and that individual differences, among other factors, do not only moderate, but often determine 
how stimuli are perceived and processed. These differences include, but are not limited to, linguistic 
competence, prior knowledge, learning styles, cognitive styles (e.g., reflection/impulsivity and field 
dependence/independence; cf. Jamieson, 1992), abilities (general, spatial, verbal), strategies (cf. 
Anderson, 1991; Kern, 1989; Raymond, 1993), and affective factors, such as interests, motivation, and 
attitude (cf. Gardner, Day, & MacIntyre, 1992). 
While most of these learner variables have an effect on learning and performance in general, some are 
especially associated with L2 reading comprehension and with learning in multimedia environments. 
Examples are verbal and spatial abilities, visualizer and verbalizer learning preferences, and background 
knowledge. Since space prevents a comprehensive review of the subject, we will focus on these 
individual differences and their effect on second language acquisition and especially L2 text 
comprehension with multimedia. A number of books and articles offer a more thorough review of 
individual differences in general than will be given here (e.g., Ehrman & Oxford, 1989, 1990; Jonassen & 
Grabowski, 1993; Keefe, 1989; Reid, 1987; Skehan, 1991). 
Verbal ability. While verbal ability has been shown to have effect on text comprehension (Knight, 1994), 
some studies also found it to be a predictor for the effectiveness of visual aids. Levie and Lentz (1982), 
for instance, concluded in a review of research on illustration effects that visual aids may be more helpful 
to learners with low verbal ability than for those with high verbal ability. Peek (1993) suggests that poor 
readers may be less capable of building mental representations based on the text itself, but may with the 
help of visual aids be able to build the appropriate representations. 
Spatial ability. Denis (1982) found in a series of four experiments on text comprehension that high 
imagers, who tend to elaborate images that express the content of the text they are reading, spend more 
time reading and have a better recall of a descriptive text that evoked imagery than low imagers who tend 
not to imagine while they are reading. Using an abstract, nonimageable text, no differences between the 
groups in reading time or recall were found. A number of studies of attribute x treatment interactions 
(ATI) show, for example, that multimedia effects are strongest for low-prior knowledge and high-spatial 
ability students (Mayer & Gallini, 1990; Mayer, Steinhoff, Bower, & Mars, 1995; Mayer & Sims, 1994). 
Dorothy M. Chun & Jan L. Plass Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 65 
Visualizer/Verbalizer. Studies of ATI effects involving learning preferences (e.g., the 
visualizer/verbalizer preference), found a moderating effect of these preferences both on vocabulary 
acquisition (Chun & Plass, 1996a) and L2 reading comprehension (Chun & Plass, 1996b). While students 
who reported remembering verbal annotations did not remember more definitions overall than did 
students who reported remembering visual annotations, the analysis revealed a significant interaction of 
learning preferences and annotation type, in which visualizers were more likely to correctly produce a 
definition when they reported using a visual retrieval cue (i.e., being reminded of a corresponding picture 
or video) than when they reported using a verbal retrieval cue (i.e., being reminded of reading a text 
definition). Similarly, verbalizers were more likely to correctly produce a definition when they reported 
using a verbal retrieval cue rather than a visual one. 
These results suggest that visualizers are more effective in using visual cues for remembering vocabulary 
information whereas verbalizers are more effective in using verbal cues. For text comprehension, Plass, 
Chun, Mayer, and Leutner (1997) found that visualizers performed better on propositions for which both 
visual and verbal annotations were provided than on those for which only verbal annotations were 
provided, whereas verbalizers performed well on both types of propositions. Similarly, the effect of a 
visual preview of the text was strong for visualizers but weak for verbalizers. 
Content and background knowledge. Proponents of top-down approaches to reading refer to a large body 
of research on how prior knowledge affects reading comprehension and, in particular, to evidence that 
both content schemata and cultural background information facilitate comprehension. Schema theory for 
L2 reading has been investigated extensively and appears to be a very useful notion for describing how 
prior knowledge is integrated in memory and used in higher-level comprehension processes (Carrell, 
1984b, 1987; Carrell & Eisterhold, 1983; Anderson & Pearson, 1984). The theory provides a strong 
rationale for both prereading activities and comprehension strategy training, that is, that readers need to 
activate prior knowledge of a topic before they begin to read and that this activated knowledge facilitates 
the reading process (Carrell, 1985, 1988). With regard to the model proposed, the activation of prior 
knowledge using multimedia aids, such as visual advance organizers, is one method of supporting the 
process of integrating newly acquired knowledge with an existing mental model (cf. Hanley et al., 1995). 
In summary, an increasing number of studies can be found that investigate ATI effects involving 
individual differences as attributes and different multimedia treatments. According to Salomon's (1972) 
preference model, one of the potentials of multimedia is to accommodate these individual differences and 
provide learners with the materials they need (Chun & Plass, 1996a, 1996b; Leutner, 1992; Plass et al., 
1997). In the following section we will draw a framework of research questions that are based on the 
belief that individual differences are one of the most important factors in studying L2 text comprehension 
in multimedia environments. 
RESEARCH AGENDA 
Based on the underlying theories of L2 reading comprehension and text comprehension with multimedia, 
and in light of the new tools and modes of information presentation that are now accessible, researchers 
are faced with exciting avenues for future research. In this section we seek to integrate what is known 
about L2 comprehension processes with current knowledge of learning with multimedia, and suggest a 
research agenda specific to language learning. 
First, with regard to L2 reading, much of the current research focuses on the cognitive processes involved 
in reading and comprehending. Interactive approaches to reading typically view reading as a combination 
of lower-level identification or decoding processes and higher-level comprehension and interpretation 
processes (cf. Harrington & Sawyer, 1992). In addition, a major focus of recent research has been the 
Dorothy M. Chun & Jan L. Plass Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 66 
issue of whether L2 reading is more a language problem (i.e., dependent on linguistic competence) or a 
reading problem (i.e., dependent on cognitive processes). In other words, what is the relative importance 
of each of the two factors--the L2 linguistic competence and the L1 reading ability of L2 learners. 
To elaborate on the interactive approaches to reading, one of the thorniest issues has been and remains the 
question of how the different processes interact and whether there is a hierarchy in the degree of 
importance of each process. Grabe (1991) states that "most current versions of interactive approaches to 
reading have taken a strong bottom-up orientation to the processing of lower-level linguistic structure" (p. 
384), but there are researchers who believe that, although the ability to decode vocabulary is a key 
facilitator in L2 reading, this ability is no guarantee of understanding (Swaffar et al., 1991).2 The main 
sources of support for favoring a bottom-up orientation to processes come from extensive research on eye 
movement in L1 reading, which has shown (a) that readers read most words on a page and fluent readers 
can identify the vast majority of words automatically (Rayner & Pollatsek, 1989), and (b) that most words 
are recognized before higher-level (nonautomatic) context information can be used to influence lexical 
access (Just & Carpenter, 1987; van Dijk & Kintsch, 1983). Hence, identification skills are extremely 
important for fluent readers, and vocabulary recognition and acquisition become paramount in reading 
comprehension. Specific research questions are suggested in the following sections. 
Second, with regard to text comprehension with multimedia and following Mayer's (1997) generative 
theory of multimedia learning, meaningful learning is said to occur when "learners select relevant visual 
and verbal information from what is presented, organize the pieces of information into coherent visual 
and verbal mental representations, and integrate these newly constructed visual and verbal representations 
with others" (p. 4) The goal is to understand the processes of how people integrate verbal and visual 
information during multimedia learning. These processes are moderated, if not determined, by individual 
differences, such as prior knowledge, abilities, preferences, strategies, and affective factors. Multimedia 
aids for text comprehension, independent of the presentation mode of the information, should support 
these processes. Their design depends on their function as aids to text comprehension. The basic 
questions posed by researchers go beyond the traditional question of whether multimedia is 
effective.3 They address the interaction of particular characteristics of multimedia, specific learning tasks, 
specific cognitive processes, and learner traits. 
In the sections Vocabulary Knowledge and Acquisition (Bottom-up Process) and Text Comprehension 
(Top-down Process), we will discuss some of the cognitive processes that have been found to be critical 
for both L1 and L2 reading and that might be enhanced by multimedia environments. Specifically, we 
propose research questions to be investigated in empirical studies concerning under what conditions 
multimedia can help L2 learners integrate verbal and visual information in order to better comprehend 
what they read; that is, what features or characteristics of information presented in different modes can be 
shown to be effective for reading comprehension. In addition, we will subsume the issue of linguistic 
competence and individual differences under the broader set of research questions concerned with for 
whom multimedia instruction is effective; namely, what types of learners benefit from particular kinds of 
multimedia instruction. 
Vocabulary Knowledge and Acquisition (Bottom-up Process) 
Vocabulary knowledge is considered by many researchers to be a critical feature of reading ability. Some 
current L1 reading theories suggest that processing at the word level is central to successful reading (Carr 
& Levy, 1990; Coady, 1993; McKeown & Curtis, 1987; Rayner & Pollatsek, 1989), that is, there may be 
a causal connection between vocabulary knowledge and reading comprehension. In L2 research, Grabe 
(1991) suggests that "virtually all second language reading researchers agree that vocabulary development 
is a critical component of reading comprehension" (p. 392), and previous research has suggested that 
Dorothy M. Chun & Jan L. Plass Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 67 
annotating lexical items with different modes of information presentation has positive effects on 
vocabulary acquisition (e.g., Kellogg & Howe, 1971; Chun & Plass, 1996a). 
In the model proposed in Figure 1 for vocabulary acquisition, visual and verbal information presented 
contiguously for a vocabulary item can result in dual coding of the information in a verbal and a 
nonverbal system in the form of a verbal and a nonverbal mental representation. The contiguous 
presentation of the two types of information allows for their simultaneous storage in short term memory 
and for building referential connections between both representations. These connections allow for more 
retrieval routes to access the vocabulary item and may lead to additive effects in recall. This process is 
also strongly dependent on learner variables, such as preferences and abilities. The following questions 
derived from this model are relevant to learning vocabulary in multimedia environments. 
Under Which Conditions Is Multimedia Instruction Effective? 
Under which conditions is the process of vocabulary acquisition with information in different modes 
effective? These questions could include, but are not limited to: 
• How should the multimedia information be designed in order to aid in the process of vocabulary 
acquisition? What types of verbal information are helpful? What types of visual information are 
helpful? 
• For what types of words are visuals helpful (e.g., nouns, verbs, adjectives)? Can visuals be 
effective, if carefully designed, for most word classes? 
• What is the effect of presenting both verbal and visual information (e.g., dual coding effect)? 
What effect will a contiguous presentation of two different types of information have? What 
effect will a simultaneous presentation of two types of information have (e.g., audio plus textual, 
audio plus visual)? 
• How can vocabulary learning in multimedia environments be assessed? Should vocabulary tests 
that include multimodal test items be used? 
• What effect does vocabulary learning have on overall comprehension? 
• What do students report remembering about modes of information presentation? Which mode of 
information do learners use as retrieval cues for remembering/learning words? 
For Whom Is Multimedia Instruction Effective? 
Taking the aforementioned effect of individual differences on vocabulary acquisition into account, an 
increasing number of research studies is concerned with the study of attribute x treatment interaction 
(ATI) effects. However, the individual difference variables currently used to study ATI effects need to be 
studied more specifically, and new ways of measuring these differences need to be explored. Identifying 
subcategories for spatial ability, Schofield and Kirby (1994) found, for instance, that mental rotation 
ability was far less related to understanding of maps than spatial visualization ability. For the assessment 
of learning style individual differences, Leutner and Plass (1997) offer a new method of identifying 
visualizer/verbalizer learning preferences in an L2 multimedia environment for text comprehension using 
a behavior observation scale (VV-BOS, Visualizer/Verbalizer Behavior Observation Scale) as an 
alternative to questionnaire-based methods, which are the focus of many critical comments (Boswell & 
Picket, 1991; Corbett & Smith, 1984; Edwards & Wilkins, 1981; Keefe, 1989; Kirby, Moore, & 
Schofield, 1988; Parrott, 1986). Research questions concerning the role of individual differences could 
include, but are not limited to: 
Dorothy M. Chun & Jan L. Plass Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 68 
• Which specific individual differences variables have an effect on vocabulary acquisition in 
multimedia environments (e.g., mental rotation as part of visual ability, vocabulary knowledge as 
part of verbal ability)? 
• How can these differences be measured (e.g., with instruments that observe behavior rather than 
questionnaires)? 
• How can an environment be designed to support the highest possible number of these differences 
(i.e., how can adaptive environments be designed)? 
• Which collaborative and competitive effects do multimedia information have on learners with 
different abilities and learning styles? For example, if learners can select information about 
individual words in different modes (e.g., visual, textual [verbal], and audio [verbal]), what do 
they choose? For whom are visuals helpful (e.g., visualizers vs. verbalizers, high vs. low spatial 
ability learners)? For whom are both verbal and visual information helpful (e.g., high vs. low 
verbal ability learners, good vs. poor L1 readers, stronger vs. weaker L2 learners)? 
Text Comprehension (Top-down Process) 
In the process of text comprehension, the learner actively selects relevant information from what is 
presented and constructs mental representations of the text's linguistic surface structure, which involves 
the interaction of the linguistic features of the text and the reader's language proficiency. The reader then 
has to construct propositional representations of the semantics of the text, that is, organize the pieces of 
information into a coherent mental representation. These newly constructed representations, with the help 
of cognitive schemata, have to be integrated into the existing mental model of the subject matter (cf. 
Figure 2). Multimedia aids for text comprehension, independent of the presentation mode of the 
information, should support these processes. Their design depends on their function as aids to text 
comprehension. Aids for selecting information focus the reader's attention on the target, for example, by 
using visual cues or adjunct questions). Aids for building internal connections support organizing the 
visual and the verbal information into coherent mental representations, for example, by using overview 
maps as visualization of structural information or an outline with headings. Aids for building external 
connections help the reader build connections between the resulting visual and verbal representations and 
their integration with one another, for example, by using a visual advance organizer or audio (cf. Figure 
2). These processes are moderated, if not determined, by individual differences, such as prior knowledge, 
abilities, preferences, strategies, and affective factors. Related research questions are concerned with the 
design of each type of aid and with the effect of individual difference variables on the effectiveness of 
these aids for text comprehension. 
Under Which Conditions Is Multimedia Instruction Effective? 
• Which types of multimedia information are useful for each type of aid for text comprehension? 
• For example, first, in order to focus the reader's attention, do adjunct questions, which readers can 
answer within a computer program and for which they can receive immediate feedback, facilitate 
comprehension? (Cf. CyberBuch comprehension questions, types 1 and 2.) 
• Second, in order to help the reader organize visual and verbal information into coherent internal 
mental representations, can the use of graphic representations of knowledge structures, such as 
overview maps, facilitate learning? (Cf. Tang, 1992, who reported that tree graphs facilitated 
comprehension in ESL reading.) 
• Third, how can prior knowledge be activated by multimedia prereading activities in order to help 
readers build external connections, such as advance organizers in verbal (textual, audio) form and 
visual (graphic, photographic, or videographic) form? (Cf. Teichert (1996) found that multiple 
Dorothy M. Chun & Jan L. Plass Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 69 
advance organizers plus audio- and videotapes enhanced listening comprehension.) In other 
words, what types of verbal or visual information are helpful for activating prior knowledge? 
• How should multimedia information be designed to help each process of text comprehension 
(focusing attention, building internal connections, building external connections)? For example, 
for what types of propositions is visual information, as opposed to, or in addition to, verbal 
information, helpful (e.g., setting the scene, depicting actions or events)? 
For Whom Is Multimedia Instruction Effective? 
• For whom are certain types of multimedia information helpful for each of the processes of text 
comprehension? For example, for whom are graphics and visuals helpful for focusing attention, 
for illustrating knowledge structures or organizational structures of texts, for activating prior 
knowledge, for the depiction of propositions, or for constructing mental models? 
• How do different learners respond to different modes of information presentation? For example, 
do low ability learners (e.g., weaker L1 readers or L2 learners) want or need more literal 
depictions? Do high ability learners (e.g., stronger L1 readers or L2 learners) prefer more 
figurative or abstract depictions so that they can construct their own mental models? 
• How can comprehension be assessed and measured when multimodal forms of information 
presentation have been used (cf. Wolf, 1993)? 
CONCLUSIONS 
The purpose of this paper has been to address the research agenda for the study of L2 reading in 
multimedia environments. Following a review of what is currently known about L2 reading 
comprehension and text comprehension with multimedia, as well as a discussion of the role of individual 
differences, a model of an interactive approach to L2 reading with multimedia was proposed. On the basis 
of this model, specific research questions for the future research agenda were suggested. Additional 
implications of the proposed model concern research methods and principles for the design of 
instructional multimedia materials. 
Proposed research methods. As stated at the onset, the primary research question is not whether 
multimedia instruction is effective, but rather under what conditions and for whom. This means that 
studies should be designed to determine the effectiveness of specific features of multimedia materials for 
specific types of learners, for specific learning tasks, and for specific cognitive processes. It is only by 
isolating individual variables that gradual progress can be made in understanding the cognitive processes 
involved in L2 reading and how they can be supported with multimedia. Some basic ideas for conducting 
research are summarized briefly below. 
First, the elements of multimedia materials whose effectiveness needs to be studied include: audio (e.g., 
individual words spoken, entire narration of dialogues or texts, background sounds that enhance 
accompanying video); graphics (e.g., charts, tables, graphs, diagrams); static or still images (e.g., 
photographs, drawings); and dynamic video (video clips, films, animations). 
With regard to individual differences and their role in or their effect on multimedia learning, among the 
factors to be studied are: (a) verbal ability in L1, L2, or both, defined, for example, by scores on 
standardized tests such as the SAT, the Kit of Factor-Referenced Cognitive Tests (Ekstrom, French, & 
Harman, 1976), or The Nelson-Denny Reading Test (Brown, Bennett, & Hanna, 1981); (b) spatial ability 
(e.g., as measured with the card rotation test and the paper folding tests, and standard measures of spatial 
ability from the Kit of Factor-Referenced Cognitive Tests); (c) linguistic ability in L2 (as measured, e.g., 
by vocabulary pre-tests, grades in L2 classes, and written essays); (d) learning preferences (e.g., 
Dorothy M. Chun & Jan L. Plass Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 70 
visualizers vs. verbalizers, as measured by observation of behavior such as VV-BOS, or self-reporting 
questionnaires); (e) prior knowledge; (f) use of metacognitive strategies (as measured, for example, by 
think aloud protocols); (g) word recognition ability in L1, L2, or both (as measured, for example, by eye 
movement studies); and (h) affective factors, such as motivation, anxiety, interest (as assessed, e.g., by 
questionnaires or interviews). 
In addition, empirical studies should seek to strike a balance between authentic learning situations and 
rigorous experimental conditions. The practical implications of this are that studies that allow learners 
complete freedom in terms of which types of information they access can only provide evidence of 
learner preferences, but cannot effectively compare the effects of particular multimedia features among all 
learners. On the other hand, studies in which "forced" treatments are administered, while allowing for 
direct assessment of feature effectiveness, do not reflect authentic learning environments. Thus, multiple 
studies with different focuses are needed. 
Design of instructional multimedia materials. One presupposition underlying the paper is that well-
designed instructional materials would be used in empirical studies. Although the actual design of 
multimedia instructional materials does not fall within the scope of the present paper, two important 
principles can be derived from the proposed model. The first is that design of information presentation 
(e.g., the selection of the mode of presentation), should be based on the cognitive processes that this 
information aids and on how these processes can be supported by the characteristics of the particular 
mode. For example, while for vocabulary acquisition a picture may be a good choice in depicting an 
individual word that represents an object, for an advance organizer, a video may be a preferable choice to 
aid the integration of information into an existing mental model of the subject matter. 
As a second principle, the instructional materials should be designed as adaptive systems to support 
learners with different traits, such as learning preferences and cognitive styles, so that different learners 
can receive the type of information in the mode they need or prefer. For example, options to access 
multiple modes of information should be available to illustrate individual words for vocabulary 
acquisition. We argue that the combination of these two capabilities, the ability to use presentation modes 
best suited to aid a particular cognitive process, and the possibility to support a variety of individual 
differences within one application, are unique attributes of instructional multimedia materials. 
Although a systematic investigation of the individual multimedia components (and under what conditions 
they are effective), as well as of specific learner types (for whom multimedia is effective), has been 
strongly encouraged, we must not lose sight of the broader field. We thus conclude with an overarching 
set of questions that remains for L2 reading comprehension research as well as for research on reading 
comprehension with multimedia, once answers to the specific questions posed in this paper have been 
found. Does L2 reading comprehension involve multiple cognitive processes that are hierarchically 
related to one another? How are these processes mediated by presenting information in multiple modes, 
such as textual and visual, simultaneously or contiguously? What is the relationship between and among 
these processes? Must these processes take place in an orchestrated manner? Is multimodal information 
processed differently on the micro-level (e.g., vocabulary learning or recognition) as opposed to on the 
macro-level (e.g., overall text comprehension)? How can smooth transitions between and among these 
processes be facilitated with multimedia instruction? Recent research on many facets of second language 
acquisition has focused increasingly on the cognitive aspects and processes of learning, and the study of 
text comprehension with the aid of multimedia components is no exception. 
Dorothy M. Chun & Jan L. Plass Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 71 
NOTES 
1 In other words, the social view of reading is "rooted in the belief that texts are manifestations of 
cultures... [and that] the processing of text can be viewed only within a unique context" (Bernhardt, 1991, 
pp. 9-10). Since each cultural context will bring a different set of values into play, each cultural context 
will provide a different reading or meaning-construction of the text. A "multifactor theory of second 
language literacy" includes three language-based features: phono-graphemic features, word recognition, 
syntax; and two knowledge-driven aspects: background knowledge (as described extensively in schema 
theory) and intratextual perceptions (p. 169).]  
2 In addition, there continues to be lively debate in cognitive psychology with regard to "modularity" vs. 
"connectionism."  
3 Mayer states that "the search for media effects dominated early research on media, but the current 
consensus among educational psychologists is that questions about the relative effectiveness of various 
media are no longer productive questions" (p. 8).  
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Dorothy M. Chun is an Associate Professor of German at the University of California, Santa Barbara. Her 
research areas include second language acquisition, computer-assisted language learning, intonation and 
discourse, and German linguistics. She is the co-author of CyberBuch, a hypermedia system for foreign 
language reading comprehension, with Jan Plass. 
E-mail: dmchun@humanitas.ucsb.edu 
Jan L. Plass is an Assistant Professor in the Organizational Learning and Instructional Technologies 
Program at the University of New Mexico. His research interests include learning with multimedia, 
especially L2 vocabulary acquisition and reading comprehension, interface design and constructivist 
learning in networked environments. Together with Dorothy Chun he co-authored CyberBuch. 
E-mail: jan@unm.edu 
REFERENCES 
Alderson, J. C. (1984). Reading in a foreign language: A reading problem or a language problem? In J. C. 
Alderson & A. H. Urquhart (Eds.), Reading in a foreign language (pp. 1-27). London: Longman. 
Anderson, R. C., & Pearson, P. D. (1984). A schema-theoretic view of basic processes in reading 
comprehension. In P. D. Pearson, R. Barr, M. L. Kamil, & P. Mosenthal (Eds.), The handbook of reading 
research (pp. 255-292). New York: Longman. 
Anderson, N. J. (1991). Individual differences in strategy use in second language reading and testing. The 
Modern Language Journal, 75(4), 460-472. 
Ausubel, L. J. (1960). The use of advance organizers in the learning and retention of meaningful verbal 
Journal of Educational Psychology, 51, 267-272. 
Dorothy M. Chun & Jan L. Plass Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 72 
material. Journal of Educational Psychology, 51, 267-272. 
Bernhardt, E. B. (1991). Reading development in a second language: Theoretical, empirical, and 
classroom perspectives. Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing Corp. 
Bernhardt, E. B., & Kamil, M. L. (1995). Interpreting relationships between L1 and L2 reading: 
Consolidating the Linguistic Threshold and the Linguistic Interdependence Hypotheses. Applied 
Linguistics, 16(1), 15-34. 
Boswell, D. L., & Picket, J. A. (1991). A study of the internal consistency and factor structure of the 
Verbalizer-Visualizer Questionnaire. Journal of Mental Imagery, 15, 33-36. 
Brown, J. I., Bennett, J. M., & Hanna, G. (1981). The Nelson-Denny Reading Test. Chicago: The 
Riverside Publishing Company. 
Carr, T., & Levy, B. (1990). Reading and its development: Component skills approaches. San Diego: 
Academic Press. 
Carrell, P. L. (1984a). The effects of rhetorical organization on ESL readers. TESOL Quarterly, 18, 441-
470. 
Carrell, P. L. (1984b). Evidence of a formal schema in second language comprehension. Language 
Learning, 34, 87-113. 
Carrell, P. L. (1985). Facilitating ESL reading by teaching text structure. TESOL Quarterly, 19(4), 727-
752. 
Carrell, P. L. (1987). Content and formal schemata in ESL reading. TESOL Quarterly, 21(3), 461-481. 
Carrell, P. L. (1988). Text-boundedness and schema interference. In P. L. Carrell, J. Devine, & D. E. 
Eskey (Eds.), Interactive approaches to second language reading, (pp. 101-113). Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Carrell, P. L., & Eisterhold, J. (1983). Schema theory and ESL reading pedagogy. TESOL Quarterly, 17, 
553-575. 
Chun, D. M., & Plass, J. L. (1996a). Effects of multimedia annotations on vocabulary 
acquisition. Modern Language Journal, 80, 183-198. 
Chun, D. M., & Plass, J. L. (1996b). Facilitating reading comprehension with multimedia. System, 24(4), 
503-519. 
Clark, R. E. (1983). Reconsidering research on learning from media. Review of Educational Research, 53, 
445-459. 
Clark, R. E. (1994). Media will never influence learning. Educational Technology Research and 
Development, 42(2), 21-30. 
Dorothy M. Chun & Jan L. Plass Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 73 
Clark, J. M., & Paivio, A. (1991). Dual coding theory and education. Educational Psychology Review, 3, 
149-210. 
Clark, R. E., & Salomon, G. (1986). Media in teaching. In M. Wittrock (Ed.), Handbook of research on 
teaching (Vol. 3, pp. 464-478). New York, NY: Macmillan. 
Clement, C. A., & Gentner, D. (1991). Systematicity as a selection constraint in analogical 
mapping. Cognitive Science, 15, 89-132. 
Coady, J. (1979). A psycholinguistic model of the ESL reader. In R. Mackay, B. Barkman, & R. R. 
Jordan (Eds.), Reading in a second language (pp. 5-12).Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
Coady, J. (1993). Research on ESL/EFL vocabulary acquisition: Putting it in context. In T. Huckin, M. 
Haynes, & J. Coady (Eds.), Second language reading and vocabulary learning, (pp. 3-23). Norwood, NJ: 
Ablex Publishing. 
Cohen, A. D. (1987). The use of verbal and imagery mnemonics in second-language vocabulary 
learning. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 9(1), 43-61. 
Corbett, S. S., & Smith, F. (1984). Identifying student learning styles: Proceed with caution! The Modern 
Language Journal, 68, 212-221. 
Davis, J. N., & Bistodeau, L. (1993). How do L1 and L2 reading differ? Evidence from think aloud 
protocols. The Modern Language Journal, 77(4), 459-472. 
de Beaugrande, R. (1982). General constraints on process models of language comprehension. In J.-F. L. 
Ny & W. Kintsch (Eds.), Language and comprehension (pp. 179-192). Amsterdam: North-Holland. 
Denis, M. (1982). Imaging while reading text: A study of individual differences. Memory & Cognition, 
10(6), 540-545. 
Edwards, J. E., & Wilkins, W. (1981). Verbalizer-Visualizer Questionnaire: Relationship with imagery 
and verbal-visual ability. Journal of Mental Imagery, 5, 137-142. 
Ehrman, M. E., & Oxford, R. L. (1989). Effects of sex differences, career choice, and psychological type 
on adult language learning strategies. The Modern Language Journal, 73, 1-13. 
Ehrman, M., & Oxford, R. (1990). Adult language learning styles and strategies in an intensive training 
setting. The Modern Language Journal, 74(3), 311-327. 
Ekstrom, R. B., French, J. W., & Harman, H. H. (1976). Manual for kit of factor-referenced cognitive 
tests. Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service. 
Gardner, R. C., Day, J. B., & MacIntyre, P. D. (1992). Integrative motivation, induced anxiety, and 
language learning in a controlled environment. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 14, 197-214. 
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-
170. 
Dorothy M. Chun & Jan L. Plass Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 74 
Goodman, K. (1967). Reading: A psycholinguistic guessing game. Journal of the Reading Specialist, 6, 
126-135. 
Goodman, K. (1985). Unity in reading. In H. Singer & R. Ruddell (Eds.), Theoretical models and 
processes of reading (pp. 813-840). Newark, DE: International Reading Association. 
Grabe, W. (1991). Current developments in second language reading research. TESOL Quarterly, 25(3), 
375-406. 
Hanley, J. E. B., Herron, C. A., & Cole, S. P. (1995). Using video as an advance organizer to a written 
passage in the FLES classroom. Modern Language Journal, 79(1), 57-66. 
Harrington, M., & Sawyer, M. (1992). L2 working memory capacity and L2 reading skill. Studies in 
Second Language Acquisition, 14, 25-38. 
Horiba, Y. (1996). Comprehension processes in L2 reading. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 
18(4), 433-473. 
Jamieson, J. (1992). The cognitive styles of reflection/impulsivity and field independence/dependence and 
ESL success. The Modern Language Journal, 76(4), 491-501. 
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983). Mental Models. Towards a cognitive science of language, inference, and 
consciousness. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Jonassen, D. H., & Grabowski, B. L. (1993). Handbook of individual differences, learning, and 
instruction. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Just, M., & Carpenter, P. (1980). A theory of reading: From eye fixations to 
comprehension. Psychological Review, 4, 329-354. 
Just, M., & Carpenter, P. (1987). The psychology of reading and language comprehension. Boston: Allyn 
& Bacon. 
Keefe, J. W. (1989). Learning style profile handbook. II. Accommodating perceptual, study and 
instructional preferences. Reston, VA: National Association of Secondary School Principals. 
Kellogg, G. S., & Howe, M. J. A. (1971). Using words and pictures in foreign language learning. Alberta 
Journal of Educational Research, 17, 87-94. 
Kern, R. G. (1989). Second language reading strategy instruction: Its effects on comprehension and word 
inference ability. The Modern Language Journal, 73, 135-149. 
Kirby, J. R. (1993). Collaborative and competitive effects of verbal and spatial processes. Learning and 
Instruction, 3, 201-214. 
Kirby, J. R., Moore, P. J., & Schofield, N. J. (1988). Verbal and visual learning styles. Contemporary 
Educational Psychology, 13, 169-184. 
Dorothy M. Chun & Jan L. Plass Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 75 
Knight, S. (1994). Dictionary use while reading: The effects on comprehension and vocabulary 
acquisition for students of different verbal abilities.The Modern Language Journal, 78(3), 285-299. 
Koda, K. (1992). The effects of lower-level processing skills in FL reading performance: Implications for 
instruction. The Modern Language Journal, 76(4), 502-512. 
Koda, K. (1993). Transferred L1 strategies and L2 syntactic structure in L2 sentence comprehension. The 
Modern Language Journal, 77, 490-500. 
Kozma, R. B. (1991). Learning with media. Review of Educational Research, 61, 179-211. 
Laufer, B., & Sim, D. (1985). Measuring and explaining the reading threshold needed for English for 
academic purposes texts. Foreign Language Annals, 18, 405-411. 
Leow, R. P. (1995). Modality and intake in second language acquisition. Studies in Second Language 
Acquisition, 17, 79-89. 
Leutner, D. (1992). Adaptive Lehrsysteme. Instruktionspsychologische Grundlagen und experimentelle 
Analysen. Weinheim: PVU. 
Leutner, D., & Plass, J. L. (1997). Measuring learning styles with questionnaires versus direct 
observation of preferential choice behavior in authentic learning situations: The visualizer/verbalizer 
behavior observation scale (VV-BOS). Manuscript submitted for publication. 
Levie, W. H., & Lentz, R. (1982). Effects of text illustrations: A review of research. Educational 
Communication and Technology Journal, 30, 195-232. 
Mayer, R. E. (1984). Aids to text comprehension. Educational Psychologist, 19, 30-42. 
Mayer, R. E. (1993). Comprehension of Graphics in texts: An overview. Learning and Instruction, 3, 
239-245. 
Mayer, R. E. (1997). Multimedia learning: Are we asking the right questions? Educational Psychologist, 
32(1), 1-19. 
Mayer, R. E., & Anderson, R. B. (1991). Animations need narrations: An experimental test of a dual-
coding hypothesis. Journal of Educational Psychology, 83, 484-490. 
Mayer, R. E., & Gallini, J. K. (1990). When is an illustration worth ten thousand words? Journal of 
Educational Psychology, 82, 715-726. 
Mayer, R. E., & Sims, V. K. (1994). For whom is a picture worth a thousand words? Extensions of a 
dual-coding theory of multimedia learning. Journal of Educational Psychology, 86, 389-401. 
Mayer, R. E., Steinhoff, K., Bower, G., & Mars, R. (1995). A generative theory of textbook design: Using 
annotated illustrations to foster meaningful learning of science text. Educational Technology Research 
and Development, 43, 31-44. 
Dorothy M. Chun & Jan L. Plass Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 76 
McKeown, M., & Curtis, M. (1987). The nature of vocabulary acquisition. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum. 
Oller, J. (1996). Towards a theory of technologically assisted language learning/instruction. CALICO 
Journal, 13(4), 19-43. 
Omaggio, A. C. (1979). Pictures and second language comprehension: Do they help? Foreign Language 
Annals, 12, 107-116. 
Paivio, A. (1971). Imagery and verbal processes. New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart & Winston. 
Paivio, A. (1986). Mental representation: A dual-coding approach. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Parrott, C. A. (1986). Validation report of the Verbalizer-Visualizer Questionnaire. Journal of Mental 
Imagery, 10, 39-42. 
Peek, J. (1993). Increasing picture effects in learning from illustrated text. Learning and Instruction, 3, 
227-238. 
Plass, J. L., Chun, D. M., Mayer, R. E., & Leutner, D. (1997). Supporting visual and verbal learning 
preferences in a second Language Multimedia Learning Environment. Manuscript submitted for 
publication. 
Raymond, P. M. (1993). The effects of structure strategy training on the recall of expository prose for 
university students reading French as a second language. The Modern Language Journal, 77(4), 445-458. 
Rayner, K., & Pollatsek, A. (1989). The psychology of reading. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Reid, J. M. (1987). The learning style preferences of ESL students. TESOL Quarterly, 21, 87-111. 
Resnick, L. B. (1982). Syntax and semantics in learning to subtract. In T. P. Carpenter, J. M. Moser, & T. 
A. Romberg (Eds.), Addition and subtraction: A cognitive perspective. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum. 
Ross, S. M. (1994). Delivery trucks or groceries? More food for thought on whether media (will, may, 
can't) influence learning: Introduction to special issue. Educational Technology Research and 
Development, 42(2), 5-6. 
Rumelhart, D. (1977). Toward an interactive model of reading. In S. Dornic (Ed.), Attention and 
performance IV (pp. 573-603). New York: Academic Press. 
Salomon, G. (1972). Heuristic models for the generation of aptitude-treatment interaction 
hypotheses. Review of Educational Research, 42, 237-343. 
Salomon, G. (1983). The different investment of mental effort in learning from different 
sources. Educational Psychologist, 18(1), 42-50. 
Salomon, G. (1989). Learning from text and pictures: Reflections on a meta-level. In H. Mandl, J.R. 
Levin (Eds.), Knowledge acquisition from text and pictures (pp. 73-81). North-Holland: Elsevier. 
Dorothy M. Chun & Jan L. Plass Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 77 
Samuels, J., & Kamil, M. (1984). Models of the reading process. In P. D. Pearson, R. Barr, M. L. Kamil, 
& P. Mosenthal (Eds.), The handbook of reading research (pp. 185-224). New York: Longman. 
Schnotz, W. (1993). On the relation between dual coding and mental models in graphics 
comprehension. Learning and Instruction, 3, 247-249. 
Schnotz, W., & Grzondziel, H. (1996). Knowledge acquisition with static and animated pictures in 
computer-based learning. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research 
Association (AERA) in New York, April 8-12, 1996. 
Schofield, N. J., & Kirby, J. R. (1994). Position location and topographical maps: Effects of task factors, 
training, and strategies. Cognition and Instruction, 12(1), 35-47. 
Secules, T., Herron, C., & Tomasello, M. (1992). The effect of video context on foreign language 
learning. The Modern Language Journal, 76(4), 480-490. 
Silberstein, S. (1987). Let's take another look at reading: Twenty-five years of reading 
instruction. English Teaching Forum, 25, 28-35. 
Skehan, P. (1991). Individual differences in second language learning. Studies in Second Language 
Acquisition, 13(2), 275-298. 
Smith, F. (1971). Understanding reading. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston. 
Smith, F. (1979). Reading without nonsense. New York: Teachers College Press. 
Smith, F. (1982). Understanding reading. (3rd ed.). New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston. 
Stanovich, K. (1980). Toward an interactive-compensatory model of individual differences in the 
development of reading fluency. Reading Research Quarterly, 16, 32-71. 
Swaffar, J., Arens, K., & Byrnes, H. (1991). Reading for meaning: An integrated approach to language 
learning. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Taillefer, G. F. (1996). L2 reading ability: Further insight into the Short-circuit Hypothesis. The Modern 
Language Journal, 80(4), 461-477. 
Tang, G. (1992). The effect of graphic representation of knowledge structures on ESL reading 
comprehension. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 14, 177-195. 
Teichert, H. U. (1996). A comparative study using illustrations, brainstorming, and questions as advance 
organizers in intermediate college German conversation classes. The Modern Language Journal, 80(4), 
509-517. 
van Dijk, T., & Kintsch, W. (1983). Strategies of discourse comprehension. New York: Academic Press. 
Vosniadou, S., & Ortony, A. (1989). Similarity and analogical reasoning. New York: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Dorothy M. Chun & Jan L. Plass Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 78 
Williams, E., & Moran, C. (1989). Reading in a foreign language at intermediate and advanced levels 
with particular reference to English. Language Teaching, 22, 217-228. 
Wolf, D. F. (1993). A comparison of assessment tasks used to measure FL reading comprehension. The 
Modern Language Journal, 77(4), 473-489. 
 
