Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/news.html 
July 1997, Volume 1, Number 1 
pp. 17-18 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 1997, ISSN 1094-3501  
 
19 
This page includes announcements from the organizations sponsoring LLT. More complete listings of 
announcements can be found from the Applied Linguistics Virtual Library, the Agora Language 
Marketplace, and the Centre for Language Teaching and Research's International Conference Schedule. 
University of Hawai'i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) 
Each year, the NFLRC offers intensive month-long summer institutes for foreign language professionals. 
The 1997 institute, Foreign Language Instruction via Distance Education, is taking place from July 7 - 
August 1. Information and applications for the 1998 NFLRC Summer Institute, which will focus on 
Technology-Based Materials for Immersion Instruction, will be available in Fall 1997. 
Recent publications from the NFLRC include new technical reports on the topics of language learni ng 
strategies and measures of J[apanese]SL pragmatics. Also, Chinese Video Clips for Classroom 
Use (video) and the companion publication, Chinese Language Video Lessons for Classroom Use (text 
plus videos) are proving popular items. Check out the rest of our publications -- you'll find technical 
reports, research notes, language teaching materials (text, video, CD-ROM), and online articles. 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR) 
CLEAR sponsors summer institutes which provide foreign language educators opportunities to 
collaborate on projects such as materials development and incorporating technology into the classroom. 
Summer 1998 Institutes include: Content-Based Instruction Materials Development, Material/Technology 
Development for Less Commonly Taught Languages, and Technology & the Internet for FL teachers. 
Information and applications for these workshops will be available in Fall 1997. 
Resources available from CLEAR Summer 1998 include: Pronunciación y Fonética, a series of CALL 
lessons designed to improve Spanish pronunciation; Chinese CALL materials for business language and 
language/culture; a tutor's manual for teaching African languages "on-demand"; an Interactive Video-
Based Training Module on "In-House" Test Development; and tutorial software, targeting pragmatic 
knowledge of German. 
Australian Technology Enhanced Language Learning Consortium (ATELL) 
ATELL is sponsoring the Inaugural WorldCALL Conference: "CALL to Creativity," to be held at The 
University of Melbourne, Australia, from July 13-17, 1998. The objective of the conference is to promote 
and develop national and international networks for CALL research and practice. With more than 500 
delegates expected and interest levels already high, WorldCALL will offer unprecedented access to 
innovators, educators, and entrepreneurs in the field. 
Deadline for receipt of abstracts is October 15, 1997. Contact WorldCALL for further details, or by e-
mail. 
Center for Advanced Research on Language Acquisition,  
Univ. of Minnesota (CARLA) 
CARLA is the coordinating office for a number of grant-funded programs devoted to research and 
program development in the areas of second language teaching, learning and assessment. Currently our 
projects encompass computer adaptive testing, language and culture research, second language 
articulation, immersion education, and teacher training in technology. 
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  20 
CARLA also maintains a database listing 300 languages taught in North America, and 
sponsors listservs for teachers of less commonly taught languages. To share the latest research and 
program opportunities for foreign language and ESL teachers, CARLAsponsors annual summer 
institutes and publishes a series of working papers. 
Computer Assisted Language Instruction Consortium (CALICO) 
Since its inception in 1983, CALICO has served as an international forum for language teachers who 
want to develop and utilize the potential of advanced technology to support their teaching and research 
needs. Through its Annual Symposia, Special Interest Groups (SIGs), CALICO Journal, CALICO 
Monograph Series, CALICO Resource Guide, and numerous other publications, CALICO provides both 
leadership and perspective in the ever-changing field of computer-assisted instruction. 
The strength of CALICO derives from the enthusiasm, creativity, and diversity of its members. It 
comprises language teachers and researchers from universities, military academies, community colleges, 
K-12 schools, government agencies, and commercial enterprises. To learn more about CALICO activities 
and how to participate in them, visit the CALICO homepage at http://www.calico.org. 
European Association for Computer Assisted Language Learning (EUROCALL) 
EUROCALL is an association of language teaching professionals from Europe and worldwide aiming to: 
 Promote the use of foreign languages within Europe 
 Provide a European focus for all aspects of the use of technology for language learning 
 Enhance the quality, dissemination, and efficiency of CALL materials. 
For those involved in education and training, EUROCALL provides information and advice on all aspects 
of the use of technology for language learning. We also: 
 Disseminate information via the ReCALL Journal and other publications 
 Organise special interest meetings and annual conferences 
 Work towards the exploitation of electronic communications systems. 
Full full details, contact EUROCALL at http://www.hull.ac.uk/cti/euro call.htm. 
International Association for Language Learning Technology (IALL) 
Estab lished in 1965, IALL is an organization of professionals in a variety of fields who are committed to 
supporting and extending language learning, teaching, and research through the use of technology. Its 
members include directors and staff of language labs, resource or media centers and grant projects, 
language teachers at all levels, developers and venders of hardware and software, and interested others. 
IALL will be holding the first FLEAT meeting in North America, FLEAT III, together with the Language 
Laboratory Association of Japan, from August 12-16, 1997, at the University of Victoria, British 
Columbia. 
In addition, IALL offers a software database, LLTI listserve (Language Learning and Technology 
International), and publications such as IALL Journal, IALL Lab Design Kit, and IALL Lab Management 
Manual. Contact Tom Browne for IALL publications, or Ed Dente for membership information. 
