Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/net/default.html 
July 1997, Volume 1 Number 1 
pp. 2-4 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 1999, ISSN 1094-3501 3 
ON THE NET  
Language Education and Learning Disabilities  
Jean W. LeLoup  
SUNY Cortland  
Robert Ponterio 
SUNY Cortland  
Once upon a time, the brain was considered a muscle and, as such, to be exercised in order to remain 
healthy and optimally useful. Studying a foreign language (FL) was seen as a useful activity for this 
purpose; to wit, Latin and Greek were the sit-ups and push-ups of the mind. For a long time, language 
study consisted primarily of parsing and dissecting grammar; any practical use was secondary and thought 
to follow from an intellectual knowledge of the formal analysis of the language (Kelly, 1969; Thomas, 
1995). Because literacy in general and language study in particular were options open to only a small 
segment of the populace, an elitism surrounding foreign languages was born during the Middle Ages and 
the Renaissance and maintained even until recently in our schools. Language study was viewed for years 
as the province of a select portion of students: parents were notified that their child had been "selected" to 
begin a second language earlier than their peers, and only those students considered "college bound" were 
encouraged or even permitted to take a FL. Indeed, many of us FL educators ourselves were guilty of 
perpetuating this elitist myth about FL study and secretly counted ourselves lucky that we did not have to 
deal with such problems as the general school populace typically brought to the classroom.  
Slowly but surely, we FL teachers began to realize that not only was this elitist stance archaic and 
fallacious in light of modern learning theory, it was also detrimental to the students in our schools and to 
the FL profession as a whole (Grittner, 1973). First, we have come to realize and acknowledge that all 
students can learn other languages. Second, we maintain that they should learn FLs in order to be fully 
functional in the global society that is their future. Third, maintaining an elitist attitude about FL offerings 
has lead to hard times and low enrollments for FL professionals and may even lead to extinction for some 
study. Happily, most students now can take a foreign language at some point in their public school career, 
and they are being encouraged to do so in greater numbers than in the past. Students also are beginning to 
see the relevance of FLs in their lives, certainly in terms of the workplace and their own marketability and 
even as a valuable goal of lifelong learning. 
The result of this increased interest in and accessibility of FL study, coupled with the current educational 
policy of inclusion, has radically changed the profile of the student population in our classrooms. We are 
seeing special needs children in increasing numbers, yet most FL teachers are ill-prepared to fulfill those 
needs. While they may have received some instruction in attending to diverse learning styles, most 
preservice FL teacher curricula provide little or no preparation in the area of special education. Inservice 
FL teachers are in the same boat; even those who remain current with the literature in the field can find 
little research to guide their classroom practice in this area. The research that does exist is not necessarily 
consonant, one major issue being the definition of terminology and identification of the needs of the 
students concerned (cf, Mabbott, 1994, 1995; Sparks, Ganschow, & Javorsky, 1995a, 1995b). 
Consequently, FL teachers are urgently seeking assistance and guides to resources that will enable them 
to work with this new and challenging student population. 
Sonja Moore of Virginia Commonwealth University has created a web page on the Internet that brings 
together a host of resources and information for FL teachers searching for assistance in dealing with 
students and their special needs. Her site, The Foreign Language Teacher's Guide to Learning Disabilities 
Jean W. LeLoup and Robert Ponterio On the Net: Language Education and Learning Disabilities:… 
 
Language Learning & Technology Journal 4 
 
 
includes a wealth of information, from basic definitions of disability terms to interactive links to journal 
articles addressing the educational requirements of special needs students to legal information necessary 
for those who deal with inclusionary educational systems. This column will review Professor Moore's 
web page in general and highlight the major features of her site as a reference guide to FL teachers 
looking for information on the timely and important topic of teaching FL students with special needs. A 
quick glance at the table of contents for the page indicates the breadth of topics covered.  
 
 
These topics are annotated below, with subsumed links of particular interest being noted. An additional 
feature of the page is a section entitled Conference Handouts, offering a series of one-page explanatory or 
reference materials ready to be used by teachers.  
 
  
Assistive Technology 
As technology becomes more readily available in the classroom, it can play a role in helping students to 
improve their performance. The "Assistive Technology" section includes links to journals specializing in 
assistive technology (AT) for disabled persons, an ERIC Digest dealing with AT for people with mild 
disabilities, IBM and Macintosh commercial sites focusing on AT, and links to entire Internet lessons on 
AT.  
 
Visual Deficits 
Auditory Deficits 
 
Jean W. LeLoup and Robert Ponterio On the Net: Language Education and Learning Disabilities:… 
 
Language Learning & Technology Journal 5 
Both the "Visual Deficits" and "Auditory Deficits" areas lead us to other web resources for people with 
these specific disabilities, singularly or in combination. Among these links are those to the DeafWorld 
server, other WWW resources for the deaf, and the Michigan State University Deaf Gopher. Additional 
resources are ERIC documents on these disabilities, recordings for the blind and dyslexic, and an article 
on how to work with blind or visually impaired people in general.  
 
Attention Deficit Disorder 
Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder 
 
Teachers have become more and more aware of the role of "Attention Deficit Disorder" (ADD) and 
"Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder"(ADHD) in the behavior of some students. Essential resources 
for these problems include several ERIC Digests, definitions of ADD and ADHD, an ADD WWW 
archive, several articles dealing with both children and adults with these disabilities that are descriptive 
and prescriptive in nature, and articles directly related to classroom teaching of students with ADD and 
ADHD. An ADD electronic newsletter helps stay on top of current information.  
Dyslexia 
 
FL teachers are often very aware of "Dyslexia" because we tend to be more familiar with the symptoms. 
Links here include a gopher bibliography, a WWW archive, ERIC Digests, and an article on language-
based learning disabilities and dyslexia.  
 
Hyperlexia 
 
Resources for "Hyperlexia" contain an article that defines and explains Hyperlexia and also a link to the 
American Hyperlexia Association home page.  
 
Learning Styles 
 
Once we know more about some of the learning disabilities that we might encounter, the next step is to 
figure out how we can help. A "Learning Styles" section has several ERIC digests on learning styles in 
general and one in particular on second language learning styles and strategies. We also find an article 
that discusses several different types of learning-style instruments.  
 
Foreign Language and LD 
 
For more specific ideas about how these learning disabilities impact on the FL classroom, we find a 
section of "Foreign Language and LD" links. FL teachers should find this section especially useful. There 
are six ERIC Digests dealing directly with FL learning, learning styles, and disabilities. Also archived 
here is an article entitled "Section 504 and the Americans with Disabilities Act: Accommodating the 
Learning Disabled Student in the Foreign Language Curriculum."  
Teaching Students with Disabilities 
 
A companion to the section above is another on "Teaching Students with Disabilities." Though not 
language-specific, it includes several ERIC Digests, general guides and links to special education 
resources, as well as an annotated bibliography on teaching students with LD. 
Jean W. LeLoup and Robert Ponterio On the Net: Language Education and Learning Disabilities:… 
 
Language Learning & Technology Journal 6 
Other useful links are:  
 
College Policies for Students 
Legal Information 
Some Common Questions and Answers 
 
While availing oneself of all the material available here is no substitute for professional education in the 
area of special needs students in the foreign language classroom or consultation with trained specialists, it 
is a welcome point of departure for the many FL professionals who are facing this instructional demand 
with little or no background. Sonja Moore has provided the profession with a valuable resource in this 
page, and her efforts are to be commended. 
 
References 
Grittner, F. M. (1973). Barbarians, bandwagons and foreign language scholarship. Modern Language 
Journal, 57(5-6), 241-248. 
Kelly, L. G. (1969). Twenty-five centuries of language teaching. Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
Mabbott, A. S. (1994). An explanation of reading comprehension, oral reading errors, and written errors 
by subjects labeled learning disabled. Foreign Language Annals, 27, 293-324. 
Mabbott, A. S. (1995). Arguing for multiple perspectives on the issue of learning disabilities and foreign 
language acquisition: A response to Sparks, Ganschow, and Javorsky. Foreign Language Annals, 28(4), 
488-494. 
Sparks, R. L., Ganschow, L., & Javorsky, J. (1995a). Counterpoint: I know one when I see one (or I know 
one because I am one). Foreign Language Annals, 28(4), 479-487. 
Sparks, R. L., Ganschow, L., & Javorsky, J. (1995b). Satiating the appetite of the sociologic sponge: A 
rejoinder to Mabbott. Foreign Language Annals, 28(4), 495-498. 
Thomas, M. (1995). Medieval and modern views of universal grammar and the nature of second language 
learning. Modern Language Journal, 79(3), 315-55. 
 
