Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vo21num1/Fromguested.html
July 1998, Volume 2, Number 1
pp. 2-3
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference)
Copyright © 1998, ISSN 1094-3501 2
FROM THE GUEST EDITOR
This special volume of Language Learning & Technology is devoted to issues
surrounding the design and evaluation of foreign language learning multimedia software.
The papers included in it are based on presentations made by the authors at the
Invitational Symposium on Assessing & Advancing Technology Options in Language
Learning (AATOLL) at the University of Hawai'i National Foreign Language Research
Center on February 26-28, 1998. The purpose of the symposium was to develop criteria
for the design and evaluation of software from the perspectives of those disciplines
which impinge most closely on the conceptualization and development of multimedia
CALL. True to the spirit of the symposium, the contributors to this volume bring an
impressive breadth of experience and background to the discussion of CALL principles
that should guide the development and evaluation of foreign language learning software.
The SLA Perspective
The potential pedagogical effect of the technological tools used in foreign language
instruction depends on the theoretical and methodological approaches that guide its
design. In her article "Multimedia CALL: Lessons to be Learned from Research on
Instructed SLA," Chapelle argues that even though much remains to be learned about
second language acquisition (SLA), existing research can provide guidance to designers
and evaluators of CALL. Proceeding from an interactionist perspective, Chapelle
suggests that multimedia CALL should be designed in such a way that it provides
optimal conditions for SLA. She advances seven hypotheses based on SLA research that
could guide the development of multimedia CALL: (1) The linguistic characteristics of
the target language input should be made salient for the learners. (2) Help
comprehending both semantic and syntactic aspects of the input should be made
available. (3) Learners should be given opportunities to produce output that is
comprehensible to an audience, even though the audience in this case is the computer.
(4) Learners need to notice errors in their output. (5) Learners need to have an
opportunity to correct their output. (6) Learners should have the opportunity to negotiate
meaning. (7) Learners need to practice linguistic tasks whose completion requires the
exchange of information. 
The Interface Perspective
User interface is the part of an application that communicates with the users by
conveying the application's functionality to them, and translates their input into a
machine-specific format. In his article "Design and Evaluation of the User Interface of
Foreign Language Multimedia Software: A Cognitive Approach," Plass identifies the
strengths and weaknesses of existing approaches to interface design. He finds that these
approaches are either very pragmatic and lacking in a theoretical basis, or they are too
theoretical to be of practical significance. Plass proposes a new contextualized three-step
approach that combines the theoretical basis of a cognitive approach with the pragmatic
methods of software engineering approaches as the most appropriate basis for both the
design and evaluation of foreign language learning software, because it takes into
account both the user and the learning task. The three steps are defined as follows: (1)
Selection of the instructional activity that supports the skill to be developed (e.g.,
activation of prior knowledge in the case of reading). (2) Determination of the attributes
of the design feature (e.g., adaptability to different levels of prior knowledge, ease of
comprehension for low prior-knowledge learners, and availability of background
information prior to actual reading). (3) Selection of the design feature (e.g., previewing
a movie with a voice-over in advance of reading a passage). Plass argues that although
this approach is based on cognitive theories, it is also domain-specific. Its advantage is
that it puts the user, the content, and the instructional activity at the center of the
interface design process.
From the Guest Editor
Language Learning & Technology 3
a movie with a voice-over in advance of reading a passage). Plass argues that although
this approach is based on cognitive theories, it is also domain-specific. Its advantage is
that it puts the user, the content, and the instructional activity at the center of the
interface design process.
The Speech Technology Perspective
Placing interactivity at the heart of SLA has led to increased demand for intelligent,
user-adaptive CALL software that offer not only comprehensible input and authentic
tasks, but also effective feedback focusing the correctness and appropriateness of user
response on areas in need of remediation. In their paper "Speech Technology in
Computer-Aided Language Learning: Strengths and Limitations of a New CALL
Paradigm," Ehsani and Knodt make a case for using automatic speech recognition and
speech processing technology to add a dimension of interactivity currently missing in
most CALL software, with the caveat that programs be designed in ways that work
around the current limitations of speech technology. After presenting an overview of
speech recognition technology and a discussion of design considerations in speech
applications, the authors identify technological advances that lend themselves most
readily to foreign language learning. To illustrate the potential use of speech technology,
Ehsani and Knodt evaluate a number of innovative CALL applications in view of how
these integrate speech technology within their overall design, and how effectively they
deal with current technological limitations. At the end of their paper, the authors identify
future trends and goals in voice-interactive CALL including some of the following: (a)
development of open-response conversational CALL applications based on large corpora
of non-native spoken and written speech; (b) development of authoring tools and
Application Programming Interfaces that are easier to use; and (c) availability of more
well designed CALL applications that will result in the accumulation of large amounts
of data to further augment and improve the existing technology.
The fourth paper in this volume by Dorothy Chun, entitled "Signal Analysis Software
for Teaching Discourse Intonation," complements the general trend towards context- and
discourse-based CALL highlighted in the first three papers by concentrating on the
teaching of sentence intonation. The author (a) reviews previous research on the
acquisition of suprasegmental features and the potential of computer-based instructional
materials to aid in improving intonation, (b) describes some of the existing software, and
(c) suggests criteria for the conceptualization and design of multimedia software for the
teaching of discourse-based phonology and intonation. Chun concludes by stressing the
need for continued research into the acquisition of L2 prosody and application of signal
analysis software for the facilitation of this aspect of phonological acquisition.
Irene Thompson
Guest Editor
