Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol2num1/net/
July 1998, Volume 2, Number 1
pp. 4-10
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference)
Copyright © 1998, ISSN 1094-3501 4
ON THE NET
Using WWW Multimedia in the Foreign Language Classroom:
Is This for Me?
Jean W. LeLoup
SUNY Cortland
Robert Ponterio
SUNY Cortland
This special issue of Language Learning & Technology looks at evaluating multimedia software. Where
does the Internet fit into this picture? When we talk about multimedia in the foreign language (FL)
classroom, we are often primarily concerned with the use of authentic materials that make the target
language culture seem more real to students. Digitizing the images, sound, and video that represent
multimedia can facilitate their distribution. However, digitized multimedia files tend to be quite large, and
on the net, large files mean slow going. Can we really do multimedia on the World Wide Web? How is
the quality? Does it require a fast connection or can a dial-up connection suffice? In this column we look
at several web sites that are intended to help FL teachers learn about using and even making multimedia
materials, and then explore a few sites that use online multimedia. Please note that several of these sites
were, in fact, created by the authors, who teach a course in multimedia development.
1. How can the Internet lend itself to the use of multimedia?
The problem with Internet-based multimedia is that images, sounds, and videos need relatively large files
that take a long time to download. This waiting period slows down the interactions between the student
and the materials, wastes time, and creates an uncomfortable impression. The CD-ROM and DVD are
superior media for multimedia distribution because they can hold huge files and display them nearly
instantly either on a local machine or over a Local Area Network (LAN). The advantage of the Internet is
that it is highly distributed; that is, materials from all over the world can be accessed from anywhere in
the world. And in addition to actually transmitting media, we can certainly use the web to learn about
multimedia before we actually take the plunge.
To make use of the Internet for multimedia, there are three basic approaches to overcoming the inherent
problems. We could distribute a very small number of files and use these extensively so that downloading
does not need to take place often. We might use a high speed network at both the sending and receiving
ends of the connection so that files are downloaded much faster. Finally, we can use a high level of file
compression so that files are smaller and thus load more quickly. None of these solutions is ideal. Limited
numbers of files can cramp the presentation style; high speed networks may not be available or network
traffic might interfere with transmissions in any case; and compression of media inevitably results in
some loss of quality. A balance is required among size, quality, and speed, and in some settings a
particular balance may simply not work. Yet with these caveats in mind, we may still use online
multimedia to enhance web-based communicative activities. One of the most important warnings, as with
any technology, is to be sure to try it out before bringing it into the classroom, and if the results are not
satisfactory, fix the problem outside of class time, not in front of 30 students.
2. Where can I find information about multimedia and its uses on the Internet?
Although many articles exist that deal with the uses of multimedia in a classroom setting, the vast
majority of these sources are found in traditional hard copy venues: magazines, newspapers, journal
articles, and books. Nevertheless, some authors have noted the irony in this and have placed some
Jean W. LeLoup and Robert Ponterio On the Net: Using WWW Multimedia ...
Language Learning & Technology 5
discussions of the issues and concerns (noted above in the first section) on the net. Below is an annotated
bibliography of sites that will assist you in answering the title question. Several of the sites address the
subject of multimedia and the rationale for its use. Others identify specific multimedia software and
discuss their merits and disadvantages, particularly in relation to use for FL instruction. A database of
multimedia software for FL use is also noted. These sites should give you a better idea of what is meant
by multimedia and why you would want to use digital materials in your FL lessons.
"What is Multimedia?" by Antti Peltonen, University of Oulu, Finland.
Defines the nature and functions of multimedia. Continues with discussion of the "why" of using
multimedia in the classroom instead of more traditional delivery methods for information.
"The Development, Formative and Summative Evaluation of A Computer Multimedia Tutorial: A Case
Study" by Robert D. Stewart, online dissertation.
Not for the faint of heart (it is, after all, a dissertation), but provides some interesting observations about
the nature and use of multimedia and problems with the development and implementation of multimedia
projects by teaching faculty. Has an extensive literature review that includes many volumes of "how-to"
for multimedia.
"Addressing the Need for Electronic Communication in Foreign Language Teaching" by Jean W. LeLoup
& Robert Ponterio, SUNY Cortland.
Proposes the use of electronic communications technologies by FL teachers as a natural segue from
traditional language instruction to a communicative curriculum. Includes many FL sites that use
multimedia applications.
"A Communications Technology Module for the Foreign Language Methods Course" by Jean W.
LeLoup, SUNY Cortland.
Offers a rationale for learning to use and then incorporating electronic communications technologies in
the FL classroom. Provides a four-part teaching module that develops an understanding of the concepts
through FL-specific activities using the applications leading to practical integration of the technologies in
the FL curriculum.
"Multimedia in the Foreign Language Classroom" by Barbara Andrews, Maumee City Schools, Toledo,
OH.
Underscores the value of using multimedia applications to replace traditional projects in the FL
classroom. Addresses several thorny issues such as training in the use of multimedia applications, limited
availability of computers in the classroom, evaluation of projects, and eventual disposition of the projects.
Concentrates primarily on the use of Hyperstudio as a useful multimedia application for FL instruction.
"Emerging Technologies: Real-time Audio and Video Playback on the Web" by Bob Godwin-Jones,
Virginia Commonwealth University.
Deals with multimedia formats of audio and video streaming files. Addresses instructional uses of these
multimedia in the FL classroom. Discusses specific applications necessary to play these files. Offers
extensive listing of streaming formats and sample sites where FL teachers can obtain the software and
subsequently access such media as live radio and television broadcasts.
"Multimedia Authoring for Foreign Language Faculty: The Libra Authoring System" by Robert Fischer,
Southwest Texas State University & Mary Ann Lyman-Hager, The Pennsylvania State University
(Abstract of a paper given at the Joint International Conference of the Association for Computers and the
Humanities and the Association for Literary & Linguistic Computing, Queen's University, Kingston,
Ontario, Canada; June 3-7, 1997).
Jean W. LeLoup and Robert Ponterio On the Net: Using WWW Multimedia ...
Language Learning & Technology 6
Discusses the use of the Libra authoring system, underscoring the theoretical basis for implementing this
software in developing multimedia FL activities. In particular, the authors argue for the realization, in
actual FL lessons, of the theoretical principals involved in FL listening comprehension.
"Using Multimedia LIBRA to Enhance Learning and Teaching in Foreign Language Classes" by Travis
Bradley & Lara Lomicka, The Pennsylvania State University.
Online PowerPoint presentation that presents a hypercard-based authoring template (LIBRA) for use in
the creation of interactive FL lessons that include many different types of multimedia. Discusses a study
carried out using the LIBRA multimedia authoring system and offers pedagogical conclusions based on
the study's outcome.
"German Studies on the Internet: Enhancing Foreign Language Acquisition through Multimedia" by
Andreas Lixl-Purcell, University of North Carolina at Greensboro (Presentation at the AATG Summer
Workshop in 1995 on German Teaching and Technology).
Discusses the rationale for teaching German with multimedia technologies and offers sample activities at
graded levels; also mentions several technologies and links to sites with more in-depth information.
Foreign Language Multimedia Evaluation Project by the National Foreign Language Resource Center,
University of Hawai'i.
Goal is to establish a database of information about FL multimedia programs available for
implementation. Requests reviewers for many different multimedia software applications; some are
reviewed, but many more are without comment presently. Includes an extended taxonomy of features for
developing and evaluating FL multimedia software.
3. How might one go about learning how to create materials?
The authors of this article recently taught a course in "Multimedia Materials Development for
International Communication" for which the syllabus and the complete set of instructional materials may
be found online at: http://www.cortland.edu/flteach/mm-course/mm-syl.html.
Working through these lessons, one can learn the fundamentals of creating and editing images, sounds,
and videos, as well as how to pull them all together in presentation formats such as HyperStudio,
PowerPoint, or web pages. Individual topics include using accents, searching the net, copyright, scanning,
flowcharting and storyboards, clip art, digital cameras, sound recording and editing, photo editing,
stylistic considerations, digitizing recorded video, editing video shots, publishing web pages with FTP,
file compression, and client-side image maps. Taken together, these topics provide the basics of
multimedia development.
The lessons walk the learner through the steps required to accomplish the specific tasks leading to
successful completion of the lesson objectives and course assignments. Illustrations and screen shots are
provided to show examples of the images and sounds that may be generated. Of course, to accomplish
these tasks the learner does need to have access to the necessary software. Most of the lessons also
include links to online supplementary materials related to the topics, though generally not from an FL
perspective.
Why bother learning about multimedia development? It certainly is not for everyone, but some teachers
may enjoy creating digital classroom materials. Others may want to use this format for student projects,
and those seeking to purchase multimedia CD-ROMs may simply want to know more to become a more
informed buyer. In any case, it is wise not to try to learn too many things at once. It may be preferable to
go slowly, becoming proficient in using a few tools at first before adding more to one's bag of classroom
tricks.
Jean W. LeLoup and Robert Ponterio On the Net: Using WWW Multimedia ...
Language Learning & Technology 7
4. Some examples of multimedia use in an FL instructional context on the Internet
Now you have read about the what, why, and how of integrating multimedia into the FL curriculum. All
that remains is to view a few examples of net sites that have put multimedia to use in activities meant for
the FL classroom.
The sites below incorporate many of the multimedia applications (e.g., audio, digitized video) and have
links to others (e.g., streaming audio and video) mentioned above. These sites were also constructed
within a sound pedagogical framework and aim to use the multimedia software to its best advantage for
FL instruction and learning. Explore these sites, evaluate them from your own particular perspective as an
FL educator, and feel free to offer comments and feedback to the respective authors of the sites.
Figure 1. The WWW Notebook for Teachers of French by Sonja Moore, Virginia Commonwealth
University
Site for French language instruction. Offers resources, activities, and links that parallel a thematic index
of topics. Has sections on media and interactivity, grammar, dictionaries, and creating your own web
page, among others.
Figure 2. Civilisation française by Marie J. Ponterio, SUNY Cortland
Site for French instruction. Addresses many different cultural topics and provides a variety of activity
formats, using audio with video support to be added soon. Also includes a "Voyage virtuel" through
France with numerous corresponding links to francophone information.
Figure 3. German for Beginners by Peter Gölz, University of Victoria, Canada
Site contains lessons for beginning German students, native speaker audio files, and links to other
German exercises on the web.
Figure 4. Hebrew Exercises by Judith Rudnick, Center for Advanced Research on Language Acquisition
(CARLA), University of Minnesota
Jean W. LeLoup and Robert Ponterio On the Net: Using WWW Multimedia ...
Language Learning & Technology 8
Site offers several types of interactive lessons in Hebrew. Must have Hebrew fonts installed on computer
and as web browser default font to read exercises. Includes instructions for obtaining fonts and RealAudio
Encoder, necessary to hear the audio files. Also contains list of computer vocabulary in Hebrew.
Figure 5. Hindi Exercises by Gabriela Nik. Ilieva, CARLA, University of Minnesota
Site contains beginning and intermediate supplemental and review exercises to accompany basic Hindi
language courses. Exercises use audio files. Must have Hindi script font installed to use exercises.
Figure 6. Taller hispano by Jean W. LeLoup, SUNY Cortland
Site for Spanish language instruction. Offers web-based lessons using video and centered around ten
themes basic to a FL curriculum. Uses authentic materials.
Figure 7. Stanford African Language Learning Center by John Mugane, Stanford University
Site is a customized web browsing environment used in Swahili classes taught by the author. Many sound
files accompany the Swahili text, which narrates photos as well as cultural stories.
Jean W. LeLoup and Robert Ponterio On the Net: Using WWW Multimedia ...
Language Learning & Technology 9
5. More sites including multimedia for less commonly taught languages
While the sites below were not necessarily constructed with specific FL instruction purposes in mind,
they do include multimedia and could be useful in FL classes. The predominant medium here is audio
transmission, although several Quicktime movies are represented also. Possible uses include
demonstration of native speaker pronunciation, cultural references, and techniques of mastering difficult
non-Roman scripts.
Figure 8. Gahoh page by Masayoshi Kanai
 Site has many Quicktime movies showing how to write in several Japanese scripts, including Hiragana,
Katakana, and Kanji.
Figure 9. Kabuki for Everyone by Ichimura Manjiro
Site includes many vocal and musical sounds of traditional Kabuki. Can be viewed in English or
Japanese. Includes Quicktime morphing movie.
Figure 10. Russian Dictionary by Sarah Withee
Site offers Russian dictionary with sounds and still images. Includes native speaker sound files in AIFF
format to present vocabulary.
