Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol2num1/article3/
July 1998, Volume 2, Number 1
pp. 54-73
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference)
Copyright © 1998, ISSN 1094-3501 54
SPEECH TECHNOLOGY IN COMPUTER-AIDED LANGUAGE
LEARNING: STRENGTHS AND LIMITATIONS OF A NEW CALL
PARADIGM
Farzad Ehsani
Sehda, Inc.
Eva Knodt
Sehda, Inc.
ABSTRACT
We investigate the suitability of deploying speech technology in computer-based systems that can
be used to teach foreign language skills. In reviewing the current state of speech recognition and
speech processing technology and by examining a number of voice-interactive CALL
applications, we suggest how to create robust interactive learning environments that exploit the
strengths of speech technology while working around its limitations. In the conclusion, we draw
on our review of these applications to identify directions of future research that might improve
both the design and the overall performance of voice-interactive CALL systems.
INTRODUCTION
During the past two decades, the exercise of spoken language skills has received increasing attention
among educators. Foreign language curricula focus on productive skills with special emphasis on
communicative competence. Students' ability to engage in meaningful conversational interaction in the
target language is considered an important, if not the most important, goal of second language education.
This shift of emphasis has generated a growing need for instructional materials that provide an
opportunity for controlled interactive speaking practice outside the classroom.
With recent advances in multimedia technology, computer-aided language learning (CALL) has emerged
as a tempting alternative to traditional modes of supplementing or replacing direct student-teacher
interaction, such as the language laboratory or audio-tape-based self-study. The integration of sound,
voice interaction, text, video, and animation has made it possible to create self-paced interactive learning
environments that promise to enhance the classroom model of language learning significantly. A growing
number of textbook publishers now offer educational software of some sort, and educators can choose
among a large variety of different products. Yet, the practical impact of CALL in the field of foreign
language education has been rather modest. Many educators are reluctant to embrace a technology that
still seeks acceptance by the language teaching community as a whole (Kenning & Kenning, 1990).
A number of reasons have been cited for the limited practical impact of computer-based language
instruction. Among them are the lack of a unified theoretical framework for designing and evaluating
CALL systems (Chapelle, 1997; Hubbard, 1988; Ng & Olivier, 1987); the absence of conclusive
empirical evidence for the pedagogical benefits of computers in language learning (Chapelle, 1997;
Dunkel, 1991; Salaberry, 1996); and finally, the current limitations of the technology itself (Holland,
1995; Warschauer, 1996). The rapid technological advances of the 1980s have raised both the
expectations and the demands placed on the computer as a potential learning tool. Educators and second
language acquisition (SLA) researchers alike are now demanding intelligent, user-adaptive CALL
systems that offer not only sophisticated diagnostic tools, but also effective feedback mechanisms capable
of focusing the learner on areas that need remedial practice. As Warschauer puts it, a computerized
language teacher should be able to
Farzad Ehsani  & Eva Knodt Speech Technology In Computer-Aided Language Learning...
Language Learning & Technology 55
understand a user's spoken input and evaluate it not just for correctness but also for
appropriateness. It should be able to diagnose a student's problems with pronunciation, syntax, or
usage, and then intelligently decide among a range of options (e.g., repeating, paraphrasing,
slowing down, correcting, or directing the student to background explanations). (Warschauer,
1996, p. 6)
Salaberry (1996) demands nothing short of a system capable of simulating the complex socio-
communicative competence of a live tutor--in other words, the linguistic intelligence of a human--only to
conclude that the attempt to create an "intelligent language tutoring system is a fallacy" (p. 11). Because
speech technology isn't perfect, it is of no use at all. If it "cannot account for the full complexity of human
language," why even bother modeling more constrained aspects of language use (Higgins, 1988, p. vii)?
This sort of all-or-nothing reasoning seems symptomatic of much of the latest pedagogical literature on
CALL. The quest for a theoretical grounding of CALL system design and evaluation (Chapelle, 1997)
tends to lead to exaggerated expectations as to what the technology ought to accomplish. When combined
with little or no knowledge of the underlying technology, the inevitable result is disappointment.
In this paper, we make a case for using automatic speech recognition (ASR) and speech processing
technology in CALL. We propose not only that speech technology is an essential component of CALL,
but that it is, in fact, ready to be deployed successfully in second language education, provided that the
current limitations of the technology are understood and systems are designed in ways that work around
these limitations.
In order to appreciate the potential benefit of using speech technology in CALL, a basic understanding of
both the core technology and its limitations--what it can and cannot do--is therefore essential. In the
following section, we will present an overview of speech recognition. We will then cover design
considerations as they relate to the performance of specific speech applications. An overview of current
research trends will help identify the kinds of technological advances that lend themselves to being
deployed in computer-based language instruction. Next, to illustrate the potential use of speech
technology, we will examine a number of innovative language learning applications that offer voice-
interactive capabilities. We will evaluate these applications in view of how they integrate speech
technology within an overall technical and pedagogical design, and how effectively they deal with current
technological limitations. In the final section of the paper, we will draw on our review of these
applications, as well as on our own experience in building a voice-interactive system for learning
Japanese, to identify directions of future research that might improve both the design and the overall
performance of voice-interactive CALL systems.
PRINCIPLES OF ASR TECHNOLOGY
Consider the following four scenarios:
1. A court reporter listens to the opening arguments of the defense and types the words into a steno-
machine attached to a word-processor.
2. A medical doctor activates a dictation device and speaks his or her patient's name, date of birth,
symptoms, and diagnosis into the computer. He or she then pushes "end input" and "print" to produce
a written record of the patient's diagnosis.
3. A mother tells her three-year old, "Hey Jimmy, get me my slippers, will you?" The toddler smiles,
goes to the bedroom, and returns with papa's hiking boots.
4. A first-grader reads aloud a sentence displayed by an automated Reading Tutor. When he or she
stumbles over a difficult word, the system highlights the word, and a voice reads the word aloud. The
student repeats the sentence--this time correctly--and the system responds by displaying the next
sentence.
Farzad Ehsani  & Eva Knodt Speech Technology In Computer-Aided Language Learning...
Language Learning & Technology 56
At some level, all four scenarios involve speech recognition. An incoming speech signal elicits a response
from a "listener." In the first two instances, the response consists of a written transcript of the spoken
input, whereas in the latter two cases, an action is performed in response to a spoken command. In all four
cases, the "success" of the voice interaction is relative to a given task as embodied in a set of expectations
that accompany the input. The interaction succeeds when the response--by a machine or human "listener"-
-matches these expectations.
Recognizing and understanding human speech requires a considerable amount of linguistic knowledge: a
command of the phonological, lexical, semantic, grammatical, and pragmatic conventions that constitute a
language. The listener's command of the language must be "up" to the recognition task or else the
interaction fails. Jimmy returns with the wrong items, because he cannot yet verbally discriminate
between different kinds of shoes. Likewise, the reading tutor would miserably fail in performing the
court-reporter's job or transcribing medical patient information, just as the medical dictation device would
be a poor choice for diagnosing a student's reading errors. On the other hand, the human court reporter--
assuming he or she is an adult native speaker--would have no problem performing any of the tasks
mentioned under (1) through (4). The linguistic competence of an adult native speaker covers a broad
range of recognition tasks and communicative activities. Computers, on the other hand, perform best
when designed to operate in clearly circumscribed linguistic sub-domains.
Humans and machines process speech in fundamentally different ways (Bernstein & Franco, 1996).
Complex cognitive processes account for the human ability to associate acoustic signals with meanings
and intentions. For a computer, on the other hand, speech is essentially a series of digital values.
However, despite these differences, the core problem of speech recognition is the same for both humans
and machines: namely, of finding the best match between a given speech sound and its corresponding
word string. Automatic speech recognition technology attempts to simulate and optimize this process
computationally.
Since the early 1970s, a number of different approaches to ASR have been proposed and implemented,
including Dynamic Time Warping, template matching, knowledge-based expert systems, neural nets, and
Hidden Markov Modeling (HMM) (Levinson & Liberman, 1981; Weinstein, McCandless, Mondshein, &
Zue, 1975; for a review, see Bernstein & Franco, 1996). HMM-based modeling applies sophisticated
statistical and probabilistic computations to the problem of pattern matching at the sub-word level. The
generalized HMM-based approach to speech recognition has proven an effective, if not the most effective,
method for creating high-performance speaker-independent recognition engines that can cope with large
vocabularies; the vast majority of today's commercial systems deploy this technique. Therefore, we focus
our technical discussion on an explanation of this technique.
An HMM-based speech recognizer consists of five basic components: (a) an acoustic signal analyzer
which computes a spectral representation of the incoming speech; (b) a set of phone models (HMMs)
trained on large amounts of actual speech data; (c) a lexicon for converting sub-word phone sequences
into words; (d) a statistical language model or grammar network that defines the recognition task in terms
of legitimate word combinations at the sentence level; (e) a decoder, which is a search algorithm for
computing the best match between a spoken utterance and its corresponding word string.  Figure 1 shows
a schematic representation of the components of a speech recognizer and their functional interaction.
Farzad Ehsani  & Eva Knodt Speech Technology In Computer-Aided Language Learning...
Language Learning & Technology 57
Figure 1. Components of a speech recognition device
A. Signal Analysis
The first step in automatic speech recognition consists of analyzing the incoming speech signal. When a
person speaks into an ASR device--usually through a high quality noise-canceling microphone--the
computer samples the analog input into a series of 16- or 8-bit values at a particular sampling frequency
(ranging from 8 to 22KHz). These values are grouped together in predetermined overlapping temporal
intervals called "frames." These numbers provide a precise description of the speech signal's amplitude. In
a second step, a number of acoustically relevant parameters such as energy, spectral features, and pitch
information, are extracted from the speech signal (for a visual representation of some of these parameters,
see Figure 2 on page 53). During training, this information is used to model that particular portion of the
speech signal. During recognition, this information is matched against the pre-existing model of the
signal.
B. Phone Models
Training a machine to recognize spoken language amounts to modeling the basic sounds of speech
(phones). Automatic speech recognition strings together these models to form words. Recognizing an
incoming speech signal involves matching the observed acoustic sequence with a set of HMM models.
An HMM can model either phones or other sub-word units or it can model words or even whole
sentences. Phones are either modeled as individual sounds--so-called monophones--or as phone
combinations that model several phones and the transitions between them (biphones or triphones). After
comparing the incoming acoustic signal with the HMMs representing the sounds of language, the system
computes a hypothesis based on the sequence of models that most closely resembles the incoming signal.
The HMM model for each linguistic unit (phone or word) contains a probabilistic representation of all the
possible pronunciations for that unit--just as the model of the handwritten cursive b would have many
different representations.
Building HMMs--a process called training--requires a large amount of speech data of the type the system
is expected to recognize. Large-vocabulary speaker-independent continuous dictation systems are
typically trained on tens of thousands of read utterances by a cross-section of the population, including
Farzad Ehsani  & Eva Knodt Speech Technology In Computer-Aided Language Learning...
Language Learning & Technology 58
members of different dialect regions and age-groups. As a general rule, an automatic speech recognizer
cannot correctly process speech that differs in kind from the speech it has been trained on. This is why
most commercial dictation systems, when trained on standard American English, perform poorly when
encountering accented speech, whether by non-native speakers or by speakers of different dialects. We
will return to this point in our discussion of voice-interactive CALL applications.
C. Lexicon
The lexicon, or dictionary, contains the phonetic spelling for all the words that are expected to be
observed by the recognizer. It serves as a reference for converting the phone sequence determined by the
search algorithm into a word. It must be carefully designed to cover the entire lexical domain in which the
system is expected to perform. If the recognizer encounters a word it does not "know" (i.e., a word not
defined in the lexicon), it will either choose the closest match or return an out-of-vocabulary recognition
error. Whether a recognition error is registered as a misrecognition or an out-of-vocabulary error depends
in part on the vocabulary size. If, for example, the vocabulary is too small for an unrestricted dictation
task--let's say less than 3K--the out-of-vocabulary errors are likely to be very high. If the vocabulary is
too large, the chance of misrecognition errors increases because with more similar-sounding words, the
confusability increases. The vocabulary size in most commercial dictation systems tends to vary between
5K and 60K.
D. The Language Model
The language model predicts the most likely continuation of an utterance on the basis of statistical
information about the frequency in which word sequences occur on average in the language to be
recognized. For example, the word sequence A bare attacked him will have a very low probability in any
language model based on standard English usage, whereas the sequence A bear attacked him will have a
higher probability of occurring. Thus the language model helps constrain the recognition hypothesis
produced on the basis of the acoustic decoding just as the context helps decipher an unintelligible word in
a handwritten note. Like the HMMs, an efficient language model must be trained on large amounts of
data, in this case texts collected from the target domain.
In ASR applications with constrained lexical domain and/or simple task definition, the language model
consists of a grammatical network that defines the possible word sequences to be accepted by the system
without providing any statistical information. This type of design is suitable for CALL applications in
which the possible word combinations and phrases are known in advance and can be easily anticipated
(e.g., based on user data collected with a system pre-prototype). Because of the a priori constraining
function of a grammar network, applications with clearly defined task grammars tend to perform at much
higher accuracy rates than the quality of the acoustic recognition would suggest.
E. Decoder
Simply put, the decoder is an algorithm that tries to find the utterance that maximizes the probability that
a given sequence of speech sounds corresponds to that utterance. This is a search problem, and especially
in large vocabulary systems careful consideration must be given to questions of efficiency and
optimization, for example to whether the decoder should pursue only the most likely hypothesis or a
number of them in parallel (Young, 1996). An exhaustive search of all possible completions of an
utterance might ultimately be more accurate but of questionable value if one has to wait two days to get a
result. Trade-offs are therefore necessary to maximize the search results while at the same time
minimizing the amount of CPU and recognition time.
PERFORMANCE AND DESIGN ISSUES IN SPEECH APPLICATIONS
For educators and developers interested in deploying ASR in CALL applications, perhaps the most
important consideration is recognition performance: How good is the technology? Is it ready to be
Farzad Ehsani  & Eva Knodt Speech Technology In Computer-Aided Language Learning...
Language Learning & Technology 59
deployed in language learning? These questions cannot be answered except with reference to particular
applications of the technology, and therefore touch on a key issue in ASR development: the issue of
human-machine interface design.
As we recall, speech recognition performance is always domain specific--a machine can only do what it is
programmed to do, and a recognizer with models trained to recognize business news dictation under
laboratory conditions will be unable to handle spontaneous conversational speech transmitted over noisy
telephone channels. The question that needs to be answered is therefore not simply "How good is ASR
technology?" but rather, "What do we want to use it for?" and "How do we get it to perform the task?"
In the following section, we will address the issue of system performance as it relates to a number of
successful commercial speech applications. By emphasizing the distinction between recognizer
performance on the one hand--understood in terms of "raw" recognition accuracy--and system
performance on the other; we suggest how the latter can be optimized within an overall design that takes
into account not only the factors that affect recognizer performance as such, but also, and perhaps even
more importantly, considerations of human-machine interface design.
Historically, basic speech recognition research has focused almost exclusively on optimizing large
vocabulary speaker-independent recognition of continuous dictation. A major impetus for this research
has come from US government sponsored competitions held annually by the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency (DARPA). The main emphasis of these competitions has been on improving the "raw"
recognition accuracy--calculated in terms of average omissions, insertions, and substitutions--of large-
vocabulary continuous speech recognizers (LVCSRs) in the task of recognizing read sentence material
from a number of standard sources (e.g., The Wall Street Journal or The New York Times). The best
laboratory systems that participated in the WSJ large-vocabulary continuous dictation task have achieved
word error rates as low as 5%, that is, on average, one recognition error in every twenty words (Pallet,
1994).
Although the annual DARPA benchmark tests have yielded significant technological advances, they are a
poor indicator of ASR performance as it relates to the technology's potential commercial use. Very few of
the laboratory systems participating in these contests are commercially viable, due in large measure to the
narrow focus on recognition accuracy. Experimental LVCSR systems generally run on very large
computers, and recognition speed is not an issue. By comparison, the base-line recognizer performance of
commercial dictation systems with roughly similar task definition and vocabularies of 20K to 60K is
much lower. Dragon's Naturally Speaking or IBM's ViaVoice, for example, start out with a baseline
recognition accuracy of only 60% to 80% (again depending on accent, background noise, type of
utterance, etc.). But these systems run on affordable PC platforms with modest memory requirements,
operate near real-time, and support speaker adaptation features that allow the user to train the system.
Training a recognizer is a reciprocal process: the system adapts to the acoustic characteristics of the user's
voice by analyzing and learning from speech samples collected during the setup phase; the user, over
time, adjusts his or her speaking style to "dictation mode," a clearly articulated speech input that conforms
to the grammatical conventions of written discourse. Haskin (1997) reports post-training error rates as
low as 5% while more conservative estimates range between 11-13% on average (Jecker, 1998). As the
apparent commercial success of these systems shows, such a performance range may be acceptable,
provided that the system offers convenient editing features. Continuous dictation, however, remains
limited in scope and is still far from recognizing spontaneous conversational speech.
An important lesson learned in the development of LVCSR systems is that the technology itself is highly
adaptable, yielding increasing robustness when tailored to a specific recognition task. This insight has led
to the successful commercialization of speech technology in telephony applications with constrained task
domains such as voice-dialing, directory assistance, and information retrieval. The key to designing such
applications lies in choosing the right task and in optimizing the variables that affect recognition
Farzad Ehsani  & Eva Knodt Speech Technology In Computer-Aided Language Learning...
Language Learning & Technology 60
performance. In what follows, we will discuss some of these variables and show how system performance
can be maximized when speech technology is integrated within a carefuly designed user interface.
Task Definition
This is the most important step in designing a speech recognizer. Delimiting the performance domain
imposes constraints on both the vocabulary size and what is referred to as "perplexity," which is usually
defined as the average branching factor within any given grammar network. A small vocabulary
recognizer with limited perplexity (e.g., of the type used in automatic voice dialing), tends to be much
more robust than a high-perplexity large-vocabulary dictation system.
In general, recognizers perform faster and more accurately when the incoming speech is enunciated
clearly and in a noise-free environment, when the task perplexity is low, and when the dictionary is small.
In this case, the system needs less CPU time and memory to process alternative recognition hypotheses,
and word error rates tend to be lower. A simple "yes/no" recognition task is trivial compared to a ticket
reservation system that uses a natural dialog user interface. The relationship between perplexity and
performance can work to our advantage when we are developing voice-interactive instructional materials
since words and phrases used by language learners are usually limited to a relatively small set of clearly
circumscribed tasks. However, for systems with limited task domain to perform as expected, all potential
user responses must be known in advance and anticipated in the system's grammar and vocabulary.
Therefore, it is important to collect authentic user data in the early stages of developing such systems.
Acoustic Models
Recognizers tend to perform best when trained on (or adapted to) the voice characteristics or speaking
style of the speaker. Speaker independent recognizers contain acoustic models obtained by averaging over
large variations in the speech patterns of large populations of various ages and dialect groups. By contrast,
speaker-dependent systems are trained specifically on the voice of the speaker(s) for whom they are
designed. A third option is speaker adaptation, a technique in which acoustic parameters obtained from a
subset of speakers, or one speaker, are used to augment or modify the generalized models of a speaker-
independent system. Speaker adaptation can reduce recognition error rates by 30% to 70% depending on
the acoustic environment and the original acoustic models used (Neumeyer, Sankar, & Digalakis, 1995;
Woodland, Pye, & Gales, 1996; Zavaliagkos, Schwartz, McDonough, & Makhoul, 1995). The importance
for CALL is that native acoustic models can be adapted to recognize the speech of language learners.
Doing so involves collecting the appropriate speech data and training non-native models. The resulting
acoustic models can be made exclusively from non-native data (Neumeyer et al., 1996), or by adapting
native models to the non-native data (Ehsani, 1996).
Input Modality
Another variable that affects recognition performance is the manner in which the system processes the
incoming speech signal. In systems with a discrete speech input modality, the recognizer processes each
word separately. Therefore each word must be spoken separately with distinct pauses between them. In
systems with continuous input mode, no such pauses are necessary. Continuous Speech Recognition
(CSR) systems use more extensive search algorithms in the decoding stage to optimize not only the phone
strings, but also the word strings. The trade-off in recognition accuracy can be formidable, and under
conditions where system resources are limited and high degrees of accuracy are necessary, discrete input
may be the design of choice.
Input Quality
For optimal recognition performance, the incoming speech signal must be of high acoustic quality. A
number of standard techniques can remove noise from the signal or adapt acoustical models to noisy data
(for a review, see Young, 1996). However, not only noise interference can affect the quality of the speech
Farzad Ehsani  & Eva Knodt Speech Technology In Computer-Aided Language Learning...
Language Learning & Technology 61
input. A number of other factors, often overlooked in the literature, play a role as well, such as the type of
sound card and microphone used, or whether the speech is run through a pre-amplifier. Sound cards have
their own internal amplifiers, but they tend to amplify the noise along with the speech. The amplitude of
the speech signal needs to be carefully adjusted for best recognition performance. More specifically, the
amplitude needs to be kept within a certain limited range. If the amplitude exceeds an upper limit, the
signal is clipped and the signal analyzer cannot extract all of the relevant features. If the amplitude is too
low, background noise becomes more prominent and can overpower the signal.
Furthermore, the microphone can make a tremendous difference in recognition performance. Most
recognizers perform best when used with a noise-canceling head-mounted microphone. Not only do these
microphones filter out extraneous noise, but the head-mounted position ensures that the distance between
the speaker's mouth and the microphone is kept constant and the amplitude remains stable throughout the
utterances. Finally, some kind of mechanism for automatically adjusting (or telling the user to adjust) the
amplifier or the pre-amp setting is of value. Most commercial voice-interactive CALL systems offer this
feature.
Careful consideration of the factors described above must enter into the design of commercial speech
applications, if they are to perform well in practical applications.
CURRENT TRENDS IN VOICE-INTERACTIVE CALL
In recent years, an increasing number of speech laboratories have begun deploying speech technology in
CALL applications. Results include voice-interactive prototype systems for teaching pronunciation,
reading, and limited conversational skills in semi-constrained contexts. Our review of these applications
is far from exhaustive. It covers a select number of mostly experimental systems that explore paths we
found promising and worth pursuing. We will discuss the range of voice-interactions these systems offer
for practicing certain language skills, explain their technical implementation, and comment on the
pedagogical value of these implementations. Apart from giving a brief system overview, we report
experimental results if available and provide an assessment of how far away the technology is from being
deployed in the commercial and educational environments.
Pronunciation Training
A useful and remarkably successful application of speech recognition and processing technology has been
demonstrated by a number of research and commercial laboratories in the area of pronunciation training.
Voice-interactive pronunciation tutors prompt students to repeat spoken words and phrases or to read
aloud sentences in the target language for the purpose of practicing both the sounds and the intonation of
the language. The key to teaching pronunciation successfully is corrective feedback, more specifically, a
type of feedback that does not rely on the student's own perception. A number of experimental systems
have implemented automatic pronunciation scoring as a means to evaluate spoken learner productions in
terms of fluency, segmental quality (phonemes) and supra-segmental features (intonation). The
automatically generated proficiency score can then be used as a basis for providing other modes of
corrective feedback. We discuss segmental and supra-segmental feedback in more detail below.
Segmental Feedback. Technically, designing a voice-interactive pronunciation tutor goes beyond the
state of the art required by commercial dictation systems. While the grammar and vocabulary of a
pronunciation tutor is comparatively simple, the underlying speech processing technology tends to be
complex since it must be customized to recognize and evaluate the disfluent speech of language learners.
A conventional speech recognizer is designed to generate the most charitable reading of a speaker's
utterance. Acoustic models are generalized so as to accept and recognize correctly a wide range of
different accents and pronunciations. A pronunciation tutor, by contrast, must be trained to both recognize
and correct subtle deviations from standard native pronunciations.
Farzad Ehsani  & Eva Knodt Speech Technology In Computer-Aided Language Learning...
Language Learning & Technology 62
A number of techniques have been suggested for automatic recognition and scoring of non-native speech
(Bernstein, 1997; Franco, Neumeyer, Kim, & Ronen, 1997; Kim, Franco, & Neumeyer, 1997; Witt &
Young, 1997). In general terms, the procedure consists of building native pronunciation models and then
measuring the non-native responses against the native models. This requires models trained on both
native and non-native speech data in the target language, and supplemented by a set of algorithms for
measuring acoustic variables that have proven useful in distinguishing native from non-native speech.
These variables include response latency, segment duration, inter-word pauses (in phrases), spectral
likelihood, and fundamental frequency (F0). Machine scores are calculated from statistics derived from
comparing non-native values for these variables to the native models.
In a final step, machine generated pronunciation scores are validated by correlating these scores with the
judgment of human expert listeners. As one would expect, the accuracy of scores increases with the
duration of the utterance to be evaluated. Stanford Research Institute (SRI) has demonstrated a 0.44
correlation between machine scores and human scores at the phone level. At the sentence level, the
machine-human correlation was 0.58, and at the speaker level it was 0.72 for a total of 50 utterances per
speaker (Franco et al., 1997; Kim et al., 1997). These results compare with 0.55, 0.65, and 0.80 for phone,
utterance, and speaker level correlation between human graders. A study conducted at Entropic shows
that based on about 20 to 30 utterances per speaker and on a linear combination of the above techniques,
it is possible to obtain machine-human grader correlation levels as high as 0.85 (Bernstein, 1997).
Others have used expert knowledge about systematic pronunciation errors made by L2 adult learners in
order to diagnose and correct such errors. One such system is the European Community project SPELL
for automated assessment and improvement of foreign language pronunciation (Hiller, Rooney, Vaughan,
Eckert, Laver, & Jack, 1994). This system uses advanced speech processing and recognition technologies
to assess pronunciation errors by L2 learners of English (French or Italian speakers) and provide
immediate corrective feedback. One technique for detecting consonant errors induced by inter-language
transfer was to include students' L1 pronunciations into the grammar network. In addition to the English
/th/ sound, for example, the grammar network also includes /t/ or /s/, that is, errors typical of non-native
Italian speakers of English. This system, although quite simple in the use of ASR technology, can be very
effective in diagnosing and correcting known problems of L1 interference. However, it is less effective in
detecting rare and more idiosyncratic pronunciation errors. Furthermore, it assumes that the phonetic
system of the target language (e.g., English) can be accurately mapped to the learners' native language
(e.g., Italian). While this assumption may work well for an Italian learner of English, it certainly does not
for a Chinese learner; that is, there are sounds in Chinese that do not resemble any sounds in English.
A system for teaching the pronunciation of Japanese long vowels, the mora nasal, and mora obstruents
was recently built at the University of Tokyo. This system enables students to practice phonemic
differences in Japanese that are known to present special challenges to L2 learners. It prompts students to
pronounce minimal pairs (e.g., long and short vowels) and returns immediate feedback on segment
duration. Based on the limited data, the system seems quite effective at this particular task. Learners
quickly mastered the relevant duration cues, and the time spent on learning these pronunciation skills was
well within the constraints of Japanese L2 curricula (Kawai & Hirose, 1997). However, the study
provides no data on long-term effects of using the system.
Supra-segmental Feedback. Correct usage of supra-segmental features such as intonation and stress has
been shown to improve the syntactic and semantic intelligibility of spoken language (Crystal, 1981). In
spoken conversation, intonation and stress information not only helps listeners to locate phrase
boundaries and word emphasis, but also to identify the pragmatic thrust of the utterance (e.g.,
interrogative vs. declarative). One of the main acoustical correlates of stress and intonation is fundamental
frequency (F0); other acoustical characteristics include loudness, duration, and tempo. Most commercial
signal processing software have tools for tracking and visually displaying F0 contours (see Figure 2).
Such displays can and have been used to provide valuable pronunciation feedback to students.
Farzad Ehsani  & Eva Knodt Speech Technology In Computer-Aided Language Learning...
Language Learning & Technology 63
Experiments have shown that a visual F0 display of supra-segmental features combined with audio
feedback is more effective than audio feedback alone (de Bot, 1983; James, 1976), especially if the
student's F0 contour is displayed along with a native model. The feasibility of this type of visual feedback
has been demonstrated by a number of simple prototypes (Abberton & Fourcin, 1975; Anderson-Hsieh,
1994; Hiller et al., 1994; Spaai & Hermes, 1993; Stibbard, 1996). We believe that this technology has a
good potential for being incorporated into commercial CALL systems.
Other types of visual pronunciation feedback include the graphical display of a native speaker's face, the
vocal tract, spectrum information, and speech waveforms (see Figure 2). Experiments have shown that a
visual display of the talker improves not only word identification accuracy (Bernstein & Christian, 1996),
but also speech rhythm and timing (Markham & Nagano-Madesen, 1997). A large number of commercial
pronunciation tutors on the market today offer this kind of feedback. Yet others have experimented with
using a real-time spectrogram or waveform display of speech to provide pronunciation feedback. Molholt
(1990) and Manuel (1990) report anecdotal success in using such displays along with guidance on how to
interpret the displays to improve the pronunciation of suprasegmental features in L2 learners of English.
However, the authors do not provide experimental evidence for the effectiveness of this type of visual
feedback. Our own experience with real-time spectrum and waveform displays suggests their potential
use as pronunciation feedback provided they are presented along with other types of feedback, as well as
with instructions on how to interpret the displays.
Figure 2. Alternative speech display modes of the phrase He was shot in the back generated with
Entropic's signal processing software. (1)
Reading Aloud
Reading aloud exercises literacy skills in both second language and literacy education. Intensive practice
in reading aloud helps students establish the conventional association between sounds and their written
form, a skill that requires years of practice in young children and students of languages with non-phonetic
writing, such as Japanese or Chinese. Teaching children and students how to read their own native or a
foreign language is thus an area where speech recognition technology can make a significant difference.
Farzad Ehsani  & Eva Knodt Speech Technology In Computer-Aided Language Learning...
Language Learning & Technology 64
Imagine a reading tutor that not only listens to children and students reading aloud a story presented on
the screen, but intervenes to provide help when needed and corrects mistakes.
Designing a basic recognition network for a voice-interactive reading tutor is relatively straightforward.
There is only one correct spoken response to any given written prompt, and the system "knows" in
advance what the student will be trying to say. However, the technical challenge is to recognize and
respond adequately to the disfluencies of inexperienced readers. Such disfluencies include hesitations,
mispronunciations, false starts, and self-corrections.
In the early 1990s, Cowan and Jones (1991), McCandless (1992), and Phillips, Zue, and McCandless
(1993) among others demonstrated the technical feasibility of a voice-interactive reading tutor, without,
however, providing empirical user data. One of the first fielded prototype systems for teaching reading to
young children was developed by the Center for Teaching and Learning (CTL) in 1991 (Kantrov, 1991).
The simple but robust multimedia application used an isolated, speaker-dependent recognizer and limited
reading vocabulary (18+ words). The system was designed to expand children's reading vocabulary by
embedding new words within the context of a goal-oriented game: children are called upon to help a bear
overcome obstacles on his way home; reading the word correctly removes the obstacle. Results of three
field trials in two Boston-area public schools indicated that the problems with the application were related
to the human interface and input mode (microphones), rather than the speech recognition component per
se. Ironically, recognition errors, especially misrecognition of correctly read words, contributed positively
to the pedagogical effect of the application: the children got additional reading practice, because they had
to repeat the words several times until the machine responded appropriately.
One of the most ambitious automated reading coaches currently being developed is the ongoing Project
LISTEN at Carnegie Mellon University (CMU). Designed to combat illiteracy, the fully automated
prototype uses continuous speech recognition to listen to children read continuous text and automatically
trigger pedagogically appropriate interventions (Mostow, Roth, Hauptmann, & Kane, 1994). The system
features a personalized agent, "Emily," who provides feedback and assistance when necessary. The
system incorporates expert knowledge on individual reading assistance that is both pedagogically relevant
and technically feasible. Emily intervenes when the child misreads one or more words in the current
sentence, gets stuck, or clicks on a word to get help. On the other hand, to reduce frustration in children
with reading difficulties, the system deliberately refrains from treating false starts, self-corrections, or
hesitations as "mistakes." Instead, errors of this type are modeled and included into the recognition
grammar as acceptable.
An experimental trial of the system was conducted among 12 second graders at an urban school in
Pittsburgh. Results showed that the children could read at a reading level 0.6 years more advanced when
using the automated reading coach, and the average number of reading mistakes fell from 12.3% (without
assistance) to 2.6% (with assistance) in texts with similar difficulty.
An improved version of CMU's reading coach running real-time on an affordable PC platform was fielded
in 1996 among 8 of the poorest third grade readers at Fort Pitt, PA to measure improvements in reading
performance over an 8 month period of using the system (Mostow, 1997; Mostow & Aist, 1997). While
the earlier study measured reading performance only in terms of student word error rates, the improved
system implements algorithms for measuring reading fluency in young children. Relevant performance
variables include reading rate, inter-word latency (silence), disfluency (false starts, self-corrections,
omissions) and time spent with the assistant. Comparing subjects' reading fluency levels at the beginning
of using the system with those at the end, the experiments suggest an overall improvement in reading
accuracy of 16% and a 35% decrease in inter-word latency. After using the system for eight months,
students' reading levels improved by an average of two years. These results are encouraging in that they
show how careful system design and evaluation based on user data can lead to useful and practical
applications.
Farzad Ehsani  & Eva Knodt Speech Technology In Computer-Aided Language Learning...
Language Learning & Technology 65
Teaching Linguistic Structures and Limited Conversation
Apart from supporting systems for teaching basic pronunciation and literacy skills, ASR technology is
being deployed in automated language tutors that offer practice in a variety of higher-level linguistic
skills ranging from highly constrained grammar and vocabulary drills to limited conversational skills in
simulated real-life situations. Prior to implementing any such system, a choice needs to be made between
two fundamentally different system design types: closed response vs. open response design. In both
designs, students are prompted for speech input by a combination of written, spoken, or graphical stimuli.
However, the designs differ significantly with reference to the type of verbal computer-student interaction
they support. In closed response systems, students must choose one response from a limited number of
possible responses presented on the screen. Students know exactly what they are allowed to say in
response to any given prompt. By contrast, in systems with open response design, the network remains
hidden and the student is challenged to generate the appropriate response without any cues from the
system.
Closed Response Designs. One of the first implementations of a closed response design was the Voice
Interactive Language Instruction System (VILIS) developed at SRI (Bernstein & Rtischev, 1991). This
system elicits spoken student responses by presenting queries about graphical displays of maps and
charts. Students infer the right answers to a set of multiple-choice questions and produce spoken
responses.
A more recent prototype currently under development in SRI is the Voice Interactive Language Training
System (VILTS), a system designed to foster speaking and listening skills for beginning through
advanced L2 learners of French (Egan, 1996; Neumeyer et al., 1996; Rypa, 1996). The system
incorporates authentic, unscripted conversational materials collected from French speakers into an
engaging, flexible, and user-centered lesson architecture. The system deploys speech recognition to guide
students through the lessons and automatic pronunciation scoring to provide feedback on the fluency of
student responses. As far as we know, only the pronunciation scoring aspect of the system has been
validated in experimental trials (Neumeyer et al., 1996).
In pedagogically more sophisticated systems, the query-response mode is highly contextualized and
presented as part of a simulated conversation with a virtual interlocutor. To stimulate student interest,
closed response queries are often presented in the form of games or goal-driven tasks. One commercial
system that exploits the full potential of this design is TraciTalk (Courseware Publishing International,
Inc., Cupertino, CA), a voice-driven multimedia CALL system aimed at more advanced ESL learners. In
a series of loosely connected scenarios, the system engages students in solving a mystery. Prior to each
scenario, students are given a task (e.g., eliciting a certain type of information), and they accomplish this
task by verbally interacting with characters on the screen. Each voice interaction offers several possible
responses, and each spoken response moves the conversation in a slightly different direction. There are
many paths through each scenario, and not every path yields the desired information. This motivates
students to return to the beginning of the scene and try out a different interrogation strategy. Moreover,
TraciTalk features an agent that students can ask for assistance and accepts spoken commands for
navigating the system. Apart from being more fun and interesting, games and task-oriented programs
implicitly provide positive feedback by giving students the feeling of having solved a problem solely by
communicating in the target language.
The speech recognition technology underlying closed response query implementations is very simple,
even in the more sophisticated systems. For any given interaction, the task perplexity is low and the
vocabulary size is comparatively small. As a result, these systems tend to be very robust. Recognition
accuracy rates in the low to upper 90% range can be expected depending on task definition, vocabulary
size, and the degree of non-native disfluency.
Farzad Ehsani  & Eva Knodt Speech Technology In Computer-Aided Language Learning...
Language Learning & Technology 66
Open Response Design. The basic principle of an open response design is that students have to come up
with a response entirely on their own, without any help from the system. Such systems present a greater
challenge to the student and consequently lend themselves to pedagogically more ambitious
implementations. Internally, however, systems of this type process students' responses as if they were
selected from a multiple-choice list (Waters, 1994). As a minimum, all possible correct responses must be
included in the grammar network. If, in addition, the system is supposed to provide detailed feedback to
incorrect or questionable input, any potential mistakes must be modeled and anticipated in the grammar
network. An open response design can be either very simple or dauntingly complex. While it is easy to
implement an open response design for simple question-answer drills (e.g., "What's the color of grass?"),
designing a system capable of holding up a prolonged conversation on "How do I get to the train station?"
requires a multi-level network grammar based on data collected from students, natural language
processing capabilities, and strategies for recovering from misunderstandings. In the following, we
provide a sense of the range of possibilities associated with this type of CALL design.
Stimulus-response queries
A recent implementation of an open response design for teaching beginning Spanish is The Auto
Interactive Tutor (TAIT) by Mitsubishi Research Laboratories (Waters, 1995). The system presents study
material in the form of stimulus-response pairs and is organized around a set of primitive items to be
learned such as "What is the Spanish word for 'left'?" It uses speech recognition to process student input
and to move forward. What distinguishes this system from the others discussed in this review is the fact
that it is user-adaptive. It constructs an evolving model of the user's knowledge by keeping track of the
average error rate, and it presents subsequent material accordingly. Even though the system was never
fielded with users, and despite the fact that it uses a rather primitive, small-vocabulary, discrete-input,
speaker-dependent speech recognizer, informal evidence suggests that TAIT makes clever use of design
in order to get the most out of a simple implementation of speech technology.
Simulated real-life conversation
In the past few years, a number of speech laboratories have tried to build systems that can understand and
judge continuous spoken language and maintain a conversation through several turns. The goal is to
emulate essential features of human-human communication for the purpose of teaching and practicing
conversational skills in the target language. Interactions should work without requiring collateral cues
from a mouse or keyboard, operate at an appropriate conversational pace, and incorporate verbal
strategies for resolving misunderstandings.
A prototype system for simulating human-human interactions was recently developed at Entropic (Ehsani,
Bernstein, Najmi, & Todic, 1997; Ehsani, Bernstein, & Najmi, in press). The system, called Subarashii
(Japanese for "wonderful"), offers beginning students of Japanese the opportunity to solve simple
problems through (virtual) spoken interactions with monolingual Japanese natives. Subarashii is designed
to understand what a student is saying in Japanese (within a constrained context) and to respond in a
meaningful way in spoken Japanese.
In a series of loosely connected everyday situations, the system poses problems in written English (e.g.,
inviting a friend to go to a movie) and offers occasional support to the student in the form of written
reminders, but problems can only be solved by speaking and understanding Japanese. Despite the
restricted communicative competence of beginning L2 learners, there is a variety of potentially valid
utterances that the student can produce in any situation, even if some of these may be grammatically or
pragmatically incorrect. Subarashii will not only properly process correct responses, but it will also
recognize and reject (with an appropriate message) many incorrect inputs. However, in order to give
appropriate feedback on student errors, the system must be able to anticipate such errors along with the
expected responses. In other words, they must be included in the recognition network. To create such a
network, each encounter was prototyped in a traditional Hypercard environment on a Macintosh with text
Farzad Ehsani  & Eva Knodt Speech Technology In Computer-Aided Language Learning...
Language Learning & Technology 67
input. Hypercard provides an effective means of modeling each encounter on the basis of actual input
from a test group of students.
The acoustic models for this system were originally built with a low rejection in order to be more
forgiving of a student's accent. However, this approach resulted in a relatively large proportion of
misrecognized utterances, and false acceptance. Two trials conducted among 32 students from Silver
Creek High School, San Jose, and 13 Stanford students yielded alarmingly low recognition accuracy rates
(41.6% and 36.6% respectively) due to insufficient training data. These results imply that only one-third
of the students' responses were correctly recognized. However, the functional accuracy, that is, the
percentage of times the system responded appropriately, was significantly higher (66.9% and 71.4% for
Silver Creek and Stanford respectively). For example, if the student said, "Hi, how are you doing?" and
the question was misrecognized as, "Hello, how are you?," this is technically a recognition error.
Functionally, however, the system will respond appropriately which suggests that near perfect recognition
accuracy may not be a necessary requirement for an effective speech dialog system.
FUTURE TRENDS IN VOICE-INTERACTIVE CALL
In the previous sections, we reviewed the current state of speech technology, discussed some of the
factors affecting recognition performance, and introduced a number of research prototypes that illustrate
the range of speech-enabled CALL applications that are currently technically and pedagogically feasible.
With the exception of a few exploratory open response dialog systems, most of these systems are
designed to teach and evaluate linguistic form (pronunciation, fluency, vocabulary study, or grammatical
structure). This is no coincidence. Formal features can be clearly identified and integrated into a focused
task design. This means that robust performance can be expected. Furthermore, mastering linguistic form
remains an important component of L2 instruction, despite the emphasis on communication (Holland,
1995). Prolonged, focused practice of a large number of items is still considered an effective means of
expanding and reinforcing linguistic competence (Waters, 1994). However, such practice is time
consuming. CALL can automate these aspects of language training, thereby freeing up valuable class time
that would otherwise be spent on drills.
While such systems are an important step in the right direction, other more complex and ambitious
applications are conceivable and no doubt desirable. Imagine a student being able to access the Internet,
find the language of his or her choice, and tap into a comprehensive voice-interactive multimedia
language program that would provide the equivalent of an entire first year of college instruction. The
computer would evaluate the student's proficiency level and design a course of study tailored to his or her
needs. Or think of using the same Internet resources and a set of high-level authoring tools to put together
a series of virtual encounters surrounding the task of finding an apartment in Berlin. As a minimum, one
would hope that natural speech input capacity becomes a routine feature of any CALL application.
To many educators, these may still seem like distant goals, and yet we believe that they are not beyond
reach. In what follows, we identify four of the most persistent issues in building speech-enabled language
learning applications and suggest how they might be resolved to enable a more widespread commercial
implementation of speech technology in CALL.
1. More research is necessary on modeling and predicting multi-turn dialogs.
An intelligent open response language tutor must not only correctly recognize a given speech input, but in
addition understand what has been said and evaluate the meaning of the utterance for pragmatic
appropriateness. Automatic speech understanding requires Natural Language Processing (NLP)
capabilities, a technology for extracting grammatical, semantic, and pragmatic information from written
or spoken discourse. NLP has been successfully deployed in expert systems and information retrieval.
One of the first voice-interactive dialog systems using NLP was the DARPA-sponsored Air Travel
Information System (Pallett, 1995), which enables the user to obtain flight information and make ticket
Farzad Ehsani  & Eva Knodt Speech Technology In Computer-Aided Language Learning...
Language Learning & Technology 68
reservations over the telephone. Similar commercial systems have been implemented for automatic
retrieval of weather and restaurant information, virtual environments, and telephone auto-attendants.
Many of the lessons learned in developing such systems can be valuable for designing CALL applications
for practicing conversational skills.
2. More and better training data are needed to support basic research on modeling non-native
conversational speech.
One of the most needed resources for developing open response conversational CALL applications is
large corpora of non-native transcribed speech data, of both read and conversational speech. Since accents
vary depending on the student's first language, separate databases must either be collected for each L1
subgroup, or a representative sample of speakers of different languages must be included in the database.
Creating such databases is extremely labor and cost intensive--a phone level transcription of spontaneous
conversational data can cost up to one dollar per phone. A number of multilingual conversational
databases of telephone speech are publicly available through the Linguistic Data Consortium (LDC),
including Switchboard (US English) and CALLHOME (English, Japanese, Spanish, Chinese, Arabic,
German). Our own effort in collaboration with John Hopkins University (Byrne, Knodt, Khudanpur, &
Bernstein, 1998; Knodt, Bernstein, & Todic,1998) has been to collect and model spontaneous English
conversations between Hispanic natives. All of these efforts will improve our understanding of the
disfluent speech of language learners and help model this speech type for the purpose of human-machine
communication.
3. Authoring tools and API's must become more widely available and easier to use.
Speech recognition functionality is more likely to become a standard feature of CALL if it can be easily
incorporated into language learning applications. The best way of accomplishing this is by using a
standardized speech API. A speech API consists of a set of program modules that allow application
developers to access the functionality of a speech decoder without the need for a full understanding of the
underlying technology. Most vendors have their own private or publicized speech API's, and currently
there are several competing "standards." Entropic has recently built a speech API specifically tailored to
the needs of language educators. This API integrates a state-of-the-art speech recognizer and a set of high
level programming routines with existing authoring environments for incorporating speech recognition
into PC-based language training applications. Entropic's speech API provides a versatile development
environment for educational software compatible with other multimedia authoring tools such as Java or
Authorware. The API is easy to use and supports powerful functionality for CALL applications, including
access to F0 information, timing, confidence scores, and automatic mapping to known non-native
pronunciations.
4. As voice-interactive CALL systems become more widely accepted, the quality of commercial
systems is likely to improve.
The lion's share of funding for CALL comes from government sources. Since these funds are modest and
production costs high, most of the funded systems remain at an experimental stage; few have been tested
with end users and fewer still have entered the commercial market. A common argument assumes that
CALL will have a greater practical impact on learning, when more well-designed CALL applications are
readily available. No doubt, we do need better and more thoroughly tested systems. Such systems must
become more affordable, easy to install, and platform-independent. However, the increasing commercial
success of telephone-based voice applications suggests that the technology will rapidly improve once it
enters the commercial market on a larger scale. As a result, large amounts of user data will become
available to augment and improve the technology even further.
Farzad Ehsani  & Eva Knodt Speech Technology In Computer-Aided Language Learning...
Language Learning & Technology 69
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Farzad Ehsani is the Chief Technology Officer at Sehda, Inc., a startup focusing on large vocabulary
applications for dialogue and captioning. Previously, he was the Head of Language Systems at Entropic
Research Laboratory. He holds a Bachelors in Computer Science and a Masters and an Engineers degree
in Electrical Engineering all from MIT. Before joining Entropic, Mr. Ehsani worked at NEC, Motorola,
MIT, and DEC as a researcher focusing on language modeling and speech recognition.
E-mail: farzad@sehda.com
Eva Knodt is the VP of Marketing at Sehda, Inc., a startup focusing on large vocabulary applications for
dialogue and captioning. She holds a PhD in German literature from the University of Virginia, and has
taught at Indiana and Stanford Universities. Previously, she was a researcher in Entropic Research
Laboratory working in the areas of experimental design and protocol implementation, as well as building
language and acoustic models for English and Japanese.
E-mail: knodt@sehda.com
REFERENCES
Abberton, E., & Fourcin, A. (1975). Visual feedback and the acquisition of intonation. In E. H.
Lenneberg, & E. Lenneberg (Eds.), Foundations of language development (2nd ed., pp. 157-165). New
York: Academic Press.
Anderson-Hsieh, J. (1994). Interpreting visual feedback on suprasegmentals in computer assisted
pronunciation instruction.  The CALICO Journal, 11(4), 5-21.
Bernstein, J. (1997). Automatic spoken language assessment by telephone (Tech. Rep. No. 5-97), Menlo
Park, CA: Entropic, Inc.
Bernstein, J., & Horacio, F. (1996). Speech recognition by computer. In N. Lass (Ed.), Principles of
experimental phonetics (pp. 408-434). St. Louis: Mosby.
Bernstein, J., & Rtischev, D. (1991). A voice interactive language instruction system, Proceedings of
Eurospeech, Sept., 981-983.
Bernstein, L., & Christian, B. (1996). For speech perceptions by humans or machines, three senses are
better than one. Proceedings of the International Conference on Spoken Language Processing, Oct.,
1477-1480.
Byrne, W., Knodt, E., Khudanpur, S., & Bernstein, J. (1998). Is automatic speech recognition ready for
non-native speech? A data collection effort and initial experiments in modeling conversational Hispanic
English, Proceedings of Speech Technology in Language Learning,  May.
Chapelle, C. (1997). CALL in the year 2000: Still in search of research paradigms? Language Learning &
Technology, 1(1), 19-43. Retrieved February 1, 1998 from the World Wide Web:
http://polyglot.cal.msu.edu/llt/vol1num1/chapelle/default.html.
Cowan, H., & Jones, B. (1991). Reaching students with reading problems. Electronic Learning 11(1), 36-
38.
Crystal, D. (1981). Clinical linguistics. New York: Harper Press.
de Bot, K. (1983). Visual feedback of intonation: Effectiveness and induced practice behavior. Language
and Speech, 26(4), 331-350.
Dunkel, P. (Ed.). (1991). Computer-assisted language learning and testing: Research issues and practice.
Philadelphia: Penn State University Press.
Farzad Ehsani  & Eva Knodt Speech Technology In Computer-Aided Language Learning...
Language Learning & Technology 70
Egan, K. (1996). Speech recognition application to language learning: Echos. Proceedings of CALICO,
July.
Ehsani, F. (1996). Air traffic control task for Japanese (Tech. Rep. No. 7-96), Menlo Park, CA: Entropic,
Inc.
Ehsani, F., Bernstein, J., Najmi, A., & Todic, O. (1997). Subarashii: Japanese interactive spoken language
education. Proceedings of Eurospeech, Sept., 681-684.
Ehsani, F., Bernstein, J., & Najmi, A. (in press). An interactive dialog system for learning Japanese.
Speech Communication.
Franco, H., Neumeyer, L., Kim, Y., & Ronen, O. (1997). Automatic pronunciation scoring for language
instruction.  Proceedings of ICASSP, April, 1471-1474.
Haskin, D. (1997, September 23). Voice recognition reaches new height with dragon naturally speaking.
PC Magazine,  16.
Higgins, J. (1988). Language learners and computers: Human intelligence and artificial unintelligence.
Singapore: Longman Group.
Hiller, S., Rooney, E., Vaughan, R., Eckert, M., Laver, J., & Jack, M. (1994). An automated system for
computer-aided pronunciation learning. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 7(1), 51-63.
Holland, M. (1995). The case for intelligent CALL. In M. Holland, J. D. Kaplan, & M. R. Sams (Eds.),
Intelligent language tutors: Theory shaping technology. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Hubbard, P. (1988). An integrated framework for CALL courseware evaluation. CALICO Journal, Dec.,
51-72.
James, E. (1976). The acquisition of prosodic features of speech using a speech visualizer. International
Review of Applied Linguistics 14, 227-243.
 Jecker, D. (1998, March 10). Speech recognition - Performance tests. PC Magazine, 17.
Kantrov, I. (1991). Talking to computer: A prototype speech recognition system for early reading
instruction  (Tech. Rep. No. 91-3). Newton, MA: Education Development Center.
Kawai, G., & Hirose, K. (1997). A CALL system using speech recognition to train the pronunciation of
Japanese long vowels, the mora nasal and mora obstruents. Proceedings of Eurospeech, Sept., 657-660.
Kenning, M. M., & Kenning, M. J. (1990). Computers and language learning: Current theory and
practice. London: Ellis Horwood.
Kim, Y., Franco, H., & Neumeyer, L. (1997). Automatic pronunciation scoring of specific phone
segments for language instruction. Proceedings of Eurospeech, Sept., 645-648.
Knodt, E., Bernstein, J., & Todic, O. (1998). A protocol for collecting a corpus of spontaneous,
conversational, Hispanic English. Proceedings of the First International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation, May, 341-345.
Levinson, S., & Liberman, M. (1981). Speech recognition by computer. Scientific American, April, 64-76.
McCandless, M. (1992). Word rejection for a literacy tutor. Unpublished master's thesis, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge.
Manuel, S. (1990). Speech communication report (Progress Report No. 133, pp. 289-299). Cambridge,
MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology, The Research Laboratory of Electronics.
Farzad Ehsani  & Eva Knodt Speech Technology In Computer-Aided Language Learning...
Language Learning & Technology 71
Markham, D., & Nagano-Madesen, Y. (1996). Proceeding of the International Conference on Spoken
Language Processing, Oct., 1473-1476.
Molholt, G. (1990). Spectrographic analysis and patterns in pronunciation. Computers and the
Humanities,  24, 81-92.
Mostow, J. (1997). Collaborative research on learning technologies: An automated reading assistant that
listens. Proceedings of the National Science Foundation Interactive Systems Grantees Workshop, Aug.
Mostow, J., Roth, S., Hauptmann, A. G., & Kane, M. (1994). A prototype reading coach that listens.
Proceedings of the 12th National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Aug., 785-792.
Mostow, J., & Aist, G. (1997). The sounds of silence: Towards automated evaluation of student learning
in a reading tutor that listens. Proceedings of the 14th National Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
July, 355-361.
Neumeyer, L., Sankar, A., & Digalakis, V. (1995). A comparative study of speaker adaptation techniques.
Proceedings of Eurospeech, Sept., 1127-1130.
Neumeyer, L., Franco, H., Weintraub, M., & Price, P. (1996). Automatic text-independent pronunciation
scoring of foreign language student speech. International Conference on Spoken Language Processing,
Sept., 1457-1460.
Ng, K. L. E., & Olivier, W. (1987). Computer-assisted language learning: An investigation on some
design and implementation issues. System, 15(1), 1-17.
Pallet, D., Fiscus, J., Fisher, W., Garofolo, J., Lund, B., Martin, A., & Przybocki, M. (1994). 1993
benchmark tests for the arpa spoken language program. Proceedings of the Human Language Technology
Workshop (pp. 49-74). San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc.
Pallet, D., Fiscus, J., Fisher, W., Garofolo, J., Lund, B., Martin, A., & Przybocki, M. (1995). 1994
benchmark tests for the arpa spoken language program. Proceedings of the Human Language Technology
Workshop (pp. 5-36). San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc.
Phillips, M., Zue, V., & McCandless, M. (1993). Language tutor: An interactive aid for teaching English
and Japanese. In V. Zue (Ed.), Annual research summary (pp. 29-30). Cambridge MA: Spoken Language
Systems Group, MIT LCS.
Rypa, M. (1996). VILTS: The voice interactive language training system. Proceedings of CALICO, July.
Salaberry, M. R. (1996). A theoretical foundation for the development of pedagogical tasks in computer
mediated communication.  CALICO Journal, 14(1), 5-34.
Spaai, G. & Hermes, D. (1993). A visual display for teaching intonation. CALICO Journal 10(3), 19-30.
Stibbard, R. (1996). Teaching English intonation with a visual display of fundamental frequency. The
Internet TESOL Journal, 2(8). Retrieved February 1, 1998 from the World Wide Web:
http://www.aitech.ac.jp/~iteslj/Articles/Stibbard-Intonation.
Warschauer, M. (1996). Computer-assisted language learning: An introduction. In S. Fotos (Ed.),
Multimedia language teaching (pp. 3-20). Logos International: Tokyo.
Waters, R. (1994). The audio interactive tutor (Tech. Rep. No. 94-04). Cambridge Research Center, MA:
Mitsubishi Electronic Research Laboratories.
Waters, R. (1995). The audio interactive tutor. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 8(4), 325-354.
Weinstein, C., McCandless, S., Mondshein, L., & Zue, V. (1975). A system for acoustic-phonetic analysis
of continuous speech. IEEE trans. Acoust. Speech and Signal Processing,  23(1), 54-67.
Farzad Ehsani  & Eva Knodt Speech Technology In Computer-Aided Language Learning...
Language Learning & Technology 72
Witt, S., & Young, S. (1997). Language learning based on non-native speech recognition. Proceedings of
Eurospeech, Sept., 633-636.
Woodland, P., Pye, D., & Gales, M. (1996). Iterative unsupervised adaptation using maximum likelihood
linear regression. Proceedings of the International Conference on Spoken Language Processing, Oct.,
1133-1136.
Young, S. (1996). A review of large-vocabulary continuous speech recognition. IEEE Signal Processing
Magazine, Sept., 45-57.
Zavaliagkos, G., Schwartz, R., McDonough, J., & Makhoul, J. (1995). Adaptation algorithms for large
scale hmm recognizers. Proceedings of Eurospeech, Sept., 1131-1134.
