Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol2num2/reviews/review2.html
July 1999, Volume 2, Number 3
pp. 23-27 online
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference)
Copyright © 1999, ISSN 1094-3501 23
REVIEW OF PASOS VIVOS 1
Title: Pasos Vivos 1
Distributor: Scott Foresman - Addison Wesley
Contact information: 1900 East Lake Avenue
Glenview, IL 60025
Phone: (847) 729-3000; (800) 552-2259 (U.S.)
Fax: (847) 729-8910
E-mail: sfawonline@aw.com
Program
information:
http://www.scottforesman.com/sfaw/product/
System
requirements:
Macintosh version requires 68030 processor or better; System 7.0.1 or later;
640 by 480, 256 color monitor; minimum of 5 MB available RAM; 300-kbs,
multimedia CD-ROM drive.
Windows version requires 486 processor at 66MHz, running Windows 3.1 or
better; 640 by 480, 256 color monitor; minimum of 8 MB available RAM (16
MB for Windows 95); 300-kbs, multimedia CD-ROM drive; Sound-Blaster
compatible audio board and speakers.
Price: Educational prices: $49.95 for 1-9 units; $39.95 for 10-99 units; $29.95 for
100+ units.
No site-licenses available.
$66.60 for an individual, non-academic unit.
Reviewed by Joseph Collentine, Northern Arizona University
OVERVIEW
Pasos Vivos 1 (PV1) is a CD-ROM accompanying Paso a Paso (Met, Sayers, & Eubanks Wargin, 1996),
a high school, introductory Spanish series that promotes proficiency with a communicative approach.
PV1 engages learners in task-based activities that would be beneficial to both high school and college
level learners not acquainted with Paso a Paso. For each of its 14 modules, students play the role of an
intern working at a "virtual" broadcast station. They must create multimedia presentations involving a
particular content theme (e.g., pastimes, friends and relationships, foods, family, the home, the
environment, etc.) that incorporate relevant vocabulary, grammatical structures, and cultural knowledge.
"Interns" utilize a library of pictures, authentic digital movies, as well as self-generated texts and sound
files to complete these tasks.
DESCRIPTION
An understanding of the developmental benefits of tasks involving situated cognition helps one to fully
appreciate what PV1 has to offer. According to Brown, Collins, and Duguid (1989), situated cognition
occurs when students develop skills and acquire new knowledge while learning about the situations where
those skills and that knowledge is useful. Thus, situated cognition involves students in a type of task-
based learning. For instance, students might explore the use of vocabulary related to money while
learning how to create an effective advertisement for a trip to Mexico. In the case of PV1, students work
as interns at KPSO, a local broadcast station, where they do research on and produce multimedia
presentations about various topics.
This software typifies the virtual worlds created with Macromedia's Director, where users interact with an
application and hyperlink to new windows/documents by clicking real-world objects (e.g., a door to move
Reviewed by Joseph Collentine Pasos Vivos 1
Language Learning & Technology 24
from one room to the next, a phone to listen to a message). PV1's first screen reveals the KPSO building.
Students click the front door and see an elevator with 14 different buttons leading to different floors, each
representing a different module (Figure 1).
Figure 1. KPSO's Elevator
For example, on the fourth floor interns find a sheet of paper on a desk; clicking it cues a pop-up window:
"KPSO is producing a commercial highlighting the delicious, diverse foods of your community. Your
assignment is to produce a rough draft of the commercial and promote interest in the community.
Remember to investigate all of your resources." Next to the desk is a sign pointing to the Biblioteca
(Library).
Figure 2. KPSO's Library
Reviewed by Joseph Collentine Pasos Vivos 1
Language Learning & Technology 25
In the library (Figure 2), a photo album contains (unglossed) pictures of Hispanic dishes. A stereo cues a
sound file with a traditional song about foods. A book of Notas culturales (Cultural Notes) next to the
stereo opens a document containing information (in English) about Latin America's culinary contributions
to the world. Finally, the library contains a slide projector which prompts a series of photos showing
restaurant scenes and kitchens containing decipherable, authentic texts in the foreground or background
(e.g., signs, newspapers, and menus).
Students can produce three types of presentations. From the library, they can access a Slide Presentation
Maker (Figure 3) to craft a PowerPoint-like presentation with the aforementioned photos and student-
generated voiceovers (using the operating system's built-in recording devices).
Figure 3. Slide Presentation Maker
Students may also utilize a Video Presentation Maker (Figure 4) to produce a film from the library's
QuickTime movies. Students have the option of using a QuickTime movie and its original (authentic)
dialogue or they may record a voiceover (e.g., using a video on open-air markets as a visual background
for a commercial on foods).
Figure 4. Video Presentation Maker
Reviewed by Joseph Collentine Pasos Vivos 1
Language Learning & Technology 26
Finally, students can create a word-processing document (using a built-in word processing program) that
can insert the aforementioned clip-art.
Learners always have access to a Spanish-English/English-Spanish Dictionary (consisting of more than
1,900 entries) and a Help hyperlink. The help mechanism is not context sensitive, however. That is, Help
does not, for instance, prompt a topic relevant to where the intern is in the building; instead, it prompts a
generic list of topics and the user must determine which one contains the desired information.
How does a student present his or her final product? For the slide and video presentations, a button cues a
full-screen presentation with the intern's visual media and any accompanying voiceovers. Users may print
their word-processed documents.
Students can (in theory) archive a presentation's components by saving references to particular
videos/photos and voiceover files to a floppy disk. Users may also store word-processing documents to a
floppy. Multiple floppies are necessary if one's audio files total more than 1.2 megabytes (about 20
seconds--22 MHz sampling rate; 8 bit size). One cannot archive to a hard disk or the local network.
EVALUATION
Educators such as Salaberry (1996) and Zhao (1996) have outlined the potential benefits of CALL tasks
involving situated cognition. PV1 provides these conditions by establishing a virtual environment in
which students can explore authentic materials (i.e., photos and digital videos), utilize Spanish
purposefully in a production studio.
Nevertheless, just as a typical textbook today does not assume that all instructors will know how to
effectively incorporate its features into a curriculum, PV1's designers would do well to provide a brief
synopsis of the processes involved in, and the goals of, situated cognition. Alternatively, a sample
multimedia presentation demonstrating what students could produce might make PV1's virtues more
transparent. This might show the instructor that students could use their knowledge of Spanish to review
authentic materials, write scripts, and record their own speech.
Additionally, PV1 is a 1997 publication, and so it is unacceptable that students cannot archive their work
on a hard disk or local network. This limitation might discourage students who are willing to approach the
production of their presentations recursively (i.e., not being satisfied with their product after the first
draft). Finally, although not a particular problem of PV1, the 8-bit sampling size of audio and QuickTime
files (which are numerous) greatly compromises the comprehensibility of the authentic speech samples.
SUMMARY
Instructors should consider PV1 if they want to implement, or are willing to explore, the incorporation of
task-based CALL programs in their curriculum. With an understanding of the developmental benefits of
these sorts of activities, instructors can create classroom conditions where learners can utilize authentic
Spanish materials as well as student-generated materials in meaningful, authentic tasks.
ABOUT THE REVIEWER
Joseph Collentine is an Assistant Professor of Spanish at Northern Arizona University. He has published
on the acquisition of morphosyntactically complex structures by foreign language learners of Spanish and
about CALL.
E-mail: Joseph.Collentine@nau.edu
Reviewed by Joseph Collentine Pasos Vivos 1
Language Learning & Technology 27
REFERENCES
Brown, J. S., Collins, A., & Duguid, S. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. Educational
Researcher, 18(1), 32-42.
Met, M., Sayers, R. S., & Eubanks Wargin, C. (1996). Paso a paso. Glenview, IL: Scott Foresman.
Salaberry, M. (1996). A theoretical foundation for the development of pedagogical tasks in computer
mediated communication. CALICO Journal, 14(1), 5-36.
Zhao, Y. (1996). Language learning on the World Wide Web: Toward a framework of network based
CALL. CALICO Journal, 14(1), 37-53.
