Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol2num1/reviews/tripleplay.html
July 1998, Volume 2, Number 1
pp. 19-20
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference)
Copyright © 1998, ISSN 1094-3501 19
REVIEW OF TRIPLEPLAY PLUS! ENGLISH
Program title: TriplePlay Plus! English
Distributor: Syracuse Language Systems, Inc.
5790 Widewaters Parkway
Syracuse, NY 13214-2845
Phone: (315) 449-4500
Fax: (315) 449-4585
Program information: http://www.syrlang.com/
E-mail: customerservice@syrlang.com
System requirements: IBM 486 DX 2/66 or faster with 8 MB RAM, Windows 3.1 or 95,
256-color display, CD-ROM drive, 16 bit sound card, speakers or
headphones, mouse, 9.5 MB free hard disk space (standard install).
Price: US $49.95; for a site license: $250.00 for 5 users, $450 for 10 users.
Reviewed by Alison Mackey and Jung-Yoon Choi, Michigan State University
OVERVIEW
TriplePlay Plus! English is a CD-ROM-based multimedia package designed for beginning to intermediate
ESL learners, ages 8 to adult. The program comes with a user's guide, plug-and-play microphone, and
technical manual. TriplePlay Plus! is claimed to assist learners in developing three skills: listening,
speaking, and reading. Vocabulary development, and a few other areas such as verb tenses and
prepositions, are also targeted through a variety of games. This multimedia language learning program
can be used by learners for self-study, by teachers in classroom settings (in computer labs), and also by
second language acquisition (SLA) researchers. The software, which includes automatic speech
recognition and 32 separate games, covers six main topics or themes. These include food, numbers, home
and office, people, activities, and places and transportation. The current version under review here
expands the activities and material from previous versions. The software is also available for Spanish,
French, German, English, Hebrew, Japanese, and Italian.
DESCRIPTION
From the first screen, the Main Menu, learners can click on: (a) the
SoundStart, which allows them to practice pronunciation of 50 words using
the Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) and Record/Playback; (b) the
Letters & Sounds, which demonstrates through the use of examples how
English letters correspond with the various sounds of the language; or (c)
the Language Connect, which gives them access to language learning
resources on the Internet.
A remarkable feature in the SoundStart is that the ASR provides immediate feedback on pronunciation
after learners select a word from the list and say it into the microphone. Learners can also record their
voices and compare their production to that of a native speaker's by using the Record/Playback. The ASR
feedback is provided visually as well as aurally. For example, when the software finds the pronunciation
acceptable, learners hear a distinct "bink" (pronunciation is OK) or if it is not, they are provided with
Reviewed by Alison Mackey & Jung-Yoon Choi Review of Tripleplay Plus! English
Language Learning & Technology 20
"bonk" (pronunciation is not correct). In the current version, visual feedback is shown through lights on
the Speech Recognition Meter. The number of lights indicates how well learners pronounced the word;
when they see all of the lights on the meter, their pronunciation is near native-like.
The ASR feature represents a considerable bonus for the current generation of CALL software. Indeed, it
shows how far the field has come from the days when native speaker production of "recognize speech"
was understood by the software to be "wreck a nice beach."
The Main Menu presents other options for a number of games. First, learners select one of the three
modes: listening, reading, or speaking. If they choose the speaking mode, they also choose a voice type
from "child, female, and male" options. The speaking mode also contains the ASR feature, again giving
learners feedback whenever they speak words, phrases, or sentences into the microphone. However,
unlike the SoundStart mode, the feedback in the speaking mode is provided only as an aural type (the
sound of either "bink" or "bonk") without the option of visual lights. After choosing a mode, learners then
select one of the six subjects: Food, Numbers, Home and Office, People, Activities, or Places and
Transportation. Within each topic, several of the 32 available games become active. Games are also
arranged by incremental developmental level.
In the first level, games such as Concentration, Bingo, and People Puzzle allow users to learn individual
words and simple phrases. In Level 2, learners can practice the vocabulary learned in Level 1 through
usage of complete phrases and sentences. Level 3 represents the most complex language usage. At this
stage, learners can extend Level 1 and 2 skills through conversations in a colorful comic strip format. In
some games, learners can also choose a skill degree, depending on the cognitive as well as linguistic
challenges of the game. Regular game-users will be familiar with the criteria of many of the games, and
with determining skill-levels.
ADVANTAGES OF TRIPLEPLAY PLUS! ENGLISH
• The software is easy to use. We tried it out in two different universities with 14 people, including
ESL learners, ESL teachers who were taking introduction-to-CALL classes, and second language
researchers. Most people were able to switch between modes and try out the ASR within 15
minutes. Beginners, while supported by their teachers, seemed particularly enchanted. The
program is CD-ROM-based, and can be easily and quickly run in Windows. The interface is
graphical and intuitive (green for go, red for stop, and a large help button). It also comes complete
with a well-written user's guide which explains in detail how to use the software and play each
game, and gives clear instructions which help learners easily move from game to game.
• One of the best features of the program is the user-friendly ASR technology which evaluates
learners' speech, indicating whether their pronunciation is acceptable and reasonably accurate
(but see also the first point in our "less positive reactions" below). The usual benefits of CALL
apply here: A motivated learner can repeat a word, phrase, or sentence and get feedback without
the necessity for a human interlocutor who usually would not have the patience or consistency of
the software. Such instant feedback on speech may help some learners improve their
pronunciation. Pronunciation studies to date, however, have been inconclusive about the
effectiveness of teacher-delivered pronunciation instruction. See for example the article in the
TESOL Research Interest Section Newsletter, February, 1998, Volume 5, Issue 1:
http://pilot.msu.edu/user/polio/news2.htm#pro. Certainly, computer evaluation of pronunciation
is also open to empirical investigation, and TriplePlay Plus! would be easy to use as a treatment
tool.
• In keeping with current approaches to ESL material design, TriplePlay Plus! represents a good
attempt at contextualizing the dialogues, even if the speech itself is highly scripted. The program
presents learners with the option of hearing native speaker conversations in "real world"
environments using natural speech rates, reductions, contractions and other features of authentic
Reviewed by Alison Mackey & Jung-Yoon Choi Review of Tripleplay Plus! English
Language Learning & Technology 21
spoken English. In the reading mode, learners' attention is also drawn to some of these features:
They have the option to click and get further information about how contractions are made, for
example. They also can control the speed of the dialogue. Depending on their listening
comprehension ability and perceived needs, learners are able to play entire conversations or
single sentences at a slower rate, and even hear sentences word by word. Obviously, they can
repeat utterances as many times as they want. That TriplePlay Plus! is clearly targeted at a range
of levels can also be seen by the fact that learners may select the level of the games. The software
lets learners control the sequencing and pacing of their learning, offering contextualized native-
speaker dialogues and complex games at one end of the spectrum, to simplified learner-friendly
language at the other. This fine-grained targeting is obviously beneficial for second language
learners, particularly in a classroom context where there may be a range of sub-levels within one
class designated "lower-intermediate."
• The program is fun, probably motivating for learners (especially in the "play against the machine"
game mode), and seems like a good learning tool. For example, the variety of games may keep
language learning, particularly vocabulary acquisition, interesting. Many of the games are
targeted at vocabulary, introducing learners to what may be new words and encouraging
productive and receptive practice. Words and phrases are well matched with pictures, so that
learners can easily comprehend the meanings and associations of the vocabulary. The bells and
whistles are very professional (graphics and sound effects together with the ASR) and suggest
that learners might remain stimulated by this software long after traditional lessons or previous
generation CALL programs have become boring. Again, there is potential for SLA research using
this software, perhaps to explore the outcomes of vocabulary learning in a CALL environment.
DISADVANTAGES OF TRIPLEPLAY PLUS! ENGLISH
• At the more advanced levels (e.g., Level 3 games in conversations), the ASR technology is less
sensitive. Users' speech is not always accurately rated. For example, the ASR made the "bink"
sound, meaning the pronunciation was acceptable, during testing when our non-native speakers
cut off the final syllables of words, saying into the microphone "Playing ten," "I can't find my
tennis rac," and "We'll also be going swim." The target forms were obviously "Playing tennis," "I
can't find my tennis racquet," and "We'll also be going swimming," respectively. That the ASR
system can be fooled into "binking" is a serious issue, and calls into question the usefulness of
relying too heavily on the ASR.
• The program claims to help learners improve not only listening and speaking skills but also
reading skills. However, this claim is not easy to substantiate since the text consists of mostly
short conversations and the reading mode is similar to that of the listening mode.
• Some less significant issues:
o We were surprised that learners cannot resume games from their last point if they stop for
the end of class, for example. If learners stop a game in the middle of playing, they have
to start it from the beginning, which can be a lengthy process. It would be useful if there
was a feature by which learners could save their previous work.
o Another frustrating point was that there is no "undo" feature when playing games in the
reading/listening mode. Users need to click an option in order to move on. There is a
feature, called "give up," but it is unfortunately only available in the speaking mode. It is
an important feature because, for example, it is easy to click accidentally on a word when
rearranging scrambled words. Even if the user realizes it is a mistake, they can't go back.
Also, there was no "I don't know" feature; all the questions required yes/no answers.
o It was also disappointing to hear that the company does not have plans for a Macintosh
version. While we do not wish to begin subscribing to the platform wars, this did seem
rather limiting.
Reviewed by Alison Mackey & Jung-Yoon Choi Review of Tripleplay Plus! English
Language Learning & Technology 22
o As a final gripe, a site licence for five users is the same price ($250.00) as buying five
individual copies. When we pointed this out to the company's education representative,
they suggested we buy a licence for ten users to get the discount. With today's tight
budgets in many language laboratories, the site licence discount and overall software cost
does not represent a good deal.
CONCLUSION
In the opinion of these reviewers,  TriplePlay Plus! English is a good software program for a variety of
contexts. Individual learners, ESL teachers instructing at the beginning to higher intermediate levels, and
others interested in CALL as a learning tool can all use this program and find something useful.
ABOUT THE REVIEWERS
Alison Mackey is Assistant Professor in the Department of Linguistics at Georgetown University. Her
research interests include second language acquisition, research methodology, and CALL. She recently
guest-edited a special issue of the Modern Language Journal (with Susan M. Gass) on the role of input
and interaction in second language acquisition to appear in Fall 1998.
E-mail: mackeya@gusun.georgetown.edu
Jung-Yoon Choi received her MA in TESOL from Michigan State University. Her research interests
include computer-assisted language learning and curriculum design. She currently teaches English as a
second language in Korea.
