Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol2num2/news/
January 1999, Volume 2, Number 2
pp. 12-15 online
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference)
Copyright © 1999, ISSN 1094-3501 12
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS
This page includes announcements from the organizations sponsoring LLT. More complete listings of
announcements can be found at the Applied Linguistics Virtual Library, the Agora Language
Marketplace, and the Centre for Language Teaching and Research's International Conference Schedule.
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource
Center (NFLRC)
Each year, the NFLRC offers intensive  summer institutes for foreign language professionals. The 1999
NFLRC Summer Institute, "Self-Directed Learning: Materials & Strategies," will feature a workshop
(June 14-26) and a symposium (June 24-26) on methods, materials, and assessment techniques to promote
learner autonomy via technology in the less commonly taught languages. The deadline for submitting
online applications is February 19, 1999.
Collected papers from the UG Access in L2 Acquisition Colloquium at the Second Language Research
Forum 1998 are now available online through NFLRC NetWorks. Other recent publications from the
University of Hawai'i NFLRC include three new Technical Reports on a variety of topics related to
second language acquisition. In addition, we've added Authentic Indonesian Video (text plus videotape)
to our collection of materials for less commonly taught languages. Feel free to browse through our other
publications--you'll find technical reports, research notes, language teaching materials (text, video, CD-
ROM), and online articles.
Michigan State University Center for Language Education
and Research (CLEAR)
CLEAR brings together specialists in language teaching and learning from multiple disciplines to create
language learning materials, conduct research, and lead professional development institutes on the
Michigan State University campus. CLEAR's activities and projects are applicable for educators of both
less commonly and more commonly taught languages.
Institutes focus on teaching methods, materials development, and/or integrating technology into the
foreign language classroom. Stipends to defray institute expenses are available to selected participants
currently working in the U.S.
Materials recently produced at CLEAR include: Foreign Languages: Doors to Opportunity, a video and
discussion guide for teachers, administrators, counselors, parents, and students promoting the study of
foreign languages; and Test Development Workbook and Video, material to assist teachers and
administrators in the development of FL assessment tools. CLEAR News, a publication covering FL
teaching techniques, research, and materials, is distributed every Fall and Spring.
Please visit our Web site or contact the CLEAR office for more detailed information about our services.
News From Our Sponsors
Language Learning & Technology 13
Apprentissage des Langues et Systèmes d'Information et de
Communication (ALSIC)
ALSIC (Language Learning and Information and Communication Systems) is an electronic journal in
French for researchers and practitioners in fields related to applied linguistics, didactics,
psycholinguistics, educational sciences, computational linguistics, and computer science.
The journal gives priority to papers from the French-speaking community and/or in French, but it also
regularly invites papers in other languages so as to strengthen scientific and technical exchanges between
linguistic communities that too often remain separate. The editorial board of ALSIC invite you to contact
them for any prospective contributions at the following electronic address: alsic@lib.univ-fcomte.fr.
Australian Technology Enhanced Language Learning Consortium (ATELL)
ATELL sponsored the Inaugural  WorldCALL Conference: "CALL to Creativity," at The University of
Melbourne, Australia, from July 13-17, 1998. The objective of the conference was to promote and
develop national and international networks for CALL research and practice. With more than 400
delegates in attendance, WorldCALL offered unprecedented access to innovators, educators, and
entrepreneurs in the field. Contact WorldCALL for further details, or by e-mail.
Center for Advanced Research on Language Acquisition,
University of Minnesota (CARLA)
CARLA is the coordinating office for a number of grant-funded programs devoted to research and
program development in the areas of second language teaching, learning and assessment. Currently our
projects encompass computer adaptive testing, language and culture research, second language
articulation, immersion education, and teacher training in technology.
CARLA also maintains a database listing 300 languages taught in North America, and sponsors listservs
for teachers of less commonly taught languages. To share the latest research and program opportunities
for foreign language and ESL teachers, CARLA sponsors annual summer institutes and publishes a series
of working papers.
Computer Assisted Language Instruction Consortium
(CALICO)
Since its inception in 1983, CALICO has served as an international forum for language teachers who
want to develop and utilize the potential of advanced technology to support their teaching and research
needs. Through its Annual Symposia, Special Interest Groups (SIGs),  CALICO Journal, CALICO
Monograph Series, CALICO Resource Guide, and numerous other publications, CALICO provides both
leadership and perspective in the ever-changing field of computer-assisted instruction.
The strength of CALICO derives from the enthusiasm, creativity, and diversity of its members. It
comprises language teachers and researchers from universities, military academies, community colleges,
K-12 schools, government agencies, and commercial enterprises. To learn more about CALICO activities
and how to participate in them, visit the CALICO homepage at http://www.calico.org.
News From Our Sponsors
Language Learning & Technology 14
European Association for Computer Assisted Language
Learning (EUROCALL)
EUROCALL is an association of language teaching professionals from Europe and worldwide aiming to:
• Promote the use of foreign languages within Europe
• Provide a European focus for all aspects of the use of technology for language learning
• Enhance the quality, dissemination, and efficiency of CALL materials
We also disseminate information via the ReCALL Journal and other publications, organise special interest
meetings and annual conferences, and work towards the exploitation of electronic communications
systems. For those involved in education and training, EUROCALL provides information and advice on
all aspects of the use of technology for language learning.
Forthcoming EUROCALL conferences:
• EUROCALL '99, Besançon, France, 16-18 September 1999
•  EUROCALL 2000, University of Abertay Dundee, Scotland, 31 August to 2 September 2000
For full details, contact us at:  http://www.hull.ac.uk/cti/eurocall.htm.
International Association for Language Learning Technology
(IALLT)
Established in 1965, IALL is an organization of professionals in a variety of fields who are committed to
supporting and extending language learning, teaching, and research through the use of technology. Its
members include directors and staff of language labs, resource or media centers and grant projects,
language teachers at all levels, developers and vendors of hardware and software, and interested others.
IALL offers a Foreign Language Software Database, LLTI listserv (Language Learning and Technology
International), and publications such as IALL Journal, IALL Lab Design Kit, and IALL Lab Management
Manual. Contact Tom Browne for IALL publications or Ed Dente for membership information.
