Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol2num1/article4/
July 1998, Volume 2, Number 1
pp. 74-93
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference)
Copyright © 1998, ISSN 1094-3501 74
SIGNAL ANALYSIS SOFTWARE
FOR TEACHING DISCOURSE INTONATION
Dorothy M. Chun
University of California, Santa Barbara
ABSTRACT
In the last fifteen years, there have been major paradigm shifts in both general and applied
linguistics toward acknowledging intonation as an indispensable component of language and
communication. In addition, the hardware and software for conducting acoustic phonetic signal
analysis have recently become more accessible. The main goal of this paper is thus to integrate
the two seemingly disparate subfields of linguistics, acoustic phonetics, and discourse intonation,
and to suggest a new framework for facilitating and studying the acquisition of suprasegmental
phonology. The purpose of this article is threefold: (1) to review previous research on the
acquisition of suprasegmentals by L2 learners and the potential of computer-based instructional
materials for improving intonation; (2) to briefly describe and critique some of the software
previously available for this purpose; and (3) to suggest criteria for the conceptualization of
multimedia software and concomitant research on the teaching of discourse-based phonology and
intonation. In looking toward the future, this article will focus on providing learners with
discourse-level language input and with specific feedback regarding acoustic features of the
intonation patterns they produce. Finally, the article urges that software be designed to include
both research tools and tools to facilitate, record, and analyze the intonation produced in real
interactions between speakers.
INTRODUCTION
Intonation is said to be among the first aspects of speech that human infants attend to, react to, and
produce themselves (Lieberman, 1986). It has also been shown that child L2 learners have little difficulty
in acquiring native-like pronunciation and intonation in the L2 (Felix, 1978). Intonation thus seems to be
easily, if not automatically, acquired by children in both L1 and L2. However, although it appears easy
for adults to maintain and retain intonation in their L1, it is difficult, if not seemingly impossible for them
to learn L2 intonation. Due to its inherent complexity and to the ensuing difficulty in learning and
mastering it, intonation was ignored for many years in language teaching. However, it is slowly gaining
recognition as an integral part of language fluency, competence, and proficiency.
There appear to be several reasons for the generally growing interest in intonation. First, in theoretical
linguistics, there have been important new advances in the theory of intonation and its representation,
aided by the growing accessibility of acoustic signal analysis. Second, the expansion of the analytical
domains of traditional linguistics from sounds (phonetics and phonology), words (morphology), and
sentences (syntax) to larger units of inquiry, such as entire texts, discourses, and interactions, has given
rise to such subfields as pragmatics, text linguistics, discourse analysis, and conversation analysis (Brazil,
1975; Brown, Currie, & Kenworthy, 1980; Couper-Kuhlen & Selting, 1996). In addition, the realization
that language and language acquisition are affected and influenced by other disciplines has strengthened
the interdisciplinary focus of linguistics to stress psycholinguistics and sociolinguistics. Third, applied
linguistics has grown to emphasize communicative function rather than linguistic form (cf. Canale &
Swain, 1980; Kramsch, 1995). With particular regard to the teaching and learning of pronunciation, there
has been an appeal to adopt a top-down approach, namely, to focus more on global meaning and
Dorothy M. Chun Signal Analysis Software For Teaching Discourse Intonation
Language Learning & Technology 75
communication (context- and discourse-based instruction), rather than adhere to the traditional bottom-up,
phonemic-based approach (based on isolated or contrasted sounds).
In accordance with these major paradigm shifts in both general and applied linguistics toward
acknowledging intonation as an indispensable component of language and communication, as well as
with the advances in acoustic phonetic technology, this paper has three main goals: (a) to review previous
research on the acquisition of suprasegmentals by L2 learners and the potential for computer-based
instructional materials to aid in improving intonation; (b) to briefly describe and critique some of the
software previously available; and (c) to suggest criteria for the conceptualization and design of
multimedia software for the teaching of discourse-based phonology and intonation. It is the third goal that
presents a distinct challenge and suggests a new framework for studying the acquisition of
suprasegmental phonology.
PERCEPTUAL AND ARTICULATORY TRAINING BEYOND SEGMENTALS: A BRIEF
HISTORY OF PREVIOUS RESEARCH
The traditional theoretical linguistic basis for the learning and teaching of pronunciation was a focus on
the segmentals, that is, the articulatory phonetics of individual sounds. Intonation, comprised of the so-
called suprasegmentals, had not been as extensively researched theoretically or acoustically and was
considered a "luxury" in terms of teaching. However, since the early 1980s there have been appeals to
reverse the emphasis from segmentals to prosodic patterns (cf., for example, Chun, 1988; Hurley, 1992;
Leather, 1983; Luthy, 1983; Morley, 1991; Pennington & Richards, 1986; Wennerstrom, 1994, 1998).
There is also a growing literature on the importance of teaching intonation to L2 learners, as well as on
the role of prosody in foreign accents (cf. Purcell & Suter, 1980; Scovel, 1988; Van Els & de Bot, 1987).
For the purposes of this paper, however, we assume its importance and focus on ways of implementing
instruction, based on underlying applied linguistic principles.
In the past, various types of training in L2 pronunciation have been studied, including perceptual,
articulatory, or some combination of both. Only those studies dealing with suprasegmentals, in
conjunction with speech technology systems or programs, will be summarized here. For example, in
perceptual or discrimination experiments, Feldman (1973, 1977) used electronic synthesis to simplify
several prosodic features that were presented to hearers for discrimination. After this initial training,
natural speech models that contained the same prosodic contrasts were presented, and positive results in
discrimination were obtained.
'T Hart and Collier (1975) sought to provide Dutch learners with necessary relevant information about
English intonation so that they could learn correct intonation. They found that "four aspects of pitch
change are perceptually relevant: (a) direction of pitch change (rise, fall, or level); (b) range of pitch
change (difference between high and low levels); (c) speed of pitch change (how abruptly or gradually the
change happens); and (d) place of pitch change (in sentence, word, or syllable)" (p. 237). These four
relevant aspects of intonation were then explained and demonstrated in a 12-minute tape, using single
tones and speech samples generated by a computer. The different pitch changes were also presented on a
screen. Though the tape was only concerned with the perception of intonation, it caused a significant
improvement in the production of intonation.1
As for using visual displays with a focus on improving articulation or production (rather than perceptual
discrimination), results of studies have also been varied: Although several studies report positive effects
of the use of visual displays of intonation for language learners (de Bot & Mailfert, 1982; de Bot, 1983;
Hengestenberg, 1980; James, 1976, 1977, 1979; Lane & Buiten, 1969; Leon & Martin, 1972), other
studies did not find these effects (Vardanian, 1964; Wichern & Boves, 1980). De Bot and Mailfert (1982)
found that a 45-minute training session in the perception of intonation did result in a statistically
significant improvement in the production of English intonation patterns by both Dutch and French
Dorothy M. Chun Signal Analysis Software For Teaching Discourse Intonation
Language Learning & Technology 76
students. Subsequent studies using visual and audio-visual feedback further corroborated the 1982
findings: De Bot (1983) showed that audio-visual feedback is more effective in intonation learning than
auditory feedback alone.
However, de Bot (1981) cautioned:
Methods making use of visualisation as an aid in intonation learning wrongly imply, that
visualisation by itself is useful in teaching. Experimental phonetic research has shown that there
is no empirical basis for a number of assumptions made in these methods. Especially, the tacit
assumption that the pupil is an unbiased perceiver of whatever the teacher is presenting leads to
many problems, because the perceptual abilities of the pupils in general have not been developed
sufficiently and specifically enough for the perception of intonation. (p. 39)
An example of a program that displays visual pitch curves is a product from Kay Elemetrics called Visi-
Pitch that has been available for a number of years for DOS-based personal computers (PCs) (Abberton &
Fourcin, 1975; Fischer, 1986; James, 1976, 1979; Molholt, 1988).2 With  Visi-Pitch, students are able to
see both a native speaker's and their own pitch curve simultaneously. Students first speak a sentence into
a microphone; their utterance is then digitized and pitch-tracked, and they can see a display of their pitch
curve directly under a native speaker's pitch curve of the same sentence. Figure 1 from Fischer (1986)
shows the pitch contours of the French question Qu'est-ce qu'il fait? (What is he doing?) as spoken by a
native speaker in the top half, and the same question produced by an American learner in the bottom half.
Figure 1. French sentence Qu'est-ce qu'il fait? (What is he doing?)
Anderson-Hsieh (1992) reported on using Visi-Pitch to teach English suprasegmentals to international
teaching assistants and found that
the major benefit of electronic visual feedback for teaching suprasegmentals is that it provides the
students with an accurate visual representation of suprasegmentals in real time paired with the normal
auditory feedback that occurs during speech. Students can thus more easily replicate native
suprasegmental targets using both the target form and the visual feedback from their own speech to guide
them. (p. 61)
Although the majority of recent studies have demonstrated the efficacy of audio and visual training to
improve learners' perception and production of intonation, the conflicting results of earlier research which
will be discussed below can be attributed to several factors. First, the relationship between perception and
production is not fully understood, at either the level of segmentals or the level of suprasegmentals. To
date, there is no conclusive evidence that a simple relationship exists between learners' perceptual ability
Dorothy M. Chun Signal Analysis Software For Teaching Discourse Intonation
Language Learning & Technology 77
and their productive skills; that is, whether correct perception must precede correct production, whether
they can occur simultaneously, or in either order. Nor has it been determined whether these abilities
progress in parallel (Leather, 1983). Second, the importance of auditory and/or visual feedback with
regard to intonation is difficult to assess because previous programs providing feedback required learners
to be able to monitor themselves critically. In other words, in a typical exercise, learners recorded
themselves, then replayed their utterance and saw a visual display of their intonation curve. Other than the
visual display, no further feedback was provided. This required learners to monitor themselves and to
extrapolate their difficulties even though they may well have lacked the phonetic criteria for critical
listening. However, it was the objective of the exercise to develop these criteria. Third, questions remain
about the long-term effects of any of the brief training sessions reported on in the studies discussed above,
and about the effects of more extensive training. Finally, the technical limitations of speech technology
systems have also made research in this area significantly more difficult.3 The limitations of both
hardware and software used in earlier studies will be discussed in the following section.
SPEECH TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS FOR LANGUAGE INSTRUCTION: PROBLEMS AND
SHORTCOMINGS
As stated above, research on using speech technology systems for intonation training has been hampered
to some degree by the limited capabilities of both the hardware and the software. This section discusses
possible reasons why not all previous studies reported on unqualified success of intonation training
systems. With regard to hardware, the devices and computers used in previous research were often
incapable of dealing with weak speech signals and particularly with voiceless consonants, as lack of
voicing means breaks in the fundamental frequency or pitch curves.
Weltens and de Bot (1984) were concerned that the limitations of the hardware and software that caused a
slight delay in feedback might impede effectiveness of their display system. However, they showed that
"feedback delay is not a critical factor when using a pitch visualizer for intonation teaching, but that the
nature of the speech material [voiceless vs. voiced consonants, neutral vs. contrastive intonation]. . .does
dramatically affect the quality of the visual feedback" (p. 79). In other words, the fact that feedback was
not provided in "real-time" (i.e., with a minimum of delay between the production of a speech signal and
its visualization) did not adversely affect the effectiveness of the visualizer. But if sentences contained
many unvoiced sounds the quality of the pitch curve was significantly poorer than for sentences with few
unvoiced sounds. Another serious difficulty with the early attempts such as the one by Weltens and de
Bot was that the devices used were very costly and often "one-of-a-kind." As a result, none of these
display systems came into widespread use.
In addition to the technical limitations of the hardware and software, other problems in the above studies
concern pedagogical issues related to the underlying assumptions of the software's content and design.
For example, subjects in an experiment by Wichern (1979) reported that they had considerable difficulties
in relating visual and auditory signals. De Bot (1981) also noted the problem in the application of visual
feedback is that the visual feedback does not indicate which parts of the signal are perceptually relevant
and which ones are irrelevant from a student's point of view (pp. 38-39). Although only those parts that
are perceptually relevant should be paid attention to and imitated as exactly as possible, either students
must be able to make these judgments, or the device must be set or programmed to judge student
performance as acceptable or unacceptable (cf. Anderson-Hsieh, 1994).
One of the problems with some of the earlier software programs was the lack of feedback processing, for
instance, the pitch could be measured and directly fed back to the learner, but interruptions in the
intonation contour during unvoiced parts of the utterance, and the inclusion of perceptually irrelevant
pitch variations made it difficult for the learner to interpret the feedback. Spaai and Hermes (1993)
devised a visual intonation-display system called "Intonation Meter" that presents visual feedback of the
intonation as a continuous representation of the pitch contour and contains only the perceptually relevant
Dorothy M. Chun Signal Analysis Software For Teaching Discourse Intonation
Language Learning & Technology 78
aspects of the intonation pattern. It also marks vowel onsets in Dutch, that is, the points at which pitch
movement is perceived (see Figures 2 and 3). The Intonation Meter displays pitch contours produced by
the foreign language teacher on the upper part of a computer screen, and the student's attempted imitation
is shown on the lower part of the screen. Both are presented in stylized form, that is, with a continuous
(interpolated) pitch "curve" which eliminates the irrelevant pitch variations. This visual display system is
used in a program for training foreign language learners that contains three types of exercises: Auditory
discrimination, imitation, and "production on demand" exercises. In the latter, spontaneous production
from the learner is elicited by means of visual cues (e.g., sentences, part of stories, or dialogues) (p. 26-
27).
Figure 2. "Unprocessed" fundamental frequency measurements
Figure 3. "Unprocessed" pitch contour (dots) and stylized pitch contour (straight line)
Anderson-Hsieh (1994) discussed some of the technical problems with existing software and sought to
provide learners with information on interpreting visual feedback graphs of intonation contours produced
by computer programs, in particular, those generated by Visi-Pitch. In addressing the problem noted by
Spaai and Hermes (1993), she compared pitch contours for sentences with mainly voiced sounds (more or
less continuous pitch curves) with sentences containing many voiceless sounds (broken or truncated pitch
curves). In Figure 4 below, the final syllable of both sentences is accented, but in the sentence with the
word nine, containing vowels and nasals (all voiced), the final accent is shown as a long fall, while in the
sentence with the word six, the two voiceless consonants cause the final accent to be cut off and to look
like a truncated fall. This could be misleading to a learner. Moreover, deep and truncated falls convey
very different meanings in English; Bolinger (1986), for example, attributed finality or assertiveness to
deep falls and a sense of offhandedness or tentativeness to truncated falls. The solution to these inherent
Dorothy M. Chun Signal Analysis Software For Teaching Discourse Intonation
Language Learning & Technology 79
problems of voiceless consonants being incapable of carrying pitch is, at least initially, to use model
sentences in training that contain mainly voiced sounds, particularly at the end of utterances, in accented
syllables, and wherever it is imperative for learners to see the movement of pitch.
Figure 4. Sentences with voiced vs. unvoiced final words
To summarize, the following main research issues remain unanswered:
• What is the relationship between perception and production ability?
• What is the effectiveness of computer training materials, particularly what are the longer-term
effects?
The main shortcomings of hardware and software used previously for training and research can be
summed up as follows:
Accessibility and Cost:
• Inaccessibility (often "one-of-a-kind" devices)
• Cost of the equipment required (high-end machines required for the most accurate processing)
Technical Problems:
• Weak speech signals
• No extrapolation for voiceless sounds
Pedagogical Shortcomings:
• Intonation contours were derived from synthesized speech (e.g., simple tones generated by a
computer)
• Pedagogical applications were often not user-friendly (i.e., learners were not told how to interpret
displays)
• Examples and exercises consisted of sentence-level intonation
In all of the studies discussed above, the units of analysis were sentence-level intonation contours. The
next section will discuss the recent calls for teaching discourse-level intonation and ways of integrating
this level of intonation teaching with the increasingly accessible signal analysis software tools. New
principles for the conceptualization and design of software as well as accompanying research on the
effectiveness of using such software for acquisition of L2 intonation will be explored.
LOOKING TOWARD THE FUTURE: BASIC PRINCIPLES FOR CONCEPTUALIZATION
AND DESIGN OF SOFTWARE FOR TEACHING INTONATION
Although computers have been utilized for providing learners with visualizations of their intonational
patterns since the 1970s, it is only recently that hardware and software for acoustic signal analysis with
microcomputers have become increasingly more accessible. This new technology comes in the form of
speech digitizers, pitch trackers to produce displays of intonation curves, and a small number of
Dorothy M. Chun Signal Analysis Software For Teaching Discourse Intonation
Language Learning & Technology 80
pronunciation tutors with audio and graphic components. At the same time, in the subfield of applied
linguistics, the pedagogical goals with regard to pronunciation and intonation teaching have been focusing
increasingly on discourse-level phenomena. It is therefore an appropriate time to integrate two areas of
linguistics that have often been placed on opposite ends of the continuum in terms of the scope of their
respective domains: Acoustic phonetic analyses, on the one hand, have traditionally dealt with individual
vowels and consonants, whereas discourse-level linguistic analyses, on the other hand, have been
concerned with entire texts and discourses.
The application of discourse-analytic principles to using computer-based tools for teaching pronunciation
leads to the following discussion regarding the design of signal analysis software and the research
questions that can be addressed using such software. Pennington (1989a) pointed out that computers can
both provide training in the production and perception of speech and create environments that facilitate
interaction. Citing the work of Chaudron (1985) and Richards (1986), Pennington stressed the need for
language learning software to move to skill-based and task-based learning activities that not only offer
users practice in listening comprehension but also elicit and encourage practice of specific types of
interactions, language forms, sound contrasts, or nuances of meaning signaled by intonation (cf. also
Piper, 1986; Young, 1988). In other words, she extended the scope of intonation practice to include
context and transactions, not only sentences.
Some research has already been conducted to expand the scope of intonation study beyond the sentence
level and to identify contrasting acoustic intonational features between languages. For example, Hurley
(1992) showed how differences in intonation can cause sociocultural misunderstanding. He found that
while drops in loudness and pitch are turn-relinquishing signals in English, Arabic speakers of English
often use non-native like loudness instead. This could be misinterpreted by English speakers as an effort
to hold the floor (pp. 272-273). Similarly, in a study of politeness with Japanese and English speakers,
Loveday (1981) found more sharply defined differences in both absolute pitch and within-utterance pitch
variation between males and females in Japanese than between English males and females in English
politeness formulas. In addition, the Japanese subjects transferred their lower native language pitch ranges
when uttering the English formulas. Low intonation contours are judged by native speakers of English to
indicate boredom and detachment, and if male Japanese speakers transfer their low contours from
Japanese to English when trying to be polite, this could result in misunderstandings by native English
speakers. Van Bezooijen (1995) corroborated earlier studies and found Japanese women to have higher
pitches than Dutch women for reasons not only of physical and psychological powerlessness, but also due
to a stronger differentiation between the ideal woman and man in Japan than in the Netherlands.
As evidence for culture-specificity with regard to the encoding and perception of affective states in
intonation contours, Luthy (1983) reported that although a set of "nonlexical intonation signals" (p. 19)
(associated with expressions like uh-oh or mm-hm in English) were interpreted consistently by a control
group of English native speakers, non-native speakers of varied L1 backgrounds tended to misinterpret
them more often. He concluded that many foreign students appear to have difficulty understanding the
intended meanings of some intonation signals in English because these nuances are not being explicitly
taught.
Kelm (1987), acknowledging that "correct intonation is a vital part of being understood" (p. 627), focused
on the different ways of expressing contrastive emphasis in Spanish and English. He investigated
acoustically whether the range of pitch of non-native Spanish speakers differed from that of native
Spanish speakers. Previous research by Bowen (1975) had found that improper intonation in moments of
high emotion might cause a non-native speaker of Spanish to sound angry or disgusted. Kelm found that
the native Spanish-speaking group clearly varied in pitch less than the two American groups; that is,
native English speakers used pitch and intensity to contrast words in their native language and transferred
this intonation when speaking Spanish. Although the results showed a difference between native and non-
Dorothy M. Chun Signal Analysis Software For Teaching Discourse Intonation
Language Learning & Technology 81
native Spanish intonation in contrasts, they did not show the degree to which those differences affect or
interfere with communication.
The studies described above provide us with preliminary criteria for the content of software to teach
discourse intonation. Examples of what might be incorporated in such software using a very accessible
signal analysis program are discussed below. In addition, it should be borne in mind that experimentation
and research to determine the effectiveness of the various methods is also needed (cf. Pennington, 1989b).
One of the greatest advantages of using computer-assisted pronunciation and intonation tutors, for
example, is that the computer serves both as a medium of instruction and as a tool for research; that is, a
software program, while teaching pronunciation, can simultaneously keep detailed and thorough records
of student performance and progress. Consequently, the recent studies on the effectiveness of visual
feedback in teaching intonation and on the use of technology to develop new measures of speaking
proficiency represent the type of ongoing research that must be done in addition to developing better and
more efficient computer software. Pennington stated, "Perhaps the most exciting possibilities combining
language training, assessment and research involve two-person interactions which are both facilitated and
analyzed by a computer" (p. 119).
Morley (1991) echoed Pennington in noting the need for "more definitive evaluative measures and
methods to quantify changes and improvements in the learner's intelligibility and communicability" and
for "controlled studies of changes in learner pronunciation patterns as the result of specific instructional
procedures" (p. 511). Both of these needs can be addressed, first, by continuing to study the acoustic
parameters that can be used to quantify intonational features, and second, by building data collection tools
into signal analysis software.
In summary, four specific areas in which technology can be integrated into intonation instruction and
research can be suggested: (1) providing learners with visualizations of their intonational patterns and
with specific feedback to help them perceive the meaningful intonational contrasts between L1 and L2 so
that they can improve their speech production; (2) providing learners with authentic and extensive speech
and cultural input to represent the diversity of speech sounds and the great variation that exists within a
language, and then in turn to hone learners' perceptual abilities; (3) using computer software to facilitate,
record, and analyze interactions between speakers; (4) using computers for research purposes by
recording students' performance, progress, and steps toward self correction.
Based on the foregoing needs assessment, some specific examples for each of the four areas described
above are presented below regarding the conceptualization and design of multimedia software for
teaching discourse intonation:4
1. Provide learners with visualization of their intonation patterns and specific contrastive feedback.
In intonation teaching, one focus has traditionally been contrasting the typical patterns of different
sentence types. Pitch-tracking software can certainly be used to teach these basic intonation contours, but
for the future, in accordance with the current emphasis on communicative and sociocultural competence,
more attention should be paid to discourse-level communication and to cross-cultural differences in pitch
patterns. Selected examples are presented below and illustrated in Figures 5 to 9. Software programs must
have the capability to:
• Distinguish the meaningful intonational features with regard to four aspects of pitch change: (a)
direction of pitch change (rise, fall, or level), (2) range of pitch change (difference between high
and low levels), (3) speed of pitch change (how abruptly or gradually the change happens), and
(4) place of pitch change (which syllable(s) in an utterance)
• Go beyond the sentence level and address the multiple levels of communicative competence:
grammatical,  attitudinal, discourse, and sociolinguistic
Dorothy M. Chun Signal Analysis Software For Teaching Discourse Intonation
Language Learning & Technology 82
• Start with utterances containing a minimum of voiceless sounds in order to ensure decipherable
pitch curves, particularly for the initial exercises, where learners must familiarize themselves with
the visual representations of the pitch curves.
Grammatical Functions of Intonation. Figure 5 contains three so-called "neutral" utterances typically
used to illustrate the grammatical function of intonation: the question Where are you going? and the
replies I'm going home and Home. It is interesting to note that all three utterances have similar intonation
patterns, typical of English wh-questions and statements. They show pitch peaks on stressed syllables,
with the greatest peak on the syllable with sentence stress. At the end of the utterance, the pitch falls to its
lowest level. This illustrates the fact that there is not a one-to-one correspondence between intonation
pattern and sentence type. In this case, the same pattern is used for different syntactic types.
Where're you going? I'm going home. Home.
Figure 5. "Neutral" question  and two statements (replies)
Figure 6 shows the yes-no question Are you going? with rising intonation and the reply Yeah, I'm going
with a falling intonation pattern similar to those shown in Figure 5.
Are you going? Yeah, I'm going.
Figure 6. Yes-no question and reply
Dorothy M. Chun Signal Analysis Software For Teaching Discourse Intonation
Language Learning & Technology 83
In accordance with Anderson-Hsieh's (1994) recommendation, these examples contain primarily voiced
sounds, and one notes that the pitch curves are relatively "continuous." Initially, for practicing basic
intonation patterns, constructed examples and exercises should strive to maximize words with a minimum
of voiceless sounds, though this will certainly be more problematic with natural discourse.
Attitudinal Functions of Intonation. Figure 7 presents examples of so-called attitudinal functions of
intonation, here, the surprised or incredulous question You're going WHERE? and the exasperated answer
I said I'm going HOME! Of note here are the wider pitch ranges and the steeper rising and falling curves
in both utterances. These are the acoustic features that can be brought to the learner's attention. Software
should thus present both a native speaker's pitch curve and that of the learner. In the case of speed or
slope of pitch change, for example, the software can also (a) instruct learners to compare the steepness of
their falling or rising pitch to that of the native speaker, and/or (b) provide a quantitative measurement of
the actual pitch slopes of both the native speaker and the learner.
 
You're going WHERE? I said I'm going HOME!
Figure 7. "Marked" question and reply
Figure 8 shows three renditions of the utterance Let's go, first said as a relatively neutral imperative, then
as an impatient command, and finally as an attempt to cajole or persuade. The differences in the
intonation curves are apparent, and learners can first be asked to practice producing these different
patterns. They can then be presented with different situations or scenarios and asked how they would
respond. For instance, they could do role-plays of (a) saying  Let's go to a friend, (b) saying Let's go as a
sports coach would say to a team, or (c) saying Let's go as a polite request to a superior. The next step for
language instructors would be to do a cross-linguistic comparison in order to determine whether the target
language uses the same means for expressing such nuances of meaning. In the examples below, the
impatient command has a higher peak on go and a steeper falling pitch curve. The cajoling utterance
shows a more sustained, level pitch and does not fall at the end.
Dorothy M. Chun Signal Analysis Software For Teaching Discourse Intonation
Language Learning & Technology 84
 
Let's go. (neutral) Let's go. (impatient) Let's go. (cajoling)
Figure 8. Three renditions of Let's go
While "surprise," "exasperation," and "impatience" can be thought of as attitudes, expressing the
illocutionary function of "cajoling" might be classified by some as a discourse function rather than an
attitudinal function of intonation. Both attitudinal and discourse functions can be considered "pragmatic"
as opposed to "grammatical" functions, although the distinctions are far from clear (Couper-Kuhlen &
Selting, 1996; Lambrecht, 1994). The important idea is that intonation is used as a signaling device in
discourse and must be analyzed and determined on the basis of the surrounding context. Speakers make
real-time assessments of what words need to be stressed, of whether to mimic their interlocutor's pitch
range, or of what attitude or intention they wish to convey by means of intonation.
Discourse Functions of Intonation.  Similar to the examples in Figure 7, the curves in Figure 9 also
show steep rises and falls, in this case with the question and answer containing stressed pronouns Are
YOU going? I'M going. Since pronouns are generally not stressed, these examples illustrate a discourse
function of intonation, that is, how contrast and emphasis can be signaled by intonation and the
importance of the surrounding context of discourse as well as the expectations of the hearer and the
speaker. In this case, the speaker may have singled out the addressee in order to find out if s/he is going,
and possibly expected that the other person would be surprised to find out the speaker is going.
Are YOU going? I'M going.
Figure 9. Stressed pronouns in a question-answer sequence
Dorothy M. Chun Signal Analysis Software For Teaching Discourse Intonation
Language Learning & Technology 85
The utterances in Figure 9, similar to those in Figure 7, employ a wider pitch range than the more
"neutral" utterances in Figure 5. The stressed pronoun I in Figure 8 has a fundamental frequency (pitch)
of nearly 500 Hz, and the statement does not end on a low pitch as would be more typical of an
unemotional or non-contrastive statement.
The final three figures (Figures 10 to 12) show pitch curves for the dialogue below:
Speaker A: I'm really worried about my GRADE.
Speaker B: You SHOULDn't be. You're NOT gonna fail.
Speaker A: I AM gonna fail.
Speaker B: I think you'll do oKAY.
Speaker A: I HOPE I'll do okay.
The features of note in this dialogue are the varying positions of the sentence stresses, which is
representative of conversations. The flaw in many earlier discussions of intonation, both within linguistics
proper and in applied linguistics, was that sentence-level intonation was analyzed and taught in terms of
where sentence stress typically occurs in a particular language, so stresses were indicated and learners
were given isolated sentences to practice, You're not gonna FAIL or I hope I'll do oKAY. But as is being
shown in conversation analysis, natural discourse exhibits anything but "default" intonational patterns,
and L2 learners must be made aware early on of how stress, emphasis, contrast, and illocutionary speech
are expressed in the L2. As Kelm (1987) found, native speakers of Spanish do not use pitch and intensity
to contrast words to the same degree that native English speakers do.
Speaker A:
I'm really worried about my GRADE.
Speaker B:
You SHOULDn't be.
Figure 10.
Dorothy M. Chun Signal Analysis Software For Teaching Discourse Intonation
Language Learning & Technology 86
 
Speaker A:
You're NOT gonna fail.
Speaker B:
I AM gonna fail.
Figure 11.
Speaker A:
I think you'll do oKAY.
Speaker B:
I HOPE I'll do okay.
Figure 12.
The examples above, though not extrapolated from authentic speech, demonstrate that sentence stress
does not occur in a relatively fixed position towards the end of the utterance in English. Rather, based on
the surrounding context, the speaker makes decisions about what word to stress and what attitude or
intention to express. In addition to the discourse-level decisions, learners must also be made aware of
sociolinguistic and sociocultural differences in intonation, so that they can practice using appropriate
pitch ranges and pitch patterns in the L2. This leads to the next consideration in the development of
discourse intonation software, namely, providing learners with ample authentic input so that they can
develop their perceptual along with their productive abilities.
Dorothy M. Chun Signal Analysis Software For Teaching Discourse Intonation
Language Learning & Technology 87
2. Provide learners with authentic and extensive speech and cultural input to hone learners'
perceptual abilities.
Although the examples presented above were taken from constructed dialogues, authentic speech should
be used when possible in later instructional units. For example, short conversations between native
speakers can be taken from corpora such as the Corpus of Spoken English (CSE); they can then be pitch
tracked and presented to learners. To as great an extent as feasible, conversations with as few voiceless
segmentals as possible should be selected. Learners would first do a very close listening and analysis, that
is, listen to the conversation or selected parts thereof multiple times as well as view the intonation curves.
They would be told which acoustic intonational features to focus on (e.g., male-female differences in
pitch patterns or pitch range). Alternatively, they would be presented with utterances and asked to
determine the nuance or attitude being expressed. Following the perception training activities, they would
be asked to practice these utterances by recording themselves and comparing their pitch tracks to those of
the native models. Finally, they would be asked to role-play a conversation or an interaction with a
partner on a similar topic. They would record themselves, pitch track their utterances and note the
direction of pitch changes, on which syllable the pitch changes occurred, the steepness of the pitch falls
and rises, as well as the overall pitch range used. If their natural speech contained a great deal of voiceless
sounds, the pitch curves might contain many breaks, unless a system such as the one described by Spaai
and Hermes (1993) were being used. If they did not have access to such a system, they would need to
have their instructor listen to their conversation and provide feedback and guidance. Although this points
to a definite limitation of current speech analysis systems, natural discourse should still be encouraged,
and instructors will have to provide the definitive feedback.
3. Design software to facilitate, record, and analyze interactions between speakers.
As suggested in the section above, due to the importance of having natural discourse as the target input
and output, software should present authentic speech samples within their cultural contexts and call
learners' attention to important intonational features. The second component of the software should
contain suggested activities for learners to interact and converse in pairs. Thirdly, the software should
provide tools for the learners to record their utterances, pitch track them, and view visual representations
of their pitch curves. These features are admittedly quite extensive and require sophisticated
implementation, but they address the deficiencies in previous software and also support all of the recent
attention in our field on the discourse-level linguistic and cultural aspects of language learning.
4. Build research tools into the software to record students' performance, progress, and attempts at
self correction.
In addition to providing audio and visual feedback to learners of their intonation patterns and to having
them engage in dialogue with each other, computer software can simultaneously serve as a data collector.
A database for each speaker--assuming adequate hard drive space or storage capacity on peripheral
devices--can be compiled. Utterances produced by learners can be ordered chronologically and compared
for progress over time. Research studies can be designed to address a number of questions, for example,
(a) to compare the effects of providing only visual feedback, only audio feedback, only descriptive
contrastive feedback, or different combinations of the above three types of feedback; (b) to test the
relationship between perception and production; and (c) to assess the long-term effects of intonation
training using different types of feedback and using both perception and production exercises.
CONCLUSION
The main goals of this paper have been, first, to review the literature on previous studies of intonation
training with computers, and second, to offer reasons for the mixed results of the effectiveness of such
training. The limitations of earlier software and technical difficulties as well as certain pedagogical
deficiencies were pointed out. Third, it was suggested that the critical next step pedagogically is to
Dorothy M. Chun Signal Analysis Software For Teaching Discourse Intonation
Language Learning & Technology 88
integrate signal analysis capabilities with current linguistic and applied linguistic principles of focusing
on discourse-level language use. Four critical components to be implemented in future pronunciation
teaching tools were proposed, but this is not a simple task. Although the technology and emerging
software are continually and rapidly improving, some aspects are still limited when it comes to analyzing
natural speech. In addition, intonation in authentic, spontaneous conversation is also not fully understood.
However, using multimedia software for the purposes of perceiving and practicing discourse intonation
places one on the cutting edge of an important aspect of second language acquisition, both from a
pedagogical as well as from a research perspective. One definite advantage of using technology for
intonation training is that concurrent research can be conducted into how prosody in L2 is acquired
(through extensive data collection and analysis), as well as into how signal analysis software can facilitate
this aspect of phonological acquisition (through testing the effectiveness of visualization and different
types of feedback).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank the two anonymous reviewers for their excellent and very helpful comments on an
earlier version of the paper.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Dorothy M. Chun, Ph.D. University of California, Berkeley, is Associate Professor of German at the
University of California, Santa Barbara. Her main research areas are discourse intonation, second
language acquisition, and computer-assisted language learning. She is completing a book on discourse
intonation and is co-author of two multimedia readers, CyberBuch and Ciberteca.
E-mail: dmchun@humanitas.ucsb.edu
REFERENCES
Abberton, E., & Fourcin, A. J. (1975). Visual feedback and the acquisition of intonation. In E. H.
Lenneberg, & E. Lenneberg (Eds.), Foundations of Language Development (pp. 157-165). New York:
Academic Press.
Anderson-Hsieh, J. (1994). Interpreting visual feedback on suprasegmentals in computer assisted
pronunciation instruction.  CALICO Journal, 11(4), 5-22.
Anderson-Hsieh, J. (1992). Using electronic visual feedback to teach suprasegmentals. System, 20, 51-62.
Bolinger, D. (1986). Intonation and its parts. Palo Alto: Stanford University Press.
Bowen, J. D. (1975). Patterns of English pronunciation. New York: Newbury House.
Brazil, D. (1975). Discourse intonation I. Birmingham: English Language Research Monographs.
Broselow, E., Hurtig, R. R., & Ringen, C. (1987). The perception of second language prosody. In G. Ioup,
& S. H. Weinberger (Eds.), Interlanguage phonology: The acquisition of a second language sound system
(pp 350-364). Cambridge, MA: Newbury House.
Brown, G., Currie, K. L., & Kenworthy, J. (1980). Questions of intonation. London: Helm.
Canale, M., & Swain, M. (1980). Theoretical bases of communicative approaches to second language
teaching and testing. Applied Linguistics, 1, 1-47.
Chaudron, C. (1985). Intake: On models and methods for discovering learners' processing of input.
Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 7, 1-14.
Dorothy M. Chun Signal Analysis Software For Teaching Discourse Intonation
Language Learning & Technology 89
Chun, D. M. (1988). The neglected role of intonation in communicative competence and proficiency.
Modern Language Journal, 72, 295-303.
Chun, D. M. (1991). The state of the art in teaching pronunciation. In J. E. Alatis (Ed.), Georgetown
University Round Table on Languages and Linguistics 1991 - Linguistics and language pedagogy: The
state of the art (pp. 179-193). Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press.
Couper-Kuhlen, E., & Selting, M. (Eds.). (1996). Prosody in conversation. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
de Bot, K. (1981). Intonation teaching and pitch control. ITL Review of Applied Linguistics, 52, 31-42.
de Bot, K. (1983). Visual feedback of intonation I: Effectiveness and induced practice behavior.
Language and Speech, 26(4), 331-350.
de Bot, K., & Mailfert, K. (1982). The teaching of intonation: Fundamental research and classroom
applications.  TESOL Quarterly, 16, 71-77.
Esling, J. H. (1992). Speech technology systems in applied linguistics instruction. In M. C. Pennington, &
V. Stevens (Eds.), Computers in applied linguistics: An international perspective (pp. 244-272).
Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Feldman, D. M. (1973). Measuring auditory discrimination of suprasegmental features in Spanish. IRAL,
11, 195-209.
Feldman, D. M. (1977). Instrumental methods for the teaching of English pronunciation. In H. P. Kelz
(Ed.), Phonetische Grundlagen der Ausspracheschulung, Hamburg: Buske.
Felix, S. W. (1978). Linguistische Untersuchungen zum natürlichen Zweitsprachenerwerb. München:
Wilhelm Fink.
Fidelman, C., & Keller, E. (1994). SpeechLab [Computer Program]. Charlestown, MA: Agora Language
Marketplace.
Fischer, L. B. (1986). The use of audio/visual aids in the teaching and learning of French. Pine Brook, NJ:
Kay Elemetrics Corporation.
Hengstenberg, P. (1980). Suprasegmentalia und Aspekte ihrer Vermittlung in sprachlichen Lehr- und
Lernprozessen. Tübingen.
Hurley, D. S. (1992). Issues in teaching pragmatics, prosody, and non-verbal communication. Applied
Linguistics, 13(3), 259-281.
James, E. (1976). The acquisition of prosodic features of speech using a speech visualizer. IRAL, 14(3),
227-243.
James, E. (1977). The acquisition of second language intonation using a visualizer. Canadian Modern
Language Review, 33(4), 503-506.
James, E. (1979). Intonation through visualization. In H. Hollien, & P. Hollien (Eds.), Current Issues in
the Phonetic Sciences Vol. IV, Amsterdam Studies in the Theory and History of Linguistic Science (pp.
295-301). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Keller, E. (1988). Signalyze [Computer Program]. Lausanne: InfoSignal, Inc.
Kelm, O. R. (1987). An acoustic study on the differences of contrastive emphasis between native and
non-native Spanish speakers. Hispania, 70, 627-633.
Kramsch, C. (Ed.). (1995). Redefining the boundaries of language study. Boston: Heinle and Heinle.
Dorothy M. Chun Signal Analysis Software For Teaching Discourse Intonation
Language Learning & Technology 90
Lambrecht, K. (1994). Information structure and sentence form. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lane, H., & Buiten, R. (1969). A self-instructional device for conditioning accurate prosody. In A.
Valdman (Ed.), Trends in language teaching (pp. 159-174). New York.
Leather, J. (1983). Second-language pronunciation learning and teaching. Language Teaching, 16, 198-
219.
Leon, P., & Martin, P. (1972). Applied linguistics and the teaching of intonation. Modern Language
Journal, 56, 139-44.
Lieberman, P. (1986). The acquisition of intonation by infants: Physiology and neural control. In C.
Johns-Lewis (Ed.),  Intonation in discourse (pp. 239-257). London: Croom Helm.
Loveday, L. (1981). Pitch, politeness and sexual role: An exploratory investigation into the pitch
correlates of English and Japanese politeness formulae. Language and Speech, 24, 71-89.
Luthy, M. J. (1983). Nonnative speakers' perceptions of English "nonlexical" intonation signals.
Language Learning, 33(1), 19-36.
Molholt, G. (1988). Computer-assisted instruction in pronunciation for Chinese speakers of American
English. TESOL Quarterly, 22(1), 91-111.
Morley, J. (1991). The pronunciation component in teaching English to speakers of other languages.
TESOL Quarterly, 25(3), 481-520.
Pennington, M. C. (1989a). Teaching languages with computers: The state of the art.. La Jolla: Athelstan.
Pennington, M. C. (1989b). Teaching pronunciation from the top down. RELC Journal, 20, 20-38.
Pennington, M. C., & Richards, J. C. (1986). Pronunciation revisited. TESOL Quarterly, 20(2), 207-225.
Piper, A. (1986). Conversation and the computer: A study of conversational spin-off generated among
learners of English as a foreign language working in groups. System, 14(2), 187-98.
Purcell, E., & Suter, R. (1980). Predictors of pronunciation accuracy: A reexamination. Language
Learning, 30, 271-287.
Richards, J. C. (1986). Focus on the learner. University of Hawai'i Working Papers in ESL, 5, 61-86.
Scovel, T. (1988). A time to speak: A psycholinguistic inquiry into the critical period for human speech.
Cambridge, MA: Newbury House.
Spaai, G. W. G., & Hermes, D. J. (1993). A visual display for the teaching of intonation. CALICO
Journal, 10(3), 19-30.
'T Hart, J., & Collier, R. (1975). Integrating different levels of intonation analysis. Journal of Phonetics,
3, 235-55.
van Bezooijen, R. (1995). Sociocultural aspects of pitch differences between Japanese and Dutch women.
Language and Speech, 38(3), 253-265.
Van Els, T., & de Bot, K. (1987). The role of intonation in foreign accent. Modern Language Journal, 71,
147-155.
Vardanian, R. M. (1964). Teaching English through oscilloscope displays. Language Learning, 3/4, 109-
118.
Weltens, B., & de Bot, K. (1984). Visual feedback of intonation II: Feedback delay and quality of
feedback. Language and Speech, 27(1), 79-88.
Dorothy M. Chun Signal Analysis Software For Teaching Discourse Intonation
Language Learning & Technology 91
Wennerstrom, A. (1994). Intonational meaning in English discourse: A study of non-native speakers.
Applied Linguistics, 15(4), 399-420.
Wennerstrom, A. (1998). Intonation as cohesion in academic discourse: A study of Chinese speakers of
English. Studies in Second Language Acquisition 20, 1-25.
Wichern, P. (1979). Visuele terugmelding als hulpmiddel bij het aanleren van onbeende
intonatieverlopen. Nijmegen: Intern Rapport Instituut Fonetiek.
Wichern, P. U. M., & Boves, L. (1980). Visual feedback of Fo curves as an aid in learning intonation-
contours.  Proceedings Institute of Phonetics Nijmegen, 4, 53-63.
Young, R. (1988). Computer-assisted language learning conversations: Negotiating an outcome. CALICO
Journal, 5(3), 65-83.
