Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num1/review/review4.html 
July 1999, Volume 3, Number 1 
pp. 27-34 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
Copyright © 1999, ISSN 1094-3501 27 
REVIEW OF UN MISTERIO EN TOLUCA 
Title: Un Misterio en Toluca 
Authors: Walter C. Oliver and Terri J. Nelson. 
Distributor: Heinle & Heinle Publishers 
Contact 
information: 
20 Park Plaza 
Boston, MA 02116 
Voice: 800-237-0053 or 617-451-1940 
Fax: 617-426-4379 
E-mail: reply@heinle.com 
Program 
information: 
Dual platform CD-ROM. 
Student CD contains introduction, vocabulary list, limited 
grammatical information, guidelines 
Instructor's CD contains web materials necessary for use. 
System 
requirements: 
Macintosh: 
8 MB RAM, 9 MB disk space, System 7.0 or higher, 256 color 
monitor 
Windows: 
486 processor, 8 MB RAM, 9 MB disk space, VGA 256 color 
monitor, Win 3.0 or Win 95 
Additional 
requirements: 
Website with at least 25.4 MB available space 
Participants must have email and internet access 
Price: Student CD: $14.95 
Instructor CD: free upon adoption 
No restrictions on repeated use of Instructor CD. 
Support: Toll-free support for problems related to materials themselves. 
No support for publishing materials to website or for the addition of 
links. 
Target audience: College classroom learners of Spanish at or above intermediate level 
Reviewed by Jennifer Leeman Un Misterio en Toluca 
Language Learning & Technology 28 
Reviewed by Jennifer Leeman, Georgetown University 
OVERVIEW 
Misterio en Toluca (henceforth MeT) is a set of Web-based materials for a role play activity designed for 
use with intermediate level Spanish courses. In contrast to stand-alone software packages which can be 
used for individual self-paced study, MeT relies on and requires the participation of at least seven 
learners. While the instructor's manual emphasizes that the MeT Web site includes "a rich variety of realia 
and links to information about Spanish speaking countries found on the World Wide Web," the heart of 
the program is a semi-structured murder mystery in which each participant plays the role of a fictional 
character in the real Mexican city of Toluca. Participants communicate with each other via e-mail and use 
the information revealed by their classmates, together with various types of simulated evidence found on 
the website, to try to determine who killed Dolores Acevedo, found dead at the outset of the activity. The 
activity is divided into four rounds. At the beginning of each round, participants are provided with more 
information about their characters and additional evidence is made available on the Web site. The authors 
estimate that the entire activity takes 10 weeks to complete within the following time frame: one week for 
the training and exploration, two weeks for each round, and one week for the conclusion. 
DESCRIPTION 
The Instructor's CD contains the bulk of the MeT program, including the Web-based materials (HTML 
documents and associated images), e-mail to be sent to participants during the course of the activity (in 
text and RTF formats), checklists to facilitate smooth management of the mystery, a few student 
exercises, and the instructor's manual. The Student CD contains only a brief introduction to the mystery, 
some grammar explanations, a few templates for summarizing information, and instructions for using 
Eudora and Netscape. Although participants do need an e-mail account and a Web browser, any 
application will work. 
In order to use the program, the Web-based materials must be published on the instructor's own Web site. 
This requires a basic knowledge of FTP (or access to technical support) and 25.4 MB of available space. 
In order to limit access to students enrolled in the course, Heinle & Heinle stipulates that all MeT 
directories must be password-protected, which can usually be arranged through institutional network 
support services. Materials for each of the four rounds must either be protected by different passwords to 
be distributed to participants at the beginning of the corresponding round, or published on the Web site at 
the appropriate time. 
At the outset of MeT each participant is assigned a character to play throughout the mystery. Suggestions 
for character assignments are provided in the instructor's manual. The instructor assumes the role of 
Inspectora Gaudí who is in charge of investigating the murder and is thus an active participant in the role 
play. 
After connecting to the MeT Web site (now residing on the instructor's Web site) and passing the 
introductory page, users are presented with the main menu (Indice de materias) from which they can 
choose to view a stylized map of Toluca, where the mystery takes place, a general help file with 
explanations of the pages and icons used on the Web site, a list of topics for which external Web sites can 
be accessed (e.g., sports, medicine, transportation), or a round-specific page with a map and links to all 
Web-based evidence available thus far. 
Reviewed by Jennifer Leeman Un Misterio en Toluca 
Language Learning & Technology 29 
Figure 1. Indice de materias 
Reviewed by Jennifer Leeman Un Misterio en Toluca 
Language Learning & Technology 30 
Figure 2. Stylized map of Toluca 
By clicking on a building, learners can view photographs of actual locations in Toluca and other cities in 
Mexico, accompanied by brief cultural explanations (e.g., participants are informed that bus travel is more 
common in Mexico than train travel) and sometimes by a list of suggested topics for discussion or 
research. In addition, some buildings have an associated section entitled "Explore the World" (Explorar el 
mundo) with a few links to related external Web sites. For example, clicking on the restaurant's "Explore 
the World" option brings up links to external Web sites with information about Latin American and 
Spanish cuisines. 
At the beginning of each round, participants go to the corresponding page and read the new evidence, 
beginning with a simulated article from the fictional Sol de Toluca newspaper which informs them of 
recent plot developments. 
Reviewed by Jennifer Leeman Un Misterio en Toluca 
Language Learning & Technology 31 
Figure 3. Fictional newspaper, El Sol de Toluca 
The newspaper articles have links to all available evidence (with new information clearly marked), and 
the first page for each round has an updated map of Toluca on which locations also contain links to 
evidence found there. Such evidence consists of a variety of written documents, including police reports, 
an autopsy, a will, a daily planner, and a prescription for medication. These are often image files, and in 
all cases an attempt has been made to simulate the format and discursive style of real-life equivalents. 
Reviewed by Jennifer Leeman Un Misterio en Toluca 
Language Learning & Technology 32 
Figure 4. Example of evidence, a prescription for medicine 
Participants use the information from the Web site as well as clues that only they have access to 
(individually distributed by the instructor at the outset of each round) to query other characters via a 
distribution list or listserve so that all participants receive all such queries and responses about their 
relationship with the victim, alibis, and motives. Although the Web materials, character descriptions, and 
major plot elements are predetermined by the program, participants are encouraged to be creative in their 
development of the character. 
The authors envision that e-mail interaction will take place outside of class, with students sending 
between 10 and 30 messages in each of the four rounds. However, they suggest that instructors 
supplement this written interaction with in-class speaking and listening activities such as simulated 
interrogations or news reports. Although not discussed by the authors, much of the interaction designed to 
be carried out by e-mail could also be done orally in class. After the completion of the fourth round, 
participants are expected to create a final project summarizing the facts of the case. Recommended 
projects include a videotaped news report, a newspaper that includes original articles about the case, and a 
written accusation of a character with supporting arguments. 
EVALUATION 
One particularly innovative aspect of MeT is that although all evidence and characters are simulated, the 
interaction among participants is real in the sense that they communicate as they see fit, rather than 
simply choosing from a list of predetermined options as in the case of many simulations (e.g., 
Reviewed by Jennifer Leeman Un Misterio en Toluca 
Language Learning & Technology 33 
Montevidisco by Larson & Bush, 1997). Within the general confines of the plot, learners can create their 
own meanings, and they must participate in two-way information exchanges with other learners. Such 
interactions, in which all participants have information which must be shared with others, are believed to 
promote second language acquisition (Pica, Kanagy, & Falodun, 1993). Moreover, interaction with real 
people (albeit people who are also playing roles) may be more motivating for learners than simulated 
interaction with virtual interlocutors (e.g., Learn to Speak Spanish 7.0). In addition, the collaborative 
nature of MeT may promote camaraderie among students and facilitate the integration of computer-based 
work with in-class activities. 
The fact that MeT requires group participation and that the e-mail interaction is largely open-ended, also 
has some disadvantages in comparison with software designed for individual use. For one, learners cannot 
work at their own pace but instead must keep up with, or wait for, the rest of the group. In addition, while 
participants may engage in negotiation of meaning as a result of the need to share information (Long, 
1996), there is no systematic feedback built into the program, as there often is in programs with limited 
student output. Thus the instructor and/or other participants must provide all evaluation and feedback for 
student production. 
Furthermore, the unvarying comprehension-based components of MeT (i.e., online evidence and cultural 
materials) are not accompanied by any on-line help or elaboration features. While some grammar 
explanations, vocabulary lists, and a general help file are included, there are no direct links to these 
features from relevant sections. A more effective use of hypermedia would provide contextualized help 
and would allow users to click on a word or sentence for lexical or grammatical annotations or other 
supporting materials (Lomicka, 1998; Roby, 1999). 
Nonetheless, the task-based nature of the entire activity, in which the overall goal is to solve the mystery, 
does offer a concrete means by which to incorporate email-based communication into the curriculum. 
While there is much discussion about the benefits of utilizing email to increase second language 
interaction and written production outside of class (e.g., González-Bueno, 1998), instructors are often 
hard-pressed to find appropriate means of promoting such interaction. Even when e-mail discussion lists 
are established, learners and instructors may not know what to communicate about. By providing a need 
to share information in each round, MeT offers a meaningful context for interaction as well as concrete 
topics to discuss. SLA researchers could also utilize this prefabricated context as the basis for 
communicative language use by L2 speakers of Spanish in order to avoid having to design all their own 
research materials. Possible studies for which MeT would be useful include comparisons of the quantity 
and quality of feedback and negotiation in oral versus email interaction, explorations of the effects of 
various types of feedback on L2 development, and investigations of the use of past tense verbs in Spanish. 
Just as the role play combines real interaction with fictional characters and documents, other components 
of MeT demonstrate an attempt to integrate the simulation within the real world. Locations in Toluca 
have photographs of actual buildings, and many include links to Web sites publicly available on the 
Internet. The authors have clearly made an attempt to include only more stable sites; however, even these 
may become outdated. Instructors are encouraged to add additional links to the MeT Web pages within 
the supplied guidelines. Unfortunately, there are no concrete suggestions for how to use the links 
provided, and the cultural commentaries (some in English, some in Spanish) are extremely brief. For 
example, the Frida Kahlo Museum (not really located in Toluca) does not contain any information about 
the painter or any links to any images of her art (e.g., http://www.cascade.net/kahlo.html, 
http://members.aol.com/fridanet/kahlo.htm, 
http://www.artsednet.getty.edu/ArtsEdNet/Resources/Maps/kahlo.html). Similarly, suggested topics for 
discussion and research are not accompanied by links to resources containing relevant information. 
Although the Web site is completely functional (i.e., all links work properly), some technical aspects of 
MeT leave room for improvement. Navigation can be cumbersome: there is no button on the main 
Reviewed by Jennifer Leeman Un Misterio en Toluca 
Language Learning & Technology 34 
navigation bar to return to the main menu, not all icons are clear, and external links cannot be accessed 
directly from the page on which they are summarized; users must instead visit the specific buildings 
associated with each topic. In addition, there are numerous typographical errors (in both Spanish and 
English) as well as some grammatical errors. Finally, on the Student CD, participants are informed that 
Toluca is in Spain instead of Mexico. 
SUMMARY 
MeT offers instructors a structured means by which to incorporate e-mail-based interaction into Spanish 
courses. The lack of specific content- or form-focused activities, explanations, and feedback means that 
instructors will likely want to create their own supplements to the program. In addition, if instructors are 
to evaluate student participation and be active participants in the role play, they will have to spend a 
considerable amount of time reading MeT-related e-mail. Nonetheless, the amount of work required is 
considerably less than would be the case were a similar activity to be created from scratch. Similarly, 
while cultural commentaries and suggested ways to use external links are sparse, the use of MeT does 
provide a context for the incorporation of additional materials and discussions. For instructors willing and 
able to supplement the materials furnished, MeT provides a fun, on-going activity for students at or above 
the intermediate level. Moreover, the emphasis on group interaction, in contrast with software programs 
that are designed for individual use, makes Un Misterio en Toluca attractive for use with language 
classes. 
REFERENCES 
(1998). Learn to Speak Spanish (Version 7.0). Cambridge, MA: The Learning Company. 
González-Bueno, M. (1998). The effects of electronic mail on Spanish L2 discourse. Language Learning 
& Technology 1(2), 50-65. Retrieved July 1, 1999 from the World Wide Web: 
http://polyglot.cal.msu.edu/llt/vol1num2/article3/default.html 
Larson, J. W., & Bush, C. D. (1997). Montevidisco. Provo, UT: Brigham Young University. 
Lomicka, L. L. (1998). "To gloss or not to gloss": An investigation of reading comprehension online. 
Language Learning & Technology, 1(2), 41-50. Retrieved July 1, 1999 from the World Wide Web: 
http://polyglot.cal.msu.edu/llt/vol1num2/article2/default.html 
Long, M. H. (1996). The role of the linguistic environment in second language acquisition. In W. C. 
Ritchie & T. K. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of Second Language Acquisition (Vol. 26, pp. 413-468). San 
Diego, CA: Academic Press. 
Pica, T., Kanagy, R., & Falodun, J. (1993). Choosing and using communication tasks for second language 
instruction. In G. Crookes & S. M. Gass (Eds.), Tasks and Language Learning: Integrating Theory & 
Practice (pp. 9-34). Clevedon, England: Multilingual Matters. 
Roby, W. B. (1999). What's in a gloss? Language Learning & Technology, 2(2), 94-101. Retrieved July 
1, 1999 from the World Wide Web: http://polyglot.cal.msu.edu/llt/vol2num2/roby/index.html 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Jennifer Leeman is a Ph.D. candidate in Spanish Applied Linguistics at Georgetown University. Her 
research interests include input and interaction in SLA, computer-assisted language learning, and 
representations of "foreign culture" in language teaching materials. 
E-mail: leemanj@gusun.georgetown.edu 
