Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num1/net/index.html 
July 1999, Volume 3 Number 1 
pp. 3-11 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 1999, ISSN 1094-3501 3 
ON THE NET 
Interactive Language Exercises on the Web: 
An Exemplar 
Jean W. LeLoup  
SUNY Cortland  
Robert Ponterio 
SUNY Cortland  
 
In an earlier column of LL&T, we discussed the rationale for using the World Wide Web (WWW) and 
multimedia materials (cf. Using WWW Multimedia in the Foreign Language Classroom: Is This for 
Me?).  For those who wish to undertake the development of multimedia materials, instructions can be 
found in many places on the Web, and the references in the latter article are a good starting place. But for 
those foreign language (FL) teachers who agree with the idea of using interactive materials and the Web 
to enhance their FL instruction but have neither the time nor the inclination to delve into materials 
development, take heart. Other FL educators have, indeed, made this a priority and many do share their 
creations on the Web. 
The WWW provides a wonderful venue for interactive language learning activities that can serve 
instructional, enrichment, and review purposes. The present column will describe in detail one such site as 
an exemplar of different types of interactive activities that language learners can use to assist them in 
learning the target language (TL).  A discussion of some of the technical aspects of this site is also 
included so that the reader can better appreciate what goes on "behind the scenes" of many Web pages. 
 
 
 
The site is hosted by Ursinus College and begins with an introduction and statement of purpose by the 
author, Juan Ramón de Arana. His main purpose is to provide a variety of "language exercises for the 
purpose of facilitating the learning and teaching of Spanish in the Internet environment" and to present 
"different approaches to common language challenges for the foreign student of Spanish." Nevertheless, 
this site serves as an example to all FL educators for WWW interactivity and language instruction and 
learning. 
The site contains seven different sections: Introduction, News, Instructor check exercises, Self check 
exercises, FAQs, Comments, and a Copyright proviso.  These sections are indicated by and accesible via 
the menu bar at the bottom of the initial frame:  
 
 
Jean W. LeLoup and Robert Ponterio On the Net: Interactive Language Exercises on the Web:… 
 
Language Learning & Technology Journal 4 
The author has made a conscientious effort to illustrate his purpose, outline the steps he has taken in 
constructing this site, justify his choice of activities and subject areas, answer commonly asked questions, 
provide access to as many learners and instructors as possible, and solicit input in order to improve the 
site. 
 
In this section, the author ennumerates the many updates and corrections that have been made to the site 
during its existence.  Many of the changes are due to comments submitted by on-line users.  The 
chronological order of the improvements is helpful to a frequent user, who can readily identify a new 
addition to the site by the date listed.  
 
The Instructor Check Exercises are extensive, covering 27 different grammar points and vocabulary items 
in a variety of formats.  The language points are presented in a table format that indicates the title of the 
activity, the language area treated, and a description of the activity, including the number of external links 
present to aid in completing the activity. 
 
The exercises use a wide range of formats (please see the section on "The Technology" for a more 
detailed explanation of several of these formats): cloze for production of vocabulary and verb 
conjugations; pull-down menus for recognition of grammar points, dialogues and short stories with fill-in 
Jean W. LeLoup and Robert Ponterio On the Net: Interactive Language Exercises on the Web:… 
 
Language Learning & Technology Journal 5 
blanks; authentic materials (texts, maps, audio files); and a PowerPoint presentation on the seasons. 
Students are asked to understand TL texts and their content, identify and produce corrrect grammatical 
answers, compose letters and valentines and short stories.  Each of the activities has a provision for 
students to send their work to the particular professor assigning the task for correction. Students can also 
receive a copy of their own  responses for later verification and correction.  
 
This section is meant mainly for self-review. The user may choose from a straight Web page format or 
from a frames configuration that lists the grammar points and subject matter in a menu tree along the left 
hand side of the page. The straight Web page format provides a table with title, directory and language 
area, and description of the activity (similar to the Instructor check exercises): 
 
 
 
The frame option provides a menu tree that lists the various topics, grammatical points, and vocabulary 
exercises:  
Jean W. LeLoup and Robert Ponterio On the Net: Interactive Language Exercises on the Web:… 
 
Language Learning & Technology Journal 6 
 
 
This section also offers some activities incorporating art and literature. Notably, Goya, Picasso, Sorolla, 
and Velázquez are treated in the portion on art. In the literature section, a sonnet by Garcilaso de la Vega 
is featured, along with interpretive exercises and a syllabification task. Lazarillo de Tormes is the subject 
of another series of activities.  
Jean W. LeLoup and Robert Ponterio On the Net: Interactive Language Exercises on the Web:… 
 
Language Learning & Technology Journal 7 
 
 
 
The FAQ (Frequently Asked Questions) section is a helpful addition to the site and will answer most 
queries a user might have. As always, the author has included an additional provision for contacting him 
with any other questions that might arise:  
 
 
 
Jean W. LeLoup and Robert Ponterio On the Net: Interactive Language Exercises on the Web:… 
 
Language Learning & Technology Journal 8 
 
The final portion of the site is a section on copyright. This is particularly important as the Internet has 
made it even easier for people to "borrow" large portions of others' work and labors and present it without 
proper documentation or credit. The author here is merely requesting that users abide by fair use 
practices, give credit where credit is due, and adhere to the spirit in which these pages were created: 
educational enhancement, improvement to FL instruction and learning, and no commercial use. The 
copyright notice on this site was adapted from that of Institute for Learning Technologies at Columbia 
University. 
The Technology Behind the Site  
Sites like this one require a considerable amount of time and effort on the part of the creator. Designing a 
site, making it freely available, and maintaining it represents a very generous contribution to the 
profession.  To give the reader an introductory idea of the work involved behind the scenes, we offer the 
following brief description of some of the technical aspects of these pages. 
The self-check exercises, touching on a wide range of grammatical topics, make good use of simple 
Javascript utilities to go beyond the basic HTML format to integrate interactive components in pages and 
allow students to receive immediate feedback. Several different types of Javascript procedures are used in 
the site, some created by the author and others borrowed from sites and software that support interactive 
WWW development. 
In many of these self-check exercises, each question uses a drop down box to give the student several 
possible choices. The Javascript utility verifies the student's selection and then tells the student the answer 
is right or explains why the answer is wrong. 
 
Although the multiple choice format of this activity, http://mld.ursinus.edu/~jarana/Ejercicios/Self-
Check/AR-verbs.html, does not permit the inclusion of open ended questions (such as those in the 
instructor-check exercises) that are much better for checking the students' ability to use the language, it 
makes excellent use of the current state of the technology and recognizes the limits of that technology for 
language teaching activities. The simple Javascript utilities are well suited to multiple choice verification, 
whereas analysis of open-ended natural language responses is more appropriately done by the teacher 
because a program capable of accomplishing this task satisfactorily (if one could even be written) would 
by its very nature be an enormous undertaking. 
The fill-in-the-blank activities make use of exact pattern matching in their Javascript infrastructure to 
determine whether or not the student's response is exactly the same as the expected answer. 
Jean W. LeLoup and Robert Ponterio On the Net: Interactive Language Exercises on the Web:… 
 
Language Learning & Technology Journal 9 
 
Even such elementary pattern matching demands a significant amount of programming to produce the 
required functionality. In the case of the sample shown above, 
http://mld.ursinus.edu/~jarana/Ejercicios/Self-Check/Prejava2.html, the Javascript program represents 
about 90% of the actual WWW page. For example, the script behind the single blank for fuimos in the 
example above is:  
function checkAnswer1(respuesta) {  
if (respuesta != "") {  
if (respuesta == "íbamos") {  
alert ("\nNo, es Pretérito: acción concluida.")  
document.forms[0].Ir.focus()  
document.forms[0].Ir.select()  
}   
else {  
if (respuesta == "fuimos") {  
alert ("\nMuy bien. Continúa.")  
document.forms[0].Salir.focus()  
}   
else {  
if (respuesta == "fui") {  
alert ('\nNo, el sujeto es "nosotros".')  
document.forms[0].Ir.focus()  
document.forms[0].Ir.select()  
}   
else {  
alert ("\nComprueba la conjugación y/o la ortografía.")  
document.forms[0].Ir.focus()  
document.forms[0].Ir.select()  
                       }  
                }  
        }  
}  
else {  
alert ("\nCompleta este espacio.")  
document.forms[0].Ir.focus()  
        }  
} 
Jean W. LeLoup and Robert Ponterio On the Net: Interactive Language Exercises on the Web:… 
 
Language Learning & Technology Journal 10 
Thus, one might say that 90% of the effort the author put into developing the page is completely hidden 
from the user.  
In a few of these activities, the Javascript utilities used to animate the pages were provided by 
Macromedia Dreamweaver. Such is the case for a relative pronoun activity, 
http://mld.ursinus.edu/~jarana/Ejercicios/Self-Check/relativos1.html, in which sentence parts move 
around the screen to illustrate pronoun placement in relative clauses. http://www.developer.com was the 
source of scripts used to animate several hangman games used for vocabulary practice, as in, for instance, 
a dentist vocabulary activity, http://mld.ursinus.edu/~jarana/Ejercicios/Self-Check/Horca1/dentista.html. 
In addition to the grammar activities, a few of these activities present literature topics, notably Lazarillo 
de Tormes,  http://mld.ursinus.edu/~jarana/Ejercicios/Self-Check/Lazarillo/, and a sonnet by Garcilaso de 
la Vega,  http://mld.ursinus.edu/~jarana/Ejercicios/Self-Check/Garcilaso/ . These pages make use of 
Dynamic HTML, primarily Layers and Cascading Style Sheets, to enhance the presentation of the text 
and an interactive vocabulary gloss.  DHTML Layers allow an area of a page to be positioned or moved 
as desired and make it possible to easily place one area of a page behind another.  In this case, the text 
scrolls across the screen from the left. Although this does not seem to be very important, it does allow 
different texts to move into one place on the page as appropriate. This may sometimes be a neater solution 
than placing text in a long page or in several smaller pages. In this way it can be easier for the student to 
navigate through a text without losing his or her place.  In addition, it allows quick changes to parts of a 
text, such as a change of color at the ends of lines of the Garcilaso verse to highlight the rhyme scheme.  
 
  
 
The use of Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) makes it possible to define the format for a particular type of 
text throughout a page.  In this case, the author has been able to format links to vocabulary glosses so the 
characters in the text do not appear underlined or colored as is usually the case for hyperlinks.  This is an 
advantage because the normal hyperlink format alters the appearance of a text and focuses too much 
attention on the link.  This may not be a problem in a text whose purpose is primarily to convey 
information, but such distractions detract from the normal process of reading a work of literature.  The 
CSS allows the links to be discreet and so not interfere with the reading of the text.  The student can find 
out if a word is glossed by passing the cursor over the word.  If the cursor changes to a hand, a gloss is 
available by clicking the mouse. 
In his site, Spanish Language Exercises, Juan Ramón de Arana has provided a creative and useful set of 
language exercises that can be used by instructors and learners alike.  He has paid attention to the current 
tenets of second language acquisition in constructing activities using authentic materials, TL input, and 
language in context.  Grammar and vocabulary are clearly at the fore, but cultural information, art, and 
literature are also present in severals activities. 
This site serves a dual purpose for FL educators.  First,  it offers ready-made activities that can be used in 
Spanish language learning by a wide variety of language learners at many different levels.  Second, it 
serves as an excellent model for those FL educators who wish to delve more into the realm of interactive 
Jean W. LeLoup and Robert Ponterio On the Net: Interactive Language Exercises on the Web:… 
 
Language Learning & Technology Journal 11 
materials development for use on the web.  We hope that Professor de Arana continues to share his efforts 
and that others follow his lead in developing similar sites on the WWW for other FLs. 
 
