Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num1/reviews/review6.html 
July 1999, Volume 3, Number 1 
pp. 39-42 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
Copyright © 1999, ISSN 1094-3501 39 
REVIEW OF CONSTRUCTING THE PARAGRAPH 
Title: Constructing the Paragraph 
Publisher: Computers for Education 
System 
requirements: 
Macintosh Version number: 3/98 
Minimal 
hardware 
requirements: 
Any Mac with 2.2 MB free disc space 
Technical 
support: 
EHansonSmi@aol.com 
Target language: English 
Target audience: ESL learners 
Language Level: intermediate or advanced 
Price: US $100.00 for unlimited use site license 
Reviewed by Mark Peterson, Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology 
OVERVIEW 
Constructing the Paragraph is a Hyper Card stack designed to assist learners in developing their academic 
writing skills. The designers have taken an approach which focuses on the basic components of paragraph 
structure. The stack provides learners access to over 60 paragraphs which encompass both tutorial and 
exercise activities. The program may be used for self-study, pair work, or as an element of a writing 
syllabus. 
INTERFACE DESIGN 
The program presents an accessible interface that offers consistent navigational metaphors by means of an 
on-screen button bar. A link to the introductory screen is provided by a home icon which is located on 
each screen. The interface provides for simple data input and error handling. Each screen is well laid out 
and free from visual clutter. Moreover, color has been used to enhance the visual appeal of the interface. 
The designers have achieved consistency of data display, thus reducing to some extent the cognitive load 
on learners. The introductory screen is reproduced in Figure 1. 
Reviewed by Mark Peterson Constructing the Paragraph 
Language Learning & Technology 40 
Figure 1. Introductory screen 
PROGRAM STRUCTURE AND CONTENT 
The stack presents learners with 5 challenge exercises and 5 tutorials that focus on the following areas: 
 Topic sentences
 Topics and Comments
 Support sentences
 Transitions
 Ordering principles
The above activities offer logically sequenced instructional tasks arranged in order of difficulty. These 
tasks are described below. 
Challenge Exercises Each challenge exercise focuses on the central aspects of the above themes. Learners 
are provided with an on-screen text where they are requested, for example, to select the topic sentence in 
a paragraph. At the same time, learners are also encouraged to interact with the program, by selecting the 
correct response from a number of alternatives. An innovative feature of the design is the fact that 
feedback is provided to learner responses. Moreover an attempt has been made to incorporate authentic 
language in most of the exercises. Figure 2 shows a screen shot of a challenge exercise interface. 
Reviewed by Mark Peterson Constructing the Paragraph 
Language Learning & Technology 41 
Figure 2 
Tutorial Mode The tutorial activities in the stack focus on the basic principles of sentence construction. 
For example, the Topic Sentence tutorial focuses on the role and position of the topic sentence in the 
paragraph. The Topics and Comments tutorial reviews the previous tutorial and reinforces its theme by 
highlighting the role that comments play in controlling the direction of the paragraph. A similar approach 
is taken in the tutorials Support Sentences, Transitions and Ordering Principles. Each tutorial reviews the 
main points of the previous one while providing new information through the use of flow charts and 
diagrams. 
Activities Folder The program comes with an additional folder entitled Word-Processing Ideas. This 
folder contains the following collection of CALL-based writing activities: 
 An intermediate writing syllabus incorporating the Constructing the Paragraph stack
 A description of a computer-based adjective clause game
 A list of questions designed to be used with a brainstorming program entitled Writing a Character
Sketch
 Advice for students on revising essay drafts
 Brainstorming activities
 A self-evaluation form for student essays
 Interview questions designed for essay preparation
 A past tense quiz that requires students to rewrite a paragraph from the present to past tense.
 A grading rubric used in holistic grading and peer evaluation
 A list of ideas relating to the creative use of word processing software in a writing course
DISCUSSION 
Constructing the Paragraph has several major strengths. One is its use of authentic text. Extensive use is 
made of authentic text in all tutorial and challenge paragraphs. It is has great design consistency. Learners 
are presented with a consistent user interface. There is good visual clarity; each screen is free from visual 
Reviewed by Mark Peterson Constructing the Paragraph 
Language Learning & Technology 42 
clutter and the overuse of color. It uses simple visual metaphors for ease of navigation. It contains user 
friendly error handling and data input as the designers have simplified the process of data input and error 
handling. Feedback is informative and is provided in all Challenge Activities. All activities are sequenced 
in order of difficulty. In contrast to many programs, extensive supplementary activities are supplied. 
Technical support is provided by the creators of the program. It is highly reliable and the reviewer found 
it to be bug free. It is inexpensive and an outstanding value for the money. 
There are also, however, some weaknesses of the program. In the reviewer's experience, the vocabulary 
level may be challenging for some intermediate level learners. There is a lack of in-depth feedback in 
some examples. Constructing the Paragraph conforms to a rather conventional instructional design 
paradigm in which outside variables are controlled and the learner is guided through the exercises through 
a route proscribed by the designer Cole and Wilson (1996). Therefore, opportunities for exploratory 
learning are somewhat limited. 
However, a strong case may be made for adopting this design approach with regard to the teaching of 
writing. By focusing on the paragraph as the basic unit of written expression the program provides 
learners with opportunities to develop the basic skills they will require to overcome what Byrne (1988) 
has identified as one of the central problems learners face in writing: expression at a level beyond that of 
the sentence. As a well designed program, Constructing the Paragraph will doubtless find a place in many 
writing labs. 
REFERENCES 
Byrne, D. (1988). Teaching Writing Skills. London: Longman. 
Cole, P., & Wilson, B. G. (1996). Cognitive Teaching Models. Retrieved June 8, 1998 from the World 
Wide Web: http://www.cudenver.edu/~bwilson/hndbkch.html 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Mark Peterson is a faculty member at Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology. At present he 
is conducting research into the design of World Wide Web based courseware. 
E-mail: mark@jaist.ac.jp 
