Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num2/LLTFromGuestEd.html 
January 2000, Volume 3, Number 2 
pp.3-4  
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference)  
 
Copyright © 2000, ISSN 1094-3501 3 
 
 
FROM THE GUEST EDITOR 
It is with great pleasure that I introduce the first of two special millennial issues on "The 
Role of Computer Technology in Second Language Acquisition Research." While the 
articles in Language Learning & Technology generally report on research studies of how 
technology can be used to facilitate language learning, these two special issues will 
focus on how technology can facilitate second language acquisition research. Of interest 
are the unique features of computer-based or Web-based software that can elicit and 
record L2 data and that help to shed light on the processes of SLA. 
In the first article, "The use of computer technology in experimental studies of second 
language acquisition: A survey of some techniques and some ongoing studies," Jan 
Hulstijn provides an excellent overview of some of the ways in which SLA researchers 
use the computer to elicit L2 production data and to record how L2 learners process L2 
input. The multimedia computer is the ideal tool to present linguistic stimuli, both in 
spoken and in written form, and to register all reactions of learners in terms of both 
accuracy and time. The types of tasks and techniques described are typical of those used 
in the field of psychology and have had an enormous impact on the study of the 
processes of language acquisition and use, in particular, the acquisition of automaticity 
in L2 reading, writing and listening, and the use of electronic bilingual dictionaries. 
In the second article, "Insights into the construction of grammatical knowledge provided 
by user-behavior tracking technologies," Joseph Collentine reports on software that 
tracks user-behavior, in this case, for the purpose of investigating the construction of 
grammatical knowledge. The study documented the types of data sources (e.g., digital 
videos, sound files) that learners accessed in a CALL-based consciousness-raising task 
and assessed whether such interactions promote grammatical development. One of the 
underlying goals was to provide a fuller picture of the processes that affect the 
acquisition of grammatical knowledge, in this case, generating indirect speech in 
Spanish. 
In the third article, "What lexical information do L2 learners select in a CALL dictionary 
and how does it affect word retention?" Batia Laufer and Monica Hill describe an 
empirical study of EFL learners' behavior and learning outcome when using various 
types of dictionary information incorporated into a CALL program. Log files registered 
every selection of the learners, and recall data was recorded by this research tool. This 
common thread of using computer technologies for eliciting data and tracking L2 
learners' behavior is evident throughout this special issue. 
 
In the fourth article, "Web-based elicitation tasks in SLA research," Dalila Ayoun 
presents an experimental study in second language acquisition designed with Web-based 
elicitation tasks. She demonstrates how a rich set of data can be elicited by using a 
variety of Web-based tasks. The experimental tasks included some typical SLA 
grammaticality/acceptability judgment tasks and tested the acquisition of the properties 
subsumed under the verb movement parameter and the null subject parameter by English 
native speakers learning French. Ayoun suggests that the Web-based tasks allow in 
general for more versatility, for a better control of experimental variables and for richer 
data that better inform SLA processes. 
Please visit the columns in the current issue. On the Net presents Jean W. LeLoup & 
Robert Ponterio's description of Cooperative Learning Activities for the Foreign 
Language Classroom. In Emerging Technologies, Bob Godwin-Jones reports on the 
 From the Guest Editor 
 
Language Learning & Technology 4 
 
 
timely topic of Speech Technologies for Language Learning. Our book reviews feature 
Learner English on Computer and Media, Multimedia, Omnimedia: Selected Papers 
from the CETaLL Symposium and the Vth Man and the Media Symposium in Nancy. 
Our software reviews feature Reading German and LIBRA. 
 
We hope that you will find these papers inspiring and will stay tuned for the second 
issue on this topic which will appear in May 2000. 
Dorothy Chun 
Guest Editor 
  
 
