Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num2/onthenet/index.html 
January 2000, Volume 3, Number 2 
pp. 5-7 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 2000, ISSN 1094-3501 5 
ON THE NET 
 
Cooperative Learning Activities for the Foreign Language Classroom 
Jean W. LeLoup  
SUNY Cortland  
Robert Ponterio 
SUNY Cortland  
 
Diligent searching on the World Wide Web (WWW) can result in the location of pages offering language 
learning activities that are ready-made by language teachers, are freely available, and can immediately 
serve educators as instructional, enrichment, and/or review tools. The present column describes in detail 
one such site that was created by a foreign language (FL) educator in Canada who took an educational 
methodology and devised activities in concert.  Pete Jones is the Head of Modern Languages at Pine 
Ridge Secondary School in Pickering, Ontario.  Mr Jones has created a myriad of activities for use in high 
school classes, all of which have one common theoretical underpinning: Cooperative Learning. 
What is Cooperative Learning? 
Cooperative learning has been around for quite some time, and a considerable amount of research has 
been carried out demonstrating the results of its use literally across the curriculum.  Certainly the work 
and writings of Robert E. Slavin of Johns Hopkins University or David and Roger Johnson of the 
University of Minnesota are well known.  In particular, much has been written concerning Cooperative 
Learning and its effects with bilingual students in ESL/LEP classes and with foreign and second language 
learners in general.  Foreign Language teachers should consult this extant database when determining 
whether or not to embrace this educational theory in their own classrooms. The WWW can assist here 
with some sites pinpointing pertinent references: 
http://cisl.ospi.wednet.edu/CISL/Strategies/COOPLEARN.html  
 (offers cooperative learning resources from the ERIC database; many pertain to second and foreign 
language learners) 
http://www.ed.gov/offices/OERI/At-Risk/cdspubs.html#p7123  
 (lists publications and research articles on Cooperative Learning with several emphasizing language 
minority students) 
Cooperative Learning Activities for Foreign Language Learners 
Mr. Jones has taken the educational theory of Cooperative Learning and used it as the basis for several 
creative activities used successfully in his FL classrooms.  The activities are offered in a variety of 
languages (English, French, German, and Spanish) and can be easily adapted for others.  His goals (in his 
own words) in creating these activities are several: 
 
 Share with teachers materials and ideas that have worked well in the modern languages 
classroom.  
  
 Create materials and exercises which can be printed out from the different sites and used by 
teachers the very next day in their classes.  
 
Jean W. LeLoup and Robert Ponterio On the Net: Cooperative Learning Activities... 
 
Language Learning & Technology Journal 6 
 Create on-line treasure hunts on the different holiday pages, which allow teachers to integrate a 
little bit of technology in the modern language classroom. (Teachers can take their students to the 
computer lab and have them try the activities or can give them as assignments to be done at 
home.)  
 
 Have fun with language and interactive crossword puzzles, multiple choices, unscramble 
sentences and cloze activities (courtesy of the wonderful Hot Potatoes programme.)  
 
   is a series of cooperative learning jigsaws 
where fairy tale characters are put on trial. This activity can be printed out for an instant lesson plan for 
advanced language classes.  
 
Several language choices are offered.  Once on the page, one clicks on the flag for the language of choice. 
Students discuss the roles of the characters from the fairy tale and come to a verdict which must be 
justified to the class. 
 
is a cooperative reading and writing activity 
which reinforces the vocabulary and some grammar points of new units. It is adaptable to the teacher's 
particular text book. Students create sentences in pairs using the words in a grid by moving through 
adjoining cells in the grid. 
 
 is a very challenging reading comprehension activity. It must be 
adapted to the class' particular text.  Students read or listen to clues about five characters and collect 
information in a table that will later allow them to answer questions about these individuals. 
Zaubersätze is the German version of Phrases Magiques and a Die Fünf Freunde is the German version of 
Cinq Amis. 
 
Jean W. LeLoup and Robert Ponterio On the Net: Cooperative Learning Activities... 
 
Language Learning & Technology Journal 7 
 is a great class building activity that 
takes little preparation to set up. A students describes an imaginary friend to another student who in turn 
describes the friend to another, and so on. At the end of the activity we see how much the descriptions 
have changed through repetition. 
 
 is a neat way to increase student-student interaction and talk time in the 
foreign language classroom. Students work in pairs to describe someone or tell a story. All of the pairs 
talk at the same time, but only one student in the pair talks. Whenever the teacher says "Flip it!," the other 
student in the pair takes over talking.  
 
Mr. Jones also has a section devoted to holiday themes.  These pages have fun activities for language 
learners as well as links to other sites that provide a wealth of cultural information about the holidays. 
Christmas Valentines 
Easter Halloween 
Mothers Day Fathers Day 
 
The samples above do not exhaust the pages Pete Jones has created for his FL colleagues to use, including 
Sight Passages, Découvrons Le Canada, Viajes De Descubrimiento, Das Gold Der Alten Dame, Le Petit 
Nicolas, and An Activity For Remembrance Day.  They do, however, provide FL educators with a place 
to begin if they wish to incorporate Cooperative Learning in their classroom to enhance student learning.  
These pages are illustrative of the time and effort one can invest in planning creative lessons for the FL 
classroom.  Much work has already been done here for us.  FL teachers and learners will certainly benefit 
from a visit to these sites. 
