Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num2/review/review2/index.html 
January 2000, Volume 3, Number 2 
pp. 20-22 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
Copyright © 2000, ISSN 1094-3501 20 
REVIEW OF MEDIA, MULTIMEDIA, OMNIMEDIA: SELECTED PAPERS 
FROM THE CETALL SYMPOSIUM ON THE OCCASION OF THE 11th AILA 
WORLD CONGRESS IN JYVASKYLA; (FINLAND) AND THE Vth MAN AND 
THE MEDIA SYMPOSIUM IN NANCY (FRANCE) 
Media, Multimedia, Omnimedia: Selected Papers From the 
CETaLL Symposium on the Occasion of the 11th AILA World 
Congress in Jyväskylä (Finland) and the Vth Man and the Media 
Symposium in Nancy (France) 
Bayreuth Contributions to Glottodidactics Series 
Gabrielle Hogan-Brun & Udo Jung (Eds.) 
1999 
ISSN: 0721-409x 
ISBN: 3-631-33765-5 
US-ISBN: 0-8204-3625- 
US $ 40.95; DM 69.-; £ 25.-; FF 224.- 
 (paperback) 221 pp. 
Peter Lang GmbH
Europäischer Verlag der Wissenschaften 
Frankfurt am Main; Berlin; Bern; New York; Paris; Wien 1999 
http://www.peterlang.com 
Reviewed by Gerhard Wazel, IIK - Institut für Interkultirelle Kommunikation e.V. 
This book focuses on the use of modern technologies in education, business, and the home. It contains 
chapters based on symposia at two international conferences: the Commission on Educational Technology 
and Language Learning (CETaLL) Symposium on "Educational Technologies at the Crossroads," held at 
the 11th World Congress of the Association Internationale de Linguistique Appliquée (AILA) in 1996, 
and the Vth CETaLL "Man and the Media" Symposium held as part of the XIXth Congress of the 
Association des Professeurs de Langues des Instituts Universitaires de Technologie (APLIUT) in 1997. 
One attractive aspect of this book is the breadth of topics addressed. The articles explore theoretical and 
practical questions about how to incorporate modern technologies in various domains, particularly the 
teaching of modern languages, and issues related to the use of specific interactive media, including CD 
ROMs, e-mail and the Internet. In addition, the volume includes an international bibliography (compiled 
by Jung) of scientific and practical research. This valuable resource, which contains 4060 entries on 
computer assisted language learning, is sorted by author and is followed by a 681 keyword index. 
The first section emphasizes the need to combine well-established pedagogical methods with innovations, 
to make sensible and efficient use of interactive media in language teaching, and to integrate new media 
into the overall instructional design. The question of whether computer-enhanced language teaching 
methodologies are more efficient than "traditional" ones, which would require a comparison between the 
two and consequently a legitimization of one or the other, is shown to be unanswerable, as it ignores the 
interdependability of variables. This issue is discussed in the first article by M. Kenning, "Effective 
Reviewed by Gerhard Wazel Review of MEDIA, MULTIMEDIA, OMNIMEDIA:… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 21 
Language Learning and the Media: A Study of Current Theories for the Exploitation of Media 
Technology," which notes that although at present new technologies are often utilized in a teacher-guided 
environment such as classrooms and computer labs, this may not be the case in the near future, when 
learners may make greater use of technology available outside of educational institutions. 
The potential of interactive media is explored in this text by most of the 15 articles which also contain 
discussion of potential problems and drawbacks, tempering current fascination with new technologies 
with caution. The chapters are also well-balanced in terms of theory and practice. For example, the more 
general, theoretically orientated contributions in section I ("The Overall Picture") such as KenningÁs 
chapter (see above), Wolff's "Computers as Cognitive Tools in the Language Classroom," and Jung's 
historically reflective "Will the Real Ed Tech Please Stand Up?" also address practical aspects. By the 
same token, more practically focused sections II ("At the Creating End") and III ("At the User End") also 
discuss theoretical implications. 
The second section begins with first-hand accounts of pilot projects sponsored by the European Union. 
The inclusion of these chapters is especially valuable given that these projects are usually discussed only 
by relatively small teams of experts. In contrast to much professionally produced but often conceptually 
weaker software, these projects rarely receive international attention, due to limited finances and/or 
unprofessional marketing. Readers may be interested to learn that the European Commission now offers 
special workshops on marketing and distribution of theoretical findings and learning materials which have 
been gathered through EU sponsored pilot projects, and even awards grants for the evaluation of language 
programs (such as SOCRATES or LEONARDO DA VINCI. 
In their paper "TELOS Language Learning: User Needs and Telemedia Answers," Kohn and Rieder 
report on a telematics project noteworthy in part because it is based on a solid needs analysis of target 
entities. In addition, they discuss some of the potential problems associated with the current trend towards 
flexible self-study. Esch and Cleany discuss video conferencing for oral skills as well as social and 
intercultural L2 competence in their the chapter entitled "Learner Interaction and Broadband Network". 
Wittig and DavisÁ "The Enigma of Kaspar Hauser: A Multimedia Approach" and BoyleÁs "Language 
Comprehension and Staged Increase of Audio Visual Support" focus on regional interests (literature and 
geography) in language learning and explore the use of the multisensoric and dynamically self-
determined potential of the new media. Both authors discuss the value of learner-oriented, high quality 
multimedia materials, which can be enhanced by instructor contributions in the form of texts, exercises, 
and so on. Davies' chapter "Integrating the Internet" reports on Swedish university teachers who were 
asked how they viewed the use of computers in language learning. 
 
Although the articles in the third section focus on the user/learner, they also reflect on the changing role 
of the teacher. The introduction of (often self-developed) interactive materials based on the real life tasks 
students will have to perform in their future careers places new demands on instructors. This issue is 
discussed by Hogan-Brun and Whittle in "Foreign Language Learning for Specific Purposes with 
Multimedia: New Teaching and Learning Dynamics," which concentrates on the increasing role of the 
service sector and the purpose-specific use of foreign languages in this area. In "The Contribution of the 
Web to Foreign Language Learning" by Piper and Wright, the authors discuss the dedicated use of Web 
resources and suggest that most learners use the Web only as an up-to-date library and thus require 
additional training from their instructors in order to take advantage of the Internet as a language learning 
tool. Roe shows in "Authority and the ESP Teacher in a Technological Age" the complex and 
complicated demands which foreign language teachers will have to meet in the future, in order to be 
recognized as authorities and called on as advisors by their students. In contrast to Roe's more 
philosophically driven thoughts, in "Who is in the Learning Zone," Vanderplank and Dyson analyze the 
results of a broad experiment within the LINGUA project, involving BBC broadcasts (mainly language 
learning programs). 
Reviewed by Gerhard Wazel Review of MEDIA, MULTIMEDIA, OMNIMEDIA:… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 22 
The final two articles of the anthology, "New Technologies: The Quest for Appropriateness" by 
Namenwirth and "Language Lab Multimedia Lab Future Lab" by Froehlich, critique current practice and 
offer predictions for the future. This seems appropriate in view of the polarized views held by many in 
relation to technology (blind belief on the one hand, and rejection and hostility towards technology on the 
other, especially in the education sector). Both authors claim that individual reports about successes and 
failures should be carefully analyzed in order to formulate more general and practice-relevant pedagogical 
theory. Clearly, the rapid pace of change in hardware and software, as well as in society, will affect theory 
development, in that it is exceedingly difficult to make specific recommendations based on technologies 
which are constantly in a state of flux. In fact, one drawback of the text is that many of the predictions 
and claims made at the symposia on which this book is based (1996 and 1997) have recently changed or 
been updated due to the fast pace of change in the technology area. Publication of new results and 
resources on the Internet (for example, this textÁs bibliography) is essential if we are to keep up with the 
changes. 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Gerhard Wazel is the director for research, education and vocational training at IIK Institut für 
Interkulturelle Kommunikation e.V. His research interests include didactics, applied linguistics and 
intercultural/crosscultural communication. 
E Mail: iik.ansbach@t-online.de 
An earlier version of this review appeared in Zielsprache Deutsch (3/99), a German language publication. 
