Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num2/review/review1/index.html 
January 2000, Volume 3, Number 2 
pp. 17-19 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 2000, ISSN 1094-3501                                                                                                                                                17 
Review of LEARNER ENGLISH ON COMPUTER 
Learner English on Computer 
Sylviane Granger (Ed.) 
1998 
ISBN 0-582 29883 
US approx. $30.00 (paperback) 
256 pp. 
Addison Wesley Longman 
Austin, TX, USA 
 
Reviewed by Michael Barlow, Rice University 
 
OVERVIEW 
Second language research has been dominated largely by a single issue for several years now, namely, the 
role played by UG (universal grammar) in the learning of a second language. Despite the clarity of this 
question, the results forthcoming from a considerable research effort within the field of SLA have not 
thrown much light on the multifaceted nature of L2 learning. It is, therefore, perhaps a good time to 
initiate an alternative data-driven paradigm based in part on the investigation of spoken and written 
language produced by L2 learners. The prerequisite for this alternative line of inquiry is the existence of 
thoughtfully constructed learner corpora and software tools for corpus analysis. These topics, along with 
preliminary analyses based on learner corpora and the comparison of learner corpora with native speaker 
corpora, are covered in Learner English on Computer. As Geoffrey Leech notes in the preface, "this is the 
first book devoted to the idea of collecting a corpus of the language produced by foreign language 
learners" (p. xiv) and "we may claim that the concept of a learner corpus is an idea 'whose time has 
come'" (p. xvi). While this may be an idea "whose time has come," even now, two years after the 
publication of this book, the concept of a learner corpus is still largely unknown within the SLA and 
TESL communities (especially in the U.S.). For those who want to explore this promising avenue of 
research, this volume provides a solid source of information and ideas. 
Sylviane Granger, editor of Learner English on Computer and Director of the Centre for English Corpus 
Linguistics (CECL), has also been closely involved with the creation of the International Corpus of 
Learner English (ICLE), which is featured in various articles in the volume. The volume begins with a 
preface by Geoffrey Leech and an introduction by Sylviane Granger. The main body of the book is 
divided into three sections: 
Part 1: Learner Corpus Design and Analysis 
This short first section covers the basics of learner corpus design and corpus analysis. 
In chapter 1, "The computerized learner corpus: a versatile new source of data for SLA research," to 
provide a setting to the volume, Sylviane Granger situates the use of learner corpora within the field of 
SLA research and discusses issues related to the construction of corpora. 
 
In chapter 2, "Computer tools for the analysis of learner corpora," Fanny Meunier provides a general 
overview of different kinds of corpora and approaches to text analysis, followed by descriptions of their 
relevance to the investigation of learner corpora. 
Reviewed by Michael Barlow Review of Learner English on Computer 
 
Language Learning & Technology 18 
Part II: Studies of Learner Grammar, Lexis and Discourse 
Part 2 contains a variety of case studies investigating learner lexis, discourse, and grammar, among other 
topics. This section forms the heart of the book and includes a wide range of types of learner corpora 
studies. Many of these are based on analyses at the word level: word frequencies, comparisons of words 
found in different environments, and so on. While there is also some discussion of collocations and 
prefabricated units in this section (especially in chapter 5), I would like to have seen more studies on the 
use of chunks and multi-word units by learners. However, since the ICLE is designed in such a way that 
there are 200,000 words per national subcorpus, a comprehensive study of the use of collocations by 
learners may have to wait for the construction of larger learner corpora. 
In chapter 3, "Vocabulary frequencies in advanced learner English: a cross-linguistic approach," Hakan 
Ringbom examines differences in the frequency distribution of words by NSs and NNSs showing, for 
example, that NNSs tend to overuse the verbs think, get, find, want and know. 
In chapter 4, "Overstatement in advanced learners' writing: stylistic aspects of adjective intensification," 
Gunter Lorenz discusses possible reasons for the overuse of adjective intensification by German advanced 
learners of English. 
In chapter 5, "An automated approach to the phrasicon of EFL learners," Sylvie De Cock, Sylviane 
Granger, Geoffrey Leech and Tony McEnery describe the use of automatic collocation extraction utilities 
to investigate the use of prefabricated forms by NSs and NNSs and to analyze differences in the use of 
these forms by the two groups. 
In chapter 6, "The use of adverbial connectors in advanced Swedish learners' written English,"  Bengt 
Altenberg  and Marie Tapper offer a preliminary study of advanced Swedish learners of English which 
shows an underuse of resultatives (e.g., hence) and contrastives (e.g., however). According to the authors, 
this may be related to a lack of awareness of register differences on the part of the students. 
In chapter 7, "Direct questions in argumentative student writing, Tuija Virtanen describes the frequency 
and placement of direct questions in the writing of NSs and NNSs. 
In chapter 8, "Writer/reader visibility in EFL written discourse," Stephanie Petch-Tyson examines the 
presence of the writer in the written discourse of NSs and NNSs and finds that learner writers tend to 
more overtly mark their presence in discourse through the use of I, for example. 
In chapter 9, "Automatic profiling of learner texts," Sylviane Granger and Paul Rayson report various 
results from the automatic analysis of learner corpora, including the fact that NNSs tend to overuse 
determiners, pronouns, and adverbs, and to underuse conjunctions, prepositions, and nouns. On a more 
detailed level, they note that learners often exhibit a higher use of a and a lower use of the. 
In chapter 10, "Tag sequences in learner corpora: a key to interlanguage grammar and discourse," Jan 
Aarts and Sylviane Granger make use of tagged corpora and extract tag trigram frequencies (such as 
PREP ART N) with the aim of discovering correlations between tagtrigram frequencies and different 
learner varieties.  
Part III: Pedagogical Applications of Learner Corpora 
Part 3 describes how Computer Learner Corpus (CLC) based studies can be used to improve pedagogical 
tools such as grammars, textbooks, and electronic tools. 
In chapter 11, "Comparing native and learner perspectives on English grammar: a study of complement 
clauses," Doug Biber and Randi Reppen discuss various sources of information about the target language 
available to teachers and learners, and exemplifies the use of corpus data with a discussion of the NS and 
NNS use of different kinds of complement clauses. 
Reviewed by Michael Barlow Review of Learner English on Computer 
 
Language Learning & Technology 19 
In chapter 12, "Using learners' corpus in compiling ELT dictionaries," Patrick Gillard and Adam Gatsby 
describe the use of learner corpora, and the Longman Learner Corpus in particular, in compiling 
dictionaries for language learners. 
In chapter 13, "Enhancing a writing textbook: a national perspective," Przemyslaw Kaszubski gives a 
brief description of the use of information from learner corpora to complement material in writing 
textbooks. 
In chapter 14, "Exploiting L1 and interlanguage corpora in the design of an electronic language learning 
and production environment," John Milton offers an interesting chapter showing how data from NS and 
NNS corpora can be used to create "electronic learning" experiences and writing assistants for NNS 
writers. 
In chapter 15, "Learner corpus data in the foreign language classroom: form-focused instruction and data-
driven learning," the final chapter, Sylviane Granger and Christopher Tribble provide an overview of the 
methodological issues connected with the use of corpus material in the classroom. 
Overall, Learner English on Computer provides an excellent introduction to the field of learner corpus 
analysis. I recommend the volume both as a description of a variety learner corpus projects and as a 
source of ideas for learner corpus compilation and analysis. I believe that interest in this area will 
continue to grow over the next decade and that this volume will be the main source of reference for 
studies in this area for some time to come. 
As a final comment, readers interested in Websites related to learner corpora might be interested in the list 
of learner corpora and other resources compiled by Yukio Tono, who is currently at the University of 
Lancaster. 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Michael Barlow is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Linguistics and Associate Director of the 
Center for the Study of Languages at Rice University. He has written articles on corpus linguistics and 
has created text analysis tools of different kinds. Michael Barlow's website lists a variety of resources 
related to corpora. 
