Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num1/hoven/index.html 
July 1999, Volume 3, Number 1 
pp. 73-90 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
Copyright © 1999, ISSN 1094-3501 73 
A MODEL FOR LISTENING AND VIEWING COMPREHENSION IN 
MULTIMEDIA ENVIRONMENTS 
Debra Hoven 
University of Queensland, Australia 
ABSTRACT 
This paper proposes an instructional design model appropriate for humanistic multimedia 
Computer-Enhanced Language Learning (CELL) in a self-access environment for second 
language learning through listening and viewing comprehension. The model is grounded in 
sociocultural theory, and set against a background of research into the complexities of listening 
and viewing, individual learner differences and learning styles, characteristics of self-directed and 
autonomous learning, and user-friendly instructional software design. 
INTRODUCTION 
Computers give learners freedom to work at their own pace and level, and to receive immediate and 
personalised feedback. In terms of group dynamics, they enable learners to pool their knowledge in more 
effective ways and enhance peer correction and language repair work. For this reason, the term CELL is 
used here in preference to CALL (Computer-Assisted/Aided Language Learning) to recognise the 
enhancing role that computers play in the language learning process. Humanistic elements of the use of 
computers in language learning emerge in discussions of types and techniques of learning, where CELL 
brings the real world into the classroom, makes learning more relevant, develops the learners' sense of 
responsibility, promotes non-linear and co-operative learning, helps reduce the need for a meta-language, 
and changes the role of the teacher (Batley & Freudenstein, 1991, pp. 14-16). 
From a philosophical point of view, computers have a very different role today than they did in the past. 
By taking on humanistic principles and shedding the rigidity of behaviourist approaches and associated 
programmed learning, scenarios for the use of computers in language learning can be greatly expanded. In 
sharp contrast to the criticisms levelled at language laboratories, both with and without computer 
technology, a much wider range of interaction models is now available to learners (Davies & Higgins, 
1985, pp. 35-36): 
1) Learners can choose either to correct themselves or to be corrected by the computer, the teacher,
or peers.
2) Utterances need not be fabricated, though they must still generally be pre-recorded for computer
retrieval.
3) Communication is possible either between two or more learners at the same terminal, at
geographically distant terminals, or in an interactive sense between learner and video and/or
audio (Brett, 1995; Chang & Smith, 1991; Doughty, 1991).
4) Learners can actively participate in the delivery of the lessons, their interpretation of meaning
during the activity, and the choices they make (Bright, Verano, & Cubero, 1991; Garrigues,
1991). 
5) Flexibility is limited only by the foresight of the designers of the learning packages or the
providers of the learning materials.
Debra Hoven A Model for Listening and Viewing Comprehension in  ... 
Language Learning & Technology 74 
With the extension of the presence of computers in learning environments to include computer-mediated 
communications (CMC) such as those possible using electronic mail or the Internet, we must now devise 
models for computer-enhanced pedagogy to encompass these new interlocutors (Chapelle, 1994). In 
devising such models, it is important that we keep in mind the theories and findings from mainstream 
second language (L2) pedagogy and modern theories of second language acquisition (SLA). 
Although the presence of new technology and new means of using it entail the development of new 
models, this is no reason to start completely afresh. For example, the addition of multimedia capabilities 
does not necessarily imply that a whole new set of pedagogical models needs to be devised. Rather, we 
should look to findings in more traditional areas such as classroom interaction, self-directed learning, and 
the use of audio and video in language instruction to ground our models of good practice in the areas of 
multimedia and CMC in language learning. We will look at some of these findings and explore their 
relationship with newer technology with a view toward developing a sociocultural language learning 
model that incorporates these features. 
This paper is divided into two sections: the first deals predominantly with the application of listening 
theory in the context of computer technology, and the second with aspects of a sociocultural model for 
language learning in this context. In the model proposed here, the framework for the allocation of control 
to learners is provided in the software by presenting the available language learning resources in a manner 
that is easy for them to navigate, while at the same time providing the information necessary for the 
learners to make informed decisions about their learning path (Lian & Lian, 1997). In keeping with the 
principles outlined above, this management of learning choices is improved by enabling learners to make 
informed decisions relating to their own learning using the resources contained in the software package. 
LISTENING AND VIEWING COMPREHENSION: THEORY AND APPLICATIONS 
Learners and L2 Listening Comprehension 
Earlier discussions and examinations of listening as a discrete component of language learning focused 
mainly on classifying and grading listening tasks in terms of difficulty (Fish, 1981; Nunan, 1989; 
Richards, 1983; Ur, 1984). The perception of difficulty usually resided in the difficulty of the material 
used as the content for the comprehension activities, and was often borrowed from readability measures 
for written texts. Concepts of the readability of texts, in turn, were based on word counts and the 
frequency of occurrence of discourse features such as nominalisation, redundancy, and ellipsis (Grellet, 
1981; Nunan, 1991; Swaffar & Bacon, 1993). These readability measures were transferred to the listening 
environment as the basis for determining the comprehensibility of listening texts. Other measures of 
difficulty in listening comprehension (LC) relied on some undefined and unspecified inherent qualities of 
the tasks. The listening passages were often created, or at least simplified, for teaching purposes, and the 
determination of levels of difficulty was often arbitrary or subjective (Lynch, 1988, p. 178). 
As changes in the focus of language teaching and learning have moved from content- or teacher-centred 
to more learner- or learning-centred approaches, the focus in LC has also shifted. The social dynamics of 
listening have become a much stronger force in the investigation and use of LC for language learning 
(Lynch, 1988; Rost, 1990; Rubin, 1994). Progressively less emphasis is now being placed on listening as 
a cognitive process internal to the hearer, while the processes of interaction and meaning-negotiation are 
being extensively investigated (Doughty, 1991; Dunkel, 1991b; Pica, Young, & Doughty, 1987; 
Robinson, 1991). 
Researchers are also refining their understanding of the essential differences and similarities between 
reading and listening (Canale, 1984; Hoven, 1991; Lund, 1991; Swaffar & Bacon, 1993). This has lead to 
the recognition that there are aspects of LC, in addition to those mentioned above, that contribute to 
learners' difficulty in successfully completing LC tasks, and increasing their proficiency in this area. 
Debra Hoven A Model for Listening and Viewing Comprehension in  ... 
Language Learning & Technology 75 
Where previously the content material was graded, structured, or specially created in keeping with the 
authors' perceptions of ease and difficulty, it is now being suggested that the tasks themselves be graded, 
particularly in the context of increasing use of authentic texts (Hoven, 1991; Lund, 1990; Lynch, 1988; 
Mendelsohn & Rubin, 1995; Nunan, 1989). 
Background to Listening Comprehension Research 
Recently, the focus of the examination of factors contributing to successful LC has shifted toward 
formulating theories which define the features involved in the L2 listening process (Anderson & Lynch, 
1988; Byrnes, 1984; Dunkel, 1991a; Rubin, 1994). As Rost (1990) asks, 
Is understanding a mental phenomenon recoverable through the mind of the hearer or is it a social 
phenomenon recoverable through examination of subsequent behaviour by the listener? (p. 1) 
However, except for examinations of L2 pronunciation and auditory perception using computers, the 
implementation of LC in a computer-assisted environment has not yet been attempted within a coherent 
theoretical framework (Craven, Sinyor, & Paramskas, 1990; Higgins, 1995; Kenning & Kenning, 1990; 
Pennington, 1989, 1996). 
With a shift to more meaning- and communication-oriented teaching approaches starting in the 1970s, 
much has been published on the nature of the listening process and techniques for teaching LC 
(Boekaerts, 1981; Boyle, 1984; Buck, 1992; Faerch & Kasper, 1986; Long, 1989; Lund, 1990; Richards, 
1985; Taylor, 1981; Wipf, 1984). Research into the interaction between speaking and listening (Anderson 
& Lynch, 1988; Brown, 1986, 1989; Brown & Yule, 1983; Byrnes, 1984; Dunkel 1986; Nunan, 1990) has 
led to the construction of information processing models of listening (Cook, 1985), and, more recently, to 
investigations of various aspects of the listening task and participants (Bacon, 1992a, 1992b; Herron, 
1994; Rubin, 1994). 
In addition, with increasingly more sophisticated visual media, a perception is emerging of the intimate 
relationship between viewing comprehension (VC) and LC. This applies particularly in L2 and foreign 
language (FL) learning, where teachers and cross-cultural researchers are focusing on the meanings 
conveyed by gesture, expression, and body language (Armstrong, Stokoe, & Wilcox, 1995; Fidelman, 
1994, 1997; Hurley, 1992; Kellerman, 1992). Since the introduction of video players into L2 language 
classrooms, and more recently with the advent of interactive multimedia applications for L2 learning, 
paralinguistic features have been receiving more attention in teaching and in learning applications (Brett, 
1995; Fidelman, 1994, 1997). 
Changing Complexion of Issues and Factors in L2 Listening Comprehension 
Increasingly, research is attempting to establish the role of the learner as an active interpreter and 
negotiator of the meaning of messages (Jonassen, 1992; Lantolf & Appel, 1994). Research energy is 
turning away from mental phenomenon towards social phenomenon models. As Rubin (1994, p. 199) 
summarises it, the on-going dialogue among researchers about the nature of learners' interaction with oral 
input revolves around the characteristics of (a) text, (b) interlocutor, (c) task, (d) listener, and (e) process 
(see also Hoven, 1991). In addition, technological advances have made available to teachers and learners 
certain forms of visual media, such as television and videos, to expand LC to encompass VC as well 
(Kellerman, 1992; Schmidt-Reinhart, 1994). Therefore, it has become essential to incorporate a 
discussion of the impact of VC on listening and listening tasks into the new language learning models. 
Many of the factors listed by Rubin (1994), such as task and process characteristics, relate to general 
learning and language learning rather than exclusively to listening. However, certain aspects of these 
factors, such as acoustic variables, are inherently specific to listening and viewing. This paper will deal 
with those specific aspects. 
Debra Hoven A Model for Listening and Viewing Comprehension in  ... 
Language Learning & Technology 76 
The Complementarity of Listening and Viewing 
The increasing focus on multimedia in CALL necessitates a renewed examination of the complementary 
nature of the visual and auditory channels in listening and viewing comprehension. This is particularly the 
case in the current context of an expanding emphasis on non-verbal channels of communication in which 
video and other multimedia resources are becoming prevalent in L2 learning contexts (Brett, 1995; Felix, 
1995; Kennedy, Tiziana, & Murray, 1995; Liou, 1995; Staddon, 1990). Areas of study include the 
following: 
 The importance of visual context (Hanley, Herron, & Cole, 1995; Herron, 1994; Secules, Herron,
& Tomasello, 1992)
 The role of non-verbal aspects of communicative competence (Kellerman, Ammerlaan,
Bongaerts, & Poulisse, 1990; Meyer, 1990; Neu, 1990)
 Cross-cultural effects of non-verbal communication (Hurley, 1992)
 Messages conveyed through the visual channel (Herron, Morris, Secules, & Curtis, 1995; Herron
& Seay, 1991; Kellerman, 1992; Neu, 1990)
 Strategies used with audio-visual material (Mueller, 1980; Vogely, 1995; Wolff, 1987)
 Skills developed through the use of computer-assisted multimedia (Brett, 1995; Dalgish, 1987;
Fidelman, 1997; Hoven & Farquhar, 1996; Linquist, Rowekamp, & Stenson, 1991; Meskill,
1991) 
Examination of the role of the visual channel leads to a discussion of the complementary nature of visual 
to auditory cues in LC involving video and multimedia resources, such as in CELL packages (Graham, 
1990; Hurley, 1992; Kellerman, 1992; Neu, 1990). In expanding this discussion of LC to include 
paralinguistics, the focus is not solely on these aspects, but rather the importance of including these 
critical aspects of listening and viewing comprehension in the language learning process. Here, 
paralinguistic features encompass kinesics, proxemics, and prosody. The term kinesics refers to 
communicative movements such as facial, hand, and other body expressions or gestures that accompany, 
complement, or replace verbal utterances. Proxemics refers to the "degree of physical distance between 
interlocutors which is acceptable in a culture, including touching" (Hurley, 1992, p. 261). Following 
Arndt and Janney (1987, pp. 234-235) and Gassin (1992), prosody comprises the varying "accent 
(articulatory force, emphasis, stress, pitch prominence), intonation (tune, melody, pitch contour, pitch 
direction), and rhythm (speed, duration, pause, tempo)" of speakers (Gassin, 1992, p. 97). 
As the studies by Beebe & Takahashi (1989), Kasper (1989), and Lörscher (1986), indicate, attention to 
and practice in paralinguistic aspects of L2 communication can and should be implemented in language 
classes and materials, particularly through activities in which the learners themselves control and direct 
the interaction. Kellerman (1992) and Hurley (1992, p. 274) advocate the use of target language audio-
visual material containing a range of different interaction types to enhance awareness of the verbal, 
prosodic, kinesic, and non-verbal features used by members of the speech community. 
Thus, studies of the relationship between kinesic information and verbal communication have shown the 
importance of kinesics in conveying and interpreting meaning at a number of levels. These findings have 
considerable impact on the uses of multimedia in a CELL environment. Therefore, not only should the 
visual channel be incorporated into CELL materials, but also explicit efforts must be made to provide 
learners with information on the kinesic aspects of messages and how to interpret and produce them. 
These should include information on how kinesic messages are conveyed in the particular language being 
studied or materials being used, in order to raise learners awareness of the importance of kinesics 
(Kellerman, 1992). This can be implemented in the software by displaying the pitch and amplitude curves 
of authentic audiovisual texts (Lian & Lian, 1997). A CELL multimedia environment also offers learners 
some unique opportunities to select and focus on specific intercultural differences in kinesic and prosodic 
features and simultaneously gain practice in their use (Fidelman, 1994; Hoven, 1997b). 
Debra Hoven A Model for Listening and Viewing Comprehension in  ... 
Language Learning & Technology 77 
Essential Features of the Listening Process 
Considerable L2 evidence has accumulated over the last two decades which shows that effective listening 
requires active mental processing by listeners on several levels, particularly in interactive listening 
situations (Anderson & Lynch, 1988; Lynch, 1988; Riley, 1981). Researchers have found that semantic 
and syntactic systems as well as top-down and bottom-up processing operate simultaneously (Anderson & 
Lynch, 1988; Bacon, 1992a; Bond & Garnes, 1980; Conrad, 1985; Lund, 1991; Marslen-Wilson & Tyler, 
1980; O'Malley, Chamot, & Küpper, 1989; Van Patten, 1989; Voss, 1984; Wolff, 1987). However, there 
is some disagreement about which kind of processing predominates at different levels of learner L2 
proficiency (Rubin, 1994, pp. 210-211). Nevertheless, the components of the listening process, including 
the listening text, the complete context of this text (both external and internal to the listener), the task 
demands, and the responses required of the listener are all interrelated. 
Listening Comprehension and CELL: Constraints and advantages 
Constraints. The implementation of listening and viewing comprehension tasks in a CELL context 
implies certain advantages and certain constraints. The constraints lie in the difficulties of allowing 
students to input random text of the kind necessary for summarising tasks. Technology has not yet 
developed the capacity to process random text input through the keyboard in ways that can simulate the 
way a teacher would annotate and give feedback on a student's work. However, this does not mean that 
such tasks cannot be implemented in a CELL environment in a modified form. 
Another constraint for CELL, arising from the same difficulties as the one above, is the lack of realistic 
person-to-person interaction. In the context of CMC via e-mail or the World Wide Web, real learner-to-
learner communication is possible for geographically separated students. Although there are still 
bandwidth and financial constraints on the personal use of visual computer-based communication, this 
may not be the case for much longer, given the present rapid rate of technological development. 
Nevertheless, even now it is easy to partially compensate for the lack of interpersonal interaction by 
making available on-line grammar notes, dictionaries, contextualised feedback, and repeated 
individualised playback. All of these features can be provided whenever and as often as the learner needs 
them. 
Advantages. The importance of providing learners with timely, task-specific feedback in LC practice is 
widely acknowledged. Because of perception and recall constraints in LC, the availability of immediate 
feedback can be a distinct advantage. Another advantage of a CELL environment relates to the necessity 
for learners to be exposed to the same text from different perspectives and with emphasis on different 
aspects in order to fully comprehend a listening text. It is a simple matter to provide learners with 
"multiple exposures to the same or similar texts" (Rost, 1990, p. 169). Moreover, choices about how often 
to review a text, how many tasks to design for the same text, the level of cognitive difficulty, and the type 
of text, can all be determined by the learners themselves with appropriate structuring and guidance 
provided in the software. 
Essential Principles of CELL 
The following five findings flow from various research studies in learning, language learning, and 
computer- or technology-mediated learning as being critical to effective CELL:
1) Interaction and negotiation are important features of communication, and therefore of L2
learning (Doughty, 1987);
2) Computers with appropriately designed software can play a mediating role between L2
learners and their sociocultural context (Chapelle, 1994; Jonassen, 1992);
3) Software can be designed to facilitate L2 learners' interaction with the computer, and
negotiation of meaning from texts (Bickel & Truscello, 1996; Meskill, 1992);
Debra Hoven A Model for Listening and Viewing Comprehension in  ... 
Language Learning & Technology 78 
4) The essential characteristic of software is to enable learners to take control of both the
content of the learning material, and their approach to making meaning from it
(Robinson, 1991; Stevens, 1992); and
5) Not all L2 learners, especially in the initial stages of L2 acquisition, want to, or are able,
to take control of their learning (Candy, 1987; Robinson, 1991).
What are the essential features of an instructional design model that incorporates these research findings? 
The following three features emerge at this stage: 
1) We can improve the kinds of tasks we provide for learners by increasing the level of
choice available to them;
2) In providing increased choice, we, as instructional designers, need to recognise,
understand, and make provisions for individual differences in learning styles and learning
strategies; and
3) With increased choice, learners must be provided with the information to make those
choices.
In a CELL environment, we can therefore give learners informed control over the choice of task, topic or 
text content, and the speed of progress through the tasks or within a task. 
Collectively, the above five hypotheses encompass the critical features of the proposed model for the 
nature of language learning, the contemporary role of computers in language learning, an instructional 
design framework to suit this role, and the nature of the relationship between learners and computer-based 
materials. In the discussion below some of the implications of these principles for the proposed 
instructional design model will be explored. 
Learning Strategies and CELL 
In order to incorporate awareness-raising about learning strategies into the CELL environment, 
taxonomies such as those of Oxford (1990), O'Malley and Chamot (1990), or Hoven (1997a) can be 
introduced to learners. They can serve to guide learners in their choice of strategies when working on 
tasks in a way similar to using a map or a street directory. For example, learners can be shown 
diagrammatically which learning strategies are embodied in the successful completion of each of the task 
types available in the software package. In this way, learners can set their own learning goals for the 
activity using information provided and structured by the software package. This exemplifies the second 
and third hypotheses above, in that the software mediates between learners and their context. Having been 
shown by the program the range of choices available, learners then use the program to guide them through 
their chosen paths. 
The term interactivity in the context of the model being proposed here refers to the potential for the 
learner to make decisions about the content, mode, order, pace, level, and degree of self-direction of a 
software package. In addition, it can be extended to mean the capacity the model provides for the learner 
to interact with, interpret, negotiate, and make meaning from the texts available, whether these are 
printed, audio, audio-visual, or visual. 
A SOCIOCULTURAL MODEL FOR CELL 
Background to the Paradigm Adopted for This Model 
This section provides a preliminary explanation of the perceived need for and uses of CELL today. For 
the purpose of simplicity, the term second language learning is used here to refer to the learning of 
another language after oneÕs first language (L1), whether within the target culture, or removed from it. 
Debra Hoven A Model for Listening and Viewing Comprehension in  ... 
Language Learning & Technology 79 
The paradigm proposed here is based on a humanistic cognitivist perspective on the teaching of language 
using computer technology. This perspective incorporates some elements of humanistic methodology 
(Stevick, 1990), cognitive learning theories (McLaughlin, 1987; O'Malley & Chamot, 1990), and 
sociocultural theories of language learning (Halliday, 1993; Lantolf & Appel, 1994; Wells, 1994). The 
humanistic aspect is based on a belief in the necessary involvement of the whole person in the language 
learning process. The cognitivist aspect derives from the conviction that one of the ways L2 learners 
acquire language is through progressive modification of their interlanguage brought about by a process of 
hypothesis testing, confirmation/disconfirmation, and subsequent modification. The sociocultural 
paradigm provides an interpretative framework within which to anchor the complex interplay of the 
features both internal and external to the physical body of the learner. It is this paradigm which promotes 
cohesion and complementarity among these disparate perspectives. 
Within this paradigm, learners take an active, goal-oriented role, negotiating and interpreting new 
experiences in terms of previous ones and in terms of models they have built up to reformulate their 
internal schemata. A corollary to this view is that if learners are provided with opportunities to use 
language and learning strategies in L2, and if they are given some training in their application, they can 
develop these strategies through exposure to and experience in the L2 (McMeniman, 1994; Perrett, 1995). 
Such development can take place through a series of steps called scaffolding, in which teachers play a 
progressively diminishing role as the involvement and investment of the learner progressively increases 
(Donato, 1994). In this way, learners become more autonomous and self-directing in their attitudes and 
approaches to their own learning (Adair-Hauck & Donato, 1994; Rowsell & Libben, 1994), enabling 
teachers to devote their time and effort to aspects of language learning not easily mediated by computers. 
In an attempt to remedy the perceived inability of Chomsky's transformational generative grammar (1965, 
1981) to account fully for the influence of social and cultural contexts on the semantic aspects of 
language, Halliday (1978, 1985) developed a systemic functional grammar, which emphasises the way in 
which the different systems interact in the whole context of language, including the social and cultural 
features. This theory represented the introduction of a focus on the sociocultural aspects of language, with 
emphasis on the way in which social and cultural interaction shapes the realisation of meaning. 
A particularly strong influence over the last few years on our understanding of the nature of language 
learning and the interrelationship between language and learning has come from the recognition of the 
similarities between the theories of Halliday and Vygotsky. While Halliday, as a linguist, has produced a 
detailed grammar that incorporates an acknowledgement of the integral part that social interaction plays 
in language, Vygotsky's contributions have been greater in the area of the role of language processing in 
the development of higher mental processes. However, both scholars are interested in the development of 
language as human beings grow and develop as social beings. In addition, they both subscribe to the 
notion that "language is a human invention" (Wells, 1994), and both believe that there is a symbiotic 
relationship between language and culture, and that language is intimately involved in the development of 
the intellect. 
A critical facet of Vygotsky's conception of the development of higher mental processes is realised as the 
Zone of Proximal Development, or ZPD (Vygotsky, 1978, p. 86). This zone represents the sphere of 
potential intellectual growth within which an individual can develop with the stimulus and intervention of 
other more skilled individuals. The ZPD has been likened in concept to Krashen's concept of i + 1 
(Richard-Amato, 1988). However, the ZPD places more emphasis on the process of learning development 
than on the stages. It is the interaction with others, such as teachers, guides, mentors, or even computers, 
that triggers the arousal of internal developmental processes. Lantolf and Appel (1994) describe it as 
follows: 
The process of voluntary acting is distributed between two people, one of whom (the adult or 
expert) already knows how to perform a particular act and one who (the child or novice) does not. 
Debra Hoven A Model for Listening and Viewing Comprehension in  ... 
Language Learning & Technology 80 
Equally important is the fact that speech serves to direct, or mediate, the interactive process that 
transpires between the two. . . .The difference between what the child, or novice, is capable of 
when acting alone and what he or she is capable of when acting under the guidance of a more 
experienced other is referred to as the zone of proximal development. (p. 10) 
Donato (1994) uses the concept of the ZPD to expand the potential of interaction from the conduit 
metaphor of a message in communication to include and emphasise collaborative meaning making. For 
Donato, this metaphor for a communicative event as merely "the successful sending and receiving of 
linguistic tokens. . .masks fundamentally important mechanisms of L2 [second language] development" 
such that "in the end, the social context is impoverished and undervalued as an arena for truly 
collaborative L2 acquisition" (p. 34). Donato proposes the metaphor of scaffolding as an alternative to 
that of the conduit, to exemplify the role of the ZPD in language development. The metaphor of 
scaffolding is used to support the principle that, "in social interaction a knowledgeable participant can 
create, by means of speech, supportive conditions in which the novice can participate in, and extend, 
current skills and knowledge to higher levels of competence" (Donato, 1994, p. 40). 
The concept of the ZPD thus represents a useful metaphor for describing the kinds of interactions and 
posited outcomes that a successful CELL software package should engender. 
The Concept of Learner-Centredness 
Central to the development of a CELL model that allocates more control to the learners is an 
understanding of what is meant by learner-centredness. Over the last quarter-century, the predominant 
factors effecting changes in approach and methodology have been the following: 
1) a stronger focus on the learner as an individual (Ellis, 1985; Skehan, 1989; Stevick, 1976,
1981);
2) a corresponding shift from a focus on teaching to a focus on learners and learning (Cotterall,
1995; Gremmo & Riley, 1995; Kumaravadivelu, 1993; Little, 1995);
3) consideration of differences in learning styles (Felder & Henriques, 1995; Griffiths & Sheen,
1992; Oxford & Ehrman, 1993; Wenden & Rubin, 1987; Willing, 1989) and learning
strategies (O'Malley & Chamot, 1990; Oxford, 1990, 1993; Wenden, 1995; Wenden &
Rubin, 1987); and
4) various manifestations of humanism (Asher, 1981; Crawford & Trojer, 1983; Curran, 1976;
Gattegno, 1976; Lozanov, 1979; Stevick, 1990; Underhill, 1989).
The focus on learners' needs has become central to the philosophy of learner-centredness, as has the 
principle of developing learners' understanding of their own language learning styles and processes 
(Brindley, 1984; Nunan, 1988; Wenden, 1991; Willing, 1985). As part of these processes, learners need to 
be able to select which texts may be appropriate for their specific needs. In the contexts of distance 
education and flexible delivery, this can be facilitated through a multimedia database which uses 
classifications such as register, participants, and language function (Hoven, 1997b; Lian & Lian, 1997). 
In a CELL environment, learners can be introduced to taking control over their own learning by being 
provided with exposure to awareness-raising activities across all parts of their language learning program, 
including the CELL software. In the initial stages, highly structured (teacher-centred) materials need to be 
available to cater to the needs of those learners with a strong dependence on teacher direction. However, 
to cater to differentially rapid development in the direction of autonomy, it is also necessary to provide 
the means whereby learners can take more control if they feel capable of doing so. This can be achieved 
by writing into the design of a CELL software package several levels of entry or several modes of 
interaction based on varying levels of learner control. 
Roles and Characteristics of CELL in Relation to Listening Comprehension 
Debra Hoven A Model for Listening and Viewing Comprehension in  ... 
Language Learning & Technology 81 
In the context of multimedia, it is also necessary to consider the nature of emerging roles of the computer 
as interlocutor, expert teacher, and mediator of learning. According to Jonassen (1992, p.2), less emphasis 
should be placed on the design of the technologies and more on the processes involved in task 
completion. In order for these roles to be realised, the use of computers needs to be located within a 
learning environment that promotes and supports the activation of learners' mental processes across all 
activities and resources. The following is an outline of the elements of such a technology-mediated 
learning environment: 
I. Total learning environment characterised by a task-based and/or process-based syllabus and a 
focus on 
-----A. Learning strategies (learning how to learn) 
-----B. Language functions and purposes 
-----C. Language structures 
-----D. Paralinguistic features 
-----E. Sociocultural features 
-----F. Autonomy and self-direction 
II. Focus all activities on the development of control and responsibility for own learning
III. Cultivate learner self-direction and autonomy
IV. Provide access to facilities for multi-channelled perception/production
V. Cultivate self- and peer-feedback and evaluation techniques among learners (to improve self-
confidence and group cohesion) 
VI. Design CELL activities that incorporate self-exploration and self-discovery of problems and
errors 
VII. Provide a range of print and non-print based resources, including student- and teacher-
produced materials and well as those commercially available and on the Web. 
In the context of CELL, there is also room to raise the question of whether characteristics of the computer 
software, help, and feedback mechanisms may be classified as interlocutor characteristics when there is a 
level of interactivity between learners and these functions. While such questions lie outside the scope of 
this article, studies in the field of human-computer interface (Reeves & Nass, 1996), have begun to deal 
with some aspects of this question. 
There have so far been no studies in the CALL area dealing specifically with the characteristics of 
interlocutors in human-computer interactions, though researchers such as Dickson (1985) and Meskill 
(1992) have begun to investigate which aspects of software and what kinds of computer-learner groupings 
lead to more communicative interaction. In addition, Chapelle (1994), working within the understanding 
of genre developed by Halliday and Hasan (1989) and Swales (1990), suggests that the effective use and 
study of CALL hinges on the analysis of CALL activities in terms of three levels of difference: text, 
genre, and context. According to Chapelle, the computer is both one of the participants in the co-creation 
of a text, and a mediator in the learning experience (p. 38). 
For Chapelle, the computer clearly has a role to play as an interactor in a language learning context. 
However, as stressed by Jonassen (1992), computer technology does not of itself take this role. Pedersen 
(1987, p. 100) also finds that "recent CALL research. . .suggests that the design of computer software to 
cause adjustments in cognitive processing, not the medium used to deliver instruction, stands the best 
chance of affecting learning outcomes." Technology is only the vehicle for the pedagogy embodied in the 
software, and thus the rationale behind the design of the software is what allows the computer to perform 
in this interactive role. More specifically, the features of the computer that allow it to be used as a 
mediator of learning are the instructional design of the learning activities, the content of the learning 
material, the design of the interface, and the various help and feedback facilities. This mediator role 
includes that of mentor in the learnerÕs learning progression through the Zone of Proximal Development. 
Debra Hoven A Model for Listening and Viewing Comprehension in  ... 
Language Learning & Technology 82 
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER: WHAT DOES THE MODEL LOOK LIKE? 
Having considered the various features to be included in a learner-centred sociocultural model for 
incorporating CELL software, we now turn to the question of how these features can be put together. It 
seems clear from the preceding discussion that in order for the software to be effective as a learning tool, 
it needs to be located within a learning environment that employs the same approach consistently across 
the different learning activities, resources, and tools which comprise this environment. 
Within this environment, the content of the software must incorporate what we know about effective 
listening and viewing comprehension from a theoretical perspective, and relate this to sociocultural 
principles. In addition, individual differences in learners, including learning styles and preferred learning 
modes, must be factored in, to cater to the heterogeneity of learners. Finally, the instructional design of 
the software, including the functional and navigational aspects, must be mapped onto these components to 
produce a coherent model as illustrated in Figure 1. 
Figure 1. Proposed learner-centred model for designing multimedia CELL software for listening 
comprehension 
CONCLUSION 
From the preceding discussion, it can be seen that it is difficult and probably undesirable to attempt to 
determine the difficulty of a listening and viewing task in any absolute terms. By considering the three 
aspects that affect the level of difficulty, namely text, task, and context features, it is possible to identify 
those characteristics of tasks that can be manipulated. Having identified the variable characteristics of 
tasks in developing the model, it is necessary to look to the dynamic interaction among, tasks, texts, and 
the computer-based environment. 
Task design and text selection in this model also incorporate the identification and consideration of 
context. Teachers can make provision for their influence on learner perception of difficulty by providing 
texts and tasks that range across these levels, and by ensuring that learners with lower language 
proficiency can ease themselves gradually into the more contextually difficult tasks. This can be achieved 
by reducing the level of difficulty of other parameters such as text or task difficulty, or by minimising 
other aspects of contextual difficulty. Thus, for example, learners of lower proficiency who are exposed 
Debra Hoven A Model for Listening and Viewing Comprehension in  ... 
Language Learning & Technology 83 
for the first time to a task based on a broadcast announcement would be provided with appropriate visual 
support in the form of graphics or video to reduce textual difficulty. The task type would also be kept to a 
low level of cognitive demand (Hoven, 1991, 1997a, 1997b). 
In a CELL environment, this identification of parameters of difficulty enables task designers to develop 
and modify tasks on the basis of clear language pedagogy that is both learner-centred and cognitively 
sound. Learners are provided with the necessary information on text, task, and context to make informed 
choices, and are given opportunities to implement their decisions. Teachers are therefore creating a CELL 
environment that facilitates and encourages exploration of, and experimentation with, the choices 
available. Within this model, learners are then able to adjust their own learning paths through the texts 
and tasks, and can do this at their own pace and at their individual points of readiness. In sociocultural 
terms, the model provides learners with a guiding framework or community of practice within which to 
develop through their individual Zones of Proximal Development. The model provides them with the 
tools to mediate meaning in the form of software incorporating information, feedback, and appropriate 
help systems. 
By taking account of learners' needs and making provision for learner choice in this way, one of the major 
advantages of using computers in language learning--their capacity to allow learners to work at their own 
pace and in their own time--can be more fully exploited. It then becomes our task as researchers to 
evaluate, with learners' assistance, the effectiveness of environments such as these in improving the their 
listening and viewing comprehension as well as their approaches to learning in these environments.  
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Debra Hoven teaches Indonesian language and culture at undergraduate level and supervises postgraduate 
research students in CALL-related areas in the Department of Asian Languages and Studies at the 
University of Queensland, Australia. She has taught ESL/EFL, Indonesian, Japanese and German at all 
levels from kindergarten to tertiary in Australia and Asia. Her research interests include learner-centred 
CALL, learning styles and strategies, particularly in multimedia language learning applications, 
innovative teaching practices, collaborative and cooperative learning, and sociocultural implications of 
the uses of electronic communications in the east Asian region. 
E-mail: d.hoven@mailbox.uq.edu.au 
REFERENCES 
Adair-Hauck, B., & Donato, R. (1994). Foreign language explanations within the zone of proximal 
development. The Canadian Modern Language Review 50(3), 532-557. 
Anderson, A., & Lynch, T. (1988). Listening. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Armstrong, D. F., Stokoe, W. C., & Wilcox, S. E. (1995). Gesture and the nature of language. 
Cambridge: University of Cambridge. 
Arndt, H., & Janney, R. W. (1987). InterGrammar: Toward an integrative model of verbal, prosodic and 
kinesic choices in speech. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 
Asher, J. J. (1981). Comprehension training: The evidence from laboratory and classroom studies. In H. 
Winitz (Ed.), The Comprehension Approach to Foreign Language Instruction (pp. 187-222). Rowley, 
MA: Newbury House. 
Bacon, S. M. (1992a). Authentic listening in Spanish: How learners adjust their strategies to the difficulty 
of input. Hispania 75, 29-43. 
Debra Hoven A Model for Listening and Viewing Comprehension in  ... 
Language Learning & Technology 84 
Bacon, S. M. (1992b). The relationship between gender, comprehension, processing strategies, cognitive 
and affective response in foreign language listening. Modern Language Journal 76(2), 160-178. 
Batley, E. M., & Freudenstein, R. (Eds.). (1991). CALL for the Nineties: Computer Technology in 
Language Learning. Marburg, Germany: FIPLV/EUROCENTRES. 
Beebe, L. M., & Takahashi, T. (1989). Do you have a bag?: Social status and patterned variation in 
second language acquisition. In S. Gass, C. Madden, D. Preston, & L. Selinker (Eds.), Variation in 
second language acquisition: Discourse and pragmatics, pp. 103-125. Clevedon, England: Multilingual 
Matters. 
Bickel, B., & Truscello, D. (1996). New opportunities for learning: styles and strategies for computers. 
TESOL Journal 6(1), 15-19. 
Boekaerts, M. (1981). Is there a direct link between the comprehension process and the production 
process? In M. Heid (Ed.), Protokoll eines Werkstattgesprachs des Goethe House, New York, pp. 26-60. 
München: Druckerei Kemmler und Hoch. 
Bond, Z. S., & Garnes, S. (1980). Misperceptions of fluent speech. In R. A. Cole (Ed.), Perception and 
production of fluent speech, pp. 115-132. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum Associates. 
Boyle, J. P. (1984). Factors affecting listening comprehension. ELT Journal 38, 35-38. 
Brett, P. (1995). Multimedia for listening comprehension: The design of a multimedia-based resource for 
developing listening skills. System 23(1), 77-85. 
Bright, D. E., Verano, M., & Cubero, R. A. (1991). From theory to practice: A model for an interactive 
videodisc lesson. In M. D. Bush, A. Slaton, M. Verano, & M. E. Slayden (Eds.), Interactive videodisc: 
The "Why" and the "How." (CALICO Monograph Series, Vol. 2, Spring, pp. 1-15.) Provo, UT: Brigham 
Young Press. 
Brindley, G. (1984). Needs analysis and objective setting in the Adult Migrant Education Program.  
Sydney: NSW Adult Migrant Education Service. 
Brown, G. (1986). Investigating listening comprehension in context. Applied Linguistics 7(3), 284-302. 
Brown, G. (1989). Making sense: The interaction of linguistic expression and contextual information. 
Applied Linguistics 1, 97-108. 
Brown, G., & Yule, G. (1983). Teaching the spoken language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Buck, G. (1992). Listening comprehension: Construct validity and trait characteristics. Language 
Learning 42, 313-349. 
Byrnes, H. (1984). The role of listening comprehension: A theoretical base. Foreign Language Annals 
17(4), 317-329. 
Canale, M. (1984). Considerations in the testing of reading and listening proficiency. Foreign Language 
Annals 17(4), 349-357. 
Candy, P. (1987). Evolution, revolution or devolution: Increasing learner-control in the instructional 
setting. In D. Boud & V. Griffin (Eds.), Appreciating adults learning: From the learners' perspective, pp. 
159-178. London: Kogan Page Ltd. 
Chang, K-Y. R., & Smith, W. F. (1991). CALL/IVD workstations: Towards a rationale for their use in 
cooperative learning environments. In M. D. Bush, A. Slaton, M. Verano, & M. E. Slayden (Eds.), 
Interactive videodisc: The "Why" and the "How." (CALICO Monograph Series, Vol. 2, Spring, pp. 101-
109.) Provo, UT: Brigham Young Press. 
Debra Hoven A Model for Listening and Viewing Comprehension in  ... 
Language Learning & Technology 85 
Chapelle, C. A. (1994). CALL activities: Are they all the same? System 22(1), 33-45. 
Chomsky, N. (1965). Aspects of the theory of syntax. The Hague: Mouton. 
Chomsky, N. (1981). Lectures on Government and Binding. Dordrecht: Foris Publications. 
Conrad, L. (1985). Semantic versus syntactic cues in listening comprehension. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition 7(1), 59-72. 
Cook, V. J. (1985). Bridging the gap between computers and language teaching. Computers in English 
language teaching. ELT Documents, No. 122, 13-24. 
Cotterall, S. (1995). Readiness for autonomy: Investigating learner beliefs. System 23, 195-205. 
Craven, M.-L., Sinyor, R., & Paramskas, D. (Eds.). (1990). CALL: Papers and reports. La Jolla, CA.: 
Athelstan Publications. 
Crawford, J., & Trojer, L. (1983). An introduction to the structuro global audio visual approach to 
language learning. Australian Review of Applied Linguistics 6, 20-29. 
Curran, C. A. (1976). Counseling-learning in second languages. Apple River,IL: Apple River Press. 
Dalgish, G. M. (1987). Some uses of computers in teaching English as a Second Language: The issue of 
control. In J. S. Blanchard & G. E. Mason (Eds.), The Computer in reading and language arts, pp. 81-93. 
New York: The Haworth Press. 
Davies, G., & Higgins, J. (1985). Using computers in language learning: A teacher's guide. Information 
Guide 22. London: Centre for Information on Language Teaching and Research. 
Dickson, W. P. (1985, May). Thought-provoking software: juxtaposing symbol systems. Educational 
Researcher, 30-38. 
Donato, R. (1994). Collective scaffolding in second language learning. In J. P. Lantolf & G. Appel (Eds.), 
Vygotskian approaches to second language learning, pp. 33-56. Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing 
Corporation. 
Doughty, C. (1987). Relating second-language acquisition theory to CALL research and application. In 
W. F. Smith (Ed.), Modern media in foreign language education: Theory and implementation, pp. 133-
167. Lincolnwood, IL: National Textbook Company. 
Doughty, C. (1991). Theoretical motivations for IVD software research and development. In M. D. Bush, 
A. Slaton, M. Verano, & M. E. Slayden (Eds.), Interactive videodisc: The "Why" and the "How." 
(CALICO Monograph Series, Vol. 2, Spring, pp. 17-23.) Provo, UT: Brigham Young Press. 
Dunkel, P. (1986). Developing Listening Fluency in L2: Theoretical Principles and Pedagogical 
Considerations. The Modern Language Journal 70(2), 99-106. 
Dunkel, P. (Ed.) (1991a). Computer-assisted language learning and testing. New York: Newbury House. 
Dunkel, P. (1991b). Listening in the native and second/foreign language: Toward an integration of 
research and practice. TESOL Quarterly 25(3), 431-457. 
Ellis, R. (1985). Understanding second language acquisition. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Faerch, C., & Kasper, G. (1986). The role of comprehension in second language learning. Applied 
Linguistics 7(3), 257-274. 
Felder, R. M., & Henriques, E. R. (1995). Learning and teaching styles in foreign language education. 
Foreign Language Annals 28, 21-31. 
Debra Hoven A Model for Listening and Viewing Comprehension in  ... 
Language Learning & Technology 86 
Felix, U. (1995). Theater Interaktiv: multimedia integration of language and literature. On-CALL 9, 12-
16. 
Fidelman, C. (1994). In the French Body/In the German Body: Project results. Demonstrated at the 
CALICO '94 Annual Symposium "Human Factors." Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ. 
Fidelman, C. G. (1997). Extending the language curriculum with enabling technologies: Nonverbal 
communication and interactive video. In K. A. Murphy-Judy (Ed.), NEXUS: The convergence of 
language teaching and reseearch using technology, pp. 28-41. Durham, NC: CALICO. 
Fish, H. (1981). Graded activities and authentic materials for listening comprehension. In The teaching of 
listening comprehension. ELT Documents Special: Papers presented at the Goethe Institut Colloquium 
Paris 1979, pp. 107-115. London: British Council. 
Garrigues, M. (1991). Teaching and learning languages with interactive videodisc. In M. D. Bush, A. 
Slaton, M. Verano, & M. E. Slayden (Eds.), Interactive videodisc: The "Why" and the "How." (CALICO 
Monograph Series, Vol. 2, Spring, pp. 37-43.) Provo, UT: Brigham Young Press. 
Gassin, J. (1992). Interkinesics and Interprosodics in Second Language Acquisition. Australian Review of 
Applied Linguistics 15(1), 95-106. 
Gattegno, C. (1976). The common sense of teaching foreign languages. New York: Educational 
Solutions. 
Graham, J. L. (1990). An exploratory study of the process of marketing negotiations using a cross-cultural 
perspective. In R. Scarcella, E. S. Andersen, & S. D. Krashen (Eds.), Developing communicative 
competence in a second language, pp. 239-279. Boston, MA: Heinle & Heinle Publishers. 
Grellet, F. (1981). Developing reading skills. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Gremmo, M. J., & Riley, P. (1995). Autonomy, self-direction and self access in language teaching and 
learning: The history of an idea. System 23, 151-164. 
Griffiths, R., & Sheen, R. (1992). Disembedded figures in the landscape: A reappraisal of L2 research on 
field dependence/independence. Applied Linguistics 13, 133-148. 
Halliday, M. A. K. (1978). Language as social semiotic: The social interpretation of language and 
meaning. London: Arnold. 
Halliday, M. A. K. (1985). An introduction to functional grammar. London: Edward Arnold. 
Halliday, M. A. K. (1993). Towards a language-based theory of learning. Linguistics and Education 5(2), 
93-116. 
Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1989). Language, context, and text: aspects of language in a social-
semiotic perspective. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Hanley, J. E. B., Herron, C. A., & Cole, S. P. (1995). Using video as an advance organizer to a written 
passage in the FLES classroom. The Modern Language Journal 79, 57-66. 
Herron, C. (1994). An investigation of the effectiveness of using an advance organizer to introduce video 
in the foreign language classroom. The Modern Language Journal 78(2), 190-198. 
Herron, C., Morris, M., Secules, T., & Curtis, L. (1995). A comparison study of the effects of video 
versus text-centered instruction in the foreign language curriculum. French Review 68, 775-795. 
Herron, C., & Seay, I. (1991). The effect of authentic aural texts on student listening comprehension in 
the foreign language classroom. Foreign Language Annals 24, 487-495. 
Higgins, J. (1995). Computers and English Language Learning. Oxford: Intellect. 
Debra Hoven A Model for Listening and Viewing Comprehension in  ... 
Language Learning & Technology 87 
Hoven, D. (1991). Towards a cognitive taxonomy of listening comprehension tasks. SGAV Review 9(2), 
1-14. Retrieved from the World Wide Web July 25, 1999: 
http://jcs120.jcs.uq.edu.au/~dlh/pubs/SGAV91.htm. 
Hoven, D. (1997a). Instructional design for multimedia: Towards a learner-centred CELL (Computer-
Enhanced Language Learning) model. In K. A. Murphy-Judy (Ed.), NEXUS: The convergence of 
language teaching and research using technology, pp. 98-111. Durham, NC: CALICO. 
Hoven, D. (1997b). Improving the management of flow of control in computer-assisted listening 
comprehension tasks for second and foreign language learners. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, 
University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia. Retrieved July 25, 1999 from the World Wide Web: 
http://jcs120.jcs.uq.edu.au/~dlh/thesis/. 
Hoven, D., & Farquhar, M. (1996). On messages and media, clocks and cannibal chiefs. In M. Farquhar 
& P. McKay (Eds.), China connections: Australian business needs and university language education, 
pp. 258-292. Canberra: National Languages and Literacy Institute of Australia. 
Hurley, D. S. (1992). Issues in teaching pragmatics, prosody, and non-verbal communication. Applied 
Linguistics 13(3), 259-281. 
Jonassen, D. (1992). What are cognitive tools? In P. A. M. Kommers, D. H. Jonassen, & J. T. Mayes 
(Eds.), Cognitive Tools for Learning, pp. 1-6. Berlin: Springer-Verlag. 
Kasper, G. (1989). Interactive procedures in interlanguage discourse. In W. Olesky (Ed.), Contrastive 
pragmatics, pp. 189-229. Amsterdam: Benjamins. 
Kellerman, S. (1992). "I See What You Mean": The role of kinesic behaviour in listening and 
implications for foreign and second language learning. Applied Linguistics 13(3), 239-258. 
Kellerman, E., Ammerlaan, T., Bongaerts, T., & Poulisse, N. (1990). System and hierarchy in L2 
compensatory strategies. In R. Scarcella, E. S. Andersen, & S. D. Krashen (Eds.), Developing 
communicative competence in a second language, pp. 163-178. Boston, MA: Heinle & Heinle Publishers. 
Kennedy, C., Tiziana, M., & Murray, S. V. (1995). Italia oggi: a multimedia window on contemporary 
Italy. On-CALL 9, 2-10. 
Kenning, M. M., & Kenning, M. J. (1990). Computers and language learning: Current theory and 
practice. Chichester, England: Ellis Horwood Ltd. 
Kumaravadivelu, B. (1993). The name of the task and the task of naming: Methodological aspects of task-
based pedagogy. In G. Crookes & S. M. Gass (Eds.), Tasks in a pedagogical context: Integrating theory 
and practice, pp. 69-96. Clevedon, England: Multimedia Matters. 
Lantolf, J. P., & Appel, G. (1994). Theoretical framework: An introduction to Vygotskian approaches to 
second language research. In J. P. Lantolf & G. Appel (Eds.), Vygotskian approaches to second language 
research, pp. 1-32. Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing Corporation. 
Lian, A. P., & Lian, A. B. (1997). The secret of the Shao-Lin monk: Contribution to an intellectual 
framework for language learning. On-CALL 11(2), 2-18. 
Linquist, K., Rowekamp, J., & Stenson, N. (1991). Learner-controlled listening materials using a 
commercial videodisc. CÆLL Journal 2, 3-7. 
Liou, H-C. (1995). Evaluation of interactive videodisc courseware: Effects of strategy training and 
collaborative learning. In F. L. Borchardt & E. M. T. Johnson (Eds.), Proceedings of the Computer 
Assisted Language Instruction Consortium 1995 annual symposium "Computers and collaborative 
learning," pp. 112-115. Durham, NC: Heinle & Heinle Publishers. 
Debra Hoven A Model for Listening and Viewing Comprehension in  ... 
Language Learning & Technology 88 
Little, D. (1995). Learning as dialogue: the dependence of learner autonomy on teacher autonomy. System 
23, 175-181. 
Long, D. R. (1989). Second language listening comprehension: A schema-theoretic perspective. The 
Modern Language Journal 73(i) 32-40. 
Lörscher, W. (1986). Conversational structures in the foreign language classroom. In G. Kasper (Ed.), 
Learning, teaching and communicating in the foreign language classroom,  pp. 11-22. Aarhus, Denmark: 
Aarhus University Press. 
Lozanov, G. (1979). Suggestology and outlines of Suggestopedy. New York: Gordon and Breach, Science 
Publishers. 
Lund, R. J. (1990). A taxonomy for teaching second language listening. Foreign Language Annals 23(2), 
105-115. 
Lund, R. J. (1991). A comparison of second language listening and reading comprehension. Modern 
Language Journal 75, 196-204. 
Lynch, A. J. (1988). Grading foreign language listening comprehension materials: The use of naturally 
modified interaction. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Edinburgh. 
Marslen-Wilson, W., & Tyler, L. K. (1980). The temporal structure of spoken language understanding. 
Cognition 8, 1-71. 
McLaughlin, B. (1987). Theories of Second Language Learning. London: Edward Arnold. 
McMeniman, M. (1994, April). Putting thinking back into language. Public Research Lecture delivered at 
Griffith University, Brisbane, Australia. 
Mendelsohn, D. J., & Rubin, J. (1995). A guide for the teaching of second language listening. San Diego, 
CA: Dominie Press. 
Meskill, C. (1991). Multimedia and language learning: Assessing goals and system attributes. CÆLL 
Journal 2, 11-14. 
Meskill, C. (1992). CALL: Individual versus negotiated task processing. Paper presented at the CALICO 
Symposium: Outreach '92, Monterey, CA. 
Meyer, L. (1990). It was no trouble: Achieving communicative competence in a second language. In R. 
Scarcella, E. S. Andersen, & S. D. Krashen (Eds.), Developing communicative competence in a second 
language, pp. 195-215. Boston, MA: Heinle & Heinle Publishers. 
Mueller, G. (1980). Visual contextual cues and listening comprehension: An experiment. Modern 
Language Journal 64, 335-340. 
Neu, J. (1990). Assessing the role of non-verbal communication in the acquisition of communicative 
competence in L2. In R. Scarcella, E. S. Andersen, & S. D. Krashen (Eds.), Developing communicative 
competence in a second language, pp. 121-138. Boston, MA: Heinle & Heinle Publishers. 
Nunan, D. (1988). The learner-centred curriculum. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Nunan, D. (1989). Designing tasks for the communicative classroom. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Nunan, D. (1990). Learning to listen in a second language. Prospect 5(2), 7-23. 
Nunan, D. (1991). Language teaching methodology. Sydney: Prentice-Hall. 
Debra Hoven A Model for Listening and Viewing Comprehension in  ... 
Language Learning & Technology 89 
O'Malley, J. M., & Chamot, A. U. (1990). Learning strategies in second language acquisition. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
O'Malley, J. M., Chamot, A. U., & Küpper, L. (1989). Listening comprehension strategies in second 
language acquisition. Applied Linguistics 10(4), 419-437. 
Oxford, R. L. (1990). Language learning strategies: What every teacher should know. Boston, MA: 
Heinle & Heinle Publishers. 
Oxford, R. L. (1993). Research on second language learning strategies. Annual Review of Applied 
Linguistics 13, 175-187. 
Oxford, R. L., & Ehrman, M. (1993). Second language research on individual differences. Annual Review 
of Applied Linguistics 13, 188-205. 
Pederson, K. M. (1987). Research on CALL. In W. F. Smith (Ed.), Modern media in foreign language 
education: theory and implementation, pp. 99-131. Lincolnwood, IL: National Textbook Company. 
Pennington, M. C. (Ed.). (1989). Teaching languages with computers: The state of the art. La Jolla, CA: 
Athelstan Publications. 
Pennington, M. C. (Ed.). (1996). The power of CALL. Houston, TX.: Athelstan Publications. 
Perrett, G. (1995, August 21-24). Communicative language teaching and second language acquisition 
theory. MLTAQ Inc. Newsletter, No. 101. 
Pica, T., Young, R., & Doughty, C. (1987). The impact of interaction on comprehension. TESOL 
Quarterly 21(4), 737-758. 
Reeves, B., & Nass, C. (1996). The media equation: How people treat computers, televisions, and New 
Media like real people and places. Center for the Study of Language & Information, Lecture Notes 
Series: CSLI Publications. 
Richard-Amato, P. A. (1988). Making it happen. New York: Longman. 
Richards, J. C. (1983). Listening comprehension: Approach, design, procedure. TESOL Quarterly 17(2), 
219-240. 
Richards, J. C. (1985). The context of language teaching. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Riley, P. (1981). Viewing comprehension: lÕoeil ecoute. The teaching of listening comprehension. (ELT 
Documents Special: Papers presented at the Goethe Institut Colloquium Paris 1979, pp. 143-156.) 
London: British Council. 
Robinson, G. L. (1991). Effective feedback strategies in CALL. In P. Dunkel (Ed.), Computer-assisted 
language learning and testing, pp. 155-167. New York: Newbury House. 
Rost, M. (1990). Listening in language learning. London: Longman. 
Rowsell, L. V., & Libben, G. (1994). The sound of one hand clapping: How to succeed in independent 
language learning. The Canadian Modern Language Review 50(4), 668-687. 
Rubin, J. (1994). A review of second language listening comprehension research. The Modern Language 
Journal 78(2), 199-221. 
Schmidt-Reinhart, B. C. (1994). The effects of topic familiarity on second language listening 
comprehension. The Modern Language Journal 78(2), 179-189. 
Secules, T., Herron, C., & Tomasello, M. (1992). The effect of video context on foreign language 
learning. Modern Language Journal 76, 480-490. 
Debra Hoven A Model for Listening and Viewing Comprehension in  ... 
Language Learning & Technology 90 
Skehan, P. (1989). Individual differences in second-language learning. London: Edward Arnold. 
Staddon, S. (1990). Interactive video and language learning ø the Expodisc Spanish experience. On-CALL 
5, 2-4. 
Stevens, V. (1992). Humanism and CALL: A coming of age. In M. C. Pennington & V. Stevens (Eds.), 
Computers in applied linguistics: An international perspective, pp. 11-38. Clevedon, England: 
Multilingual Matters. 
Stevick, E. W. (1976). Memory, meaning and method. Cambridge, MA: Newbury House Publishers. 
Stevick, E. W. (1981). Teaching and learning languages. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Stevick, E. W. (1990). Humanism in language teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Swaffar, J., & Bacon, S. (1993). Reading and listening comprehension: Perspectives on research and 
implications for practice. A. Omaggio Hadley (Ed.), Research in language learning: Principles, 
processes, and prospects, pp. 124-155. Lincolnwood, IL: National Textbook Company in conjunction 
with the American Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages. 
Swales, J. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Taylor, H. M. (1981). Learning to Listen to English. TESOL Quarterly 15(1), 41-50. 
Underhill, A. (1989). Process in humanistic education. ELT Journal, 43(4), 250-260. 
Ur, P. (1984). Teaching listening comprehension. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Van Patten, B. (1989). Can learners attend to form and content while processing input? Hispania 72, 409-
417. 
Vogely, A. (1995). Perceived strategy use during performance on three authentic listening comprehension 
tasks. The Modern Language Journal 79, 41-56. 
Voss, B. (1984). Perception of first-language and second-language texts: a comparative study. Bielefelder 
Beiträge zur Sprachlehrvorschung 13(2), 131-153. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. M. Cole, V. 
John-Steiner, S. Scribner, & E. Souberman (Eds. and Trans.). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Wells, G. (1994). The complementary contributions of Halliday and Vygotsky to a "language-based 
theory of learning." Linguistics and Education 6(1), 41-90. 
Wenden, A. (1991). Learner strategies for learner autonomy. New York: Prentice Hall International. 
Wenden, A. (1995). Learner training in context: A knowledge-based approach. System 23, 183-194. 
Wenden, A., & Rubin, J. (1987). Learner strategies in language learning. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall. 
Willing, K. (1985). Helping adults develop their learning strategies. Sydney: AMES. 
Willing, K. (1989). Teaching how to learn. Learning strategies in ESL: A teachers guide.  Sydney: 
National Centre for English Language Teaching and Research. 
Wipf, J. A. (1984). Strategies for teaching second language listening comprehension. Foreign Language 
Annals 17(4), 345-348. 
Wolff, D. (1987). Some assumptions about second language text comprehension. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition 
