Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num2/editors.html 
January 2000, Volume 3, Number 2 
pp. 1-2 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 2000, ISSN 1094-3501 1 
 
 
 
FROM THE EDITORS 
 
We would like to wish our readers a happy New Year and to report that the coming of 
the millenium had no adverse effect on the journal. In fact, we have only good news to 
report. 
First, we are very pleased to welcome Dr. Dorothy Chun, Associate Professor of 
German at the University of California, Santa Barbara, and a frequent contributor to the 
journal, who has joined the editorial team. Dr. Chun is the Guest Editor for this special 
issue on "The Role of Computer Technology in Second Language Acquisition 
Research." Her enthusiasm, energy, and dedication, as well as her expertise in Second 
Language Acquisition and Computer-Assisted Language Learning will strengthen the 
ability of our editorial team to bring you exciting information about the rapidly growing 
field of language learning and technology. 
Second, we are happy to announce that beginning with this issue, Language Learning & 
Technology will increase its publication schedule from two to three issues per year. Note 
our new publication schedule for the next two years which will align the volumes with 
calendar years: 
January 2000 Vol. 3, No. 2 
May 2000 Vol. 4, No. 1 
September 2000 Vol. 4, No. 2 
January 2001 Vol. 5, No. 1 
May 2001 Vol. 5, No. 2 
September 2001 Vol. 5, No. 3 
 
Our publication schedule includes a series of exciting special issues. The May 2000 
issue (Vol. 4, No. 1), edited by Dorothy Chun, will constitute Part II of the current 
special issue on the "The Role of Computer Technology in Second Language 
Acquisition Research." Our September 2000 issue (Vol. 4, No. 2), guest-edited by Rick 
Kern will be dedicated to the topic of "Literacies and Technologies." The May 2001 
issue (Vol. 5, No. 2), edited by Irene Thompson, will deal with "Computer-Assisted 
Language Testing." Finally, the theme of the September issue (Vol. 5, No. 3), guest-
edited by Chris Tribble and Michael Barlow, is "Using Corpora in Language Teaching 
and Learning." 
Third, in a continual effort to make our journal as reader-friendly as possible, we are 
pleased to announce that starting with this issue our readers will be able to access the 
journal's full archives by a new set of indices (by author, title, issue, and subject) and by 
content searches of the complete set of full-text articles. 
We would like to report one more change. Beginning with the next issue, Jennifer 
Leeman, Ph.D. candidate in Applied Linguistics at Georgetown University, will take 
over as book and software review editor of Language Learning & Technology. We 
would like to thank India Plough and Alison Mackey, our outgoing book and software 
editors for their superb contribution to the journal. 
 
Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num2/editors.html 
January 2000, Volume 3, Number 2 
pp. 1-2 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 2000, ISSN 1094-3501 2 
We hope you will continue supporting our journal by sending us manuscripts, 
commentaries, and reviews , and by taking out a free subscription. We look forward to 
seeing you in May with the second part of the millennial issue on "The Role of 
Computer Technology in Second Language Acquisition Research." 
 
We would like to hear from you. Send us e-mail  with your comments and suggestions. 
And finally, please bookmark the journal's new URL:http://llt.msu.edu. 
 
Mark Warschauer and Irene Thompson 
 
 
 
