Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num1/reply/index.html 
July 1999, Volume 3, Number 1 
pp. 96-104 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 1999, ISSN 1094-3501 
 
96 
RESEARCH QUESTIONS FOR A CALL RESEARCH AGENDA: 
A REPLY TO RAFAEL SALABERRY 
Carol A. Chapelle 
Iowa State University 
 
I am grateful to Rafael Salaberry for his comments on my paper "CALL in the year 2000: Still in search 
of research paradigms?" takes up the discussion that I hoped the paper would motivate about fundamental 
issues in CALL research--issues such as what the relevant research questions are, why particular research 
methods are appropriate, and how CALL research relates to second language acquisition (SLA) research. 
In the interest of moving the discussion forward, I have responded to each of the points that Salaberry has 
raised. Points (a) through (e) below are quoted directly from his paper: 
 
(a) The literature review on research perspectives of classroom discourse needs to be expanded [beyond 
what is presented in Chapelle's 1997 paper]. 
The development of fruitful directions for CALL research can benefit from the perspectives of other SLA 
discourse work than what I illustrated in my 1997 paper if that work is linked to the study of CALL. 
Salaberry points out that the general questions and examples of research that I suggested represent only a 
fraction of the issues that a CALL research agenda should take up and therefore that sociocultural 
approaches to L2 classroom discourse should also be consulted. In my view, this is a reasonable 
suggestion, but it should include the additional step of articulating the implications of sociocultural 
perspectives for CALL research in terms of the research questions and methods that they imply. For 
example, as Salaberry points out, Warschaeur (1996) takes a step in this direction by summarizing some 
of the tenets of sociocultural theory and research results from studies of computer-mediated-
communication. In another paper, he goes further toward what I see as necessary for arguing about the 
relevance of particular research paradigms: 
 
In researching the use of new technologies by L2 learners, one might want to look at questions such as 
these: What new literacies does multimedia computer technology demand, both inside and outside the 
classroom? How does the development of these new literacies intersect with issues of class, race, gender, 
and identity? How does the sociocultural context of particular educational institutions or communities 
affect the learning and practice of electronic literacies? (Warschauer, 1998, p. 759) 
 
Having identified these as important questions, he suggests a critical approach to the study of CALL, 
which might, for example, entail the perspectives and methods of critical classroom discourse analysis 
(Kumaravadivelu, 1999). In short, research paradigms for CALL can benefit from further exploration of 
second language classroom discourse perspectives, but only to the extent that they help to frame CALL 
research questions and suggest methods for addressing these questions. 
 
(b) Research domains other than discourse analysis may also be relevant for the analysis of pedagogical 
effectiveness of CALL. 
 
Salaberry's assertion that other domains may be equally or more relevant than SLA for investigating 
CALL is one that is made repeatedly in the CALL literature. His example is that computational linguistics 
should be as relevant as SLA for guiding research on the effectiveness of a program such as Kommissar, 
Carol Chapelle RESEARCH QUESTIONS FOR A CALL RESEARCH… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 97 
which relies on natural language processing technologies. To evaluate this claim, it is informative to 
consider the research objectives of computational linguistics. Computational linguistics investigates how 
rules of language and language processing can be used to write computer programs that recognize and 
produce human language. The focus is on the nature of the formalisms that adequately work in language 
generation and recognition. Research methods therefore consist of proving algorithms, writing software, 
and testing it on relevant data. This work is clearly of interest to those developing some types of CALL 
software. The principle research questions and methods, however, point in a different direction from those 
of concern in CALL where the questions focus on such issues as language use, language acquisition, and 
the nature of electronic literacies. 
 In... The primary question is... In CALL, the corresponding question is... 
Educational  
technology 
How can computers best be used to 
improve learning? 
How can computers best be used to 
promote development of L2 
communicative competence? 
Computers 
and 
collaborative  
learning 
How can computer-assisted activities 
be 
designed to promote learning through 
collaboration?  
How can collaborative computer-assisted 
language learning activities be designed 
to promote development of L2 
communicative competence? 
Artificial 
intelligence 
How can rules of logic be 
implemented in computer programs to 
perform functions requiring 
knowledge-based analysis and 
judgement? 
How can computer programs with 
capability for knowledge-based analysis 
and judgement be used to promote 
development of L2 communicative 
competence? 
Computational 
linguistics 
How can rules of language, and 
language processing be used to write 
computer programs to recognize and 
produce human language? 
How can computer programs for 
language recognition and production 
promote development of L2 
communicative competence? 
Corpus 
linguistics 
What do descriptions and analyses of 
language from large corpora of texts 
reveal about the lexical patterns and 
grammatical structures that people 
use? 
How can learners' use of corpora promote  
development of L2 communicative  
  
Looking at research questions across some of the areas that have been suggested as relevant to CALL, one 
can see that CALL research is concerned with either a narrower or, as in the case of computational 
linguistics, a different set of issues (see Table 1). Other domains may have somewhat related objectives 
from which CALL research can borrow methodologically; however, none addresses the specific concerns 
about development of L2 competence. I therefore believe it is necessary to begin by identifying the 
research questions essential for progress in CALL. The uncritical statement that another area may be 
Carol Chapelle RESEARCH QUESTIONS FOR A CALL RESEARCH… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 98 
relevant for the study of CALL threatens to make the search for research paradigms a wild goose chase. 
What is needed to appropriately draw from other disciplines is a clear notion of exactly what they have to 
offer to the development, use, and evaluation of CALL. What is needed to understand the nature of CALL 
evaluation is a clear formulation of research questions that pertain to language teachers' choices about 
CALL--the types of questions suggested by Chapelle (1997) and Warschauer (1998). 
 
Table 1. Guiding questions of other disciplines and CALL 
 
(c) The theoretical analysis of the psycholinguistic process of L2 development needs to be specified in 
further detail. 
 
Many of the papers describing research within an interactionist perspective toward SLA have outlined the 
psycholinguistic processes in more detail than the brief summary I presented in my paper (see Chapelle, 
1998, for more detail). While it is possible that additional theoretical analysis of this process may generate 
some useful research hypotheses and empirical research questions for CALL, in my view, it would be 
more fruitful to investigate empirically the research questions that the current theory implies. The 
problem with theorizing an excessively detailed model without a coordinated research program is that the 
theory does not have the necessary empirical support and the theorizers may have difficulty in articulating 
what empirical support would consist of (McLaughlin, 1987). Existing theory appears to provide a 
number of useful hypotheses and constructs that need to be operationalized in CALL research. 
 
What seems unproductive to me is perpetuation of the argument that the field knows so little about SLA 
(e.g., because theories need to be specified in greater detail) that research and development in CALL 
should proceed with no input from work in SLA. In fact, interactionist theory is sufficiently detailed to 
draw principles for CALL. Table 2 illustrates some of the principles that one might posit from this theory, 
the research questions that they imply for CALL, and possible process-oriented research approaches for 
investigating these questions. Results of both process- and product-oriented research can be used to 
evaluate these theory-based principles and their applicability to various CALL activities. My paper 
illustrates only a few examples, but as Salaberry points out, examples of how relevant constructs have 
been, or might be, operationalized appear throughout the research on instructed SLA, and I agree that 
examination of these studies is useful. 
 
Table 2. Principles of interactionist SLA that imply CALL research questions and methods 
 
 Principles of Interactionist SLA Example Research Questions Example Research Methods 
1) Learners should notice the 
linguistic characteristics of the 
target language input that 
learners receive need to be 
noticed 
1) Do learners attend to the 
linguistic characteristics of the 
target language input? 
1) Introspective methods 
seeking students' reports of 
what they attend to. 
2) Learners need to have 
opportunities to produce target 
2) Do learners produce 
"comprehensible output?" 
2) Discourse analysis 
investigating learners' 
Carol Chapelle RESEARCH QUESTIONS FOR A CALL RESEARCH… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 99 
language output. linguistic output in CALL 
tasks in which language is used 
communicatively. 
3) Learners need to notice errors 
in their output. 
3) Is there any evidence that 
learners notice errors in their 
output? 
3) Introspective methods 
including learners' reports of 
their noticing errors. 
4) Learners need to correct their 
linguistic output. 
4) Do learners correct their 
linguistic output? 
4) Interaction analysis 
identifying learners' 
corrections of their own 
language. 
5) Learners need to engage in 
target language interaction 
whose structure can be modified 
as needed for comprehension. 
5) To what extent do the 
learners interact with the 
computer or with other 
language users, and to what 
extent are "normal" 
interactional structures 
modified to focus on the form 
and meaning of the language? 
5) Analysis of learners' 
language and other interactions 
that modify the interaction to 
help with comprehension.. 
 
(d) The analysis of electronic and face-to-face communication does not take into account relevant 
differences brought about by distinct communication media. 
 
In response to this comment, I would ask, What are the differences that are relevant for identifying CALL 
research questions from interactionist theory? My point in looking at similarities was 
 
1) that a need exists to identify research questions and methods for CALL, 
2) that interactionist theory makes some hypotheses about the task conditions that may be 
beneficial for SLA (e.g., those that focus attention on language or that allow learners to request 
modified input), and 
3) that CALL tasks which create these conditions might be researched through the same methods 
used in SLA research. 
 
In other words, it is the similarities that are of interest because they allow for identification of features 
expected to be beneficial in CALL, and therefore raise possibilities for research. An analysis of the 
differences between CALL tasks and those used in other research, teaching, and language use is of 
interest for other purposes, such as to assess the generalizeability of results from research using CALL to 
tasks that do not rely on CALL (Chapelle, 1999). It is important to note that part 3 of my point above was 
not to generalize findings from research on face-to-face communication to interactions in CALL. Instead, 
the suggestion is to identify potential foci for research based on prior work within the relevant domain. 
Carol Chapelle RESEARCH QUESTIONS FOR A CALL RESEARCH… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 100 
Results of such research would provide evidence pertaining to generalizability. 
 
An example of such research was a study of the effects of requests for modified input in a CALL listening 
comprehension activity. Hsu (1994) conducted a focused analysis of interactions between learners and the 
computer to identify their requests for modified input. The normal interaction in this part of the program 
consisted of learners' requests for continuation of a story with accompanying pictures on one computer 
screen after another. The researcher documented "interactional modifications" evident by learners' 
requests for repetitions, written transcriptions, or written definitions for words in the input. She also 
recorded the specific linguistic input associated with each of the learners' requests. She then assessed 
outcomes through pre- and post-tests which had been constructed specifically for the research to include 
the lexical phrases in the input. 
Table 3 displays the data gathered for one student in this study. The first column shows the target words, 
and the next two columns show pre- and post-test results indicating improvement in comprehension on a 
number of items. Improvement is indicated in the fourth column with a plus for improvement and a minus 
for no improvement. The final column codes whether or not the learner requested a modification for the 
segment of text in which that item occurred. By first coding pluses as 1 and minuses as 0, the researcher 
calculated a Phi correlation of .67 for the data shown in the example. In the study, data were gathered for 
15 learners each of whom completed two listening passages. For the 15 students, mean phi correlations 
for one of the stories was .60 and for the other was .71, which means that this research found significant 
relationships between requests for modified input and improvement in listening comprehension. This type 
of research provides some evidence for the validity of the modified input hypothesis in CALL. 
Table 3. Pre-test, post-test, improvement analysis, and recorded requests for modifications for nine words 
in the study by Hsu (1994). 
 
  
Words  
Pre-test 
Responses  
Post-test 
Responses  
improvement?1  requested 
modification?2  
ice  high  Ice  +  +  
age  area  Age  +  +  
earth       
   
  
-  
-  
climate      Climate  +  -  
cooler       
   
  
-  
-  
winter      Winter  +  +  
Carol Chapelle RESEARCH QUESTIONS FOR A CALL RESEARCH… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 101 
centuries      Centuries  +  -  
sunlight     Sunlight  +  -  
huge      Huge  +  +  
1 If learners were unable to fill in the word correctly on the pretest but were able to on the post-test, they were awarded a plus for 
improvement; if they did the same or worse from pretest to post test, they were given a minus. 
2 If learners chose a modification (repetition, text, or dictionary) when they were listening to the segment with the target word, the 
word was coded with a plus for use of modifications; if they did not choose a modification, the word was given a minus. 
 
(e) The relative importance of computer mediated communication (CMC) in the proposed research 
agenda appears to deserve greater emphasis given the current level of interactivity achieved by various 
communication media. 
 
I question two aspects of this suggestion. First, the issue of what should be emphasized in a research 
agenda depends on who is conducting the research and for what purpose rather on any inherent 
capabilities of software. Researchers investigating intelligent tutoring systems, for example, might argue 
that learners' use of these systems deserves more attention because of the amount of time and money they 
are devoting to their construction. Teachers whose students regularly engage in CMC outside of class may 
be more interested in research on how to structure individualized CALL activities with particular focus on 
language in class. In short, what deserves emphasis in a research agenda for CALL will ultimately 
depended on the professional, personal, and political agenda of the researcher. 
 
Second, I question the assumption that CALL activities based on computer-mediated communication 
inherently achieve a higher level of interactivity than other forms of CALL. Human-human interaction of 
CMC can clearly take a greater variety of forms than that of computer-learner interaction, but both the 
level and quality of interactivity achieved in particular CALL activities are empirical questions that can 
only be addressed through the analysis of interactions . For example, in a study of CALL which 
incorporated CMC, Lamy & Goodfellow (1999) identified what they saw as important differences in the 
types of interactions which they observed. They contrasted social conversation (Table 4) which requires 
little negotiation of meaning or stretching of competence, with reflective conversation (Table 5) in which 
learners talk about the target language and the learning task, thereby obviously focusing their attention on 
the language. The researchers claim that engaging in reflective conversation is the more worthy goal for 
language learning because such exchanges provide an opportunity to negotiate understanding, make 
explicit reference to language, and to engage in a context where control is negotiated. Research like this 
which aims to interpret types of interactivity on the basis of empirical data begins to appropriately tease 
apart the complexities inherent in the construct of interactivity. What needs to be investigated is the extent 
to which quality interaction can be prompted by particular task demands. 
 
Carol Chapelle RESEARCH QUESTIONS FOR A CALL RESEARCH… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 102 
 
Table 4. An example of social conversation (Lamy & Goodfellow, 1999) 
 
Participant  Language  Function  
Student 1 A quelle heure ouvira-t-il? Je pense que je voudrais 
une biere... 
Imaginative/Social 
Student 2 Bonjour, E. je voudrais une bière aussi mais il n'y a pas 
de vertu dans une bière virtuelle... 
Imaginative/Social 
Student 3 Bonjour D. Juis suis a Caen le 23 aout. Et vous? S. Request?/Social 
Student 4 Bonjour S. Moi aussi je serai à Caen le vignt-troisième 
aoüt. Peut-être on peut recontre... 
Invitation?/Social 
 
Table 5. An example of reflective conversation (Lamy & Goodfellow, 1999) 
 
 Participant Language  Function  
Student 1 Pour ma première liste j'ai choisi les mots suivants: déchiré, 
couler... Je ne comprends pas les "groups" et à quoi sert cet 
outil. ... Est ce qu'il y a quelqu'un (une) qui peut donner moi 
des examples ... 
Explaining 
learning 
processes 
 
Requesting help 
Student 2 D'apres moi, les groupes servent comme un aide-memoir Giving help 
 
Salaberry concludes with the suggestion that a valid research proposal should be attentive to important 
principled distinctions incorporated into theoretical frameworks. In contrast, I have argued that such 
general distinctions provide no guidance for research on CALL (Chapelle, 1990). While they may be 
useful as general organizing principles for introducing types of CALL software, from a research 
perspective they offer no substantive framework because they target the wrong level of analysis. Figure 1 
abstracts from the complex reality of second language classrooms a set of relationships of interest in 
CALL research. The arrows should be read as "influences." In other words, the horizontal reads as 
follows: (1) Available CALL software influences the (2) CALL activities that teachers plan, which, in 
turn, influence (3) the work that learners engage in; this work on CALL (hopefully) positively influences 
(4) learners' ability to use the language beyond the CALL activity. 
Carol Chapelle RESEARCH QUESTIONS FOR A CALL RESEARCH… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 103 
(1) 
Available 
CALL Software  
4 (2) 
Teacher planned 
CALL activities  
4  (3) 
Learners' work on 
CALL  
4  (4) 
Learners' 
ability to use 
the language  
  
 
 
5  5   
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 Teacher's knowledge 
Teacher's philosophy 
Class goals 
Institutional practices  
    Learner's identity 
Learners' knowledge 
Learners' attitudes  
     
   
 
Figure 1. Interrelated influences in CALL software, teacher-planned activities, learners' CALL use, and 
language ability 
  
I have suggested that the most critical research questions center around (3), learner's work on CALL, 
because regardless of what the teacher plans and regardless of the classification of the software as tool or 
tutor, it is the learners' actual language use during the activity that is likely to influence future ability. The 
research questions Warschauer (1998, p. 759) poses focus primarily on the factors that help to define (4), 
the learner's ability to use the language, in a way that can inform teachers' knowledge, and philosophy, 
class goals, and institutional practices. He asks, "What new literacies does multimedia computer 
technology demand, both inside and outside the classroom?" In other words, what kind of language 
abilities do learners need to function in the electronic world of the 21st century? These needs should be 
central to the activities that teachers plan for the language classroom. He asks "How does the 
development of these new literacies intersect with issues of class, race, gender, and identity? In other 
words, how do these learner factors influence their needs (4) and their work on CALL in the classroom 
(3)? He asks, "How does the sociocultural context of particular educational institutions or communities 
affect the learning and practice of electronic literacies?" In other words, how do institutional practices in 
language programs affect the CALL activities teachers plan (2), and how do institutional practices outside 
the language program affect the abilities learners require (4)? 
 
If abstract, binary distinctions between types of software bear some relationship to relevant research 
questions about CALL, what are these questions? 
 
In closing, I invite other readers to comment on the issues Rafael Salaberry and I have raised concerning 
CALL research. In my view, this critical area of our profession has received far too little attention in 
applied linguistics and language teaching. As a professor of TESL/applied linguistics, I am frequently 
contacted by graduate students wishing to pursue research on CALL but not knowing where to begin. 
General suggestions in the literature that many disciplines should inform the study of CALL do not help 
to identify the relevant research questions. The critical research issues and appropriate methods need to be 
formulated so development, use, and research of CALL can proceed in fruitful directions in the 21st 
Carol Chapelle RESEARCH QUESTIONS FOR A CALL RESEARCH… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 104 
century. To underscore Salaberry's point, we need to revisit these issues regularly--not by reinventing 
them but by building on previous discussion and research results. 
 
REFERENCES 
Chapelle, C. A. (1999). Investigation of "Authentic L2 Tasks." In J.Egbert & E. Hanson-Smith (Eds.), 
Computer-enhanced language learning (pp. 101-115). Alexandria, VA: TESOL Publications. 
 
Chapelle, C. A. (1998). Multimedia CALL: Lessons to be learned from research on instructed SLA. 
Language Learning and Technology, 2 (1), 22-34. Retrieved July 22, 1999 from the World Wide Web: 
http://polyglot.cal.msu.edu/llt/vol2num1/article1/index.html. 
 
Chapelle, C.A. (1997). CALL in the year 2000: Still in search of research paradigms? Language Learning 
and Technology, 2 (1), 22-34. Retrieved July 22, 1999 from the World Wide Web: 
http://polyglot.cal.msu.edu/llt/vol1num1/chapelle/default.html. 
 
Chapelle, C. A. (1990). The discourse of computer-assisted language learning: toward a context for 
descriptive research. TESOL Quarterly, 24, 199-225. 
 
Hsu, J. (1994). Computer assisted language learning (CALL): The effect of ESL students' use of 
interactional modifications on listening comprehension. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Department of 
Curriculum and Instruction, College of Education, Iowa State University, Ames. 
 
Kumaravadivelu, B. (1999). Critical classroom discourse analysis. TESOL Quarterly, 33(3), 453-484. 
Lamay, M-N., & Goodfellow, R. (1999). "Reflective conversation" in the virtual language classroom." 
Language Learning & Technology, 2(2), 43-61. Retrieved July 22, 1999 from the World Wide Web: 
http://polyglot.cal.msu.edu/llt/vol2num2/article2/index.html. 
 
McLaughlin, B. (1987). Theories of second-language acquisition. London: Edward Arnold. 
Warschauer, M. (1997). Computer-mediated collaborative learning: Theory and practice. The Modern 
Language Journal, 81, 470-481. 
 
Warschauer, M. (1998). Researching technology in TESOL: Determinist, instrumental, and critical 
approaches. TESOL Quarterly, 32(4), 757-761. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Carol Chapelle is a professor in the Department of English and Program in Linguistics at Iowa State 
University where she teaches courses in second language acquisition, language testing, and computers in 
applied linguistics. She has published extensively in the areas of computer-assisted language learning and 
language assessment. 
E-mail: carolc@iastate.edu 
 
 
