Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num2/announce/index.html 
January 2000, Volume 3, Number 2 
pp. 13-16 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 2000, ISSN 1094-3501  
 
13 
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS 
This page includes announcements from the organizations sponsoring LLT. More complete listings of 
announcements can be found at the Applied Linguistics Virtual Library, the Agora Language 
Marketplace, and the Centre for Language Teaching and Research's International Conference Schedule. 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource 
Center (NFLRC)  
Less commonly taught languages, particularly those of Asia and the Pacific, are the focus of the 
University of Hawai`i National Foreign Language Resource Center. 
The NFLRC proudly presents its 2000 NFLRC SUMMER INSTITUTES! The first workshop 
COMPUTER-BASED TESTS FOR LESS COMMONLY TAUGHT LANGUAGES (June 12-23) will 
incorporate training in language test construction and evaluation and examine the role of technology in 
assessment, focusing on Web and computer-based testing (self-assessment, proficiency, achievement) for 
less commonly taught languages. The second workshop,  PERFORMANCE-BASED CHINESE 
LANGUAGE INSTRUCTION (July 10-21), conducted in tandem with summer Chinese courses at the 
University of Hawai'i at Manoa, focuses on strategies for instruction and testing to enhance learner 
performance on communicative tasks in the 4 skills. Deadline for application for both workshops is 
February 1, 2000. 
In addition to engaging in research and materials development projects and conducting summer institutes 
for language professionals, the UH NFLRC makes available a wide variety of publications on Center 
projects and programs. 
Advanced learners of Chinese and Korean may celebrate the release of KAN NA! and HANGUL-RO 
BOJA! on CD-ROM. The lessons are based on authentic materials (i.e., materials created by native 
speakers for native speakers) and include newspaper articles, personal letters, video interviews, 
informational brochures, and television commercials. The activities are designed to activate in the learner 
the strategies used by native speakers to comprehend text and video. In addition, the popular Chinese 
Language Video Clips is now available on cross-platform CD-ROM. 
If you haven't visited our Foreign Language Multimedia Software site yet, be sure to check in. At this site 
you may search for multimedia instructional materials by language, find out about authoring tools, view a 
selected bibliography of CALL evaluations, and consult criteria for preparing your own software 
evaluations. 
Other new publications from the NFLRC include a number of additions to the NFLRC NetWorks 
collection of online publications. 
You may contact the NFLRC at nflrc@hawaii.edu. 
 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education 
and Research (CLEAR)  
CLEAR brings together educators in language teaching and learning from multiple disciplines to create 
language learning materials, conduct research, and lead professional development institutes on the 
Michigan State University campus. CLEAR's activities and projects are applicable for educators of both 
less commonly and more commonly taught languages. 
CLEAR has produced materials such as "Foreign Languages: Doors to Opportunity," a video and 
discussion guide for teachers, administrators, counselors, parents, and students which promotes the study 
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  14 
of foreign languages; "Test Development Workbook and Video," a material to assist teachers and 
administrators in the development of FL assessment tools; and "Tasks for Communication and Grammar" 
(for Thai and Japanese). CLEAR's most recently developed material is an interactive CD-ROM for 
Elementary Business Chinese which is currently in the beta-testing stage. 
CLEAR's 2000 Summer Institutes focus on "Writing in the Foreign Language Classroom," "Business 
Language for the High School Classroom," "Computer-Assisted Language Learning Materials 
Development," "The Internet in Foreign Language Instruction: Introductory Techniques," and "The 
Internet in Foreign Language Instruction: Advanced Techniques." Stipends to defray expenses are 
available to most participants currently working in the US. 
CLEAR also produces "CLEAR News," a biyearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, 
and materials. 
Visit CLEAR's website (http://clear.msu.edu) or contact the office (517-432-2286 / clear@msu.edu) for 
more information. 
 
Apprentissage des Langues et Systèmes d'Information et de 
Communication (ALSIC) 
 
ALSIC (Language Learning and Information and Communication Systems) is an electronic journal in 
French for researchers and practitioners in fields related to applied linguistics, didactics, 
psycholinguistics, educational sciences, computational linguistics, and computer science. 
The journal gives priority to papers from the French-speaking community and/or in French, but it also 
regularly invites papers in other languages so as to strengthen scientific and technical exchanges between 
linguistic communities that too often remain separate. The editorial board of ALSIC invites you to contact 
them for any prospective contributions at the following electronic address: alsic@lifc.univ-fcomte.fr. 
Center for Advanced Research on Language Acquisition, 
University of Minnesota (CARLA) 
 
CARLA (http://carla.acad.umn.edu/) is one of nine National Language Resource Centers whose role is to 
improve the nation's capacity to teach and learn foreign languages effectively. Launched in 1993 with 
funding from the national Title VI Language Resource Center program of the U.S. Department of 
Education, CARLA's mission is to study multilingualism and multiculturalism, to develop knowledge of 
second language acquisition, and to advanced the quality of second language teaching, learning, and 
assessment by 
 • conducting research and action projects  
 • sharing research-based and other forms of knowledge across disciplines and education systems  
 • extending, exchanging, and applying this knowledge in the wider society  
CARLA's research and action initiatives include a focus on: the articulation of language instruction, 
content-based language teaching through technology, culture and language studies, less commonly taught 
languages, language immersion education, second language assessment, second language learning 
strategies, and technology and second language learning. 
To share its latest research and program opportunities with language teachers around the country, 
CARLA offers the following resources: a summer institute program for teachers; a database which lists 
where less commonly taught languages are taught throughout the country; listservs for teachers of less 
commonly taught languages and immersion educators; a working paper series; conferences and 
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  15 
workshops; and a battery of instruments in French, German, and Spanish for assessing learners' 
proficiency in reading, writing, speaking, and listening at the Intermediate-Low level on the ACTFL 
scale. Check out these and other CARLA resources on the CARLA website at http://carla.acad.umn.edu. 
 
The Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL)  
The Center for Applied Linguistics aims to promote and improve the teaching and learning of languages, 
identify and solve problems related to language and culture, and serve as a resource for information about 
language and culture. CAL is a private, nonprofit organization that carries out a wide range of activities in 
the fields of English as a second language, foreign languages, cultural education, and linguistics. These 
activities include research, teacher education, information dissemination, instructional design, conference 
planning, technical assistance, program evaluation, and policy analysis. Publications include books on 
topics in language education, online databases of language programs and assessments, curricula, research 
reports, teacher training materials, and print and online newsletters. 
CAL builds knowledge and applies it to real world issues through publications, a World Wide Web site at 
http://www.cal.org, "Language and Literacy in Public Life" events, and in many other ways. CAL 
responds to current needs in language education with accurate, accessible, and timely language resources. 
Major CAL projects include: the following: 
• ERIC Clearinghouse on Languages and Linguistics (http://www.cal.org/ericcll)  
• National Clearinghouse for ESL Literacy Education (http://www.cal.org/ncle)  
• Refugee Service Center (http://www.cal.org/rsc)  
• PreK-12 School Services Center (contact info@cal.org for information).  
CAL collaborates with other language education organizations on the following projects: 
 • Center for Research on Education, Diversity, & Excellence (http://www.cal.org/crede)  
• Improving Foreign Languages in the Schools Project of the Northeast and Islands Regional      
Laboratory at Brown University (http://www.cal.org/earlylang)  
 • National Capital Language Resource Center (http://www.cal.org/nclrc)  
 • National K-12 Foreign Language Resource Center (http://www.cal.org/public/k12nflrc.htm)  
 • National Network for Early Language Learning (http://www.cal.org/public/nnell.htm)  
For more information about CAL projects and services, visit http://www.cal.org. 
 
Computer Assisted Language Instruction Consortium 
(CALICO) 
 
Since its inception in 1983, CALICO has served as an international forum for language teachers who 
want to develop and utilize the potential of advanced technology to support their teaching and research 
needs. Through its Annual Symposia, Special Interest Groups (SIGs), CALICO Journal, CALICO 
Monograph Series, CALICO Resource Guide, and numerous other publications, CALICO provides both 
leadership and perspective in the ever-changing field of computer-assisted instruction. 
The strength of CALICO derives from the enthusiasm, creativity, and diversity of its members. It 
comprises language teachers and researchers from universities, military academies, community colleges, 
K-12 schools, government agencies, and commercial enterprises. To learn more about CALICO activities 
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  16 
and how to participate in them, visit the CALICO homepage at http://www.calico.org. 
 
European Association for Computer Assisted Language 
Learning (EUROCALL)  
EUROCALL is an association of language teaching professionals from Europe and worldwide aiming to 
 • Promote the use of foreign languages within Europe  
 • Provide a European focus for all aspects of the use of technology for language learning  
 • Enhance the quality, dissemination, and efficiency of CALL materials  
We also disseminate information via the ReCALL Journal and other publications, organise special 
interest meetings and annual conferences, and work towards the exploitation of electronic 
communications systems. For those involved in education and training, EUROCALL provides 
information and advice on all aspects of the use of technology for language learning. 
Forthcoming EUROCALL conferences: 
 • EUROCALL 2000, University of Abertay Dundee, Scotland, 31 August to 2 September 2000  
 • EUROCALL 2001, University of Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 30 August to 1 September 2001  
For full details, contact us at  http://www.hull.ac.uk/cti/eurocall.htm. 
  
International Association for Language Learning 
Technology (IALL) 
 
Established in 1965, IALL is an organization of professionals in a variety of fields who are committed to 
supporting and extending language learning, teaching, and research through the use of technology. Its 
members include directors and staff of language labs, resource or media centers and grant projects, 
language teachers at all levels, developers and vendors of hardware and software, and interested others. 
IALL offers a Foreign Language Software Database, LLTI listserv (Language Learning and Technology 
International), and publications such as IALL Journal, IALL Lab Design Kit, and IALL Lab Management 
Manual. 
IALL is co-sponsoring (with LLA of Japan) the 4th International Conference on Foreign Language 
Education and Technology (FLEAT IV), July 29-August 1, 2000, at the Kobe Bay Sheraton Hotel and 
Rokko Island Center in Kobe, Japan. The theme is Language Learning and Multimedia: Bridging 
Humanity and Technology. For details on this conference, please visit http://www.hll.kutc.kansai-
u.ac.jp:8000/fleat4.html. 
Contact Lauren Rosen for IALL publications or Ed Dente for IALL membership information. For details, 
visit the IALL Web site at http://www.iall.net.  
 
