Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num1/comment/index.html 
July 1999, Volume 3, Number 1 
pp. 91-95 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
Copyright © 1999, ISSN 1094-3501 91 
CALL IN THE YEAR 2000:  
STILL DEVELOPING THE RESEARCH AGENDA 
A commentary on Carol Chapelle's CALL in the Year 2000: Still in search of research 
paradigms. Langauge Learning & Technology, Vol. 1, No. 1. 
Rafael Salaberry 
Pennsylvania State University 
In this commentary I would like to address several aspects of the proposal for a research agenda for 
CALL advanced by Chapelle (1997). The explicit aim of Chapelle's article is the identification of "key 
questions about CALL" as well as "effective research methods to be used to answer them" (p. 19). 
Chapelle raises a number of interesting points that will prove helpful for the design of future studies. I 
believe, however, that some points of her argument deserve greater emphasis whereas others could benefit 
from a more comprehensive analysis. The five areas of improvement identified in this commentary are (a) 
the literature review on research perspectives of classroom discourse needs to be further expanded, (b) 
research domains other than discourse analysis may also be relevant for the analysis of the pedagogical 
effectiveness of CALL, (c) the theoretical analysis of the psycholinguistic process of L2 development 
needs to be specified in further detail, (d) the analysis of electronic and face-to-face communication does 
not take into account relevant differences brought about by distinct communication media, and (e) the 
relative importance of computer mediated communication (CMC) in the proposed research agenda 
appears to deserve greater emphasis given the current level of interactivity achieved by various 
communication media. 
Chapelle points out that CALL practice draws on cross-disciplinary work and argues further that research 
from a number of areas such as computational linguistics, instructional design, communicative language 
theory, and psychology "fall short of providing the concrete principles needed to investigate CALL for 
instructed SLA" (p. 21). As a consequence, Chapelle states that "what is needed. . .is a perspective on 
CALL which provides appropriate empirical research methods for investigating the critical questions 
about how CALL can be used to improve instructed SLA" (p. 21). For this purpose, Chapelle focuses on 
the findings from research studies documenting language input and interaction in classroom instruction 
(interactionist approach) as well as the "research methods and assumptions they rest on" (p. 21). While I 
do not wish to deny the importance of the specific perspectives on classroom discourse explicitly 
described by Chapelle, I believe that Chapelle's review of the background literature is limited. For 
instance, the recent appearance of a substantial number of theoretical and empirical studies on the analysis 
of L2 classroom interaction from the perspective of sociocultural theory has not been incorporated to 
Chapelle's analysis (e.g., Brooks & Donato, 1994; Hall, 1993; Lantolf & Appel, 1994; McCafferty, 1992; 
Swain & Lapkin, 1995). 
The apparent lack of reference to sociocultural approaches in Chapelle's article is highly relevant for two 
main reasons. First, given that sociocultural theory emphasizes the role of individuals' interests and 
motivation (e.g., concept of self- versus object-regulation) as well as the role of inherently educational 
goals (e.g., concept of Zone of Proximal Development), it represents a new perspective that provides a 
contrast with strictly information-processing approaches. Second, some researchers have specifically 
addressed the challenges brought about by new technologies for educational purposes--such as CALL--
from a strictly sociocultural perspective (e.g., Crook, 1994, Warschauer, 1997; and more recently, van 
Lier, 1999, and Wegerif & Scrimshaw, 1997). Such analysis appears to be inherently relevant for the 
assessment of the future research agenda outlined by Chapelle. 
Rafael Salaberry CALL IN THE YEAR 2000:… 
Language Learning & Technology 92 
Another way in which Chapelle's proposal may be strengthened is by expanding the scope of her 
proposed hierarchy of relevant areas of inquiry (research domains) for CALL studies. In this respect, the 
recommended "shift from general approaches such as those of psychology, computational linguistics, and 
educational technology to specific questions and methods of researchers who investigate instructed SLA" 
is not necessarily justified by Chapelles analysis (p. 28). For instance, the example of the pedagogical 
activity implemented with the German program Kommissar appears to be related to concerns inherently 
tied to the area of computational linguistics as much as they are to concerns from instructed SLA. The 
program Kommissar is ideally based on the use of natural language parsers that analyze learners' queries 
and provide appropriate sociolinguistic responses that allow for the mimicking of real human interaction. 
The limitations of language parsers to mimick human discourse--extensively discussed elsewhere 
(Holland, Kaplan, & Sams, 1995; Murray, 1991; Pinker, 1979; Weizenbaum, 1976)--highlight a research 
area where technological sophistication is actually behind what L2 teachers would like to accomplish. 
This limitation stands in contrast with other technological advances that, as correctly argued by Chapelle, 
"have expanded far beyond prior expectations" (p. 28). 
It is important to mention, however, that Chapelle introduces one caveat that qualifies her position: "these 
questions and methods are fundamental for choosing classroom activities, but they are, of course, not the 
only questions that one might pose about CALL use nor the only informative approach to research [italics 
added]" (p. 28). Among the alternative questions regarded by Chapelle as relevant for the development of 
a research agenda in CALL studies are the analysis of specific linguistic points, the role of metacognitive 
strategies, and the quality of cross-cultural experiences. Given the importance of such research questions 
especially for instructed SLA environments, their analysis should be further expanded in order to provide 
a more comprehensive framework for the development of a valid research agenda (i.e., in search of 
research paradigms). 
Another potential concern about the research objectives identified by Chapelle is related to the apparent 
absence of a comprehensive theoretical analysis of the process of L2 development. For instance, Chapelle 
states that "what was not very well understood years ago. . .is the importance of learners' attention to form 
periodically [italics added] while they are working toward a communicative task goal" (p. 27). She further 
argues that CALL activities can focus learners' attention on form through the use of hypertext links or 
error signals and claims that "the effectiveness of these features needs to be investigated empirically" (p. 
28). The analysis of a loosely defined interplay between a focus on form and a focus on meaning, 
however, may be insufficient for the development of a systematic research agenda. Notice that it is not 
clear in the above-mentioned analysis how the principle of "periodic attention to form" could be 
implemented (i.e., lack of specification of theoretical constructs). In this respect, previous studies have 
explicitly identified various ways of addressing the interplay of attention to form and attention to meaning 
from a variety of clearly articulated theoretical approaches such as comprehension-based activities (Ellis, 
1993), task-based instruction (Foster & Skehan, 1996), structure-based communicative tasks (Loschky & 
Bley-Vroman, 1993), input processing (VanPatten & Cadierno, 1993), incidental attention to form (Long, 
1991), and so forth. The analysis of the relative importance of the above-mentioned theoretical and 
empirical studies needs to be fully addressed in order to outline the goals of a research agenda for the 
analysis of attention to form and attention to meaning in CALL studies. 
Another major concern relates to Chapelle's analysis of the psycholinguistic process that underlies second 
language acquisition. For instance, Chapelle states, "interactional modifications initiated by the learner on 
input from the computer should yield similar psycholinguistic effects [italics added] as those in oral face-
to-face linguistic exchanges in which they were first investigated" (p. 27). Such an assumption, however, 
cannot be taken for granted, as there is little research that shows that human-computer and human-human 
interaction "yield similar psycholinguistic effects." In fact, previous research such as that on human 
versus machine feedback points in the opposite direction (Bloom, 1984; and Anderson, 1990: 455-9 for a 
general overview). As a consequence, the appropriate distinction between computer-human and human-
Rafael Salaberry CALL IN THE YEAR 2000:… 
Language Learning & Technology 93 
human interaction should be further analyzed. Another unwarranted assumption is related to the analysis 
of non-linguistic communication in CALL activities as opposed to face-to-face communication: "Unlike 
L2 classroom tasks many CALL tasks are intended to rely on forms of communication other than the 
target language (e.g., icons and mouse clicks) to accomplish the target goal" (p. 24). Face-to-face 
interaction, however, may be considered to be equally if not more constrained than electronic 
communication by non-linguistic forms of interaction (e.g., Clark & Brennan, 1991; Salaberry, 1996, in 
press). In essence, some a-priori assumptions would be better regarded as research objectives to be 
thoroughly investigated as part of the proposed research agenda for the year 2000 and beyond. 
Finally, as a corollary to the previous argument, it appears that the role of CMC should be regarded as one 
of the important domains of research to be addressed in future studies. Chapelle's strong argument for the 
role of learner-centered instruction leads her to conclude, "the pedagogical goal of CALL activities is for 
learners to improve their ability in the target language through participating in linguistic interactions" (p. 
23). Chapelle's proposal, however, pays attention mostly to CALL activities representative of machine-
human interaction as opposed to human-human interaction implemented in CMC activities (see also 
Chapelle, 1998). In fact, the example about the Portuguese class (the most representative of a CMC-based 
activity) was not comprehensively analyzed to show how features inherent to CMC environments may 
provide a strong foundation for future studies in CALL. In this respect, some recent theoretical studies 
(e.g., Warschauer, 1997) as well as empirical ones (e.g., Beauvois, 1992; Kern, 1995) appear to be highly 
relevant for the purpose of outlining a future research agenda for CALL-based studies and should be 
considered in further detail. 
In effect, the development of a valid research proposal for CALL should be attentive to important 
principled distinctions incorporated into various theoretical frameworks. For instance, the 
conceptualization of CALL systems as tools or tutors (e.g., Higgins, 1988; Levy, 1997), or alternatively, 
as open or closed systems (Crook, 1994; Wegerif & Scrimshaw, 1997), provides a principled foundation 
for the design, use and assessment of CALL software. Such contrasts are relevant for the development of 
a research agenda for CALL because, as Levy argues, "evaluation studies to date have shown a tendency 
to view CALL materials as tutorial in nature" (p. 203). In contrast, when computers are conceptualized as 
tools, the focus is on "how well the tool helps the user accomplish the task, not how well the computer 
can teach" (p. 204). In this regard, the analysis of computer mediated communication, including the 
analysis of learners' use of technical components that render CMC possible, deserves to be at the forefront 
of future research agendas. 
ACKNOWLEDGMNENTS 
I am thankful to the three anonymous reviewers from Language Learning and Technology for their 
comments and suggestions on an earlier version of this paper. 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Rafael Salaberry (Ph.D., Cornell University) is an Assistant Professor in Spanish Applied Linguistics at 
Pennsylvania State University. He has published on topics related to second language acquisition and 
teaching in several refereed journals such as Applied Linguistics, CALICO, Canadian Modern Language 
Review and Modern Language Journal. 
E-mail: salaberry@psu.edu 
REFERENCES 
Anderson, J. (1990). Cognitive Psychology and its Implications. New York: W. Freeman and Co. 
Rafael Salaberry CALL IN THE YEAR 2000:… 
Language Learning & Technology 94 
Beauvois, M. (1992). Computer-assisted classroom discussion in the foreign language classroom: 
Conversation in slow motion. Foreign Language Annals 25, 455-464. 
Bloom, B. (1984). The 2 sigma problem: The search for methods of group instruction as effective 
one-to-one tutoring. Educational Researcher 13, 3-16. 
Brooks, F., & Donato, R. (1994). Vygotskyan approaches to understanding foreign language 
learner discourse during communicative tasks. Hispania 77, 262-274. 
Chapelle, C. (1997). CALL in the year 2000: still in search of research paradigms? Language 
Learning and Technology 1(1), 19-43. Retrieved July 1, 1999 from the World Wide Web: 
http://polyglot.cal.msu.edu/llt/vol1num1/chapelle/default.html 
Chapelle, C. (1998). Multimedia CALL: lessons to be learned from research on instructed SLA. 
Language Learning and Technology 2(1), 22-34. Retrieved July 1, 1999 from the World Wide 
Web: http://polyglot.cal.msu.edu/llt/vol2num1/article1/index.html 
Clark, H., & Brennan, S. (1991). Grounding in communication. In L. Resnick, J. Levine, & S. 
Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on Socially Shared Cognition, pp. 127-149.Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association. 
Crook, C. (1994). Computers and the Collaborative Experience of Learning. London: Routledge. 
Ellis, R. (1993). Second language acquisition and the structural syllabus. TESOL Quarterly 27, 
91-113. 
Foster, P., & Skehan, P. (1996). The influence of planning and task type on second language 
performance. Studies in Second Language Acquisition 18, 229-323. 
Hall, J. (1993). The role of oral practices in the accomplishments of our everyday lives: The 
sociocultural dimension of interaction with implications for the learning of another language. 
Applied Linguistics 14, 145-166. 
Higgins, J. 1988. Language, Learners and Computers: Human Intelligence and Artificial 
Unintelligence. Singapore: Longman. 
Holland, M., Kaplan, J., & Sams, M. (Eds.). (1995). Intelligent language tutors: Theory shaping 
technology. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Kern, R. G. (1995). Restructuring classroom interaction with networked computers: Effects on 
quantity and characteristics of language production. The Modern Language Journal 79, 457-476. 
Lantolf, P., & Appel, G. (1994). Theoretical framework: an introduction to Vygotskian 
perspectives on second language research. In P. Lantolf & G. Appel (Eds.), Vygotskian 
Approaches to Second Language Research (pp. 1-32). Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
Levy, M. (1997). Computer Assisted Language Learning: Context and conceptualization. Oxford, 
England: Oxford University Press. 
Rafael Salaberry CALL IN THE YEAR 2000:… 
Language Learning & Technology 95 
Long, M. (1991). Focus on form: a design feature in language teaching methodology. In K. de 
Bot, R. Ginsberg, & C. Kramsch (Eds.), Foreign Language Research in Cross-cultural 
Perspective. Philadelphia: John Benjamins. 
Loschky, L., & Bley-Vroman, R. (1993). Grammar and task-based methodology. In G. Crookes 
& S. Gass (Eds.), Tasks and Language Learning: Integrating Theory and Practice (pp. 123-167). 
Clevedon, England: Multilingual Matters Ltd. 
McCafferty, S. (1992). The use of private speech by adult second language learners: a cross-
cultural study. Modern Language Journal 78, 179-189. 
Murray, J. (1991). Anatomy of a New Medium: Literary and Pedagogic Uses of Advanced 
Linguistic Computer Structures. Computers and the Humanities 25, 1-14. 
Pinker, S. (1979). Formal models of language learning. Cognition 7, 217-283. 
Salaberry, R. (1996). A theoretical framework for the design of CMC pedagogical activities. 
CALICO 14, 5-36. 
Salaberry, R. (in press). Pedagogical design of Computer Mediated Communication tasks: 
learning objectives and technological capabilities. Modern Language Journal. 
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (1995). Problems in output and the cognitive processes they generate: a 
step towards second language learning. Applied Linguistics 16 (3), 371-391. 
van Lier, L. (1999). All hooked up: An ecological look at computers in the classroom. 
Unpublished manuscript, National Foreign Language resource Center, Washington, DC. 
VanPatten, B., & Cadierno, T. (1993). Explicit instruction and input processing. Studies in 
Second Language Acquisition (15), 225-244. 
Warschauer, M. (1997). Computer-mediated collaborative learning: Theory and practice. Modern 
Language Journal 81, 470-481. 
Wegerif, R., & Scrimshaw, P. (1997). Computers and Talk in the Primary Classroom. Clevedon, 
England: Multilingual Matters, Ltd. 
Weizenbaum, J. (1976). Computer Power and Human Reason. New York: W. H. Freeman. 
