Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num2/review/review3/index.html 
January 2000, Volume 3, Number 2 
pp. 23-27 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 2000, ISSN 1094-3501 23 
REVIEW OF READING GERMAN 
Title: Reading German, 1997 
Author: Jörg Roche, Centre for Intercultural Language Studies/Department of 
Germanic Studies, University of British Columbia 
Distributor: Distance Education and Technology, Continuing Studies 
 The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC 
Contact 
information: 
2329 West Mall, Room 1170 
 Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z4, Canada 
 Phone: 604 822 1573 
 Fax: 604 822 8636 
 Web: http://det.cstudies.ubc.ca/ 
Demo Site: http://web.arts.ubc.ca/mlc/GER/PROTECH.HTM 
 E-mail 
support: 
protech@arts.ubc.ca 
System 
requirements: 
IBM PC or clone, capable of running Windows (3.1 or later), with CD-
ROM capability 
 Price: Instructors Package Reading German Level 1: includes volume 1, 
introduction text, and Level 1 CD: ($ 500.00).  
 Target 
audience: 
Anyone interested in gaining basic and subject-specific reading 
knowledge in German, in a self-study or course environment 
 
Reviewed by Heidi Byrnes, Georgetown University 
 
 DESCRIPTION 
 
This multimedia course for reading general and technical texts in German responds to a much-neglected 
and persistent need, namely, the challenge of teaching reading knowledge to an often quite heterogeneous 
group of learners. Learners may differ in terms of age, experience, developmental level, professional 
background and interests, ability, learning efficiency, and availability for regular classroom instruction. 
Developed at and distributed through the University of British Columbia, the two complementary 
components of Reading German (the textbook and the software), can be used both in conventional 
reading courses or as part of a self-study program. The textbook and the software are largely identical, 
with two exceptions. The text contains an extensive reference section including suggested reading 
strategies, a reference grammar, and a glossary of frequently used expressions, while the software 
contains answers to the questions and pedagogical tasks, sample summaries which learners can compare 
to their own notes, sound files for some units, and an approximately 300 word glossary. The 
documentation accompanying the program recommends, "ideally, students use the computer program and 
textbook side by side, but it is also possible to prepare tasks with the book only before checking answers 
Reviewed by Heidi Byrnes Reading German 
 
Language Learning & Technology 24 
on the program." As I will discuss below, this ambivalence about the possibilities and limitations of the 
media being employed pervades the Reading German package, and ultimately detracts from the breadth 
of its conceptualization, the appropriateness of its didactic choices, and, most importantly for a computer-
based program, from the innovativeness of the pedagogical tasks in which the learners engage as they 
learn to read German texts. 
 
The material is divided into five modules. The first module, Level I, provides a general introduction to 
reading German and is designed to be completed first by all learners. The remaining four modules which 
make up Level II offer four specialized reading programs, one each in the humanities, music, business 
and economics, and chemistry, and can be completed in any order. Each module is subdivided into five to 
six groups which consist of five to six units, with each unit focusing on a single text. When the material is 
used within a regular university course, the projected pace of study is two units per week. Thus, a full 
semester course typically will cover the introductory module as well as one specialized module. 
Individual study can obviously result in a different pace. 
 
The textual selections within the five units are intended to progress from what is termed "colloquial 
language" through "common language with some specific terminology" and "specialist's language," 
culminating in "scholarly language." Learners can complete all the texts within a unit, progressing from 
least to most difficult, or they may complete all the texts of roughly equal complexity from different units 
before progressing to the next complexity level and repeating this process. 
 
The types of pedagogical tasks for each text are held more or less constant throughout the program, 
irrespective of the subject matter, the text type, or the learner's increasing reading abilities. These 
pedagogical tasks are arranged in near identical sequence for each unit, and require the learner first to 
read the entire text, then to choose certain specified linguistic features (which are primarily lexical and 
grammatical), take notes (which may later be compared to a teacher-provided answer), mark textual 
components according to the degree to which they are known to readers, evaluate such components as 
central or marginal to text comprehension, match vocabulary lists (usually English and German 
translations), mark multiple-choice or true-false answers, translate vocabulary items or concepts, and 
finally, to summarize the text. 
 
 
EVALUATION 
 
From the standpoint of reading research, the dual challenge to any adult L2 reading program is to activate 
literate readers' background content- and genre-related knowledge (top-down strategies), while also 
building up their text- and reader-based language abilities (bottom-up strategies). Reading courses are 
particularly well-suited to address this challenge because their focus on comprehension rather than 
production affords the opportunity to exploit these strategies with single-minded intent. Given what we 
know about the adult learner, SLA in general, and L1 and L2 reading in particular, this challenge and 
opportunity means that effective reading programs must maximally engage learners' cognitive processing 
and meaning-making capacity through a careful generative iteration within an overall progression of 
increasing processing demands determined by task complexity, task difficulty, and task performance 
conditions (Robinson, 2000; Swaffar, 1993). 
 
While Reading German claims to be attuned to the methodological implications, particularly for 
computer-based materials, of such considerations in applied linguistics, it limits itself to only three 
avenues: first, the invocation of what it calls "reading strategies" which are akin to common-sense 
admonitions when the pedagogical tasks themselves do little to instantiate them in sophisticated ways 
(e.g., work from your strengths in learning, structure your learning process, draw on different sources of 
information, use your background knowledge, and form hypotheses); second, the extensive use of 
Reviewed by Heidi Byrnes Reading German 
 
Language Learning & Technology 25 
grammatical explanations that have no meaning-oriented functionalist orientation, but instead are nearly 
identical to the structuralist and production-oriented grammar explanations of typical introductory college 
textbooks; and, third, the emphasis on various word-based strategies (e.g., near-identity across languages, 
names, what the program calls "internationalisms," and diverse derivational patterns) that are quite similar 
to traditional vocabulary lists. Thus, the program's recommendation to avoid overuse of dictionaries is 
unpersuasive when the tasks themselves do not engage learners in discourse-based and context-embedded 
creation of meaning for individual words but instead limit them to decontextualized and local issues 
which often have relatively little to do with the real meaning of the text, such as requiring them to match 
English and German vocabulary lists, answer true-false questions, and mark multiple-choice answers. 
Thus, the dangerous presumption that one has grasped the central meaning of a text simply by having 
identified the greatest number of tokens for a given word type (e.g., if "carbon monoxide" appears 
repeatedly, then the text must be about air pollution), appears here as a repeatedly invoked reading 
strategy, thereby omitting any consideration of authorial position, author intent, intratextual development 
of an argument, much less extra-textual linkages for a particular issue and its unique construction within a 
text. 
 
In other words, what is missing is a discourse-based approach to reading, one which would challenge 
readers to use their topical background knowledge as well as their knowledge of major text organization 
patterns and the linguistic means by which such patterns are created (e.g., through the use of discourse 
markers) and to draw on their developing appreciation of what constitutes text coherence and cohesion for 
different genres. Ideally, such an approach would build up in its readers, through the different groupings 
of texts, a uniquely shared knowledge base which could subsequently be exploited pedagogically for 
increasingly sophisticated and self-directed reading strategies (Swaffar, Arens, & Byrnes, 1991). 
Unfortunately, neither the bundling of the texts within a group nor the sequencing of groups reflects any 
such considerations. Instead, as stated above, the pedagogical tasks remain remarkably uniform--and thus 
fall remarkably short of what might have been done with this medium, in terms of innovative pedagogies 
in support of reading development. 
 
Other problems with this software include the texts themselves. These are generally short, bland excerpts, 
with little indication of the overall context or of what has been eliminated. One exception is the business 
and economics module, which contains some of the longest and most interesting texts and which together 
form a coherent argument since they are consecutive parts of a more in-depth treatment of the topic. Also 
problematic is that sources, including dates, are often missing. Moreover, with the exception of tables and 
bank ledgers in the economics section, no attempt has been made to emulate the layout of authentic texts 
(through the use of titles and subtitles, columns, graphic material, or special fonts) and there is no visual 
material other than the rather standard fare of pictures of famous personalities like Einstein and 
Beethoven. Surprisingly, these graphics are in the printed text rather than on the CD! 
 
 
The pedagogical tasks that form the heart of Reading German, do not advance beyond the standard fare of 
most reading comprehension activities in college textbooks in that they ignore the importance of the 
learner's processing focus (English or German), they do not differentiate between comprehension and 
production tasks, they reflect only limited awareness of the intricate interrelationship between top-down 
and bottom-up processing demands, and/or they fail exploit of the possibilities of the computer medium. 
Given the current state of the art in computer-assisted language learning, and the increasing dialogue with 
SLA research as evidenced in this millennial issue of LLT, it is hard to justify the reliance on translation 
tasks with largely unmotivated vocabulary items when an on-line dictionary (or, better yet, a well 
designed concordancer) might have afforded learners the opportunity to engage in more meaningful 
activities which foster attention to meaning-form relationships beyond the level of individual words. For 
example, activities could have been designed to promote recognition of discourse organization, major 
sentence patterns, syntactic consequences of pragmatic concerns such as backgrounding and 
Reviewed by Heidi Byrnes Reading German 
 
Language Learning & Technology 26 
foregrounding, deictic references across sentence or clause boundaries, fixed and varied word order 
requirements, as well as compositional, derivational, and inflectional patterns. As it stands, the potentially 
useful resource of marking anything from entire passages to individual words with different colors 
remains largely untapped. 
 
Another example of Reading German's failure to exploit the medium more fully is the display of texts: 
there is no split-screen which allows simultaneous viewing of a significant portion of a text while one 
explores it, layer by layer, for its increasingly richer meanings. Instead, many of the tasks become a 
tedious back-and-forth that is all the more frustrating because it is not possible to scroll back to a previous 
page within a multi-page task in order to revisit one's earlier answer. While the inclusion of an audio-
component which supports visual and cognitive engagement with a text through listening is a good 
feature, the monotonous recitation of individual words, alphabetically arranged, and individual titles of 
literary works or operas is not helpful. 
 
Similarly the possibilities for the provision of feedback are only marginally utilized. Feedback is 
restricted and restrictive in that it does not differentiate between incorrect spelling and incorrect answers 
and it is dependent on the precise number of words being provided for something to count as a right 
answer. This insistence on correct spelling (including capitalization) can be considered a reflection of the 
above-mentioned confusion between comprehension and production tasks and the excessive emphasis on 
word-level formal precision as well as of the technological shortcomings of the program. 
 
 
  
 
SUMMARY 
 
In sum, what makes this program both so intriguing and forward-looking and at the same time so 
disappointing is that while it addresses an important niche in our field, it falls short on a number of crucial 
fronts. While the authors stress the importance of making connections between language knowledge and a 
range of academic and professional endeavors, the program does not draw from our ever greater 
Reviewed by Heidi Byrnes Reading German 
 
Language Learning & Technology 27 
understanding of the nature of adult L2 reading and the intricate relationship between L1 and L2 literacy. 
It does not take into account the sophisticated pedagogical interventions that are now being advocated on 
the basis of cognitive-interactionist SLA research into the role of attention, awareness, and noticing of 
formal elements within an otherwise meaning-focused engagement with language, such as in reading. Nor 
does it reflect recent calls for task-based pedagogies to link meaning and form in learners' processing 
(e.g., Lee, 1999). And, most disappointingly, its use of the computer is so unadventurous as to justify the 
suggestion by the author himself that learners might just as profitably work with the printed text as with 
the CD-ROM version, if the text also included the answers that are currently found only on the CD. 
Perhaps this attempt at creating a wide-ranging reading comprehension program through the use of 
computer technology will inspire others to take up this worthy challenge. 
 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
 
Heidi Byrnes teaches undergraduate and graduate courses in the German Department at Georgetown 
University. Most recently she has been working to establish a content-based and task-oriented integrated 
four-year curriculum in her department. Her particular interest is in advanced L2 acquisition by instructed 
adult learners. 
 
E-mail: byrnesh@gusun.georgetown.edu 
 
 
REFERENCES  
 
Lee, J. (1999). Task and communication in language classrooms. Boston: McGraw-Hill. 
 
Robinson, P. (2000). Task complexity, cognition, and second language syllabus design: A triadic 
framework for examining task influences on SLA. In P. Robinson (Ed.), Cognition and second language 
instruction. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 
Swaffar, J. (1993). Constructing tasks for content classes. The case for generative iteration. In M. Krueger 
& F. Ryan (Eds.), Language and content: Discipline- and content-based approaches to language study 
(pp. 181-199). Lexington, MA: D.C. Heath. 
 
Swaffar, J., Arens, K., & Byrnes, H. (1991). Reading for meaning. An integrated approach to language 
learning. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall. 
