Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num1/fromed.html 
January 1999, Volume 3, Number 1 
p. 1-2 
 
Copyright © 1999, ISSN 1094-3501 1 
 
 
FROM THE EDITORS 
Dr. Lucinda Hart-González, who has been an editor of Language Learning & 
Technology for the last two years, is stepping down from the position as of this issue due 
to her other professional responsibilities as Director of English, Humanities, and Modern 
Languages at the University of Maryland University College.  Dr. Hart-González's 
editorial guidance and wisdom have been central to the success of the journal. On behalf 
of the sponsors and co-sponsors of the journal, as well as the advisory and editorial 
boards, we extend a hearty thanks to Dr. Hart-González for all she has contributed to the  
journal.  We would also like to congratulate her for recently winning the 1999 Peterson 
Award for Innovation in Distance Education given by the University Continuing 
Education Association (UCEA) for her design of an online Spanish 101 course.  We are 
grateful that Dr. Hart-González will continue remain on the editorial board of LLT.  
We would also like to congratulate our two main sponsoring organizations, the 
University of Hawai'i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) and the 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR), for 
recently being re-awarded new three-year grants from the U.S. Department of Education 
as national language resource centers.  We thank NFLRC and CLEAR for their 
continuing support.  
Two of the main articles in this issue examine how communication is changing in online 
realms.  David Nunan, in A Foot in the World of Ideas: Graduate study through the 
Internet, reports on a teacher training course taught online, examining the types of 
interactional dynamics which take place between instructor and students.  Raffaella 
Negretti looks at learners' online interaction in Web-Based Activities and SLA: A 
conversation analysis research approach.  Our third main article, A Model for Listening 
and Viewing Comprehension in Multimedia Environments by Debra Hoven, also 
assesses the importance of new social aspects of online computing.  
In our commentary section, Rafael Salaberry offers CALL in the Year 2000: Still 
developing the research agenda, a thoughtful response to an earlier piece by Carol 
Chapelle. Chapelle keeps the conversation going with a reply to Salaberry, Research 
Questions for a CALL Research Agenda.  We think readers will find their comments 
quite useful and we encourage readers to submit their own commentaries on this and 
other issues raised in the pages of LLT.  
This issue also contains our largest book and software review section to date, with 
reviews of three recent books,  CALL Environments: Research, practice, and critical 
Archives, edited by Joy Egbert and Elizabeth Hanson-Smith; New Ways of Learning and 
Teaching: Focus on technology and foreign language education, edited by Judith A. 
Muyskens; and Electronic literacies: Language culture and power in online education, 
by Mark Warschauer; as well as two software programs, Un Misterio en Toluca, 
developed by by Walter C. Oliver and Terri J. Nelson; and Cyberbuch, developed by 
Dorothy Chun and Jan Plass.  
Finally, this issue includes our regular On the Net and Emerging Technologies columns, 
as well as announcements from our sponsoring organizations.  
Please note as well a call for papers for an upcoming special issue on "Computer-
Assisted Language Testing."  
This issue marks our final publication of the 20th century! Thank you for the support 
you've given us to date, and we hope that you will continue to support our journal by 
submitting manuscripts and reviews and by taking out a free subscription. See you in 
Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num1/fromed.html 
January 1999, Volume 3, Number 1 
p. 1-2 
 
Copyright © 1999, ISSN 1094-3501 2 
January with our upcoming special millennial issue on "The Role of Computer 
Technology in Second Language Acquisition Research."  
Mark Warschauer and Irene Thompson, Editors   
 
 
