Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num2/collentine/index.html 
January 2000, Volume 3, Number 2 
pp. 46-60 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 2000, ISSN 1094-3501 46 
INSIGHTS INTO THE CONSTRUCTION OF GRAMMATICAL KNOWLEDGE 
PROVIDED BY USER-BEHAVIOR TRACKING TECHNOLOGIES 
Joseph Collentine 
Northern Arizona University 
 
ABSTRACT 
Objectivist assumptions that instruction should transfer knowledge and involve learners in 
deductive processes  no longer dominate second-language curricula (Feng, 1996; McGroarty, 
1998). Constructivist premises are increasingly  compelling teachers to employ exploratory and 
inductive tasks, stipulating that students should be "agents"  who manufacture rather than receive 
knowledge. Approaches to grammar instruction such as consciousness-raising  tasks acknowledge 
the central role learners play in the acquisition process, engaging students in activities where  they 
must hypothesize their own rules that account for patterns found in the input (Ellis, 1995; Fotos, 
1994).  Research, however, has concentrated on the efficacy of these premises (Ellis, 1998), such 
that we know much about  the product, yet little about the processes affecting acquisition (Ellis & 
Schmidt, 1997). 
In this article, the author demonstrates how computer-assisted language learning (CALL) 
software containing  user-behavior tracking technologies can provide important insights into the 
construction of grammatical knowledge.  It showcases these technologies' potential by reporting a 
study which documented the data sources (e.g., digital  videos, sound files) learners utilized in a 
CALL-based consciousness-raising task that promoted the abilities of  foreign-language learners 
of Spanish (N = 30) to generate indirect speech. The study also assessed whether  such 
interactions promote grammatical development. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The most popular contexts for second-language acquisition (SLA) research are the classroom and 
naturalistic  settings. Yet, the computer offers a multisensorial experience, increasing its attractiveness as 
a learning and  research venue (Chapelle, 1998; Tergan, 1997). This technology provides insights into not 
only the product  of learners' efforts but also the process, offering unprecedented opportunities for 
documenting acquisition  "during treatment and during testing" (Hulstijn, 1997, p. 132). User-behavior 
tracking technologies,  for instance, document learners' experiences as they acquire knowledge (Ellis & 
Schmidt, 1997; Robinson, 1997).  Traditionally, such documentation was provided by ethnographic 
documentation which is quite labor intensive (Davis,  1995). 
These technologies are particularly welcome today. The process-oriented educational philosophy known 
as Constructivism,  which views knowledge acquisition as a dynamic process where learners are the 
architects rather than the recipients  of knowledge, increasingly informs pedagogical practice (McGroarty, 
1998). Indeed, grammar instruction currently  adopts the assumption that learners are agents in the 
acquisition process (VanPatten, 1993). Yet, little is known  about the extent to which learners engage 
grammatical data sources and the extent to which such undertakings correlate  with knowledge acquisition 
(Ellis, 1998; Ellis & Schmidt, 1997). This article details an experiment in which  foreign-language (FL) 
learners of Spanish developed their knowledge of indirect speech in a computer-assisted language  
learning (CALL) environment. Thus, the author also demonstrates the potential of user-behavior tracking 
Joe Collentine Insights Into the Construction of Grammatical Knowledge… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 47 
technologies  for providing SLA researchers with insights into how learners construct grammatical 
knowledge. 
 
ADVANTAGES AND LIMITATIONS OF PRODUCT- AND PROCESS-ORIENTED RESEARCH 
Process-oriented research examines knowledge acquisition while the learner reacts to learning conditions,  
whereas product-oriented research studies knowledge acquisition after exposure to such conditions. Most 
SLA research  focuses on products, favoring psychometric tools that measure how much learners benefit 
from different instructional  methods (Eisner & Peshkin, 1990; Lazaraton, 1995; Nunan, 1992). This 
research is advantageous because it is  highly replicable (Reichardt & Cook, 1979). Furthermore, product-
oriented research is highly generalizable  since subject pools are relatively large and most analyses 
employ inferential statistics predicting population  characteristics (Henning, 1986). 
Nevertheless, product-oriented research routinely lacks some logical validity. According to Hulstijn 
(1997),  even when experiments determine one method to enjoy greater efficacy than another, many do 
not control for the  effects of variables such as previous exposure to the target language, the amount of 
treatment input given to different  groups, and research-situation effects (e.g., Hawthorne, John Henry, 
and Pygmalion effects). Ellis and Schmidt  (1997) contend that, on the whole, SLA research focuses on 
gaining "an understanding of learning and development  from observations of the final state" (p. 146). 
They submit that a more complete understanding of the knowledge-acquisition  process would result from 
analyses of the input, the production, and the attentional focus of individual learners  during an 
experiment's training phase. 
The process-oriented approach to data collection recognizes that SLA is a dynamic process, resulting 
from subjective  interactions between the individual learner, L2 data sources, and situational factors 
(Chaudron, 1988; Nunan, 1992).  And, while consideration of all these factors is an enormous task, a 
process-oriented approach to SLA research  clearly has the potential to address the validity issues that 
product-oriented research faces. Unfortunately, the  labor-intensive nature of process-oriented research 
results in small subject pools, thereby limiting the generalizability  of such "qualitative" research 
(Lazaraton, 1995). 
The combination of both product- and process-oriented research can provide an adequate understanding 
of SLA  (Nunan, 1992), while technology can provide both perspectives with amply sized subject pools 
(Ellis & Schmidt,  1997). Computers can easily test treatment effects, and user-behavior tracking 
technologies can document numerous  learner behaviors during a treatment phase. Of course, computer-
based research is not problem-free. CALL-based  instruction has the potential to lack ecological validity: 
even if certain behaviors occur during (or result from)  CALL-based instruction, it is reasonable to 
question whether such behaviors would occur in naturalistic or classroom  settings (Salaberry, 1996). 
Still, these technological tools are particularly welcome today given Constructivism's rising importance. 
As  an educational philosophy, it has shifted pedagogues' concerns from products to processes. However, 
McGroarty (1998)  maintains that, in spite of this widespread shift, research pays insufficient attention to 
how students learn throughout  any given methodology. Interestingly, upon proposing ways to make our 
research interests more process-oriented,  McGroarty (1998) points to CALL investigations as providing 
models for SLA researchers (Avila & Sadoski, 1996;  Chun & Plass, 1996). 
CONSTRUCTIVIST MOTIVATIONS FOR PROCESS-ORIENTED GRAMMAR 
INSTRUCTION AND RESEARCH 
Cognitively speaking, Constructivism is a learning theory which departs from the traditional, objectivist 
perspective  of knowledge acquisition (Feng, 1996; Spiro, Feltovich, Jacobson, & Coulson, 1991). 
Objectivism, in its purest  form, assumes that the essential elements of instruction are communication and 
Joe Collentine Insights Into the Construction of Grammatical Knowledge… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 48 
deduction. In this view, when educators  adequately comprehend a phenomenon (e.g., the Spanish 
subjunctive), they can describe it and transfer that knowledge  to the student (orally or in writing). To 
verify that knowledge has been transferred, a teacher asks learners to  utilize an explanation in tasks 
where they apply a construct or rule (e.g., a translation exercise, a Cloze passage).  Constructivism, on the 
other hand, presumes that learners build knowledge actively, largely through inductive processes. 
Effective pedagogy thus allows exploration and provides multiple perspectives of a targeted phenomenon. 
Through  exploration, learners formulate, reflect on, and refine hypotheses that explain how a 
phenomenon works (Bruner,  1990). General cognitive problem-solving mechanisms and background 
knowledge relevant to a phenomenon help learners  to make sense of new data. Viewing a targeted 
phenomenon from multiple perspectives (i.e., data sources such as  a written text, a network of hyperlinks 
or a video) increases the likelihood that the phenomenon will become salient  to the learner since features 
lacking salience in one context might be more salient in another (Spiro et al., 1991).  For instance, two 
different perspectives of the imperative construction might provide distinct viewpoints, one highlighting 
its meaning and the other its structural features. A video with a dialog between two people who amplify  
their suggestions with kinesic and suprasegmental information might accentuate the imperative's 
pragmatic intent  (e.g., ¡No lo pongas ahí! "Don't put it there!"). Alternatively, imperatives in newspaper  
advertisements--whose heuristic conventions often result in important lexical items being isolated and 
expressed  in enlarged fonts (e.g., ¡COMPRE HOY! "BUY TODAY!")--might increase a student's 
attention  to the imperative's morphological features. Another way in which constructivist instruction 
makes a targeted phenomenon  more salient is through scaffolding, whereas Socratic dialogs between the 
instructor and the individual learner  evoke learners' schemata for a phenomenon and give them models, 
or problem-solving strategies, for achieving comprehension,  (e.g., Does this headline have a noun or a 
verb? Do you need the preterite or the imperfect here?; Bruner, 1990;  Duffy & Roehler, 1986; Jonassen, 
1990). 
Grammar instruction today clearly adopts the constructivist perspective. The learner has been viewed as 
an agent  in the grammar acquisition process since the groundbreaking studies on interlanguage 
development of the 1970s and  1980s. The morpheme-acquisition studies generated the creative 
construction hypothesis, postulating "the  existence of universal cognitive mechanisms which enable 
learners to discover the structure of a particular language"  (Ellis, 1990, p. 47). Researchers noticed that 
learners possessed an innate grammar acquisition mechanism that  allowed them to acquire grammatical 
structures when they were ready for it, rather than when the latter were taught.  While some scholars 
interpreted such discoveries to mean that explicit instructional intervention into learners' grammatical 
development would not be profitable, most researchers and educators currently concentrate their efforts  
on identifying instructional strategies that directly foster the acquisition of grammar (Ellis, 1998; 
VanPatten,  1993). 
Instruction offers learners multiple perspectives of a targeted phenomenon and encourages exploration. 
Although  educators recognize the importance of comprehensible input (Krashen & Terrell, 1983), many 
researchers seek  to identify the conditions under which a learner will intake grammatical information 
(Terrell, 1991; VanPatten,  1993). Instruction increases the likelihood that intake will occur when it 
provides input that connects with the  learner subjectively. Therefore, students are exposed to a variety of 
written and aural data whose content is "meaningful"  given the students' background knowledge 
(VanPatten, 1993). Instruction also facilitates intake by enhancing the  salience of a grammatical 
phenomenon. A targeted phenomenon becomes intake if learners "notice" (i.e.,  attend to) it in the input 
(Schmidt, 1990). "Having noticed some aspect of the environment, we can analyze  it and compare it to 
what we have noticed on other occasions" (Schmidt, 1990, p. 132). 
 
Joe Collentine Insights Into the Construction of Grammatical Knowledge… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 49 
Many educators acknowledge that scaffolding also promotes the construction of grammatical knowledge. 
Learners  receive negative feedback when interlocutors identify errors and somehow prompt them to 
correct such errors. This  purportedly encourages students to notice gaps in their grammatical knowledge, 
and to generate new hypotheses and  refine old ones (Johnson, 1988; Lightbown & Spada, 1990; Swain, 
1985; Swain & Lapkin, 1995). 
The core principles outlined above have spawned various "instructional options" for grammar instruction  
(Ellis, 1998), many of which employ inductive strategies (Collentine, 1998b). For instance, Processing 
Instruction  (VanPatten 1993, 1997) provides learners with explicit grammatical descriptions; yet, more 
importantly, it promotes  the analysis and contemplation of structured input that is carefully designed to 
draw students' attention to a  targeted grammatical phenomenon, so that they might infer its semantic 
properties. Consciousness-raising tasks  seek to increase the probability that a learner will notice a 
targeted phenomenon in the input by promoting metalinguistic  knowledge (Ellis, 1995; Fotos, 1994; 
Sharwood Smith, 1993). This approach asks learners to "analyze data illustrating  the workings of a 
specific grammatical rule" and "discover rules" (Ellis, 1998, p. 48). 
Nevertheless, the research gauging the efficacy of today's instructional options largely examines products.  
Ellis (1998) notes that investigations into the efficacy of such instruction have not isolated the effects of 
particular  features of a given methodology, for example, the separate effects of input, production, and 
explicit grammatical  descriptions, "making it difficult to determine which [feature] was responsible for 
effects observed"  (p. 54). The present author thus examined the knowledge-construction processes in 
which learners engage in a grammar slide show (Collentine & Collentine, 1997), fostering  in a CALL-
based consciousness-raising task the abilities of FL learners of Spanish to generate indirect speech.  
Utilizing user-behavior tracking technologies, the researcher measured the extent to which various 
knowledge-construction  processes predicted learner benefits from the slide show. However, before 
reporting the study, it would be fruitful  to explore the extent to which one can establish constructivist 
learning conditions in a CALL-based environment. 
CALL'S POTENTIAL FOR GENERATING CONSTRUCTIVIST CONDITIONS 
In his outline of the basic tenets of what he terms "constructive hypermedia, Yang (1996) suggests that  
computer assisted instruction (CAI) can readily provide a multisensory discovery-based learning 
environment. According  to Yang, "hypermedia is a tool which can provide a rich base of information and 
nurture the process of sense  and meaning-making, where learners guide their own learning." (p. 45). 
CAI can give students access to networks of ideas, connected through nodes and links, that offer various 
perspectives  of a targeted phenomenon. A student might initially have access to the uses and 
connotations of a grammatical structure  in a textual format, with the option of linking to aural 
representations of the text, or even a digital video from  which exemplars were extracted. Digital video is 
particularly effective at providing learners with the situational  and social features that lexical and 
grammatical items encode (Garza, 1996). Collentine (1998a) reasons that effective  CALL tasks designed 
to encourage grammatical hypothesis-formation combine textual with aural data. He also suggests  that 
the technique known as "colorization," that is, presenting an item in a font color different from  its 
surrounding context (Bell, 1984), may enhance the perceptual prominence of grammatical phenomena 
that lack  overall salience, such as verbal or case morphology. Even though the current state of artificial 
intelligence limits  the ability of software engineers to create algorithms that emulate Socratic interaction, 
context-sensitive feedback  and guidance are becoming increasingly more sophisticated. This is especially 
true of applications whose scope  is narrow, such as software modules focusing on a particular 
grammatical phenomenon (Nagata, 1996). 
 
Joe Collentine Insights Into the Construction of Grammatical Knowledge… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 50 
One of the most distinctive features of multimedia CAI is its non-linear presentation of information. 
Rather  than presenting information in a highly structured, objectivist fashion, the nodes and links that 
connect information  contained in CAI tasks empower students to search out nodes that render those 
perspectives of the targeted phenomenon  that relate to their individual knowledge bases (Tergan, 1997; 
Warschaurer, Turbee, & Roberts, 1996). 
Nevertheless, these multimedia conditions may not be equally effective for learners at different levels of 
proficiency.  In summarizing the current research on the efficacy of constructivist CAI, Tergan (1997) 
surmises that providing  a myriad of stimuli and data is minimally beneficial to novices. Accordingly, this 
researcher designed the grammar  slide show for FL learners of Spanish with slightly advanced 
communicative abilities. Still, the targeted phenomenon,  indirect speech, was sufficiently complex to 
discriminate amongst the abilities of even advanced-level learners  (Collentine, 1995). Examples include 
Antonio le preguntó a María cuándo llegaría  "Antonio asked María when she would arrive" and María 
le dijo a su hermana que limpiara  la cocina "María told her sister to clean the kitchen." 
METHODOLOGY 
As mentioned above, this study attempted to provide insights into the construction of grammatical 
knowledge  while showcasing the potential of user-behavior tracking technologies to document such 
processes. The 40 participants  who volunteered for the study were third-year, university-level FL learners 
of Spanish. The study utilized a grammar  slide show to increase their knowledge for the production of 
indirect speech in Spanish. The researcher then utilized  the user-behavior tracking data to determine 
which aspects of the instruction contributed to improvement in the  participants' performance. 
Participants 
Before examining the relationship between learner behaviors and improvements in the use of indirect 
speech,  it was necessary to establish that the slide show was indeed beneficial. To that end, 30 
participants were randomly  assigned to an experimental group which utilized the slide show and 10 to a 
control group which received no instruction. 
Only 10 of the 40 subjects were assigned to the control group to maximize the size of the tracking-
technologies  database. To ascertain whether the control group's small size compromised the study's 
internal validity, the researcher  investigated whether any significant differences existed between the two 
groups prior to the experiment (Borg &  Gall, 1989). The control group contained 4 females and 6 males; 
the experimental group comprised 16 females and  14 males. There was no significant difference in the 
ratio of males to females between the two groups [ChiSq =  0.53, df = 1, p = 0.467]. No significant 
differences existed between the two groups in terms of years  of high school Spanish studied [control = 
2.6 (SD = 1.3); experimental = 2.4 (SD = 1.1); F(1,38)  = 0.13; p = 0.717] or semesters of university-level 
Spanish [control = 4.1 (SD = 1.3); instructional  = 3.7 (SD = 1.2); F(1,38) = 0.52; p = 0.474]. To 
determine whether the two groups  enjoyed equal linguistic abilities before the experiment, all 
participants completed two linguistic competency  exams two weeks prior to the experiment: (a) a 
computer-based grammar exam, assessing each participant's ability  to use various grammatical structures 
in meaningful tasks; (b) a computer-based listening-comprehension exam, which  measured the 
participants' ability to comprehend main ideas and details of authentic digital-video clips. An unbalanced,  
multivariate analysis of variance revealed that neither group enjoyed an overall advantage in terms of its 
Spanish  proficiency prior to the experiment [Wilk's lambda = 0.93, F(2,37) = 1.38, p = 0.260]. 
Procedure 
An assessment task measured both groups' ability to use indirect-speech before and after  the instructional 
group used the slide show. The ten-item task, which was computer based (written by the researcher  in 
Macromedia's Director®) prompted the participants to generate  indirect speech in writing. Each item 
Joe Collentine Insights Into the Construction of Grammatical Knowledge… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 51 
depicted a situation graphically and aurally. For instance, a student might  see a mother and a daughter 
chatting in a kitchen. The learner could then cue (only once) a short dialog of four  to six turns 
accompanying that drawing. Within a dialog, a student might hear the daughter asking the mother, 
¿Cuándo  vamos a comer? "When are we going to eat?" The application then would instruct the 
participant in  English to report in Spanish a particular turn, such as: "Report in Spanish what the daughter 
asked  her mother."1 A student might type in the situation's text  box, La hija le preguntó a su mamá 
cuándo iban a comer "The daughter asked her  mother when they were going to eat." 
Both groups completed the first administration of the assessment task, referred to as the pretest, two 
weeks  before the treatment. The second administration, referred to as the posttest, took place 
immediately after the  experimental group completed the slide show. 
Scoring 
The researcher evaluated each sentence produced by the participants on the pretest and the posttest on a 
12  point scale. The following describes the four features that the author evaluated and their relative 
weights. 
1. Main-clause pronoun (weight: 2 points). In indirect speech in Spanish, the addressee must be 
referred  to by an indirect-object pronoun (e.g., Le dijimos a Carlos/Le dijimos que debía  salir 
pronto, "We told Carlos/We told him that he should leave soon"). 
2. Main-clause verb (weight: 4 points). A main-clause verb must be one of communication (e.g., 
decir  "to tell" or preguntar "to ask") and it must be in the preterite (indicative). 
3. Subordinating conjunction (weight: 2 points). Indirect speech in Spanish requires a conjunction 
representing  the original utterance's pragmatics (e.g., a question such as cuándo "when," si  
"whether," or an assertion such as que "that"). 
4. Subordinate-clause verb (weight: 4 points). A subordinate-clause verb in Spanish must be in the 
past,  and its mood must reflect the original utterance's pragmatics (e.g., Juan le preguntó cuándo 
lo  tendría "Juan asked him when he would have it," Mamá les dijo que se bañaran  "Mom told 
them to take a bath"). 
Instruments 
The grammar slide show, written by the researcher in Macromedia's Director® and the authoring 
environment's  Lingo® scripting language, promoted grammatical competence through consciousness-
raising techniques. Learners  could infer the rules underlying a grammatical structure by exploring data 
sources and interacting with computer-mediated  scaffolding mechanisms. 
 
 
Joe Collentine Insights Into the Construction of Grammatical Knowledge… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 52 
 
 
a. Sample digital-video component slide 
  
 
b. Sample exemplar-contemplation component 
slide 
 
c. Sample exemplar component slide with a 
consciousness-raising question 
 
d. Sample comprehension-check component slide 
Figure 1. Sample screen shots of the grammar slide show 
 
Slides are a series of screens, or windows, through which the learner can move bidirectionally (i.e., 
backwards  and forwards) through an application using navigation buttons. The first slide in the slide 
show contained an advance  organizer that provided general information about the discourse function of 
indirect speech. The students then  worked with two successive cycles, each containing three components. 
It is important to note that the application  did not require linear exploration. A student could move freely 
from one component back to another (e.g., to review  an exemplar's corresponding digital video), or even 
from the second cycle back to the first. The following describes  these components. 
Digital-video component. The digital-video component allowed the learners to play a QuickTimeé 
movie. Students  provided written answers to questions posed about the video and received feedback 
about their accuracy. The learners  could freely explore the movie with the pause, advance-forward, and 
rewind controls. For instance,  a digital-video interaction might involve a professor telling a student, 
"Diego, voy a estar en mi oficina  a las once" ("Diego, I'm going to be in my office at eleven"). 
 
Joe Collentine Insights Into the Construction of Grammatical Knowledge… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 53 
Exemplar contemplation component. The exemplar-contemplation component allowed the learners to 
study exemplars,  or instances of indirect speech relating to particular statements in the digital video. An 
exemplar-contemplation  screen presented sentences whose audio representations the learners could cue; 
additionally, colorization enhanced  each exemplar's main-clause pronoun and subordinate clause. An 
exemplar might be as follows: El profesor le  dijo a Diego que iba a estar en su oficina a las once "The 
professor told Diego that he was going to be  in his office at eleven." Colorization would set le as well as 
que iba a estar en su oficina a las  once apart from the rest of the sentence. 
On the remaining slides of these components, the application posed consciousness-raising questions about 
the  exemplars. Here, the exemplars had audio support but not colorization. Questions involved such 
phenomena as the  grammatical status of the main-clause pronoun, the type of conjunction separating the 
main and subordinate clauses,  the mood of the subordinate-clause verb, and so forth. Students typed their 
answers in a text box, and could then  check their correctness by clicking a button. A context-sensitive 
routine searched for key words in an answer,  and then a dialog box indicated whether the response was 
correct or incorrect. In the event of an error, the dialog  box provided the correct answer. 
Comprehension-check component. The comprehension-check component provided brief video clips, 
each accompanied  by three sentences. The participants selected the sentence that represented an instance 
of indirect speech relating  to the clip by clicking one of three radio buttons. The application provided 
feedback on the correctness of their  choices. The learners could continue to select choices until they 
provided the correct answer. 
User-behavior tracking technologies recorded all events that a student generated while  using the 
application, as well as the time (in ticks 2) between any two events. Students  generated events within a 
slide by interacting with its "controls," or screen elements that essentially  alter the learning environment, 
such as a button that gives feedback on an answer. The Director authoring  environment allows an 
application to capture various events and to document run-time conditions surrounding them,  such as the 
time between two events, or where a student is working in an application. For instance, the application  
recorded students' uses of navigational controls to move back and forth from one slide to another. It could 
also  record which icons the learners clicked to cue a sound file, as well as what they typed in text boxes. 
To capture an event or a run-time condition, the programmer could assign a Lingo® "script" to  any 
control. For instance, the following tracking script might be associated with a digital video control, 
writing  to a file the slide number, an identification of the control, and the time of the event: 
on mouseDown 
 
record_version1(mySlideNumber, "digital video", the ticks) 
 
end 
 
Other recordable data might include testing for conditions such as whether a learner supplied an answer  
to a question. This script might be associated with a button where the student checked the veracity of one 
of his  or her answers: 
 
on mouseDown 
 
if the answerTextField = "" then 
 
alert "At least provide an answer first!" 
 
else 
 
veracity = checkAnswer(the text of answerTextField) 
Joe Collentine Insights Into the Construction of Grammatical Knowledge… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 54 
 
record_version2(mySlideNumber, "answer check", veracity, the ticks) 
 
end if 
 
end 
 
This script does not allow students to get feedback unless they venture a response. If  a response is 
provided, the script calls a function that determines whether the answer provided was correct, and  returns 
a number indicating its veracity (i.e., 1 = correct; 0 = incorrect). Subsequently, the script records in  a user 
file the event's slide number, the type of control targeted, the result, and when the event occurred.3 
Research Questions 
To understand the knowledge construction processes that correlated with any resulting instructional 
benefits,  the researcher examined five factors: 
Audio events represents the average number of times a participant cued sound files that supported  
exemplars in the instructional material. Since these data sources are redundant, though different 
manifestations  of written exemplars, this variable could represent the extent to which learners sought 
multiple or additional representations of a data source. 
Digital-video events represents the average number of times a participant interacted with the QuickTimeé  
movies. It is reasonable to assume that this variable reflects the extent to which the participants obtained 
situational  information surrounding an exemplar, such as pragmatic information (Garza, 1996). 
Substantive written answers represents the average number of substantive answers that a participant  
provided to consciousness-raising questions within the exemplar-contemplation components. If a long 
answer containing  three or more words was provided, it could indicate that a learner spent a significant 
amount of time contemplating  some feature of indirect speech. 
Exemplar contemplation time measured the average time (in seconds) that a participant spent on the  
exemplar-contemplation screens containing colorized exemplars (less the time spent on listening to aural 
representations  of those exemplars). This factor thus partially represented the amount of attentional 
resources that the learners  dedicated to text enhanced by colorization. 
Incorrect answers represents the average number of incorrect answers that a participant provided  in the 
comprehension-check components. Since these components prompted learners to identify  instances of 
indirect speech and informed them whether they were correct, the learners received feedback on their 
hypotheses about the structural properties of indirect speech; and feedback on incorrect answers. 
Results and Discussion 
To examine the relationship between these factors and any treatment benefits, five regression analyses 
employed  one each of these variables as the predictor and the pretest-posttest difference scores as the 
response. 4 
 An ANCOVA utilizing the assessment-task pretest scores as the covariant and the posttest scores as the 
dependent  variable showed that the instructional group [M(adjusted) = 70.1, SD = 4.4] could generate 
indirect  speech significantly better than the control group [M(adjusted) = 49.8, SD = 8.1] as a result of 
the treatment [F(1,37) = 4.85, p = 0.034].Thus, the instructional group benefited from the slide show. 
 
The user-behavior tracking data suggested that certain--though not all--types of knowledge-construction 
processes,  which were tracked during the instruction, were associated with instructional gains, which 
were measured by the  pretest-posttest difference scores. The average number of audio events that a 
Joe Collentine Insights Into the Construction of Grammatical Knowledge… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 55 
participant generated was a significant  predictor of instructional benefit [r = 0.404, F(1,28) = 5.28, p = 
0.030]. Yet, even though cueing audio files  facilitated the development of indirect-speech abilities, the 
participants significantly underutilized this technology.  The average participant cued only 8.0 (SD = 4.7) 
of the 12 audio links that supported exemplars of indirect  speech [t(one-tailed) = -4.63, df = 29, p < 
0.000]. 
In contradistinction to audio events, the learners over-utilized the QuickTimeé technology given its 
apparent  ineffectiveness: even though the digital video components contained two QuickTimeé movies. 
The participants averaged  7.0 (SD = 4.1) digital-video events, such as pauses, or rewinding [t(one-tailed) 
= 6.61,  df = 29, p < 0.000]; yet, digital-video events did not correlate with treatment benefit [r = 0.056,  
F(1,28) = 0.09, p = 0.772]. 
Exemplar-contemplation time was not a significant predictor of treatment benefit [r = 0.232, F(1,28)  = 
1.54, p = 0.226]. This result may relate to the observation that the participants underutilized these  slides. 
An exploratory analysis showed that the participants averaged 1.1 seconds (SD = 0.3) per slide throughout  
the treatment, and yet they averaged only 0.7 seconds (SD = 0.5) per exemplar-contemplation screen 
[t(one-tailed)  = 3.38, df = 56, p = 0.001]. However, exploratory analyses of the exemplar-contemplation 
data suggest that  the dependent variable studied here hides some important tendencies. 
Recall that the dependent variable (i.e., the pretest-posttest difference scores) effectively combines a 
participant's  scores on four general features: (a) main-clause pronoun; (b) main-clause verb; (c) 
subordinating conjunction;  and (d) subordinate-clause verb. However, the uniqueness of an exemplar-
contemplation screen is that it highlights  through colorization the pronoun and the subordinate clause of 
any exemplar. This then begs the question: Did exemplar-contemplation  time correlate positively with 
improvement in a learner's ability to generate a main-clause pronoun and/or a subordinate  clause in 
indirect speech? The researcher re-coded the data from the pretest and posttest assessment tasks, 
producing  pretest-posttest difference scores for each of these four general features. The results of this 
analysis  indicated that exemplar contemplation time correlated significantly with one factor, namely, the 
students' ability  to produce correct subordinate-clause verbs [r = 0.412, F(1,28) = 5.51, p = 0.026]. 
The regression analysis suggested that the average number of substantive written answers significantly 
predicted  treatment benefit [r = 0.425, F(1,28) = 5.96, p = 0.022]. However, this result  requires careful 
interpretation. The learners averaged 8.0 (SD = 3.08) substantive answers to the 9 total  consciousness-
raising questions that the slide show posed, implying that most participants provided thoughtful  answers 
to these questions. However, given that the mean was close to its maximum value, the positive correlation  
resulting from the regression analysis hints that these data were negatively skewed. A test of skewness 
confirmed  as much (sk = -1.66; z = -3.71; p < 0.000), warranting a slightly different interpretation  of the 
results: some learners (n = 6) did not or could not provide substantive relevant answers to the 
consciousness-raising  questions, and these students uniformly did not benefit from the instruction as a 
whole. 
Finally, the number of incorrect answers that the average participant provided in the comprehension-
check components,  and so the amount of negative feedback he or she received, significantly predicted 
success [r = 0.447, F(1,28)  = 6.76, p = 0.015]. It is noteworthy that, although the comprehension-check 
components posed a total  of 16 questions, the learners averaged only 1.83 (SD = 1.6) incorrect answers. 
In other words, they received  very little negative feedback, overall. 
This last observation may not be inconsequential. It indicates that, although the participants benefited 
from  negative feedback, most of the benefits that they obtained from the treatment resulted from one of 
the other components.  Given that the data suggested that digital-video events did not correlate with 
treatment success, it is reasonable  to conjecture that the principal affective agent in the grammar slide 
show could be found in the exemplar-contemplation  component. 
Joe Collentine Insights Into the Construction of Grammatical Knowledge… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 56 
CONCLUSIONS 
This study attempts to broaden our perspective of the processes associated with the acquisition of 
grammatical  knowledge. The tracking mechanisms employed in this study provide a window into 
knowledge acquisition processes  that are difficult to observe in most product-oriented research. Since 
any one grammar-instruction methodology  employs a number of techniques (e.g., negative feedback, 
input, answering consciousness-raising questions), product-oriented  studies are generally limited to 
commenting on the effect(s) of a combination of factors on learning (Ellis, 1998).  Tracking technologies, 
however, have allowed this researcher to study process-product relationships, providing  an understanding 
of the effects of individual factors on learner outcomes. 
What insights can we glean from the analysis about the construction of grammatical knowledge? All in 
all, a  consideration of two factors supports the postulate that access to multiple perspectives of indirect 
speech is  beneficial (Spiro et al., 1991). Recall that the variable termed audio events measured how often 
the learners cued  aural representations of sentences that they read; and, exemplar-contemplation time 
represented, in part, how much  attention the learners dedicated to textual exemplars that were colorized. 
Thus, these aural and visual enhancements  provided alternative perceptual perspectives of textual data in 
the instruction, and both factors were associated  with improved grammatical performance. 
The data also reveal that constructing knowledge in a cooperative fashion is beneficial, even if it is with  
an "interlocutor" possessing limited artificial intelligence such as the computer-generated feedback  in 
this study's slide show (Nagata, 1996). The variable termed incorrect answers measured the participants'  
encounters with negative feedback on their hypotheses about indirect speech; and the more negative 
feedback learners  received, the better they could generate indirect speech. Additionally, the analysis of 
the variable termed substantive  written answers suggests that inductive, Socratic interactions can be 
agents in the construction of grammatical  knowledge. 
Interestingly, however, some participants were hesitant to explore the information the slide show offered 
and  to engage in Socratic interactions. First, the subjects largely moved forwards through the slide show, 
as the  average number of backwards movements (i.e., navigating from one slide to a previous one) was 
insignificant, at  2.6 (SD = 2.3) per student. Second, most participants answered consciousness-raising 
questions  cooperatively, and they benefited from doing so. However, a handful of learners provided short 
answers of less  than three words, and none of these learners appeared to benefit from the instruction. 
That is, their inability  or unwillingness to engage in such Socratic interactions was a strong predictor of 
lack of instructional benefit.  Both of these observations are consistent with Tergan's (1997) findings 
about constructivist CAI environments,  surmising that objectivist influences continue to portray highly 
structured, linear learning as the most productive  approach to instruction. Consequently, many learners 
today do not exploit opportunities to engage in exploratory  strategies in CAI environments. 
FL pedagogues may need to consider ways of educating learners about the benefits of the "discovery"  
and "negotiated" learning that underscore the constructivist teaching philosophy (McGroarty, 1998). 
Researchers  would also do well to address the following: (a) Are there certain learning conditions under 
which students resist  the exploratory, process-oriented nature of a constructivist learning environment? 
(b) Are there certain types  of learners that, because of their learning style (or previous training), resist 
constructivist environments? 
Educators may find that not all instructional mechanisms which provide a multiplicity of perspectives and 
allow  exploration promote learning. To be sure, in this study, the participants overutilized the slide 
show's digital  video, interacting with this technology frequently, even though such interaction did not 
correlate with overall  treatment benefit. Of course, it is important to keep in mind that the digital videos 
used in this study did not  contain examples of indirect speech. Instead, the videos contained the speech 
samples upon which the indirect-speech  exemplars were based. Thus, it may be unreasonable to expect to 
find evidence of a direct cause-and-effect relationship  between digital-video use and learner outcomes, 
Joe Collentine Insights Into the Construction of Grammatical Knowledge… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 57 
given the grammatical structure targeted here. Nonetheless, the  results do raise the question of what 
learners expect to gain from interacting so frequently with a technology  that only indirectly helps them 
achieve a goal. 
There is a final observation to make about the data sets. The analysis indicated that the learners 
underutilized  certain instructional features available to them. Nonetheless, the limited exposure to, for 
instance, audio events  correlated highly with instructional benefit. Future research would do well to 
confirm whether small doses of certain  types of data are indeed beneficial to learners. To the author's 
knowledge, this aspect of SLA has not been studied  to date. 
It is important to consider the generalizabilty of these results. CALL-based instruction lacks some degree 
of  ecological validity compared to classroom and naturalistic learning contexts (Salaberry, 1996). Indeed, 
to a certain  extent, this study's instructional materials both overstate and understate the potential of FL 
pedagogy to provide  constructivist learning environments. On the one hand, the incorporation of aural, 
textual, and video materials  into a coherent lesson on a regular basis requires a vast amount of resources, 
and so the lesson presented here  is not representative of most daily lessons. On the other hand, the slide 
show metaphor may not adequately foster  exploratory learning. The slide show used here asks learners to 
move backwards and forwards, but it contains little  hyper-movement (linking to new and autonomous 
contexts) of the type that typifies the Internet. Nonetheless, whether  the learning conditions are CALL-
based or otherwise, pedagogues must encourage exploratory learning sensibly. Spiro  et al. (1991), for 
instance, surmise that constructivist learning environments are most effective when they offer  
multisensory and exploratory environments while incorporating some elements of structured learning. 
Finally, the scope of the above analysis is broad and the sample size limited, such that the author offers 
these  conclusions cautiously. Nevertheless, the study achieved its goal to showcase the utility of user-
behavior tracking  technologies for SLA research while providing insights into the construction of 
grammatical knowledge. 
NOTES 
1. These instructions were in English so as not to influence the participants' responses  morphologically or 
syntactically. [return] 
2. Ticks are a standard measure of time in programming environments, recording the time  of events at a 
precision of 1/60 of a second. [return] 
3. Prior to the instruction, the researcher described to the participants the tracking technologies  
underlying this application. [return] 
4. Optimally, the analysis would have employed a single multiple regression analysis, depicting  how 
much each independent variable predicted instructional benefit, holding the remaining variables constant. 
However,  Borg and Gall (1989) recommend increasing the total sample size by 15 subjects for each 
predictor variable in a  multiple regression analysis. This sample size was not available for the present 
experiment, and so the author  reports the extent to which each factor predicted learner success 
independently of the other factors. [return] 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Joseph Collentine is an Assistant Professor of Spanish at Northern Arizona University. He has published 
on the  acquisition of morphosyntactically complex structures by foreign language learners of Spanish and 
about CALL. 
E-mail: Joseph.Collentine@nau.edu 
Joe Collentine Insights Into the Construction of Grammatical Knowledge… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 58 
REFERENCES 
Avila, E., & Sadoski, M. (1996). Exploring new applications of the keyword method to acquire English 
vocabulary.  Language Learning, 46, 379-395. 
Bell, J. M. (1984). The ColorSounds story. ColorSounds Monthly, 1, 1-2. 
Borg, W., & Gall, M. (1989). Educational research. New York: Longman. 
Bruner, J. (1990). Acts of meaning. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Chapelle, C. (1998). Multimedia CALL: Lessons to be learned from research on instructed SLA. 
Language Learning  & Technology, 2 (1), 22-34. Retrieved from the World Wide Web January 11, 2000: 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol2num1/article1/index.html. 
Chaudron, C. (1988). Second language classrooms. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Chun, D., & Plass, J. (1996). Effects of multimedia annotations on vocabulary acquisition. Modern 
Language  Journal, 80, 183-198. 
Collentine, J. (1995). The development of complex syntax and mood-selection abilities by 
intermediate-level learners of Spanish. Hispania, 78, 122-35. 
Collentine, J. (1998a). Cognitive principles and call grammar instruction: A mind-centered, input 
approach.  CALICO Journal, 15, 1-18. 
Collentine, J. (1998b). Processing instruction and the subjunctive." Hispania, 81, 576-587. 
Collentine, J., & Collentine, K. (1997). The compatibility of computer mediated communication solutions  
with beginning level foreign language curricula. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 10, 411-425. 
Davis, K. (1995). Qualitative theory and methods in applied linguistics research. TESOL Quarterly, 29,  
427-434. 
Duffy, G., & Roehler, L. (1986). The subtleties of instructional mediation. Educational Leadership, 43,  
23-27. 
Eisner, E. W., & Peshkin, A. (Eds.). (1990). Qualitative inquiry in education: The continuing debate.  
New York: Teachers College Press. 
Ellis, N., & Schmidt, R. (1997). Morphology and longer-distance dependencies: laboratory research 
illuminating  the A in SLA. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 19, 145-172. 
Ellis, R. (1990). Instructed second language acquisition. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 
 
Ellis, R. (1995). Interpretation tasks for grammar teaching. TESOL Quarterly, 29, 87-106.Ellis, R. (1998). 
Teaching and research: Options in grammar teaching. TESOL Quarterly, 29, 39-60. 
Feng, Y. (1996). Some thoughts about applying constructivist theories to guide instruction. Computers in  
the Schools, 12, 71-84. 
Fotos, S. (1994). Integrating grammar instruction and communicative language use through grammar 
consciousness-raising  tasks. TESOL Quarterly, 28, 323-351. 
Garza, T. (1996). The Message is the Medium: Using Video Materials to Facilitate Foreign Language 
Performance.  Texas Papers in Foreign Language Education, 2, 1-18. 
 
Joe Collentine Insights Into the Construction of Grammatical Knowledge… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 59 
Henning, G. (1986). Quantitative methods in language acquisition research. TESOL Quarterly, 20, 701-
708. 
Hulstijn, J. (1997). Second language acquisition research in the laboratory: Possibilities and limitations.  
Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 19, 131-143. 
Johnson, K. (1988). Mistake correction. English Language Teaching Journal, 42, 89-101. 
Jonassen, D. (1990). Semantic network elicitations: Tools for structuring hypertext. In C. Green & R. 
McAleese  (Eds.), Hypertext: State of the art (pp. 131-162). Oxford: Intellect Books Ltd. 
Krashen, S., & Terrell, T. (1983). The Natural Approach: Language acquisition in the classroom. 
Hayward,  CA: Alemany Press. 
Lazaraton, A. (1995). Qualitative research in applied linguistics: A progress report. TESOL Quarterly, 29,  
455-472. 
Lightbown, P. , & Spada, N. (1990). Focus on form and corrective feedback in communicative language 
teaching:  Effects on second language learning. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 12, 429-448. 
McGroarty, M. (1998). Constructive and constructivist challenges for applied linguistics. Language 
Learning,  48, 591-622. 
Nagata, N. (1996). Computer vs. workbook instruction in second language acquisition. CALICO Journal, 
14,  53-75. 
Nunan, D. (1992). Research methods in language learning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Reichardt, C. S., & Cook, T. D. (1979). Beyond qualitative versus quantitative methods. In T. D. Cook &  
C. S. Reichardt (Eds.), Qualitative and quantitative methods in evaluation research (pp. 7-32). Beverly  
Hills, CA: Sage. 
Robinson, P. (1997). Generalizability and automaticity of second language learning under implicit, 
incidental,  enhanced, and instructed conditions. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 19, 223-248. 
Salaberry, M. (1996). A theoretical foundation for the development of pedagogical tasks in computer 
mediated  communication. CALICO Journal, 14, 1, 5-36. 
Schmidt, R. (1990). The role of consciousness in second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 11, 127-
158. 
Sharwood Smith, M. (1993). Input enhancement in instructed SLA: Theoretical bases. Studies in Second 
Language  Acquisition, 15, 165-179. 
Spiro, R., Feltovich, P., Jacobson, M., & Coulson, R. (1991). Cognitive flexibility, constructivism, and  
hypertext: Random access instruction for advanced knowledge acquisition in ill-structured domains. 
Education  Technology, 3, 24-33. 
Swain, M. (1985). Communicative competence: Some roles of comprehensible input and comprehensible 
output in  its development. In S. Gass & C. Madden (Eds.), Input in Second Language Acquisition (pp. 
235-256).  Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (1995). Problems in output and cognitive processes they generate: A step 
towards  second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 16, 371-91. 
Tergan, S. (1997). Multiple views, contexts, and symbol systems in learning with hypertext/hypermedia: 
A critical  review of research. Education Technology, 37, 5-18. 
 
Joe Collentine Insights Into the Construction of Grammatical Knowledge… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 60 
Terrell, T. (1991). The role of grammar instruction in a communicative approach. Modern Language 
Journal,  75, 52-63. 
VanPatten, B. (1993). Grammar teaching for the acquisition rich classroom. Foreign Language Annals, 
26, 435-450. 
VanPatten, B. (1997). The relevance of input processing to second language theory and second language 
teaching.  In W. Glass & A. Pérez-Leroux (Eds.), Contemporary perspectives on the acquisition of 
Spanish: Volume  II (pp. 93-108). Sommerville, MA: Cascadilla Press. 
Warschauer, M., Turbee, L., & Roberts, B. (1996). Computer learning networks and student 
empowerment. System,  24, 1-14. 
Yang, S. C. (1996). Designing instructional applications using constructive hypermedia. Educational 
Technology,  36, 45-50. 
 
