Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num1/review/review3.html 
July 1999, Volume 3, Number 1 
pp. 24-26 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
Copyright © 1999, ISSN 1094-3501 24 
REVIEW OF ELECTRONIC LITERACIES: LANGUAGE, CULTURE AND 
POWER IN ONLINE EDUCATION 
Electronic Literacies: 
Language Culture and 
Power in Online 
Education
Mark Warschauer 
1999 
ISBN 0-8058-3119-3 
US $22.50 (paperback) 
ISBN 0-8058-3118-5 
US $45.00 (cloth) 
224 pp. 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates 
Mahwah, NJ, USA 
Reviewed by Loretta F. Kasper, Kingsborough Community College/CUNY 
OVERVIEW 
As we move into the 21st century, it is becoming increasingly clear that success in our present and future 
academic, social, and workforce environments requires proficiency in the multiplicity of discourses 
represented in the varied communication systems made possible by developing technologies (New 
London Group, 1996; Murray, 1991). As Warschauer notes in his book, "becoming fully literate in 
today's society, at least in the industrialized world, means gaining competent control of representational 
forms in a variety of media and learning how those forms best combine in a variety of genres and 
discourses" (p. 177). Digital technologies such as the Internet are rapidly changing our perception and 
definition of literacy, and this change demands research to clarify the complex interrelationships that exist 
among new electronic literacies, educational practices, and reform, and struggles for social and cultural 
equality. 
Warschauer's book, Electronic Literacies, describes one of the early research studies to document the role 
of the Internet and other new digital technologies in the development of language and literacy. The book 
represents a revised version of Warschauer's doctoral dissertation at the University of Hawai` i and 
provides rich ethnographic data based upon his study of Internet use by a sample of culturally and 
linguistically diverse students in four language and writing classes in Hawai` i. Warschauer maintains that 
in their pursuit of literacy, these student populations often fall victim to inequalities in terms of 
technological access, language and discourse access, and cultural appropriation. In Electronic Literacies, 
Warschauer skillfully weaves the data he collected into an interdisciplinary theoretical base to describe 
his view of the relationship of technology to language, literacy, education, culture, and class. 
DESCRIPTION 
Reviewed by Loretta F. Kasper Electronic Literacies… 
Language Learning & Technology 25 
The book is divided into six chapters, an epilogue, and an appendix. The major portion of the book 
(chapters 2 through 5, the epilogue, and the appendix) offers detailed descriptions of the four classes 
observed, the educational practices resulting from the experience, and the procedures followed in the 
context of the research study. Chapters 1 and 6 offer a concise and cogent historical analysis of literacy 
practices and present a theoretical foundation and rationale for the study and teaching of electronic 
literacies in particular. While chapters 1 and 6 represent the theoretical bookends that provide a context in 
which to interpret the results of the study, theory is woven into each of the other chapters. Thus, the 
reader benefits from concrete illustrations of theory in practice, as well as from examples of instances in 
which there was lack of fit between the two. 
Chapter 1, "Surveying the Terrain of Literacy," offers an historical analysis of the socioeconomic and 
technological bases that form "the terrain of literacy." Chapters 2 through 5 report in depth on each of the 
four classes researched . In chapter 2, "Computers, Composition, and Christianity," Warschauer describes 
his study of Mary's class, an undergraduate English as a second language (ESL) writing class at a small 
Christian college. According to Warschauer (p. 43), Mary's class "effectively served as a pilot for the 
remainder of the classrooms studied" because it "clarified the questions and situations [he] wanted to 
investigate [and] strengthened his interest in working with teachers who had a critical perspective on 
language, writing, and education." Chapter 3, "Networking into Academic Discourse," describes 
Warschauer's work with Luz' class, a graduate ESL writing class at a large public university. Chapter 4, 
"Computer-Assisted Language Revitalization," describes Kapuli Manaole's Hawaiian 201 class, a third 
semester Hawaiian language class which focused on reading, writing, speaking, listening, grammar, and 
culture, and in which Warschauer simultaneously played the roles of researcher, colleague, assistant, and 
student. Chapter 5, "Cyber Service Learning," describes Warschauer's experiences with JoanÕs English 
writing class at Bay Community College in O'ahu. Joan's class participated in a service learning project, 
"a form of experiential education in which students engage in activities that address human and 
community needs together with structured opportunities intentionally designed to promote student 
learning and development" (Jacoby, 1996, p. 5, as cited in Warschauer, 1999, p. 127). 
In Chapter 6, "Conclusion: Striving Toward Multiliteracies," Warschauer sums up and interprets the 
results of his research, drawing conclusions about the relation of new online technologies to literacy, 
education, and culture. Warschauer offers his views on the nature of electronic literacies and the need to 
define educational practices and suggest educational reforms, for example. He then discusses the 
inequalities in technological access, language and discourse access, and cultural appropriation that plague 
culturally and linguistically diverse students as they strive to become literate in a digital society. 
The book concludes with an epilogue that describes the educational practices and reforms implemented 
by the four teachers in the semesters subsequent to the study. Finally, an appendix details the 
ethnographic approach and methods Warschauer used to research the online classroom. 
EVALUATION 
Electronic Literacies represents a much-needed contribution to the field of literacy and language 
education. Its well-balanced synthesis of relevant theory and pedagogical practice, as well as 
Warschauer's clear writing style make the book not only relevant, but also accessible to a wide audience 
of readers, both those with a good deal of experience in online education as well as those with none at all. 
As someone interested in the relationships that exist among technology, literacy, and language education, 
I found Warschauer's concise and cogent historical analysis of literacy practices and his presentation of 
the theoretical and practical foundations for electronic literacies to be particularly valuable. In addition, it 
is clear that Warschauer has researched his topic well, and his reference list provides the interested reader 
with a plethora of additional resources that can be used to further knowledge on this topic. 
Balance is one of the key strengths of this book, in terms of both the design of the study described and the 
conclusions drawn from it. Warschauer's research design included students representing diverse 
Reviewed by Loretta F. Kasper Electronic Literacies… 
Language Learning & Technology 26 
populations, including those studying the Hawaiian language and those studying English as a first or 
second language. Because he studied diverse populations, his data are applicable to a broader audience of 
readers. The conclusions drawn and the recommendations made from the data are also balanced, taking 
into account the pros and cons of using technology in language and literacy education. While Warschauer 
is clearly in favor of technology use in education, he realizes that it does not represent a panacea for 
learning and literacy problems. In keeping with this realization, Warschauer is careful to address the 
concerns of both technophiles and technocritics and to point out weaknesses in the outcomes of his own 
study. Such a balanced presentation and discussion of data are critical to structured research, and it makes 
the book a valuable and reliable source of information. 
Too often reading professional books is simply a matter of picking and choosing the sections and/or 
chapters that are most relevant to our own needs and interests. However, I believe that educators will, and 
I strongly recommend that they do, take the time to read Electronic Literacies from cover to cover. For 
whether those readers embrace, abhor, or are reticent with regard to technology in education, they will be 
prompted by this book to revisit and critically examine both their views on this issue and the bases for 
those views. 
REFERENCES 
Jacoby, B. (1996). Service learning in higher education. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
Murray, D. E. (1991). Conversation for action: The computer terminal as a medium of communication. 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
New London Group. (1996). A pedagogy of multiliteracies: Designing social futures. Harvard 
Educational Review, 66(1), 60-92. 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Loretta F. Kasper is Associate Professor of English at Kingsborough Community College/CUNY. The 
author of Content-Based College ESL Instruction, Teaching English Through the Disciplines: 
Psychology, Interdisciplinary English, and numerous scholarly articles and book chapters, she also owns 
and moderates the listserv, Content-ESL. Her recent research involves Internet applications in ESL 
instruction. 
E-mail: Drlfk@aol.com 
