Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num2/emerging/index.html 
January 2000, Volume 3, Number 2 
pp. 8-12 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 2000, ISSN 1094-3501 8 
EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES 
 
Speech Technologies for Language Learning  
Bob Godwin-Jones 
Virginia Commonwealth University 
Contents:  
 Recorded Speech: From Analog to Digital 
 Speech Recognition 
 Speech Synthesis 
 Multilingual Speech to Speech 
 Speech on the Web 
 Resource List  
 
Recorded Speech: From Analog to Digital 
Using machines to allow students to work with the target language in its spoken form is one of the oldest 
applications of technology to language learning. Generations of tape players have allowed learners to 
listen to examples of native speech and to imitate and compare their own utterances. Dual track cassette 
players remain a staple of many language labs. Variable speed tape players which allow for slower 
playback while maintaining pitch have also been widely used. Of course, the trend today is away from 
analog and towards digital formats. Publishers are making their accompanying audio programs available 
on CD. At some schools, audio programs have been digitized and made available to students through an 
intranet or local area network (publishers usually require some kind of restricted access). Audio files are 
typically digitized in wav or aiff formats or in a streaming format like QuickTime or RealAudio, and 
played back through Web browsers. Jay Kunz (Mississippi State) has been using PureVoice (a freeware 
audio program bundled with Eudora) to digitize audio for playback at three different speeds, while 
maintaining the original pitch. 
Digital audio provides for random access, variable playback speeds, and incorporation into interactive 
language learning applications. However, the greatest potential benefit to language learners the digital age 
is providing in the area of spoken language practice lies in speech recognition and speech synthesis. The 
greater processing speed of current personal computers, the commercialization of speech technologies, 
and the tremendous interest in making the World Wide Web voice-accessible have led to interesting 
developments in these areas. We are not yet at the point that a beginning Spanish student can have a free-
ranging conversation with a computer, but parts of what needs to be there for that to be possible are 
beginning to fall into place. 
 
Speech Recognition 
In the last several years programs have begun to appear which allow word processing and other kinds of 
computing tasks to be accomplished through voice input. Programs like IBM's ViaVoice or Dragon 
System's Naturally Speaking have become mainstream software products and have been extended to a 
variety of languages. These are, however, productivity products, not language learning software. In fact, 
the needs of language learners in respect to speech recognition software are quite different from those of 
regular consumers. The commercial speech recognition products are typically trained to recognize an 
Roberrt Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: New Developments in Digital Video 
 
Language Learning & Technology 9 
individual user's voice input, with the assumption that there will not be significant changes in that user's 
speech patterns. Clearly this is not the case for language learners, whose spoken language will change (we 
hope) as they learn. The programs, in fact, are designed to recognize the speech of native speakers, not of 
struggling beginners. 
Current language learning software programs which incorporate speech recognition do not generally 
attempt to process continuous speech from users, but rather operate within a controlled environment, 
limiting the user's vocabulary. Some of the better-known software which incorporates speech recognition 
includes TriplePlay (Syracuse Language Systems), Echos (Stanford Research Institute), and New 
Dynamic English (DynaEd). The forthcoming Spanish for Business Professionals (University of Houston-
Downtown) makes extensive use of natural language processing in its application of speech technology. 
Typically, such programs focus on word/phrase discrimination and word order/syntax transformations, 
incorporating speech recognition in question formation and answering, transformational grammar 
exercises, and responses to audio/video input. Using voice input rather than the keyboard or mouse 
enhances active learning and simulates more closely real world communication. Advanced research and 
development in speech recognition is being done at the US Military Academy through project Santiago, 
which incorporates Entropic's speech recognizer into the WinCALIS authoring environment. 
Speech Synthesis 
For a two-way conversation to take place, the computer needs not only to recognize human speech, but 
also to talk back, to synthesize human speech. The use of speech synthesis has become familiar to 
consumers through the telephone system. Text-to-speech has been available for some time in personal 
computers as well. Apple's PlainTalk, for example, allows user to have texts in English or (Mexican) 
Spanish read back to them in a variety of voices. Most synthesized speech, however, is a far cry from 
HAL's smooth voice in 2001. The artificial voices sound like what they are, computers pretending to be 
human beings. The robotic voices, however, have improved considerably in recent years. Some computer 
products are capable of providing voices which, while not quite mistakable for human, are quite useful for 
language learning. 
Some demos of text-to-speech synthesis, such as Lucent's are available on the Internet. Selecting a 
language from the pull-down menu of their demo page allows playback of text in the selected language of 
English, French, German, or Spanish (reading the default text or a text of your choice), using a variety of 
voices and speeds with adjustment of parameters such as pitch and breathiness. On-line examples are 
available from Lucent in other languages as well, such as Mandarin Chinese, Italian, Navajo, or 
Romanian. Demos are available using other text to speech engines as well, such as Elan (English, French, 
German, Brazilian Portuguese, Russian, Spanish) and Festival (English, French, Welsh). An experimental 
use of text-to-speech generated on the fly at user request can be seen in a sample German story. 
Processing and download time make Internet use of synthesized speech less practical in give and take 
Web interactions (for example, reading back student input, or using natural language processing to 
generate responses). 
Multilingual Speech to Speech 
Speech to speech takes speech processing a step further towards a voice-only computer interface. It 
incorporates both speech recognition and speech synthesis, enabling computing devices to first 
understand spoken language, then analyze the utterance through natural language processing, and finally 
formulate and utter a response through synthesized speech. Several urban police departments in the US 
are currently experimenting with hand-held computers which can perform speech to speech in several 
different languages. 
 
Roberrt Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: New Developments in Digital Video 
 
Language Learning & Technology 10 
Pioneering work in speech to speech technology has been done at Carnegie Mellon University beginning 
in the 1980's through Project JANUS. Several prototype applications have been developed through 
JANUS including a conversational speech translator for Spanish and a portable travel assistant that 
provides speech translation, information and navigation assistance to travellers. On the commercial front, 
Vocal Systems has developed OmniBabel. OmniBabel is software which accepts spoken language input 
in several different languages, then processes and recognizes in that or another language, making use of 
artificial intelligence to try to generate a meaningful response. 
 
Speech on the Web 
There is considerable interest today in making the Web voice accessible so that users can have Web pages 
read to them, from a Web browser over the telephone. AudioWeb from Rutgers University offered one of 
the first implementations of voice enabled Web access. Netphonic (recently renamed MyTalk) uses 
extended HTML to provide telephone access to Web services. Vocalis SpeeHTML uses a modified 
version of HTML to provide interactive voice services. IBM recently announced SpeechML, which 
provides a markup language for speech interfaces to Web pages. HTML, however, is not well suited for 
speech applications. HTML does not consistently separate formatting and content and lacks tag sets for 
speech elements such as voice or pitch as well as formatting for dialogs and conditional structures. 
However, the arrival of XML (extensible markup language) largely overcomes these limitations. 
Several recent XML initiatives hold considerable promise for the interactive use of speech technologies 
(both speech recognition and synthesis) over the Internet, namely VoiceXML and SABLE. These are 
projects sponsored by a consortium of companies striving to establish a common standard for 
incorporating speech commands and dialogs into Web-accessible documents. SABLE is an XML-based 
markup language for Text-to Speech synthesis. It is designed to support applications such as language 
learning tutorials. SABLE incorporates the use of "aural cascading style sheets," as a standard way to 
format documents for voice access. In traditional style sheets, level 1 headers (H1 in HTML) might be 
given a style definition to be rendered in 24 point bold red font. In an aural style, the parameters would 
deal with voice, pitch, and other voice attributes (as in H1 {voice family: paul, male}). 
VoiceXML, or Voice markup language, is a joint project of some 20 companies spearheaded by 
Motorola, AT&T, and Lucent. It is an ambitious project to support complete, interactive speech services 
over the Web (and through telephone access to Web pages). Initial specifications (version 0.9) were 
published recently (9/99). The following example is taken from that document. It asks the user for a 
choice of drink and then submits it to a server script: 
 
<?xml version="1.0"?> 
<vxml> 
  <form> 
    <field name="drink"> 
      <prompt>Would you like coffee, tea, milk, or 
nothing?</prompt> 
      <grammar src="drink.gram"/> 
    </field> 
    <block> 
Roberrt Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: New Developments in Digital Video 
 
Language Learning & Technology 11 
      <goto next="http://www.drink.example/drink2.asp" submit="drink" 
method="get"/> 
    </block> 
  </form> 
</vxml> 
 
A field is an input field. The user must provide a value for the field before proceeding to the next element 
in the form. A sample interaction based on this code might be:  
 
C (computer): Would you like coffee, tea, milk, or nothing? 
H (human): Orange juice. 
C: I did not understand what you said. 
C: Would you like coffee, tea, milk, or nothing? 
H: Tea 
C: (continues in document drink2.asp) 
 
This is of course an example of limited usefulness for language learning. But the ability to write formatted 
text to generate meaningful spoken dialogues with conditional statements and responses would provide a 
powerful new technology tool for language learning. 
 
Resource List 
Information and Research on Speech Projects & Related Technologies 
 Commercial Speech Recognition Extensive and well-maintained list  
 Speech Research Long list (lots of graphics) from UCSC  
 Multilingual Speech Processing Article by Alexander Waibel 
 inSTIL Integrating Speech Technology in Language Learning SIG (EUROCALL)  
 C-Star Consortium for Speech Translation Advanced Research  
 SABLE A Synthesis Markup Language (Bell-Labs)  
 Voice XML Forum Joint XML project for speech  
 Speech in Java Information on Java Speech Markup Language (JSML) & Java Speech Grammar 
Format (JSGF)  
 JANUS Speech to speech project from Carnegie Mellon  
 Verbmobil Large-scale German speech project  
 Speech Translation Links By Joachim Quantz  
 Natural Language Processing Yahoo list  
Roberrt Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: New Developments in Digital Video 
 
Language Learning & Technology 12 
 Natural Language Processing Webopedia site  
 Computing Resource Repository Source for papers on computational linguistices, natural 
language processing (ACM)  
 The Association for Computational Linguistics  
 Machine Translation Links From Catherine N. Ball (Georgetown)  
Voice and Speech Applications/Software  
 
 The Festival Speech Synthesis System From the University of Edinburgh  
 PureVoice From Eudora/Qualcomm  
 Plaintalk Apple's speech technology in different formats  
 L&H Software PowerTranslator, VoiceXpress, RealSpeak  
 Lucent Multilingual Text-to-Speech Systems  
 IBM ViaVoice  
 Philips Speech Processing  
 Unisys Natural Language Speech Assistant  
 Natually Speaking From Dragon Systems  
 Vocalis SpeechWare 
 Locus Dialogue 
 Elan TTS  
Speech Demos on the Web  
 
 Elan English, French, German, Brazilian Portuguese, Russian, Spanish  
 Lucent English, French, German, Italian, Spanish  
 Festival English, French, Welsh  
 RealSpeak English  
 Pig Latin Translator (Lucent)  
 
 
 
