Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num1/reviews/review2.html 
July 1999, Volume 3, Number 2 
pp. 22-23 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
Copyright © 1999, ISSN 1094-3501 22 
REVIEW OF NEW WAYS OF LEARNING AND TEACHING: FOCUS ON 
TECHNOLOGY AND FOREIGN LANGUAGE EDUCATION 
New Ways Of Learning And Teaching: Focus On Technology And Foreign 
Language Education 
Judith A. Muyskens, Editor 
AAUSC Issues in Language Program Direction: A Series of Annual 
Volumes 1997 
ISBN 0-8384-7809-3 
US $25.95 (paperback) 
234 pp. 
Heinle & Heinle Publishers  
An International Thomson Publishing Company 
20 Park Plaza, Boston, Massachusetts, 02116 U.S.A. 
Reviewed by Travis Bradley and Lara Lomicka, The Pennsylvania State University 
This volume contains eight papers which discuss the role of technology and foreign language education. 
Editor Judith A. Muyskens begins with a brief introduction in which she explains the choice of change as 
the underlying theme of the book. Authors were asked to reflect on questions about the future of language 
instruction in relation to the information age, the effectiveness of language instruction with new 
technologies, and issues related to training and teacher preparation. 
New Ways Of Learning And Teaching: Focus On Technology And Foreign Language Education  is 
divided into three sections. The first section includes two articles addressing issues related to the 
technological training of teaching assistants and faculty. The second section presents four case studies on 
the use of various technologies within language educational contexts, ranging from e-mail to electronic 
conferencing to distance education. The two articles found in the third and final section offer perspectives 
on the relationship between learning, foreign languages, and technology. Abstracts of the articles included 
in this volume are available at the Heinle & Heinle Web site. 
In the first section, Virginia Scott, Winnifred Adolph, and Leona LeBlanc discuss change in relation to 
technology, teaching, training and teaching assistants (TAs). Scott suggests that "technology can provide 
an opportunity for reexamining teaching and learning" (p. 3). As part of their training, Scott suggests that 
TAs be encouraged to develop and use research skills to explore computer-assisted language learning 
(CALL). Specifically, TAs can (1) critically analyze CALL applications, (2) examine the supporting 
theories, and (3) frame questions about language instruction. While Scott focuses more on TA training 
and development, Adolph and LeBlanc address "dangers" related to language program design. Like Scott, 
they point to the importance of reevaluating instruction in technological contexts. Before getting too 
caught up in the "technological revolution," language educators should always keep motives and goals in 
focus. 
The second section highlights four case studies, all of which provide examples of the emphasis placed on 
communication and interaction by today's CALL. For example, Bernhardt and Kamil show how 
newsgroups can be used for out-of-class discussion in order to foster the growth of cultural knowledge. In 
his article, Kern examines both synchronous and asynchronous communication systems. Particularly 
insightful is his comparison of conventional writing (i.e., pen and paper) with writing in various 
Reviewed by Travis Bradley & Lara Lomicka New Ways of Learning and Teaching… 
Language Learning & Technology 23 
computer-mediated media such as electronic conferencing, e-mail, and MOOs (virtual meeting places 
where users interact in a text-based environment). As Kern demonstrates, technology-enhanced 
interaction can foster virtual learning communities, promote interaction across linguistic and cultural 
boundaries, and provide a different set of classroom discourse conventions in which to communicate. 
Also of interest is the investigation carried out by Beauvois. Her pilot study tends to suggest that student 
participation in synchronous electronic discussion has positive consequences on their oral performance. 
Finally, Fant discusses the resurgence of interest in distance education and the possibilities for language 
education. He examines four models of L2 distance education applicable to the college context and then 
considers some crucial implications of integrating computer-driven communications technologies into the 
L2 curriculum. 
Finally, in the third section, Meunier's article presents a provocative account of personality and 
motivational factors in computer-mediated foreign language communication (CMFLC). In her article, she 
provides a concise review of research on personality and motivational factors, as well as the results from a 
study that she conducted exploring student perspectives on motivational and affective factors in CMFLC. 
Data from her study suggest that CMFLC may lead to increased motivation among language learners. 
Whereas Meunier's article examined personality and motivational factors in CALL, Frommer looks at 
cognition, memory, and context to explore the relationship between computers and language learning. 
One highlight of her article is an insightful discussion of the different dimensions offered by computers 
and technology. Dimensions having the potential to supplement the CALL environment include the 
following: the multisensory and multidimensional nature of computers, the ability to allow learners to 
tailor information and tasks to their own level and interests, the possibility of authentic communication 
and access to authentic cultural resources, and the interactive learning experience afforded by 
contemporary computer technology. 
New Ways Of Learning And Teaching: Focus On Technology And Foreign Language Education offers a 
variety of articles (both research-based and experience-based) which examine the implications of 
technology for change in language instruction. Muyskens' volume represents a needed contribution to the 
current field of literature available on technology and foreign language education. This contribution 
reflects the shift of emphasis that has taken place in recent years from behavioristic and communicative 
CALL to integrative CALL (see Warschauer & Healey, 1998). In contrast to Michael Bush's "collection 
of...essays discussing the role of multimedia and technology" (O'Leary, p. 20), Muyskens' book offers a 
fresh look at varied issues facing educators as they approach the millenium, from TA training to 
computer-mediated communication. As the discipline begins to focus less on stand-alone language 
learning software and more on innovative uses of the computer as a tool for communication, the articles 
in this volume offer valuable perspectives on this shift in technology-enhanced language learning. 
REFERENCES 
O'Leary, M. H. (1998). Review of Technology-Enhanced Language Learning. Language Learning & 
Technology, 1(2), 20-22. Retrieved July 16, 1999 from the World Wide Web: 
http://polyglot.cal.msu.edu/llt/vol1num2/reviews/review2.html 
Warschauer, M., & Healey, D. (1998). Computers and language learning: An overview. Language 
Teaching, 31, 57-71. 
ABOUT THE REVIEWERS 
Travis Bradley and Lara Lomicka are Co-Directors of the Language Three Initiative at Penn State 
University. Travis Bradley specializes in Spanish linguistics and technology-enhanced language learning. 
Lara Lomicka specializes in foreign language acquisition theory and pedagogy. They currently team-
teach a graduate seminar, Technology in Foreign Language Education, and are involved in various 
multimedia and web-based projects for language instruction. 
E-mail: tgb114@psu.edu and lomicka@psu.edu
