Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num1/news/index.html 
January 2000, Volume 3, Number 1 
pp. 16-19 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
Copyright © 1999, ISSN 1094-3501 16 
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS 
This page includes announcements from the organizations sponsoring LLT. More complete listings of 
announcements can be found at the Applied Linguistics Virtual Library, the Agora Language 
Marketplace, and the Centre for Language Teaching and Research's International Conference Schedule. 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource 
Center (NFLRC) 
University of Hawai` i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) 
Less commonly taught languages, particularly those of Asia and the Pacific, are the focus of the 
University of Hawai` i National Foreign Language Resource Center. The Center engages in research and 
materials development projects, conducts summer institutes for language professionals, and makes 
available a wide variety of publications on Center projects and programs. 
Advanced learners of Chinese and Korean may look forward to the release of KAN NA! and HANGUL-
RO BOJA! on CD-ROM by the end of the year. The lessons are based on authentic materials, that is, 
materials created by native speakers for native speakers, and include newspaper articles, personal letters, 
video interviews, informational brochures, and television commercials. The activities are designed to 
activate in the learner the strategies used by native speakers to comprehend text and video. In addition, 
the popular Chinese Language Video Clips is now available on cross-platform CD-ROM. 
Foreign language educators who are considering offering language courses via distance education 
technology will find NFLRCís Foreign Languages on ITV Web site packed with useful information as 
well as videoclip examples of an ITV classroom in action. 
Other new publications from NFLRC include the second volume of Nah, Baca! Authentic Indonesian 
Readings, and four additions to the NFLRC NetWorks collection of online publications. 
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  17 
 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education 
and Research (CLEAR)  
CLEAR brings together educators in language teaching and learning from multiple disciplines to create 
language learning materials, conduct research, and lead professional development institutes on the 
Michigan State University campus. CLEAR's activities and projects are applicable for educators of both 
less commonly and more commonly taught languages. 
Institutes focus on teaching methods, materials development, and integrating technology into the foreign 
language classroom. Stipends to defray institute expenses are available to selected participants currently 
working in the US. 
Materials recently produced at CLEAR include: Foreign Languages: Doors to Opportunity, a video and 
discussion guide for teachers, administrators, counselors, parents, and students promoting the study of 
foreign languages; Test Development Workbook and Video, material to assist teachers and administrators 
in the development of FL assessment tools; and Tasks for Communication and Grammar (for Thai and 
Japanese). CLEAR News, a publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials, is 
distributed every Fall and Spring. 
Please visit our Web site or contact the CLEAR office for more detailed information about our services. 
 
 
Apprentissage des Langues et Systèmes d'Information et de 
Communication (ALSIC) 
 
ALSIC (Language Learning and Information and Communication Systems) is an electronic journal in 
French for researchers and practitioners in fields related to applied linguistics, didactics, 
psycholinguistics, educational sciences, computational linguistics, and computer science. 
The journal gives priority to papers from the French-speaking community and/or in French, but it also 
regularly invites papers in other languages so as to strengthen scientific and technical exchanges between 
linguistic communities that too often remain separate. The editorial board of ALSIC invites you to contact 
them for any prospective contributions at the following electronic address: alsic@lib.univ-fcomte.fr. 
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  18 
 
Center for Advanced Research on Language Acquisition, 
University of Minnesota (CARLA)  
CARLA is the coordinating office for a number of grant-funded programs devoted to research and 
program development in the areas of second language teaching, learning and assessment. Currently our 
projects encompass computer adaptive testing, language and culture research, second language 
articulation, immersion education, and teacher training in technology. 
CARLA also maintains a database listing 300 languages taught in North America, and sponsors listservs 
for teachers of less commonly taught languages. To share the latest research and program opportunities 
for foreign language and ESL teachers, CARLA sponsors annual summer institutes and publishes a series 
of working papers. 
 
Computer Assisted Language Instruction Consortium 
(CALICO) 
 
Since its inception in 1983, CALICO has served as an international forum for language teachers who 
want to develop and utilize the potential of advanced technology to support their teaching and research 
needs. Through its Annual Symposia, Special Interest Groups (SIGs),  CALICO Journal, CALICO 
Monograph Series, CALICO Resource Guide, and numerous other publications, CALICO provides both 
leadership and perspective in the ever-changing field of computer-assisted instruction. 
The strength of CALICO derives from the enthusiasm, creativity, and diversity of its members. It 
comprises language teachers and researchers from universities, military academies, community colleges, 
K-12 schools, government agencies, and commercial enterprises. To learn more about CALICO activities 
and how to participate in them, visit the CALICO homepage at http://www.calico.org. 
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  19 
 
European Association for Computer Assisted Language 
Learning (EUROCALL)  
EUROCALL is an association of language teaching professionals from Europe and worldwide aiming to: 
 Promote the use of foreign languages within Europe  
 Provide a European focus for all aspects of the use of technology for language learning  
 Enhance the quality, dissemination, and efficiency of CALL materials  
We also disseminate information via the ReCALL Journal and other publications, organise special interest 
meetings and annual conferences, and work towards the exploitation of electronic communications 
systems. For those involved in education and training, EUROCALL provides information and advice on 
all aspects of the use of technology for language learning. 
Forthcoming EUROCALL conferences: 
 EUROCALL '99, Besançon, France, 16-18 September 1999  
 EUROCALL 2000, University of Abertay Dundee, Scotland, 31 August to 2 September 2000  
For full details, contact us at: http://www.hull.ac.uk/cti/eurocall.htm. 
 
International Association for Language Learning Technology 
(IALLT) 
 
Established in 1965, IALL is an organization of professionals in a variety of fields who are committed to 
supporting and extending language learning, teaching, and research through the use of technology. Its 
members include directors and staff of language labs, resource or media centers and grant projects, 
language teachers at all levels, developers and vendors of hardware and software, and interested others. 
IALL offers a Foreign Language Software Database, LLTI listserv (Language Learning and Technology 
International), and publications such as IALL Journal, IALL Lab Design Kit, and IALL Lab Management 
Manual. 
IALL is co-sponsoring (with LLA of Japan) the 4th International Conference on Foreign Language 
Education and Technology (FLEAT IV), July 29-August 1, 2000, at the Kobe Bay Sheraton Hotel and 
Rokko Island Center in Kobe, Japan. The theme is Language Learning and Multimedia: Bridging 
Humanity and Technology. Proposals for papers to be presented in either oral or poster sessions are 
currently being invited. For details on this conference, please visit http://www.hll.kutc.kansai-
u.ac.jp:8000/fleat4.html. 
Contact Lauren Rosen for IALL publications or Ed Dente for IALL membership information. For details, 
visit the IALL Web site at http://www.iall.net 
 
