Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num2/ayoun/index.html 
January 2000, Volume 3, Number 2 
pp. 82-105 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 2000, ISSN 1094-3501 82 
WEB-BASED ELICITATION TASKS IN SLA RESEARCH 1 
Dalila Ayoun 
University of Arizona 
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper presents an experimental study in second language acquisition (SLA) designed with 
web-based elicitation tasks to obtain greater internal and external validity. The background 
information questionnaire and three experimental tasks--a scaled grammaticality judgment task, a 
preference/grammaticality task and a production task--were created with a web-based software, 
Claris Homepage®, while a fourth experimental task--a magnitude estimation acceptability 
judgment task--was designed with a multimedia software, Director®. The present study tested the 
acquisition of the properties subsumed under the verb movement parameter and the null subject 
parameter by English native speakers enrolled in French college classes. The results for the 
former parameter but not the latter support the hypothesis of progressive parametric manifestation 
in L2 learners' grammar. The preference/grammaticality and production tasks proved particularly 
informative. 
 
Methodology in the field of second language acquisition (SLA) research has been surprisingly limited to a 
few elicitation tasks, such as scalar grammaticality judgment tasks (GJT), with simple media, such as 
pencil-and-paper, since the early 1980s. The problems and caveats of GJTs are well-documented (e.g., 
Bard, Robertson, & Sorace, 1996; Birdsong, 1989, 1992; Cowart, 1997; Gass, 1994; Schütze, 1996; 
Sorace, 1996). Researchers usually conclude that traditional scalar GJTs are a poor reflection of the 
learners' competence, particularly when they are used alone. However, they may be modified to be more 
informative, especially when combined with other types of elicitation tasks, such as computer- or Web-
based tasks. 
The versatility and potentially powerful applications of computer-based tasks remains largely unexplored. 
One rare exception is Doughty (1991) who used computer-assisted reading lessons to evaluate the 
effectiveness of instruction in the acquisition of English relative clauses by native speakers of various 
languages. The experimental part of the lessons was highly controlled, while the participants were given a 
certain amount of user flexibility whenever appropriate (e.g, to navigate through the lessons or to access 
lexical information). 
This study intends to show how a rich and wide set of data can be elicited using a variety of innovative 
Web-based tasks which offers the following advantages:  
 it eliminates or minimizes human error in collecting and recording the data;  
 it facilitates the organization and analysis of data;  
 it avoids missing data since the tasks may be designed to require the participants to enter a 
response;  
 it ensures that all participants are exposed to the stimuli and/or the treatment in the same way 
(Hulstijn, 1997);  
 it permits the accuracy of timed experiments; and  
 it allows for a better control of experimental variables in general. The data are then more likely to 
better inform SLA processes.  
Delila Ayoun Web Based Elicitation Tasks in Second Language Acquisition … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 83 
 
Participants may also approach Web-based elicitation tasks differently than they approach traditional 
pencil-and-paper tasks. The mere novelty of the medium with its sophisticated presentation, ease of 
navigation, and speed may have all a positive impact on the participants. A 50 item GJT is spread over 
several pages on paper, whereas the length does not seem as daunting on a computer screen with scrolling 
arrows. It may also be speculated that performing a task on a computer screen may provide some isolation 
which participants lack in a classroom. That isolation may be conducive to better concentration, and 
therefore improved performance. 
Being able to better inform SLA processes is especially critical for empirical studies which have focused 
on the parameter-setting approach to language acquisition. This line of research has produced mixed 
results and has been variously interpreted (e.g., Meisel, 1998; Schwartz, 1998; White, 1996) partly 
because it lacks sufficient convincing evidence such as converging data from a variety of tasks. Due to 
practical constraints, participants are often administered a single task. It is difficult to draw solid, 
generalizable conclusions based on a sole elicitation task. However, the parameter-setting approach 
remains actively pursued for it directly addresses the question of ultimate attainment in adult SLA which 
amounts to asking whether adult learners are able to (re)set their parameters and thus still access 
Universal Grammar (Ayoun, 1999;  Bley-Vroman, 1998; Schwartz, 1998). 
This paper reports on the innovative Web-based design of an empirical study which is part of a larger 
project investigating the acquisition of French and Spanish by English native speakers from a parameter 
(re)setting perspective (Ayoun, 2000). It focuses on the (re)setting of two of the most studied parameters 
of UG by English native speakers learning French, the verb movement parameter (Pollock, 1989, 1997) 
and the null subject parameter (Chomsky, 1981). Since the main emphasis of this paper is on the 
experimental design of the study, the linguistic and learnability issues will only be briefly mentioned (see 
e.g., Ayoun, 1999; Pollock, 1997, for a more detailed account). 
LINGUISTIC FOCUS 
The Verb Movement Parameter2 
Following early work from Emonds (1978), Pollock (1989, 1997) observed that the distribution of four 
surface level syntactic properties was determined by whether finite lexical verbs raise out of the verb 
phrase (VP) as in French, or do not, as in English. These four properties are negation placement, adverb 
placement, floating quantifiers and inverted questions as illustrated in the following examples: 
(1) a. Jean ne veut pas les livres. 
      b. *John wants not the books. 
 (2) a. Eric regarde toujours les actualités. 
      b. *Eric watches always the news. 
 (3) a. Mes amis vont tous à la plage. 
      b. *My friends go all to the beach. 
 (4) a. Veut il les livres? 
      b. *Wants he the books? 
Assuming an underlying structure in which the verb follows adverbs and negatives as illustrated in (5), 
 
(5) [IP NP I ([Neg not/pas]) [VP (Adv) V...]] 
Delila Ayoun Web Based Elicitation Tasks in Second Language Acquisition … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 84 
a surface structure in which the verb precedes these elements indicates that it has moved out of its initial 
position by raising to the left (Pollock 1989, 1997). 
Within the Minimalist framework (Chomsky, 1995), the visibility of "rich" morphological features at LF 
triggers overt verb movement to Infl before Spell-Out to check and erase these features which would 
otherwise violate the Full Interpretation Principle. It follows that verb movement in English is limited to 
have/be raising, to the exclusion of lexical verbs because their verbal paradigm is morphologically poor, 
lacking features of person and number as shown in (6): 
(6) a. Have you seen your brother? 
      b. Didn't you say he was sick? 
Non-finite lexical and auxiliary verbs should not raise since their morphological features are assumed to 
be weak. However, Ayoun (1998a) found that native speakers allow nonfinite lexical verbs and auxiliaries 
to move past adverbs as in (7a), while rejecting the optional raising of nonfinite auxiliaries past negation 
as assumed in Pollock (1995, 1997) and Roberts (1998) as in (7b): 
(7) a. Sortir souvent, c'est amusant. 
   "To often go out is fun" 
      b. Ne pas avoir peur, c'est rare / n'avoir pas peur, c'est rare 
   "To not be afraid is rare" 
There is no principled explanation for this optionality of verb movement in relation to adverbs. 
Thus French and English differ on whether overt verb movement is allowed or not. Verb movement does 
not systematically apply to [+finite] lexical verbs with strong morphological features: both languages 
allow structures with and without verb movement, only in [+finite] contexts for English auxiliaries, but in 
both [+finite] and [-finite] contexts with respect to adverb placement for French lexical verbs as well as 
with respect to negation for auxiliaries in the grammar of older speakers (see Pollock, 1995). 
The Null Subject Parameter 
English and French are considered to be [-null subject] languages which require overt subject pronouns as 
in (8) and expletives as in (9), while disallowing that-trace effect as in (10) and nominal inversion as 
illustrated in (11): 
(8) a. Elle sort trop souvent / *sort trop souvent. 
      b. She goes out too often / *goes out too often. 
 (9) a. Il a plu toute la journée / *a plu toute la journée. 
      b. It rained all day / *rained all day. 
 (10) a. *Qui a-t-il dit qu'est venu? 
      b. *Who did he say that came? 
 (11) a. *Vient Marie cet après-midi. 
      b. *Comes Mary this afternoon. 
In spite of the extensive research it has generated since its initial formulation by Perlmutter (1971), the 
licensing of null subjects parameter still remains somewhat of a mystery: first, not all richly inflected 
languages allow null subjects while some poorly inflected languages do, such as Japanese, Korean, and 
Chinese (e.g., Fukui, 1995; Hasegawa, 1985; Huang, 1989); second, uniformly inflected languages such 
as German and Icelandic show that the Morphological Uniformity Principle (Jaeggli & Safir, 1989) does 
Delila Ayoun Web Based Elicitation Tasks in Second Language Acquisition … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 85 
not hold. The same problem exists for the verb movement parameter: there seems to be a correlation 
between richly inflected verbs and verb raising, but not all languages with rich verbal inflection allow 
verb movement (e.g., Lardiere, 1998, Rohrbacher, 1999). These issues are not addressed here and will 
have to be in future research. 
From a learnability perspective, English native speakers learning French will have to reset the verb 
movement parameter which differs from the L1 to the L2, but not the null subject parameter. Following 
others (e.g., Ayoun, 1999; Bolotin, 1996a, 1996b, 1996c; Uziel, 1993), it is argued that parameter 
resetting is evidenced by a partial clustering of the properties due to a progressive manifestation of 
parameter-setting properties (e.g., Ayoun, 1999; Platt, 1993; Schwartz & Tomaselli, 1990; Uziel, 1993). 
This partial clustering, as opposed to a simultaneous clustering is due to the following two factors: 
a) the complexity and systematic application of the abstract syntactic mechanism involved for 
each parameter: verb movement does not apply in a systematic and consistent fashion in French, 
while the null subject parameter does. 
b) the learners' level of proficiency: it is assumed that the longer learners are exposed to primary 
language data, the higher their proficiency level will be3. 
This learnability approach translates into the following research hypotheses to be tested statistically with a 
repeated measures ANOVA design followed by post hoc Tukey tests as appropriate. 
 
RESEARCH HYPOTHESES 
Hypothesis 1 
The syntactic properties subsumed under the verb movement parameter and the syntactic 
properties subsumed under the null subject parameter will be acquired as a cluster. 
Hypothesis 2 
There will be a relationship between the learners' proficiency level, as measured by the pre-test, 
and their performance on the experimental tasks: the higher the proficiency level, the better the 
learners' performance across tasks should be. 
Hypothesis 3 
There will be a relationship between the learners' performance on various syntactic properties and 
task types: the learners' performance should be consistent. 
 
Hypothesis 1 predicts that there should not be significant differences between the properties subsumed 
under each parameter. Evidence of successful parameter resetting is taken to be a better-than-chance 
performance (which is usually assumed to be at or above 60%). Properties are not expected to cluster 
following any particular or specific order since they are governed by the same abstract principle of 
grammar. Hypothesis 2 predicts that there will be a positive correlation between the learners' score on the 
proficiency test and their performance across experimental tasks. And Hypothesis 3 predicts that that 
there should be an interaction between the learners' performance on various syntactic properties and task 
types. 
Delila Ayoun Web Based Elicitation Tasks in Second Language Acquisition … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 86 
STUDY DESIGN 
Description of the software 
Claris Homepage®Claris Homepage is software used to design World Wide Web (Web) pages. The 
opening untitled page resembles a classic word processing page and one may simply start typing new text, 
or import (by copying and pasting) text from an existing text file created by another application such as a 
word processor. Once created, Web pages are written in HTML (Hypertext Markup Language), the 
language used to format documents so that they may be "published" or uploaded on the Web. HTML uses 
formatting commands or "tags" that are embedded around the various parts of a Web document so that a 
browsing software such as Netscape® may display documents' links, text, and graphics properly. The tags 
do not appear on the browser screen, but translate the information for the browser. However, no 
knowledge of HTML encoding is required to use Claris Homepage® since it automatically encodes any 
text file in the appropriate HTML format. 
Claris Homepage® is flexible and provides pull-down menus for a variety of options in text style, font, 
color, size, etc. Users may simply click on the small icons located on top of the page to take advantage of 
many functions to create links to other Web pages, to preview and test their pages in a Web browser, to 
change the alignment of the text, or to insert tables, images, or a variety of forms. The latter are of special 
interest for designing the types of elicitation tasks commonly used in SLA research and refer to the 
following: 
 Text fields are rectangular boxes, the dimensions of which may be specified as needed. They 
may be used for a cloze test or to enter a single word of information such as 'user-name', 'ID#' 
or 'password'. Participants click in the text field to start typing and use either the tab key or the 
mouse to move from field to field.  
 Text areas are larger boxes; their dimensions may be specified as well, and they are best used 
to enter more extensive text such as short narratives or longer answers to open-ended 
questions. They are bordered by vertical and horizontal arrows to scroll through the text. 
 Check boxes and radio buttons are small squares and circles respectively. When participants 
click on them, an X or a check mark appears to indicate that they have been selected. They may 
be used to collect data such as participants' gender, college major or status. Researchers may 
allow or disallow multiple selections. 
 Pop-up menus are used to list several options, for example a variety of languages under the 
category 'native language' or 'second language'. To use pop-up menus, the participants scan up 
and down the answers provided and select one by releasing the mouse on the desired option. 
Any given selection may be changed and multiple selections may be allowed. 
 Finally, you may insert a form known as password to limit access to the Web page(s) to 
specific individuals if necessary.  
Director Macromedia®  Director® is a very sophisticated and flexible software whose purpose is to 
create multi-media, computer-based documents. Text, sound, and images may be combined to create 
interactive animations called "movies." The software provides ready-made scripts to make basic movies. 
These scripts may be used as provided or customized for specific purposes. The complexity of this 
software requires either a solid knowledge of its programming language or the assistance of a computer 
programmer. However, its extreme versatility and power make it worthwhile for creating multi-media 
documents. In the present study, a pre-existing movie script was modified to create an original magnitude 
estimation acceptability judgment task to be described below4 
 
Delila Ayoun Web Based Elicitation Tasks in Second Language Acquisition … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 87 
The next section details how Claris Homepage® and Director® were used to create innovative elicitation 
tasks to obtain a richer set of data in a parameter (re)settting study. 
Tasks and Stimuli 
The tasks were performed in the order in which they are presented here. Task 1 was a pre-test which 
included 41 stimuli exemplifying a variety of syntactic properties (dative alternation, dative passive, 
Exceptional-Case Marking, interrogative and declarative pied piping/preposition stranding, il est/c'est, 
and various tense/aspectual distinctions) to obtain an independent measure of the participants' proficiency 
level5. The experimental tasks (Task 2 through Task 5) tested the following properties:  
 verb movement parameter: negation placement in finite contexts (NegFin) and nonfinite 
contexts (NegInf); adverb placement in finite contexts (AdvFin) and nonfinite contexts 
(AdvInf); inverted questions (ProInv); and floating quantifier (FQ). 
 null subject parameter: (null) subject pronouns in main clauses (ProSub) and embedded clauses 
(ProEmb); expletives (Explet); extraction for that-trace effect (Extr); nominal subjects 
(NomSub); and nominal subject inversion (NomInv).  
All stimuli were controlled for length and simplicity of vocabulary. No distractors were included since the 
stimuli offered sufficient variety. 
Background Information Questionnaire Participants provided the usual background information such as 
age, gender, native language, second language, language proficiency, and so forth. Almost all types of 
forms were put to use: check boxes, radio buttons, pop-up menus, text fields, and text areas. Pop-up 
menus were especially useful to indicate language proficiency: the learners were given several options 
from novice-low to native-like. They were coded into numbers (invisible to the participants) for statistical 
purposes. To avoid missing data, the fields were designed as required fields: participants had to enter a 
response for the submission of the form to be valid. 
 
Scaled Grammaticality Judgment/Correction Task Task 1 (PreTest) and Task 3 (S-GJT) 
Participants were asked to judge individual sentences according to the following categories: completely 
ungrammatical, ungrammatical,  I don't know, grammatical, and completely grammatical. The categories 
were presented in pop-up menus and were coded from 1 to 5, respectively, for statistical analysis. The 
codings were not visible to the participants. It was deemed preferable to ask participants to make 
judgments according to the Likert scale rather than to choose numbers since numbers may be perceived 
differently or assigned different degrees of grammaticality or ungrammaticality by participants. The 
researcher was present to answer questions participants had the Likert scale or other parts of the 
experiment. In addition, participants were asked to provide a correction to the sentences they judged to be 
either  completely ungrammatical or ungrammatical to ensure that the proper syntactic criterion 
motivated the rejection of these stimuli.6 Task 3 included 45 sentences to test all properties with the 
exception of adverb placement in nonfinite contexts. 
 
Preference/grammaticality task (Task 2) (PrefGT) Participants were presented with pairs of sentences. 
Below the stimuli were two pop-up menus: the first allowed the participants to indicate which of the two 
sentences, A or B, they preferred; while the second permitted the participants to specify whether the other 
sentence, that is, the one they had not selected, was grammatical or ungrammatical. This latter feature is 
unique to the present study and makes this preference task more informative. Participants clicked on the 
pop-up menus to see the relevant options and released the mouse on the desired selection. They had the 
option of going back to change a previous selection. Participants were instructed to complete all items 
before submitting the form. This task was composed of 34 pairs of sentences to exemplify all the 
properties except for adverb placement in infinitive clauses and subject pronoun inversion in finite 
Delila Ayoun Web Based Elicitation Tasks in Second Language Acquisition … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 88 
clauses. The first property was tested only in the production task, following earlier research (Ayoun, 
1998a, 1998b) which showed its "ambivalence" or "fuzziness" (Sorace, 1996). The last property is 
directly tested in all other tasks and indirectly in several stimuli in Task 2. 
 
Production task (Task 4) (ProdT) Participants were asked to translate sentences from their L1 into 
French. Participants typed their answers in a text field below the stimulus sentence. All text fields were 
specified as required to avoid missing data. Task 4 tested all properties with 35 sentences. 
 
Magnitude estimation acceptability judgment task (Task 5) (ME-AJT) This task is the most 
innovative both in terms of its design and for SLA research. It was inspired by the work of Sorace and her 
colleagues (Bard et al., 1996; Sorace, 1996) who explored the possibility of applying magnitude 
estimation from psychophysics to linguistic judgments. It consists in asking participants to judge or rate 
stimuli in relation to one another. For instance, 
In numerical estimation, informants are presented with a series of stimuli of unequal magnitudes, 
one at a time in random order, and are asked to assign a number (the modulus) to the perceived 
magnitude of the first stimulus (the standard), and then successive numbers to the perceived 
magnitude of stimuli in proportion to the modulus (Sorace, 1996, p. 401). 
In the present study, the stimuli consisted of individual sentences that the participants were asked to read 
to make two decisions: first, whether the sentence was grammatical or ungrammatical; second, how much 
more or less (un)grammatical a stimulus was compared to the last stimulus judged to also be (un) 
grammatical. 
This is how Task 5 appeared: there were five sentences per screen with a long blue rectangular box above 
each stimulus with a cursor in the middle; the portion to the right of the cursor was devoted to 
"grammaticality" and the portion to the left of the cursor to "ungrammaticality" as indicated above the 
box. The two decisions participants made were carried out by moving the cursor within the box with the 
mouse. Moving the cursor blackened the area covered so that participants could clearly see how 
(un)grammatical they were indicating each stimulus to be. Invisible to the participants was a scale from 
+1 to +100 for grammaticality, and -1 to -100 for ungrammaticality. The cursor could be moved back and 
forth as desired, and the numerical value was recorded when the cursor was released. To avoid missing 
data, the form could not be submitted until all stimuli presented in each screen had been judged. This task 
included all properties with the exception of adverb placement in infinitive clauses with a total of 50 
sentences. 
COMPUTERIZED DATA COLLECTION 
Once the elicitation tasks designed with Claris Homepage® were completed, they were uploaded on a 
server before the beginning of the experiment so that participants could access them from any computer 
equipped with a Web browser. The participants entered their first and last names (which were later coded 
to preserve their anonymity), completed the tasks, and clicked on the button SUBMIT to send the data to 
a folder located on the server. 
Computerized data collection is greatly facilitated by the possibility to organize it in any way the 
researcher may see fit. For example, the data may be sent to group folders organized by levels of 
proficiency or by language, or to individual folders, with one folder for each participant or alternatively, 
the folders may be divided by tasks. The data organization may also be modified later to conduct different 
types of analyses. 
 
Delila Ayoun Web Based Elicitation Tasks in Second Language Acquisition … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 89 
As mentioned, an extremely useful feature of Claris Homepage® is that the forms (e.g., text field or pop-
up menus) can be designed so that participants are required to enter information before submitting the 
form. When some information was missing, participants received a message asking them to click on 
"Back" on their browser to return and complete the task by supplying the missing information. When the 
task was properly completed, participants received a positive confirmation message. This feature allowed 
us to avoid the common problem of missing data. The resulting analyses are thus more reliable in that we 
obtained complete data sets. 
In the present study, Task 5 was installed on hard drives to be accessed quickly. It is also available 
through anonymous file transfer protocol (FTP): the task can be downloaded simply by clicking on it.7 It 
was created in both MacOS and Windows versions. As already mentioned, Task 5 was also designed so 
that all the stimuli had to be judged: first, before the participants could move on to the next screen; and 
second, so that the data they entered could be properly submitted by clicking on the SUBMIT button at 
the end of the task. As in the Claris Homepage tasks, the learners then received a positive confirmation 
message. The data were saved in the appropriate folders on the server to be later accessed for statistical 
analysis. 
Participants 
The participants (13 females and 4 males with an average age of 20) were enrolled in various classes: 
most of them (n=11) were taking only one French course which ranged from second year to graduate 
level for one participant. There were 5 French majors and 12 non-language majors. 
RESULTS 
The raw data were computed in the following manner. In the scaled GJTs and magnitude estimation AJT, 
participants were awarded one point per correct answer, namely, one point for each correctly accepted 
sentence (grammatical sentence accepted as "grammatical") and one point for each correctly rejected 
sentence (ungrammatical sentence rejected as "ungrammatical"). In the scaled GJT a correctly accepted 
sentence was rated 4 or 5, while a correctly rejected sentence was rated 1 or 2. In the magnitude 
estimation AJT, a correctly accepted sentence was any positive number from 1 to 100, while a correctly 
rejected sentence was any negative number from -1 to -100. The number of correct answers for 
grammatical sentences was divided by the total number of grammatical sentences for each participant and 
multiplied by 100 to obtain a percentage accuracy score (e.g., 10 correctly accepted sentences out of 15 
grammatical sentences = 66.67% accuracy score). The process was repeated for ungrammatical sentences, 
thus yielding two accuracy percentage scores for each participant. These two accuracy scores were 
averaged to obtain an overall accuracy score for each participant (e.g., 66.67% for grammatical sentences 
+ 82.42% for ungrammatical sentences = overall accuracy score of 74.54%). 
The scores for the grammaticality/preference task reflect the participants' ability to make two decisions: 
first, selecting the correct sentence from a pair of stimuli and second, correctly accepting (when 
grammatical) or correctly rejecting (when ungrammatical) the other sentence. A point was given for each 
correct answer. The points were totalled and divided by the total number of sentences to obtain an overall 
accuracy percentage score. More details are given below with the results for this particular task. 
And finally, in the production task, participants were awarded one point per sentence for correctly 
producing the relevant structure. Vocabulary errors or gender agreement mistakes were ignored for they 
may be due to performance error, not competence, and are found even in native speaker elicited data or 
spontaneous productions. The total number of points was divided by the total number of sentences to 
obtain an overall accuracy percentage score (e.g., 20 correctly produced sentences out of 35 yields a score 
of 57.14%). 
 
Delila Ayoun Web Based Elicitation Tasks in Second Language Acquisition … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 90 
Results by Properties 
If parameter setting is taking place in L2 acquisition, there should not be any significant differences 
between properties as they progressively cluster. Again, we do not expect a specific clustering order since 
all the properties are governed by the same abstract principle. They should simply be acquired at about 
the same time. Table 1 presents the accuracy percentage means obtained on the properties for each 
parameter across all four experimental tasks for the L2 learners as a group. Table 1 presents the means 
obtained on the properties for both parameters. 
 
The learners' performance appears to vary from property to property and the ANOVA presented in Table 
2 confirms that there were significant differences among verb movement properties. 
 
A post hoc Tukey test (confidence level is consistently at .05) revealed that there are significant 
differences between: 
- neginf and proinv 
 - advfin and proinv 
 - advinf and proinv 
 - FQ and proinv 
These significant differences are also displayed in Table 3 where they are indicated by (*) in the bottom 
row: 
 
 
Delila Ayoun Web Based Elicitation Tasks in Second Language Acquisition … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 91 
The post hoc Tukey thus indicates that the properties subsumed under the verb movement parameter do 
partially cluster since they form two homogeneous subsets (i.e., the highest and lowest means are not 
significantly different) as follows: 
 
These two subsets indicate that most of the verb movement properties cluster in the L2 learners' grammar, 
which confirms our first hypothesis. Learners performed significantly worse on negative placement, 
adverb placement and floating quantifiers in comparison to verb-subject pronoun inversion where they 
did very well, obtaining an overall average of 93%. The other properties are much closer together but 
with relatively low scores. 
Table 5 indicates that there are significant differences among null subject properties as well. 
 
A post hoc Tukey test revealed that there are significant differences between: 
- prosub and proemb 
 - prosub and expl 
 - prosub and nomsub 
 - proemb and extract 
 - expletive and extraction 
 - extract and nomsub 
 - extract and nominv 
 - nomsub and nominv 
Or as illustrated by (*) in the white cells of the lower triangle in Table 6: 
 
Delila Ayoun Web Based Elicitation Tasks in Second Language Acquisition … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 92 
The post hoc Tukey test indicates that the null subject properties form four homogeneous subsets (i.e., the 
highest and lowest means are not significantly different) as displayed in Table 7. 
  
The participants performed very poorly on extraction with a means of 52.6%. The other properties appear 
to be acquired as a cluster or rather, as clusters. 
To sum up, we may say that our first hypothesis which stated that the properties subsumed under each 
parameter would be acquired as a cluster is confirmed for the verb movement parameter, providing 
evidence of initial successful parameter resetting in the grammar of our L2 learners. It is more difficult to 
reach the same conclusion for the null subject parameter. The participants performed below chance level 
on extraction, and properties form four clusters as opposed to only two. The null subject properties may 
thus be acquired individually as opposed to as a parametric cluster. However, the difference between the 
two parameters is not statistically significant (difference mean = -5.80, SD = 16.387, t = -1.46, df = 16, p 
= .163). 
Results by Tasks 
The results by tasks allow us to see whether the second hypothesis, which stated that there would be a 
relationship between the learners' proficiency levels and their performance on the various tasks, was 
confirmed (see the Appendix for complete results). The scores were computed as explained above for 
each participant. The means represent overall accuracy percentage scores across all properties. They were 
averaged to obtain group results which are presented in Table 8. 
 
Or as shown in Figure 1: 
Delila Ayoun Web Based Elicitation Tasks in Second Language Acquisition … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 93 
 
Figure 1. 
The pre-test (Task 1) shows an overall low level of proficiency (67%)8 and it does not seem to be a good 
predictor of the learners' performance on the experimental tasks. The learners' scores are more consistent 
and higher across all experimental tasks. At least four learners performed in the 80% range, showing that 
they have acquired the properties tested for both parameters. The group average score was the highest on 
the production task: 80.4% with a low of 63% and a high of 91.4%. All scores are above the better-than-
chance level of 60%. The results of a Pearson correlation test displayed in Table 9 confirmed that learners 
performed differently from task to task. 
 
The higher the correlation, the more similarly the participants performed. We thus see that the pre-test 
was a relatively good predictor of the participants' performance only for task 3 (r = .600, p = .05) but not 
for the other experimental tasks. This result may be explained by the fact that both the pre-test and task 3 
were scaled GJTs. And the results of a oneway ANOVA presented in Table 10 indicate a significant 
difference between tasks: 
 
 The results of a post-hoc Tukey test displayed in Table 11 show that these significant differences are to 
found between the following tasks indicated by (*) in the white cells in the lower triangle: 
Delila Ayoun Web Based Elicitation Tasks in Second Language Acquisition … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 94 
 
There are thus significant differences between 
- Task 1 (PreTest) and Task 4 (ProdT), as well as Task 1 and Task 5 (ME-AJT) 
 - Task 2 (PrefGT) and Task 5 (ME-AJT) 
 - Task 3 (S-GJT) and Task 5 (ME-AJT) 
These results show that participants performed differently from task to task. This may be explained by 
contending that different elicitation tasks require greater metalinguistic skills than those possessed by our 
learners at the time of their participation. An alternative explanation is that our learners' L2 competence 
level is simply not high enough yet to perform consistently on different types of elicitation tasks. Some 
degree of uncertainty or fuzziness in their interlanguage grammar may be revealed more easily when they 
are required to perform experimental tasks which solicit a variety of metalinguistic skills.  For example, 
the preference/grammaticality task required the participants not only to correctly select one sentence but 
to correctly judge the (un)grammaticality of the rejected sentence. Thus in addition to percentage scores 
for CS/CG (correct sentence/correct grammaticality) already given above, the results included the 
following:  
 The percentage scores for CS/IG (correct sentence/incorrect grammaticality) indicate that the 
participants selected the right sentence but not the (un)grammaticality status of the rejected 
sentence. For example when presented with the pair in (12):  
    (12)  a. Paul souvent va au marché. 
b. Paul va souvent au marché. 
Participants correctly showed a preference for (12b) and then correctly indicated that (12a) was 
ungrammatical. 
 The percentage scores for IS/CG (incorrect sentence/correct grammaticality) show that the 
participants selected the wrong sentence but the correct (un) grammaticality status of the 
rejected sentence. Here participants preferred (12a) but judged (12b) to be grammatical.  
 The percentage scores for IC/IG (incorrect sentence/incorrect grammaticality) show that 
participants were unable to select the right sentence or the right (un) grammaticality status. The 
participants' selection was (12a) for "sentence preferred" and "ungrammatical" for (12b).  
Delila Ayoun Web Based Elicitation Tasks in Second Language Acquisition … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 95 
All these results are presented in Table 12. The results displayed in the "total" column adds the percentage 
scores from CS/CG and CS/IG. 
 
The results displayed in "total" now indicate that the learners were actually quite successful at correctly 
selecting the right sentence (they completely missed only 5% of the stimuli) but had difficulty in 
consistently judging the (un)grammaticality of the other sentence. This suggests that their interlanguage is 
still entertaining mixed settings by allowing both the L1 and the L2 options (Ayoun, 1998b; Bolotin 
1996a, 1996b, 1996c; White, 1992). 
Results by Properties/Tasks 
A repeated measures ANOVA was run to determine whether there was any difference in the participants' 
performance on specific properties in different types of tasks. The results reported in Table 13 reveal (a) a 
significant task effect, (b) a significant property effect, and (c) a significant property by task interaction 
which means that the differences among the properties varied by task. 
 
Let us now see exactly where the learners' performance on properties differed based on the experimental 
task. Starting with the properties subsumed under the verb movement parameter, let us present all the task 
effect significance levels by property in Table 14 (AdvInf is omitted since it was only tested in Task 4). 
 
The following tables will now show the means obtained on each task and the results of post hoc Tukey 
tests in the form of groupings. Means with the same letter under Tukey groupings are not significantly 
different. All the means for NegFin--negation placement in finite contexts--in Table 15 are thus in the 
same group: the participants performed quite consistently from task to task. 
Delila Ayoun Web Based Elicitation Tasks in Second Language Acquisition … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 96 
 
On the other hand, Table 16 indicates that the learners' performance was significantly different between 
the production task (Task 4) and the grammaticality/preference task (Task 2). 
 
 
The participants did not perform as consistently on the placement of adverbs in finite contexts (AdvFin) 
but there are no significant differences between tasks due to the high standard deviations, particularly on 
Task 2. 
 
Tukey groupings in Table 18 for floating quantifiers indicate that the L2 learners' performance was 
significantly different on only two tasks: Task 4 (ProdT) and Task 3 (S-GJT). 
Delila Ayoun Web Based Elicitation Tasks in Second Language Acquisition … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 97 
 
We obtained similar results for the last verb movement property, inverted questions (proinv), for which a 
significant difference was found between the production task (Task 4) and the preference/grammaticality 
judgment task (Task 2) as displayed in Table 19. 
 
These means and Tukey groupings for the verb movement properties thus clearly indicate that learners' 
performance may vary widely depending on the elicitation task as illustrated in Figure 3. 
 
  
 Figure 3. Verb movement properties by tasks 
Delila Ayoun Web Based Elicitation Tasks in Second Language Acquisition … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 98 
 
Let us now consider the results for the properties subsumed under the null subject parameter. Again, we 
first present the results of the ANOVA in Table 20 before showing the means and Tukey groupings for 
each property. 
 
Table 20 indicates that the learners' performance was significantly different from task to task for four 
properties: embedded null subjects (ProEmb), extraction (extr), nominal subjects (NomSub) and nominal 
inversion (NomInv). Let us examine the means and Tukey groupings for each property. 
 
The participants did not do very well on null subjects in main clauses particularly on the preference/ 
grammaticality task (Task 2) as shown in Table 21. However the means for the Tukey groupings have the 
same letter indicating that there is not a significant difference due to the extremely high standard 
variation. 
 
Our next table, Table 22, shows that the participants did extremely well on all tasks on null subjects in 
embedded clauses with the exception of the preference/grammaticality task which is significantly 
different from the production task. 
 
Delila Ayoun Web Based Elicitation Tasks in Second Language Acquisition … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 99 
 
The participants did extremely well on expletives as well as shown on Table 23 which reveals high means 
on all tasks. It is interesting to note that participants obtained the same mean on the preference task and 
the scaled-GJT, but show a greater standard variation on the former. 
 
 
The means and Tukey groupings displayed in Table 24 for extraction show again a significant difference 
between the preference task and the production task, but this time, the participants performed much worse 
on the latter than on the former. 
 
The Tukey groupings displayed in Table 25 indicate that the participants performed significantly 
differently on the two A/GJTs: they obtained a perfect score of 100% on the magnitude estimation AJT 
Delila Ayoun Web Based Elicitation Tasks in Second Language Acquisition … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 100 
but did not do as well on the scaled GJT with an average of 85.29%. Thus, although the high means show 
that the property has been acquired, different experimental tasks yield a significantly different 
performance. 
 
And finally, the means and groupings presented in Table 26 reveal a very good performance on Task 4, 
the production task, which is significantly different from the Task 2, the preference/grammaticality task. 
 
Figure 4 sums up the L2 learners' performance on each property from task to task. 
   
Figure 4. Null subject properties by tasks 
The only generalization which holds across all syntactic properties is that the learners' best performance 
was on the production task and their worst performance was on the preference/ grammaticality task. But 
Delila Ayoun Web Based Elicitation Tasks in Second Language Acquisition … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 101 
even that generalization is not without a puzzling exception: the fact that learners were able to select and 
judge stimuli exemplifying extraction with a 72.55% accuracy on the preference/grammaticality task but 
performed so poorly on the production task (20.59%). Hypothesis 3, which stated that would be a positive 
relationship between learners' performance and task types, is therefore rejected. The learners did not 
consistently perform across task types. This finding raises important questions for parameter setting 
theory which will have to be addressed in future research. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
It was hypothesized that the syntactic properties subsumed under the null subject and the verb movement 
parameters would be acquired as a cluster. It is unclear why results revealed that this was the case for the 
verb movement parameter, which requires a resetting from the L1 value to the L2 value, but not for the 
null subject which does not require such a resetting, since the L1 and the L2 have the same value. 
However, this indicates that L2 learners do not simply rely on the L1 and that other psycholinguistic 
processes are at work. 
It was argued that a variety of Web-based elicitation tasks would produce a richer set of data and would 
be more informative and dependable, and it was indeed the case. First, a study limited to a single 
traditional scaled GJT would be less informative and would even lead to inaccurate conclusions since it 
was found that participants performed better on all other tasks revealing a higher level of proficiency, 
which would otherwise have gone unnoticed. Furthermore, and although no significant difference was 
found for all properties confounded, most participants (11 out of 17) obtained better results on Task 5 
than on Task 3, showing that learners actually perform differently on different types of GJTs/AJTs. And 
finally, almost as many participants (9 out of 17) obtained their highest score on the production task. We 
may thus establish a decreasing order of difficulty across all properties: production task (4), magnitude 
estimation GJT (5)/scaled GJT (3), preference/ grammaticality task (2). 
When we considered specific properties for which significant differences were found among tasks we 
discovered that indeed learners performed better on the production task than on any other task. A 
particularly important finding was the significant difference on nominal subjects between the two types of 
judgment tasks, the magnitude estimation AJT and the scaled GJT. A flawless performance of 100% 
accuracy on the former was significantly different from a very respectable performance of 85.29% on the 
latter. 
Let us be more specific about the various tasks. It seems that participants performed best on the tasks 
which imposed the least restrictions and were the least artificial. The production task required the 
participants to translate individual sentences from English into French. This is an exercise the participants 
may have experienced as students in their respective language classes, although it is certainly not an easy 
task. The stimuli were controlled for length and simplicity of vocabulary to avoid any unnecessary 
distraction. The relative open-endedness of the production task may be a good way to actually tap into the 
learners' competence since it requires them to directly compare the L1 and the L2. The comparison either 
yields a corresponding structure in their interlanguage grammar or it does not. In the latter case, learners 
are likely to "fall back" on their L1. On the other hand, learners are very unlikely to be able to correctly 
produce a structure which is not part of their interlanguage grammar. The drawback of a production task 
is that it does not rule out the possibility that learners know that the L2 (dis)allows alternatives. This is 
where acceptability/grammaticality judgment tasks (A/GJT) come into play. 
A/GJTs differ from production tasks in several ways. First, they may require less processing time. This 
may allow learners to access the knowledge stored in long term memory. Second, the artificiality of a 
A/GJT probably has an impact on learners, which may explain why native speakers rarely perform at a 
100% accuracy either. Although there are several other possible explanations such as dialectal and/or 
individual variations or "fuzzy" grammaticality of the syntactic structures being tested (Sorace, 1996). In 
Delila Ayoun Web Based Elicitation Tasks in Second Language Acquisition … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 102 
addition, "serial order, repeated presentation, deliberate judgment strategies, modality, register, 
preparation, and judgment speed are all features of the elicitation task that might contribute systematically 
to variation in judgment" (Schütze, 1996, p. 169). 
The preference/grammaticality task showed that even when they were capable of correctly producing a 
given structure in task 4, L2 learners were not always able to both indicate their preference and correctly 
determine whether the other sentence was (un)grammatical. As a matter of fact, a significant difference 
was found between Task 2 and Task 4 on two verb movement properties and three null subject properties. 
It may thus be concluded that the various elicitation tasks used in this study provided a better insight into 
the learners' interlanguage than a single traditional GJT (Chapelle, 1998) in that they yielded a richer and 
more informative set of data. Web-based elicitation tasks definitely offer a greater versatility. This 
increases the generalizability of empirical studies and our understanding of second language acquisition 
processes. 
 
NOTES  
1. I am most grateful for the insightful suggestions, constructive comments, as well as the technical 
and statistical support, the following individuals provided: Roby Ariew, Robert Bley-Vroman, 
J.D. Brown, Adam Dudsic, George Gutsche, Pat Jones, Kazue Kanno, Gabi Kasper, William 
O'Grady, and four extremely thorough anonymous reviewers. The usual disclaimers apply.  
2. The verb movement parameter is alternatively referred to as the V-Raising parameter (Culicover, 
1997), the V-to-I parameter (Deprez, 1994), or the (strength of) AGR parameter (Williams, 
1994), since the systematic differences between the two languages most often studied, French and 
Delila Ayoun Web Based Elicitation Tasks in Second Language Acquisition … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 103 
English, depend on whether overt verb movement is allowed or disallowed due to the [±strong] 
feature of AGR.  
3. This does not necessarily imply that deductive processes are replaced with inductive processes.  
4. I would like to very sincerely thank Dr. Chris Johnson for the expert programming of this task, 
and Adam Dudsic for invaluable technical assistance throughout the data collection.  
5. The properties are notoriously difficult for L2 French learners and are often used to determine the 
learners' level of proficiency (Coppieters, 1987; Birdsong, 1992).  
6. Gass (1983) showed that providing a correction to an ungrammatical or unacceptable sentence 
requires a very different metalinguistic ability than making a holistic judgment. See Birdsong 
(1989) for the methodological desirata of requiring participants to provide corrections following 
grammatical judgments.  
7. Documents created with Director® can also be made available on a Web page so that they can be 
easily accessed from any computer equipped with a Web browser.  
8. There was also a wide range of variation among participants with a lowest score of 44% and a 
highest score of 90.5%.  
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Dr. Ayoun is currently Assistant Professor of French Language & Linguistics at the University of 
Arizona, and Graduate Faculty in the Interdisciplanary PhD program in Second Language Acquisition and 
Teaching. Her research focuses mainly on the applied pyscholinguistics processes underlying adult 
second language acquisition. 
REFERENCES 
Ayoun, D. (1998a). The verb movement parameter revisited: syntactic theory and language data. 
Unpublished manuscript, University of Arizona. 
Ayoun, D. (1998b). Visiting traditional assumptions in Principles-and-Parameters theory. Arizona 
Working Papers in SLAT, 6, 61-79. 
Ayoun, D. (1999). The verb movement parameter in French L2 acquisition. Bilingualism: Language & 
Cognition, 2, 103-125. 
Ayoun, D. (2000). Parameters of Universal Grammar in first and second language acquisition. 
Manuscript in progress. 
Bard, E., Robertson, B., & Sorace, A. (1996). Magnitude estimation of linguistic acceptability. Language, 
72, 32-68. 
Birdsong, D. (1989). Metalinguistic performance and interlinguistic competence. Berlin: Springer-
Verlag. 
Birdsong, D. (1992). Ultimate attainment in second language acquisition. Language, 68, 706-55. 
Bley-Vroman, R. (1998). Access to UG: can we have our cake and eat it too? Colloquium presentation at 
the Second Language Research Forum, Honolulu, HI. 
 
Delila Ayoun Web Based Elicitation Tasks in Second Language Acquisition … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 104 
Bolotin, N. (1996a). Arabic speakers' resetting of parameters. In M. Eid (Ed.), Perspectives on Arabic 
Linguistics VIII (pp. 135-155). Philadelphia: John Benjamins. 
Bolotin, N. (1996b). Resetting parameters in acquiring Arabic. In M. Eid & D. Parkinson (Eds.), 
Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics IX (pp. 167-178). Philadelphia: John Benjamins. 
Bolotin, N. (1996c). Arabic speakers and parasitic gaps. In M. Eid & R. Ratcliffe (Eds.), Perspectives on 
Arabic linguistics X (pp. 273-282). Philadelphia: John Benjamins. 
Chapelle, C. (1998). Construct definition and validity inquiry in SLA research. In L. Bachman & A. 
Cohen (Eds.), Interfaces between second language acquisition and language testing research (pp. 32-70). 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Chomsky, N. (1981). Lectures on government and binding. Dordrecht: Foris. 
Chomsky, N. (1995). The Minimalist Program. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Cowart, W. (1997). Experimental syntax. Applying objective methods to sentence judgments. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 
Doughty, C. (1991). Second language instruction does make a difference. Evidence from an empirical 
study of SL relativization.  Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 13, 431-469. 
Emonds, J. (1978). The verbal complex V'-V in French. Linguistic Inquiry, 9, 49-77. 
Fukui, N. (1995). The principles-and-parameters approach: a comparative syntax of English and Japanese. 
In M. Shibatani & T. Bynon (Eds.), Approaches to language typology (pp. 327-372). Oxford: Clarendon 
Press. 
Gass, S. (1994). The reliability in second language grammaticality judgments. In E. Tarone, S. Gass & A. 
Cohen (Eds.), Research methodology in second language acquisition (pp. 303-322). Hillsdale, NJ: 
Erlbaum. 
Hasegawa, N. (1985). On the so-called "zero-pronouns" in Japanese. The Linguistic Review, 4, 289-341. 
Huang, Y. (1989). Anaphora in Chinese: toward a pragmatic analysis. Doctoral dissertation. University 
of Cambridge. 
Hulstijn, J. (1997). Second language acquisition research in the laboratory. Possibilities and limitation. 
Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 19, 131-43. 
Jaeggli, O. & Safir, K. (Eds.). (1989). The null subject parameter. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer. 
Lardiere, D. (1998). Dissociating syntax from morphology in a divergent L2-end state grammar. Second 
Language Research, 14, 359-375. 
Meisel, J. (1998). Revisiting Universal Grammar. Paper presented at the Second Language Research 
Forum, Honolulu, HI. 
Perlmutter, D. (1971). Deep and surface constraints in syntax. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston. 
Platt, E. (1993). Parameter resetting in second language acquisition: a study of adult Spanish and 
Vietnamese learners of English. In F. Eckman (ed.), Confluence. Linguistics, L2 acquisition and speech 
pathology (pp. 105-134). Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Pollock, J.-Y. (1989). Verb movement, Universal Grammar, and the structure of IP. Linguistic Inquiry 20, 
365-424. 
Pollock, J.-Y. (1995). Talk given at the Fourth Diachronic Generative Syntax Conference. Université du 
Québec à Montréal. 
 
Delila Ayoun Web Based Elicitation Tasks in Second Language Acquisition … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 105 
Pollock, J.-Y. (1997). Langage et cognition. Introduction au programme minimaliste de la grammaire 
générative. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France. 
Roberts, I. (1998). Have/Be raising, Move F, and Procrastinate. Linguistic Inquiry, 29, 113-125. 
Rohrbacher, B. (1999). Morphology-driven syntax. A theory of V to I raising and pro-drop. Amsterdam: 
John Benjamins. 
Schütze, C. (1996). The empirical base of linguistics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Schwartz, B. & Tomaselli, A. (1990). Some implications for an analysis of German word order. In W. 
Abraham, W. Kosmeijer, & E. Reuland (Eds.), Issues in Germanic syntax (pp. 251-274). New York: 
Mouton de Gruyter. 
Schwartz, B. (1998). Back to basics. Paper presented at the Second Language Research Forum, Honolulu, 
HI. 
Sorace, A. (1996). The use of acceptability judgments in second language acquisition research. In W. 
Ritchie & T. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 375-409). San Diego, CA: 
Academic Press. 
Uziel, S. (1993). Resetting Universal Grammar parameters: evidence from second language acquisition of 
Subjacency and the Empty Category Principle. Second Language Research, 9, 49-83. 
White, L. (1996). Universal Grammar and second language acquisition: current trends and new directions. 
In W. Ritchie & T. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 85-120). San Diego, 
CA: Academic Press. 
White, L. (1998). Impaired or unimpaired representation in SLA: evidence from functional categories 
and features. Colloquium presentation at the Second Language Research Forum, Honolulu, HI. 
 
