Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/blake/default.html 
May 2000, Volume 4, Number 1 
pp. 111-125 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 2000, ISSN 1094-3501 111 
COMPUTER MEDIATED COMMUNICATION:  
A WINDOW ON L2 SPANISH INTERLANGUAGE 1 
 
Robert Blake  
University of California, Davis 
 
ABSTRACT 
The Interaction Hypothesis states that the conditions for SLA are crucially enhanced by having 
L2 learners negotiate meaning (i.e., resolve their miscommunications) with other speakers, native 
or otherwise (Long & Robinson, 1998, p. 22). This study demonstrates that incidental 
negotiations commonly occurred in networked learner/learner discussions as well, especially with 
respect to their lexical confusions. Fifty intermediate L2 Spanish learners were asked to carry out 
networked discussions in pairs during their lab time using a synchronous chat program, Remote 
Technical Assistance (RTA), which records all textual entries. Each dyad carried out a series of 
online tasks that can be described as jigsaw, information-gap, or decision-making. The results 
show that jigsaw tasks appear to lead the way in promoting negotiations, as Pica, Kanagy, and 
Falodun (1993) had previously predicated, but that information-gap tasks were not nearly as 
productive as a stimulus. The findings suggest that computer mediated communication (CMC) 
can provide many of the alleged benefits ascribed to the Interaction Hypothesis, but with greatly 
increased possibilities for access outside of the classroom environment. Nevertheless, the 
predominance of incidental lexical negotiations, in contrast to the paucity of syntactic 
negotiations, leaves unanswered or unsatisfactorily addressed the issue of grammatical 
development. The study demonstrates, however, the value of synchronous chat records as a 
window for investigating interlanguage. 
BACKGROUND AND GOALS 
From the L2 students' point of view, there exists a relatively long period in which they struggle to 
communicate in the target language via their own interlanguage, an emerging linguistic system (Gass & 
Selinker, 1994, p. 11). In order to move toward the target language, SLA research suggests that students 
must first focus on their own linguistic deficiencies vis-à-vis the target language--what some researchers 
have described as "noticing the gap" or apperception (Gass, 1997, p. 4). In other words, L2 learners must 
develop their own metalinguistic awareness in order to stimulate a change in their interlanguage 
(Schmidt, 1990; Schmidt & Frota, 1986, pp. 306-319).  
One way of provoking students to develop this sense of what still needs to be learned consists in having 
them attempt communication tasks that require them to negotiate the meaning of the message in order to 
succeed at exchanging information. When working in pairs to solve real communication tasks, students 
typically encounter linguistic problems, be they lexical, grammatical, phonological, semantic, or 
pragmatic in nature. At the point that one partner notices a gap or suffers some confusion, the pair will 
suspend the normal flow of the conversation or "push-down," as it were, from the discourse of the task 
itself in order to resolve their miscommunication (Gass, Mackey, & Pica, 1998, p. 301; Varonis & Gass, 
1985; Gass, 1997). In Gass' words (1997, p. 107), "Negotiation here refers to communication in which 
participants' attention is focused on resolving a communication problem as opposed to communication in 
which there is a free-flowing exchange of information." These negotiations often result in the correction 
of specific mistakes and promote the evolution of the L2 learner's interlanguage toward the target.  
Robert Blake Computer Mediated Communication: … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 112 
In particular, Pica, Kanagy, and Falodun (1993) have predicted that jigsaw and information-gap tasks will 
promote more of these negotiations than other task stimuli. When working in dyads, jigsaw tasks provide 
each partner with only half of the information needed to solve the communication task; the partners must 
share their respective parts equally (i.e., two-way task) and then try to converge on a single outcome. 
Information-gap tasks assume only one person holds the pertinent information, which the other partner 
must solicit (i.e., this constitutes a one-way task, but the task can be repeated with the roles reversed to 
form a two-way task), whether or not a unique outcome is predictable.  
Long and Robinson (1998, p. 22) have subsumed this process of negotiation of meaning under the 
Interaction Hypothesis, which states that the conditions for SLA are crucially enhanced by having L2 
learners negotiate meaning with other speakers, native or otherwise. Among the benefits cited, these 
negotiations tend to increase input comprehensibility through language modifications--such as 
simplifications, elaborations, confirmation and comprehension checks, clarifications requests, or recasts--
which end up providing the L2 learner with the type of negative evidence deemed necessary by some 
SLA theories for continued language development (Gass, 1997, p. 143; Long, 1996; White, 1991). This 
type of negotiation is also described in the literature as Focus on Form, and is defined by Long (1991, pp. 
45-46) as follows:  
Focus on form . . . overtly draws students' attention to linguistic elements as they arise 
incidentally [italics added] in lessons whose overriding focus is on meaning or communication. 
This is not to say that the Interaction Hypothesis can claim that these types of negotiations in and of 
themselves cause SLA, but rather that tasks which promote negotiations of meaning create a fertile 
environment for SLA to occur. According to Gass (1997, p. 131), "negotiation is a means of drawing 
attention to linguistic form, making it salient and thereby creating a readiness for learning."  
Actually proving that the negotiation of meaning also promotes the restructuring of the learner's linguistic 
system is a far more elusive proposition, not only for the proponents of the Interaction Hypothesis, but for 
all theories of SLA as well. Output, especially delayed and linguistically productive output, certainly 
constitutes strong evidence, but not necessarily conclusive proof, that the learner's internal system has, in 
fact, been restructured. Tracing output back to a single recorded learning moment would seem 
exceedingly difficult for any SLA theory. Notwithstanding these research obstacles, the study of what 
learners do with their miscommunications has brought to light many interesting observations concerning 
the SLA process. The present study offers additional observations within this interactionist framework by 
presenting data from computer mediated communication (CMC) among L2 learners of Spanish. 
 
As briefly mentioned above, the benefits of negotiations of meaning were first demonstrated for 
learner/native speaker oral exchanges (Hatch, 1978; Holliday, 1995; Long, 1981), but further 
investigations have shown that these benefits hold true for learner/learner oral discussions as well (Gass 
& Varonis, 1994). Within the context of the Interaction Hypothesis, then, the goals of this study were 
threefold: (a) to document that networked learner/leaner discussions in Spanish would also produce 
language modifications such as those reported in the oral-based interactionist literature; (b) to characterize 
linguistically those modifications; and (c) to test whether Pica, Kanagy, and Falodun's predictions 
concerning the superiority of jigsaw and information-gap tasks also held for students involved in CMC. 
While it might seem obvious to some that L2 learners will negotiate meaning if engaged by the 
appropriate tasks, few studies have documented how students do this on-line (for one notable exception, 
see Pellettieri, 1999). Above all, this study seeks to show how chat programs can provide the SLA field 
with a convenient window through which to observe L2 interlanguage as it is unfolding.  
TOOLS FOR COMPUTER MEDIATED COMMUNCIATION 
Robert Blake Computer Mediated Communication: … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 113 
To address these three goals, 50 students from two intermediate Spanish classes at UC Davis were asked 
to chat in pairs for one hour a week in the language lab using a synchronous chat program, Remote 
Technical Assistance (RTA), developed at UC Davis. RTA tool differs from other chat programs such as 
Daedalus Interchange, IRC, or WebCT chat in the following ways: 
• RTA allows users to record and forward digitized sound *NOTE* on the fly. 
• Students can share text in two ways: through a chat window that supports random exchanges 
and through a collaborative writing window or "Textpad" Window that requires the participants 
to follow a turn-taking protocol.  
• Students can create shared whiteboards using either screen capture or blank, white backgrounds. 
• This chat program also lets each user remotely manipulate his or her partner's Web browser. 
• Finally, RTA permits both point-to-point and multipoint/group chat, whereas other chat 
programs often only facilitate one or the other mode. 
Most importantly, the RTA chat program records all written interactions entered in both a chat window 
and the collaborative writing window (Textpad), which provide researchers with an instantaneous 
transcript of all user exchanges that can be conveniently retrieved from a Web-based management page. 
Fortunately, for the purposes of research, telling students that their responses would be logged by the 
computer for further examination did not seem to diminish their level of participation or their sense that 
the computer afforded them a relatively anonymous, or at least protected, environment for their 
discussions, as evidenced by the confidential nature of some of their exchanges with their partners.  
While these special RTA features were fully employed in order to deliver and facilitate the students' on-
line completion of the tasks, the experiments described below could also have been carried out by any 
other chat programs that supports pair work, if supplemented by written instructions, illustrations, and 
pre-recorded materials. Demonstrating the superiority of RTA vis-à-vis other chat programs was not the 
focus of this study. Rather, this study assumed certain advantages common to all computer mediated 
communication (CMC) over face-to-face oral exchanges that have already been reported in the literature, 
namely, that computer mediated communication constitutes (a) a text-based medium that amplifies 
students' attention to linguistic form (Warschauer, 1997), (b) a stimulus for increased written L2 
production (Kern, 1995), (c) a less stressful environment for L2 practice (Chun, 1998), and (d) a more 
equitable and non-threatening forum for L2 discussions, especially those involving women, minorities, 
and naturally reserved personalities (Warschauer, 1996, 1997). Swaffar (1998, p. 1) has succinctly 
summarized the benefits derived from CMC as compared to oral exchanges in the L2 classroom:  
"Networked exchanges seem to help all individuals in language classes engage more frequently, with 
greater confidence, and with greater enthusiasm in the communicative process than is characteristic for 
similar students in oral classrooms."  
TWO EXPERIMENTS 
All 50 students asked to chat in Spanish were native speakers of English enrolled in university-level 
intermediate Spanish courses during the 1998 Spring and Fall quarters. Students were given an hour-long 
training session on how to use RTA for synchronous chatting at a distance before attempting the tasks 
described below. Next, working in dyads in different locations throughout the lab, the students attempted 
to solve a series of tasks that required cooperation with their assigned partner to complete successfully. 
The instructors were not part of any of these networked discussions. Each task asked the pairs to use the 
chat window to solve the task and then summarize their results in a more formal way (i.e., write a report) 
using the Textpad window. While the RTA chat window promotes more colloquial, if not oral-like 
exchanges, the Textpad window--where only one person can have control of the cursor or stylus at any 
one time--produces much more formal and accurate prose, like that of take-home writing assignments.  
Robert Blake Computer Mediated Communication: … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 114 
The primary focus of this study was to analyze the discourse produced in the chat window, including any 
chat-window discussions that took place in response to finishing the Textpad summary. Testing whether 
or not the more expanded array of RTA options (i.e., sound, shared whiteboards, remote URL 
manipulation) might have a significant effect on language learning vis-à-vis other chat programs remains 
a questions for future investigation.  
The tasks themselves were modeled after Pica, Kanagy, and Falodun's (1993) typology, which 
distinguishes whether the tasks are one-way or two-way exchanges of information, whether only one or 
both members of the pair have access to all the pertinent facts needed to find a solution, whether there 
exists a unique solution or multiple solutions and, finally, whether the task require that the participants 
reach some sort of agreement or convergence. As mentioned earlier, Pica et al. singled out jigsaw and 
two-way information-gap tasks as being particularly favorable for stimulating negotiations of meaning. 
With jigsaw tasks, the participants possess different pieces of the puzzle needed for a solution and, 
therefore, must work collaboratively to converge on a single outcome. With information gap tasks, the 
participants must affect an exchange of information, either one-way or two-way. With decision-making 
tasks, the participants have equal access to all relevant facts but are not necessarily forced to converge on 
any common solution. Pica et al. also predicted that tasks with a convergence requirement were, in 
general, superior for promoting interactions. This study sought to validate their findings for CMC 
exchanges among non-native speakers (NNS).  
The tasks for the 1998 Spring and Fall quarters are given in (1) and (2) below. The four tasks from Spring 
Quarter were modified slightly and expanded for Fall quarter based on the results from the first group of 
25 students. In essence, more information-gap tasks were added for the fall and the "Drawings" 
comparison task was replaced by a "Password Game" task in hopes of stimulating more negotiations. In 
addition, the tasks for Fall '98 also included developing a profile of a Spanish heritage speaker (NS) who 
connected to the RTA network from another building at the same time as the L2 students. This task was 
added in response to the students' frequent requests for more contact with native speakers as registered in 
the Spring '98 post-test usage questionnaires.  
All students were assigned different partners for each new task in order to heighten the collaborative 
nature of their conversations and to avoid any student collusion that might work against the spirit of the 
negotiations. All tasks were carried out within the constraints of one 50-minute classroom period. 
(1) Tasks for Spring '98 
a. NNS Profile (1-way information gap task): Develop a personality profile of your partner; 
summarize the profile in writing by working together and using the collaborative writing tool, 
TEXTPAD.  
b. Drawings A and B (jigsaw of the "Odd man out" type): Identify the drawing that doesn't fit in 3 
groups of 4, where each partner can see only 2 of 4 drawings. Then develop a rationale for these 
choices and summarize them in writing using TEXTPAD.  
c. Calendar (jigsaw task): Share the activities from two different personal calendars: Antonio 
Banderas and Madonna. Identify the events done in common by the two people. Then develop a 
story written in the past about those common activities.  
d. Apartment (jigsaw task): Find an apartment in Madrid by sharing different sets of Web ads and 
radically different personal preferences (see URL) for the ideal living conditions, as given by the 
instructor. Summarize the results using TEXTPAD.  
(2) Tasks for Fall '98 
a. NNS Profile (1-way information gap task): Develop a personality profile of your partner. 
Summarize the profile in writing using the collaborative writing tool, TEXTPAD.  
b. NS Profile (1-way information gap task): Partners will connect to a group chat with some 
unknown native speaker (NS) located in another building. The dyad must find out who the 
Robert Blake Computer Mediated Communication: … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 115 
mystery NS person is, develop a personality profile of this person, and summarize the profile in 
writing using the collaborative writing tool, TEXTPAD.  
c. Password game (2-way information gap task): Guess the object or concept that your partner 
describes (or gives synonyms for), then switch roles. Each person has a set of three words. 
Develop a rationale for these choices and summarize them in writing using TEXTPAD. (List of 
possible words: sadness, conflict, absence, history, dialogue, democracy, translation, success, 
and wound.)  
d. Mystery Object (Decision-making task): Based on written, sound, and image clues given by the 
instructor, guess the identity of the mystery object, then write up the results using TEXTPAD. 
Each student has access to the same task stimuli.  
e. Calendar (jigsaw task): Share the activities from two different personal calendars: Antonio 
Banderas and Madonna. Identify the events done in common by the two people. Then develop a 
story written in the past about those common activities using TEXTPAD.  
f. Apartment (jigsaw task): Find an apartment in Madrid by sharing different sets of Web ads and 
radically different personal preferences (see URL) for the ideal living conditions. Summarize the 
results using TEXTPAD. Each partner has a different set of goals that s/he must negotiate with 
the partner and, if necessary, reach a compromise.  
Regardless of the task type, the negotiations that arose in these networked exchanges tended to follow 
Varonis and Gass' (1985) typical schema, illustrated in (3): trigger, indicator, response, reaction. In other 
words, the first use of the linguistic item(s) in question becomes the "trigger" for the negotiation event. 
The partner experiencing a communication problem indicates that fact with an appropriate phrase, such 
as, "I don't understand X," or, more simply, "what's X?" The other partner then attempts an explanation or 
"response" in an effort to clarify the misunderstanding. If the negotiation is successful, the partner who 
indicated the non—understanding in the first place brings closure to the negotiation event by 
acknowledging the help given, usually by means of a stock phrase such as "yes, thanks" or "I see" or 
"now that's clear." Notice in (3) that the response, which is an explicit correction in this case, is 
articulated completely in Spanish, albeit with some nontarget-like expressions typical of the students' 
interlanguage at this level. In other words, their utterances are neither all wrong nor all right but 
somewhere in between, as the concept of interlanguage itself suggests. The student exchanges have been 
translated literally into English in order to approximate the level and quality of their interlanguage. Their 
linguistic errors are not discrete in nature, but involve complex misuses and omissions of structures from 
the target language, as well as pragmatic and cultural confusions. Often times a native Spanish speaker 
would have used completely different structures than the one employed by the L2 learners. Calculating 
what is right or wrong is not a straightforward proposition when dealing with interlanguage. 
(3) Lexical negotiation with an explicit correction (Drawings task, Spring ' 98) 
X: Cuales son en común? 
[What are in common?]  
[TRIGGER]  
Y: como se dice comun en igles? no 
comprehende  
[How do you say "common" in 
English?... no understand]  
[INDICATOR]  
X: común es cuando algo y una otra 
algo son el mismo; entiendes mi 
explicacion?  
["Common" is when something and 
another thing are the same; do you 
[RESPONSE]  
Robert Blake Computer Mediated Communication: … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 116 
understand my explanation?]  
Y: si, gracias...  
[Yes, thank you.]  
[REACTION]  
 
Some negotiations, of course, were considerably shorter than the schema shown in (3), being 
composed of more pointed speech routines such as "What's X?" followed by a retort such as "X 
is Y." Others negotiations, such as (4) below, required extended probing and negotiation between 
partners to resolve the initial misunderstanding.  
X: describame su primer dibujo y 
despues yo describo a tu mi primer 
dibujo 
[Describe for me your first picture and 
then I will describe to you [nominative 
case] my first picture.]  
  
Y: ellos estan a una sepultura.  
[They are at a tomb.]  
[TRIGGER]  
X: que es sepultura? 
[What's a "tomb"?]  
[INDICATOR]  
Y: cementario 
[a cementary]  
[RESPONSE]  
X: tu estas usando el diccianario? 
[You are using the dictionary?]  
  
Y: si 
[yes.]  
  
X: puse 
[I put.  
  
Y: para la gente muerto 
[for the dead people.]  
[RESPONSE]/ [TRIGGER]  
X: ...no puse un diccionario 
[I didn't put a dictionary.]  
  
X: una esta muerto?  
[one is dead?]  
[INDICATOR]  
Y: tu sabes 
[you know.]  
  
X: no 
[no.]  
  
X: No se. 
[I don't know.]  
  
X: hola, describama mas 
[hello, describe for me more]  
  
Robert Blake Computer Mediated Communication: … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 117 
Y: donde tu puso gente muerto 
[where you puts [sic] dead people.]  
[RESPONSE]  
Y: y visitas tu familia muertos 
[and you visit your dead family.]  
[RESPONSE]  
X: oooo, el lugar donde los muertos ir 
cuando estan muertos....en latierra? 
[Ooooh. The place where the dead to go 
when they are dead . . . in the earth?]  
[REACTION]  
Y: si pero en un cementario 
[Yes, but in a cementary.]  
[RESPONSE]  
X: si entiendo 
[Yes, I understand]  
[REACTION]  
 (4) Request for lexical assistance (Calendar task, Fall '98) 
THE RESULTS 
Looking at the transcripts in a purely quantitative light, Tables 1 and 2 illustrate just how task-sensitive 
these incidental negotiations can be. To begin with, the total number of negotiations comprises only a 
small fraction of the overall conversational turns, ranging from 0.3% to 3.8%. This result is not 
unexpected since these conversations are driven by the need to exchange information, and the incidental 
moments that focus on form are tangential to the main line of discourse (i.e., the task). Jigsaw tasks 
account for 93% and 78% of the total negotiations for the spring and fall, respectively, with task #6 
(Apartment task) stimulating the most negotiations from students in both quarters. A chi-square test 
comparing jigsaw tasks with all other task types proved highly significant (all p< .001), although the 
effect size as measured by a phi coefficient was only .067 and .102 for the fall and spring, respectively. 
These results appear to corroborate Pica et al.'s finding for jigsaw tasks, but not for information-gap tasks. 
Table 1. Total Number of Negotiations for Spring '98 Study  
Task  
Task 
Type  
Total 
Turns  
Negotiations  
Negotiations/ 
Turns  
1. NNS 
Profile  
Info gap 
(1-way)  
769  2  0.3 %  
2. 
Drawings  
Jigsaw  817  16  1.9 %  
3. 
Calendar  
Jigsaw  1064  21  2.0 %  
4. 
Apartment  
Jigsaw  929  36  3.8 %  
Table 2. Total Number of Negotiation for Fall '98 Study  
Task  
Task 
Type  
Total 
Turns  
Negotiations  
Negotiations/ 
Turns  
1. NNS- Info gap 544  7  1.2%  
Robert Blake Computer Mediated Communication: … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 118 
Profile  (1-way)  
2. NS-
Profile  
Info gap 
(1-way)  
1,348  4  0.3%  
3. 
Password  
Info gap 
(2-way)  
1,154  5  0.4%  
4. 
Mystery 
Obj.  
Decision-
making  
354  6  1.7%  
5. 
Calendar  
Jigsaw  504  15  3.0%  
6. 
Apartment  
Jigsaw  1,013  35  3.5%  
The Apartment jigsaw task was the most productive for several reasons. First, the students had to 
maintain loyalty throughout the entire task to their assigned personalities (the Oscar/Feliz "odd-couple" 
phenomenon), which helped animate their exchanges. Second, the apartment ads themselves contained 
many abbreviations in Spanish which motivated frequent clarifications (e.g., wc = bathroom, c/ = calle 
[street], c/c = calefacción central [central heat], ext. = exterior [exterior], port. físico = portero físico 
[doorman on duty]). And, finally, the chat session could only be terminated when the pair successfully 
chose 1 apartment from the 8 listings (four for each partner). In other words, failure was not an option and 
any miscommunications had to be resolved, if the pair had any realistic hope of moving toward a final 
solution.  
In Table 2, it should also be noticed that task #2 from the Fall quarter, the "native-speaker profile," 
generated the most exchanges, but triggered few negotiations. This was the only pairing of an L2 learner 
with a native speakers in these two experiments. For task #2, each intermediate Spanish learner used a 
computer in the language lab to connect to an unknown heritage speaker located in a different building on 
campus at a pre-arranged time outside of class. The L2 learners enjoyed this experience immensely. In 
fact, the Spring group from the quarter before had strongly suggested that future networked exchanges 
should include native speakers. Without a doubt, the presence of heritage speakers increased the overall 
glibness in Spanish for these pairs, possibly because the heritage speaker constantly tried to keep the 
conversation moving along. But the mere protocol imposed by an interview tends to encourage polite 
listening for content as opposed to expressing concerns about linguistic forms or accuracy. In terms of 
power and authority, the learner/native speaker pairing was unequal, since the native speakers were much 
more in control of the conversation. This fact could have increased the fear of embarrassment for the L2 
learner and acted as a damper to noticing and repairing any miscommunications. I will leave for a further 
study what interactions between L2 learners and native speakers look like when they are assigned a more 
challenging jigsaw task, such as #6.2 
From the linguistic viewpoint, lexical confusions triggered the overwhelming majority of negotiation: 
75% and 95% of all negotiations were lexical for the Spring and Fall groups, respectively. In the post-test 
attitude surveys, one student (Fall '98) clearly articulated his new awareness of the importance of these 
lexical negotiations by observing "It gave me a wake-up call that vocabulary means everything." Whether 
this finding would obtain for other non-Romance target languages that exhibit more syntactic complexity 
(e.g., Japanese) remains an interesting question for further research. 
Nevertheless, other miscommunications due to phonology, morphology, and syntax did crop up, but these 
were few and far between. In (5) the correct response for the password game is salida [exit]. Speaker Y 
Robert Blake Computer Mediated Communication: … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 119 
guesses the answer by typing exito without an accent where he or she should have put salida [exit]. 
Speaker X explicitly reminds speaker Y that phonemic stress in Spanish can be important, despite the fact 
that their networked exchanges are text-based. In this case, speaker X points out that éxito [ék-si-to] with 
an accent is a correct Spanish word, but it means "success" not "exit" as speaker Y had intended. Speaker 
Y acknowledges that [ek'-sí-to] with an accent means "success," and then the dyad continues working 
toward the correct answer, salida. 
(5) Pronunciation negotiation: (Password task, Fall '98) 
X: cuando hay un fuego, nos vamos . . . 
[when there is a fire, we go . . . ]  
  
Y: alli 
[there]  
  
Y: a un exito 
[to an exit]  
[TRIGGER]  
X: perdon, la palabra no es exito 
[excuse me, the word is not exíto]  
[INDICATIVE]  
X: es ex' ito 
[it's éxito]  
[RESPONSE]  
X: son differentes, pero los mismos 
[they are different, but the same]  
[RESPONSE]  
Y: success 
['success']  
[RESPONSE]  
X: si 
[yes]  
[REACTION]  
 
Morphological confusions, too, served as an occasional point of departure for an exchange which focuses 
on form, as shown by the direct question on gender marking in (6). The pair is trying to write up their 
report on the Spring '98 Drawing task (2) by using Textpad, the collaborative writing tool. They switch 
back to the chat window to resolve a gender confusion which needs to be correctly written in their report. 
Both (6) and (7) below are not, strictly speaking, examples of negotiation of meaning in the classical 
sense, since there is no incidental communicative misunderstanding, but rather a direct attempt to resolve 
a linguistic question, albeit extremely relevant to finishing the task at hand (i.e., the written report).  
(6) Grammar negotiation: gender marking (Drawing task, Spring '98) 
X: la o el país? 
["la" or "el" country]  
  
Y: pais es masculino 
["Country" is masculine.]  
  
X: sí? 
[Yeah?]  
  
Y: ok 
[Ok.]  
  
Robert Blake Computer Mediated Communication: … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 120 
Example (7) presents another direct grammatical question similar to the one in (6). Here the pair tries to 
clarify the Spanish aspectual distinctions in the past: the preterite versus the imperfect. Speaker Y first 
states that the verb should be in the preterite fue because the action occurs in the past, a thoroughly 
unhelpful comment, since both the imperfect era and the preterite fue encode past events and are mapped 
to only one translation in English, "was." Then speaker Y differentiates repeated or habitual events from 
discrete, punctual past actions--a reasonably good account of the aspectual contrasts in question. This 
explanation proved comprehensible and effective for speaker X, and the pair then returned to the more 
central task imposed by writing up their report.  
(7) Grammar negotiation: verbal aspect (Calendar task, Spring '98) 
X: pero, usamos era o fue? 
[But, do we use era ("was" the imperfect) 
or fue ("was" the preterite)?]  
  
X: Fue un día llena 
[It was (the preterite) a full day.]  
  
Y: creo que fue porque todo occure en el 
pasado 
[I think fue (the preterite) because it all 
occurs in the past.]  
  
Y: y fue un dia y no un serie de dias 
[And it was (the preterite) one day and not 
a series of days.]  
  
X: esta bien, ok? 
[All right?]  
  
Y: sí 
[Yes.]  
  
 
POST-TEST STUDENT ATTITUDES AND REFLECTIONS  
All participants were asked to fill out a post-test attitude survey which gathered opinions about the pros 
and cons of synchronic chatting using the RTA tool. The most common student response (51 comments) 
fell into one or more of the following three areas: their RTA experience was fun, helpful, and/or 
conducive to improving their communication skills in Spanish, as illustrated by (8), a sample of their 
most frequent comments. A few students seemed to suggest that the computer mediated communication 
(CMC) medium might even be superior at times to the oral discussions that occur (or, unfortunately, do 
not occur) in the language classroom.  
(8) Common Responses from the Post-Test Attitude Survey:  
 RTA definitely made me feel more comfortable using Spanish. Since we were not allowed to use 
English as a crutch, we had to figure out how to communicate with each other. I've never really 
had the opportunity to do that before this program. (Spring '98)  
 The RTA experience was fun and helpful. It made you think quickly and keep communicating. It 
took the place of having conversations with a partner in class, which I think is better because 
most people don't seem to converse very long or enthusiastically in class. (Spring '98)  
 Being able to communicate with a fellow student was very useful as a learning process, as we 
were able to help each other. Chat and Sound created two good sources of communication. Chat, 
Robert Blake Computer Mediated Communication: … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 121 
Sound, and Textpad were key as they enabled us to work together on the same paper or "text". . . 
We were able to help each other with problems or try to figure out a problem together. (Fall '98)  
Two students were able to reflect on the underlying interactionist framework and the advantages of jigsaw 
tasks, as shown in (9). These comments underscore the importance of negative evidence as a stimulus for 
continued development toward the target language, at least with respect to lexical development. 
(9) Unusual Comments from the Post-Test Attitude Survey:  
 You learn by correcting yourself and your partner's mistakes. Therefore, a good method but 
actually it is not obvious right now. (Fall '98)  
 I feel that having to compromise and working blindly, meaning not everybody had the same 
information [i.e., jigsaw tasks], I was forced to exercise writing/communication skills--which was 
helpful. (Fall '98)  
When specifically asked what were the weaknesses of the RTA program, about half of the students said 
they were completely satisfied with their experience. The complaints that did surface varied widely and 
dealt with system failures or program glitches, the difficulty of adding Spanish accents, the lack of time to 
complete the tasks, uneven levels of task difficulty, or their own lack of sufficient computer experience.  
 
FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION 
1. These two experiments support the following four findings: 
2. Well-designed networked tasks promote learners to notice the gaps in their lexical interlanguage 
in a manner similar to what has been reported in the literature for oral learner/learner discussions.  
3. Jigsaw tasks prove superior to other types of tasks (e.g., information gap, decision-making, 
opinion tasks) as a stimulus for the students' Focus on Form as Pica et al. had predicted, but the 
same cannot be said of information gap tasks.  
4. Networked exchanges, since they are text-based and learners must type out or produce the 
structures in question, appear to constitute an example of forced output (Swain, 1985), which 
some researchers have identified as a crucially important factor in the promotion of a fertile 
learning environment for SLA. Networked exchanges especially stimulated learners' metatalk or 
reflections on their own vocabulary use (Swain, 1998, p. 68).  
5. Lexical confusions make up the most common form of negotiation in these learner/learner 
networked exchanges.  
Although finding (1) may appear at first blush rather obvious or even trivial in that learners are bound to 
focus on form in the due course of carrying out well-designed collaborative tasks, this study demonstrates 
that CMC produces similar benefits to those of oral discussions without the temporal and spatial 
constraints imposed by the classroom. The practical implications of this finding, however, are not 
insignificant. If one puts aside phonetic accuracy and oral practice for the moment and concentrates on 
written modalities alone, this finding suggests that a CMC learning environment could provide many of 
the alleged benefits ascribed to the Interaction Hypothesis, but with greatly increased possibilities for 
access outside of the classroom. If negotiations are important for the SLA process (i.e., the Interaction 
Hypothesis), then networked negotiations provide a medium for this fruitful activity to occur not only 
more frequently but also at any time of the day or night. Increased opportunities to engage in 
collaborative tasks online could provide a significant benefit in light of the arduous journey L2 learners 
must make toward the target language and the important role that input plays in this process. Providing 
students with increased opportunities to engage in negotiations, in the sense defined above, could direct 
language teachers to accord CMC a more expanded role in the L2 curriculum. 
By the same token, future research needs to compare and contrast synchronic learner/learner exchanges, 
such as those reported in this study, with asynchronic discussions so commonly employed in today's 
Robert Blake Computer Mediated Communication: … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 122 
foreign-language classroom in the form of e-mail and bulletin boards. It is important to determine if 
negotiations of meaning occur with the same frequency in an asynchronic setting with jigsaw-type tasks. 
Finding (4)--that lexical negotiations predominate these learner/learner exchanges--should not come as 
any surprise either. An intermediate L2 learner has typically logged only 200 hours of instruction in the 
target language and simply doesn't have a solid syntactic base with which to help or correct peers. 
Vocabulary knowledge, however, can be more straightfowardly developed. In fact, certain methodologies 
such as the Natural Approach concentrate more on lexical growth than grammatical accuracy. Vocabulary 
breakdowns constitute the most obvious barrier to learner/learner discussions, especially on the Internet 
where no body language clues are available to support the speaker's meaning.  
Nevertheless, the Focus on Form approach still leaves certain questions either unanswered or 
unsatisfactorily addressed: in particular, the issue of grammatical development. While the positive impact 
of negotiations on vocabulary development seems fairly obvious from the examples presented here and 
elsewhere in the literature, it is not at all clear that incidental negotiations will ever suffice for supplying 
all the types of evidence needed to come to grips with the many syntactic difficulties still plaguing the 
intermediate learner's grammar. This present study yielded only a handful of grammatical negotiations 
and many of them did not constitute negotiations of meaning in the classical sense, but rather direct 
questions about linguistic forms. Few interactionist studies have demonstrated that incidental negotiations 
within a task-based approach might stimulate a comprehensive development of the learners' 
morphological and syntactic problems on a larger scale (for exceptions, see Loschky & Bley-Vroman, 
1993; Mackey, 1999; Swain, 1998). More attention must be directed to this end, if the Interactionist 
Hypothesis is to be considered a principal stimulus for students' internal syntactic restructuring, which is 
at the very heart of the SLA question.  
On a related topic, classroom practitioners frequently worry that learner/learner discussions will 
propagate and reinforce nontarget-like language, in other words, the blind leading the blind. Kern (1995, 
p. 470) has adequately characterized this problem with large-group networked exchanges in an 
intermediate French class using Daedalus Interchange: "Grammatical accuracy suffers [with CMC] and 
consequently learners read 'defective' French." These fears certainly warrant close attention, but they were 
not borne out by an examination of this study's transcripts of 50 students. No incorrect forms were 
explicitly passed on from one to the other in their incidental negotiations in the present experiments. 
Porter's findings (1986, p. 219) also seem to indicate that "such miscorrections and error incorporations 
were extremely rare in the data." Nevertheless, this issue needs to be rigorously monitored and 
reexamined as more data comes in. Again, additional data from networked discussions via Chat programs 
that make the data collection relatively easy, such as RTA, should allow us to determine the frequency of 
student/student miscorrections. Swain's recent study (1998, pp. 77-79) offers some new data on this 
question: Of the total negotiations tallied in her study, only 8.2% involved the transmission of incorrect 
solutions. She found in her post-tests, however, that students tended to remember these incorrect solutions 
and reproduced them on subsequent tests. 
CONCLUSIONS 
SLA research conducted with chat programs with log-keeping capabilities, such as RTA, document much 
more than the type of student satisfaction reflected in the sample comments given above in (8) and (9). 
They provide a window that lets us track the painfully slow development of interlanguage, an evolution 
which proceeds most overtly at the lexical level, one word and/or meaning at a time. The complete chat 
records from these two RTA experiments provide convincing evidence that carefully crafted tasks 
stimulate L2 learners to negotiate meaning which, in turn, seems to affect their output. By all accounts, 
jigsaw tasks provide the greatest inducement for negotiations, perhaps because they require each partner 
to both request and contribute parts of the solution, exacting from L2 learners a certain level of 
cooperation, convergence, and a pooling of resources. These tasks appear to constitute ideal conditions 
Robert Blake Computer Mediated Communication: … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 123 
for SLA, with the CMC medium being no exception. In the process, L2 learners heighten their 
metalinguistic awareness of where they are in their own L2 vocabulary development and where they still 
need to go in order to gain more targetlike lexical control. Doing tasks in a CMC environment, then, 
generates apperceived input, which can subsequently be used to modify and improve their vocabulary.  
Clearly, the interactionist model has opened up many productive avenues for SLA research. This study 
shows that the records provided by networked exchanges can be of great service to this line of 
investigation.  
NOTES 
1. I wish to thank FIPSE (grant #P116B70194) for their generous support of this study and 
Professor Dick Walters (Computer Science, UC Davis), co-PI of this same FIPSE grant and 
leader of the RTA project at UC Davis. I greatly appreciate the classroom assistance of Adam 
Karp, Sebastiaan Faber, and Kim Faber. I also gratefully acknowledge Curt Acredulo's statistical 
expertise and David Fahy's comments on the earlier versions of this article. Any and all errors 
found within our my responsibility alone.  
2. The native speakers in this study were all enrolled in a special course designed for heritage 
Spanish speakers. This adds a further complication in that these speakers have strong oral 
knowledge of Spanish but underdeveloped or non-academic Spanish written skills.  
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Robert Blake (Ph.D University of Texas) is professor of Spanish in the Department of Spanish & Classics 
and director of the Second Language Acquisition Institute at the University of California, Davis. He has 
published widely in Spanish Linguistics on topics dealing with historical phonology, historical syntax, 
modern syntax, and second-language learning. He is the lead author for Al corriente (1998, 3rd ed.), a 
second-year Spanish textbook based on authentic reading materials and fully integrated Web activities. 
He is the chief academic adviser for Nuevos Destinos CD-ROM (1998), a joint project of McGraw-Hill, 
Annenberg PCB projects, and WGBH Boston. He is one of three authors about to release TESOROS 
(McGraw-Hill and Boecillo Editorial Multimedia), a CD-ROM course for introductory Spanish that forms 
part of a multimedia distance-learning package for Spanish. Prof. Blake is also active in the field of 
computer-assisted language instruction and distance learning through his work on computer mediated 
communication, especially in reference to the Remote Collaboration project, currently funded by a three-
year, $300,000 grant from FIPSE.  
 
E-mail: rjblake@ucdavis.edu  
REFERENCES 
Chun, D. (1998). Using Computer-Assisted Class Discussion to Facilitate the Acquisition of Interactive 
Competence. In J. Swaffar, S. Romano, P. Markley, & K. Arens (Eds.), Language Learning Online: 
Theory and Practice in the ESL and L2 Computer Classroom (pp. 57-80). Austin, TX: Labyrinth 
Publications.  
Gass, S. (1997). Input, Interaction, and the Second Language Learner. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates.  
Gass, S., Mackey, A., & Pica, T. (1998). The Role of Input and Interaction in Second Language 
Acquisition: Introduction to the Special Issue. The Modern Language Journal 82(3), 299-305. 
Gass, S., & Selinker, L. (1994). Second Language Acquisition: An Introductory Course. Hillsdale, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Robert Blake Computer Mediated Communication: … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 124 
Gass, S., & Varonis, E. (1994). Input, interaction and second language production. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition 16, 283-302.  
Hatch, E. (1978). Acquisition of syntax in a second language. In J. Richards, (Ed.), Understanding 
Second and Foreign Language Learning: Issues and Approaches (pp. 34-70). Rowley, MA: Newbury 
House. 
Holliday, L. (1995). NS syntactic modifications in NS-NSS negotiation as input data for second language 
acquisition of syntax. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.  
Kern, R. (1995). Restructuring classroom interaction with networked computers: effects on quantity and 
characteristics of language production. Modern Language Journal, 79, 457-476. 
Long, M. (1981). Input, Interaction and Second Language Acquisition. In H. Winitz (Ed.), Native 
Language and Foreign Language Acquisition (pp. 259-278). New York: Annals of the New York 
Academy of Science. 
Long, M. (1991). Focus on Form: A Design Feature in Language Teaching Methodology. In C. Kramsch 
& R. Ginsberg (Eds.), Foreign Language Research in Cross-Cultural Perspective (pp. 39-52). 
Amsterdam: Benjamins. 
Long, M. (1996). The Role of the Linguistic Environment In Second Language Acquisition. In W. Ritchie 
& T. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of Research on Second Language Acquisition (pp. 413-468). New York: 
Academic. 
Long, M., & Robinson, P. (1998). In C. Doughty & J. Williams. Focus on Form in Classroom Second 
Language Acquisition (pp. 15-41). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Loschky, L., & Bley-Vroman, R. (1993). Grammar and Task-Based Methodology. In G. Crookes & S. 
Gass (Eds.), Tasks and Language Learning: Integrating Theory and Practice, Vol 1. (pp. 123-167). 
Clevedon, England: Multilingual Matters. 
Mackey, A. (1999). Input, Interaction, and Second Language Development: An Empirical Study of 
Question Formation in ESL. Studies in Second Language Acquisition 21, 557-587. 
Pellettieri, J. (1999). Negotiation in Cyberspace: The Role of Chatting in the Development of 
Grammatical Competence. In. M. Warschauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Network-Based Language Teaching: 
Concepts and Practice (pp. 59-86). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Pica, T. (1994). Research on negotiation: What does it reveal about second-language learning conditions, 
processes, and outcomes? Language Learning 44, 493-527.  
Pica, T., Kanagy, R., & Falodun, J. (1993). Choosing and using communication tasks for second language 
instruction. In G. Crookes & S. Gass (Eds.), Tasks and Language Learning: Integrating Theory and 
Practice. Vol 1. (pp. 9-34). Clevedon, England: Multilingual Matters. 
Porter, P. (1986). How Learners Talk to Each Other: Input and Interaction in Task-Centered Discussions. 
In R. Day (Ed.), Talking to Learn: Conversation in Second Language Acquisition (pp. 200-222). Rowley, 
MA: Newbury House. 
Schmidt, R. (1990). The role of consciousness in second language acquisition. Applied Linguistics 11, 
219-258.  
Schmidt, R., & Frota, S.N. (1986). Developing Basic Conversational Ability in a Second Language: A 
Case Study of an Adult Learner of Portuguese. In R. Day (Ed.), Talking to Learn: Conversation in Second 
Language Acquisition (pp. 237-326). Rowley, MA: Newbury House.  
Robert Blake Computer Mediated Communication: … 
 
Language Learning & Technology 125 
Swaffar, J. (1998). Networking Language Learning: Introduction. In J. Swaffar, S. Romano, P. Markley, 
& K. Arens (Eds.), Language Learning Online: Theory and Practice in the ESL and L2 Computer 
Classroom (pp. 1-15). Austin, TX: Labyrinth Publications.  
Swain, M. (1985). Communicative Competence: Some roles of comprehensible input and comprehensible 
output in its development. In C. Madden & S. Gass (Eds.), Input in Second Language Acquisition (pp. 
235-253). Rowley, MA: Newbury House.  
Swain, M. (1998). Focus on form through conscious reflection. In C. Doughty & J. Williams (Eds.), 
Focus on Form in Classroom Second Language Acquisition (pp. 64-81). Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.  
Varonis, E.M., & Gass, S. (1985). Non-native/non-native conversations: A model for negotiation of 
meaning. Applied Linguistics 6, 71-90. 
Warschauer, M. (1997). Computer-mediated Collaborative Learning. Modern Language Journal. 81(4), 
470-481. 
White, L. (1991). Adverb placement in second language acquisition: some effects of positive and negative 
evidence in the classroom. Second Language Research 7, 133-161. 
 
