Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num2/review1/default.html 
September 2000, Volume 4, Number 2 
pp. 24-27 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 2000, ISSN 1094-3501                 24                                                                                                                                 
REVIEW OF CALL: MEDIA, DESIGN, & APPLICATIONS 
CALL: Media, Design, & Applications  
Keith Cameron (Ed.)  
 
1999  
 ISBN 90-265-1543-x  
 US $85.00 (or 150 Dutch guilder)  
 321 pp.   
 
Swets and Zeitlinger Publishers  
 Heereweg 347B 2161 Lisse  
 The Netherlands  
 (US office)  
 440 Creamery Way, Suite A  
 Exton, PA 19341  
 
 
Reviewed by Mike Ledgerwood, State University of New York at Stony Brook  
This edited volume contains three sections, Media, Design, and CALL Applications, as well as an 
introduction and an epilogue. Editor Keith Cameron, one of the best known experts in computer-assisted 
language learning in the United Kingdom, introduces the volume with a brief history of CALL that 
provides a context for the rest of the volume, which in turn is intended to "provide a focus for future 
research, be a stimulus to graduates embarking on Master's or Doctoral programs, encourage reflection 
amongst established CALLers, increase awareness of what has been done and what still has to be done in 
the CALL domain, and establish a reference work which is unavoidably incomplete but will constitute a 
source of essential information for all those involved in CALL" (p. 2). In this introduction, Cameron 
emphasizes that CALL: Media, Design, & Applications deals with language learning rather than language 
teaching.  
Like two other recent collections reviewed in LLT, New Ways of Learning and Teaching: Focus on 
Technology and Foreign Language Education (Bradley & Lomicka, 2000), and Technology-Enhanced 
Language Learning (O'Leary, 1998), this volume includes articles by a variety of well-known CALL 
practitioners and researchers. In contrast with those volumes, however, CALL: Media, Design, & 
Applications is extremely international; the authors included hail from three continents, with Europe and 
Canada best represented. Like the other two volumes, this collection is also very diverse in terms of the 
authors' background, interests, level of discourse, and experience in CALL. This diversity of educational 
situations and cultures, while it makes for some unevenness, is a breath of fresh air and allows for 
perspectives not possible in the other volumes.  
In general, CALL: Media, Design, & Applications meets the goals outlined by the editor. Thus, it 
represents a significant contribution to the field of CALL and will be an important addition to many 
researchers' libraries. Especially valuable are the contributors' extensive bibliographies, and their 
reflections on the future of the topics covered. Yet, it is also important to note that this volume, like any 
book dealing with technology, is not always completely up-to-date, an observation intended not to 
disparage this work, but rather to point out one of the most frustrating problems of working in a field 
which is evolving so quickly.  
 
Reviewed by Mike Ledgerwood Review of CALL: Media Design & Applications 
 
Language Learning & Technology 25 
Section 1, Media, includes an article on computer-mediated communication by Dana Paramskas of 
Guelph, one on user-driven development and content-driven research by Wilfried Decoo and Jozef 
Colpaert of Antwerpen, and one on authoring by David Bickerton of Plymouth. Paramskas' chapter, "The 
Shape of Computer-Mediated Communication," is one that shows its age perhaps more than any other in 
the volume. Computer-mediated communication is evolving so rapidly that it is difficult to do much more 
than provide a general outline of what has happened to date, a task that is well-performed in this article. 
Two areas not covered here are commercially-available software for synchronous chat, such as Daedalus 
and Common Space, and courseware, such as Top Class and Blackboard, which make the use of chat so 
much easier, especially for combinations of both synchronous and asynchronous chat.  
The second chapter, "User-Driven Development and Content-Driven Research," is my personal favorite 
in the whole volume. Decoo and Colpaert provide a convincing account of why their software and their 
work have been successful in Belgium. They argue that their success is due to providing what users 
actually want instead of what they, themselves, believe their users need. All too often CALLers create 
programs that they believe will be useful, only to discover that few users are interested. In fact, one of the 
main obstacles to greater CALL implementation is that teachers and students do not see an immediate 
need for it nor are they able to see how it relates to the existing curriculum. It is fine to say (as I do) that 
teachers and students need to repurpose and implement CALL creatively; however this requires more 
time than many CALL users are willing or able to spend. Colpaert and Decoo have understood this 
problem, and thus have not made the mistake of falsely assuming that users will adapt software to their 
own needs. Instead, the authors have tailored their work to a specific instructional situation, Belgium's 
national English language curriculum, and they have created an extremely useful series of programs for 
the targeted learners.  
The third chapter in the Media section, "Authoring and the Academic Linguist: the Challenge of 
Multimedia CALL," is also one that reflects the difficulty of publishing up-to-date surveys. Bickerton 
discusses various authoring programs and their advantages and shortcomings. He clearly points out the 
difficulties current teachers and instructors would have using these programs to create materials, and he 
discusses problems such as having to learn programming languages, inadequate manuals and tools, 
copyright issues, and perhaps most importantly, lack of time.  
In Section 2, Design, there are also three chapters: "Design Processes in CALL" by Michael Levy of 
Queensland; "Evaluating Performance" by Robin Goodfellow of the Open University in the UK; and 
"Computers as Tools for Sociocollaborative Language Learning" by Carla Meskill of the State University 
of New York at Albany. Levy's (1997) book,  Computer-Assisted Language Learning: Context and 
Contextualization, which has been reviewed in LLT (Leahy, 1998), is already regarded as a landmark 
volume in CALL. The chapter in the present volume is a natural outgrowth of his book's arguments and is 
important in its insistence on using theory in the design of CALL, as well as for its discussion of 
evaluation.  
Goodfellow carries this argument further by pointing out that evaluation is also influenced by design, and 
he reports on a very interesting case study where he used students' retention of lexical items as a means to 
evaluate learning via different media. The third chapter focuses on how different kinds of spaces can be 
used to create a community of learners, such as interrogation space, workbook space, storybook space, 
creation space, virtual world space, and dialogic space.  
Section 3, CALL Applications, is the largest in the volume and contains six chapters. Gregory Aist of 
Carnegie-Mellon discusses speech recognition; Henry Hamburger, Michael Schoelles, and Florence 
Reeder from George Mason look at artificial intelligence and CALL; Cornelia Tschichold from Basel and 
Gerard Kempen from Leiden discuss aspects of grammar and CALL; Glyn Holmes from Western Ontario 
presents corpora in language and literature; and Martha Pennington of Luton discusses affective factors in 
computer-assisted writing.  
Reviewed by Mike Ledgerwood Review of CALL: Media Design & Applications 
 
Language Learning & Technology 26 
In "Speech Recognition in Computer-Assisted Language Learning," Aist is thorough in his presentation 
of the problems of speech recognition used for language learning, as is the George Mason group in their 
discussion of AI and natural language processing for CALL ("More Intelligent CALL"). Tschichold 
provides an excellent, detailed discussion of why grammar checkers are less useful for teachers and 
students than they might be ("Grammar Checking for CALL: Strategies for Improving Foreign Language 
Grammar Checkers"), and Kempen has a very interesting chapter ("Visual Grammar: Multimedia for 
Grammar and Spelling Instruction in Primary Education") on the benefits of presenting grammar in a 
visual manner.  
In "Corpus CALL: Corpora in Language and Literature," Holmes offers a series of creative ways in which 
to use language corpora in language learning, and I plan to incorporate her ideas in my own classes. For 
example, she suggests using lexical lists, concordances, and even written lists to focus on specific word 
use, as well as on how those words relate to the larger topics of the course. I agree with Holmes that 
starting with single words and combinations of single words or concepts can then help illuminate larger 
semantic units in ways well-suited to student learning.  
In the last chapter of the section ("The Missing Link in Computer-Assisted Writing"), Pennington says the 
time has come to focus on students, rather than computers, in the analyses of "success" in computer-
assisted writing. She provides a strong argument for addressing affective aspects in computer-assisted 
writing as well as an illuminating discussion of these issues.  
In some respects, I liked the epilogue, "Is Your CALL Connected? Dedicated Software vs. Integrated 
CALL," by Ian Richmond of the Université Sainte-Anne in Nova Scotia, more than any single chapter of 
the book. Richmond provides the reader with an excellent overview of the current state of CALL 
development and usage. As such, the epilogue to this volume might be a good prologue to a new volume 
in this field, one that treats the Web and the Internet as primary sources of CALL. It could also be used as 
an introductory article to anyone teaching the subject of CALL.  
CALL: Media, Design, and Applications offers a variety of articles (both research-based and experience-
based) which examine the state of computer-assisted language learning and signal future directions for the 
field. This emphasis on the future, as well as the excellent bibliographies presented in every chapter, 
make Cameron's volume a particularly useful addition to the field of CALL. In contrast to a work such as 
Muysken's (1997) New Ways of Learning And Teaching: Focus on Technology and Foreign Language 
Education, this volume is aimed at those whose primary interest is CALL theory and research, rather than 
those interested more in how technology affects language pedagogy and language teacher education. In 
this way, it is similar to Bush and Terry's (1997) Technology-Enhanced Language Learning, although its 
inclusion of international contributors and its more academic discourse also distinguish it from that 
volume. In addition, the more recent publication date allows it to be closer to current trends in CALL than 
the Bush and Terry volume. As such,  CALL: Media, Design, and Applications is indispensable, at least 
for the near future, for anyone who wishes to learn in detail about the current state of CALL, its media, 
design, and applications.  
ABOUT THE REVIEWER  
Mike Ledgerwood is tenured professor of French and Technology and Education, as well as Director of 
the Language Learning and Research Center, at the State University of New York at Stony Brook. He has 
published on student and teacher use of technology for language learning, and the semiotics of 
cyberspace. He teaches two graduate courses in the area of technology-enhanced education.  
E-mail: mledgerwood@ms.cc.sunysb.edu.  
 
Reviewed by Mike Ledgerwood Review of CALL: Media Design & Applications 
 
Language Learning & Technology 27 
REFERENCES  
 
Bush, M. D., & Terry, R. M. (Eds.). (1997). Technology-Enhanced Language Learning. Lincolnwood, IL: 
National Textbook Company.  
 
Bradley, T., & Lomicka, L. (2000). Review of New Ways of Learning and Teaching: Focus on 
Technology and Foreign Language Education. Language Learning & Technology 3(2), 24-26. Retrieved 
May 4, 2000 from the World Wide Web: http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num1/review/review2.html.  
 
Leahy, C. (1998). Review of Computer-Assisted Language Learning: Context and Contextualization. 
Language Learning & Technology 2(1), 17-18. Retrieved May 4, 2000 from the World Wide Web:  
http://llt.msu.edu/vol2num1/review/levy.html  
 
Levy, M. (1997). Computer-Assisted Language Learning: Context and Conceptualization. Oxford, UK: 
Clarendon Paperbacks.  
 
Muyskens, J. (Ed.). (1997). New Ways of Learning And Teaching: Focus on Technology and Foreign 
Language Education. AAUSC Issues in Language Program Direction: A Series of Annual Volumes. 
Boston: Heinle & Heinle Publishers.  
 
O'Leary, M. H. (1998). Review of Technology-Enhanced Language Learning. Language Learning & 
Technology, 1(2), 20-22. Retrieved May 4, 2000 from the World Wide Web: 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num2/reviews/review2.html. 
