Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/onthenet/default.html 
May 2000, Volume 4, Number 1 
pp. 3-5 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 2000, ISSN 1094-3501 3 
ON THE NET 
Starting Point for Classical Studies: The Perseus Project? 
Jean W. LeLoup  
SUNY Cortland  
Robert Ponterio 
SUNY Cortland  
 
The number of number of foreign language (FL) related sites on the Internet has been growing 
exponentially over the past several years, and this trend is likely to continue. While the quality is not 
necessarily keeping pace with the quantity, the sheer number of pages makes it much easier for instructors 
to find information, authentic materials, and even ready-made lessons on the net for use in FL classrooms. 
This is particularly true for teachers of the mainstream modern languages taught in the public schools 
(French, Italian, German, Spanish). In a previous article (Resources for Instructors and Learners of Less 
Commonly Taught Languages), we noted the difficulties experienced by teachers of the less commonly 
taught languages (LCTLs) in various areas, including finding materials on the Internet. In this article, we 
address yet another category of foreign languages: the classical languages (Greek and Latin). Happily, 
these languages (and their accompanying Classical Studies) enjoy more prominence on the Internet. 
Indeed, a search for "Classical Studies" yields nearly 20,000 hits on a good day. But, as always, the 
problem of sifting through this vast number of sites for quality content remains. This article reviews one 
such quality site The Perseus Project that serves as a remarkable entry page to the exploration of Greek, 
Latin, and the ancient classical world. 
The Perseus Project  
The Perseus Project is funded by the Digital Libraries Initiative Phase 2, the Annenberg/CPB Project, the 
National Science Foundation, the National Endowment for the Humanities, the Getty Grant program, 
Tufts University, the Modern Language Association, the Berger Family Technology Transfer 
Endowment, and the Fund for the Improvement of Postsecondary Education. Support for the project has 
been provided by Apple Computer, The National Endowment for the Arts, the Packard Humanities 
Institute, Xerox Corporation, Boston University, the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, and Harvard 
University. Perseus is a non-profit enterprise and is headquartered at the Classics Department, Tufts 
University.  
 
Jean W. LeLoup and Robert Ponterio On the Net: Starting Point for Classical Studies:... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 4 
The Perseus Project is a vast digital library of resources for the study of the classical world. The initial 
aim of the project was to construct a large collection of materials, both textual and visual, on the archaic 
and classical Greek world. More recently, the project has expanded into Latin texts and tools as well as 
Renaissance materials. Concomitantly, the project has developed new ways of presenting complex 
resources for electronic publication in formats that facilitate the humanities focus of classics programs. A 
major project goal has been the development of a framework to contain and make accessible the huge 
collection of texts, images, plans, and maps that make up the library. To better understand the problem to 
be addressed, one has only to think about the inherent differences between searching through text and 
searching through photos. The project is engaged in the ongoing gathering of materials and developing of 
presentational modes for these materials, as well as improving the searching and indexing tools that make 
the site usable as well as valuable. The exploration of the archived materials for general readers and 
specialists alike is a primary goal of the project. Even a cursory look at the site will show how well this 
goal is met by the extensive searchable collection and the helpful tools for understanding the materials.  
Starting Points in Perseus 
The Perseus site is quite extensive, but it is well organized and offers several 
beginning points to help initiate investigation of the resources contained therein.  
 
 Overview of Greek Culture and History 
Thomas Martin's Overview of Archaic and Classical Greek History provides a brief summary of the 
history of ancient Greece from approximately 1200 B.C., the period when Mycenaean civilization 
perished, to 323 B.C., the death of Alexander the Great. The Greek texts included in Perseus fall mostly 
within this time frame. 
 Introduction to the Primary Texts 
After boning up on the history of the classical period, one can read the writings of the Greek masters (e.g., 
Homer, Plato, Pindar). These texts are available in English translation or in Greek. A separate font help 
page offers assistance with installing and using Greek fonts or relying on other conventions to read the 
text in as near original form as possible. In addition, a page for Text and Morphological Tools Help 
provides many suggestions and tips for navigating the texts, including searching tools in a variety of 
languages and directions (e.g., English to Greek) and morphological and lexical tools to help students and 
scholars interpret the texts, look up topics, and find intertextual connections among all the materials in the 
database. Links to Greek and Latin dictionaries provide additional support.  
 
Several Latin texts are also available, including those of Catullus and Cicero. A separate site for 
Shakespeare's Julius Caesar site is also located at the Perseus Project.  
 
Most of the texts are extensively glossed with cross-reference links to other texts, dictionaries, and 
encyclopedic entries. The idea or person glossed is also cross-referenced with sculptures, artifacts, and 
images of the era.  
 Introduction to the Art & Archaeology Catalogs 
The Perseus Project offers a massive library of art objects, sites, and buildings. The library's catalogs 
currently document 523 coins, 1,548 vases, over 1,400 sculptures, 179 sites, and 381 buildings. Each 
catalog entry has a description of the object and its context; most have images. More than 33,000 pictures 
are available here. Many of the images appear in both thumbnail and enlarged size. Among the artifacts 
Jean W. LeLoup and Robert Ponterio On the Net: Starting Point for Classical Studies:... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 5 
and archeological items catalogued in Perseus are coins, vases, fortification architecture, sculptures, and 
sites such as Delphi. 
Perseus Atlas 
 
The Perseus Atlas has been completely renovated and provides an easy means to 
locate geographically the subject of investigation. This Atlas is integrated with 
the Perseus Lookup Tool and with the texts of the Perseus Digital Library. Place 
names referred to in the texts are linked to the Atlas database.  
 
Searches 
 
The Perseus site offers a number of different searching tools. Some are general 
and use keywords and phrases to find a specific subject in the site. Some have 
more specific uses, such as word frequency or Latin and Greek words in context 
(handy for searching out idioms and phrases). The search tools can also be used to browse the 
architecture, sites, coins, sculptures, and vases entries.  
 
Teaching with Perseus 
 
In this section one finds several syllabi and class notes for a wide variety of 
courses incorporating the Perseus site, including history, literature, culture and 
politics, art and archaeology, mythology, and language. Several of the syllabi have detailed descriptions 
of class assignments and projects. In addition, many syllabi contain further links to Classics sites that the 
reader will find of interest and that have been selected by other teachers. This section also presents 
recommendations from teachers who are using Perseus in their classes to their students.  
 
Other Ancillaries on the Site 
 
Navigation and use of the Perseus site is further enhanced by information 
located on the Help pages and the FAQs . Due to the nature of much of the 
material contained in the site, an explanation of copyright for the site is also available. 
The Perseus site is an excellent example of an evolving digital library. The project has amassed, 
catalogued, and categorized an enormous amount of material and resources for those interested in 
exploring the classical world. Unlike many text archives on the Web, this one pays careful attention to 
helping the user work and interect with the materials presented, and this makes all the difference. While 
this site may not contain everything you always wanted to know but were afraid to ask about the classics, 
it is certainly a marvelous beginning for classics scholars and neophytes alike. Using Perseus is a 
thoroughly enjoyable experience that we recommend to anyone with an interest in the ancient world.  
 
 
