Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num2/call_for_papers.html 
September 2000, Volume 4, Number 2 
p. 137 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
  
 
Copyright © 2000, ISSN 1094-3501 137 
 
Call for Papers 
Special Issue: Technology and Teacher Education 
 
Guest Editors: Yong Zhao and Seppo Tella 
While research has traditionally focused on the interface between technology and language learners, the 
role of teachers as mediators between technology and the learner has received less attention. In this 
special issue of LLT, we invite submissions that investigate the role of teachers in technology-enhanced 
language education, explore the process by which teachers integrate technology into their pedagogical 
practices, and probe the social, psychological, communicative and cognitive arrangements necessary for 
teachers to make creative and appropriate uses of technology in language learning. 
Possible issues include but are not limited to the following: 
 How do teachers learn to incorporate information and communication technologies into their 
teaching? 
 What should teachers know in order to effectively use technology in their teaching? 
 In what ways do technological innovations interact with existing pedagogical practices? 
 What sort of teacher education solutions help teachers realize the educational potential of ICT? 
 What psychological and social factors influence teachers' use technology? 
 What pedagogical, technological, social, and psychological conditions are necessary for 
successful integration of technology in the foreign language classroom? 
Please note that all articles published in LLT, including in this special issue, should either report on 
original research or present an original framework that links previous research, educational theory, and 
teaching practices. 
Those interested in contributing to this special issue should send an e-mail of intent with a 250 word 
abstract by December 30, 2000 to the guest editors:  
Yong Zhao (zhaoyo@pilot.msu.edu)  
Seppo Tella (seppo.tella@helsinki.fi) 
Language Learning & Technology is published exclusively on the World Wide Web. You may see 
current or back issues, and take out your free subscription, at http://llt.msu.edu 
 
 
