Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/groot/default.html 
May 2000, Volume 4, Number 1 
pp. 56-76 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 2000, ISSN 1094-3501 56 
COMPUTER ASSISTED SECOND LANGUAGE VOCABULARY 
ACQUISITION 
Peter J. M. Groot 
Utrecht University 
ABSTRACT 
During the initial stages of instructed L2 acquisition students learn a couple thousand, mainly 
high frequency words. Functional language proficiency, however, requires mastery of a 
considerably larger number of words. It is therefore necessary at the intermediate and advanced 
stages of language acquisition to learn a large vocabulary in a short period of time. There is not 
enough time to copy the natural (largely incidental) L1 word acquisition process. Incidental 
acquisition of the words is only possible up to a point, because, on account of their low 
frequency, they do not occur often enough in the L2 learning material. Acquisition of new words 
from authentic L2 reading texts by means of strategies such as contextual deduction is also not a 
solution for a number of reasons. There appears to be no alternative to intentional learning of a 
great many new words in a relatively short period of time. The words to be learned may be 
presented in isolation or in context. Presentation in bilingual word lists seems an attractive 
shortcut because it takes less time than contextual presentation and yields excellent short term 
results. Long term retention, however, is often disappointing so contextual presentation seems 
advisable. Any suggestions how to implement this in pedagogic contexts should be based on a 
systematic analysis of the two most important aspects of the L2 word learning problem, that is to 
say, selecting the relevant vocabulary (which and how many words) and creating optimal 
conditions for the acquisition process. This article sets out to describe a computer assisted word 
acquisition programme (CAVOCA) which tries to do precisely this: the programme 
operationalises current theoretical thinking about word acquisition, and its contents are based on a 
systematic inventory of the vocabulary relevant for the target group. To establish its efficiency, 
the programme was contrasted in a number of experimental settings with a paired associates 
method of learning new words. The experimental results suggest that an approach combining the 
two methods is most advisable. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The naive view that the vocabulary of a language should be seen as a "set of basic irregularities" 
impervious to systematic study, and its acquisition as a haphazard process of learning largely unrelated 
elements is long outdated. Furthermore, the language teaching profession has come to realise that in 
foreign language teaching, a grammar-oriented approach is not, to understate the case, the most efficient 
way to achieve communicative competence. An integrated approach combining systematic attention to 
the acquisition of both grammar and vocabulary is considered much more effective. This fuller 
appreciation of the importance of vocabulary teaching gives rise to a number of questions concerning the 
way in which it should be selected and presented for learning. These questions will be addressed below. 
In the early stages of instructed foreign language acquisition1 students learn a few thousand mainly high 
frequency words. Such words occur so frequently in the teaching materials to which they are exposed that 
many are easily acquired. However, a vocabulary of that size, say 2,000 words, is not sufficient for 
functional language proficiency. To take reading as an example, estimates of the number of words 
required for understanding non-specialised texts vary (dependent, among others, on what is meant by 
Peter J.M. Groot Computer Assisted Second Language Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 57 
"words" and "adequate comprehension") but there is general consensus that 5,000 base words is a 
minimal requirement (Laufer, 1997; Nation 1990) while for non-specialised, academic reading a 
considerable larger vocabulary is needed (Groot, 1994; Hazenberg & Hulstijn, 1996). It is therefore 
necessary that a large number of words be learned in a short period of time at the intermediate and 
advanced stages of language acquisition. Incidental acquisition of these words is only possible to a point, 
because they do not occur often enough in the foreign language learning material. Learning new words 
from authentic L2 reading texts by means of strategies such as contextual deduction is not the answer 
either, for reasons to be given later. Although there is evidence that retention is better with L1 glosses 
than without (Hulstijn, Hollander, & Greidanus, 1996; Watanabe, 1997), isolated presentation of the 
numerous words to be learned in bilingual word lists results in long-term retention that is widely felt to be 
disappointing. Since the time available for the learning of the large number of new words is limited, it is 
essential to tackle this problem systematically, both in selecting the relevant vocabulary and in creating 
optimal conditions for the acquisition process. This article sets out to describe a computer assisted word 
acquisition programme which intends to do precisely this: the programme tries to systematically 
operationalise current theoretical thinking about word acquisition, and its contents are based on a 
systematic inventory of the vocabulary relevant for the target group. The programme (called CAVOCA, 
an acronym for Computer Assisted VOCabulary Acquisition) was developed over a trial period of several 
years. Its present database was constructed with the help of a government grant and contains some 500 
words specially selected for their difficulty and relevance to the academic reading needs of Dutch 
university students. In the following paragraphs the theoretical and practical considerations involved in 
the construction of the programme will be dealt with. 
HOW MANY WORDS? 
Obviously, a detailed answer to this general question is impossible without a detailed description of the 
language activity and level intended. Therefore I shall confine myself to a specific example, namely, the 
vocabulary required for an adequate comprehension of academic reading texts of the type used in the 
foreign language reading comprehension tests annually constructed by the CITO (the Dutch central 
educational testing body) for the final exams of Dutch "vwo," an upper level secondary type of school 
preparing for university studies. These tests comprise a selection of authentic, argumentative and/or 
popular-scientific L2 texts on a variety of non-specialist topics. They specifically measure L2 reading 
skills, and comprehension does not depend primarily on textual features such as conceptual or structural 
complexity, or on reader characteristics such as familiarity with the topic. 
To the extent that reading comprehension is dependent on word knowledge, there is empirical evidence 
(Groot, 1994) that for an adequate understanding of academic texts of this kind, a vocabulary of at least 
7,000 words is required (Hazenberg & Hulstijn, 1996 mention an even higher number--10,000). Nation 
(1993) and Laufer (1997) suggest a target vocabulary of 5,000 as the minimum lexical requirement for 
understanding general, non-specialised texts. The rationale for these numbers is that only a vocabulary 
this size will result in a sufficiently dense lexical coverage of texts of this kind. Various studies (Groot, 
1994; Hazenberg & Hulstijn, 1996; Hirsh & Nation, 1992; Laufer, 1989) have demonstrated that for 
adequate comprehension of texts at this level, readers must be familiar with more than 90% of the words 
used. With such a dense lexical coverage of a text, the percentage of unknown words is so low that, 
generally speaking, they will either not be essential for an understanding of the text or their meaning may 
be deduced from the context. 
Peter J.M. Groot Computer Assisted Second Language Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 58 
WHICH WORDS? 
Apart from the most frequently used 2,000 words there are, a further 3,000 words that should be learned. 
It is not possible to indicate accurately which words, partly because beyond the first 1,200 words, the 
frequency of words rapidly decreases and depends greatly on the corpus. Additional selection criteria 
such as usefulness and valency do not solve the problem either. Every selection will therefore contain a 
certain degree of arbitrariness as far as inclusion or omission of certain words is concerned. A partial 
solution to this problem may be compiling a much longer list of words of which only a portion must be 
mastered (Groot, 1994). The advantage of a list of this length is that difficult choices as to whether or not 
to include a particular word can be largely avoided. The feasibility of this idea has been studied in relation 
to English (de Jong, 1998). For this purpose, the subdivision into six frequency levels of the head words 
listed in the Collins Cobuild Dictionary (1995) was used. Allocation of a particular frequency level to a 
word is based on an analysis of the 200 million-word "The Bank of England Corpus." Level 1 includes 
the 700 most frequent words, level 2 the next 1,200 words, level 3 the next 1,500 words, level 4 the next 
3,200, level 5 the next 8,100 and level 6 all remaining words. It turned out that the application of a 
number of qualitative criteria such as relevance and difficulty, and quantitative criteria such as frequency 
resulted in a list of approximately 8,000 words drawn from levels 3, 4 and 5. Familiarity with any 3,000 
words from this list added to the first 2,000 would result in a lexical repertoire of 5,000 words considered 
sufficient for general reading while command of any 5,000, again in addition to the first 2,000, would 
suffice for academic reading. Complementary to this approach, various other word lists relevant to 
reading at this level may also be used in the compilation of such a list (Nation, 1990). 
HOW TO TEACH/LEARN THE WORDS? 
In connection with word learning, a distinction is commonly drawn between incidental and intentional 
learning. Unless one narrowly defines incidental learning as excluding any conscious attention to the 
words being learned (cf. Singleton 1999, p. 274), the two learning modes are not always easy to 
differentiate and show a considerable overlap, not unlike the acquisition/learning dichotomy suggested by 
Krashen. In this paper, intentional learning will be used to refer to any learning activity the learner 
undertakes with the intention of gaining new knowledge. As such it differs from incidental learning where 
there is no such intention (Anderson, 1990). From a pedagogic perspective, however, the distinction is 
still useful in a discussion on the optimal way of presenting new L2 words in instructional contexts. 
Most words in first language acquisition are learned incidentally in an incremental way because the 
language learner comes across them frequently in a wide range of contexts (De Bot, Paribakht, & 
Wesche, 1997; Nagy & Herman, 1987). In a short space of time, a large number of words are thus learned 
and this lexical repertoire then forms the basis for learning other new words. In the case of foreign 
language acquisition in instructional contexts, this process is virtually impossible to simulate. The 
exposure to new words is considerably less intensive and varied.2 Undoubtedly, a limited number of high 
frequency words can be learned incidentally but that will certainly not be possible for the much larger 
number of less frequent words that must subsequently be learned if one wishes to speak of functional 
proficiency. 
To solve this problem it has been suggested that learners be exposed to authentic L2 material and trained 
in communicative strategies such as contextual deduction of the meaning of new words so that incidental 
acquisition can take place, thus partially copying the L1 acquisition process (Krashen, 1989). Attractive 
though this idea may seem, it is not very realistic. Authentic language material is generally not produced 
with the intention of illustrating to learners the meaning or usage of certain words but rather to convey 
information to other native speakers who are already familiar with these words. More often than not, it is 
therefore largely unsuitable for the learning of new words for a number of reasons. 
Peter J.M. Groot Computer Assisted Second Language Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 59 
First, because of their relatively low frequency, the words to be learned will occur rarely in the inevitably 
small authentic L2 input. This means there is not enough repetition for an incremental learning process in 
which the various features of the words are picked up from the contexts, resulting in a solid embedding in 
the mental lexicon, as in L1 acquisition. 
Second, in authentic use of language, it is frequently not the immediate context of an unknown word that 
contains the clues to its meaning but wider contexts that cumulatively illustrate its semantic properties. In 
most instructed L2 learning situations, however, the learner is only exposed to selected passages, which in 
themselves may not aptly illustrate meaning and use of the particular word at all. 
But probably the most important reason why authentic L2 language is inadequate for incidental 
acquisition (except at highly advanced levels) is that it contains too many other unknown words. Of 
course, some of these may not be essential for understanding the context. Function words are generally 
less relevant for comprehension than content words and the same goes for adjectives compared to nouns. 
But others will be essential and not knowing them will make contextual deduction of the word to be 
learned problematic. Contextual deduction and, in its wake, incidental acquisition of an unknown word is 
only possible if the context is well understood and clearly illustrates its meaning. One might say that in 
such cases, for a proficient reader, the new word is redundant; in other words, it might as well have been 
left out (as, indeed, it is in cloze tests to measure comprehension of the context). But to the extent that the 
context contains other unknown words for the learner, there arises what one might call a cumulative 
reduction of the redundancy of the word in question. The number of possible meanings of the unknown 
word increases proportionally to the number of other unknown words in the context; the new word may 
mean "x" if another unknown word means "y," but if this is not the case, "x" must have a different 
meaning and this puzzle of semantic permutations gets more and more complex with each additional 
unknown word. The learner must form ever more hypotheses as to the possible meaning and 
systematically utilise previous and subsequent information to corroborate or refute these. This process 
will take so much attention and working memory capacity that higher reading processes, which are 
essential for understanding the context (such as recognition of suprasentential links and discourse 
markers), are seriously impeded. 
The above line of reasoning may be summarised as follows. A thorough understanding of the context is 
essential for deducing the meaning of an unknown word. For any context to be well understood a dense 
coverage is required. This means the reader must have "foreknowledge" of most other words in the 
particular context, which in turn presupposes a large vocabulary. There is a certain irony to this 
phenomenon (sometimes referred to as the Matthew effect) in the sense that a learner can only pick up 
new words from authentic contexts if s/he already has a large vocabulary (Horst, Cobb, & Meara, 1998). 
The above arguments may serve to illustrate the principle that in the limited time available in an L2 
teaching context such a large vocabulary cannot be incidentally acquired by dint of sheer exposure to 
authentic L2 material. 
If in instructional L2 situations incidental acquisition of a large vocabulary of lower frequency words 
through exposure to authentic L2 texts is hardly possible, it follows that efficient acquisition of new 
vocabulary requires a conscious effort from the learner (Prince, 1996; Sternberg, 1987). There seems to 
be no viable alternative to intentional learning of a large number of words with the help of authentic L2 
material that has been selected (or edited) specifically for this purpose. The limited time available for this 
huge learning effort makes it imperative that the acquisition process be, as it were, accelerated. This 
requires a careful analysis of what should be learned and how it should be learned or, in other words, 
which words should be selected for learning (cf. "Contents of the Programme") and how they should be 
presented (cf. "Theoretical Background"). A computer assisted word learning programme which intends 
to do this is described below. 
CAVOCA 
Peter J.M. Groot Computer Assisted Second Language Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 60 
Theoretical Background 
CAVOCA (Computer Assisted  VOCabulary Acquisition) is a computer programme for vocabulary 
acquisition in a foreign language. It has been designed on the basis of generally accepted theories about 
the way the mental lexicon is structured and operates. Allowing for certain differences between the 
various theories on how words are learned, stored in, and retrieved from the internal lexicon (cf. 
Aitchison, 1995), there is general agreement that in a natural (L1) word acquisition process several stages 
may be recognised. They cannot always be clearly distinguished because learning a word is an 
incremental process that gradually develops with repeated exposure and because there is constant 
interaction between the various stages. However, for clarity’s sake, they will be briefly described as if 
they were separate stages independent of one another. 
1. Notice of the various properties of the new word: morphological and phonological, syntactic , 
semantic, stylistic, collocational, and so forth. 
2. Storage in the internal lexicon in networks of relationships that correspond to the properties 
described in (1). 
3. Consolidation of the storage described in (2) by means of further exposure to the word in a 
variety of contexts which illustrate its various properties. This results in a firmer embedding in 
the memory needed for long term retention. 
Adequate implementation of the stages described above will result in a solid embedding of the word in 
the mental lexicon, which is necessary for efficient receptive and productive use. If one of the stages is 
neglected, the word will not properly fix itself in the internal lexicon and will be stored only superficially 
without the many associations and links with other words needed for efficient lexical retrieval. The 
learner will not or barely recognise the word in a reading or listening text and will certainly be unable to 
use it in speaking or writing. These ideas about the importance of an intensive processing of the new word 
were first presented in a systematic fashion in Craik and Lockhart's (1972) "levels of processing" theory. 
It postulated that "rates of forgetting are a function of the type and depth of encoding" information and 
distinguished between various levels of processing. Thus, in their view, processing semantic properties of 
a word represented a deeper level than just processing its phonological features. Certain aspects of their 
theory have been criticised (especially its inability to clearly define the differences between levels in 
operational terms) but it has since led to a general consensus among researchers that there is a stringent 
relationship between retention and intensity or elaborateness (Anderson, 1990) of processing lexical 
information about a new word (i.e., paying close attention to its various features such as spelling, 
pronunciation, semantic and syntactic attributes, relationships with other words, etc.). Important elements 
in this intensive processing are the variability (Anderson,1990) and specificity (Tulving & Thomson, 
1973) of the encoding activity. This theoretical position appears to have several important pedagogic 
implications for the teaching/learning of new words. 
The first is that exposure to words in context is preferable to exposure to words in isolation. Only contexts 
will fully demonstrate the semantic, syntactic, and collocational features of a word the learner has to 
process in order to establish the numerous links and associations with other words necessary for easy 
accessibility and retrieval (see also Nation, 1990, and Singleton, 1999, for a summary of the arguments 
and evidence supporting this position). 
Another implication, although more controversial than the first, appears to be that having learners infer 
the meaning of new words from the context is a better way to safeguard elaborate, intensive processing 
than giving the meaning because of the greater cognitive effort required. 
Mondria (1996) presents evidence that seems to refute this theoretical stance. He interprets his finding 
that vocabulary test scores for the two conditions (given vs. inferred meaning) indicated that there is no 
difference in long term retention effects between the two presentation methods and that, in teaching new 
Peter J.M. Groot Computer Assisted Second Language Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 61 
words, giving the meaning is a more efficient method than having learners contextually infer it, because it 
takes less time. His conclusions, however, are based on scores of tests of receptive knowledge only (a 
multiple choice and an open ended test) in which subjects were asked to recognise the target words. 
Whether tests of productive use (in which subjects have to recall the word themselves) would have 
yielded the same results leading to the same conclusions is doubtful (cf. the first remark in "Discussion"). 
The natural word acquisition process (as this occurs in first language acquisition) consists of gradual 
acquisition of the various properties of a word through repeated exposures in a wide range of authentic 
contexts illustrative of its various features. Bearing this in mind, we are faced with a dilemma in an 
instructed L-2 learning situation. On the one hand, there is not enough time for exposure to new words of 
the same intensity as in L1 acquisition. On the other hand, superficial exposure leads to shallow 
processing which fails to establish enough associations and links with other words for solid storage and 
efficient retrieval. Obviously, there is no easy solution to this dilemma. The most realistic approach seems 
to be to create an environment that is maximally conducive to learning new words by striking a balance 
between the two contradictory demands. The CAVOCA programme intends to do just that by speeding up 
the acquisition process; it takes the learners systematically through the various stages by exposing them to 
carefully selected L2 material which illustrates the salient features of the new L2 word and/or the 
differences between the L2 word and its nearest L1 equivalent or counterpart. 
 
The Programme 
The stages of the vocabulary acquisition process described above are operationalised in the various 
sections of the CAVOCA programme. The programme takes the learner systematically through the 
sequence of mental operations which make up the acquisition process. The word to be acquired is 
presented in contexts selected in such a way as to ensure an efficient and, as it were, condensed 
acquisition process. To secure learner involvement, the programme is interactive: at certain points the 
learner has to make choices ("What do you think the word means?" "Is the word correct/appropriate in 
this context?" "What is the word that is missing in this context?") and is given feedback by the computer. 
The current CAVOCA programme presents the words in modules, each consisting of 25 words and taking 
about 50 minutes to complete. The programme covers each word in four sections which embody the 
various stages of the word acquisition process. 
The first two stages of the vocabulary acquisition process, learning the word's various properties (among 
which, most importantly in a L2 acquisition context, is its semantic properties, see Singleton, 1999, p. 
189) and storing the word in the memory are operationalised in the first section of the programme, called 
"Deduction." The word to be learned appears on the screen for a few seconds. Next, it is used in three 
sentences, presented in order of contextual richness. The first sentence contains only a few clues as to the 
meaning of the word and mainly serves to draw the learner's attention to its morphological composition, 
spelling, syntactic function, and so forth. The second sentence contains more clues as to the meaning, and 
the third is so contextually rich that the meaning becomes entirely clear. Every sentence is followed by a 
multiple choice question to be answered by the learner with four options as to the possible meaning, the 
correct alternative being a (near) synonym. After each sentence the learner is given immediate feedback 
(whether the meaning s/he inferred was right or wrong) to avoid the wrong meaning from being retained. 
After the third presentation of the word, the key to the multiple choice item is given as final feedback for 
the learner. To a certain extent, this way of presenting new words may seem unnatural since in natural 
word acquisition first contexts need not but may very well contain clues to the meaning of an unknown 
word. It was nevertheless opted for to make learners process the word intensively by forcing them to form 
and test hypotheses as to its meaning. The word is presented three times in sentences containing ever 
more semantic clues and the learner has to deduce the meaning in stages. This method of presenting the 
new word is meant to trigger off a cognitive process of what might be called "graded contextual 
disambiguation"; step by step the learner reduces the uncertainty about the meaning of the word by 
Peter J.M. Groot Computer Assisted Second Language Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 62 
making use of the contextual clues increasingly present in the three consecutive sentences. It should yield 
better long term retention results than simply giving the meaning because it enforces a deeper level of 
processing (Mondria & Wit-de Boer, 1991). Here is an example. The word to be learned is "abrasive." 
 
 
Figure 1. "Deduction" 
 
The second and third context sentences in this example are: 
2. He was offended by her abrasive tone of voice. 
3. His abrasive criticism undermined her confidence and made her doubt herself. 
The second section of the programme ("Usage") is geared to the second stage of the word acquisition 
process, consolidation. To further secure the word's position in the mental lexicon and to further illustrate 
its exact meaning, two sentences are presented in which the word is either used correctly/appropriately or 
not. The learner chooses and the computer gives feedback, explaining why the use of the word in question 
in that particular context was correct or incorrect. Also, whenever relevant, additional information about 
the word is given: other meanings (or, as in the example given here, the original, literal meaning of the 
word), derivatives, similar or misleadingly similar words, idiomatic usage, and so forth. In this section the 
learner is also requested to type the word in order to reinforce storage of the word's morphological 
properties. The computer points out and corrects any mistakes. An alternative version of the programme 
on CD-ROM gives the pronunciation of the word. The learner is then asked to repeat it and his/her 
Peter J.M. Groot Computer Assisted Second Language Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 63 
pronunciation is recorded so that it can be listened to and compared to the correct pronunciation. The 
theoretical rationale for this multi-modal presentation is its supposed positive effect on the retrievability 
of a word. A diversity of operations to be performed vis a vis a word is likely to lead to better storage of a 
word and ,as a result, more (efficient) retrieval routes (Chun & Plass, 1996; Gathercole & Conway, 
1988).   
Peter J.M. Groot Computer Assisted Second Language Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 64 
Figures 2 and 3. "Usage"  
The third section of the programme, "Examples," is likewise designed to reinforce consolidation and thus 
ensure long term retention. The learner is presented with a number of authentic L2 passages selected from 
large databases containing the word just learned. These passages have been specially selected to clearly 
illustrate both meaning and use of the word in question. An additional objective of this section of the 
programme is to increase the learner's motivation for learning words (or, to put it more realistically, to 
motivate them at all). The learner recognises that he/she (better) understands the authentic L2 passage 
thanks to the recently acquired knowledge of the word learned. Hopefully, in the learner’s mind, this 
experience will serve as a specific illustration of the general principle of the importance of vocabulary for 
understanding authentic L2 reading texts. 
  
Peter J.M. Groot Computer Assisted Second Language Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 65 
Figure 4. "Examples"  
Once the learner has dealt with each of the 25 words in the module in the manner described above, he/she 
comes to the fourth and final section of the CAVOCA programme, called "Lexical Retrieval." In this 
section, which also serves as a self-assessment test, the learner's active knowledge of the word is elicited. 
The learner is presented with 25 sentences, each with one word missing. These sentences have been 
selected specially so that the blank can be filled by one word only (i.e., one of the words covered in the 
module). To help the learner and to elicit specifically the word recently acquired, the first letter of the 
word belonging in the sentence is given. Once the 25 sentences have been completed, the learner's score 
appears on the screen and any mistakes are pointed out. Print-outs enable the teacher to check the 
student's performance in each module. 
 
Peter J.M. Groot Computer Assisted Second Language Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 66 
 
Figure 5. "Lexical Retrieval"  
 
Contents of the Programme 
The words in the current CAVOCA database have been selected to fulfil two criteria: relevance and 
difficulty for the target group (Wijbenga, 1997). 
To select a body of words relevant to first year university language proficiency courses, a preliminary list 
of several thousand words judged relevant to "academic reading" was put together based on frequency 
and a number of other considerations of a contrastive/linguistic and didactic nature. Seven experienced 
teachers of English from Dutch universities were presented with this list and were requested to put each 
word into one of five categories according to relevance. Subsequently, a list of 1,500 words with the 
highest mean score and the lowest standard deviation was made, in other words, all the words which were 
judged relevant and suitable by all or most of the teachers. From these 1,500 words a selection of about 
500 difficult words was made, based on a contrastive analysis. This selection encompassed words which 
lack a Dutch equivalent or a one-to-one relationship with their Dutch counterparts in terms of usage or 
meaning. Examples are acknowledge, encroach, fumble, enhance, oblivious, and anxious, words for 
which there is no direct (context-independent) translation in Dutch. However, words like  abduct (which 
denotes the exact same concept as the Dutch ontvoeren and which is used in the same way syntactically, 
stylistically, etc.) were not selected for the CAVOCA treatment. Such words receive a less intensive 
treatment (what we named the EDIT treatment: Extended DIctionary Treatment) on the assumption that 
words of this kind are easier to learn. In the EDIT treatment, the word is presented in one or two 
contextually rich sentences followed by a definition, derivatives, words related in form but not in 
Peter J.M. Groot Computer Assisted Second Language Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 67 
meaning, and so forth. A database of words from the higher frequency band width described in "Which 
Words?" relevant for intermediate stages of L2 acquisition, is under construction. 
THE EFFICIENCY OF THE PROGRAMME 
The CAVOCA programme is based on a theoretical analysis of the L1 word acquisition process and, in a 
sense, tries to replicate the various stages of this process, albeit in a condensed form to save time. It sets 
out to speed up the word acquisition process by means of intensified exposure to carefully selected L2 
material. Thus, it fulfils the theoretical and practical conditions for efficient word learning. There are, 
however, a number of differences between L1 and L2 word acquisition. In L1 acquisition, the new word 
and its meaning are learned simultaneously, while in L2 learning the concept covered by the L2 label is 
either familiar to the learner (when the two labels cover semantic equivalents) or can be integrated into 
his/her conceptual framework. This difference alone justifies the question as to whether an intensive 
method of word learning like CAVOCA is efficient compared to less time-consuming methods such as 
"paired associates" learning (e.g., via bilingual word lists), efficiency being defined here as the ratio 
between the number of words learned and the time needed to learn them. One might argue that because 
the learner is already familiar with the concepts covered by the new L2 labels, the conceptual learning 
load in L2 word acquisition is lighter than in L1 acquisition so that intensive processing of the new L2 
words is not essential for retention, even in the case of L2 words lacking one-to-one relationships with L1 
counterparts such as those selected for the CAVOCA database. Another ground for comparing the two 
methods is that the CAVOCA method represents a way of learning new words which is very unlike what 
most students are used to. It takes more time per word than a bilingual list, students are not given a 
translation but have to work out the meaning for themselves, and all of the context material and the 
feedback is in the L2. In short, it is a much more difficult method than the familiar paired associates 
learning methods that they are used to. 
In order to collect evidence relevant to this question, the CAVOCA approach was compared with the 
more orthodox approach of L2 word learning by means of bilingual word lists in a number of 
experimental settings. A detailed report of the experimental procedure and data would exceed the scope of 
this article and has appeared elsewhere (Groot, 1999) but the results most relevant to an evaluation of the 
efficiency of the CAVOCA approach will be discussed. 
 
Experimental Procedure 
The experimental (CAVOCA) and the control condition (bilingual lists) were compared in four 
experiments (Bonte, 1997; Dufour, 1997; Janssen, 1996; Nep, 1998). These experiments had a quasi-
experimental, pre-test/post-test, differential treatment design, with the learning method as the independent 
variable and the scores on the post tests as the dependent variable. Subjects, ranging from upper level 
secondary school (vwo) pupils (aged 16 to 18) to first year university students (aged 19-20), were 
presented with two equivalent sets of words, one in the experimental and the other in the control 
condition, in two separate learning sessions of the same length. The words were selected according to the 
contrastive linguistic criteria described in "Contents of the Programme" and assignment of the words to 
either of the two conditions was random. In all experiments the effect of the two methods was measured 
twice: immediately after the learning session and two to three weeks later to determine the long-term 
retention effect. Subjects had not been told about the delayed test to prevent them from paying more than 
usual attention to the words after the learning session, which might invalidate the results. Due to their 
relatively low frequency, the chances that they would come across the test words in the period between 
the immediate and the delayed test were slim. Prior to the learning session, a pre-test was administered 
containing more words than the final set used in the experiments to check whether subjects were familiar 
with any of the words. This turned out to be the case in a few instances and these words were not used in 
the experiment. 
Peter J.M. Groot Computer Assisted Second Language Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 68 
In experiments 1 and 2, carried out by Janssen and Dufour (the second being a replica of the first in order 
to establish the generalisibility of the results), the effect of the two methods was measured by means of a 
test of receptive knowledge. The subjects were shown the two sets of words learned and asked to give a 
translation or definition. Obviously, this testing method favours the control condition since the method 
used in the testing session is the same as the one followed in the learning session (see Schneider, Healy, 
& Bourne, 1999, p. 89, and the observation in "Theoretical Background" about encoding specificity). 
Subjects need only remember the translation of the control condition words to achieve a high score. For 
the words used in the experimental condition, this direct association was not possible since no translation 
was provided. 
Two follow-up experiments (3 and 4), carried out by Bonte and Nep (again, the second replicating the 
first to determine the generalisibility of the results), were set up in the same way in all other respects as 
the first two, except for the testing technique used to measure the effect of the two methods of word 
learning. To establish to what extent the scores obtained were the result of the particular testing method 
used in these experiments (or, in other words, to determine the constraints on their validity), a different 
testing technique was used, namely a cloze test. This testing format obviously measures more than just 
receptive knowledge of words since the word itself is not given but has to be provided by the testees 
themselves. This form of lexical retrieval clearly requires a deeper knowledge of a word than receptive 
knowledge. The context sentences used in the cloze tests were not the same as those used in the "Lexical 
Retrieval" part of the CAVOCA programme so that subjects could not come up with the target words 
because they recognised the sentences. Since pre-tests showed that subjects found this way of testing 
much more difficult than the receptive tests and to preclude them from filling in a semantically acceptable 
alternative word, the first letter of the word was given. 
 
C control method 
X experimental method 
 
test 1 immediate test 
test 2 delayed test 
1-2 decrease in scores on immediate and delayed tests 
mean mean score 
SD standard deviation 
ss number of subjects 
R reliability (Cronbach alpha) 
nax maximum score 
Peter J.M. Groot Computer Assisted Second Language Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 69 
 
 
Peter J.M. Groot Computer Assisted Second Language Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 70 
  
The reliability coefficients of nearly all the tests used were satisfactory (>0.80), which is not surprising 
for discrete point tests. The immediate receptive knowledge tests in the first two experiments were an 
exception: these showed a low reliability due to a clear ceiling effect in the scores resulting in a low 
standard deviation. 
Significance levels were calculated for the following two most relevant results of the four experiments: a) 
the difference between the mean scores for both conditions on the delayed tests and b) the difference 
between the decrease in the mean scores on the immediate and delayed tests for both conditions. 
The two-tailed t-tests for independent means resulted in levels never higher than p< .05. There was one 
exception for a ) in experiment 3 (n=15), which was only significant at a level of p< 0.10 
The experimental results consistently show certain patterns, independent of the subjects or the words used 
in the experiments. 
1. In the first two experiments the scores on the immediate tests of receptive knowledge were 
considerably higher for the control condition. Recall of the fresh association between the words 
and their translation, as established by the bilingual word list, was sufficient for a high score. In 
fact, in both experiments the mean scores on the immediate tests of receptive knowledge of the 
words learned by means of bilingual lists were extremely high (> 95%). As observed above, this 
strategy of pairing associates resulting in high scores could not be applied in the case of the words 
learned through the CAVOCA programme, since in this condition no translation was provided 
and the meaning had to be worked out by the subjects themselves. Of course, subjects may have 
tagged their own L1 labels onto these (L2) concepts but, since no feedback in the form of the 
Peter J.M. Groot Computer Assisted Second Language Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 71 
correct translation was given, it is unlikely that these individual L2-L1 associations were always 
wholly correct or, if they were, as firmly established as those in the control condition. 
2. As was expected, the scores on the delayed tests in these two first experiments were considerably 
lower for both conditions. Retention loss as manifested in the decrease in scores on the delayed 
test was larger for the bilingual word list method than for the CAVOCA condition: 24.85 versus 
19.03 (= 33% vs. 25%) and 15.87 versus. 8.41 (= 39% vs.21%) in experiments 1 and 2, 
respectively, but the mean scores on the delayed tests of receptive knowledge were still higher for 
the word list condition than for the CAVOCA method. 
3. In the last two experiments, where the effect of both methods was measured with cloze tests, the 
mean scores for both conditions on the immediate tests did not show the large differences 
observed in the first two experiments. However, as in the first two experiments, the decrease in 
the scores on the delayed tests was larger for the bilingual word list condition than for the 
CAVOCA condition: 7.65 vs. 2.60 (=31% vs.10%) in experiment 3 and 4 vs. 2.2 (=16% vs. 9%) 
in experiment 4, resulting in higher scores for the experimental condition. 
4. If the figures found in the four experiments for the decrease in scores on the immediate and the 
delayed tests mentioned above in (2) and (3) are converted into forgetting rate percentages (i.e., 
the percentage of the words learned that was forgotten during the period of time between the 
immediate and the delayed tests), we get the following results for the control and the 
experimental condition in the four experiments: 33% versus 34% in the first experiment , 40% 
versus. 31% in the second , 60% versus 27% in the third, and 26% versus 13% in the fourth. With 
the exception of the first experiment, these figures confirm the retention loss pattern observed 
above in (2) and (3). 
 
Discussion 
For a correct interpretation of the above data three preliminary remarks are called for. 
 
1. The experiments were carried out to determine which of the two methods of learning new words is 
more efficient in the sense of yielding the best long term retention results. The crucial question is then 
"When has a word been learned?" or, in other words, "What does it mean to know a word?" Clearly, 
as observed before, there are various levels of or dimensions to word knowledge (Nagy & Herman, 
1987). Knowing a word may be seen in operational terms as a continuum ranging from vague 
recognition of its spelling to (semantically, syntactically, stylistically) correct and contextually 
appropriate productive use. Retrieval of a word from the mental lexicon for productive use requires a 
higher degree of accessibility or, in other words, a more solid integration in various networks than is 
needed for receptive use. For measuring this higher level of mastery, a test which asks testees to 
simply recognise a word and give its meaning is unsuitable; a test using the cloze technique, which 
measures testees’ ability to produce the word themselves, is much more valid for that purpose. The 
experimental results reported in "Results" clearly demonstrate that for a meaningful interpretation of 
the data, it is essential to give an accurate description of what one understands by the trait "knowing a 
word" and of what trait is intended to be measured by what testing method. 
 
2. The scores on the tests administered after the experimental learning session do not pretend to show 
the learningeffect of each separate part of the CAVOCA programme but rather the overall effect of 
the CAVOCA induced learning process as a whole. As observed in "Theoretical Background" in the 
description of the theoretical background of the programme, it is difficult, from a psycholinguistic 
Peter J.M. Groot Computer Assisted Second Language Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 72 
perspective, to discriminate between the various stages in the word acquisition process. All one can 
logically say is that there must be a temporal order: noticing a word’s properties must of necessity 
precede any storage and consolidation can only follow when something has been stored. But even if it 
were desirable from a theoretical point of view, it is practically hardly possible to determine the 
relative contribution to the learning effect of the various stages in the learning process. 
 
3. It is not unlikely that a lack of familiarity with the CAVOCA method of word learning negatively 
influenced the scores in the experimental condition. This way of learning was completely new to the 
subjects. It was intuitively felt to be useful but also much more difficult than the more orthodox 
approach with its facile association between the L2 word and its L1 translation. Experimenters 
observed again and again that subjects are, as it were, conditioned for superficial learning and find it 
difficult to switch to a different style. 
If long-term retention is the ultimate goal of learning new words, little significance should be attached to 
the extremely high scores for the control condition on the immediate receptive tests in the first two 
experiments. Considering the sizable fall in the scores on the delayed tests, these high scores possess no 
predictive value whatsoever with regard to long term retention of the words. The immediate tests 
measured superficial recognition of the words that had been presented in the bilingual list, automatically 
triggering fresh associations between the L2 and the L1 words. It is common knowledge that high ability 
learners in these age groups possess an admirable memorising capacity (Hulstijn, 1997; Knight, 1994). 
This enabled the subjects to achieve extremely high scores on the immediate tests. The associations, 
however, are not firmly established and two weeks later most of them are beyond recall. 
It is not unlikely that the higher scores on the delayed tests in the first two experiments for the control 
condition should be attributed for a substantial part to the fact that for the control condition the method of 
learning and testing were identical (cf. the observation in "Experimental Procedure"). 
The higher scores on the delayed cloze tests and the smaller loss of retention for the experimental 
condition in all four experiments may be regarded as corroborative evidence for the theory that there is a 
strong relationship between retention rates and depth of processing. They appear to indicate that intensive 
processing of new words leads to a more solid embedding and better long term retention which is needed 
for active use of the words, than does superficial processing of the words out of context with the 
translation given, as in bilingual lists. 
On the other hand, the higher scores on the delayed receptive tests for the control condition in the first 
two experiments point to the conclusion that, even where L2 word learning cannot be equated to just 
relabeling familiar L1 concepts (as was the case in the experiments described above where the L2 target 
words did not have a direct L1 equivalent), high ability learners at high L2 proficiency levels achieve 
receptive command more efficiently with the help of bilingual lists than with the CAVOCA method. 
Whether this also holds for L2 word learning at lower levels in lower age groups is a moot point. One 
might argue that high level learners have meta-cognitive strategies at their disposal which make their 
acquisition of new vocabulary much less dependent on externally imposed learning conditions (such as 
the intensive CAVOCA presentation that tries to copy the L1 word acquisition process in a condensed 
form) than is the case for younger, low level learners whose less developed cognitive maturity makes 
their L2 acquisition process more similar to L1 acquisition. The data reported here do not warrant any 
conclusions regarding this issue. 
 
As to the significance of the above results from a pedagogic L2 teaching perspective, they strongly 
suggest that a combined approach, making use of the two methods simultaneously, is probably the most 
efficient. On the one hand, using bilingual word lists would fully profit from the L1 conceptual 
Peter J.M. Groot Computer Assisted Second Language Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 73 
framework, especially where the L1 and L2 labels are near equivalents in meaning and use, the effect 
being enhanced if these lists take a form such that they stimulate the learner to establish more than the 
superficial, minimalist associations between the L2 and L1 labels often attributed to this way of 
presenting new words. On the other hand, such an approach would yield better chances for long term 
retention due to the intensive processing of the words in the form of the various mental actions to be 
performed on them such as those offered by the CAVOCA programme. 
In what order, proportion and form the two methods should be incorporated in the dual approach is an 
open question. One possibility would be to present the new words first in the CAVOCA programme 
immediately followed by a bilingual word list presentation. Further experimentation will have to provide 
data as to the efficiency of this particular way of combining the two methods. Of course, whatever the 
outcome of our endeavours to find the optimal mode of presenting new words, repeated exposure at 
certain intervals is essential for long-term retention. It is highly improbable that one learning session, 
however intensive, is sufficient. Modern technology offers unique possibilities for rehearsal practice that 
will ensure further consolidation. Using a concordance programme for finding the word in question, 
learners may be instructed to search in large electronic databases of authentic L2 texts for examples of the 
words just learned which best illustrate their meaning and usage. An exercise such as this refreshes the 
learner's awareness of the word, its meaning and how it is used. It is a useful exercise which also enables 
the teacher to assess whether the learner has retained the words in question. Also, repeated exposure to 
the recently learned words in short texts, in combination with words that frequently co-occur with them in 
authentic L2 material (either because they belong to the same semantic field or because they are linked up 
in standard phrases, collocations or idiomatic expressions), will stimulate further consolidation. 
CONCLUSION 
The CAVOCA computer programme is an attempt to operationalise theoretical ideas about word 
acquisition. As such, it is an instrument which enables us to empirically verify the theory on word 
acquisition in general and its validity for L2 word acquisition in particular. If it yields data incompatible 
with what the theory predicts, either the theory is partially incorrect (e.g., where it claims a basic 
similarity between L1 and L2 word acquisition), or there is something wrong with the way it has been 
operationalised in the CAVOCA programme. If the data collected with CAVOCA are in accordance with 
the theoretical predictions, they may be regarded as a confirmation of the theory. The evidence reported 
above may be regarded as a first indication that theories about word learning are correct in the importance 
they attribute to intensive processing for long term retention. But the data also indicate that there are 
marked differences between the L1 and the L2 word learning process. In particular, the fact that the L2 
learner already has a system of conceptual categories at his disposal to accommodate the new L2 labels 
may imply that L2 word learning represents a simpler cognitive task than L1 word acquisition where new 
concepts and labels have to be learned simultaneously. To the extent that this is indeed the case the 
question arises whether attempts such as the CAVOCA programme to make L2 word learning a 
condensed copy of the L1 word acquisition process are cost effective, especially in the case of L2 words 
that have equivalent L1 counterparts. In such cases a simple bilingual presentation followed by some 
rehearsal practice may be more efficient. The overall conclusion must be that there is no simple answer to 
the key question what form the most efficient method of L2 word learning should take. It depends very 
much on variables like degree of L1-L2 equivalence of the words to be learned, the intensity (both 
qualitative and quantitative) of processing, the age and cognitive level of the learner, the quantity and 
quality of rehearsal practice etc. More experimentation systematically controlling these variables is 
needed to gather data that will provide more insight into their relative importance. Instruments like 
CAVOCA may help provide such data. 
 
Peter J.M. Groot Computer Assisted Second Language Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 74 
NOTES 
1. In this paper, the acronym L2 will be used to include second and foreign language learnings as 
opposed to L1 learning.  
2. Singleton (1999, 236) estimates one year of natural exposure to be the equivalent of 18 years of 
classroom exposure.  
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Dr. Groot is senior lecturer at the University of Utrecht (The Netherlands) and currently teaches and 
supervises research in second language acquisition. His research interests are: L2 testing, word 
acquisition and reading. 
For a demo version of the programme, please e-mail the author at Peter.Groot@let.uu.nl 
REFERENCES 
Aitchison, J. (1995). Words in the Mind. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 
Anderson, J. R. (1990). Cognitive psychology and its implications. New York: Freeman. 
Bonte, W.F.W. (1997). Vocabulaire Verwerving. Een vergelijking van twee methoden [Vocabulary 
learning. A comparison of two methods]. Unpublished master's thesis, Universiteit Leiden, The 
Netherlands. 
Chun, D. M., & Plass, J.L. (1996). Effects of multimedia annotations on vocabulary acquisition. The 
Modern Language Journal, 80, 183-197. 
Collins Cobuild English Dictionary. (1995). London: Harper Collins. 
Craik, F., & Lockhart, R.S., (1972). Levels of Processing. A framework for memory research. Journal of 
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behaviour, 11 671-684. 
De Bot, K., Paribakht, T.S., & Wesche, M.B. (1997). Toward a lexical processing model for the study of 
second language vocabulary acquisition: Evidence from ESL reading. Studies in Second Language 
Acquisition, 19, 309-329. 
Dufour, M.J. (1997). Foreign Language Vocabulary Acquisition: Two Methods Compared. Unpublished 
master's thesis, Universiteit Utrecht, Faculty of Letters, The Netherlands. 
Groot, P.J.M. (1994). Tekstdekking, tekstbegrip en woordselectie voor het vreemde-taalonderwijs (with a 
summary in English) [Lexical coverage, reading comprehension and wordselection in foreign language 
teaching]. Toegepaste Taalwetenschap in artikelen, 3, 111-121. 
Groot, P.J.M. (1999). Computer ondersteunde vreemde-taalverwerving op de hogere niveaus (with a 
summary in English) [Computer assisted foreign language learning at higher levels]. Toegepaste 
Taalwetenschap in Artikelen, 1, 111-126. 
Hazenberg, S.,& Hulstijn, J.H. (1996). Defining a minimal receptive second language vocabulary for non-
native university students: an empirical investigation. Applied Linguistics, 7,  145-163. 
Hirsch, D., & Nation, P. (1992). What vocabulary size is needed to read unsimplified texts for pleasure? 
Reading in a Foreign Language, 8, 689-696. 
Horst, M., Cobb, T., & Meara, P. (1998). Beyond a Clockwork Orange: Acquiring second language 
vocabulary through reading. Reading in a Foreign Language, 11, 207-223. 
Peter J.M. Groot Computer Assisted Second Language Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 75 
Hulstijn, J. (1997). Mnemonic methods in foreign language vocabulary learning: Theoretical 
considerations and pedagogical implications. In J. Coady & T. Huckin, Second Language Vocabulary 
Acquisition  ( pp. 203-224). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Hulstijn, J., Hollander, M., & Greidanus, T. (1996). Incidental vocabulary learning by advanced foreign 
language students: The influence of marginal glosses, dictionary use, and reoccurrence of unknown 
words. Modern Language Journal, 80,(3), 327-340. 
Janssen, A.E.P. (1996). CAVOCA. Computer-assisted Vocabulary Acquisition. Unpublished master's 
thesis, University of Utrecht, Faculty of Arts, The Netherlands. 
Jong, A.P.H. de (1998). Between Abandon and Zoom. A Quantitative Study of Required VWO 
Vocabulary. Unpublished master's thesis, University of Utrecht, Faculty of Arts, The Netherlands. 
Knight, S. (1994). Dictionary: The tool of last resort in foreign language reading? A new perspective. 
Modern Language Journal, 78, 285-299. 
Krashen, S. (1989). We acquire vocabulary and spelling by reading: Additional evidence for the input 
hypothesis.  The Modern Language Journal, 73, 440-464. 
Laufer, B. (1989). What percentage of lexis is essential for comprehension? In C. Lauren & M. Nordman 
(Eds.),  Special Language: from humans thinking to thinking machine (pp. 69-75). Clevedon, England: 
Multilingual Matters. 
Laufer, B. (1997). The lexical plight in second language. In J. Coady, & T. Huckin, Second Language 
Vocabulary Acquisition (pp. 20-34). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Mondria, J.A. (1996). Vocabulaireverwerving in het vreemde-talenonderwijs. De effecten van context en 
raden op de retentie [Vocabulary acquisition in foreign language teaching. The effects of context and 
guessing on retention]. Doctoral dissertation. The Netherlands: Groningen University Press. 
Mondria, J.A., & Wit-de Boer, M. (1991). The effects of contextual richness on the guessability and the 
retention of words in a foreign language. Applied Linguistics 12, 249-267. 
Nagy, W.E., & Herman, P.A. (1987). Breadth and depth of vocabulary knowledge: Implications for 
acquisition and instruction. In M.G. McKeown & M. Curtis (Eds.), The nature of vocabulary acquisitio 
(pp. 19-35). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Nation, I.S.P. (1990). Teaching & Learning Vocabulary. Boston: Heinle & Heinle. 
Nation, P. (1993). Vocabulary size, growth and use. In R. Schreuder & B. Weltens (Eds.), The Bilingual 
Lexicon (pp. 115-134). Amsterdam: Benjamins. 
Nep, W. (1998). Computer ondersteunde woordverwerving in de tweede fase [Computer assisted 
vocabulary acquisition at higher levels]. Unpublished master's thesis, University of Utrecht, IVLOS 
[Teacher training department], The Netherlands. 
Prince, P. (1996). Second language vocabulary learning: the role of context versus translations as a 
function of proficiency. The Modern Language Journal, 80, 478-493. 
Schneider, V.I., Healy, A.F., & Bourne, L.E. (1999). Contextual Interference Effects in Foreign Language 
Vocabulary Acquisition and Retention. In A.F. Healy & L.E. Bourne (Eds.), Foreign Language Learning 
(p. 89). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Singleton, D. (1999). Exploring the Second Language Mental Lexicon. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Sternberg, R.J. (1987). Most vocabulary is learned from context. In M.G. McKeown & M. Curtis (Eds.), 
The nature of vocabulary acquisition (pp. 89-105). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Peter J.M. Groot Computer Assisted Second Language Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 76 
Tulving, E., & Thomson, D.M. (1973). Encoding specificity and retrieval processes in episodic memory. 
Psychological Review, 80, 352-373. 
Watanabe, Y. (1997). Input, intake and retention: effects of increased processing on incidental learning of 
foreign language vocabulary. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 19, 287-307. 
Wijbenga, A. (1997). Compiling a Dutch University Word List. Unpublished master's thesis. University 
of Utrecht, Faculty of Arts, The Netherlands. 
