Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num2/from_the_editors.html 
September 2000, Volume 4, Number 2 
p. 1 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 2000, ISSN 1094-3501 1 
 
 
FROM THE EDITORS 
 
The Editors are pleased to introduce this special issue of Language Learning & 
Technology dedicated to issues surrounding the relationship between computer 
technologies, literacy practices, and literacy communities. Our special guest editor, Rick 
Kern, has worked long and hard to bring the collection of articles that comprise this 
volume to our readers. In his From the Guest Editor  column he introduces the five 
articles that make up this issue. 
In keeping with the theme of this volume, our On the Net column is appropriately 
entitled "Literacy: Reading on the Net." In it, Jean W. Leloup and Robert Ponterio 
present a survey of foreign language Web sites that offer language learners reading 
materials to help them improve their literacy skills. 
Our Emerging Technologies column further explores the topic of literacies and 
technologies. In "Literacies and Technology Tools/Trends," Bob Godwin-Jones 
describes new electronic resources that make it easier for individuals today to become 
informed users and developers of new media and electronic texts. 
Our Reviews section opens with Mike Ledgerwood's review of CALL: Media, Design, 
and Applications. This anthology includes articles by a variety of well-known CALL 
practitioners and researchers who hail from three continents and represent a diversity of 
backgrounds, interests, and perspectives. 
This issue contains two software reviews: (a) Robert Blake reviews Roberto's 
Restaurant,  a stand-alone PC software package on CD-ROM that offers learners of 
Spanish a simulated face-to-face conversation and a parallel practice session that utilizes 
Speech Recognition technology to evaluate their pronunciation; (b) Jane Boris reviews 
Easy Writer, a PC-based software program designed to help writers identify and correct 
grammar, spelling, and punctuation errors by editing student-produced essays 
We would like to thank all the reviewers of volume 4 of LLT whose expertise and hard 
work have contributed to the quality and success of this volume. 
We hope you will continue supporting our journal by sending us manuscripts, 
commentaries, and reviews, and by taking out a free subscription.  
We are pleased to announce a Call for Papers for a special issue of LLT dedicated to the 
theme of Technology and Teacher Education to be guest edited by Seppo Tella and 
Yong Zhao. 
We look forward to seeing you in January 2001 with a regular issue of LLT. 
We hope you will find this special issue interesting and stimulating. We would like to 
hear from you. Send us  e-mail with your comments and suggestions. 
 
Irene Thompson, Mark Warschauer, and 
 Dorothy Chun, Editors 
Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num2/from_the_editors.html 
September 2000, Volume 4, Number 2 
p. 1 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 2000, ISSN 1094-3501 2 
 
