Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num2/announcements/default.html 
September 2000, Volume 4, Number 2 
pp. 17-23 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 2000, ISSN 1094-3501   17 
 
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS 
This page includes announcements from the organizations sponsoring LLT. More complete listings of 
announcements can be found at the Applied Linguistics Virtual Library, the Agora Language 
Marketplace, and the Centre for Language Teaching and Research's International Conference Schedule. 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource 
Center (NFLRC)  
Less commonly taught languages, particularly those of Asia and the Pacific, are the focus of the 
University of Hawai`i National Foreign Language Resource Center, which engages in research and 
materials development projects and conducts Summer Institutes for language professionals among its 
many activities.  
NEW ON THE HORIZON - The NFLRC is proud to announce that, starting Fall 2000, new courses in 
Chinese and Korean language at the third-year level will be offered by the University of Hawai`i to 
institutions nationwide via the World Wide Web.  
Universities and colleges in need of third-year Chinese and Korean language education resources can 
contract with the University of Hawai`i to receive Web-based, asynchronous instruction for their Chinese 
and Korean language students. The students will pay tuition to, and receive credit from, their home 
institution; the home institution will in turn pay a course delivery fee to UH.  
Last semester, one Web-based course, CHN 399a, ran at the University of Hawai`i. The course was very 
successful: 14 students formed a lively on-line community and cooperated in the completion of a series of 
rigorous learning activities week by week. The activities are a mix of on-line interaction (including 
interaction with and feedback from the instructors), on-line independent learning activities, and off-line 
independent assignments using a CD-ROM for advanced study which was developed previously at the 
University of Hawai`i.  
For more information about our web courses, please visit: http://www.LLL.hawaii.edu/nflrc/399info.html 
Among recent new publications from the UH NFLRC:  
 
 Studies on Korean in Community Schools 
 
The papers in this volume focus on language teaching and learning in Korean community 
schools. Topics covered include childhood bilingualism, Korean grammar, language 
acquisition, children's literature, and language teaching methodology.  [in KOREAN]  
 
 A Communicative Framework for Introductory Japanese Language Curricula 
 
This publication, intended primarily for individual teachers and professional associations 
throughout the United States, proposes guidelines for designing Japanese language curricula 
and provides a framework for teachers who wish to enhance and strengthen the quality of their 
Japanese language instruction.  
 
 Integration of National Standards in a Japanese Language Classroom [video] 
 
This 20-minute video plus guidebook familiarizes pre-service and in-service teachers of 
Japanese with the "five C" goals of the Japanese National Standards and illustrates the concept 
of learning scenarios with classroom examples. The guidebook assists the viewers as well as 
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  18 
supplements the video with additional examples and tips.  
 
 LSEV: Learner Self-Evaluated Videos [video] 
 
Regularly videotaping students' conversations for them to analyze gives them more holistic 
data from which they can learn and improve. This video shows teachers an innovative use of 
technology that enhances classroom interaction, increases students' ability to observe and 
control their learning, and provides teachers with rich data so they can teach to their students' 
needs and levels.  
 
 Shadowing and Summarizing [video] 
 
Shadowing and summarizing are deceptively simple tasks that can greatly enhance learning. 
This video shows a real class going through shadowing and summarizing activities and also 
gives explanations of the rationale and background to help teachers grasp the value inherent in 
shadowing and summarizing.  
 
Check out our many other publications at http://www.LLL.hawaii.ed u/nflrc/publication.html  
 
You may contact the NFLRC at nflrc@hawaii.edu.  
 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education 
and Research (CLEAR)  
 
CLEAR's mission is to promote foreign language education in the United States. To meet its goals, 
CLEAR's projects focus on foreign language research, materials development, and teacher training.  
FOREIGN LANGUAGE RESEARCH  
•  Acquisition of Prosody by English-Speaking Learners of French 
•  Feedback and Interaction 
•  Longitudinal Analysis of Foreign Language Writing 
•  Longitudinal Analysis of the Acquisition of German 
MATERIALS DEVELOPMENT  
Products  
•  Business Chinese (CD-ROM) 
•  Foreign Languages: Doors to Opportunity (video and discussion guide) 
•  Pronunciación y fonética  (CD-ROM) 
•  Task-based Communicative Grammar Activities for Japanese and Thai (workbook) 
•  Test Development (workbook and video) 
Coming Soon!  
•  Business Language Packets for High School Classrooms (French, German and Spanish) 
•  Extended Oral Proficiency Assessment Modules (German and Russian) 
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  19 
•  Portuguese Pronunciation and Phonetics CD-ROM 
•  Tutorial Manuals (African Languages and Thai) 
 
Newsletter  
 
 CLEAR News is a biyearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research and 
materials. Contact the CLEAR office to join the mailing list or see it on the Web at 
http://clear.msu.edu/clearnews/index.html. 
TEACHER TRAINING  
Summer Institutes  
Every summer, CLEAR offers institutes for foreign language educators to help strengthen and expand 
their teaching skills. CLEAR offers stipends to help defray the institute fees and travel/accommodation 
expenses. For more information about these institutes, see CLEAR's Web site at http://clear.msu.edu.  
2001 Summer Institutes  
•  Using Communicative Activities in a Grammar-Based Curriculum (June 20-23) 
•  Putting Your Course Online (June 26-30) 
•  Making a Language-Learning CD-ROM: Introductory Techniques (July 10-14) 
•  Making a Language-Learning CD-ROM: Advanced Techniques (July 17-21) 
•  Promoting Student Motivation and Interest in Foreign Languages (July 22-24) 
•  Using Authentic Materials in the Foreign Language Classroom (July 25-28) 
 
On-Site Technology Training Workshops  
Last year, CLEAR began offering technology training workshops to foreign language educators at their 
home institutions. The workshops are tailored to fit the needs of the participants and the technology 
available at their institutions. Once again this year, CLEAR is offering these workshops. For more 
information, contact Jane Ozanich at ozanichj@msu.edu.  
Visit CLEAR's Web site (http://clear.msu.edu) or contact the office (517-432-2286 / clear@msu.edu) for 
more information. 
Apprentissage des Langues et Systèmes d'Information et de 
Communication (ALSIC) 
 
ALSIC (Language Learning and Information and Communication Systems) is an electronic journal in 
French for researchers and practitioners in fields related to applied linguistics, didactics, 
psycholinguistics, educational sciences, computational linguistics, and computer science. 
The journal gives priority to papers from the French-speaking community and/or in French, but it also 
regularly invites papers in other languages so as to strengthen scientific and technical exchanges between 
linguistic communities that too often remain separate. The editorial board of ALSIC invites you to contact 
them for any prospective contributions at the following electronic address: alsic@lifc.univ-fcomte.fr. 
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  20 
The Australian Technology Enhanced Language Learning Consortium 
(ATELL) 
 
Contacts: Dr Mike Levy, The University of Queensland (mlevy@lingua.arts.uq.edu.au) 
 Prof. Roly Sussex, The University of Queensland (sussex@lingua.arts.uq.edu.au) 
 
ATELL is an informal collaboration of Australian language teachers involved in technology-enhanced 
language learning and teaching. 
 
It has recently been moved to The University of Queensland, where Dr. Mike Levy and Professor Roly 
Sussex are developing the concept in collaboration with Mr. Greg Dabelstein, coordinator of the CALL 
special interest group of the Association of Modern Language Teachers' Associations of Australia 
(AFMTLA). We intend to establish a network of complementary and collaborating resources for teachers 
and learners in the TELL domain in schools and tertiary institutions. 
 
There will be a Web site, which will include information, collaboration and resources such as: 
 •  a register of Australian TELL experts 
 •  links to other sites with TELL-related information and materials 
 •  links to reviews of hardware, software, courseware 
 •  a section for FAQs (Frequently Asked Questions) 
 •  what's new — ideas, research, materials 
 •  a register of projects, current and past, in TELL research, development, implementation 
 •  software modules, libraries and related resources for developers 
 •  audio and video files for language learning support 
 •  policies and discussion 
 •  special interest groups 
 
In addition, we are reviving the ATELL mailing list, whose e-mail location is atell@lingua.arts.uq.edu.au. 
 
ATELL is supported by the Language Laboratory at the University of Queensland. 
Center for Advanced Research on Language Acquisition, 
University of Minnesota (CARLA) 
 
 
CARLA is one of nine National Language Resource Centers whose role is to improve the nation's 
capacity to teach and learn foreign languages effectively. Launched in 1993 with funding from the 
national Title VI Language Resource Center program of the U.S. Department of Education, CARLA's 
mission is to study multilingualism and multiculturalism, to develop knowledge of second language 
acquisition, and to advanced the quality of second language teaching, learning, and assessment by 
conducting research and action projects sharing research-based and other forms of knowledge across 
disciplines and education systems extending, exchanging, and applying this knowledge in the wider 
society.  
CARLA's research and action initiatives include a focus on: the articulation of language instruction, 
content-based language teaching through technology, culture and language studies, less commonly taught 
languages, language immersion education, second language assessment, second language learning 
strategies, and technology and second language learning.  
To share its latest research and program opportunities with language teachers around the country, 
CARLA offers the following resources: a summer institute program for teachers; a database which lists 
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  21 
where less commonly taught languages are taught throughout the country; listservs for teachers of less 
commonly taught languages and immersion educators; a working paper series; conferences and 
workshops; and a battery of instruments in French, German, and Spanish for assessing learners' 
proficiency in reading, writing, speaking, and listening at the Intermediate-Low level on the ACTFL 
scale.  
On May 17-19, 2001, CARLA will sponsor the Second International Conference on Language Teacher 
Education which will bring together teacher educators from a variety of language teaching contexts to 
discuss and share research, theory, and best practices and to initiate and sustain meaningful professional 
dialogue across languages, levels, and settings.  
Check out these and other CARLA resources on the CARLA website at http://carla.acad.umn.edu.  
The Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL)  
News from the ERIC Clearinghouse on Languages and Linguistics:  
 
Visit the new "Directory of Resources for Foreign Language Programs" at 
http://www.cal.org/ericcll/ncbe/fldirectory. An online, searchable database, the directory includes national 
associations, professional organizations, state foreign language offices, funders, publishers of language 
learning materials, centers, clearinghouses, instructional materials Web sites, online publications, 
databases, regional conferences, and listservs. Also new on ERIC/CLL's Web site is "What Teachers 
Need to Know about Language" by Lily Wong Fillmore and Catherine E. Snow. The paper outlines the 
reasons educators need to know about language, the kinds of knowledge about language that they need, 
and an inventory of courses and course topics. Read the paper on the Web at 
http://www.cal.org/ericcll/teachers.pdf.  
 
News from NCLE:  
 
"NCLE Resource Collections: Learning Disabilities and Adult ESL" is the first in a series of resource 
collections that will be developed and published on the NCLE Web site. These collections will act as 
gateways to information on specific topics in adult ESL. NCLE has also published three new FAQs and 
two new digests on adult ESL. Visit the "What's New" section of NCLE's site at 
http://www.cal.org/ncle/whatnew.htm for links to these and other publications.  
 
ESL Standards Project News:  
 
"Training Others to Use the ESL Standards: A Professional Development Manual" is a manual created for 
staff developers, teacher trainers, teacher education faculty, and others who deliver pre- and in-service 
programs to practicing teachers. The book is one in a series of publications on CAL's ESL standards work 
in collaboration with the Teachers of English to Speakers of Other Languages (TESOL). Contact TESOL 
at http://www.tesol.org to order.  
- 24 -  
 
The Center for Applied Linguistics promotes and improves the teaching and learning of languages, 
identifies and solves problems related to language and culture, and serves as a resource for information 
about language and culture. CAL is a private, nonprofit organization that carries out a wide range of 
activities in the fields of English as a second language, foreign languages, cultural education, and 
linguistics. These activities include research, teacher education, information dissemination, instructional 
design, conference planning, technical assistance, program evaluation, and policy analysis. Publications 
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  22 
include books on language education, online databases of language programs and assessments, curricula, 
research reports, teacher training materials, and print and online newsletters.  
 
CAL builds knowledge and applies it to real world issues through publications, a World Wide Web site at 
http://www.cal.org, "Language and Literacy in Public Life" events, and in many other ways. CAL 
responds to current needs in language education with accurate, accessible, and timely language resources.  
Major CAL projects include the following:  
•  ERIC Clearinghouse on Languages and Linguistics 
•  National Clearinghouse for ESL Literacy Education 
•  Refugee Service Center 
•  PreK-12 School Services Center (contact http://www.cal.org/schoolservices for information). 
CAL collaborates with other language education organizations on the following projects:  
•  Center for Research on Education, Diversity, & Excellence 
•  Improving Foreign Languages in the Schools Project of the Northeast and Islands Regional 
Laboratory at Brown University 
•  National Capital Language Resource Center 
•  National K-12 Foreign Language Resource Center 
•  National Network for Early Language Learning 
For more information about CAL projects and services, visit http://www.cal.org. 
Computer Assisted Language Instruction Consortium 
(CALICO) 
 
Since its inception in 1983, CALICO has served as an international forum for language teachers who 
want to develop and utilize the potential of advanced technology to support their teaching and research 
needs. Through its Annual Symposia, Special Interest Groups (SIGs), CALICO Journal, CALICO 
Monograph Series, CALICO Resource Guide, and numerous other publications, CALICO provides both 
leadership and perspective in the ever-changing field of computer-assisted instruction. 
The strength of CALICO derives from the enthusiasm, creativity, and diversity of its members. It 
comprises language teachers and researchers from universities, military academies, community colleges, 
K-12 schools, government agencies, and commercial enterprises. To learn more about CALICO activities 
and how to participate in them, visit the CALICO homepage at http://www.calico.org. 
 
European Association for Computer Assisted Language 
Learning (EUROCALL)  
EUROCALL is an association of language teaching professionals from Europe and worldwide aiming to 
 • Promote the use of foreign languages within Europe  
 • Provide a European focus for all aspects of the use of technology for language learning  
 • Enhance the quality, dissemination, and efficiency of CALL materials  
We also disseminate information via the ReCALL Journal and other publications, organise special 
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  23 
interest meetings and annual conferences, and work towards the exploitation of electronic 
communications systems. For those involved in education and training, EUROCALL provides 
information and advice on all aspects of the use of technology for language learning. 
Forthcoming EUROCALL conferences:  
 • EUROCALL 2001, University of Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 30 August to 1 September 2001  
For full details, contact us at  http://www.hull.ac.uk/cti/eurocall.htm. 
International Association for Language Learning 
Technology (IALL) 
 
Established in 1965, IALL is an organization of professionals in a variety of fields who are committed to 
supporting and extending language learning, teaching, and research through the use of technology. Its 
members include directors and staff of language labs, resource or media centers and grant projects, 
language teachers at all levels, developers and vendors of hardware and software, and interested others.  
IALL offers biennial conferences, regional groups and meetings, the LLTI listserv (Language Learning 
and Technology International), publications such as IALL Journal, IALL Lab Design Kit, and IALL Lab 
Management Manual, and a Foreign Language Software Database.  
The 2001 meeting of IALL will be held at Rice University (Houston, TX) on May 23-26. For 
membership, meeting, publication, or listserv information, including contact people, visit the IALL Web 
site at http://iall.net. 
 
