Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num2/from_the_geditor.html 
September 2000, Volume 4, Number 2 
p. 2-4 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 2000, ISSN 1094-3501 2 
 
 
FROM THE GUEST EDITOR 
 
It is a privilege and pleasure to introduce this special issue on "Literacies and 
Technologies." I must begin with a word of explanation about the title. It has been 
recognized in recent years that "literacy" cannot be usefully characterized in blanket 
terms as a universally homogeneous concept, given the great diversity of literacy 
practices that exist across discourse communities. Instead, many scholars have proposed 
that we might more fruitfully think in terms of multiple literacies--roughly defined as 
dynamic, culturally and historically situated practices of using and interpreting diverse 
written (and spoken) texts to fulfill particular social purposes. The plural term is 
particularly apt as we consider literacy practices in relation to shifts in writing 
technologies (here again, plural, since we are concerned with multiple ways of 
fashioning implements, practicing the art and skill of writing, and extracting or 
collecting written materials). Hence the use of plurals in the title. 
Of particular relevance in this issue is the relationship between computer technology and 
literacy practices. As increasing numbers of people rely on computers in their day-to-
day lives, researchers and educators must reconsider a host of questions about how we 
communicate, how we understand notions of authorship and authority, how we gain 
entry into electronically mediated communities, and how we represent ourselves in those 
communities. What does it mean to be "literate" in an age of electronically mediated 
communication? What do historical relationships between technologies and literacy 
practices augur for the computer age? How do notions of "text," "reader," and "writer" 
change as new media, new communities, and new uses of literacy take hold? What kinds 
of meaning-making abilities do people need in order to participate successfully in virtual 
communities? How, and in what contexts, do people acquire these meaning-making 
abilities? What is the role of teachers and educational institutions in fostering the needed 
kinds of abilities? 
These questions shape the three principal themes of this special issue: 
1. Literacy and technological change: the history of relationships between 
technologies of writing and literacy practices and the social dynamics of change 
in literacy technologies 
2. Reading, writing in electronic environments: the emergence of new discourse 
practices and genres in computer-mediated communication; the reframing of 
questions of authorship, authority, and identity; and the acquisition of 
multimedia interpretation and authoring abilities 
3. Pedagogy of electronic literacies: proposed goals of teaching electronic 
literacies within language curricula; the design and implementation of 
appropriate learning tasks; and the evaluation of learner performance 
Addressing the first theme, Denise Murray's "Changing Technologies, Changing 
Literacy Communities?" takes a critical historical perspective on the relationship 
between technologies and literacies. Murray argues on the one hand that technologies 
are not at the root of social or cognitive changes (as people commonly assume), but 
rather they amplify particular values and beliefs that a society already holds. On the 
other hand, she argues that if all tools reflect social values and practices, their full social 
meaning is generally not evident when they are first introduced, but develops only 
through their use in society. Murray takes these as starting points in her discussion of the 
role of computer technology in society in general, and its implications for literacy in 
particular. At the heart of her argument is a conviction that the outcomes of computer-
Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num2/from_the_geditor.html 
September 2000, Volume 4, Number 2 
p. 2-4 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 2000, ISSN 1094-3501 3 
 
 
 
based literacy will be neither inevitable nor ideologically neutral, and that we, as 
educators, hold a special responsibility to understand and to help shape the ideological 
climate that will influence how computers are used in our lives. 
Bridging the first two themes, Cameron Richards ("Hypermedia, Internet 
Communication, and the Challenge of Redefining Literacy in the Electronic Age") takes 
a theoretical perspective on shifts in typologies of discourse, with a particular emphasis 
on hypermedia and computer-mediated communication. Richards argues that 
hypermedia models of electronic discourse that adopt an informational focus are too 
narrowly construed and are plagued by internal contradictions. In an attempt to move 
beyond strict dichotomies (e.g., spoken vs. written language; image vs. text; immediacy 
vs. distantiation; social communion vs. alienation) in the development of typologies of 
network communication, Richards draws on the work of Paul Ricoeur to propose a 
broader, communications-based framework for the analysis of electronic discourse. 
Within this perspective, Richards proposes a dialogical "rhetoric of design" that would 
help us to view literacy as a dialogical process (whatever the mode and medium of 
communication) and to better understand the rhetorical uses and abuses of electronic 
media. 
The third article, "Authenticity and Authorship in the Computer-Mediated Acquisition 
of L2 Literacy," by Claire Kramsch, Francine A'Ness, and Wan Shun Eva Lam, links all 
three themes. Although the authors focus squarely on the theme of reading and writing 
in electronic environments, they do so in terms of a broad theoretical and historical 
context of technological change, and their conclusions have important implications for 
pedagogy. Kramsch, A'Ness, and Lam critically interrogate the stability of two pillars of 
communicative language teaching--authenticity of input and authorship of the language 
use--in the context of computer-mediated language use. They focus their study on two 
virtual environments: a multimedia CD-ROM authored by American college learners of 
Spanish, and the Internet relay chat and Web page of a Chinese high school learner of 
English. The authors argue that as a function of the physical properties of the electronic 
medium and the nature of students' engagement with it, the textual and the social are 
brought into creative tension with each other and language use becomes "verbal art." 
What gets negotiated is not just information, but ultimately "the representation of self 
and other." The authors conclude that as one moves from print literacy to electronic 
literacy the key notions of authenticity and authorship should be reframed in terms of 
agency and identity, and they speculate that computer technology may restore the value 
of role play, theatricality, fictionalization in language learning. 
The final two articles focus on the theme of pedagogy. Loretta Kasper ("New 
Technologies, New Literacies: Focus discipline research and ESL learning 
communities") argues that content-based instruction can be highly effective in helping 
ESL students develop the literacies they need to be successful in academic and 
workforce environments. Drawing on the work of the New London Group and others, 
Kasper describes a "focus discipline research" program in which students are 
encouraged to use English to gather, synthesize, evaluate, and articulate interdisciplinary 
information and knowledge and in which students are sensitized to sociolinguistic 
conventions related to audience and purpose. Kasper describes a classroom study 
designed to evaluate the effectiveness of a content-based pedagogy of focus discipline 
research, and concludes that it has been successful in strengthening ESL learners' 
competence in each of the functional, academic, critical, and electronic literacies 
deemed necessary for a successful academic experience at her institution. 
Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num2/from_the_geditor.html 
September 2000, Volume 4, Number 2 
p. 2-4 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 2000, ISSN 1094-3501 4 
 
 
 
And finally, in "The Role of Tasks in Promoting Intercultural Learning in Electronic 
Learning Networks," Andreas Müller-Hartmann explores what happens when language 
learners from different countries are brought together through the Internet to learn about 
one another's cultures by discussing young adult novels or plays they read in common. 
Presenting a study of individually organized e-mail exchanges between classrooms in 
Germany, the United States, and Canada, Müller-Hartmann focuses in particular on the 
crucial role that teacher-specified tasks play in facilitating 11th and 12th grade high 
school students' learning electronic interaction. The goal of his study was to examine the 
particular ways in which task properties, setting, teacher and learner roles, and the 
structure of learners' e-mail exchanges influenced intercultural learning. 
All five articles in this issue represent a major effort to rethink traditional notions and 
practices, with an end goal of improving our understanding of language learning and 
teaching. I hope that you will enjoy reading them as much as I have, and we look 
forward to your responses. 
 
Richard Kern 
 Guest Editor 
 
 
