Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num2/onthenet/default.html 
September 2000, Volume 4, Number 2 
pp. 5-9 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 2000, ISSN 1094-3501 5 
ON THE NET 
Literacy:  Reading on the Net 
Jean W. LeLoup  
SUNY Cortland  
Robert Ponterio 
SUNY Cortland  
 
Most foreign language (FL) professionals agree that developing reading skills in a second language (L2) 
is of paramount importance in the whole scheme of second language acquisition. First, written texts 
provide a great deal of comprehensible input. Second, many language learners can frequently read at 
levels far more advanced that their speaking abilities indicate (Knutson, 1998). Third, the improvement of 
reading skills and employment of reading strategies also foster development and refinement of literacy 
skills in general. Fourth, reading is a skill that can be maintained after the cessation of formal study 
(Omaggio Hadley, 1993).  
With the proliferation of FL websites on the Internet, language learners can readily find a plethora of 
reading materials to help them improve their literacy skills. For the self-motivated learner, access to target 
language media offers virtually unlimited opportunities to practice reading and increase proficiency. One 
subcategory here is the daily newspaper.  What used to be available only as realia carefully brought back 
from trips abroad, laminated or photocopied and displayed or employed for classroom use, is now readily 
accessible on a daily basis on the Internet. On-line newspapers provide daily access to new, up-to-date, 
and interesting reading material from practically every country in the world. Several sites on the web 
provide links to newspapers and magazines around the world.  
 
 
This site allows the reader to browse by region and media category, including newspapers, magazines, 
city guides, radio, and even television. Listings are quite extensive. France, for example, has 26 
newspapers online; Ecuador, 10; Argentina, 40; Russia, 11; Sweden, 48; Germany, 64; Kenya, 3; Japan, 
54; China, 8.  Even Brunei and Tahiti are represented (1 each).  
 
The Inkternational News Links is another source for online news links. It contains major international 
news links as well as links to international weather sites.  
Jean W. LeLoup and Robert Ponterio On the Net: Literacy: Reading on the Net... 
 
Language Learning & Technology Journal 6 
 
While these sites do provide access to current information through various media types, language learners 
needing more structure may not benefit fully from their use without some guidance from a FL instructor 
and the implementation of planned, meaningful activities. Not a criticism of these sites, they simply do 
not provide the language support that helps non-natives develop reading proficiency. The Web, with its 
interactive capabilities, is an ideal medium for providing such support through the annotation of texts, but 
very few sites using this strategy are available as yet.  
 
One example of using annotation to assist in reading comprehension and L2 acquisition is a site created 
by Dr. Barbara Kuczun Nelson at Colby College:  
 
  
The popular song, "Ojalá que llueva café" by Juan Luis Guerra of the Dominican Republic, is the vehicle 
in this activity which promotes literacy and provides an opportunity for the language learner to engage in 
a reading exercise that uses meaningful language. The words of the text that are glossed appear in a 
different color and are active links to cues for meaning. Unlike typical WWW links that bring the viewer 
to a new page, clicking on these links makes the cues appear within the original page so that the text 
being read remains visible to the reader while the cue is displayed.  
 
The cues that appear when the reader clicks on the glossed vocabulary take various forms. Some are text 
explanations only, generally using a combination of target language and English words. Others are 
pictorial representations of the meaning of the word or phrase.  
 
   
 
Jean W. LeLoup and Robert Ponterio On the Net: Literacy: Reading on the Net... 
 
Language Learning & Technology Journal 7 
 
Still others employ previously glossed vocabulary in a target language sentence to illustrate the sense of 
the phrase.  
 
  All cues are closed by clicking. The text and concomitant audio representation are divided into 
reasonable portions for presentation in a language classroom. The language learner can readily assimilate 
these short portions with the assistance of the glosses and the accompaniment of the music. The author 
has also provided a full translation of the text in case of any doubts.  
In addition to the cultural references glossed in the text, a "foto tour" is available to provide even more 
connections to the target language culture depicted in the lyrics.  
 
Jean W. LeLoup and Robert Ponterio On the Net: Literacy: Reading on the Net... 
 
Language Learning & Technology Journal 8 
 Finally, the author has created a series of grammar activities which coincide with the text, in particular, 
the use of subjunctive. This rather complex aspect of Spanish grammar is thus presented in a meaningful 
context and hopefully absorbed better by the language learner.  
 
 
We can see that such rich interactive tools can make the Web a powerful aid in developing FL reading 
skills. These tools are made possible through the use of Dynamic HTML and JavaScript which together 
modify the way the links work. Normally a WWW link appears as underlined text in a different color 
from that of the main text. The color varies depending on whether the link has been followed. The result 
of clicking on an ordinary link is that the original page disappears as it is replaced by a new page. 
Dynamic HTML lets us modify the appearance of links to make the difference between the linked text 
and the main text less distracting to the reader. In the case of the "Ojalá que llueva café" page, the linked 
text is not underlined and the color does not change when the text is clicked. A JavaScript utility alters the 
function of the link by allowing new information appear without making the text disappear. In this case, 
the cues appear in a "layer," which is an HTML structure representing an area that appears to be 
Jean W. LeLoup and Robert Ponterio On the Net: Literacy: Reading on the Net... 
 
Language Learning & Technology Journal 9 
superimposed on the main page. Cues appear and disappear as the layers are changed from visible to 
invisible.  
Slightly different techniques can be used to provide similar features. In a page by one of the authors of 
this column the song "J'ai tout quitté pour toi" by Patricia Kaas is presented for study at the beginning 
level. In this case, the links are made less distracting by using underlining but making links the same 
color as the rest of the text. Clicking on one of these links makes a cue appear in a new window, though 
the window containing the original text remains visible to the reader. Thus, similar if somewhat different 
aspects of HTML and JavaScript are used to accomplish similar goals in these two sites.  
One problem for the teacher wishing to make such annotated texts available to students is the issue of 
copyright. In these cases the purpose of the pages is clearly pedagogical and care has been taken to 
prevent the copying of the songs which has become such a concern in many mp3 Internet sites. On the 
"Ojalá que llueva café" page, the song has been cut up into small segments and the author has been in 
contact with the publisher about the project. On the "J'ai tout quitté pour toi" page the music is not 
available outside the local language lab. Thus in both cases the music cannot be simply downloaded from 
the site as is the case on the illegal mp3 sites which have been so much in the news of late.  
The Web is a great source of material for extensive reading that is so important for developing literacy, 
but finding texts at an appropriate level for a particular student remains a problem. By adding annotation 
to ease the process, such texts become accessible to a wider audience at a variety of reading levels. As 
more and more texts appear online, we expect that the Internet has the potential to become a highly useful 
extension of our library facilities as we plan programs to develop our students' reading skills. 
    
REFERENCES  
 
Knutson, E. K. (1998, December). Reading with a purpose: Communicative reading. Tasks for the foreign 
language classroom. ERIC Digest [On-line]. Retrieved August 22, 2000, from the World Wide Web: 
http://www.cal.org/ericcll/digest/reading_digest.html.  
Omaggio Hadley, A. (1993). Teaching language in context. Boston: Heinle & Heinle. 
 
