Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num2/kasper/default.html 
September 2000, Volume 4, Number 2 
pp. 96-116 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 2000, ISSN 1094-3501       96 
NEW TECHNOLOGIES, NEW LITERACIES: 
FOCUS DISCIPLINE RESEARCH AND ESL LEARNING COMMUNITIES 
Loretta F. Kasper  
Kingsborough Community College/CUNY 
ABSTRACT 
This paper describes a classroom study of a content-based instructional model that engages high 
intermediate1 ESL students in sustained content study within collaborative learning communities 
and uses information technology resources to hone linguistic, academic, socioaffective, and 
metacognitive skills through an activity called focus discipline research (Kasper, 1998a). The 
paper describes how focus discipline research derives from the principles of cognitive learning 
theory and second language acquisition research and how it incorporates the four critical elements 
of a pedagogy of multiliteracies as outlined by The New London Group (1996). The paper goes 
on to detail the study, illustrating how pedagogical activities engaged students in situated 
practice, overt instruction, critical framing, and transformed practice, and it concludes by offering 
both quantitative and qualitative support for the efficacy of focus discipline research in promoting 
"multiliteracies." 
DEFINING AND ACQUIRING LITERACY IN THE AGE OF INFORMATION 
Moll defined literacy as "a particular way of using language for a variety of purposes, as a sociocultural 
practice with intellectual significance" (1994, p. 201). While traditional definitions of literacy have 
focused on reading and writing, the definition of literacy today is more complex. The process of 
becoming literate today involves more than learning how to use language effectively; rather, the process 
amplifies and changes both the cognitive and the linguistic functioning of the individual in society. One 
who is literate knows how to gather, analyze, and use information resources to solve problems and make 
decisions, as well as how to learn both independently and cooperatively. Ultimately literate individuals 
possess a range of skills that enable them to participate fully in all aspects of modern society, from the 
workforce to the family to the academic community. Indeed, the development of literacy is "a dynamic 
and ongoing process of perpetual transformation" (Neilsen, 1989, p. 5), whose evolution is influenced by 
a person's interests, cultures, and experiences. Researchers have viewed literacy as a multifaceted concept 
for a number of years (Johns, 1997). However, succeeding in a digital, information-oriented society 
demands multiliteracies, that is, competence in an even more diverse set of functional, academic, critical, 
and electronic skills. 
To be considered multiliterate, students today must acquire a battery of skills that will enable them to take 
advantage of the diverse modes of communication made possible by new technologies and to participate 
in global learning communities. Although becoming multiliterate is not an easy task for any student, it is 
especially difficult for ESL students operating in a second language. In their attempts to become 
multiliterate, ESL students must acquire linguistic competence in a new language and at the same time 
develop the cognitive and sociocultural skills necessary to gain access into the social, academic, and 
workforce environments of the 21st century. They must become functionally literate, able to speak, 
understand, read, and write English, as well as use English to acquire, articulate and expand their 
knowledge. They must also become academically literate, able to read and understand interdisciplinary 
texts, analyze and respond to those texts through various modes of written and oral discourse, and expand 
their knowledge through sustained and focused research. Further, they must become critically literate, 
defined here as the ability to evaluate the validity and reliability of informational sources so that they may 
Loretta F. Kasper New Technologies, New Literacies: Focus Discipline Research... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 97 
draw appropriate conclusions from their research efforts. Finally, in our digital age of information, 
students must become electronically literate, able "to select and use electronic tools for communication, 
construction, research, and autonomous learning" (Shetzer, 1998). 
Helping students develop the range of literacies they need to enter and succeed at various levels of the 
academic hierarchy and subsequently in the workforce requires a pedagogy that facilitates and hastens 
linguistic proficiency development, familiarizes students with the requirements and conventions of 
academic discourse, and supports the use of critical thinking and higher order cognitive processes. A large 
body of research conducted over the past decade (see, e.g., Benesch, 1988; Brinton, Snow, & Wesche, 
1989; Crandall, 1993; Kasper, 1997a, 2000a; Pally, 2000; Snow & Brinton, 1997) has shown that content-
based instruction (CBI) is highly effective in helping ESL students develop the literacies they need to be 
successful in academic and workforce environments. 
CONTENT-BASED INSTRUCTION AND LITERACY DEVELOPMENT 
CBI develops linguistic competence and functional literacy by exposing ESL learners to interdisciplinary 
input that consists of both "everyday" communicative and academic language (Cummins, 1981; Mohan, 
1990; Spanos, 1989) and that contains a wide range of vocabulary, forms, registers, and pragmatic 
functions (Snow, Met, & Genesee, 1989; Zuengler & Brinton, 1997). Because content-based pedagogy 
encourages students to use English to gather, synthesize, evaluate, and articulate interdisciplinary 
information and knowledge (Pally, 1997), it also allows them to hone academic and critical literacy skills 
as they practice appropriate patterns of academic discourse (Kasper, 2000b) and become familiar with 
sociolinguistic conventions relating to audience and purpose (Soter, 1990). 
The theoretical foundations supporting a content-based model of ESL instruction derive from cognitive 
learning theory and second language acquisition (SLA) research. Cognitive learning theory posits that in 
the process of acquiring literacy skills, students progress through a series of three stages, the cognitive, 
the associative, and the autonomous (Anderson, 1983a). Progression through these stages is facilitated by 
scaffolding, which involves providing extensive instructional support during the initial stages of learning 
and gradually removing this support as students become more proficient at the task (Chamot & O'Malley, 
1994). Second language acquisition (SLA) research emphasizes that literacy development can be 
facilitated by providing multiple opportunities for learners to interact in communicative contexts with 
authentic, linguistically challenging materials that are relevant to their personal and educational goals 
(see, e.g., Brinton, et al., 1989; Kasper, 2000a; Krashen, 1982; Snow & Brinton, 1997; Snow, et al., 
1989). 
In a 1996 paper published in The Harvard Educational Review, The New London Group (NLG) 
advocated developing multiliteracies through a pedagogy that involves a complex interaction of four 
factors which they called Situated Practice, Overt Instruction, Critical Framing, and Transformed 
Practice. According to the NLG, becoming multiliterate requires critical engagement in relevant tasks, 
interaction with diverse forms of communication made possible by electronic technologies, and 
participation in collaborative learning contexts. Warschauer (1999) concurred and stated that a pedagogy 
of critical inquiry and problem solving that provides the context for "authentic and collaborative projects 
and analyses" (p. 16) that support and are supported by the use of electronic technologies is necessary for 
ESL students to acquire the linguistic, social, and technological competencies key to literacy in a digital 
world. 
According to a 1995 report published by the United States Department of Education, "technology is an 
important enabler for classes organized around complex, authentic tasks" and when "used in support of 
challenging projects, [technology] can contribute to students' sense ... that they are using real tools for real 
purposes." Technology use increases students' motivation as it promotes their active engagement with 
language and content through authentic, challenging tasks that are interdisciplinary in nature (McGrath, 
Loretta F. Kasper New Technologies, New Literacies: Focus Discipline Research... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 98 
1998). Technology use also encourages students to spend more time on task. As they search for 
information in a hyperlinked environment, ESL students benefit from increased opportunities to process 
linguistic and content information. Used as a tool for learning, technology supports a level of task 
authenticity and complexity that fits well with the interdisciplinary work inherent in content-based 
instruction and that promotes the acquisition of multiliteracies. 
THEORY INTO PRACTICE 
These research findings suggest that in our efforts to prepare ESL students for the challenges of the 
academic and workforce environments of the 21st century, we should adopt a pedagogical model that 
incorporates information technology as an integral component and that specifically targets the 
development of the range of literacies deemed necessary for success in a digital, information-oriented 
society. This paper describes a content-based pedagogy, which I call focus discipline research (Kasper, 
1998a), and presents the results of a classroom study conducted to measure the effects of focus discipline 
research on the development of ESL students' literacy skills. 
As described here, focus discipline research puts theory into practice as it incorporates the principles of 
cognitive learning theory, SLA research, and the four components of the NLG's (1996) pedagogy of 
multiliteracies. Through pedagogical activities that provide the context for situated practice, overt 
instruction, critical framing, and transformed practice, focus discipline research promotes ESL students' 
choice of and responsibility for course content, engages them in extended practice with linguistic 
structures and interdisciplinary material, and encourages them to become "content experts" in a subject of 
their own choosing. 
Students work both individually and as members of collaborative learning communities, called focus 
discipline groups, to complete a range of writing assignments of progressive complexity, beginning with 
shorter pieces of two to three pages and culminating in two extended research projects of five to seven 
pages each. As they carry out their research and compose their essays and projects, ESL students become 
familiar with the discourse patterns, rhetorical conventions, and conceptual content of their chosen fields 
of study and learn how to further knowledge by networking with peers and experts in those fields. 
Information technology use is key to the process because the extended research that is integral to 
sustained and focused content study is more effectively carried out when an extensive body of 
instructional and informational resources is available. (Kasper, 2000b). 
Because it promotes close reading and in-depth discussion of salient interdisciplinary issues, focus 
discipline research helps students acquire the linguistic and cognitive skills that they need to succeed in an 
English-speaking academic environment. As students join in collaborative teams to pursue their own 
interests through extended and focused research of content that is personally relevant and important to the 
fulfillment of both academic and professional goals, they effectively build linguistic competency and 
develop the range of skills defined as multiliteracies. 
 
PEDAGOGICAL CONCERNS 
The classroom study described here was designed to measure the efficacy of the focus discipline research 
model in addressing several pedagogical concerns that were especially relevant to students at my college. 
Due to newly implemented university regulations on developmental programs, in order to maintain 
matriculation and full time status, students need to pass institutional reading and writing assessments 
within a period of two semesters. Unfortunately, many ESL students at my college are multiple repeaters 
and their failure rate on institutional assessments is high. Moreover, even those who pass these 
examinations often remain underprepared for the rigors of the mainstream college curriculum, and so 
many never complete their degree programs (see, e.g., Kasper, 1997a, 1998b). 
Loretta F. Kasper New Technologies, New Literacies: Focus Discipline Research... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 99 
Because semesters at my college are only 12 weeks in length, pedagogy was needed to help ESL students 
quickly develop and strengthen the range of skills required to pass institutional reading and writing 
examinations and to enter and succeed in mainstream college courses. To help students meet these needs, 
I developed a content-based pedagogy of focus discipline research designed to target and build 
competence in each of the functional, academic, critical, and electronic literacies deemed necessary for a 
successful academic experience. Evaluating the results of this pedagogical approach was the purpose of 
the present study.  
PARTICIPANTS IN THE STUDY 
The participants in this classroom study were 50 students enrolled in two sections of my ESL 91 course. 
ESL 91 represents the high intermediate level 12 at my college and is an integrated reading/writing course, 
which meets 6 hours per week over a twelve-week semester. The students in my ESL 91 course came 
from a diverse set of linguistic and ethnic backgrounds and were representative of the general ESL 
population at my college. Most of the students were Russian; the remaining students were Haitian, 
Dominican, Asian, Indian, and Arab. 
 
It is important to note that in this classroom study there was no random assignment of subjects. The 
students who participated in the study were those who registered for my two sections of ESL 91. Students 
at my college placed into ESL 91 based on their scores on reading and writing examinations taken upon 
entry into the university. The reading examination is the DTLS (Descriptive Test of Language Skills), a 
45-minute timed reading comprehension examination developed by The College Board (1978). The 
DTLS presents students with a variety of short reading passages, each of which is followed by three to 
five multiple choice items, for a total of 40 questions. The writing examination is the CUNY Writing 
Assessment Test (CWAT). The CWAT gives students 50 minutes to write an expository essay on their 
choice of one of two possible topics. The test is scored according to a six-point scale aimed at defining 
"minimal readiness" for freshman composition; minimal readiness is defined as a score of four or higher 
by two independent raters (CUNY Task Force on Writing, 1983). The students who placed in the ESL 91 
classes involved in the study described here had scored 2-2 on the CWAT and between 18-23 on the 
DTLS; these entry scores are typical and representative of the overall ESL 91 population at my college. 
RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
This study addressed three research questions. First, it examined Whether focus discipline research 
facilitated students' acquisition of the basic literacy skills considered necessary for college level work. For 
the purposes of this study, these basic literacy skills were reading and writing and were quantified by 
student pass rates on separate institutionally mandated reading and writing examinations taken at the end 
of the semester. The study attempted to determine whether focus discipline research had a significant 
impact on student performance, as measured by each of these reading and writing examinations. 
Specifically, when compared with other ESL students at the same level of instruction, did the students 
who engaged in focus discipline research over the course of the twelve-week semester attain significantly 
higher pass rates on the end-of-semester reading and writing assessments? 
The second research question relates to academic promotion. According to departmental and college 
regulations, ESL 91 students who pass both the reading and the writing assessments are able to skip a 
level of instruction. Given these regulations, a pedagogy that enables students to progress more rapidly 
through the developmental sequence offers them a better chance to fulfill their educational goals. The 
second research question therefore was, When compared with other ESL 91 students, are students who 
engage in focus discipline research more likely to pass both reading and writing tests and therefore able to 
skip a level of instruction?  
Loretta F. Kasper New Technologies, New Literacies: Focus Discipline Research... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 100 
Because electronic literacy now counts among the basic skills necessary for success in college and the 
workforce, finding ways to use technology to support curricular objectives has become increasingly 
important. Focus discipline research pedagogy is inherently task-based, student-centered, and project-
oriented and so offers a natural context for the integration of technology into instruction. Unfortunately, 
although many educators have extolled the value of technology in facilitating student performance, little 
research has been done to support this belief (Brown, 2000). For this reason, the present study also 
examined the effect of extensive technology use in focus discipline research. 
Technology was naturally integrated into the course since the students who participated in the study 
described here were also part of a content-based Internet project begun during the semester of the study. 
The project involved students in two sections of ESL 91 taught by the author and two additional classes 
of ESL students, one at a college in Buffalo, New York and the other at a college in Kiev, The Ukraine. 
All of the students participating in the Internet project were at the high intermediate level and they were 
all independently researching and writing about the same focus discipline topics. Although all students 
were doing focus discipline research, the general structure of the courses was not necessarily the same at 
each school and students were subject to different types of assessments. For this reason, only the 
performance of the ESL students at my college (Kingsborough Community College) was considered for 
the purposes of this study. 
The third research question was,  Does technology use in focus discipline research have a significant 
impact on ESL 91 students' performance on tests of reading and writing? Assessing the impact of 
technology on focus discipline research required comparing the performance of students in this study with 
those who had been in my ESL 91 classes in semesters prior to electronic technology resources being 
made available to ESL students. At that time, my focus discipline research pedagogy involved having 
students work in groups, as they did here, but having them use traditional print resources available in the 
college library for their research. The reading texts and writing prompts were the same as those used here, 
as were the institutional assessments that students were required to take at the end of the semester. 
Therefore, assessing the impact of technology on literacy development necessitated a post hoc 
comparison of the scores of ESL 91 students who used information technology resources in their focus 
discipline research with those of students who had used only traditional library resources in their focus 
discipline research. 
Finally, because focus discipline research pedagogy encourages students to assume an active role in the 
learning process, their views on this pedagogy and its relationship to literacy skill acquisition can provide 
valuable insights into, and suggestions for improving, the process. For this reason, students were asked to 
complete online feedback questionnaires at the end of the semester. These feedback questionnaires asked 
students to evaluate the usefulness of focus discipline research, the value of working in groups, and to 
offer their insights on the experience of engaging in extended interdisciplinary study and writing research 
projects. 
FOCUS DISCIPLINE RESEARCH AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF MULTILITERCIES 
Becoming multiliterate requires developing competence in a range of functional, academic, critical, and 
electronic skills. As students become more proficient in each of these skills, they acquire the knowledge 
necessary to attain passing scores on institutional assessments, enter the mainstream academic curriculum, 
and move toward fulfilling their academic and professional goals. As suggested by the NLG (1996), the 
development of multiliteracies requires a pedagogy that incorporates four critical factors: situated 
practice, overt instruction, critical framing, and transformed practice. These principles will be defined 
briefly here and discussed extensively in subsequent sections of this paper. 
The NLG (1996) defined situated practice as "immersion in meaningful practices within a community of 
learners [and experts] who are capable of playing multiple and different roles based on their backgrounds 
Loretta F. Kasper New Technologies, New Literacies: Focus Discipline Research... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 101 
and experiences" (p. 85). Thus, situated practice facilitates literacy development through an authentic 
learning environment that provides direct experience with tasks students value and intellectual stimulation 
from teachers and peers who ask thoughtful questions and provide supportive coaching. 
Overt instruction refers to "active interventions on the part of the teacher and other experts that scaffold 
learning activities. . .[to] allow the learner to gain explicit information. . .when it can most usefully 
organize and guide practice" (p. 86). The goal of overt instruction is to enable the learner to gain 
"conscious awareness of and control over what is being learned," and meeting this goal requires an 
interaction between students and teacher that allows learners "to accomplish a task more complex than 
they could accomplish on their own" (NLG, 1996, p. 86).  
Critical framing encourages learners to evaluate what they have learned, to constructively critique that 
learning, and to creatively extend and apply it to new contexts (NLG, 1996, p. 87). Transformed practice 
is designed to help students simultaneously apply and revise what they have learned and then to put this 
understanding to work in reaching their own goals and fulfilling their own values (NLG, 1996, p. 87). The 
NLG stated that transformed practice requires juxtaposing and integrating "discourses or social identities 
or 'interests' that have historically been at odds" (p. 87) and in so doing creates a certain degree of tension 
in the learner. 
Through activities that engage students in situated practice, overt instruction, critical framing, and 
transformed practice, focus discipline research represents a content-based pedagogy which supports the 
principles advocated by the work of the NLG as it targets the literacy skills necessary for students' success 
in the academic and workforce environments of the 21st century. It is important to note here that none of 
these four factors alone is sufficient; each is necessary for effective literacy learning to take place. The 
following sections of this paper will detail how the focus discipline research model used in the study 
described here incorporated these four pedagogical principles. Each of the four pedagogical principles 
will be discussed separately; however, it is important to note that they often worked interactively with 
each other in many of the activities described. 
Situated Practice 
In this study, focus discipline research incorporated situated practice in a number of ways. From the 
subject areas studied in the course, 3 students chose one focus discipline to research in depth for the entire 
semester. Students based their choice on personal interest and/or college major, so that they were invested 
in a personally meaningful and important learning experience. The focus disciplines chosen by students in 
this study were psychology, computer science, biology, sociology, diet and nutrition, business, and 
physical anthropology. All of the students said that they had chosen a focus discipline that was related to 
their future career plans. Students who chose to study the same focus discipline worked together in 
collaborative learning communities called focus discipline groups. 
 
Focus discipline tasks were designed to provide ample opportunities for ESL students to use English to 
gather, synthesize, and evaluate a range of informational resources and to construct responses using 
appropriate discourse patterns. Each student produced a series of written reports and a research project, 
and each focus discipline group produced a group research project. All written work was based upon 
assigned topics within their focus discipline and required students to define problems, to examine 
evidence collected from a variety of sources, and to make objective judgments on the basis of their 
extended focus discipline research. 
Although it is possible for students to engage in focus discipline research without the assistance of 
electronic technologies, these technologies offer students unique benefits and support the curricular 
objectives inherent in this content-based pedagogical model. Technology makes available a vast range of 
resources at the click of a mouse. This vast range of resources exposes students to a variety of 
Loretta F. Kasper New Technologies, New Literacies: Focus Discipline Research... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 102 
perspectives on key interdisciplinary issues. Students are then guided by the teacher through instructional 
activities that encourage them to take a critical stance on the issues presented. Here, situated practice 
interacts with overt instruction and critical framing to provide students with a powerful context for 
developing critical literacy skills as they read and evaluate the resources they find on the Internet. 
Moreover, technology provides the means and the motivation for students to share resources and discuss 
their research with an audience outside of the immediate physical classroom. 
Because it offers so many benefits to focus discipline research and because these ESL 91 classes were 
part of a content-based Internet project, technology was a key component of the present study. Students in 
this study were required to use Internet technologies to complete their focus discipline tasks. Each student 
was given an Internet account by the college.4 Students used these accounts to subscribe to CBESL, an e-
mail discussion list set up specifically for this course and the Internet project. They were required to post 
a minimum of one message per week to CBESL. The format of these postings was sometimes student-
chosen, sometimes teacher-directed. Student-chosen postings took the form of requests for information 
about topics studied, suggestions for how to search for information, descriptions of resources found and 
responses to posts from other students, either those in one of my ESL 91 classes or those at the other 
colleges participating in the Internet project. Teacher-directed postings required students to summarize 
the results of their research on a given topic or to compose a reader response to student essays that had 
been published on the course Web page. 
ESL students in this study honed English language skills, built their overall knowledge base, and 
developed multiliteracies through their use of text-based computer-mediated communication (CMC), 
intensive reading and research using Internet hypertext documents, and their production of written essays 
and individual and group research projects based on their research efforts. As these students conducted 
research in their focus disciplines, they made extensive use of hypertext documents available on the 
Internet. Internet hypertext facilitated students' acquisition of complex knowledge by providing easy 
access to multiple cross-references on related topics across several documents, or screens, enabling a 
natural juxtaposition of ideas, and allowing students a flexible means of exploring those ideas. (Tierney, 
Kieffer, Whalin, Desai, Moss, Harris, & Hopper, 1997). As students explored hyperlinks to produce a text 
determined by their own interests and purposes, they actively engaged in a process of acquiring and 
creating complex knowledge (Warschauer, 1999). Students' acquisition of knowledge was further 
facilitated through graphic illustrations on Web pages which helped to consolidate and concretize abstract 
content-based concepts by encouraging multi-modal processing of both visual and verbal cues as 
presented on the Internet page (Chun & Plass, 1997).5  
As outlined by the NLG (1996), situated practice advocates that students and teachers play multiple roles 
during the learning process. In keeping with the pedagogical principles underlying focus discipline 
research, both the instructor and the students in this study assumed multiple roles, and sometimes 
alternated these roles. In the context of the focus discipline research pedagogy investigated here, the 
instructor was both a knowledge sharer and a resident expert in the subject areas studied in the course. 
The instructor structured the activities, guided the students in carrying them out, and was a facilitator of 
the learning process. For example, the focus discipline research topics used in this study were instructor-
generated; the prompts were designed to provide students with a clear direction for their research. In 
keeping with the goal of using technology to support and facilitate curricular objectives, each focus 
discipline assignment was posted to the course Web page. In addition, weekly assignments were e-mailed 
to the class. Because some students were not familiar with Web browsers when they began the course, 
these e-mails often contained hyperlinks. This made it easier for all students to access the online course 
materials. 
In the context of focus discipline research, the instructor's role went beyond that of a knowledge provider; 
rather, the instructor regularly joined each focus discipline group as a "colleague" who listened and posed 
questions within the context of discussions begun by the students. Therefore, the instructor became "a 
Loretta F. Kasper New Technologies, New Literacies: Focus Discipline Research... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 103 
sage who guided both on the stage and on the side." In the focus discipline research model, the instructor 
is "a sage" in that he or she has background in the subject areas studied, has researched and gathered 
references in each discipline, and therefore is able to offer students both structure and guidance. Yet, 
rather than creating knowledge for students in a teacher-centered model, here the instructor joined 
students as they discussed and worked through readings, encouraging them to discover and expand 
knowledge through their own efforts and providing them with constructive feedback throughout the 
process. 
Like the instructor, the students in this study assumed multiple roles through their participation in focus 
discipline groups. The focus discipline group offered ESL students the opportunity to become part of a 
diverse community of learners who worked together to construct knowledge. In the study described here, 
students began by researching topics on their own and then joining with the group to summarize and 
evaluate each of the sources found. The learning environment created through collaborative focus 
discipline research encouraged students to view their peers as additional knowledge resources, each who 
brought his or her own unique perspective on the issues and topics studied (as well as his or her own 
personal reason for studying them). Multiliteracies were developed as students engaged in social and 
academic discourse with focus discipline group members, elaborating and reflecting on both their own 
ideas and those of their peers. 
Computer-mediated-communication (CMC) networks afforded further possibilities for communication 
and knowledge representation by making it possible for students to share their thoughts with a global 
community, thereby extending the collaborative learning context beyond the physical classroom. To 
enable students to take full advantage of the power of extended learning communities, Luke and Elkins 
(1998) suggested that literacy education train students to deal with emergent technologies and 
environments, "preparing them for new forms of social participation and linking their voices and 
communities with those of their counterparts in other cultures and worlds" (p. 6). 
As part of their focus discipline research, the ESL students in this study developed skill in using a variety 
of discourses key to multiliteracies through their participation in e-mail and electronic bulletin board 
discussions via CBESL. These electronic discussions provided students with a context in which to 
collaborate not only with peers in the physical classroom, but also with students in other parts of the 
country and the world. As explained previously, these other students, some as far away as Kiev, were also 
researching and writing about the same focus discipline topics. Technology therefore expanded the peer 
network and the focus discipline group and created a global learning community. Their participation in 
CMC networks provided these ESL students with valuable informational resources, an opportunity to join 
point-counterpoint debate on issues of interest to the learning community, and an additional source of 
feedback that they could use to monitor and assess present and future learning. 
The power of collaborative learning communities, both within and beyond the physical classroom, is well 
documented in the research (see, e.g., Bruffee, 1993; Crook, 1994; Gabelnick, MacGregor, Matthews, & 
Smith, 1990; Kahn, 1999). Through a process of collaborative, constructive, and creative activities, these 
learning communities provide the context for students to create, share, apply, and critique their own new 
knowledge, rather than just absorb knowledge created by others. Allowing students to participate actively 
in their own learning and to play alternating roles as knowledge receivers, knowledge providers, and 
knowledge designers (Kahn, 1999) increases self-efficacy, fosters their active processing of 
interdisciplinary themes and concepts, encourages them to reconstruct and accommodate existing ideas 
and make personal connections with learning, and builds metacognitive knowledge associated with 
enhanced task performance (Kasper, 1997b). Additionally, membership in both face-to-face and 
electronic learning groups teaches ESL students community norms and helps them develop a sense of 
personal efficacy and social affiliation (Sproull, 1998). According to the NLG (1996), such collaborative 
learning communities facilitate literacy development because "when learners juxtapose [their differences], 
they gain substantively in metacognitive and metalinguistic abilities and in their ability to reflect critically 
Loretta F. Kasper New Technologies, New Literacies: Focus Discipline Research... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 104 
on complex systems and their interactions" (p. 69). Here it is important to note that the interaction of 
situated practice with overt instruction (which provides the metalanguage) and critical framing (which 
introduces the critical reflection) is necessary for students to learn how to take a critical stance on the 
issues under discussion. 
Overt Instruction 
There are two main ways in which overt instruction was an integral feature of the content-based model 
described here. First, in this study general class activities were designed to teach students vocabulary and 
language structures and to provide them with day-to-day practice in complex interdisciplinary texts. 
These general class lessons provided overt instruction on how to dissect a text, search for clues to 
meaning, and compose cogent responses to inferential questions and essay prompts. Moreover, to provide 
each of the students in the course with a foundation in the focus disciplines chosen for study by 
individuals, the entire class read and responded to essays written about the chosen subject areas. In this 
way the entire class acquired the linguistic and cognitive skills needed to participate in an intelligent 
discussion of each of the individual focus disciplines studied in the course. 
Second, the focus discipline research topics were instructor generated and progressively structured into a 
series of several short papers and two longer research projects. The short (i.e., two to three page) papers 
were designed to develop language and literacy skills as students gradually built a base of knowledge in 
their focus discipline. Here students benefitted from the interactive effects of overt instruction and 
transformed practice as their developing base of knowledge was further expanded through in-class or 
online focus discipline group discussion of salient issues under study. Their growing base of knowledge 
provided the foundation for the two longer assignments. In the first, each individual student was 
responsible for writing a five to seven page research paper on an assigned topic within the focus 
discipline. The second research project was a group effort; each member of the focus discipline group was 
required to research and write about one related aspect of the assigned topic. Working together, the group 
then synthesized these writings into a coherent research report. 
Students produced multiple drafts of each piece of writing, both long and short. Students received both 
peer and instructor feedback, and with each subsequent revision, worked to express themselves more 
fluently, clearly, and correctly. Students in this study made extensive use of Internet resources to help 
them develop linguistic accuracy and build writing skills. The  course Web page provided students with 
links to a variety of sites, for example, Dave's ESL Café, EnglishPractice.com, and The Purdue Online 
Writing Lab. Students were able to access these sites at any time and so had readily available a large body 
of interactive exercises that they could use to target and work on the specific forms and structures they 
found problematic. Students in the study said that they enjoyed using these computer-based resources 
because of the greater range of items with which to practice, the interactivity and immediate feedback 
provided, and the chance to repeatedly return to tackle difficult or confusing items again and again. 
Students' efforts to improve the clarity and linguistic accuracy of their written work were well rewarded. 
The final versions of the focus discipline essays and research projects produced by students in this study 
were extremely thoughtful and coherent examples of strong academic writing which demonstrated not 
only improved literacy skills, but also a growing ability to critically frame and analyze intra- and extra-
systematic relationships. For example, in a focus discipline project on eating disorders, a young woman 
from Poland, who had chosen diet and nutrition as her focus discipline, presented a detailed analysis of 
the causes and effects of anorexia and bulimia. In her analysis, she examined cross-disciplinary 
relationships as she articulated the social, biological, and psychological factors involved in eating 
disorders. She also explained how she had applied her newly gained knowledge of eating disorders to 
events in her own life. She expressed how her research had led her to a greater awareness of the 
possibility that one of her friends might be suffering from an eating disorder and how she was able to help 
this friend recognize her problem. 
Loretta F. Kasper New Technologies, New Literacies: Focus Discipline Research... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 105 
Student writing was published on the course Web page, and students were encouraged to submit their 
revised pieces for publication. Most students in the class were eager to do this, and these writings became 
additional course texts used to expand interdisciplinary knowledge. Students were asked to read and 
respond to each other's writings published on the Web. They were given a list of reader response 
questions to answer and were asked to post their responses to the course discussion list, CBESL. 
Technology here provided the student authors not only with the means for having their work read by a 
wide audience, but also with the opportunity to discuss it with that same audience. The reader responses 
exposed the student authors to various perspectives on their writing and research. The responses 
introduced critical framing by giving student writers a chance to rethink their positions as they opened up 
an electronic dialogue with a variety of readers other than the instructor. Composing the responses also 
forced students to view writing from the perspective of a reader and helped to make them aware of the 
elements that make writing clear or confusing. 
Both general course and focus discipline research activities were structured to help students develop 
research and argumentation skills. Overt instruction was used to teach them how to search for 
information, evaluate resources, construct and support a point of view, and cite references used. 
Scaffolding was provided through a guided research activity, as well as through instructor and peer 
feedback. The guided research activity provided students with a series of questions which taught them not 
only how to search for information on the Internet, but also how to evaluate the resources they found 
there. After completing their search, students shared the resources found and their responses to them with 
the instructor and the peer group, and received feedback from both sources. 
As described here, overt instruction is key to students' success on the focus discipline research task, since 
as Horowitz (1986) noted, left on their own to produce a series of academic research papers, some, if not 
all, might find the task an insurmountable challenge to their English language skills. However, because 
focus discipline research represents a progressive and highly structured task, with a good deal of 
scaffolding, students' success is facilitated. Students in this study learned the vocabulary and language 
structures necessary to comprehend informational resources and to articulate the results of their research. 
They learned how to evaluate the quality of those resources. Finally, by discussing their research with 
peers, both in class and online, students were able to discover connections between concepts and issues in 
the discipline(s) being studied. In this way, they learned how to build and articulate knowledge and 
became more aware of effective learning strategies. 
Critical Framing 
As students completed each of their focus discipline essays and projects, they consistently were required 
to define problems, examine evidence collected from a variety of sources, and make objective judgments 
on the basis of their extended research. The entire process offered students multiple opportunities and 
contexts in which to synthesize and critically frame knowledge. 
Students in this study were asked to analyze and articulate their understanding of how intra and/or 
extrasystematic relationships applied to salient issues in the focus discipline; this engendered knowledge 
synthesis, in which students needed to link together information gleaned from the various texts read and 
written in the course. Such knowledge synthesis requires a deeper level of information processing and, 
through spreading activation, promotes the creation of a richly connected cognitive network of 
interdisciplinary associations (Anderson, 1983b) that can be used to facilitate future learning (Nelson & 
Schmid, 1989). 
As students in this study examined intra- and extra-systematic relationships, they revisited not only what 
they had learned about their own focus discipline, but also what they had learned, through class readings 
and group discussions, about other focus disciplines studied in the course. For example, students who 
chose to study business as a focus discipline were asked to research and analyze key issues influencing 
sales and advertising. In one of their focus discipline papers, students considered the effects of a particular 
Loretta F. Kasper New Technologies, New Literacies: Focus Discipline Research... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 106 
advertising medium on the sales of different types of products. Explaining these relationships required 
that students critically analyze issues within and across a number of different disciplines, including 
business, psychology, sociology, technology, and popular culture. 
Articulating critical intra- and extra-systematic relationships encourages students to grapple with "the 
historical, social, cultural, political, ideological, and value-centered relations of particular systems of 
knowledge and social practice" (NLG, 1996, p. 86) and to put focus discipline themes and issues into a 
broader context. When students are able to put these themes and issues into a broader context, when they 
are able to reframe and view them through the lens of other disciplines, they enter a higher stage of 
learning. The situated practice and overt instruction that students receive helps them develop the ability to 
engage in transformed practice, as they transfer what they have learned to new and varied contexts and to 
discover intra- and interdisciplinary connections that can be used to facilitate all future learning. 
Transformed Practice 
Empowering ESL students to engage in transformed practice is in fact the ultimate goal of collaborative 
focus discipline research pedagogy as described here. Cummins and Sayers (1995) advised that activities 
that engender a process of critical inquiry within the context of collaborative partnerships provide 
students with a strong foundation for transformed practice by injecting a critical perspective into learning. 
As members of collaborative learning communities, ESL students are encouraged to continually revisit, 
rethink, and often revise their beliefs in response to questions posed by others in the group. This promotes 
a process of critical reflection which is integral to transformed practice. 
Although developing the ability to critically reflect on issues is a goal of literacy education, Imel (1998) 
cautioned that it is sometimes difficult to achieve this goal. Critical reflection requires that the learner 
move beyond "the acquisition of new knowledge and understanding into questioning existing 
assumptions, values, and perspectives" (Cranton, 1996, p. 76). This can be unsettling, particularly in a 
group context, where the learner may be confronted and challenged to examine the extent to which 
personal values affect attitudes, beliefs, and ideas (Imel, 1998). 
 
The critical reflection that accompanies transformed practice forces students to become aware of and to 
challenge their beliefs; this process may be not only challenging but also troubling to ESL learners. To 
facilitate the process, instructors must be sure to support ESL learners as they engage in activities that 
demand critical reflection. Focus discipline study can provide a supportive context through which 
students may develop the ability to engage in critical reflection through their interactions within a 
community of peers "engaged in common practices centered around a specific ... domain of knowledge" 
(NLG, 1996, p. 82). To illustrate, as ESL students, each of the participants in this study was actively 
involved in acquiring a second language, and although none of them had chosen to study linguistics as a 
focus discipline, the principles inherent in effective second language acquisition were both interesting and 
relevant to them in their attempts to build the literacies required for success in college and the workforce. 
For this reason the course incorporated activities that required all students to reflect on the ways in which 
psychological and sociological issues influence language acquisition. They read, discussed, and wrote 
about the way(s) in which individual and group needs influence language use. They were encouraged to 
connect their understanding of these influences to their own experiences as second language learners. 
Doing this required that these ESL students reflect on their place in a new linguistic, social, and cultural 
system, and sometimes raised some difficult issues that they have had to face in pursuing their goals and 
defining their identities. 
As both immigrants to a new country and second language learners, ESL students are forced to critically 
examine and redefine all aspects of self, their social identities transformed in complex ways (Ullman, 
1997). A number of them experienced an abrupt transformation of social identity as they went from being 
Loretta F. Kasper New Technologies, New Literacies: Focus Discipline Research... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 107 
respected professionals in their native country to being students of limited English proficiency. Many 
ESL students are also conflicted in terms of their desire to learn English and be accepted as full members 
of an English-speaking culture, and their desire to maintain a deep and lasting connection to their native 
language and culture. 
As they studied the psychological, sociological, and cultural factors that impact second language 
acquisition, students were encouraged to examine their own experiences and viewpoints. The goal of this 
reflective practice is to help students move beyond a general understanding of the factors involved in 
second language acquisition to a more specific and personal understanding of the influence these factors 
have had on their own lives. As part of the collaborative model described here, each student was 
supported in his or her personal critical reflection by peers who were simultaneously engaged in their own 
process of critical reflection and who were experiencing similar conflicts with regard to their linguistic 
and cultural identities. 
As Scholfield (1995) noted, useful introspection about experiences, including language learning 
experiences, can help students develop metacognitive awareness of the learning process. Studies (see, 
e.g., Devine, Railey, & Boshoff, 1993; Kasper, 1997b; Kellogg, 1994) have shown that developing a 
strong metacognitive knowledge base facilitates second language learning, and according to the work of 
Devine (1993), may play an even more important role than linguistic competence in skills like writing. 
Therefore, incorporating activities that promote transformed practice by encouraging students' critical 
examination of their learning experiences and the results of those experiences can help build the range of 
functional, academic, and critical skills defined here as multiliteracies. 
Students in this study were also actively involved in a process of transformed practice as they worked 
together to research and write the group research project. While designing and composing the group 
project, students had to simultaneously apply and revise what they had learned about their focus discipline 
to accommodate the interpretation of information contributed by others in the group. Then in the process 
of synthesizing knowledge gathered by each member of the group, they needed to put this understanding 
to work to enable them to reach their personal and group goals in a way consistent with their own values. 
This was not an easy task for students, as their responses to feedback questionnaires indicated. Although 
95% of students said they believed that this writing assignment had been a valuable experience 
(specifically because it had taught them how to work with other people), they also said that dealing with 
so many different viewpoints was difficult. However, they indicated that writing in a group had taught 
them the necessity of listening to and respecting one another's opinions and of working out compromises 
when there was disagreement among the group members. Nevertheless, although all of the students 
thought that discussing focus discipline topics and sharing information with the group was very beneficial 
in terms of acquiring and building knowledge, most did not believe that the written articulation of 
knowledge should be a group effort. As they reflected on the experience, students gained a deeper 
understanding of themselves as learners and of their preferred learning strategies. 
ASSESSING STUDENTS' ACQUISITION OF MULTILITERACIES 
The theoretical models upon which focus discipline research is based advocate a view of assessment as a 
developmental process used to guide learners so that they may acquire the skills they need to function in 
and contribute to the community. Viewed as a developmental process, assessment becomes a multifaceted 
construct that describes the process of learning by addressing a wide variety of skills, including 
communicative competence, appropriate use of language, problem solving, and concept comprehension 
(Short, 1993). Ideally speaking, assessment should reflect an understanding of learning as 
multidimensional, integrated, and revealed in performance over time. This view of assessment was 
embodied in the range of assignments of progressive complexity that constituted both the process and the 
product of the focus discipline research carried out by students in this study. 
Loretta F. Kasper New Technologies, New Literacies: Focus Discipline Research... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 108 
Unfortunately however, although ESL faculty may believe that the power of assessment should derive 
from conceiving it as a cumulative process, requiring attention not only to outcomes, but also equally to 
the experiences that lead to those outcomes, assessment measures are too often dictated by academic 
institutions and consist of summative examinations in which a discrete test score determines a student's 
progress. This is particularly true at the college level, where many of our students must attain satisfactory 
scores on institutional assessments of basic literacy skills like reading and writing in order to progress in 
the ESL sequence, enter the academic mainstream, and ultimately fulfill their academic and professional 
goals. Such is the case for ESL students at KCC, who must take end of semester reading and writing 
assessments, the results of which determine their future progress in college. 
Assessment of Writing Skills 
At KCC, students' writing skills are assessed formatively through a portfolio of revised essays produced 
over the course of the semester, as well as summatively by a timed essay examination taken at the end of 
the semester. At the end of the semester, students submit a writing portfolio, which consists of a cover 
letter to the reader, two revised pieces, including all drafts, and the essay examination. Portfolios are 
cross-graded by another instructor of ESL 91, and this instructor's rating determines the portfolio grade. 
All instructors' ratings are normed to a departmental standard of what constitutes a passing portfolio. The 
portfolio may be rated as either  S (satisfactory) or U (unsatisfactory) in each of three categories:  Finding 
and Organizing Material, Developing and Refining Ideas, and Mechanical Accuracy. To pass, a portfolio 
must be rated as Satisfactory in each of these three categories. 
The cover letter provides the portfolio reader with some background on the student writer. Students are 
asked to tell the reader how they believe their writing ability has developed over the course of the 
semester, to indicate what weaknesses still remain in their writing, and to explain why they chose the 
particular revised pieces they included in their portfolio. The revised pieces with drafts represent the essay 
topics that students have worked on during the semester and so are formative in nature. Students, with the 
help of their teacher, choose the two revised pieces that they will include in their portfolio. The revised 
pieces should represent the student's best work and should demonstrate the progression of skill as the 
student writer worked on refining and clarifying ideas and presenting them in accurate language. 
In contrast, the examination essay is an essay written in response to a reading text of several pages. The 
topic of the reading text may vary from "The Origins of Language" to "Educational Systems in Various 
Cultures" to "Changing Values in the Family." Students are given the reading passage several days before 
the examination, so that they may read it at home and discuss its content in class. On the day of the 
writing examination, they are asked to choose one of two writing prompts based on the reading and are 
given two hours to compose a clear, well-organized, and grammatical essay in response to the prompt. 
The reading passage and writing prompts are designed by the English Department. 
Assessment of Reading Skills 
Like the examination essay that forms part of the overall process of writing assessment, the process of 
reading assessment is also summative. Each student's reading skill is assessed through a timed 
departmental final examination that requires them to read and interpret an academic text, and to compose 
short written answers to various types of open-ended questions. Students have two hours to complete the 
reading examination and must answer a minimum of 65% of the questions correctly to pass it. Like the 
portfolio, the reading examination is cross-graded by another instructor of ESL 91, whose rating 
determines the reading grade. All instructors' ratings are normed to a department standard of what 
constitutes a correct answer. According to English department policy, the same instructor may not grade 
both the reading examination and the portfolio. 
Loretta F. Kasper New Technologies, New Literacies: Focus Discipline Research... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 109 
Potential Outcomes of Testing 
To understand the outcomes of this study, it is useful for the reader to understand the system of 
assessment and promotion at KCC. Based on their performance on these end-of-semester assessments, 
students may progress from ESL 91 to ENG 92 or ENG 93. Students who pass either reading or writing, 
but not both, progress to ENG 92, considered the level following ESL 91. Like ESL 91, ENG 92 is an 
integrated developmental reading/writing course that meets 6 hours per week over a twelve-week 
semester. It is important to note that students at both the ESL 91 and ENG 92 levels take the same final 
reading examination. While students are given the opportunity to exit developmental reading from the 
ESL 91 level, many do not. However, some students progress sufficiently to pass both the reading and the 
writing assessments; those who do are able to skip a level of instruction and progress to ENG 93. ENG 
93, the final course in the developmental sequence, focuses on refining academic writing skills and meets 
4 hours per week over a twelve-week semester. 
Outcomes of the Study: Focus Discipline Research and Students' Progress 
The first research question investigated by this study was: When compared with other ESL students at the 
same level, did the students who engaged in focus discipline research over the course of the twelve-week 
semester attain significantly higher scores on end-of-semester reading and writing examinations? Here it 
is necessary to note that while all ESL 91 classes at KCC follow a content-based curriculum (see Kasper, 
2000a, for a full discussion of various content-based curricular models), no classes except my own 
participate in focus discipline research. In addition, computer technology is not an integral part of any of 
the other ESL 91 classes, due to limited resources and lack of teacher experience in using it. 
The analyses described here compared the performance of the 50 students in my two sections of ESL 91 
with that of five other ESL 91 sections, or a total of 125 other students. All students placed into ESL 91 
based on the same reading and writing assessments and the linguistic and ethnic backgrounds of students 
was consistent across all sections. 
The results of this study suggest that ESL students' performance on individual tests of reading and writing 
was enhanced as a result of focus discipline research. In terms of their performance on the portfolio 
assessment of writing skill, the pass rate for students who engaged in focus discipline research was 
significantly higher than the pass rate for all other ESL 91 students enrolled during the same semester of 
instruction (83% vs. 54%; chi-square = 6.14; p< .02). In terms of their performance on the assessment of 
reading skill, the pass rate for students who engaged in focus discipline research was also significantly 
higher than the pass rate for all other ESL 91 students enrolled during the same semester of instruction 
(69% vs. 46%; chi-square = 4.6; p< .05). 
However, although it was effective in developing proficiency in basic literacy skills for the students in 
this study, did focus discipline research pedagogy improve these skills sufficiently to enable students to 
pass both reading and writing and thereby allow them to skip a level of instruction? When the percentage 
of students who were able to advance to ENG 93 was compared by a chi-square test, significant 
differences were found. Therefore, the response to the second research question is affirmative: A 
significantly greater percentage of students who engaged in focus discipline research passed both reading 
and writing and so were able to skip a level to advance to ENG 93 (59% vs. 33% for other ESL 91 
students enrolled during the same semester of instruction; chi-square = 7.34; p< .01). 
The preceding results suggest that focus discipline research is effective in building basic literacy skills 
like reading and writing. It also appears that the focus discipline research yields greater benefits to 
literacy development than does other content-based pedagogy. However, do these benefits derive from 
focus discipline research itself or does the integration of technology further facilitate literacy 
development? 
Loretta F. Kasper New Technologies, New Literacies: Focus Discipline Research... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 110 
This leads to the third research question, which asks whether the pass rates of students exposed to focus 
discipline research plus technology were significantly higher than those of students exposed to focus 
discipline research alone. Answering this research question requires a post hoc examination of pass rates 
attained by students in my ESL 91 course in previous semesters before technology was made an integral 
component of the focus discipline pedagogy. 
Although I had instituted focus discipline research pedagogy into my courses as early as 1997, at that 
time, electronic technology resources were not made available to ESL students at my college. For this 
reason my early focus discipline research pedagogy involved having students work in groups, as they did 
in this study, but using traditional print resources available in the college library for their research. The 
reading texts and writing prompts were the same, as were the institutional assessments that students were 
required to take at the end of the semester. Likewise, as they are at present, students in 1997 had initially 
been placed in ESL 91 based upon their scores on the CUNY Writing and the CUNY Reading 
Assessment Tests. Finally, the ethnic and linguistic backgrounds of my former ESL 91 students were 
essentially the same as those in the present study. 
The post hoc examination of pass rates attained in 1997 by two sections, or a total of 50 students, who 
engaged in focus discipline research without the benefit of electronic technology resources, revealed that 
these students had achieved a pass rate of 75% on the writing assessment. As stated previously, students 
in the present study, who engaged in focus discipline research with technology, achieved a pass rate of 
83%. Although the pass rate is higher for those students who used technology, differences in these 
percentages are not statistically significant based on a chi-square test. In contrast, significant differences 
were found in a comparison of the pass rates on the reading examination. While 69% of the students who 
engaged in focus discipline research with technology passed the reading examination, only 47% of the 
students who had engaged in focus discipline research without technology passed it. This difference is 
significant by a chi-square test (chi-square = 4.17; p< .05). 
Thus, for the ESL 91 students at my college, technology use appears to have significantly facilitated 
reading skill development, while leaving writing skill development basically unchanged. In view of the 
writing requirements involved in doing focus discipline research, this result is not entirely surprising. 
Whether students used electronic or traditional print resources, the writing assignments required them to 
articulate and synthesize knowledge. Moreover, with or without technology, students worked 
collaboratively in focus discipline groups. As Bruffee (1993) and others have noted, collaborative 
learning communities, be they face-to-face or online, encourage active participation in learning, foster 
processing of interdisciplinary themes and concepts, and teach students how to construct and articulate 
the knowledge they need in order to produce strong written projects. 
This finding does bring into question the value of having students post to electronic discussion lists like 
CBESL. Although the course required students to post to the list on a regular basis, these posts were 
rather informal in nature, consisting essentially of personal opinions and experience. As Leki and Carson 
(1994) noted, "writing tasks that require students only to tap their own opinions and experiences" (p. 95) 
do not provide them with practice in nor adequately prepare them to produce the structure and discourse 
modes inherent in academic writing. Thus, although their postings to the list did provide the ESL students 
in this study with additional opportunities to produce written English, these postings did not offer students 
a model for the type of academic pieces they were required to produce for the writing assessment. 
In contrast, technology appears to have facilitated the development of students' reading skills. Once again, 
this result is not entirely surprising. Students who use the information technology resources available on 
the Internet have immediate access to a far wider variety of texts than is available in the college library. 
Students would need to spend many hours in the college library to access even a small percentage of the 
informational sources available to them online. As one of my ESL 91 students noted, an effective Internet 
search can turn up many more "hits" in far less time than a trip to the college library. 
Loretta F. Kasper New Technologies, New Literacies: Focus Discipline Research... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 111 
Furthermore, when compared to traditional print, reading hypertext is not only a more active, but also a 
much more interactive process. Searching through and reading hypertext is a naturally dynamic, 
recursive, and integrated process, and therefore provides ESL students with multiple opportunities to 
acquire, test, and reframe knowledge. Traditional print texts are static and unchanging, determined by the 
interests and purposes of the author. In contrast, as Warschauer (1999) noted, the texts created when 
students pursue hyperlinks are dynamic and determined by each particular student's own interests and 
purposes. In addition, by following new and different links during subsequent online sessions, student 
readers are continually creating new texts that expose them to varied perspectives on issues studied. 
Moreover, because it fosters a nonlinear pattern of exploration and discovery, reading hypertext helps to 
promote the cognitive flexibility necessary for the integration and consolidation of knowledge gleaned 
from a variety of sources. 
Nonlinear hypertext can offer students each of the benefits noted above; however, without overt 
instruction in how to navigate hypertext effectively, students may become lost in a sea of information, 
potentially experiencing cognitive overload (Rouet & Levonen, 1996). Guided practice that takes students 
through a hypertext document enables them to acquire the cognitive strategies necessary for them to 
navigate and comprehend nonlinear texts. 
By allowing easy access to multiple cross-references on related topics across several documents, or 
screens, hypertext encourages students to read widely, and exposes them to a variety of perspectives as 
well as to varied vocabulary and language structures. In previous semesters, the students who had used 
print resources for focus discipline research had ready access to a limited number of texts–three readings 
for each focus discipline in their textbook, as well as several books available in the college library. In 
contrast, students in the present study who used hypertext resources had ready access to a far greater 
range of material. As a result, these students read more texts over the course of the semester. As Nelson 
and Schmid (1989) found, and as this study supports, when students continually engage in this type of 
extensive and extended reading, vocabulary and language structures become increasingly familiar, 
intertextual associations become clearer, and a broader base of schematic knowledge that may be used to 
guide the construction of meaning of subsequent texts like the final readng assessment is developed. 
STUDENT FEEDBACK 
The foundations of the pedagogical method described here require that students themselves play an active 
role in assessing the efficacy of the learning process. For this reason, one component of the third research 
question involved students' own perceptions of the benefits of technology-enhanced focus discipline 
research on their acquisition of literacy skills. At the end of the semester, students were asked to complete 
an online questionnaire requesting their feedback on the overall learning experience. This feedback 
questionnaire asked students to evaluate the usefulness of doing focus discipline research, the value of 
working with the focus discipline group and to provide their insights on the experience of writing the 
individual and group projects. In addition, the questionnaire asked students to describe what they believed 
to be the most helpful aspect of the course. 
In their responses, ESL students indicated a belief that participating in focus discipline research helped 
them develop linguistic, academic, social, and technological skills. Specifically, 98% of these students 
mentioned a greater awareness of their own ability to conduct research and report findings; 90% noted the 
confidence that comes from being able to map out a project and see it come to fruition; 80% expressed the 
pride in gaining important knowledge and insights, the enthusiasm generated by mastering new 
technologies, and the excitement of sharing newly-gained knowledge with peers and teachers. 
 
Students also appreciated being given the responsibility of becoming the assessors of learning as they 
discussed and critiqued both their own and others' interpretations of resources. They believed that the 
Loretta F. Kasper New Technologies, New Literacies: Focus Discipline Research... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 112 
classroom methodology and the focus discipline group provided them with a supportive context in which 
to build the skills they needed to monitor learning and effectively articulate the results of their research. 
Finally, many students noted that teamwork is a part of many jobs, and they said that learning how to 
work with other people would be very helpful when they entered the workforce. 
Students also extolled the value of using technology in support of their focus discipline research. They 
mentioned the ease with which they could find information from a variety of sources; they were also 
cognizant of the necessity of evaluating Internet resources carefully. Seventy-five percent of students 
indicated that they now viewed all information more critically than they had before; they were less likely 
to accept something as fact just because it was published, either in print or online. They all believed that 
the skills they had learned in this class would serve them well in their future classes as well as in the 
workforce. 
Ninety-eight percent of the students stated that the most helpful aspects of the course were having the 
opportunity to do focus discipline projects and to learn how to use the Internet for research. They said that 
the experience of conducting and writing up the results of extended research would help them in their 
future college classes. Ninety-eight percent of the students noted that experience with technology is now a 
required skill for college courses and for most jobs. Even students who entered the course with little 
experience with technology said that completing the various activities in this course made them feel 
confident in their ability to use technology for a variety of tasks and purposes. 
CONCLUSION 
Focus discipline research appears to have been effective in enabling the students who participated in this 
study to develop and hone the multiliteracies they need to participate and succeed not only in ESL 
learning communities, but also in academic, social, and professional contexts beyond the ESL classroom. 
From the viewpoint of the instructor and the institution, the quality of their projects and their scores on 
final examinations support these ESL students' increased literacy skills. As evinced by the body of written 
work they produced, students were able to present the results of their research efforts in a coherent, well-
organized format that articulated and explained complex intra- and interdisciplinary relationships. 
This ability, as well as their performance on institutionally mandated reading and writing examinations, 
clearly demonstrates their growing literacy skills. 
Although its outcomes are encouraging, this study represents only a preliminary research effort, and 
certainly many more studies are needed before definitive claims can be made about the ways in which 
multiliteracies are most effectively acquired. Nevertheless, the results of this study suggest that ESL 
students can develop the range of skills that constitute multiliteracies through a content-based pedagogy 
like focus discipline research that fosters a learning environment within which students become partners 
and participants in meaningful interaction with peers and teachers to design learning contexts, examine 
interdisciplinary issues, and articulate knowledge. 
NOTES 
1. For the purposes of this paper, the high intermediate level is defined as an entry TOEFL score of 
425.   
2. See note 1  
3. Students choose their focus discipline from among the 10 subject areas--linguistics, environmental 
science, computer science, mathematics, business and marketing, psychology, sociology, physical 
anthropology, biology, and diet and nutrition--represented in the course text, Interdisciplinary 
English (Kasper, 1998c).  
4. Although college e-mail accounts were available, these accounts could only be accessed through 
the campus network and expired at the end of the semester. Thus, to provide students with 
Loretta F. Kasper New Technologies, New Literacies: Focus Discipline Research... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 113 
permanent e-mail accounts they could access from home as well as in school, individual e-mail 
accounts were set up through Yahoo mail.  
5. It should be noted that the electronic resources used in this study were primarily text-based, so 
that although students often encountered audio and video clips during their individual Internet 
research, audio and video technologies were not inherent components of the course design.  
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR  
Loretta F. Kasper is Associate Professor of English at Kingsborough Community College/CUNY. The 
author of Content-Based College ESL Instruction, Teaching English Through the Disciplines: 
Psychology, Interdisciplinary English, and numerous scholarly articles and book chapters, she also owns 
and moderates the listservs Content-ESL and Instructionaltech. Her recent research involves Internet 
applications in ESL instruction. 
E-mail: Drlfk@aol.com 
 
REFERENCES 
Anderson, J. R. (1983a). The architecture of cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
 
Anderson, J. R. (1983b). A spreading activation theory of memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and 
Verbal Behavior, 22, 261-295. 
 
Benesch, S. (1988). Ending remediation: Linking ESL and content in higher education. Washington, DC: 
TESOL. 
 
Brinton, D. M., Snow, M. A., & Wesche, M. B. (1989). Content-based second language instruction. 
Boston: Heinle and Heinle. 
 
Brown, G. (2000, January/February). Where do we go from here? The Technology Source. Retrieved 
January 5, 2000, from the World Wide Web: http://horizon.unc.edu/TS/reading/2000-01.asp. 
 
Bruffee, K. A. (1993). Collaborative learning: Higher education, interdependence, and the authority of 
knowledge. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. 
 
Chamot, A. U., & O'Malley, J. M. (1994). The CALLA handbook: Implementing the cognitive academic 
language learning approach. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
 
Chun, D. M., & Plass, J. L. (1997). Research on text comprehension in multimedia 
environments.Language Learning and Technology, 1(1), 60-81. Retrieved July 15, 2000, from the World 
Wide Web: http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/chun_plass/default.html. 
 
College Board. (1978). Descriptive test of language skills (DTLS).  
 
Crandall, J. (1993). Diversity as challenge and resource. In Proceedings on the Conference on ESL 
Students in the CUNY Classroom: Faculty Strategies for Success (pp. 4-19). New York: CUNY. 
 
Cranton, P. (1996). Professional development as transformative learning: New perspectives for teachers 
of adults. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 
 
Loretta F. Kasper New Technologies, New Literacies: Focus Discipline Research... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 114 
Crook, C. (1994). Computers and the collaborative experience of learning. London: Routledge. 
 
Cummins, J. (1981). The role of primary language development in promoting educational success for 
language minority students. In California State Department of Education (Ed.), Schooling and language 
minority students. Los Angeles, CA: Evaluation, Dissemination, and Assessment Center. 
 
Cummins, J., & Sayers, D. (1995).  Brave new schools: Challenging cultural illiteracy through global 
learning networks. New York: St. Martin's Press. 
 
CUNY Task Force on Writing. (1983).  The CUNY Writing Skills Assessment Test: Short essays 
evaluated and annotated by the CUNY Task Force on Writing. New York: CUNY Task Force on Writing. 
 
Devine, J. (1993). The role of metacognition in second language reading and writing. In J. G.Carson & I. 
Leki (Eds.), Reading in the composition classroom: Second language perspectives (pp. 105-127). Boston: 
Heinle and Heinle. 
 
Devine, J., Railey, K., & Boshoff, P. (1993). The implications of cognitive models in L1 and L2 writing. 
Journal of Second Language Writing, 2, 203-225. 
 
Gabelnick, F., MacGregor, J., Matthews, R. S., & Smith, B. L. (1990). Learning communities: Creating 
connections among students, faculty, and disciplines. New directions for teaching and learning, No. 41. 
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
 
Horowitz, D. (1986). What professors actually require: Academic tasks for the ESL classroom. TESOL 
Quarterly, 20(3), 445-462. 
 
Imel, S. (1998). Teaching critical reflection. ERIC Trends and Issues Alerts (00071). Retrieved May 17, 
1999, from the World Wide Web: http://ericacve.org/docs/tia00071.htm. 
 
Johns, A. M. (1997). Text, role, and context: Developing academic literacies. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
 
Kahn, T. (1999, Spring). Designing virtual communities for creativity and learning. Edutopia Retrieved 
April 27, 1999 from the World Wide Web: http://www.glef.org/edutopia/newsletters/6.2/kahn.html. 
 
Kasper, L. F. (1997a). The impact of content-based instructional programs on the academic progress of 
ESL students.  English for Specific Purposes, 16(4), 309-320. 
 
Kasper, L. F. (1997b). Assessing the metacognitive growth of ESL student writers. TESL-EJ, 3(1). 
Retrieved January 6, 2000, from the World Wide Web: http://www-writing.berkeley.edu/TESL-
EJ/ej09/a1.html. 
 
Kasper, L. F. (1998a). ESL and the Internet: Content, rhetoric, and research. In W. E. Tanner & S. S. 
Webb (Eds.), Proceedings of Rhetoric and Technology in the Next Millennium [CD-ROM]. Mesquite, 
TX: Caxton's Modern Art Press. Retrieved January 6, 2000, from the World Wide Web: 
http://members.aol.com/Drlfk/rhetoric.html. 
 
Kasper, L. F. (1998b). Meeting ESL students' academic needs through discipline-based instructional 
programs. In T. Smoke (Ed.), Adult ESL: Politics, pedagogy and participation in classroom and 
community programs (pp. 147-157). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
 
Loretta F. Kasper New Technologies, New Literacies: Focus Discipline Research... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 115 
Kasper, L. F. (1998c). Interdisciplinary English (2nd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. 
 
Kasper, L. F. (2000a). Content-based college ESL instruction. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates. 
 
Kasper. L. F. (2000b). Sustained content study and the Internet: Developing functional and academic 
literacies. In M. Pally (Ed.), Sustained content-based teaching in academic ESL/EFL: A practical 
approach (pp. 54-73). Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 
 
Kellogg, R. T. (1994). The psychology of writing. New York: Oxford. 
 
Krashen, S. (1982). Principles and practice in second language acquisition. Oxford, UK: Pergamon. 
 
Leki, I., & Carson, J. G. (1994). Students' perceptions of EAP writing instruction and writing needs across 
the disciplines. TESOL Quarterly, 28(1), 81-101. 
 
Luke, A., & Elkins, J. (1998). Reinventing literacy in "New Times." Journal of Adolescent and Adult 
Literacy, 42(1), 4-7. 
 
McGrath, B. (1998, April). Partners in learning: Twelve ways technology changes the teacher-student 
relationship.  T.H.E. Journal. Retrieved May 16, 1999, from the World Wide Web: 
http://www.thejournal.com/magazine/vault/A1982.cfm. 
 
Mohan, B. (1990, September). LEP students and the integration of language and content: Knowledge 
structures and tasks. In Proceedings of the research symposium onlimited English proficient students' 
issues (pp. 113-160). Washington, DC: Office of Bilingual Education and Minority Language Affairs. 
 
Moll, L. C. (1994). Literacy research in community and classrooms: A sociocultural approach. In R.B. 
Ruddell, M.R. Ruddell, & H. Singer (Eds.), Theoretical models and processes of reading, 4th edition (pp. 
179-207). Newark, DE: IRA. 
 
Neilsen, L. (1989). Literacy and living: The literate lives of three adults. Portsmouth, NH: 
Heinemann/Boynton-Cook. 
 
Nelson, G., & Schmid, T. (1989). ESL reading: Schema theory and standardized tests. TESOL Quarterly, 
23, 539-543. 
 
New London Group. (1996). A pedagogy of multiliteracies: Designing social futures. Harvard 
Educational Review, 66(1), 60-92. 
 
Pally, M. (1997). Critical thinking in ESL: An argument for sustained content. Journal of Second 
Language Writing, 6(3), 293-311. 
 
Pally, M. (Ed.). (2000). Sustained content-based teaching in academic ESL/EFL: A practical approach. 
Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 
 
Rouet, J. F., & Levonen, J. J. (1996). Studying and learning with hypertext: Empirical studies and their 
implications. In J. F. Rouet, J. J. Levonen, A. Dillon, & R. J. Spiro (Eds.),  Hypertext and cognition (pp. 
9-23). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
 
Scholfield, P. (1995). Quantifying language. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Loretta F. Kasper New Technologies, New Literacies: Focus Discipline Research... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 116 
 
Shetzer, H. (1998, March). Electronic literacies: Bridging the gap. Paper presented at the 1998 
conference of Teachers of Speakers of Other Languages, Seattle, WA. Retrieved July 21, 1999, from the 
World Wide Web: http://www.eslplanet.com/tesol98/literacy/electlit.html. 
 
Short, D. J. (1993). Assessing integrated language and content instruction. TESOL Quarterly, 27(4), 627-
656. 
 
Snow, M. A., & Brinton, D. B. (Eds.). (1997). The content-based classroom: Perspectives on integrating 
language and content. New York: Longman. 
 
Snow, M. A., Met, M., & Genesee, F. (1989). A conceptual framework for the integration of language 
and content in second/foreign language instruction. TESOL Quarterly, 23, 201-217. 
 
Soter, A. O. (1990). The non-English-speaking student. In G. E. Hawisher & A. O. Soter (Eds.), On 
literacy and its teaching (pp. 224-242). Albany, NY: State University of New York Press. 
 
Spanos, G. (1989). On the integration of language and content information. Annual Review of Applied 
Linguistics, 10, 227-240. 
 
Sproull, L. (1998, November 12).  A database is not a community: Important social dynamics in online 
groups. Keynote address presented at WebNet '98, Orlando, FL. 
 
Tierney, R. J., Kieffer, R., Whalin, K., Desai, L., Moss, A. G., Harris, J. E., & Hopper, J. (1997, May). 
Assessing the impact of hypertext on learners' architecture of literacy learning spaces in different 
disciplines: Follow-up studies. Reading Online. Retrieved May 21, 1999, from the World Wide Web: 
http://www.readingonline.org/research/impact. 
 
Ullman, C. (1997). Social identity and the adult ESL classroom. ERIC Digest (EDO-LE-98-101). 
Retrieved May 28, 1999, from the World Wide Web:http://www.cal.org/ncle/digests/Socident.htm. 
 
United States Department of Education (1995, August). Technology supports for project-based learning. 
Technology and Education Reform: Technical Research Report Retrieved May 16, 1999, from the World 
Wide Web: http://www.ed.gov/pubs/SER/Technology/ch8.html. 
 
Warschauer, M. (1999). Electronic literacies: Language, culture, and power in online education. 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
 
Zuengler, J., & Brinton, D. (1997). Linguistic form, pragmatic function: Relevant research from content-
based instruction. In M. Snow & D. Brinton (Eds.), The content-based classroom: Perspectives on 
integrating language and content (pp. 263-273). White Plains, NY: Longman. 
 
