Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/sotillo/default.html 
May 2000, Volume 4, Number 1 
pp. 77-110 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 2000, ISSN 1094-3501 77 
DISCOURSE FUNCTIONS AND SYNTACTIC COMPLEXITY IN 
SYNCHRONOUS AND ASYNCHRONOUS COMMUNICATION 
Susana M. Sotillo 
Montclair State University 
ABSTRACT 
The present study investigates discourse functions and syntactic complexity in English-as-a-
second-language (ESL) learner output obtained via two different modes of computer-mediated 
communication (CMC): asynchronous and synchronous discussions. Two instructors and twenty-
five students from two advanced ESL writing classes participated in this study. Answers were 
sought to the following questions: a) Are the discourse functions present in ESL learners' 
synchronous discussions of reading assignments quantitatively and qualitatively different from 
those found in asynchronous discussions? And, b) which mode of CMC shows more syntactically 
complex learner output? The results showed that the quantity and types of discourse functions 
present in synchronous discussions were similar to the types of interactional modifications found 
in face-to-face conversations that are deemed necessary for second language acquisition. 
Discourse functions in asynchronous discussions were more constrained than those found in 
synchronous discussions and similar to the question-response-evaluation sequence of the 
traditional language classroom. Concerning syntactic complexity, the delayed nature of 
asynchronous discussions gives learners more opportunities to produce syntactically complex 
language. Asynchronous and synchronous CMC have different discourse features which may be 
exploited for different pedagogical purposes. In the hands of experienced teachers, both modes of 
CMC can be used as novel tools to enhance the language acquisition process by encouraging 
interaction among participants, collaborative text construction, and the formation of electronic 
communities of learners. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Technological revolutions and the expanding use of computers are rapidly changing the nature and scope 
of pedagogy in all fields of knowledge. In 21st century American classrooms, computers have become 
indispensable tools for enhancing content and language teaching. As a result of these technological 
innovations, a new type of learning environment is emerging, which represents a shift from a teacher-
centered to a student-centered theory of learning. As Salaberry (1996) points out, computer based 
telecommunications represent new types of emerging technologies that offer language teachers cost-
effective tools to create learning environments that encourage purposeful interaction among learners (see 
comprehensive review of computer assisted language learning [CALL], multimedia applications, 
intelligent CALL and CMC by Salaberry, 1996). Student participation in the learning process and a shift 
away from a highly structured, teacher controlled environment characterizes recent pedagogical practices 
(Goodlad, 1994). 
Along with efforts for educational reform and renewal, advances in theories of second language 
acquisition (SLA) have informed many of our current language learning and teaching practices. In terms 
of language learning, we can see a shift from teacher-centered classrooms to student-centered learning 
environments with certain uses of technology (Warschauer, 1997). However, this shift to student-centered 
learning can only take place by carefully managing the complex interplay between student needs and 
Susana M. Sotillo Discourse Functions and Syntactic Complexity in Synchronous… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 78 
characteristics, the learning activities that are computer mediated, the characteristics and reliability of the 
software or groupware, and the instructor's pedagogical orientations (Brandon & Hollingshead, 1999). 
SLA and Computer-Mediated Communication (CMC) 
Empirical studies informed by SLA interactionist theory have shown that negotiation of meaning, which 
facilitates comprehension of input through interactional modifications to the structure of conversation, is 
necessary to the overall process of language acquisition (see Long, 1981; Pica, 1987, 1994). But input 
comprehension in meaning negotiations or reading activities is not sufficient for language acquisition. 
According to Swain's (1985) output hypothesis, learner output is also necessary in promoting acquisition. 
Second-language (L2) learners need opportunities for what she calls "pushed output" such as speech or 
writing in order to develop specific grammatical features that do not seem to be acquired based solely by 
learning to comprehend input. The use of computers in computer-mediated communicative activities 
appears to provide the necessary opportunities that Swain describes. 
With the increasing use of computer assisted language learning, or CALL, Chapelle (1997) cautions 
researchers that they need to address critical questions concerning both the kind of language learners 
produce in CALL activities and the quality of the language learning experience. Salaberry (1999, 104) 
adds computer-mediated communication (CMC) to the set of pedagogical issues to be considered in 
research on computer-assisted learning, arguing that CMC generates high levels of interactivity. 
Furthermore, he suggests that a critical study of CALL should incorporate the findings of recent 
theoretical and empirical studies from a sociocultural perspective (Aljaafreh & Lantolf, 1994; Crook, 
1994; DeGuerrero & Villamil, 1994; Lantolf, 1994; Warschauer, 1997). 
One of the most exciting aspects of CMC involves synchronous (or instantaneous) interaction on a local 
area network (LAN). The research literature on foreign and second language learning reports that this 
type of electronic discussion encourages learners to construct knowledge collaboratively (e.g., Beauvois, 
1997a,1997b; Berge & Collins, 1994; Meunier, 1994; Warschauer, 1996, 1997). Additional benefits for 
CMC include greater participation by people in subordinate positions, women, minorities, shy students, 
and the physically challenged (Bruce, Peyton, & Batson, 1993; Kiesler, Siegel, & McGuire, 1984). And 
due to the high-quality of interaction and sharing that computer networking has been shown to encourage, 
some CMC researchers have claimed that "in the hands of professors who know what they are doing, 
online instruction is superior to face-to-face instruction" (Feenberg, 1999; Harasim, Hiltz, Teles, & 
Turoff, 1995). 
It appears that synchronous electronic discourse is more efficient in terms of time on task than ordinary 
classroom discourse, and that a decrease in teacher domination of discussions creates more opportunities 
for the production of more complex language (Chun, 1994; Kern, 1995). There is also growing support 
for pedagogical claims made by proponents of CMC for greater student empowerment, autonomy, 
equality, and enhanced critical thinking skills (see Kroonenberg, 1994/1995; Warschauer, Turbee, & 
Roberts, 1996). 
Second language learning opportunities are also available in asynchronous or delayed discussions 
(Cummins & Sayers, 1995). For example, at the Hong Kong International School, Kroonenberg (1995) 
used e-mail to facilitate analysis and discussion of controversial issues, such as a letter sent by the 
administration to parents about controlling young people's alcohol consumption. Van Handle & Corl 
(1998) working at different universities, used e-mail exchanges between two intermediate level German 
classes at both institutions to improve students' speaking and writing in German. And from a first-
language (L1) composition-as-collaboration perspective, Harris & Wambeam (1996), in an experimental 
study, showed how a combination of both asynchronous (e-mail) and synchronous (MOO) activities 
enhanced the experimental students' opportunities to improve their writing skills, contribute more 
frequently to their on-line journals, and increase their enjoyment of writing. 
Susana M. Sotillo Discourse Functions and Syntactic Complexity in Synchronous… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 79 
Anecdotal and experimental data seem to support claims that both synchronous and asynchronous 
exchanges, in first- and second-language student populations, encourage interaction and help improve the 
quality of written and spoken discourse. 
Although text-based harassment incidents in chat rooms have been reported in the literature on CMC 
(Hall, 1996), synchronous and asynchronous modes of CMC are powerful tools that facilitate the creation 
of dynamic learning environments where language is used as a tool to brainstorm, disseminate 
information, analyze text as it is produced, take linguistic risks, and challenge other views without fear of 
overt intimidation by bullies or egotists who often interrupt the most and speak the loudest in face-to-face 
discussions and traditional classroom settings (see McGuire, Kiesler, & Siegel, 1987; Sproull & Kiesler, 
1991). 
With respect to SLA research, most recent studies have focused on a comparison between learner output 
in computer-mediated synchronous discussions and learner output in face-to-face discussions. This 
exploratory study will examine the qualitative and quantitative aspects of electronic discourse functions 
and syntactic complexity in the written output of learners enrolled in two sections of advanced ESL 
writing that used different modes of CMC: synchronous and asynchronous communication. 
 
Research Questions 
Motivated by interactionist SLA research and Salaberry's (1999) recommendations for a stronger focus on 
interactional activities in CMC informed by a sociocultural perspective, this study investigates discourse 
functions and syntactic complexity in learner language generated via two different modes of computer-
mediated communication: asynchronous and synchronous. Two research questions were posed: (1) Are 
discourse functions present in ESL learners' synchronous discussions of reading assignments 
quantitatively and qualitatively different from those in asynchronous discussions? And, (2) which mode 
of CMC shows more syntactically complex learner output? 
In this study, discourse functions are defined as categories of behavior in electronic discourse, such as 
requests, responses, apologies, greetings, complaints, and reprimands. We define syntactic complexity as 
the ability to produce writing that shows how ideas and large chunks of information are represented with 
the use of subordination and embedded subordinate clauses. An additional construct used in this study is 
the electronic utterance, which is a single clause with complements and adjuncts. Although accuracy and 
fluency have been identified as important dependent variables in task-based SLA experimental studies 
(Foster & Skehan, 1996), they were not the primary focus of this investigation. 
 
METHODOLOGY 
Subjects 
Two groups of university-level students from two intact English-as-a-Second Language (ESL) academic 
writing classes that used computers as part of the instructional program participated in this study. There 
were 13 students in group A, and 12 in group B. These classes were held from January to May. Students 
had been placed in the advanced writing courses based on their performance on departmentally mandated 
reading and writing exams and on two subsets of the CELT test. Because of scheduling constraints, it was 
not possible to design a controlled experiment; that is, students could not be randomly assigned to an 
experimental or control group. In this situation, it would have been highly inappropriate because most 
ESL students at the university are commuter students who come to campus on Friday evenings and 
weekends. The researcher thus had to respect students' scheduling preferences. 
 
Susana M. Sotillo Discourse Functions and Syntactic Complexity in Synchronous… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 80 
The students in this study ranged in age from 18 to 31 and had lived in the U.S. mainland an average of 
18 months. Two of them were enrolled in graduate courses. The average number of years of schooling 
was 13. There were 8 males and 17 females. Six different language backgrounds were represented: 
Arabic, Japanese, Korean, Polish, Russian, and Spanish. 
Subject Pool and Preliminary Data Collection 
In order to determine whether or not there were initial significant differences between these two groups of 
students prior to the start of the instructional period, measures of central tendency (means and standard 
deviations) were compared and a t-test performed on data obtained from placement writing examinations. 
Though the standard deviations for each of seven indicators of syntactic complexity showed that there 
was a wide range of distribution of scores or variability in both groups, there was no statistically 
significant difference between the two groups for 7 of the 8 indicators used to measure complexity. There 
was, however, a significant difference between the two groups with respect to the number of error-free T-
units (.044 at p<.05). Table 1 displays the results obtained. 
In terms of syntactic complexity, several SLA researchers have pointed out that measures such as length 
of T-unit and error-free T-units do not capture different aspects of the writing process that measure the 
development of syntactic maturity. For example, error-free T-units may hide the fact that excessive 
coordination within a sentence might be involved, in which case the learner avoids sentence embedding 
altogether (Gaies, 1980; Lantolf, 1988; Ney, 1966). Thus for the purpose of this exploratory study, the 
preliminary means and standard deviations obtained for seven of eight indicators of syntactic complexity 
for groups A and B seemed to indicate that the two ESL student groups were comparable. 
Indicators  Group ` x s.d. t-values p<.05 
Error-free 
Clauses 
A 12.58 6.86 -1.678 .122 
 B 20.25 14.05    
Total Cls. A 29.33  12.13 -.842 .418 
 B 34.33 14.62   
Error-free T-
Units 
A 11.16  8.14 2.271 .044* 
 B 22.00 13.71 -1.678   
Total T-Units A 15.58  6.27 -1.627 .132 
 B 23.00 13.06   
Total # Words  A 217.50 69.47 -.798 .442 
 B 258.41 153.28   
Total Emb. Cls A 10.33 7.34 1.599 .138 
 B 6.75  3.25   
Total Sub. Cls  A 4.41 2.46 .306 .765 
 B 4.08  1.88   
T-Unit Length A 18.77 18.69 .979 .349 
 B  12.92 6.16   
`x=mean 
 s.d= standard deviation 
 t-values = values from t-test 
p = probability level  
 *values significant at p <.05. 
Group frequencies (Table 2) show that there were quantitative differences between the two groups with 
respect to the number of error-free clauses, total number of clauses, error-free T-units, total number of T-
units, total number of words, and T-unit length. Group B had higher frequencies in five of the seven 
indicators of syntactic complexity. With the exception of one of the indicators of syntactic complexity, 
Susana M. Sotillo Discourse Functions and Syntactic Complexity in Synchronous… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 81 
error-free T-units (.044), the differences between the two groups for seven of eight indicators of syntactic 
complexity were not significant. 
Table 2. Group Frequencies - Writing Placement Exam (N=25)  
Group Error-
free 
Clauses 
Total 
Cls. 
Error-
free T-
units 
Total T-
units 
Total 
words 
Subordinate 
clauses 
Embedded 
subord. 
Clauses 
T-Unit 
Length 
A 162 375 65 200 2829 59 128 14.145 
B 243 412 157 276 3101 42 81 11.235 
Networked Classrooms and Instruction 
Classes met twice a week for six hours, and were taught by two different ESL instructors. Group A met 
with one instructor (the teacher-researcher) Friday evenings and Saturdays. Group B met with another 
ESL instructor (a graduate student in Applied Linguistics) on Friday evenings and Saturdays. The 
textbooks used in both courses were Independent Writing by O'Donnell & Paiva (1993), and Experiencing 
Race, Class, and Gender in the U.S. edited by Virginia Cyrus (1993). The students used networked 
computers in a teaching laboratory, and each group worked separately on CMC activities. 
Synchronous discussions were part of the CMC learning activities for both groups. These were scheduled 
in the networked computer lab on Saturdays using Internet Relay Chat (mIRC), which is a user-friendly 
real time chatware developed by Khaled Mardam-Bey. Students and instructors can configure mIRC's 
features such as fonts, screen size, aliases, popup menus, and sounds to suit their own needs. The screen 
size can be adjusted and all participants are able to scroll up and down to reread previous postings and 
keep up with the ongoing discussion. 
Computer-Mediated Learning Tasks 
Students in group A spent 90 minutes Saturday mornings discussing assigned readings synchronously, 
while group B did the same in the afternoon session. These CMC activities were part of the six hours of 
language instruction. When students met in the regular classroom, they interacted face-to-face with their 
instructor and classmates, and often spent the remaining hour and a half discussing the readings, 
negotiating meaning among themselves, evaluating teacher- and peer-feedback on their drafts in small 
groups, and focusing on specific grammar rules. 
In order to evaluate the pedagogical value of asynchronous (delayed time) communication in language 
learning, tasks were used which involved synthesizing and analyzing information from the book of 
readings. Tasks in this study are defined as learning activities with a purpose such as to summarize, 
analyze, respond. The purpose of the study was to generate textual discourse data from two different types 
of CMC modes in a computer lab setting where the tasks or activities assigned were primarily of a formal 
academic nature (e.g., responding, synthesizing and analyzing information). (See Foster & Skehan, 1996 
for an explanation of the impact of different variables on the nature of language performance in the 
context of task-based instruction.) 
Groups A and B, the two classes selected for this study, were comparable on several bases: same 
textbook, same length of instruction (one semester), same writing activities, and same type of learning 
environment. The goal of the CMC learning tasks or activities was twofold: to encourage fluency in 
writing, and to teach students how to summarize and analyze information based on readings discussed in 
class. The writing activities were designed to encourage the development of academic writing skills. 
Students had to write and rewrite their essays based on teacher and peer feedback. 
 
Susana M. Sotillo Discourse Functions and Syntactic Complexity in Synchronous… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 82 
While there were some differences in the amount of time students spent in the writing lab and in teacher-
fronted reading activities, these were primarily due to room scheduling constraints and teacher 
preferences. Group B's instructor decided not to switch rooms while students were engaged in the process 
of writing and rewriting their drafts. Originally, the writing lab was to be used for an hour and a half, but 
she secured permission to use it for three hours. With respect to the teacher-fronted reading strategies 
instruction, scheduling of classrooms on Saturday mornings forced a slight revision in the amount of time 
the instructor spent teaching top-down reading processing skills. The one major difference in the learning 
tasks/activities consisted of the postings to the asynchronous discussion forum by group A students. Since 
postings were based on the topics covered in Experiencing Race, Class, and Gender in the U.S., students 
had to learn how to synthesize and analyze the authors' writings before posting to the ESL threaded 
discussion forum. This was in lieu of an additional hour students would have had to spend in the writing 
lab writing and revising drafts. 
Asynchronous Threaded Discussions 
On Friday evenings, students enrolled in group A spent an hour posting to an asynchronous threaded 
discussion forum on the World Wide Web (WWW) their reaction to specific reading assignments on 
various topics: Ways of Being, Ethnic and Racial Identity, Generational Conflict, Female and Male Roles, 
and Economics and the American Dream. They were specifically instructed by the researcher to exchange 
information among themselves and respond to their classmates' postings on the Web-based discussion 
forum. Students were given course credit for participating in both synchronous and asynchronous 
discussions as specified in their Web-based syllabi. 
 The two teachers participating in this study met weekly to coordinate CMC learning tasks and discuss 
students' language learning progress. The researcher was responsible for facilitating the weekly 
asynchronous and synchronous discussions for group A, and the ESL instructor coordinated the 
synchronous discussions for group B. Both teachers had training in ESL methodology and shared similar 
orientations toward the teaching of writing. They favored the process approach to writing.  Figure 1 below 
shows a breakdown by type of learning tasks or activities 1 for both groups of students, and the specific 
pedagogical goals both teachers sought to accomplish by asking students to engage in these activities. 
 
Participants  
 
Type of Task or Activity 
Pedagogical Goals  
 
Group A  
 
Postings to Discussion Forum — 
Asynchronous CMC in computer 
lab Friday evenings (one hour).  
 
Learning to synthesize and 
analyze information from 
Experiencing Race, Class, and 
Gender in the U.S.  
 
Group B  
 
Essay writing in computer lab on 
cultural and social topics covered 
in Independent Writing. Friday 
evenings with ESL graduate-
student instructor. 
Drafts writing and revising. 
Development of academic 
writing skills. Focus on both 
form and meaning. 
Group A  
 
Teacher-fronted reading 
strategies instruction. 
Brainstorming in small groups 
using Independent Writing. 
Friday evenings with researcher 
in regular classroom. 
Development of academic 
reading skills (top-down 
processing), inferring, acquisition 
of new vocabulary. Development 
of writing skills. 
Group B  Teacher-fronted reading Development of academic 
Susana M. Sotillo Discourse Functions and Syntactic Complexity in Synchronous… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 83 
 strategies instruction in regular 
classroom and brainstorming in 
small groups using  Independent 
Writing. Saturday mornings with 
ESL graduate-student instructor. 
reading skills (top-down 
processing), inferring, acquisition 
of new vocabulary. Development 
of writing skills. 
Group A  
 
Synchronous CMC discussion 
based on book of readings; 
Saturday mornings with 
researcher. 
Encourage fluency in writing or 
the capacity to engage in 
continuous performance online in 
response to teacher prompts.  
 
 
Group B  
 
Synchronous CMC discussion 
based on book of readings; 
Saturday afternoons with ESL 
instructor.  
 
 
Encourage fluency in writing or 
the capacity to engage in 
continuous performance online in 
response to teacher prompts. 
Group A 
Essay writing in writing lab with 
researcher Saturday afternoons. 
Draft writing and revising. 
Development of academic 
writing skills. Focus on both 
form and meaning. 
Figure 1. Learning Tasks/Activities and Pedagogical Goals 
 
Procedures 
Synchronous discussions of 90 minutes each for both groups were collected at four different time 
intervals during the semester (January, February, March, and April). Although both instructors covered 
the same readings (ethnicity, social class, homelessness, Mother Jones, labor strikes, unionization), each 
of these topics were discussed synchronously at different times during the semester. The instructor in 
group B selected topics from the book of readings according to themes such as homelessness or social 
class, whereas the researcher-instructor followed the outline of topics presented in the book. In order to 
obtain comparable synchronous discussion data for both groups on similar topics, data were collected 
during the months of January and March for group A, and during February and April for group B. The 
data were saved on diskettes, and subsequently printed in their entirety and coded according to categories 
identified in previous SLA interactionist research, derived from classroom tasks in which oral face-to-face 
interaction was the medium of communication (see Mendonça & Johnson, 1994). Transcripts for both 
groups were analyzed separately for discourse functions, but the data were combined and subsequently 
categorized according to a scheme devised following Mendonça and Johnson, 1994. Definitions of 
categories and examples are provided in Appendix A. 
In order to analyze the totality of discourse functions that might be present in the synchronous 
discussions, the synchronous data obtained from groups A and B were combined. However, for purposes 
of measuring syntactic complexity only, which is discussed in the following section, a sample of complete 
postings to the asynchronous discussion forum was compared with synchronous discussion data obtained 
from group B because the same topics were being discussed by both groups (e.g., ethnic and racial 
identity, economics and the American dream). We could not use the combined synchronous data from 
groups A and B to compare these with the asynchronous discussion postings because different topics were 
covered synchronously by students from group A (Mother Jones' union organizing activities; exploitation 
of garment workers). 
Susana M. Sotillo Discourse Functions and Syntactic Complexity in Synchronous… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 84 
 Data collected from the synchronous discussions were coded separately by two experienced writing 
instructors and the researcher. An interrater coefficient of .89 was obtained, 2 and disagreements were 
worked out through group discussions until the three raters came to 100% agreement. 
 
The following unedited excerpt illustrates the conversational nature of a synchronous discussion based on 
assigned readings: 
 Excerpt #1 (March 1997 — Group A) 
(Learners' written output has not been edited) 
 
<Alsushka> hey (greeting) 
 <Kae> Hello (greeting) 
 <Morrigan> Anybody there? (greeting) 
 <Edi> Mother "Jones" was very stuborn (response — elaboration) 
 <Morrigan> What did Mother Jones do to become famous? (clarification request) 
 <Lucy> Mother Jones was the leader of woman's voice and strike. She start leadership 
after her husband and four children died because of yellow-sickness. She is one of the 
most famous women in America. (explanation and elaboration) 
 <Kae> She organized a labor union. (explanation) 
 <Chie> She worked as a union organizer. (clarification) 
 
The data on discourse functions in asynchronous discussions consisted of 105 postings to the ESL 
threaded discussion forum from January 24 through May 9, 1997. Both sets of data (asynchronous and 
synchronous) were approximately the same size. Some of the postings to the asynchronous discussion 
were two to three sentences long. Likewise, some of the exchanges in the data collected from the 
synchronous discussions were short greetings and directives ("Hi people," "People, talk to me!") or single 
electronic utterances ("Goodbye"). Not all students generated the same amount of written text in the 
synchronous chats. 
The written output from the synchronous discussions for group A was compared to the asynchronous data 
obtained from the same group. There were differences in the types of discourse functions present in both 
the asynchronous and synchronous data. For example, greetings, imperatives, requests for clarification 
and information, and adversarial moves predominated in group A's synchronous data, whereas the 
discourse features found in the asynchronous discussions for the same group consisted primarily of topic 
initiation moves, questions, student responses to teacher- or student-generated questions, and comments 
on postings made by both teacher and students. Given the total written output obtained from these two 
different modes of CMC, it was determined that the two bodies of data were comparable. Thus the 
asynchronous data were compared to the synchronous discussion data with respect to the possible 
differences in the type and quantities of discourse functions. 
The data selected for an examination of syntactic complexity consisted of 24 topic-specific postings on 
readings covered in class (ethnic and racial identity, ways of being, economics and the American dream). 
These postings were selected out of a total of 105 asynchronous postings to the threaded discussion forum 
because they represented the most complete set for students in group A at two different time periods: 
January 25 - February 7, 1997, and April 5-7, 1997. Because of student absences during the semester, 
Susana M. Sotillo Discourse Functions and Syntactic Complexity in Synchronous… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 85 
postings to the asynchronous discussion forum could not be randomly selected for an investigation of 
syntactic complexity. In terms of content and learner written output, the 24 postings selected were 
comparable to the two entire sessions of synchronous discussions (February and April) that were selected 
from group B for analyzing syntactic complexity. An interrater reliability coefficient of .92 was obtained 
in coding for syntactic complexity. Three raters identified and coded for eight indicators of syntactic 
complexity from the asynchronous and synchronous discussion data. 
 
Defining Syntactic Complexity 
To examine syntactic complexity, data were collected from two synchronous and two asynchronous 
discussions on specific topics: Ethnic and Racial Identity and Economics and the American Dream. The 
clause and T-unit constituted our units of analysis. The Minimal Terminable Unit or T-unit was first 
defined as the shortest unit which a sentence can be reduced to, and consisting of one independent clause 
together with whatever dependent clauses are attached to it. For example, After he had eaten, Bill went to 
bed would be described as containing one T-unit (Hunt, 1965). Data were coded as follows: T-units per 
CMC sample text (i.e., asynchronous postings and students' synchronous exchanges); error-free T-units; 
total number of clauses per CMC text/message; error-free clauses; total number of words per CMC 
text/message; total number of subordinate clauses; total number of embedded subordinate clauses; and T-
unit length (total number of T-units per CMC text/message divided into the total number of words in each 
CMC text produced from postings or synchronous messages). 3 
Syntactic Complexity in SLA Research 
In the late 1970s, SLA researchers began to apply T-unit analysis in studies of second language learning. 
They used the T-unit to measure the syntactic maturity of learners (Larsen-Freeman & Strom, 1977). This 
measure had been used extensively by first-language acquisition researchers such as Hunt (1970), 
O'Donnell (1976) and many others, but both first- and second-language acquisition researchers began to 
question its significance in assessing syntactic complexity (e.g., Gaies, 1980; Lantolf, 1988; Moffett, 
1968; Schleppegrell, 1992). For example, Gaies (1980) and Ney (1966) pointed out that mean T-unit 
length fails to deal with excessive coordination within a sentence, and Moffett (1968) showed how a 
learner's use of syntactically more complex clauses could be interpreted as evidence of restricted 
vocabulary; that is, he/she could be using extensive circumlocution. 4 
Experimental studies investigating the effects of cognitive complexity upon the written production of 
learners of English as a second language (ESL) have also used indicators of syntactic complexity in 
assessing language development in traditional writing classes (Zhang, 1987). Learners' use of various 
cognitive strategies, including the use of the first language, in creating second language (L2) texts has 
also been investigated. For example, in a study by Kobayashi and Rinnert (1992) comparing translation as 
a strategy in L2 composing vs. direct composing in the L2, the researchers found that as syntactic 
complexity increased in the cognitively demanding translation task, awkward forms and transitional 
problems emerged which frequently interfered with the intended meaning. 
Recent studies in networked classrooms informed by SLA theory have shown contradictory results with 
respect to syntactic complexity. For example, Chun (1994) and Kern (1995) found that CMC learner 
output showed a higher proportion of simple sentences over complex ones. In contrast to these findings, 
Warschauer (1996) compared the coordination index (i.e., syntactic complexity) and the type-token ratio 
(i.e., lexical change) of learner language produced in CMC and face-to-face small group discussions and 
found that students engaged in CMC discussions obtained higher values on both measures. 
Despite these shortcomings, T-units and clauses were used in this study because they are easily 
identifiable (low-level inference categories) and provide an objective means of assessing sentence-level 
complexity in written texts. With respect to the asynchronous data (group A), transcripts from 24 postings 
Susana M. Sotillo Discourse Functions and Syntactic Complexity in Synchronous… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 86 
to the threaded ESL discussion forum on two topics (Ethnic and Racial Identity and Economics and the 
American Dream) were obtained. Transcripts from two synchronous sessions covering the same topics 
were obtained for group B. In order to measure syntactic complexity, eight indicators were initially 
identified and ratios calculated for both groups. (Refer to Appendix B for definitions and examples of T-
units, clauses, and errors). 
 
The following unedited posting illustrates the coding procedures used, and the often lengthy and 
syntactically complex learner output found in asynchronous discussions: 
Excerpt #2 
 ESL Discussion Forum 
 Rosa Wakefield story 
by Ina, 2/7/97  
 (T-units have been enclosed in brackets. Embedded subordinate clauses are shown in bold type, 
and subordinate clauses that show a hierarchical relationship with respect to the main clause are 
in bold type and italicized. Of the 16 T-units identified in this excerpt, only five are error-free.) 
["The main idea of this story is that you can't deny your race, ethnic group] [and 
[you]can't show people how white or how american you supposed to be]. ["The real thing 
is that even if you are nice person, some people don't even want to talk to you, because 
of your race or nationality.] [This woman, Rosa Wakefield, tried to do the best [that] she 
could in her life.] [Everything  that she did was perfect], [she helped her relatives, 
friends],[[and she] worked hard], [everybody knows that she is the best cook and the best 
housekeeper.] [She says a lot about differences between black and white people.] [One 
thing is even that the white people think a lot about everything, they are not always 
successful.] [She says that if  she was thinking about everything like this, she'd burn her 
cakes and scorch skirts.] [I can't say that this is not true because there were so many 
situations when I was doing one thing and in the same time thinking about another] [and 
the result was, that I did wrong my job] [and I was depressed in my mind.] [She also says 
that  people love her and treat her like the best friend, because she helped them a lot.] 
[Also she says that whites treat blacks like "the second kind of people…"] 
 
An example of an evolving complex system of subordinate and embedded subordinate clauses is shown in 
. Ceci, one of the students posting to the ESL threaded discussion forum, spent a considerable amount of 
time planning her response and engaging in risk-taking behavior, which is reflected in her use of 
embedded clauses and more elaborate language as she struggles to explain the topic of ethnic identity in 
Mexico. 
 
Coding for Discourse Functions in Synchronous Discussions 
Excerpt #3 from a synchronous session among students in group A shows the discourse functions that 
were identified in the CMC discourse data and coded according to the categories presented in  Table 3: 
Excerpt #3 
 mIRC Session 
 (Group A, January 1997) 
Susana M. Sotillo Discourse Functions and Syntactic Complexity in Synchronous… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 87 
<Luumanh> I will kick you out anyway. (Adversarial move, 6) 
 <Alsushka> What is your problem, darling? I am your secret admirer. (Humor, 9) 
 <Morrigan> Luumanh, what are your thoughts on the last article?  
 (Request for information,10) Did you like it? (floor holding move,11) 
 <Luumanh> Yeah Dr. Sotillo. It is very interesting.  
 (Response:agreement, 5e; and elaboration,5a) 
 <Morrigan> What do you mean by interesting? Did you read it? (Request for 
clarification, 4a; and request for information, 10) 
 <Alsushka> You are computer fanatic, darling! You don't care 
 about anything else, even about me!!! J (Humor, 9) 
 <Luumanh> Why do I have to care about you? (Adversarial move, 6) You are not in my 
class. (Assertion, 3) 
 <Alsushka> You are computer fanatic, darling! You don't care about anything else, even 
about me!!! J (Humor, 9) 
 <Edi> Fatima, why don't you talk? (Request for an explanation, 4c) 
 <Lucy> Fatima, why you called yourself like that? (Explanation request, 4c) 
 <Kae> Is that only the case of garment factories? (Clarification request, 4a) 
 <Edi>Fatima, I am sorry. (Response: apology, 5d) 
In the excerpt above, Luumanh and Alsushka were actively involved in socializing and only marginally 
interested in responding to a teacher prompt. Luumanh had figured out a way of kicking out Alsushka 
using commands included in the instructions to mIRC users. The teacher's question (Morrigan) is finally 
addressed by one of the students, Kae, after seven intervening messages. The teacher had asked a question 
about an article dealing with underpaid and exploited garment workers. As shown by four of the postings 
above (Alsushka, Luumanh, Edi, and Lucy), students seemed more interested in exchanging information 
among themselves than in responding to teacher questions. This phenomenon has been described in detail 
in the literature on Electronic Networks for Interaction (ENFI) by Kremers (1993, 113-116) who found 
himself relegated to the sidelines when trying to lead a class discussion in real time. 
Some students in group B, Excerpt #4, tried to shift the discussion away from the serious topic of 
homelessness by joking about it, but the instructor in this group, Lenore, often succeeded in keeping the 
discussion focused on the reading assignment: 
Excerpt #4 
 mIRC Session 
 (April 1997 - Group B) 
<Lenore> Do you think that everyone has someone who can help them in the time of 
need? (request for an explanation) 
 <Saxa> When become a jobless, you become a job-hunter (response to teacher question) 
 <ruca> I thing so (agreement) 
 <sanson> yes, I think so, if you try to find some person who can help you (agreement 
and elaboration) 
Susana M. Sotillo Discourse Functions and Syntactic Complexity in Synchronous… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 88 
 <Jellybean> I think a lot of times people are too embarrassed to ask for help. My best 
friend had to go on welfare and I only found out from another friend. (response to teacher 
prompt and elaboration) 
 <ruca> Poor girl, but why she didn't ask somebody also here, like a friend or something 
(explanation request) 
<Dalila> Joie? (student asking for a classmate) 
 <takatook> Sorry for her but I guess she is too much… (elaboration) 
 <Saxa> I think let the problems become bigger enough that they could not manege them. 
(explanation as to why a female student became homeless) 
 <takatook> You have to be clever and try to find what do you need. (elaboration) 
 <Lenore> In the essay, it is suggested that Winterlin might be able to escape his 
homelessness permanently. Why is this the case? (explanation request) 
 <sanson> If you don't have money even to make a phone call, well call collect. (response 
to teacher prompt about homeless student) 
 <takatook> Excuse me I DON'T UNDERSTAND YOUR QUESTION. (clarification 
request) 
 <Albert> I think it's important to make good friends and family relationships. Then if we 
get any problem they could help…(explanation and elaboration offered in response to 
teacher's question) 
 <sanson> what question? (clarification) 
RESULTS 
Discourse Functions in CMC Synchronous Discussions 
Table 3 displays the number and type of electronic discourse functions present in the synchronous 
discussion data for the two groups. The user-friendly interface provided by mIRC for real-time 
discussions allowed students to use the networked computer lab as a virtual meeting place. The data of 
four 90-minute synchronous discussions, two obtained from group A and two from group B, were 
analyzed and coded according to a scheme derived from previous SLA interactionist research. We thus 
coded for 14 different discourse functions that could be easily identified in these electronic discussions as 
students engaged in lively and informative student-centered exchanges. These represent "electronic 
moves" or units of discourse which encode specific functions, such as greetings, topic initiation moves, 
assertions and/or imperatives, requests, responses, adversarial moves, off topic moves, topic shifts, 
humor, requests for information, floor holding moves, corrective feedback, reprimands, and closings. For 
a conversation in slow motion to take shape, learners had to jointly construct a discourse structure, which 
meant initiating a request to be followed by a response or perhaps another move (request for information, 
clarification request, topic shift). The actual construction or production of a conversation between and 
among students shifted from slow motion to rapid-fire exchanges in the synchronous discussions 
examined. 
Table 3. Discourse Functions in Synchronous Communication Using mIRC (Data from four 90-minute 
sessions - Groups A and B) 
Categories (Electronic 
Discourse Functions)  
Total  
Teachers 
(N=2)  
Students 
(N=25)  
Susana M. Sotillo Discourse Functions and Syntactic Complexity in Synchronous… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 89 
(1) Greetings  53  7  46  
(2) Topic Initiation  18  12  6  
(3) 
Assertions/Imperatives  
192  23  169  
(4) Requests 
(clarification,  
         
Comprehension 
checks,  
         
Explanation requests)  186  91  95  
(5) Responses 
(elaboration  
         
Explanation, 
clarification,  
         
Apology, agreement)  556  74  482  
(6) Adversarial Moves  44  ---  44  
(7) Off topic 
comments  
8  2  6  
(8) Topic Shift Moves  17  5  12  
(9) Humor  66  1  65  
(10) Information 
Requests  
92  43  49  
(11) Floor Holding 
Moves/  
         
Topic Continuation  11  7  4  
(12) Corrective Moves  14  8  6  
(13) Reprimands  3  2  1  
(14) Closing Moves  12  5  7  
Totals  1272  280  992  
 
Teacher-initiated moves accounted for 22% of all moves present in these electronic discussions 
(280/1272), whereas student-initiated moves comprised 78% of all moves (992/1272). Responses to 
teacher-and student-initiated requests accounted for 44% of all discourse functions, indicating that 
exchanges were indeed taking place in electronic space. Comprehension questions, requests for 
explanations and clarification accounted for 14% of all moves, and these were almost evenly divided 
between teachers and students. All adversarial moves were student-initiated, as were the majority of the 
reprimands. In interactionist SLA research, moves that modify the structure of the conversation (e.g., 
clarification requests, confirmation checks, comprehension checks) have been shown to facilitate input 
comprehension, which is deemed necessary for second language acquisition (Long, 1981; Pica, 1994). 
These types of interactional modification moves were present in the synchronous data analyzed. Other 
Susana M. Sotillo Discourse Functions and Syntactic Complexity in Synchronous… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 90 
types of discourse functions, including humor, reprimands, topic shifts, and corrective moves, were also 
present in the synchronous discussions and accounted for 1.1% of all the discourse functions identified 
and coded. 
In the CMC synchronous discussions, students posted questions or responses to teacher- and student-
generated questions. As shown in Excerpt #4, the rapid scrolling of messages from multiple users of the 
chatware (mIRC) exerted pressure on students to post short messages rapidly without paying attention to 
form (accuracy). There were very few long messages because these required more attentional resources to 
process. The software features of mIRC, which allowed communication from one to many, and from 
many to many, seemed to promote the loss of chronological information as a result of the intervening 
postings and lack of adjacency. Because of the rapid scrolling of messages, some students posted only 
two or three messages during the 90-minute sessions, and spent their time reading their classmates' 
postings. Each student worked separately at a computer terminal, but all messages posted were displayed 
in the front of the room on a screen using a data projector. Both students and instructor could scroll up or 
down to reread previous messages. 
 
Asynchronous Discussions (Postings to the ESL Discussion Forum) 
The discourse functions identified in the asynchronous threaded discussion forum were qualitatively and 
quantitatively different from those present in the synchronous discussions dealing with similar topics. 
Some of the asynchronous postings were fairly long and focused on a specific topic. Only four specific 
discourse functions were clearly identified from the 105 postings to the ESL threaded discussion: Topic 
initiation moves; student responses; teacher response/comments; and student responses or comments to 
other students. Twenty-one percent (21%) were classified as topic initiation moves and teacher 
response/comments on students' postings. Twenty-two percent (22%) of all moves were teacher-initiated. 
Student-initiated moves consisted of topic initiations, responses to teacher questions, and comments or 
responses to other student-initiated postings. As with the synchronous discussions, student-initiated 
moves accounted for 78% of all electronic moves. The data displayed in Table 4 below show that 
discourse functions in asynchronous discussions seemed to be restricted to the kind of question, response, 
evaluation sequence found in traditional "chalk and talk" classrooms. However, there were some topics 
that generated lively student exchanges. 
Table 4. Discourse Functions in Asynchronous Communication Postings from January - April 1997  
 (N=13 students, 1 instructor)  
Type of 
Posting/Electronic 
Discourse Function  
Teacher 
Postings  
Student 
Postings  
Topic Initiation Moves  9  13  
Student Responses     52  
Teacher 
Response/comments  
14     
Student Comments or 
Responses to other 
Students  
   17  
Totals (105)  23  82  
 
Susana M. Sotillo Discourse Functions and Syntactic Complexity in Synchronous… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 91 
For example, in response to one of the readings, Ways of Being, a Vietnamese student replies to a student 
from the former Soviet Union about religious beliefs and traditions. This topic was of interest to students 
in group A. The following unedited posting is reproduced in the student's evolving second language: 
 
 Excerpt #5 
 Asynchronous Discussion 1/25/97 
 ESL Discussion Forum (unedited) 
Ways of being by Susana 
Fathers and Sonsby Ina 
Re: Father and Sonsby Viet  
 
The tradition which made your family and you weren't believers. But what do you think 
about tradition? In some coutries you can not change your tradition. You always have to 
do whatever which your grand or your parent did. You think it is good? I think it was 
good but it had something not good. You can not do everything which they did about 50 
years or longer so. Because their socieites is not like our society. You should change if it 
is not good. Why not? You change it to mean you make your tradition better. I think you 
made a right decision. Because I think every religion teach us better. How to behave with 
everyone around you. If everyone behave each other like what religion teach then I think 
our society will be perfect. What do you think about it? 
The excerpt above illustrates this student's thoughtful response to another student's posting in which she 
challenges her parents' beliefs by joining a church at the age of sixteen (Fathers and Sons by Ina): 
When I was sexsteen years old lots of my friends decided to go to the church. I was 
curious about it and I decided to come and see what it is all about. It was protestanic 
church and it was very interesting for because all I knew about christianity was Russian 
Orthodocsal Church, in which I never was intrested. 
These excerpts from the asynchronous ESL discussion forum illustrate the cognitive process of (a) laying 
out the background information in a student's response to an article on cultural traditions and then (b) 
providing details and examples or elaborating. From these two excerpts, one can infer two cognitive 
processes at work: organizing the information to be conveyed and elaborating for clarification. This is 
accomplished by three strategies: rephrasing (e.g., "You always have to do whatever which your grand or 
your parent did"); sentence combining ("I was curious about it and I decided to come and see what it is all 
about"); and learning to use embedded and subordinate clauses (If everyone behave each other like what 
religion teach then I think our society will be perfect). 
The numbers and types of discourse functions displayed in Table 4 show that the quantity and types of 
interactional functions found in the synchronous mode of CMC were not present to the same extent in the 
asynchronous discussions. 
 
Syntactic Complexity Results 
 Syntactic complexity, defined in this study as the ability to produce writing that uses subordination and 
embedded subordinate clauses, is shown in Table 5 as frequency counts obtained from samples of 
Susana M. Sotillo Discourse Functions and Syntactic Complexity in Synchronous… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 92 
asynchronous and synchronous sessions. The type of embedded subordinate clauses examined in this 
study were generally introduced by for, that, what, and which.5 
Additionally, t-tests were performed on the means and standard deviations of paired samples in order to 
determine whether or not there were statistically significant differences in terms of syntactic complexity 
between the written output generated under two different modes of CMC. 
 
Table 5. Frequency Distribution of Syntactic Complexity Indicators by Type of Electronic Discussion  
Type of 
Electronic 
Discussion  
Error-free 
clauses  
Total 
Clauses  
Error-free 
T-units  
Total 
T-units  
Sub-ordinate 
Clauses  
Embedded 
Subord. 
Clauses  
T-unit 
Length 
(Total # 
Words/Total 
T-units)  
Asynchronous 
(Group A) 
N=13  
270  577  120  322  83  195  12.06  
Synchronous 
(Group B) 
N=12  
53  330  120  230  28  47  9.49  
 
Table 6. Ratios of Syntactic Complexity by Type of Electronic Discussion 
(N= 13 Group A, N= 12 Group B) 
Type of 
Electronic 
Discussion  
Error-free 
Clauses/Total 
Clauses  
Error-free T-
units/total 
clauses  
Error-free 
T-units/total 
T-units  
Subordinate 
Clauses/Total 
Clauses  
Embedded 
Subordinate 
Clauses/Total 
Clauses  
Asynchronous 
(Group A) 
N=13  
0.467  0.207  0.372  0.144  0.338  
Synchronous 
(Group B) 
N=12  
0.160  0.363  0.521  0.084  0.142  
 
Statistically significant differences at p<.0001 obtained for error-free clauses/total clauses between these 
two modes of computer-mediated communication. The data are displayed in Table 6. The distribution of 
frequencies in Table 5 shows that more error-free clauses were present in the asynchronous discussions 
than in the synchronous discussions (270 vs. 53). 
In terms of error-free T-units,  Table 5 shows the same frequency count for both modes of 
communication, but the ratios of error-free T-units/total clauses and error-free T-units/total T-units in 
Table 6 were higher for students in group B. Only the ratios for error-free T-units/total T-units were 
statistically significant (p=0.039) between these two modes of CMC. That is, students participating in 
synchronous discussions produced a higher ratio of error-free T-units to total T-units than students 
Susana M. Sotillo Discourse Functions and Syntactic Complexity in Synchronous… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 93 
participating in asynchronous discussions. These results appear to mirror data collected prior to the 
groups' exposure to these two different types of CMC modes; however, it is important to keep in mind 
that group A's postings to the ESL threaded discussion forum (the asynchronous mode) were longer and 
included 203 more subordinate and embedded subordinate clauses and 92 more T-units than those found 
in the synchronous discussion data for group B. Thus group B's written output consisted primarily of 
significantly fewer embedded clauses, total clauses, and T-units. In other words, they produced shorter 
sentences and clauses. Since both groups had an equal number of error-free T-units but group B had a 
total of 230 T-units compared to group A's total T-unit count of 322, statistically significant differences 
obtained between these two groups with respect to the ratio between error-free T-units/Total T-units. 
Frequency counts in Table 5 show that students communicating in the asynchronous mode produced more 
subordinate and embedded subordinate clauses than students participating in synchronous discussions. 
The differences between the ratios for subordinate clauses/total clauses and embedded subordinate 
clauses/total clauses between these two modes of CMC were statistically significant, (p=0.039) and 
(p=0.008), respectively at p<.05. These ratios are shown in  Table 6. Differences in T-unit length when 
comparing written output in synchronous and asynchronous communication were surprisingly not 
statistically significant. However, students writing in the asynchronous mode (group A) produced longer 
T-units than those writing in the synchronous mode (group B). (Refer to excerpts #2 and #3.)   
DISCUSSION 
The results of this study support previous claims made concerning the interactive nature of synchronous 
discussions and the overall benefits provided for foreign- and second-language learning (Beauvois, 
1997b; Bork, 1997; Chun, 1994; Kelm, 1992; Kern, 1995; Kremers, 1993; Sirc & Reynolds, 1993; 
Warschauer, 1997; Warschauer et al., 1996). 
With respect to the first research question, whether the discourse functions present in ESL learners' 
synchronous discussions of reading assignments are quantitatively and qualitatively different from those 
found in asynchronous discussions, the results clearly show that indeed qualitative and quantitative 
differences exist. Synchronous discussions are highly interactive and primarily controlled by students. 
Although there is a feature in mIRC that allows the instructor to banish unruly participants or to take 
control of the board, the instructors facilitating the synchronous discussions in this study did not chose to 
exercise this controlling option. As a result of our decision not to manipulate the flow of synchronous 
communication, there is a significant decrease in teacher domination of discussions. These results, which 
show how students challenge the traditional role of the teacher as dispenser of knowledge and authority 
figure, support previous findings reported by Kremers (1993) and Sirc & Reynolds (1993) who used the 
collaborative technique called ENFI in network-based classrooms to teach writing. This move away from 
traditional pedagogy toward a pluralistic and innovative pedagogy that encourages the formation of 
collaborative writing communities has been characterized as a paradigm shift (see Bruce et al., 1993). 
There is evidence of meaning negotiations between and among participants who are discussing topics of 
interest to them. These meaning negotiations, which are evident from the types of questions asked and 
responses provided, are seen as necessary for second-language learning by interactionist SLA researchers 
(see Long, 1981; Pica, 1994; Pica, Young, & Doughty, 1987). The importance of studying discourse in an 
environment where one can see the actual construction of a conversation, including the constraints that 
CMC software (e.g., message size) places on interactants, has been reported in analyses of face-to-face 
communication and CMC discourse (see Sacks, Schegloff, & Jefferson, 1974; Cech & Condon, 1998, 
258-262). 
As Cech & Condon (1998, 257) explain, "typing at a keyboard for most people is more time consuming 
than is speaking." In this study, given the limitations of the software being used (mIRC), participants were 
forced to maintain topic focus while preparing their responses. This type of CMC imposes attentional 
Susana M. Sotillo Discourse Functions and Syntactic Complexity in Synchronous… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 94 
demands on participants that differ from those commonly found in face-to-face interaction (see Beauvois, 
1992; Cech & Condon, 1998). As shown in the synchronous discussions analyzed (e.g., Excerpt #3), most 
of the postings in the present study were from one to many and from many to many; in other words, there 
were often multiple threads going on at the same time. Additionally, participants seemed to focus only on 
topics that were of interest to them and often collaborated in meaning construction and interpretation 
despite attempts by the instructor to shift the focus of the discussion to the readings assigned. For 
researchers working from a sociocultural perspective, synchronous discussions exemplify ideal 
environments because they encourage the intense social interaction and textual meaning construction and 
negotiation deemed crucial for human learning and development of higher-order cognitive functions 
(Vygostsky, 1978; Wertsch, 1979). The interactive nature of these online discussions promises the 
establishment of genuine "communities of learners" where the purpose of education is to impart 
autonomy to the student. (Refer to Teaching at an Internet Distance: The Pedagogy of Online Teaching 
and Learning.) 
The rapid message scrolling and numerous intervening postings accounted for the loss of chronological 
information. Because there were many rapid fire responses and a great deal of socializing among students, 
as shown in Excerpts #3 and #4, both instructors experienced difficulty keeping the discussions focused 
(i.e., Morrigan with group A, and Lenore with group B, respectively). As pointed out by Ortega (1997, 
89), this loss of chronological information and lack of adjacency appear to hinder systematic and reliable 
analyses of interactionally modified input present in the data, including evidence of the possible 
incorporation of lexical, syntactic, and morphological features by L2 learners. This may present a 
challenge to researchers seeking to apply well-established methods of analysis from interactionist SLA 
research to amorphous data from synchronous discussions from one to many and many to many. 
Functional Uses of Language 
As with face-to-face communication, the synchronous discussion data show the functional uses of 
language as students engaged in interaction, such as requesting personal information, flirting, making 
assertions, challenging classmates, and joking among themselves. Synchronous communication seems to 
encourage communicative fluency, which is generally understood as a quality of oral communication that 
expresses itself in coherence, fluidity, and appropriate lexical choice. Although there is no generally 
accepted operationalization of fluency, Foster & Skehan (1996, 305) measure it in terms of "continued 
performance and repair avoidance." Given the various discourse features identified and coded for in the 
present study, it appears that when students were engaged in synchronous communication, they 
participated more often in the ongoing discussions, often deviating from the topic under consideration and 
discussing issues raised by their classmates. In both the synchronous and asynchronous discussions 
students interacted with their classmates to a greater extent than with the instructor, but the nature of the 
interaction seemed more varied in the synchronous discussions. The nature of collaborative work in 
creating meaning through textual exchanges synchronously in electronic space appears to facilitate 
"learner output," which according to Swain (1985) and others is necessary for the development of the 
learner's linguistic system. 
Most of the discourse moves identified by examining the transcribed electronic utterances (e.g., words, 
clauses and complements) found in synchronous discussions are similar to those present in informal 
conversations. For example, the following excerpt shows how some students used floor holding/topic 
continuation moves to keep the discussion focused on a particular topic, often monopolizing the 
conversation: 
 
<tm> My article is about the French guy named Daniel Jouvance. He believes the natural power 
of the ocean and the potential for its wealth of life sustaining elements. 
Susana M. Sotillo Discourse Functions and Syntactic Complexity in Synchronous… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 95 
 <tm> Then he made skin and body care treatment and products. 
 <Magie> Music sometimes awakes different feelings. How does therapist know what kind of 
music is good for his patient? 
 <tm> He also made music that makes you relax. I think it is kind of music therapy. You can 
listen to that from computer if you access the home page. (floor holding move) 
 <tm> Magie, I agree with you. 
 <tm> I guess nobody knows about the importance of plankton in the ocean. (Floor holding move; 
tm is unwilling to relinquish the floor and begins discussing another topic; excerpt from 
Appendix A, category 11.) 
 
There was also some evidence that students noticed errors in spelling, grammar, and punctuation, and 
occasionally corrected each other: 
 
<Chinche> and what kind of education is that?? 
 <Cucarron> it is just a fact of independent ideas, if people want to educate their children at home 
they can organize their lifes with a very strictic program in order to do the right thing. 
 <JCQH> Yeah! But don't you remember the nice time that you spent at school with children your 
edge?" 
 <Jellyman> you can give this moral to your children also at home 
 <Nita> School teaches history, geography, math, and science, biology, arts and some more 
subject. 
 <Cucarron> I remember those days, at that AGE. NOT EDGE! (Excerpt from  Appendix A, 
category 12.) 
To encourage self-correction and accuracy in writing, perhaps one solution for ESL writing classrooms 
would be to distribute transcripts from synchronous discussions and ask the learners to study and critique 
their own and others' use of the L2. This type of activity would provide an appropriate context for L2 
learners to focus on form as part of the language learning process. 
The findings of this study are consistent with the tenets of interactionist SLA research (as described in the 
work of Pica, 1994, and Pica et al.,1987) and seem to address some of Chapelle's (1997, 1999) critical 
questions (e.g., How good is the language experience in CALL for learning? Do learners produce 
"comprehensible output"?) The results show that learners produce more informal electronic speech and 
utilize a variety of discourse functions when they exchange ideas and information with their classmates in 
a synchronous mode than when posting to the asynchronous discussion forum. 
In the asynchronous discussions (the threaded ESL discussion forum), students participated in 
information exchanges, challenged each other's views, questioned new concepts, but primarily responded 
to teacher and student questions. Thus the quantity and quality of interaction was largely constrained in 
this mode of CMC. Some topics generated more student interaction than others. For example, the 
readings on Ways of Being generated a total of 19 student exchanges, including a Vietnamese student's 
critical response to a Russian student's posting on religion and tradition (Fathers and Sons). 
In general, student output in the asynchronous discussions was lengthy and more syntactically complex 
than that available in synchronous discussions (c.f., Edy's postings in Appendix C and the synchronous 
exchanges in Excerpts #1 and  #3.) While students communicating synchronously seemed to focus on 
Susana M. Sotillo Discourse Functions and Syntactic Complexity in Synchronous… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 96 
meaning and disregard accuracy, those communicating asynchronously had more time to plan their 
answers and monitor spelling and punctuation. However, malformed sentences and inaccuracies in 
spelling and punctuation were evident in many of the asynchronous postings. 
While both modes of CMC (synchronous and asynchronous) presented ESL learners with opportunities to 
practice and expand their fluency in ways that differ from conventional oral and written classroom 
practices, not all students took advantage of this opportunity. In the asynchronous data examined, 49% of 
the discourse functions identified were classified as student responses to teacher questions or prompts. 
Asynchronous discourse functions identified were similar to those found in traditional language 
classroom discourse: teacher request — student response — teacher evaluation. Yet there were many 
instances where students, while not often threading their responses, posted sequentially in response to 
teacher queries, addressed issues brought up by each other, presented many types of elaboration and 
explanation (e.g., Ina's and Edi's long postings, and Ceci's complex sentences shown in  Appendix D), 
signaled humor, and suggested agreement and disagreement in indirect ways (e.g., Viet's agreement with 
parts of Ina's argument in Excerpt #5). In other words, students responded to other students' postings in 
the threaded ESL discussion forum when the issues addressed were directly relevant to their own personal 
experiences. 
Concerning the second research question, which mode of CMC shows more syntactically complex learner 
output, the results indicate that learners used more subordinate and embedded subordinate clauses in their 
written output while posting to the asynchronous discussion forum than when communicating 
synchronously. An example of the complex level of embeddedness found in many of these postings is 
illustrated by the excerpt and tree diagram displayed in Appendix D. Research has shown that using 
progressively more complex language is also an indicator of the cognitive processes involved in the act of 
composing and revising texts (Daiute, 1986; Hawisher & Selfe, 1989; Kobayashi & Rinnert, 1992). These 
processes seemed to be at work as students composed and revised their postings to the asynchronous 
discussion forum. 
 The average T-unit length also increased in asynchronous discussions when compared to data from 
synchronous discussions (12.06 vs. 9.49, respectively). When coding and examining the synchronous data 
for syntactic complexity indicators, we found numerous "fragments" or electronic utterances (i.e., words, 
clauses, or sentences usually found in face-to-face interaction) that did not constitute traditional units of 
analysis in written texts (e.g., sentences, s-nodes, c-units). 6/P>  
The data appear to show that the asynchronous mode, to a greater extent, provides opportunities that 
would seem to facilitate the use of more complex language than the synchronous mode. This may be 
explained by the fact that writing in delayed-time conditions is affected by audience expectation (teacher 
and other students as audience), the nature of the task (in this case, responding critically to specific 
academic readings), and the need to adhere to time constraints (e.g., one hour) in organizing one's 
response and identifying the main ideas in the readings. Since these students were writing for academic 
purposes, their goal was to produce well-structured essays within a specific time frame. 
The threaded ESL discussion forum also gave L2 learners opportunities to orally discuss their ideas with 
their teacher and classmates prior to posting to the discussion forum, plan their responses, and organize 
their material. These are all features generally found in the traditional ESL writing classroom in the form 
of oral discussions in large or small groups. Thus the kinds of written texts students produced in the 
asynchronous mode contained features that are representative of formal written discourse. 
The fact that many of these postings contained grammatical inaccuracies might be related to one of Foster 
& Skehan's (1996) findings concerning complexity. According to Foster & Skehan (1996, 303), 
"complexity emphasizes the organization of what is said and draws attention to the progressively more 
elaborate language that may be used, as well as a greater variety of syntactic patterning." It also reflects 
Susana M. Sotillo Discourse Functions and Syntactic Complexity in Synchronous… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 97 
the learner's risk taking behavior in using more advanced forms of the target language and coping with the 
demands of cognitive processing time and effort. Students experimenting with more complex language 
probably had little energy left for monitoring sentential errors. This is exemplified by Ina's extensive use 
of subordinate and embedded subordinate clauses in Excerpt #2. Ina is clearly using forms closer to "the 
cutting edge of interlanguage development" (Foster & Skehan, 1996, 304). 
Though synchronous communication is text-dependent, it would seem that fluency or effective ongoing 
discourse, but not syntactic complexity or accuracy, is facilitated via this mode of CMC. Given the 
conversational nature of synchronous discussions, where electronic utterances predominate, it was 
difficult to measure syntactic complexity because these utterances were not coded as either T-units or 
clauses. 
These results partially confirm previous findings by Kern (1995), who reported loss of grammatical 
accuracy and lack of coherence because of the fast pace of the discussions taking place in real time. 
However, as shown in the results section, despite the cognitive processing time constraints and effort 
involved in tracking a discussion thread in the synchronous discussions, error-free T-units/Total clauses 
and error-free T-units/total T-unit ratios were higher for students in group B than for students in group A. 
That is, there were significantly fewer errors found in the more informal synchronous exchanges of group 
B than in the asynchronous discussion texts produced by students from group A. 
Although there are many plausible explanations for the fact that group B produced higher error-free T-
units/total clauses and error-free T-units/total T-unit ratios than group A, one of the most important 
explanations is the degree to which learners control speech/writing mechanisms. The error-free T-unit 
ratios data displayed in Table 6 seem to mirror the data collected prior to the CMC activities, where group 
B produced a significantly greater number of error-free T-units in the pre-test. This can best be explained 
in terms of the type of CMC involved. Group B learners were engaged in real-time (synchronous) 
communication, which entails different language information processing and production mechanisms 
(Wei, 2000). These learners were operating at the lexical-conceptual structural level, which conflates 
universally available semantic and pragmatic information (Wei, 2000, 109-114). These students produced 
significantly shorter sentences because their immediate attention was focused on conveying information 
directly. 
They were asking questions, clarifying information previously discussed as their classmates' postings 
scrolled by. In stark contrast, students in group A posting to the asynchronous discussion forum paid 
more focal attention to language forms and grammatical structure. They fully exploited lexical choices 
and syntactic structures available to them (e.g., subordinate and embedded subordinate clauses). Group A 
students seemed to be operating at the predicative-argument structural level "which specifies the 
properties of verbs in different subcategories and how the expressed arguments are encoded 
grammatically," (Wei, 2000, 109). Their use of surface devices for word order, agreement and 
tense/aspect marking represents their morphological realization patterns. 
It thus appears that different cognitive processing demands are placed on student performance by these 
two modes of CMC. The effects on learners' grammatical accuracy of different types of cognitive 
demands by learning task have been shown by Foster and Skehan (1996) in their study of planning and 
task type in SLA. Their findings indicate that for each task, undetailed planners produced the most 
accurate level of language performance. 
Finally, with respect to overall syntactic complexity, the length of the postings to the ESL threaded 
discussion forum and the students' risk-taking behavior in using more elaborate language seem to account 
for the fact that students in group A produced more subordinate and embedded subordinate clauses than 
students from group B who were communicating synchronously. 
Susana M. Sotillo Discourse Functions and Syntactic Complexity in Synchronous… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 98 
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS 
A paradigm shift seems to be underway in classroom relations and means of delivering information as a 
result of recent technological innovations. The extent to which teachers manage classroom discussion, 
provide feedback or reframe their intervention involves a complex interplay between and among several 
key factors. For example, the rationale behind using CMC in a course, the instructor's pedagogical 
orientation and instructional goals, and the features of the software utilized affect the learning outcomes 
and effectiveness of the students' language learning experiences (see Brandon & Hollingshead, 1999). 
 As some researchers investigating the role of CMC in the teaching of content, second languages and 
writing skills have shown, teacher domination of discussions and control of the knowledge base seem to 
be challenged by the students' degree of participation in both synchronous and asynchronous modes of 
communication (Berge, 1995; Kremers, 1993; Miller, 1993; Sirc & Reynolds, 1993; Warschauer, 1997). 
In this study, both teachers tried to keep the discussion of academic readings focused, as in Excerpt #1, by 
reframing questions, scaffolding, and providing implicit corrective feedback through modeling. The 
teacher in group B succeeded in keeping the discussion focused (Excerpt #4) for longer stretches of 
discourse, but students often managed to change the topic. This should not be seen as a weakness but 
rather as part of a collaborative learning process found in purposeful action (Vygotsky, 1978). 7 
Furthermore, student collaboration and text construction in both modes of CMC, especially synchronous 
communication, seem congruent with the text-mediational interpretation of Vygotsky, which views texts 
as thinking devices that allow learners to generate new meanings collaboratively (Wertsch & Bivens, 
1992). As anecdotal evidence and the results of recent experimental research have shown, this learner-
centered aspect of CMC technologies enhances learning opportunities for students (Berge, 1995; Harasim, 
1987). 
Asynchronous discussions in particular allow language learners more time to plan their writing, edit their 
spelling, grammar, and punctuation when paying attention to form, and make longer contributions than 
students composing synchronously. Asking students to respond to challenging academic readings 
encourages them to think critically and post carefully prepared responses to teacher and student queries. 
Learners are thus able to focus on both form and meaning to a greater extent than when they are engaged 
in rapid fire exchanges and socializing via synchronous discussions. 
Since student postings to the asynchronous ESL discussion forum were saved for the duration of the 
academic year, learners were able to gauge the development of their second language writing skills. Data 
collected from synchronous and asynchronous discussion groups could be used in carefully planned 
longitudinal studies. 
There are limitations concerning the findings of this study. First, the number of students participating in 
this study was relatively small (25). Second, these were two intact ESL classes, which meant that students 
were not randomly selected or assigned to different treatment groups (synchronous vs. asynchronous 
CMC). Third, unlike previous SLA studies on computer mediated communication, this study used T-
units, subordinate clauses and embedded subordinate clauses as indicators of syntactic complexity rather 
than lexical density, lexical range, or coherence and cohesion devices, which are also used in L1 and L2 
composition studies (e.g., Ferris, 1994). Fourth, it is possible that differences in teacher intervention and 
personalities in these two types of CMC might account for the significant decrease in teacher domination 
of discussions. The researcher-instructor chose not to intervene directly in the CMC discussions, opting 
for guiding the discussions as opposed to controlling the content, whereas the ESL instructor who 
monitored two of the synchronous discussions with group B tried to keep students focused on the 
academic readings. Future research could control for differences in teacher participation in CMC 
discussions, task design, and time spent on CMC writing activities. Given these limitations, these findings 
should be considered only indicative of patterns that might be found with other ESL student populations. 
Susana M. Sotillo Discourse Functions and Syntactic Complexity in Synchronous… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 99 
In conclusion, it seems appropriate to point out that while these technological innovations foster changes 
in power relations in the classroom, facilitate massive information exchange, and encourage learner 
autonomy, they are ultimately tools or adjuncts in the hands of instructors who must use them creatively 
to maximize the students' language learning experience. Although face-to-face interaction in language 
learning situations is still essential for making oral input comprehensible and facilitating the restructuring 
of the learner's evolving linguistic system, CMC technologies have the potential to enhance the process of 
second language acquisition and encourage the formation of electronic communities of learning. Future 
research studies on language acquisition based on the impact of various modes of CMC and multimedia 
developments will form part of the research agenda for the 21st century. 
APPENDIX A  
CODING CATEGORIES DEFINITIONS 
1. Greetings Opening move in a synchronous 
discussion 
"People talk to me!" 
2. Topic Initiation Suggesting a topic in a 
synchronous discussion 
"Let's talk about beach erosion." 
3. Assertions/ 
Imperatives 
Declarative statements; 
commands 
"This is really terrible, but it's the 
law…" 
4. Questions/ 
Requests 
pecific electronic speech acts 
based on Long (1981):  
 (a) clarification requests;  
 (b) comprehension checks;  
 (c) explanation requests  
"Is that only the case with garment 
factories?" (4a); 
 "Why did she feel that NASA was 
responsible for her loss?" (4c). 
5. Responses (a) Elaboration;  
 (b) explanation;  
 (c) clarification;  
 (d) apology;  
 (e) agreement 
Examples of elaboration and 
explanation, respectively: "I have been 
interested in classical music since I 
began to learn piano. I knew that music 
was not only for people to make happy, 
but also for patients who have 
emotional and physical handicaps," 
(5a) and "because her father was 
working in NASA," (5b). 
6. Adversarial 
moves/ 
challenges 
Electronic speech acts where one 
participant challenges another 
"Do you only read cheap magazines?" 
7. Off Topic Electronic speech act that 
deviates from the topic under 
discussion  
"You are crazy, boyfriend! You are 
crazy, boyfriend!" 
8. Topic shift 
moves 
 "I think we should now move on to 
your article." 
9. Humor  "Vietnamese movie is not good. It is 
very cheap…J .J "  
10. Request for 
information 
 "Where does one find the worst beach 
erosion in New Jersey?" 
11. Floor holding 
moves/ topic 
continuation 
Electronic speech acts where one 
participant tries to keep the 
conversation going and is 
unwilling to relinquish his/her 
turn, as in the following sequence 
<tm> My article is about the French 
guy named Daniel Jouvance. He 
believes the natural power of the ocean 
and the potential for its wealth of life 
sustaining elements 
Susana M. Sotillo Discourse Functions and Syntactic Complexity in Synchronous… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 100 
 <tm> Then he made skin and body 
care treatment and products. 
 <Magie> Music sometimes awakes 
different feelings. How does therapist 
know what kind of music is good for 
his patient? 
 <tm> He also made music that makes 
you relax. I think it is kind of music 
therapy. You can listen to that from 
computer if you access the home page. 
(floor holding move) 
 <tm> Magie, I agree with you. 
 
<tm> I guess nobody knows about the 
importance of plankton in the ocean. 
(floor holding move) 
 <Inanna> Ing, music helps when one 
is depressed. What type of music do 
therapists recommend for people who 
are depressed? 
 <Ing> I believe that music is spiritual 
thing. Music reproduces the mood and 
spirit of the composer; of the moment 
he composed it. 
 <Inanna> Yes, anyone can play an 
instrument, sing beautifully like the 
sopranos and tenors, or compose music 
if truly gifted…." (floor holding move) 
 <futsuunonko> Music is a very trace 
that the composer made. 
12. Corrective 
moves 
As in the following sequence <Jellyman> In at home also you can 
take a tutor from teacher no need to be 
parents 
 
<Chinche> and what kind of education 
is that?? 
 <Cucarron> it is just a fact of 
independent ideas, if people want to 
educate their children at home they can 
organize their lifes with a very strictic 
program in order to do the right thing 
 <JCQH> Yeah! But don't you 
remember the nice time that you spent 
at school with children your edge?" 
 <Jellyman> you can give this moral to 
your children also at home 
 <Nita> School teaches history, 
geography, math, and science, biology, 
arts and some more subject. 
 <Cucarron> I remember those days, at 
that AGE. NOT EDGE! 
Susana M. Sotillo Discourse Functions and Syntactic Complexity in Synchronous… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 101 
13. Reprimands  "Margo, you are rude!!!" 
14. Closing moves  "Class, for next week, I want you to 
read the following articles…" 
 
 APPENDIX B  
GUIDELINES FOR CLAUSES, T-UNITS, WORD COUNTS, AND ERRORS 
 
T-Units: Working Definitions 
A T-Unit is defined as either an independent clause and all its dependent clauses (e.g., "When they 
graduated from college, the government let them work in Beijing"), or as an independent clause only 
(e.g., "He came to this country to continue his education"). 
Examples of two T-units: "[In 1991, my husband got a scholarship from Louisiana Tech University] [and 
he came to this country to continue his education]." 
a. Count run-on sentences and comma splices as two T-Units with an error in the first T-Unit. 
Example: "Problems will always exist between humans regardless of race or ethnic background 
or anything, it is part of the human existence equation."  
T   T  
1 error   1 error-free  
b. Do not count sentences fragments. 
c. If a NP is standing alone or a subordinate clause is standing alone, do not count them as T-Units. 
d. When there is a grammatical subject deletion in a coordinate clause, count the entire sentence as 
one T-Unit. 
Example: "More and more women should take an active part in society and use their ability to 
helps others." 
e. Count S-nodes with a deleted complementizer as an embedded clause as in: "The main idea of 
this story is that you can' t deny your race or ethnic group and [that] you can't show people how 
white or how American you are supposed to be." 
f. Direct quotes should be counted as follows: "I don't trust anybody who would deny their color 
like that." (1 T-Unit) 
 "They can't stand the idea of anything good being black. If a black person does something good, 
they say he did that because of the white in him." (2 T-Units) 
g. Count the following as subordinators: after, although, because, if, until, where, since, when, 
while, as if, as though, so that, in order that, so as, in order, as (many) as, more than, although, 
even though, despite, so (that). 
 Example: "In order not to pick poisonous mushrooms, you must know much information about 
all kinds of mushrooms." 
h. Count T-Units in parenthesis as individuals T-Units. 
  
Susana M. Sotillo Discourse Functions and Syntactic Complexity in Synchronous… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 102 
Clauses: Working Definitions 
In this study two main types of clauses were included. 
a. Finite clause. A clause equals an overt subject and a conjugated verb, or a verb that is preceded 
by a modal (will, would, can, may, should, and so on). 
Example: "Japanese high school girls make a lot of money and buy Chanel, Gucci, etc." "I will 
visit my family next year."  
Normally, a finite embedded clause is introduced by the complementizer that.  (e.g., "I thought 
that things were not so difficult in this country"), while a finite subordinate clause can be 
introduced by any of the above subordinators. (e.g., "When one comes to this country,…") 
Finite clauses can stand on their own as grammatical sentences or as the main clause of a larger 
clause if the complementizer is omitted. (e.g., "I studied medicine in my country.") 
b. Nonfinite Clauses. These types of clauses differ from the others in that they do not have an overt 
subject and the verb is preceded by to. Nonfinite embedded clauses are introduced by for, and 
although this complementizer is omitted sometimes, they cannot stand on their own as do finite 
clauses. ("We are going  to live in San Francisco.") (Jacobs, 1995, 50,81-82.) 
c. Imperatives do not require a subject to be considered a clause as in: "Talk to me people!" 
d. In a sentence that has a subject with only an auxiliary verb, do not count the subject and verb as a 
separate clause. (e.g., "Cecilia is sad and her mother is too.") (Polio, 1997, 138-139.)  
Error Guidelines 
a. Count as error improper spelling of proper nouns, geographic sites, and corporate names. 
Example: "We cannot say that racial problem is over and franclin's circle is full."  
(Three errors = article deletion, no capitalization, and incorrect spelling of proper name.) 
"I am from Mexico." (1 T-Unit, proper capitalization.) 
b. Count missing commas in restrictive clauses, inappropriately placed commas, and missing 
commas after prepositional phrases as errors. 
Example: "John my next door neighbor is a person who spent his time doing nothing but 
watching t.v." (Errors in tense and comma omission; 1-T-Unit.) 
c. Count tense/reference errors only within the context of the preceding discourse 
Example: "I did my best every time I cooked. Then I realize that I really like cooking." (Deletion 
of regular past tense marker —ed.) 
d. Count overgeneralization of —ed marker and plural —s to inappropriate contexts; omission of 
third person singular, -s marker. 
Example: "I was borned in Mexico city which is a huge city." (Overgeneralization of —ed 
marker.) 
"How come no one respond to me?" 
"At meal or breaks times students take the streets." (Overgeneralization of plural —s marker to an 
inappropriate context.) 
e. Count article omissions as errors. 
f. Count errors in capitalization. 
g. Count as error non-native usage errors in syntax and morphology. 
Susana M. Sotillo Discourse Functions and Syntactic Complexity in Synchronous… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 103 
APPENDIX C  
ESL THREADED DISCUSSION FORUM 
 
Ethnic and Racial Identity 
by Susana, 1/24/97 
Franklin (In Experiencing. . . (1993), p. 19) writes: "If the history of ethnicity has meant anything at all 
during the last three centuries, it has meant the gradual but steady retreat from the broad and healthy 
regard for cultural and racial differences to a narrow, counter-productive concept of differences in terms 
of whim, intolerance, and racial prejudice. We have come full circle." Do you agree or disagree with 
Franklin's argument? What arguments would you offer to support or refute his analysis? 
Sample of threaded discussions: 
 
History of Ethnicity During the Last Three Centuries by Ceci 1/25/97  
 Changing Attitudes by Susana 1/30/97  
 Ways of Being by Susana 1/24/97  
 A Message from Hopi to Our Modern Societies by Ceci 1/24/97  
 Fathers and sons by Ina 1/24/97  
 Re : Father and Sons by Viet 1/25/97  
 Religion and Tradition by Susana 1/30/97  
 The Elephant. by Edi 1/24/97  
 My parents and me: Two generations by Ceci 1/24/97  
 different types by S. K. 1/25/97  
 Response to Two generations by Dr. Ina 1/25/97  
 Response to Two generations by Dr. Ina 1/25/97  
 No Taboos by Ceci 1/25/97  
 The beliefes by S. K. 1/24/97  
 Re : beliefes by Vi 1/25/97  
 Great Attitude! by Susana 1/30/97 
 
Economics and American Dream  (unedited posting) 
 by Edi 4/5/97 
 
Mack and Glennon come from different social classes. She is a member of the working family 
and he belongs to a higher social class. That is way, their behaviour, language, and dressing style 
are completly different. Mack uses the slang which is typical for his social class but it sounds 
strange for his partner. Glennon feels a great distance between herself and Mack and she 
descrides her position as a "marginal". She wants to decrease the distance between them by 
erasing " any trace of her lower station". 
Susana M. Sotillo Discourse Functions and Syntactic Complexity in Synchronous… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 104 
According to Ruth Sidel " the persistent poor" is a person who lives in poverty eight of the ten 
years. She states that group contains one-third of elderly living in rural areas. She also considers 
black households and female- headed hauseholds as groups of persistend poverty. The 
femalization of poverty is coused by social and economic factors. Women bear more 
responsibility for their family, and employers believe that they cannot work as effectively as men. 
So, they are discriminated at the work. In many cases, they are also dependent on men who make 
main income and suport family. When women become a head of hausehold, they find a lot of 
difficulties to get a job. As a result, they become dependent on a welfare fund. 
APPENDIX D  
EMBEDDED SUBORDINATE CLAUSES TREE DIAGRAM AND EXCERPT 
I agree with Franklin that this century has been difficult to the history of ethnicity. 
  
History of Ethnicity During the Last Three Centuries by Ceci 1/25/97 
History of Ethnicity is a controvertial and difficult topic to talk about. It is because many lives 
and hard personal experiences are involved in this topic. However we do not have to avoid the 
past but to learn from it. In my country we have a terrible history about racism and intolerance. 
Many people are still so angry with "the conqueres", and they cannot understand that many 
generations have past and that Spanish people are not the same that five centuries ago. The 
Conquer of Latin America is a fact, and many indigenous people dead. Intolerance, ignorance and 
racism governed the minds of those people who killed many indians in America. However we 
cannot continue crying those facts but learning from them. I agree with Franklin that this century 
has been difficult to the History of Ethnicity; but I consider that we have to be optimist and to try 
to change this situation in this moment. History is nothing if we do not bring it to our everyday 
lives, and if we do not see how do those terrible experiences can be changed or how can we avoid 
other possible experiences that our racists, intolerants and ignorants attitudes can propiciate. 
Every day is a new day, a new opportunity to start again. Why do we have to wait until others 
decide to start a new world? We can start changing these terrible situations that manking has had. 
Susana M. Sotillo Discourse Functions and Syntactic Complexity in Synchronous… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 105 
If we think that it is not possible to do it, it won't be possible. But if we think that it is possible 
and we start with our personal relationships, we can change the world... 
NOTES 
1. I am using the terms task and activity interchangeably. Tasks are usually defined as activities that 
are meaning-focused and outcome-evaluated and have some sort of real-world relationship 
(Foster & Skehan, 1996). In this study, posting student reactions to academic readings and 
evaluating these student texts in terms of content and syntactic complexity constituted a task. 
These tasks or activities had a real-world relationship in that students were expected to develop 
academic writing and reading skills.  
2. Writing instructors Mauricio Mendez Lopez and Marsha Rickels, who were also graduate 
assistants, helped identify, code, and analyze the asynchronous and synchronous data. Mauricio 
Mendez Lopez performed the statistical analyses on the data.  
3. The T-unit is defined by Hunt (1970, 64-67) as [the] "main clause [of a sentence] plus all 
subordinate clauses and nonclausal structures attached to or embedded in it." For example, the 
following was coded as one T-unit: "When they graduated from college, the government let them 
work in Beijing." Similarly, the following example is coded as one T-unit: "I know a little bit of 
Tseltal which is an indigenous dialect from the Mayan area." The first example contains a 
subordinate adverbial clause (when), whereas the second example shows evidence of 
embeddedness (which) within a main clause. In identifying and counting clauses we included 
both an overt subject and a finite verb (e.g., "Glennon is from a working class family,") and 
nonfinite clauses such as "in order to study…" A subordinate clause usually represents the 
embedding of one clause within another in a hierarchical relationship. The subordinate clauses we 
identified were generally preceded by the following subordinating conjunctions: After, although, 
because (as causation), before, if, since, so as, until, and when. The specific types of embedded 
sentences which we identified were generally introduced by a complementizer, which is defined 
as a word such as that, who, which, for that introduces a clause (Jacobs, 1995).  
4. Moffett (1968, 174) illustrates a problem concerning the validity of the T-unit as a measure of 
syntactic complexity in his comparison of the following pair of sentences: 
"{I don't like}{ what is left in the cup}{after you finish drinking}" (three clauses, one T-unit) 
"[I don't like the dregs] (one clause and one T-unit)Superficially, the first sentence is syntactically 
more complex because of the number of embedded clauses. However, the second sentence is 
more target like and may be an indication that this writer possesses a more elaborate vocabulary 
than the writer of the first sentence.  
5. The following example illustrates our coding and identification of embedded subordinate clauses 
in this study: "[The main idea of this story is that you can't deny your race or ethnic group] [and 
[that] you can't show people how white or how American you are supposed to be.]" This 
example was coded as two T-units. There were two embedded subordinate clauses within these 
two T-units.  
6. Foster and Skehan (1996) use clauses/c-units and syntactic variety as indicators of syntactic 
complexity. They define c-units as each independent utterance providing referential or pragmatic 
meaning (1996, 310) but never give concrete examples of either c-units or syntactic variety.   
7. Intense social interaction for intermental development and functioning form part of Vygotsky's 
(1978) view of human learning and development. A key concept is the zone of proximal 
Susana M. Sotillo Discourse Functions and Syntactic Complexity in Synchronous… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 106 
development (ZPD) or the gap between what the learner could accomplish alone and what he or 
she could accomplish in cooperation with more skilled or experienced caretakers or peers.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I would like to thank Longxing Wei for his input and help with the construction of tree diagrams, the 
anonymous reviewers of the manuscript, and the LLT editors for their thorough editing and excellent 
suggestions for improving the manuscript. 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Susana M. Sotillo (Ph.D., University of Pennsylvania) is an Associate Professor of Linguistics at 
Montclair State University in northern New Jersey. Her recent research has focused on the critical 
examination of political discourse in working-class towns, the discourse of cyberchats, and computer-
mediated communication and second-language acquisition. She has published articles in Discourse & 
Society, the Technology Source, NJTESOL/NJBE Newsletter, and IATEFL Teacher Development 
Newsletter, and book reviews in Language, Studies in Second Language Acquisition, and Language in 
Society. She has also published chapters of books on bilingual education and adult literacy, theory of 
bilingual education, and language transfer and UG. 
E-mail: sotillos@mail.montclair.edu 
REFERENCES 
Aljaafreh, A., & Lantolf, J.P. (1994). Negative feedback as regulation and second language learning in the 
zone of proximal development. The Modern Language Journal, 78(4), 465-483. 
Beauvois, M.H. (1992). Computer-assisted classroom discussion in the foreign language classroom: 
Conversation in slow motion. Foreign Language Annals, 25, 455-464. 
Beauvois, M.H. (1997a). High-tech, high-touch: From discussion to composition in the networked 
Classroom. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 10, 57-69. 
Beauvois, M.H. (1997b). Computer-mediated communication (CMC): Technology for improving 
speaking and writing. In Technology-Enhanced Language Learning (pp.165-183). Lincolnwood, 
IL:National Textbook Company. 
Berge, Z. L. (1995). Facilitating computer conferencing: Recommendations from the field. Educational 
Technology, 35, 22-30. 
Berge, Z.L., & Collins, M.P. (Eds.). (1994). Computer Mediated Communication and the Online 
Classroom (Volume One). Cresskilll, NJ: Hampton Press. 
Bork, A. (1997). The Future of Computers and Learning. T.H.E. Journal, 24(11), 69-77. 
Brandon, D.P., & Hollingshead, A.B. (1999). Collaborative Learning and Computer-Supported Groups. 
Communication Education, 48(2), 109-126. 
Bruce, B., Peyton, J.K., & Batson, T. (Eds.). (1993). Network-based classrooms: promises and Realities. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Cech, C.G., & Condon, S. L. (1998). Message size constraints on discourse planning in synchronous 
computer-mediated communication. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 30(2), 255-
263. 
Susana M. Sotillo Discourse Functions and Syntactic Complexity in Synchronous… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 107 
Chapelle, C. (1997). CALL in the year 2000: Still in search of research paradigms? Language Learning & 
Technology, 1(1), 19-43. Retrieved May 15, 2000 from the World Wide Web:  
http://LLT.MSU.EDU/vol1num1/chapelle/default.html. 
Chapelle, C. (1999). Research Questions for a Call Research Agenda: A Reply to Rafael Salaberry. 
Language Learning & Technology, 3(1), 108-113. Retrieved October 11, 1999 from the World Wide 
Web:  http://LLT.MSU.EDU/vol3num1/comment/reply.html. 
Chun, D. (1994). Using computer networking to facilitate the acquisition of interactive competence. 
System, 22, 17-31. 
Crook, C. (1994). Computers and the Collaborative Experience of Learning. London: Routledge. 
Cummins, J., & Sayers, D. (1995).  Brave new schools: Challenging cultural illiteracy through global 
learning networks. New York:St. Martin's Press. 
Cyrus, V. (Ed.). (1993). Experiencing race, class, and gender in the U.S. Mountain View, CA:Mayfield 
Publishing Co. 
Daiute, C. (1986). Physical and cognitive factors in revising: Insights from studies with computers. 
Research in the Teaching of English, 20, 141-151. 
DeGuerrero, M.C.M., & Villamil, O.S. (1994). Social-cognitive dimensions of interaction in L2 peer 
revision.  The Modern Language Journal, 78, 484-496. 
Feenberg, A. (1999). Distance Learning: Promise of Threat? Crosstalk, Winter Retrieved May 15, 2000 
from the World Wide Web: http://www-rohan.sdsu.edu/faculty/feenberg/TELE3.HTM. 
Ferris, D. (1994). Lexical and syntactic features of ESL writing by students at different levels of L2 
proficiency.  TESOL Quarterly, 28(2), 414-421. 
Foster, P., & Skehan, P. (1996). The Influence of Planning and Task Type on Second Language 
Performance. Studies in Second Language Acquisition 18, 299-323. 
Gaies, S.J. (1980). T-Unit Analysis in second language research: Applications, problems and limitations. 
TESOL Quarterly, 14(1), 53-60. 
Goodlad, J. (1994). Educational renewal. San Francisco, CA: Jossey Bass Publishers. 
Hall, K. (1996). Cyberfeminism. In S. C. Herring (Ed.), Computer-Mediated Communication: Linguistic, 
Social and Cross-Cultural Perspectives (pp. 147-170). Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing 
Company. 
Harasim, L. (1987). Teaching and learning on-line: Issues in computer-mediated graduate courses. 
Canadian Journal of Educational Communication, 16,117-135. 
Harasim, L., Hiltz, S.R., Teles, L., & Turoff, M. (1995). Learning Networks: A Field Guide to Teaching 
and Learning Online. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Harris, L., & Wambeam, C. (1996). The Internet-based composition classroom: A study in pedagogy. 
Computers and Composition, 13, 353-371. 
Hawisher, G., & Selfe, C. (1989).  Critical perspectives on computers and composition instruction. New 
York: Teachers College Press, Columbia University. 
Hunt, K.W. (1965). Grammatical structures written at three grade levels. Champaign, IL: National 
Council of Teachers of English. 
Hunt, K. W. (1970). Syntactic maturity in school children and adults. Monographs of the Society For 
Research in Child Development, 53 (134), Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Susana M. Sotillo Discourse Functions and Syntactic Complexity in Synchronous… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 108 
Jacobs, R.A. (1995). English Syntax: A Grammar for English Language Professionals. New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
Kelm, O. (1992). The use of synchronous computer networks in second language instruction: A 
preliminary report. Foreign Language Annals, 25(5), 441-454. 
Kern, R. (1995). Restructuring classroom interaction with networked computers: Effects on quantity and 
quality of language production. The Modern Language Journal, 79, 457-476. 
Kiesler, S., Siegel, J., & McGuire, T.W. (1984). Social Psychological Aspects of Computer-Mediated 
Communication.  American Psychologist, 39(10), 1123-1134. 
Kobayashi, H., & Rinnert, C. (1992). Effects of First Language on Second Language Writing: Translation 
versus Direct Composition. Language Learning 42(2), 183-215. 
Kremers, M. (1993). Student authority and teacher freedom: ENFI at New York Institute of Technology. 
In B. Bruce, J.K. Peyton, & T. Batson (Eds.), Network-Based Classrooms (pp. 113-123). Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Kroonenberg, N. (1994/1995). Developing communicative and thinking skills via electronic mail. TESOL 
Journal, 4,  24-27. 
Kroonenberg, N. (1995). The French connection: Public journals for high school students. In M. 
Warschauer (Ed.),  Virtual connections: Online activities and projects for networking language learners 
(pp.27-29). Honolulu, HI: University of Hawai'i, Second Language Teaching & Curriculum Center. 
Lantolf, J. (1988). The Syntactic complexity of written texts in Spanish as a foreign language: A 
markedness perspective.  Hispania 71, 933-940. 
Lantolf, J.P. (1994). Sociocultural Theory and Second Language Learning: Introduction to the Special 
Issue. The Modern Language Journal, 78(4), 418-420. 
Larsen-Freeman, D., & Strom, V. (1977). The construction of a second language acquisition index of 
development.  Language Learning, 27(1), 123-134. 
Long, M.H. (1981). Input, interaction, and second language acquisition. In H. Winitz (Ed.), Native 
language and foreign language Acquisition (pp.259-278). New York:Annals of the New York Academy 
of Sciences, Vol. 379. 
McGuire, T., Kiesler, S., & Siegel, J. (1987). Group and computer-mediated discussion effects in risk 
decision making. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52(5), 917-930. 
Mendonça, C.A., & Johnson, K.E. (1994). Peer review negotiations: Revision activities in ESL writing 
instruction.  TESOL Quarterly, 28, 745-769. 
Meunier, L.E. (1994). Computer-assisted language instruction in cooperative learning. Applied Language 
Learning, 5, 31-56. 
Miller, J.D. (1993). Script writing on a computer network: Quenching the flames or feeding the fire? In B. 
Bruce, J.K. Peyton, & T. Batson (Eds.), Network-Based Classrooms (pp. 124-137). Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Moffett, J. (1968). Teaching the universe of discourse. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. 
Ney, J. (1966). Review of grammatical structures written at three grade levels (Hunt, K.W.). Language 
Learning, 16, 230-235. 
O'Donnell, R. (1976). A critique of some indices of syntactic maturity. Research in the Teaching of 
English, 10, 31-38. 
Susana M. Sotillo Discourse Functions and Syntactic Complexity in Synchronous… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 109 
O'Donnell, T.D., & Paiva, J.L. (1993). Independent Writing. Boston, MA: Heinle & Heinle. 
Ortega, L. (1997). Processes and Outcomes in Networked Classroom Interaction: Defining the Research 
Agenda for L2 Computer-Assisted Classroom Discussion. Language Learning & Technology, 1(1), 82-
93. Retrieved May 24, 2000 from the World Wide Web: http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/ortega/default.html. 
Pica, T. (1987). Second language acquisition, social interaction, and the classroom. Applied Linguistics, 8, 
3-21. 
Pica, T. (1994). Research on negotiation: What does it reveal about second-language-learning conditions, 
Processes, and outcomes? Language Learning, 44, 493-527. 
Pica, T., Young, R., & Doughty, C. (1987). The impact of interaction on comprehension. TESOL 
Quarterly, 21, 737-758. 
Polio, C. G. (1997). Measures of Linguistic Accuracy in Second Language Writing Research. Language 
Learning, 47(1), 101-143. 
Sacks, H., Schegloff, E., & Jefferson, G. (1974). A simplest systematics for the organization of turn-
taking for conversation. Language, 50, 696-735. 
Salaberry, M. R. (1996). A theoretical foundation for the development of pedagogical tasks in computer 
mediated communication.  CALICO Journal, 14, 5-34. 
Salaberry, M. R. (1999). Call in the Year 2000: Still Developing the Research Agenda. Language 
Learning & Technology, 3(1),104-107. Retrieved October 11, 1999 from the World Wide Web:  
http://LLT.MSU.EDU/vol3num1/comment/index.html. 
Schleppegrell, M.J. (1992). Subordination and linguistic complexity. Discourse Processes, 15, 117-131. 
Sirc, G., & Reynolds, T. (1993). Seeing students as writers. In B. Bruce, J.K. Peyton, & T. Batson (Eds.),  
Network-Based Classrooms (pp. 138-160). Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press. 
Sproull, L., & Kiesler, S. (1991). Connections: New Ways of working in the networked organization. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Swain, M. (1985). Communicative competence: Some roles of comprehensible input and comprehensible 
Output in its development. In S.M. Gass & C.G. Madden (Eds.), Input in Second Language Acquisition 
(pp.235-253). Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
Teaching at an Internet Distance: the Pedagogy of Online Teaching and Learning. The Report of a 1998-
1999 University of Illinois Faculty Seminar. Retrieved May 15, 2000 from the World Wide Web:  
http://www.vpaa.uillinois.edu/tid/report/toc.html. 
Van Handle, D., & Corl, K. (1998). Extending the dialogue: Using electronic mail and the Internet to 
promote conversation and writing in intermediate level German language courses. CALICO Journal, 15, 
1-3, 129-143. 
Vygostsky, L.S. (1978). Mind and Society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Warschauer, M. (1996). Comparing face-to-face and electronic communication in the second language 
Classroom.  CALICO Journal, 13, 7-26. 
Warschauer, M. (1997). Computer-Mediated Collaborative Learning: Theory and Practice. The Modern 
Language Journal, 81(4), 470-481. 
Warschauer, M., Turbee, L., & Roberts, B. (1996). Computer learning networks and student 
empowerment. System, 14, 1-14. 
Susana M. Sotillo Discourse Functions and Syntactic Complexity in Synchronous… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 110 
Wei, L. (2000). Unequal Election of Morphemes in Adult Second Language Acquisition. Applied 
Linguistics, 21(1), 106-140. 
Wertsch, J. (Ed.). (1979). The concept of activity in Soviet psychology. Armonk, NY: Sharpe. 
Wertsch, J., & Bivens, J.A. (1992). The social origins of individual mental functioning: Alternatives and 
perspectives. The Quarterly Newsletter of the Laboratory of Comparative Human Cognition, 14, 35-44. 
Zhang, S. (1987). Cognitive complexity and written production in English as a second language. 
Language Learning, 37, 469-481. 
 
 
 
