Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/hegchap/default.html 
May 2000, Volume 4, Number 1 
pp. 39-55 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 2000, ISSN 1094-3501 39 
METHODOLOGICAL ISSUES IN RESEARCH ON LEARNER-COMPUTER 
INTERACTIONS IN CALL 
 Volker Hegelheimer & Carol A. Chapelle  
 Iowa State University  
ABSTRACT 
CALL materials may provide a mechanism for implementing theoretically-ideal conditions for 
second language acquisition and for conducting empirical research to investigate effects of these 
conditions. This paper explores methodological issues involved in realizing this potential by 
focusing on investigation of the noticing hypothesis (Schmidt, 1990) in CALL reading materials. 
It reviews the problem of assessing noticing in classroom and experimental settings through a) 
conditions for noticing, b) retrospective assessment, and c) concurrent assessment. Concurrent 
assessment, which provides the most direct measure of noticing, is illustrated through CALL 
materials that gather data on noticing, test retention of word meaning, and calculate the 
correlation between noticed and remembered words. Methodological issues of implementation 
and validation are discussed. 
 
Teachers and researchers interested in improving the effectiveness of CALL activities sometimes look for 
guidance from second language acquisition (SLA) research with the hope that CALL activities can be 
designed to create ideal conditions for SLA. Despite convictions that SLA theory and research should 
inform CALL practice, details of how to form such links need to be spelled out. One might look to the 
SLA research that has used computer-assisted materials for developing experimental language learning 
tasks and for gathering performance data, but with some exceptions (e.g., Doughty, 1991; Hulstijn, 1993), 
the tasks used in such research appear decidedly experimental because they require participants to learn 
specific forms of an artificial language, for example. Even such experiments on learning rules of a natural 
language may require learning specific aspects of a language not of the learners' choosing for short 
duration determined by the researcher. Although such experiments carefully model the desired cognitive 
characteristics for formal learning, critical elements of learner motivation and communicative language 
use are likely to be missing. In fact, given the artificiality of the learning situation created by the 
laboratory experiment, Hulstijn warns that ". . .without additional research in real L2 learning 
environments, one should be extremely cautious in drawing immediate conclusions from laboratory 
studies to language pedagogy" (Hulstijn, 1997, p. 132). 
This paper addresses the need for research in real L2 learning environments by illustrating how SLA 
theory can inform the design and evaluation of a CALL task that can be used in language classes or for 
self study. Methodological issues in the study of CALL from the perspective of interactionist SLA theory 
(Gass, 1997; Long, 1996; Pica, 1994) are explored through analysis of how one of its hypotheses, the 
noticing hypothesis (Schmidt, 1990, 1992), can guide the process of CALL development, data collection, 
analysis, and interpretation. The methodology is illustrated through sample texts in English, French, 
Spanish and German which allow readers to play the role of an L2 learner--who reads the text, requests 
definitions, and takes the post-test--and the researcher--who sees the report of student data and the 
statistical analysis. Discussion of the methodology highlights two issues: the quality of the task for 
creating conditions for noticing and the validity of assessment of noticing through this method. 
 
SLA THEORY, CALL MATERIALS, AND EMPIRICAL RESEARCH  
Volker Hegelheimer  & Carol Chapelle Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 40 
 
CALL developers and users constantly seek pedagogical principles that can guide their construction of 
CALL tasks to make them effective for SLA. At the same time, some SLA researchers seek to improve 
the ecological validity of studies by conducting them in settings where L2 learners are eager and 
motivated participants. CALL activities designed in view of hypotheses about ideal conditions for SLA 
can meet both objectives. This symbiotic relationship between CALL and SLA is maintained through a 
combination of theoretically-based hypotheses to inform the design of CALL materials and empirically-
based research which evaluates both theory and materials (illustrated in Figure 1). 
 
Figure 1. The relationship between SLA theory, CALL materials, and empirical research 
Interactionist SLA Theory 
Theory can be approached in a variety of ways, but for evaluating CALL materials, a theory needs to 
hypothesize characteristics of the linguistic environment that may be valuable for SLA (Doughty, 1987). 
Such a theory, interactionist theory, has been articulated primarily through a research program on the role 
of linguistic input and interaction in SLA in instructional settings (Gass, 1997; Long, 1996; Pica, 1994). 
Consequently, it makes hypotheses which are relevant to the design and study of CALL. First, 
interactionist theory claims that linguistic input, such as that received through CALL materials, needs to 
become intake in order to be acquired by the learner. Intake refers to input that the learner has 
comprehended both semantically and syntactically. Importantly, linguistic input that has been 
comprehended semantically may be of limited help to the learner because semantic comprehension is 
often accomplished by recognition of isolated lexical items or interpretation of non-linguistic cues with 
the help of existing schemata. 
Second, input is more likely to become intake if it is noticed, and therefore Schmidt (1990) hypothesizes 
that noticing is necessary for acquisition. He claims ". . .that subliminal language learning is impossible, 
and that intake is what learners consciously notice. This requirement of noticing is meant to apply equally 
to all aspects of language (lexicon, phonology, grammatical form, pragmatics. . ." (Schmidt, 1990, p. 
149). The noticing hypothesis is drawn from theoretical extensions from psychological research on 
attention and memory (Robinson, 1995; Schmidt, 1990) as well as the seminal introspective study 
documenting the role of attention and noticing for a beginner learning Portuguese through a combination 
of formal classroom instruction and immersion (Schmidt & Frota, 1986). 
Third, learners are most likely to notice linguistic form during interaction. The most useful interactions 
are those which help learners comprehend the semantics and syntax of input and which help learners to 
improve the comprehensibility of their own linguistic output. Such beneficial interactions can occur in a 
number of different ways depending on the situation. In face-to-face conversation, comprehension can be 
achieved through negotiation of meaning which occurs during communication breakdowns when learners 
are confused about meaning or syntax and are therefore unable to comprehend the message at first. One 
reason that negotiation of meaning is valuable is that it can result in modified input--input which is better 
tuned to the learner's level of ability. Unlike intake and noticing, negotiation of meaning can be observed 
sequences of discourse including requests for repetition (e.g., Huh?), or clarification (e.g., What do you 
mean?). These and other observable interactions may indicate that learners have noticed the input. 
Volker Hegelheimer  & Carol Chapelle Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 41 
 
CALL Materials 
 
In pedagogical materials, principles for making intake from input through noticing have been introduced 
as the construct of focus on form (Long, 1988). 
Focus on form refers to how [the learner's] focal attentional resources are allocated. Although 
there are degrees of attention, and although attention to form and attention to meaning are not 
always mutually exclusive, during an otherwise meaning-focused [interaction], focus on form 
often consists of a shift of attention to linguistic code features--by the teacher and/or one or more 
students--triggered by perceived problems with comprehension or production. (Long & Robinson, 
1998, p. 23) 
Ideally, not only traditional classroom tasks, but CALL tasks as well, can provide conditions for learners 
to focus on form. Although some attempts at links between constructs of SLA theory and CALL design 
have been made (Chapelle, 1998; Doughty, 1987), much territory remains to be explored in the principled 
development and evaluation of CALL materials. 
Evaluation requires investigation of the extent to which conditions for noticing can be shown to be related 
to retention of what was noticed. Schmidt (1992) described the problem as follows: 
It is. . .important to operationalize concepts such as intention, noticing, and awareness in both 
experimental and pedagogical settings, recognizing that the major issue in resolving problems of 
awareness and learning in psychology has been lack of consensus as to what constitutes an 
adequate measure of awareness. . . (p. 218) 
Despite this difficulty, the effects of noticing have been investigated to some extent in several studies. 
EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION OF NOTICING 
Research on noticing has taken three approaches to assessment. One method is to construct conditions for 
noticing in instructional or experimental materials by highlighting particular linguistic features. Learners 
who use those materials are then assumed to have noticed the target points. The second method asks 
learners to retrospectively report what they had noticed during task completion. The third method is to 
infer noticing from observable interactions such as negotiation of meaning during task completion. In 
none of these cases is noticing observed directly; each requires an inference, but they differ in the size of 
the inference that is made. 
Inferences About Noticing From Conditions  
Some researchers have attempted to investigate the effects of noticing through input enhancement 
(Sharwood Smith, 1993) conditions in which teachers or materials are expected to draw learners' attention 
to aspects of the input. For example, White (1998) provided francophone learners of English in grade 6 
with texts in which particular grammatical forms were highlighted through use of a bold font. Three 
groups of students received 10 hours of instruction over a two-week period. The target structure--
possessive determiners in French--was not visually enhanced for one group of students. Instead, the past 
tense marker —ed was enhanced to account for any effect text enhancement might have. Two groups 
received enhanced input (i.e., all third person singular pronouns and possessive determiners were 
italicized). Additionally, one group was exposed to more naturally occurring correct instances of the 
target form through a supplemental book. Using a baseline test, an immediate pre- and post-test, and a 
delayed posttest, White concluded that while the noticing prompted by enhancement may accelerate the 
acquisition of highlighted features, it may not be effective for L1-L2 contrasts such as the one researched 
in this study. 
Volker Hegelheimer  & Carol Chapelle Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 42 
A study that found positive effects associated with input enhancement investigated the effects of 
highlighting relative clauses in texts presented in CALL materials. Doughty (1991) found that learners 
who used the materials with relative clauses highlighted in the texts outperformed another group receiving 
no highlighting when tested on their comprehension of the texts and their knowledge of relative clauses. 
Importantly, learners were instructed to read the text for meaning. Whereas all learners were assumed to 
focus on meaning, those provided with highlighting were assumed to have noticed the relative clauses in 
the text. 
Without minimizing the contributions of this research design, researchers should note that this method of 
assessing noticing requires a high degree of inference because even though learners are presented with a 
condition in which noticing is prompted, it is not possible to assess exactly when and where noticing has 
occurred. Schmidt refers to this as an external approach to noticing, pointing out that it is incomplete for 
the investigation of noticing. 
The problem with this external approach is that the treatment may not have the intended effect. 
Learners may look for rules even when told not to, fail to notice highlighted words in the text, fail 
to understand grammar explanations, or fail to see how such explanations apply. . .so there is no 
choice but to continue to approach these questions from both external and internal perspectives, 
giving equal attention to experimental treatment and the assessment of learner awareness. 
(Schmidt, 1992, p. 219) 
 
Retrospective Assessment of Noticing 
 
Addressing the need for a more direct assessment of noticing, researchers have attempted to assess the 
extent to which learners have, in fact, noticed highlighted input by probing their knowledge of a structure 
after receiving input or examining retrospective think-alouds. A study investigating effects of input 
enhancement of preterit and imperfect verb forms in Spanish, for example, found that 14 second semester 
adults receiving enhanced input (underlined, bolded, and shadowed) made more references to these forms 
during think-alouds on a subsequent production task than learners who had not received input 
enhancement (Jourdenais, Ota, Stauffer, Boyson, & Doughty, 1995). 
However, because the think aloud was conducted after learners had received the input the authors 
concluded that 
[t]he difference in mention of the target forms indicates that the enhancement participants had not 
been primed for processing of the target forms. This may have been caused by increased 
registration of the input stimulus due to textual modification. Whether most participants were 
aware of the enhancement, however, cannot be determined by this study, as only one 
enhancement subject remarked on the appearance of the sample text. (Jourdenais et al., 1995, p. 
206) 
In other words, this method requires a large inference to be made from learners' retrospective reports to 
their noticing during task completion. 
Concurrent Assessment of Noticing in Oral Discourse 
A number of classroom studies have investigated noticing during face-to-face oral conversation through 
observation of learners' conversational adjustments (Larsen-Freeman & Long, 1991), requests for 
modified input (Ellis, 1995), and language related episodes (Swain, 1998). The study of conversational 
adjustments signaled by clarification requests (e.g., What do you mean?) or requests for repetition (e.g., 
Huh?), for example, have become a mainstay in research on L2 learning tasks. Researchers believe that 
Volker Hegelheimer  & Carol Chapelle Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 43 
conversational adjustments signal miscommunication which draws learners' attention to the language 
during otherwise meaning-focused activity (e.g., Gass & Madden, 1985). 
 
Investigation of the effects of requests for modified input is based on the same general hypothesis–that 
communication breakdown allows for noticing which can result in comprehension if input is modified 
appropriately. One study investigating the relationship between modified input and retention of the words 
that had been modified found that premodified input promoted acquisition of word meanings (Ellis, 
1995). Fifty-one third year High School students in Japan were asked to listen to directions and identify 
objects and place them in a specific position on a picture of a kitchen. The input was either premodified 
(i.e., by adding redundancy to the instructions) or interactionally modified (i.e., by allowing students to 
ask clarifying questions while the instructions were being read). Investigation of interactionally modified 
language was accomplished through concurrent assessment. In other words, learners requests for modified 
input were documented as they occurred. 
Language‚related episodes are observed when students engage in metatalk, or "talk about the language of 
the text they were reconstructing" (Swain, 1998, p. 71) during a dictogloss task requiring learners to 
collaboratively reconstruct a text. One study investing such tasks found that the approximately 40% of the 
instances of metatalk--language related episodes--focused on form while about 30% focused on word 
meaning. Both types of language-related episodes were hypothesized to be beneficial for acquisition 
because they were evidence that the learners were noticing aspects of the language rather than engaging in 
problem-free reconstruction. As a consequence, the research question asks to what extent the learner 
acquires the language that is the object of attention during the language-related episode, and language-
related episodes are investigated through concurrent assessment to observe the precise object of the 
linguistic metatalk. 
What conversational adjustments, requests for modified input, and language related episodes have in 
common is that they each indicate precisely when and where the learner stopped and noticed the language 
due to a problem in comprehension. Based on her concurrent assessment of language-related episodes, 
Swain (1998) argued for the importance of such concurrent assessment: "it seems essential in research to 
test what learners  actually do, not what the research assumes instructions and task demands will lead 
learners to focus on" (p. 80) [italics in original]. She was referring particularly to the study of oral 
language; however, the same need exists for the assessment of noticing in written language. As a 
consequence, the following statement by Schmidt (1990) remains relevant today by calling for research 
designs which include concurrent assessment of noticing: 
There is almost a complete lack of evidence in the second language literature which is directly 
relevant to the [noticing] hypothesis, since second language researchers have never asked learners 
to provide systematic information on what they notice while learning languages that could be 
compared to what they can be shown (by other measures) to have learned. (p. 139) 
ASSESSMENT OF NOTICING VOCABULARY IN READING 
The majority of studies of noticing have focussed on grammatical form, but at least equally important to 
investigate is the role of noticing on vocabulary retention. The need for concurrent assessment may be 
even stronger in the study of vocabulary. When grammatical form is studied, researchers supply learners 
with multiple instances of a particular form or contrast that they are expected to notice in the input, and 
therefore their noticing at any point in the input may help to strengthen their knowledge of the form. 
Perhaps the more they notice the better, but the effects of noticing can be investigated through assessment 
of learners' improved knowledge of the target grammatical form. In contrast, vocabulary items in reading 
typically appear in the input once, and therefore investigation of noticing needs to record who noticed 
what. In a text with some unknown lexical items, the learners should be expected to notice vocabulary 
Volker Hegelheimer  & Carol Chapelle Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 44 
which impedes their progress in reading for meaning. They then need to receive modified input as either 
L1 translations or L2 simplification to make the input intake, and therefore make it potential for 
acquisition. 
 
Conditions 
The value of conditions that provide modified input for vocabulary has been found in studies in which 
learners have access to glosses for difficult words during reading. For example, Watanabe (1997) found 
that EFL learners who were given access to marginal glosses retained previously unknown words better 
than did learners who were not offered marginal glosses with their readings. One might speculate that 
both groups noticed those words that they stumbled over as they were attempting to interpret the text, but 
that only those students in the condition with the gloss were able to recover from the breakdown through 
the use of the glosses. 
Studies of vocabulary look up behavior relying on paper texts and glosses can only be implemented 
through a "condition" research design, unless obtrusive or impractical methods are used to observe 
behavior. In other words studies with texts and glosses on paper rely on what Schmidt refers to as the 
"external" approach rather than attempting to assess exactly when the learner noticed a particular 
linguistic form. 
 
Concurrent Assessment of Noticing Vocabulary in Reading 
Two approaches have been taken to address the need for concurrent assessment, both of which record 
learner's requests for modified input, during their on-line reading. The first summarizes the data to 
indicate who noticed, resulting in a classification of participants into those who requested glosses 
frequently and those who requested glosses infrequently. 
A study that documented learners' look-up behaviors was conducted using second-year German students 
who were given on-line texts to read as part of their regular classroom assignment (Chun & Plass, 1996). 
As they read, they had access to annotations to words that the researchers believed would be difficult. The 
researchers recorded all requests by learners and conducted detailed analyses concerning the types of 
annotations (text, picture, or video) learners chose. The relationship between noticing and retention was 
examined by calculating the correlation of the number of look-ups each learner had made with their 
overall performance on the vocabulary test. Their conclusion fails to support the noticing hypothesis: 
"high frequencies of words looked up do not necessarily result in better performance on a vocabulary test" 
(p. 192). 
Another study assessing noticing in the same way yielded contrary findings. Hegelheimer (1998) recorded 
individual instances of noticing and requests for input modification as expressed through mouse-clicks. 
After completing an online vocabulary pre-test, students read three short passages and answered nine 
questions about meaning following each passage. As the participants proceeded through the experiment, 
they had access to progressively more contextual help. The first passage provided students no access to 
help functions; they had access to textual glosses (definitions in the target language) in the second passage 
and access to textual glosses and sentence-level audio glosses (students could listen to the passage 
sentence-by-sentence) in the third passage. Results of a vocabulary post-test administered one week after 
the treatment indicated that the learners who frequently requested glosses (i.e., noticed and received 
modified input) performed significantly better on vocabulary post tests than those who used the glosses 
infrequently (Hegelheimer, 1998). 
The second approach to concurrent assessment was taken in a study by Hsu (1994), who looked at the 
relationship between what was noticed and improvement in listening comprehension. Hsu documented 
noticing and receipt of modifications evident by learners' requests for repetitions, written transcriptions, 
Volker Hegelheimer  & Carol Chapelle Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 45 
or written definitions for words in aural input in a CALL lesson. She also recorded the specific linguistic 
input associated with each of the learners' requests. She then assessed outcomes through pre- and post-
tests which had been constructed specifically for the research to include the lexical phrases in the input. 
She found significant relationships between noticing and improvement in listening comprehension on 
lexical items for which modifications had been requested. Even though improved comprehension is only 
one facet of acquisition, and no delayed post-test results could argue that the effects lasted, this 
methodology provides an example of how concurrent assessment of noticing can be combined with 
assessment of improvement. 
The findings from the latter two studies are consistent with the hypothesis from interactionist theory--that 
noticing unknown vocabulary and receipt of modified input increases chances for acquisition. As a 
consequence, this is a promising line of research to implement through CALL materials. 
Assessing the Relationship Between Noticing and Retention 
The following example provides an illustration of how the theoretical hypothesis about the value of 
noticing is operationalized through an on-line reading activity, and how the hypothesis is tested through 
collection and analysis of particular interaction data. 
 
The CALL Materials 
 
The CALL reading activity is intended to allow learners to acquire vocabulary in written input through 
noticing unknown words, requesting modified input by clicking on them, and receiving modified input. In 
other words, the CALL materials create opportunities for noticing vocabulary by glossing particular 
words and expressions that are expected to be troublesome for learners' comprehension of the text. This 
design has become commonplace in CALL materials such as those produced by Transparent Language 
and those that can be developed through authoring systems such as LIBRA, a CALL authoring tool based 
on a HyperCard application that can also be used to create controlled research experiments. 
You, the reader, can participate in the activity by reading an example text as a learner would in English, 
French, German, or Spanish. As the learner, you can read the text, request definitions for (selected) 
unknown words, take the posttest and see your results. You can then look at your data and the analysis 
from the researcher's perspective.  
The reading passages were all taken from online versions of newspapers and slightly adapted, that is, 
shortened to fit within the scope of this paper. Native or near-native speakers of each language identified 
the words they felt to be more difficult and crucial for understanding of the passage, created the glosses in 
consultation with a dictionary, and produced the reading comprehension and vocabulary questions. 
The materials were authored through use of frames for the page layout, JavaScript for data gathering and 
analysis, and basic HTML coding for the content pages. The page layout was implemented through the 
use of three frames. The top frame serves as a container for data collection, the second frame displays 
instructions and glosses, and the third frame displays the reading passage and the post-test. 
Since future access to the data was not required, data are collected through variables in JavaScript rather 
than submitted to a database (e.g., Microsoft Access or FileMaker Pro) via a CGI (common gateway 
interface) script. In other words, the data are stored on the client computer and deleted once the user exits 
the browser. Throughout the activity, JavaScript functions are used to keep track of the glosses that are 
invoked, to analyze the data, and to generate the student report and the analysis and report for the 
researcher. 
Figure 2 shows part of the code in the <HEAD> of the reading passage. This example segment contains 
the glossed items (Target[1] — Target[4]) and the respective definitions (Htext[1] — Htext[4]). Target 
Volker Hegelheimer  & Carol Chapelle Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 46 
and HText are JavaScript variables that are set up as an array. In addition to the actual item (e.g., 
currency), the HTML markup determining the display of each item is included (i.e., Currency) will be 
displayed in bold (<b>). 
 
Target[1] = "<b>Currency</b>"; 
 HText[1] = "<b>Definition</b>: money, legal tender, e.g., US <b>Dollars</b> or Japanese <b>Yen</b> ."; 
 Target[2] = "<b>recalcitrant</b>"; 
 HText[2] = "<b>Definition</b>: formal adjective; refusing to obey or be controlled, even after being 
punished: recalcitrant behavior "; 
 Target[3] = "<b>euro</b>"; 
 HText[3] = "<b>Definition</b>: the new currency in Europe ";  
 Target[4] = "<b>launching</b>"; 
 HText[4] = "<b>Definition</b>: to begin (an activity, plan, way of life) ";  
 
Figure 2. Example of HTML code showing glosses  
Each glossed item is hyperlinked in such a way that when it is invoked (clicked), a JavaScript function is 
called that causes the definition of the word to appear in the frame above the reading passage. 
When the learner clicks on "Please click here when you are ready for the questions," another JavaScript 
function is called which stores all data generated while the learner was going through the reading passage 
(i.e., words clicked on, frequency of clicks on particular words, and the actual items as well as the 
definitions) in the top frame. Additionally, in preparation for the correlation analysis, an array is set up in 
such a way that the value of the items clicked on is set to one (1) while the value of the items that were 
not selected is set to zero (0). 
In this particular example, the word currency is the first Target, or Target[1]. As students read the passage 
and click on various words, the data are collected in the form of a comma-separated string of numbers, 
with each number representing a word. The data are stored sequentially, which means that every instance 
of a mouse click is recorded in order for later cross-referencing. For example, the string 1,1,2,4,1, 
indicates that the learner clicked on currency twice, then on recalcitrant, and then on launching before 
clicking on currency again. In preparation for the correlation analysis, the value of these items (1, 2, and 
4) is set to 1. When the student takes the post-test, the responses to the vocabulary items are evaluated and 
stored as either correct (1) or incorrect (0). Both arrays of zeros and ones are then used to compute the 
correlation coefficient. 
Since JavaScript was used to implement this example, and since JavaScript is interpreted differently by 
the two most popular browsers, careful programming which would not exclude one or the other was 
necessary. O' Reilly's Definite Guide to JavaScript (Flanagan, 1998, 3rd ed.) proved helpful in avoiding 
browser-dependent functions. While this was the most challenging feature to implement, other areas need 
to be cautiously considered when creating Web-based language learning activities. For example, materials 
developers must be aware the variety of displays learners will use to access materials. While monitors 
come in sizes ranging from 13'' to 21'', the more meaningful measurement is the monitor resolution, which 
indicates the total number of pixels on the screen. For example, a graphic which appears to be "the right 
size" on a high resolution monitor (e.g., 1280 x 1024) will appear much bigger on a standard 14'' monitor 
running at 640 x 480. Authoring applications such as the cross-platform Macromedia Dreamweaver or 
Adobe's GoLive make it easy for developers to preview Web sites in various browsers and in various 
Volker Hegelheimer  & Carol Chapelle Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 47 
resolutions. For a more detailed discussion of browser and display issues, refer to Niederst (1999) or 
Lynch and Horton (1999). 
Implementation 
Figure 3 outlines elements of the process of working with the CALL materials. The five columns 
represent the learner's action (Student), the data collected (Data), the implementation (Program), the type 
of inferences made (Inferences), and the researcher's observation (Researcher). The eight rows are 
arranged chronologically, representing learner's process while completing the activity. 
 
Figure 3. Schematic overview of the process of using the CALL materials. 
The first row illustrates how a learner, after reading the instructions, enters the reading passage. At this 
time, a JavaScript function records the time of entry and stores it the invisible top frame used to store all 
data collected. 
Then, learners read the text and may or may not click on glossed items (row 2). If they do, two 
simultaneous actions occur: a) the requested gloss appears above the reading passage in the third frame 
and b) the mouse-click is recorded through another JavaScript function. Clicking on a glossed item is 
inferred to indicate that a learner has noticed an unfamiliar lexical item. The actions outlined in two may 
go through multiple iterations as the learner clicks on a number of vocabulary items and perhaps some 
more than once. 
After completing the reading passage, the learner requests the vocabulary and comprehension questions 
(row 3). Again, the elapsed time is recorded as is the time when the learner begins with the questions. 
While elapsed time is not used for subsequent analysis in this particular example, it is sometimes used to 
Volker Hegelheimer  & Carol Chapelle Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 48 
address other research questions (e.g., Jamieson & Chapelle, 1987). As the learner responds to the 14 
vocabulary and 6 reading comprehension questions, the responses are stored for later analysis. 
When the questions have been completed and the answers submitted (rows 4 and 5), the program stores 
the responses and evaluates them for correctness. The degree of student comprehension is inferred from 
the number of correct responses. The relationship between mouse clicks and correct answers can be 
inferred when looking at the correlation coefficient, which is computed based on the glosses that were 
selected and learner performance on the respective vocabulary comprehension questions (row 6). 
The program then provides the learner and the researcher with the opportunity to view a report (Row 7). 
The learner can view a performance report along with a list of words for which input modification was 
requested, which can be used as a study guide. The researcher can view the same report and observe the 
correlation (Row 8). The information gathered might be used not only for the student and the researcher, 
but also for the teacher who wishes to tailor instruction to meet specific student needs. 
 
The Empirical Research 
The implementation is designed to investigate the following question: Is learners' noticing of vocabulary 
and receipt of modified input during the reading activity related to their retention of word meaning? 
For the purpose of this demonstration, retention of word meaning is operationalized through performance 
on vocabulary items on a reading and vocabulary test that is part of the reading activity. In a research 
setting, one would also want to assess learners' knowledge of the target vocabulary before the activity, 
and to include a delayed post test to assess retention over time. What this example shows, however, is a 
methodology for assessing the extent to which noticing (with modified input) of particular words is 
related to their retention. Noticing is the independent variable which can have a value of 1 (word noticed) 
or 0 (word not noticed). Word retention is the dependent variable which can have the value of 1 (word 
retained) or 0 (word not retained). The unit of analysis, then, is the word rather than the learner, and for 
each of the target words, two values are obtained. For the complete set of target words, a phi correlation is 
calculated to summarize the relationship between the words noticed and those retained. The phi 
correlation is interpreted like other correlations (e.g., the Pearson product-moment correlation); that is, it 
can attain values anywhere within the range of -1.00 to 1.00 and should not necessarily be interpreted as 
indicating causality. The closer it is to 1.00 the stronger the relationship between two variables. 
Because the unit of analysis is the word rather than the learner, a phi correlation is calculated for each 
learner rather than for the group of learners. To summarize the degree of relationship between noticing 
and word retention for a group of learners, the researcher can use the mean phi correlation for the group. 
In other words, a phi correlation is calculated for each learner, and then the mean phi is calculated by 
summing the individual correlations and dividing by the number of participants. 
You can view the data you generated as you worked through the example and you can see how they are 
analyzed. Before choosing to view the data and data analysis, you should have worked through the 
reading activity from the learner's perspective. If you choose to view the data from the researcher's 
perspective before you have created the data as the researcher, some simulated data from the English 
example will be generated and displayed. Click here to see the data and analysis. 
 
METHODOLOGICAL ISSUES 
 
 
Methodological issues in this research design center around two related questions: 
 • To what extent does the on-line reading task create conditions for noticing linguistic problems and 
Volker Hegelheimer  & Carol Chapelle Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 49 
receiving modified input? 
 • To what extent are the mouse click data valid measures of noticing? 
 
Conditions for Noticing and Modified Input 
 
Two related concerns should be considered about the validity of the conditions for noticing and receiving 
modified input. The first focuses on the way the task has been constructed to operationalize the constructs 
of noticing and modified input as they have been defined in interactionist theory. This is particularly 
important because the on-line task is different from the paper and pencil or the face-to-face tasks that 
have illustrated these constructs in other research. Moreover, noticing is typically discussed in relation to 
grammatical forms in the input rather than vocabulary even though the noticing hypothesis does not limit 
the hypothesized beneficial effects of noticing to morphosyntactic phenomena. Second, much of the 
research on noticing has manipulated the input externally, either through the materials or the teacher, but 
noticing is internal to the learner and therefore should be expected to equally effective whether it is 
motivated externally or by the learner. Modified input has typically been operationalized through oral 
face-to-face communication, but again here there is nothing about the construct of modified input that 
says it cannot occur in written texts. 
Conclusions drawn about vocabulary retention in this context assume that learners noticed vocabulary 
that was causing difficulty for their reading, that is, vocabulary that they did not already know. A pretest 
would help to distinguish words that the learner might learn during the reading task from those already 
known. The former words are the ones of interest, and therefore they are the ones that should be included 
in the analysis when the correlation between noticing and correct responses is calculated. When the 
process of pretesting, observing, and postesting is done automatically, the computer can isolate the 
specific linguistic items that the learner needs to learn. In classroom research, this approach to assessing 
acquisition of noticed forms was used by Swain (1998), who constructed assessments specifically for 
individual students to assess their knowledge of the linguistic elements that researchers saw them focus 
on during task completion. Isolating the relevant linguistic forms for outcome assessment cannot be 
accomplished without observation of learners as they complete a task, and therefore it is ideally suited to 
CALL. 
The second concern about conditions is the extent to which learners participate in the learning condition 
as it has been defined. Addressing this concern, Hulstijn (1997) suggests that a computer-assisted research 
task be followed by a retrospective interview or questionnaire to assess the extent to which learners 
participated, but the most reliable indication comes from the computer-documented data indicating the 
processes through which learners complete a task. DeKeyser (1995), for example, noted that records of 
learners' progress through the teaching materials as well as the retrospective data obtained from subjects' 
explanation of their strategies indicated that the intended implicit or explicit teaching methods he 
attempted to investigate were "sometimes overridden by their learning strategies" (DeKeyser, 1995, p. 
398). In the case of noticing and receiving modified input, the effectiveness of the condition depends 
entirely on the learners' participation, and therefore the assessment of their noticing is essential to 
evaluating the quality of the learning condition. 
Learners' participation depends on factors such as their ability level, their interest in the reading passage, 
and their desire to learn the language of the reading passage. These issues are inherent problems for 
constructing any good language materials; however, they are underscored when data from learners' use of 
materials is to be used to make inferences about their noticing. If learners have no desire to acquire the 
target language (as one may suspect is the case in laboratory settings) or if they have no interest in the 
meanings conveyed in the particular reading passage, they may not care enough to notice unknown 
vocabulary and to request modified input. Such a situation is disastrous for both learners, who waste their 
time, and researchers who fail to collect the relevant data. 
Volker Hegelheimer  & Carol Chapelle Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 50 
 
Validity of Measurement  
As Schmidt put it, noticing is an internal factor, which means that it is not observed directly, but must be 
inferred from observation of behavior. In the research described above an inference is made on the basis 
of observed mouse clicks--requests to see the modified input of the gloss. However, because this is a form 
of measurement, it is subject to the same concerns about validity as any other form of measurement 
(Chapelle, 1996). Validity of assessment of noticing should be considered in light of current principles of 
validation (Chapelle, 1999). These theoretical principles are put in the form of heuristics for evaluation 
through Bachman and Palmer's (1996) qualities of test usefulness, which suggests that a test should be 
evaluated against six qualities: reliability, construct validity, authenticity, interactiveness, impact, and 
practicality. In considering or developing a particular measure such as assessment of noticing through 
mouse clicks, the researcher needs to consider each of these qualities on the basis of a reasoned 
judgement. 
Questions about reliability address the extent to which the assessment obtains a consistent picture of 
performance by minimizing irrelevant, or unmotivated variation across samples of performance. Factors 
such as instructions, and consistency of the input to the test taker, their response, and scoring procedure 
influence judgements about the potential reliability of a test. In this research design, because each 
assessment of noticing is obtained from item-level data which are correlated with a dependent variable 
(i.e., performance on each vocabulary item), any single assessment would not be considered reliable; 
however, the complete research design relies on multiple assessments of noticing, which together should 
be expected to be reliable. Since the item-level assessments of reliability are not added up to yield a score 
of how much of a "noticer" an individual is in the suggested design, the calculation of an internal 
consistency reliability across items is not relevant to this use of the measure. 
Construct validity issues concern the clarity of the inference to be made, and the relevance of the 
assessment tasks and the scoring procedure to the inference. Construct validity requires that inferences be 
well defined, the knowledge of the participants be adequate so as not to bias performance, and the test 
tasks and scoring be consistent with the inference. The construct of noticing has been defined as directing 
attention to language. The behavior of requesting definitions during reading should indicate the readers' 
attention is being directed to the language, assuming the reader is seriously attempting to read the text. 
Authenticity is evaluated by judgements about the extent to which the characteristics of the assessment 
reflect activities that the learner would engage in beyond the assessment setting. Use of hypertext during 
reading is authentic to some kinds of reading that the learners would be expected to engage in; however, 
the hypertext aspect of the reading would be different from many of the readings that learners would be 
doing. The journalistic style of the text would be authentic to some of the reading that learners would 
engage in, but not others. 
Interactiveness is evaluated by assessing the extent to which the assessment engages participants' 
knowledge, communicative language strategies, and interest in the tasks. These features of interactiveness 
would be expected to be engaged during the reading activity, and could be prompted through the use of 
this text as one part of a unit that included other activities related to the European currency. A text such as 
this should not be used as a stand-alone, but as part of a task requiring learners to use the information they 
learn from the text. 
Impact refers to the extent to which the assessment can be expected to positively influence students, 
language classes and programs, and society. Impact presents a different dimension for a validity argument 
than the other forms because it involves hypotheses directed beyond the assessment (Alderson & Wall, 
1993; Bailey, 1996; Wall, 1997). Potential positive impacts on the learners is their learning some 
vocabulary, their learning to use hypertext for vocabulary learning, and their receipt of feedback on 
Volker Hegelheimer  & Carol Chapelle Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 51 
retention after reading. Positive impact on teachers is that the materials allow for evaluation of their 
appropriateness by allowing them to observe the extent to which learners are noticing vocabulary as they 
read. A text with hypertext glosses can only be effective for vocabulary acquisition if it contains some 
words that the learners need to learn. Texts that do not record learners' performance provide no evidence 
to teachers about appropriateness. This assessment of noticing provides a means of empirically testing the 
hypothesis that noticing and receiving modified input in this format is valuable for vocabulary retention. 
 
The materials also may have some negative impacts such as discomfort felt by some learners who are not 
accustomed to reading on a computer screen and those who may be uncomfortable having data gathered 
on their performance. Issues of privacy and consent involved in most empirical research on language 
teaching are particularly salient when SLA research is conducted through CALL tasks. Researchers need 
to decide the best way to obtain consent for data collection. The solution suggested here is to provide 
learners with a general notice about their responses being recorded to report to them before they enter the 
reading passage. This general notice, like those that appear in many Web applications, provides an 
implied consent for learners who chose to continue with the activity. At the end of the activity, learners 
could be asked if their data can be stored along with those of other readers for subsequent analysis 
without their name attached. At this point they can make an explicit choice about how their data are to be 
used. This approach to consent provides a solution which assumes the value of using the computer's data-
gathering capabilities to help make the learner more aware of their learning and needs. 
Practicality is assessed through consideration of the feasibility implementing the assessment given the 
available resources. Implementation of this assessment on the Web makes it practical for a wide audience 
provided technical issues such as browser and display compatibility are addressed. According to Which 
Browser, a browser statistic site, Netscape Navigator and Microsoft Internet Explorer currently account 
for 87% of browser use while AOL covers about 12% of the market, leaving less than 2% to other 
browsers. Clearly, such statistics are important for Web-based CALL materials developers since they 
need to know what works on which browser and design an activity accordingly. Implementation decisions 
must also be informed by the fact that browsers are implemented slightly differently on different 
platforms. For example, Niederst (1999) notes that dynamic HTML (DHTML) is problematic on Internet 
Explorer 4.0 on the Macintosh. This assessment was implemented using principles that would execute 
successfully on both browsers and across platforms. 
This usefulness analysis is directed toward the method of assessing noticing as it is outlined in this paper. 
As the assessment is used in research and classrooms, additional evidence can be obtained to support 
these judgements about usefulness. For example, to provide additional support for construct validity, 
learners might be asked to think aloud while they are performing the reading task to see whether or not 
learners click on words that they don't know but need in order to understand the meaning of the text. Such 
data have been reported in studies of learner's use of hypertext. For example, Park's (1994) study 
investigating use of ESL multimedia through think aloud data identified thoughts such as "I think I have a 
lot of vocabulary that I don't know" (p. 147). This statement was made while the learner was clicking on 
one of the words in the input provides empirical support for construct reliability. 
 
Volker Hegelheimer  & Carol Chapelle Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 52 
Table 1. Summary of Usefulness Analysis for Assessment of Noticing 
 
Quality  Positive Attributes Negative Attributes 
Reliability Multiple scores for noticing are used in 
the research design. 
Noticing score for each word may be 
based on a single instance of 
behavior. 
Construct Validity  
 
 
Observed behavior appears to match 
construct definition of noticing language 
due to comprehension difficulties. 
Any serious reader who clicked on the 
words would be noticing them. 
 
Authenticity The activities of reading in a hypertext 
environment and reading while looking 
up words are authentic to some of the 
reading contexts of language students. 
The activity of reading with hypertext 
glosses is unlikely to be authentic to 
much of the target language reading 
that learners engage in. 
Interactiveness Communicative language strategies 
would be expected to be engaged for text 
comprehension. 
 
Impact Learners may learn vocabulary and learn 
about using hypertext for acquiring 
vocabulary 
 
Learners receive information about their 
performance on the vocabulary and 
comprehension questions. 
 
Teachers can see to what extent learners 
are noticing and receiving modified input 
to evaluate the appropriateness of the 
materials. 
 
The profession can learn the extent to 
which noticing and receiving modified 
input correlates with immediate retention 
of vocabulary. 
Learners not accustomed to reading 
on a computer screen may not be 
comfortable participating in this 
activity 
Practicality The entire process from instruction to 
data analysis is included in one program 
which can be run on any browser. 
 
 
CONCLUSION  
Construction of computer-assisted reading materials points out that a "gloss" can take a variety of forms 
in multimedia materials. Roby (1999), for example, proposes that glosses can be characterized in terms of 
authorship (e.g., whether learners or materials developers wrote them), presentation (e.g., whether 
learners have access to them prior to or during the reading exercise), function (e.g., whether they include 
procedural or declarative information), focus (e.g., whether they make reference to the text or present new 
information), language (e.g., whether they were written in the target language or in the first language), 
and form (e.g., whether they provide verbal, visual, or audio help). Each of these provides learners with a 
variety of input modification and raises the empirical question of whether some types of modifications are 
more effective than others for learners. This question must be addressed through the type of computer-
Volker Hegelheimer  & Carol Chapelle Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 53 
assisted methods described in this paper because the question is not only what kind of glosses learners 
have access to, but also which glosses learners actually use and whether their use correlates with 
vocabulary retention. 
The study of on-line noticing of vocabulary in CALL materials is just one way that hypotheses from SLA 
theory can be tested through CALL design with built-in data collection and analysis. This paper has 
explored the methodological issues associated with such research to sharpen understanding of the 
technical and measurement issues associated with linking SLA and CALL. Future work in needed to 
apply these methods in research and instruction in order to produce results that contribute to SLA theory 
and CALL practice. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We are grateful to the GRApES research group for comments on an earlier version of this paper, to the 
four anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments and suggestions, and to the following people for 
their help with various parts of the examples: Arati Bhat Manjeshwar, Bellinda Hegelheimer, Julio 
Rodriguez, Cindy Myers, and Douglas Mills. 
The CALL materials created for this paper draw on JavaScript examples by Douglas Mills and Marmo 
Soemarmo. 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Volker Hegelheimer is an assistant professor in the Department of English and the Program in Linguistics 
at Iowa State University. He teaches ESL and graduate courses on technology in language teaching and 
research and his research interests include applications of the WWW and emerging technologies in 
language learning and language testing. 
E-mail: volkerh@iastate.edu  
 
Carol A. Chapelle (Ph.D. University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign) is Professor of TESL/applied 
linguistics at Iowa State University. She teaches courses in applied linguistics and ESL and conducts 
research on computer-assisted language learning and language testing. Her book, Computer Applications 
in Second Language Acquisition: Foundations for teaching, testing, and research (Cambridge University 
Press, forthcoming), reviews past research on computer applications and charts directions for second 
language acquisition in the era of technology. Her papers have appeared in journals such as TESOL 
Quarterly, Language Learning, Language Testing, and Language Learning & Technology. She is editor 
of TESOL Quarterly. 
E-mail: carolc@iastate.edu  
 
REFERENCES 
Alder son, J.C., & Wall, D. (1993). Does washback exist? Applied Linguistics 14, 115-29. 
Bachman, L.F., & Palmer, A.S. (1996). Language testing in practice: Designing and developing useful 
language tests. New York: Oxford 
Bailey, K. (1996). Working for washback: A review of the washback concept in language testing. 
Language Testing, 13(3), 257-279. 
Chapelle, C. A. (1996). Validity issues in computer-assisted strategy assessment. Applied Language 
Learning, 7(1), 47-60. 
Volker Hegelheimer  & Carol Chapelle Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 54 
Chapelle, C. A. (1998). Multimedia CALL: Lessons to be learned from research on instructed SLA. 
Language Learning and Technology, 2(1), 22-34. Retrieved May 12, 2000 from the World Wide Web:  
http://llt.msu.edu/vol2num1/article1/index.html. 
Chun, D. M., & Plass, J. L. (1996). Effects of multimedia annotations on vocabulary acquisition. The 
Modern Language Journal, 80, 183-198. 
DeKeyser, R. M. (1995). Learning second language grammar rules: An experiment with a miniture 
linguistic system.  Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 17, 379-410. 
Desmarais, L., Duquette, L., Renié, D., & Laurier, M. (1998). Evaluating learning interactions in a 
multimedia environment. Computers and the Humanities, 22, 1-23. 
Doughty, C. (1987). Relating second-language acquisition theory to CALL research and application. In 
W.F. Smith, (ed.), Modern Media in Foreign Language Education: Theory and Implementation, (pp. 133-
167). Lincolnwood, IL: National Textbook Company. 
Doughty, C. (1991). Second language instruction does make a difference: Evidence from an empirical 
study of SL relativization.  Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 13, 431-469. 
Ellis, R. (1995). Modified oral input and the acquisition of word meanings. Applied Linguistics, 16(4), 
409-441. 
Flanagan, D. (1998). JavaSCRIPT: The definite guide (3rd ed.). Cambridge, Massachusetts: O'Reilly. 
Gass, S. (1997). Input, interaction, and the second language learner. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates. 
Gass, S. M., & Madden, C. G. (Eds.). (1985) Input in second language acquisition. Rowley, MA: 
Newbury House Publishers. 
Hegelheimer, V. (1998). Effects of textual glosses and sentence-level audio glosses on online reading 
comprehension and vocabulary recall. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Department of Educational 
Psychology, College of Education, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL. 
Hsu, J. (1994). Computer assisted language learning (CALL): The effect of ESL students' use of 
interactional modifications on listening comprehension. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Department of 
Curriculum and Instruction, College of Education, Iowa State University, Ames, IA. 
Hulstijn, J. (1993). When do foreign language learners look up the meaning of unfamiliar words? The 
influence of task and learner variables. Modern Language Journal, 77(2), 139-147. 
Hulstijn, J. (1997). Second language acquisition research in the laboratory: Possibilities and limitations. 
Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 19, 131-143. 
Jamieson, J., & Chapelle, C. (1987). Working styles on computers as evidence of second language 
learning strategies.  Language Learning, 37, 523-544. 
Jourdenais, R., Ota, M., Stauffer, S., Boyson, B., & Doughty, C. (1995). Does textual enhancement 
promote noticing? A think-aloud protocol analysis. In R. Schmidt (Ed.), Attention and awareness in 
foreign language learning (Technical Report #9) (pp. 183-216). Honolulu, HI: University of Hawai'i, 
Second Language Teaching and Curriculum Center. 
 Larsen-Freeman, D., & Long, M. (1991). An introduction to second language acquisition research. 
London: Longman. 
Long, M. H. (1988). Instructed interlanguage development. In L. Beebe (Ed.), Issues in second language 
acquisition: Multiple perspectives (pp. 115-141).New York: Newbury House. 
Volker Hegelheimer  & Carol Chapelle Methodological Issues in Research on Learner Computer ... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 55 
Long, M. H. (1996). The role of linguistic environment in second language acquisition. In W. C. Ritchie 
& T. K. Bhatia, (Eds.), Handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 413-468). San Diego, CA: 
Academic Press. 
Long, M. H., & Robinson, P. (1998). Focus on form: Theory, research and practice. In C. Doughty & J. 
Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in classroom second language acquisition (pp. 15-41). Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Lyman-Hager, M., Davis, J., Burnett, J., & Chennault, R. (1993). Une vie de boy: Interactive reading in 
French. In F.L. Borchardt & E.M.T. Johnson (Eds.), Proceedings of the CALICO 1993 Annual 
Symposium on Assessment (pp. 93-97). Durham, NC: Duke University. 
Lynch, P., & Horton, S. (1999).  Web style guide: Basic design principles for creating web sites. New 
Haven: Yale University. [Available on the World Wide Web at http://info.med.yale.edu/caim/manual/] 
Martinez-Lage, A. (1997). Hypermedia technology for teaching reading. In M. Bush & R. Terry (Eds.), 
Technology enhanced language learning (pp. 121-163). Lincolnwood, IL: National Textbook Company. 
Niederst, J. (1999). Web Design in a Nutshell. Cambridge, MA: O'Reilly. 
Park, Y. (1994). Incorporating interactive multimedia in an ESL classroom environment: Learners' 
interactions and learning strategies. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Department of Curriculum and 
Instruction, College of Education, Iowa State University, Ames, IA. 
Pica, T. (1994). Research on negotiation: What does it reveal about second-language learning conditions, 
processes, and outcomes? Language Learning, 44(3), 493-527. 
Robinson, P. (1995). Review article: Attention, memory and the "noticing" hypothesis. Language 
Learning, 45, 285-331. 
Roby, W. (1999). What's in a gloss?  Language Learning & Technology. 2 (2) 94-101. Retrieved May 12, 
2000 from the World Wide Web: http://llt.msu.edu/vol2num2/roby/index.html. 
Schmidt, R. (1990). The role of consciousness in second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 11(2), 
129-158. 
Schmidt, R. (1992). Awareness and second language acquisition. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 
13, 206-226. 
Schmidt, R., & Frota, S. (1986). Developing basic conversational ability in a second language: A case 
study of an adult learner of Portuguese. In R. Day (Ed.), Talking to learn: Conversation in second 
language acquisition, (pp. 237-326). Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
Sharwood Smith, M. (1993). Input enhancement in instructed SLA: Theoretical bases. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition, 15, 165-179. 
Swain, M. (1998). Focus on form through conscious reflection. In C. Doughty & J. Williams (Eds.), 
Focus on form, (pp. 64-81). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Wall, D. (1997). Impact and washback in language testing. In C. Clapham & D. Corson, (Eds.), 
Encyclopedia of language and education. Volume 7: Language testing and assessment, (pp. 291-302). 
Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
Watanabe, Y. (1997). Input, intake, and retention: Effects of increased processing on incidental learning 
of foreign language vocabulary. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 19(3), 287-307. 
White, J. (1998). Getting the learners' attention: A typographical input enhancement study. In C. Doughty 
& J. Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in classroom second language acquisition (pp. 85-113). Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
