Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num2/emerging/default.html 
September 2000, Volume 4, Number 2 
pp. 10-16 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 2000, ISSN 1094-3501 10 
EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES 
Literacies and Technology Tools/Trends 
Bob Godwin-Jones 
Virginia Commonwealth University 
 
Our information age has expanded considerably the concept of "literacy." While technology offers new 
ways to teach the traditional literacies of reading and writing, learning how to use digital technology has 
become itself a vital stepping stone to being "literate" in the twenty-first century. New tools are making it 
easier to become both an informed user and an author/developer of new media and electronic texts. 
Emerging standards are helping in this process, too, although sometimes at the cost of narrowing choices. 
READING  
Literacy is a shared responsibility between consumer/learner and producer/teacher. The electronic 
resources instructors have available today provide myriad opportunities for making texts more 
comprehensible to students. We know quite a bit about optimized formats for screen reading, as we do 
also about the benefits of glosses. And the Internet has provided a powerful mechanism for making texts 
of all kinds available to readers. For language learners, authentic texts in the target language abound 
(journals, travel reports, newspaper articles, reviews, family histories, government reports, recipes, etc.). 
In many countries today, what appears in print also becomes available electronically. Yet the vast 
majority of texts on the Web today are not optimized for either screen reading or print. Nor do many of 
the texts targeted for language learners offer glosses or other comprehension aids. Web technology in this 
area has not caught up with the state-of-the-art in fixed media creation. Some programs on CD-ROM 
make extensive use of multimedia to aid in text comprehension. Cyberbuch, for example, (by Dorothy 
Chun and Jon Plass; reviewed in this journal), makes excellent use of video and graphics for text 
introductions and comprehension help. Authoring programs are available which help to gloss texts, using 
either text annotations or other media (graphics, sound, video). Several programs,  annotext and GALT, 
for example, have been developed specifically for working with second language texts. 
The current technology of the Web makes it possible to present texts in a variety of formats which can be 
user-selected and changed on the fly. Currently, for compatibility reasons, most such applications use 
server-based approaches, reformatting through CGI scripts ("common gateway interface"). Some text 
manipulation is possible through JavaScript (extensively on Microsoft's  Internet Explorer) but XML 
("extensible markup language") and a common and scriptable browser "document object model" (or 
DOM) should make this local text manipulation much more powerful as well as easier to create. Some 
Web sites are beginning to present texts not only in Web-formatted versions, but also in PDF (portable 
document format) designed specifically to be printed and read on paper. PDF files, viewed with the free 
Acrobat Reader from Adobe, can include features such as navigation bookmarks, links, and searching. 
Some text collections offer versions in popular electronic book formats. A new electronic book format 
which has generated a good deal of interest is Microsoft Reader used in Microsoft's  PocketPC (the 
successor to WindowsCE) and also available on Windows-based computers. It uses a new font rendering 
process called "ClearType" to considerably enhance screen readability. A conversion tool is available for 
e-book creation in Reader format as are tools for Palm compatible books. Microsoft has made marketing 
agreements with Barnes and Noble and Amazon to make electronic books available in MS Reader format 
widely available. 
 
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Literacies and Technology Tools... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 11 
WRITING  
 
Few today would question the efficacy of word processing as an aid in learning to write well. Electronic 
revision makes process writing much more practical. Proofing tools in the target language can be 
invaluable aids to language learners. The arrival of networks has of course provided further opportunities 
for collaboration, mutual proofing, and shared writing. From early LAN programs such as Daedalus 
Interchange or Norton Connect to Internet-based tools, language teachers have used a variety of 
approaches to encourage student practice and proficiency in writing. E-mail is, of course, the most widely 
used form of computer-mediated communication (CMC). Many language teachers have been using e-mail 
as a means to communicate with students but also as a vehicle for students to interact with each other and 
with other language learners or native speakers. Projects such as the Tandem Network have been created 
to facilitate the use of e-mail exchanges in language learning. It used to be that using e-mail involved 
learning a dedicated e-mail program, such as the Unix-based Elm or Pine, or one of the popular desktop 
applications  Eudora or Outlook. Today many users read and send e-mail through Web-based mail 
interfaces such as Webmail. Often, users who sign on to a free e-mail service such as Hotmail will use its 
interface. E-mail access is also beginning to become more widely available on smaller electronic devices 
such as Palm organizers or cellular phones equipped with small screens. The reduced screen size of these 
devices makes only short messages practical and formatting may be a problem. The eventual use of XML, 
combined with CC/PP ("Composite Coupling/Preferences Profiles") technology, should help in that area. 
However, access to e-mail attachments, an increasingly popular option, may remain problematic, despite 
translation utilities. 
Other forms of CMC are also being used widely in language learning. Web-based bulletin boards or 
discussion forums are available in a variety of formats, Web Crossing being currently one of the most 
popular. Many forums are linked from course Web sites, created with tools from course management 
systems such as WebCT or Blackboard. These offer the advantage of user-restricted access. E-mail and 
bulletin boards have generally outstripped in popularity synchronous modes of communication, in which 
on-line users communicate in real time with one another. Internet Relay Chat (IRC) and various kinds of 
chat rooms can be effective in small groups and are often used to connect language learners and native 
speakers for focused discussions on concrete topics. There are as well more complex text-mediated virtual 
environments such as MUDs (multi-used domains), MUSHes (multi-user shared hallucination) or MOOs 
(multi-user object oriented). There are a number of MOOs targeted specially to language learners. With 
the exception of MOOs, students are generally expected to jump into these applications with a minimal 
orientation. Effective use of MOOs requires a substantial amount of training; that factor, as compared to 
the instant usability of AOL "Instant Messenger" (AIM), helps understand the latter's current popularity. 
Considering the ubiquity of instant messaging among younger users, explorations of its use in language 
learning may be of interest. 
ELECTRONIC LITERACY  
 
As a number of other US colleges and universities have done in recent years, Virginia Commonwealth 
University (VCU), my home institution, will require all incoming students next fall to own a computer. 
Universal computer ownership (and ubiquitous network access) by students brings with it a host of thorny 
issues, including procurement, user support, network infrastructure, classroom configuration, and 
faculty/student training. The central issue, however, is electronic literacy. What do we expect our students 
to be able to do on their computers, on the local network, on the Internet? At VCU, the faculty has 
recommended that at a minimum, students be able to use e-mail, word processing, the Web, and 
spreadsheets. In most cases "computer literacy" as defined by state education standards (such as those of 
Texas or Virginia), does not go beyond development of similar basic skills in core PC and Internet 
applications. Informed information retrieval, despite the urging of librarians, is seldom included. Even 
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Literacies and Technology Tools... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 12 
less likely to be included is an awareness of issues such as design (user interface, color schemes, 
accessibility issues), programming paradigms (procedural, object-oriented, hierarchical), or network 
basics (internet vs. intranet, LAN, IP), concepts which lie at the basis of the virtual world becoming so 
important a part of students' real world. 
Generally left out of computer literary as well are multimedia use/creation. Students may be more familiar 
than faculty in this area, especially in the use of MP3 files (MPEG 1 layer 3), a format with tremendous 
popularity which delivers high quality audio in a highly compressed format. One of the factors that has 
contributed to the success of the MP3 format has been the ease of use of encoders. Programs such as 
Soundjam make it easy to "rip" MP3s from music CDs and to obtain/play MP3 files from Internet sites. In 
fact, access to all forms of Internet-delivered audio and video has become much user-friendlier in recent 
years. For most formats the Web browser itself handles playback, or a player (such as the QuickTime 
player) may come bundled with the Web browser installer. 
Multimedia authoring programs have become increasingly user-friendly. Apple's iMovie, for example, 
designed for broad consumer use, has a very short learning curve, not even requiring that a movie be 
named (it is given a default file name) when created. Other video creation programs are similarly user-
friendly. This holds true for streaming media creation as well. It used to be that creation of a synchronized 
slide show with audio was a long, involved process. Now RealNetworks has a suite of tools (including 
"Real SlideShow") which make the development of this and other advanced uses of multimedia very 
accessible (using their proprietary format). Learning about different audio and video formats is not 
generally recognized as a necessary component of computer literacy. Yet many current media consumers, 
given today's software and hardware advances, are likely to become media developers in the near future, 
and would benefit from basic knowledge of file compatibility and network delivery in this area. 
As is the case with all software, installation of players and browser-linked helper applications has become 
much easier. This, however, is still a major support issue in setting up students for on-line courses. 
Installation and configuration of software are seldom part of computer literacy programs. The popularity 
of "smart" installers may lead to the conclusion that such knowledge is no longer necessary. Many users, 
however, have experienced the problem of such installers being too "smart," that is, not allowing 
installation on marginally compatible systems, or permitting customized configurations. If users have 
questions on the installation process, or on how to use the program, they are likely to find little help in 
accompanying print manuals. The trend in the software industry the last several years has been towards 
electronic manuals (in PDF or HTML formats) or just availability of electronic help. Electronic help, 
however, is not always well-designed, with help screens sometimes obstructing the program they're 
supposed to be helping or changing the state of the computer, causing user confusion. 
OUTLOOK: STANDARDS AND UNIFORMITY?  
 
One of the concerns in designing a program of computer literacy is the lack of accepted standards in many 
areas. The Internet ideals of openness and inter-operability have been fading as commercialization grows. 
Microsoft's new electronic book format, for example, is not compatible with popular Palm hand-helds. 
Users of AOL's "Instant Messenger" cannot interact with other instant messaging systems, such as those 
from Microsoft or Yahoo. On the other hand, taking advantage of a de-facto standard tends to perpetuate 
that particular format. The ubiquity of Microsoft Word, for example, had led to many training courses in 
using that program for word processing. This leads to standardization, popular with support personnel, but 
limiting in choice to users and tending to drive away competing programs which may have advantages in 
certain fields. NisusWriter and Nota Bene, for example, offer compelling advantages for language 
professionals. 
 
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Literacies and Technology Tools... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 13 
Another complicating factor in outlining a program of computer literacy is the constant state of flux of 
information technology today. Should students, for example, have a basic awareness of HTML (even if 
not knowing any code)? But isn't HTML giving way to XML? And, in any case, to author Web pages no 
longer requires any knowledge of any encoding system. In fact, Web authoring programs today such as 
Dreamweaver or FrontPage not only facilitate creation of static Web pages, they also enable creation of 
interactive Web pages using a pull-down menu to insert JavaScript "behaviors" or snippets of code. Even 
learning about Web site navigation can become an issue. On many U.S. campuses, faculty use a Web 
course authoring program such as WebCT or Blackboard to create a course Web site. An argument often 
used in support of the use of such programs is that each course Web site presents a familiar and 
comfortable user interface to students. Yet shouldn't students learn how to navigate Web sites outside of 
the university and then find their way back? An alternative to proprietary course management systems 
could be a set of user guidelines encouraging faculty to create Web sites with consistent page formatting 
and navigational structures. Users of different course management systems currently cannot easily share 
materials. A development which should help is the adoption by major software companies of the IMS 
standard ("Instructional Management System"). This provides for the use of a standard set of meta-data 
(for better location and retrieval) and exchange of learning modules. 
 
RESOURCE LIST  
 
Literacy and Technology  
 
Technology and Literacy by Cynthia Selfe 
 
Redefining Literacy: The Multilayered Grammars of Computers by Cynthia Selfe 
 
The Nine Information Literacy Standards for Student Learning (American Association of School 
Librarians) 
 
Computer Skills for Information Problem-Solving by Michael B. Eisenberg and Doug Johnson 
 
Texas Essential Knowledge and Skills for Technology Applications (Chapter 126 of the Texas Education 
Code) 
 
Computing Skills Workshop (Carnegie Mellon University) 
 
Literacy and Machines: An Overview of the Use of Technology in Adult Literacy Programs by Terilyn C. 
Turner 
 
The Death of Documentation by Adam C. Engst 
 
Reading/Texts  
 
Interface Design and Optimization of Reading of Continuous Text by Paul Muter 
 
Strategy-based reading lesson in Russian (Irene Thompson) 
 
The On-Line Books Page (University of Pennsylvania)  
 
FL texts  
 
Gutenberg Project  
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Literacies and Technology Tools... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 14 
 
Humanities Text Initiative (University of Michigan) 
 
Electronic Text Center (University of Virginia) 
 
Microsoft Reader (new e-book format from Microsoft) 
 
ReaderWorks (tools for creating "Reader" e-books; commercial) 
 
Writing/Computer-Mediated Communication  
 
Effectively Using Electronic Conferencing (Indiana University) 
 
Educational Uses of CMC (Penn State University) 
 
Chat Etiquette The Do's and Don'ts of On-line Conversation 
 
Indispensable Writing Resources (Quint Careers; commercial site) 
 
High Wired enCore Moo database 
 
More about MOOs created by Steve Thorne 
 
LinguaMOO (University of Texas at Dallas) 
 
PennMOO (direct telnet link: use "connect Guest"; University of Pennsylvania) 
 
Dave's ESL Cafe (Dave Sperling) 
 
SchMOOze University  
 
mIRC (IRC client for Windows) 
 
IRCle (MacOS IRC client) 
 
Multimedia  
 
Making MP3s by Jerry Kindall (from Tidbits) 
 
Real Jukebox (for creation of RealAudio and MP3 files) 
 
Real Slide Show (for creating syncrhonized slide shows) 
 
Apple Quicktime Player  
 
Windows Media Player  
 
Macromedia Shockwave (browser helper application) 
 
Winamp (MP3 player) 
 
Microsoft Netmeeting (video teleconferencing) 
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Literacies and Technology Tools... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 15 
 
CUSeeMe (video teleconferencing) 
 
Web/Internet Literacy  
 
Web Skills for Language Learners (WELL Project)  
 
 WELL in the classroom  
 
Knowledge Design (on creating interactive Web pages; from George Metrevski) 
 
Internet Resources for Language Teachers and Learners (University of Hull, C&IT Centre) 
 
Managed Learning Environments (comparison of Web course management systems) by Peter Jackson and 
Geoff Minshull 
 
Quick and Dirty Web Editing (Penn State University, Center for Language Acquisition) 
 
Netscape Composer: An Introduction (Pat Pecoy) 
 
Non-western Character Sets, Languages, and Writing Systems (overview of internationalizing efforts; 
from W3 org) 
 
Multilingualism and the Internet (WorldWide Language Institute) 
 
Multilingual Information Society  
 
How to type accents (Pat Pecoy) 
 
Unicode (information about Unicode) 
 
The ISO 8859 Aphabet Soup by Roman Czyborra 
 
Yamada Font Archive (University of Oregon) 
 
NETGLOS (an online glossary of Internet terms in 10 different languages; Worldwide Language 
Institute) 
 
The Internet Dictionary Project  
 
Winzip (unzipping utility) 
 
Stuffit Expander (expanding compressed files for Macintosh or Windows) 
 
Acrobat reader (for reading PDF files) 
 
Netscape browser  
 
Microsoft browser  
 
WS FTP client (for Windows) 
 
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Literacies and Technology Tools... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 16 
Fetch (FTP client for MacOS) 
 
FLTeach quiz (for testing your electronic literacy; Foreign Language Teaching Forum; by Jean LeLoup 
and Robert Ponterio) 
 
 
 
 
 
