Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/review3/default.html 
May 2000, Volume 4, Number 1 
pp. 24-29 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 2000, ISSN 1094-3501 24 
REVIEW OF CONEXIONES: INTERACTIVE CD-ROM 
Name of Product: Conexiones: Interactive CD-ROM 
Author: Fast, Michael (1999) 
Distributor: Prentice-Hall, Inc. 
Contact 
Information: 
One Lake Street  
 Upper Saddle River, NJ 07458  
 Phone: 1-800-374-1200 (within US); 515-284-6751 
(international)  
 Fax: 515-284-2607  
http://www.prenhall.com 
Platform: Macintosh System 7+; Windows 95/98 
Minimum 
Hardware 
Requirements: 
Windows: Pentium processor, 16 MB RAM, CD-ROM drive (2X 
minimum), SVGA monitor with 640X480 resolution, sound card, 
monitor that can support 16-bit color.  
Macintosh: PowerMac/G3, 16 MB f RAM, CD-ROM drive (2X 
minimum), SVGA monitor with 640X480 resolution, sound card.  
To record one's own speech, a microphone is needed. 
Support Offered: On-line support offered at http://www.prenhall.com/conexiones 
 Target Audience: University-level, intermediate Spanish course (suitable for 
advanced high school level as well) 
 Price: Free to institutions that adopt Conexiones: Comunicación y 
cultura 
 
Reviewed by Karina Collentine, Yavapai College  
OVERVIEW  
Conexiones: Interactive CD-ROM is the software package to accompany Conexiones: Comunicación y 
cultura (Zayas-Bazán, Bacon, & García, 1999), a university level, intermediate Spanish textbook. It 
purports to expose students to "task-based activities using authentic material that further engages students 
with the high-interest topics of the text" (Zayas-Bazán et al., 1999, p. xvi). Task-based instruction 
requires learners to achieve a goal by searching for or exchanging information (Long, 1985; Nunan, 
1989). Unfortunately, Conexiones  falls short of achieving its task-based objective, and fails to take 
Reviewed by Karina Collentine Review of Conexiones: Interactive CD-ROM  
 
Language Learning & Technology 25 
advantage of today's electronic and multimedia features that could promote such a learning environment. 
Nonetheless, the wealth of cultural information is a strength of the package.  
DESCRIPTION  
Once the CD-ROM is loaded, the user is asked to type his or her name and to mark either male or female. 
The main menu appears next, with all of the activities connected by hyperlinks. The software is divided 
into lessons which correspond to the chapters of the textbook, each of which contains a reading/culture 
selection, a vocabulary list, grammar exercises, and a writing section. Each lesson on the CD-ROM, on 
the other hand, contains four sections: Mail (Correo), Kiosk (Kiosco), Let's Chat (A conversar), and Let's 
Play (A jugar), all accessible through hyperlinks.  
  
 Figure 1. Sample screen from the Mail section  
The Mail section contains a lengthy (five to eight paragraphs) e-mail message in Spanish, personalized to 
the user, which expands on a cultural topic of the textbook. The messages use an informal register, as is 
appropriate to e-mail messages, and are from fictitious characters. For example, in Lesson 11 ("Free 
Time") a fictitious Andrea writes about how a typical weekend goes for her and her friends. She describes 
the places she and her friends frequent (e.g., the beach, shopping malls, night clubs, carnivals), as well as 
the time she spends with her family and alone. Each e-mail message ends with a question. For instance, 
the message in Lesson 11 asks, "And what do you do to have fun? What are young people's favorite 
activities where you live?" Students type their responses in a text box and can print or save them (to a 
floppy disk or a volume on the network). Two pieces of visual realia accompany each Mail section; a 
click on an icon will load the images. For example, in Lesson 11, one photograph depicts an aerial view 
of the Puerto Rican coastline, the other shows young people at a night club. There are no activities to 
accompany the photographs.  
Reviewed by Karina Collentine Review of Conexiones: Interactive CD-ROM  
 
Language Learning & Technology 26 
 
 Figure 2. Sample screen from the Kiosk section  
The Kiosk section entails an authentic reading passage related to the lesson topic, followed by five open-
ended questions. As with the Mail section, students may save their answers. In chapter 11 ("Free Time"), 
the passage's topic is an article on laughter.  
 
  
Figure 3. Sample screen from the Let's Chat section  
In Let's chat, users view a QuickTime movie in which an interviewer poses a series of thematically 
related questions both to an interviewee (seen and heard in the digital movie) and to the student. Students 
record their answers with the microphone, and can then play them back to (mentally) compare their own 
answers to the interviewee's responses.  
Reviewed by Karina Collentine Review of Conexiones: Interactive CD-ROM  
 
Language Learning & Technology 27 
  
  
Figure 4. Sample screen from the Let's Play section  
The Let's play section provides opportunities to practice vocabulary recognition with items from the 
textbook. Here, the student completes five fill-in-the-blank sentences by clicking one of four word 
choices on the screen. Students can make choices and receive feedback until they provide the appropriate 
response. After completing all five items correctly, the user sees a color photo relating to the cultural 
topic in question.  
Conexiones contains a number of student resources. It includes a link to Prentice-Hall's Web site (where 
students can explore numerous supplementary activities for each lesson), a series of verb charts, a 
dictionary with words and phrases translated from Spanish to English, and a Help button, all of which can 
be accessed at any time during the lesson.  
EVALUATION  
Conexiones provides students with valuable cultural information relating to the lesson themes, which 
include "Technology and Progress," "Human Rights," "Diversity and Prejudices," "Employment and the 
Economy," and "Culinary Arts and Nutrition," among others. The slices of life in the Mail section's e-mail 
messages are engaging and realistic, while the authentic reading passages of various genres (e.g., short 
stories, autobiographies, and newspaper and magazine articles) in the Kiosk section expose students to the 
type of authentic language models believed to promote acquisition (Vigil, 1987). Still, the package does 
not take advantage of the unique learning experience that computers offer. A digital video presentation of 
the cultural information detailed in the Mail sections would have provided a multimedia cultural 
experience, thus bringing the target culture to life at multiple levels of representation, that is, through 
aural and visual avenues (Garza, 1996).  
Conexiones also does not provide the task-based learning experience that it promises. It does not offer an 
exchange-of-information learning environment, which the term "task-based learning" implies (cf. Pica, 
Kanagy, & Falodun, 1993). Instead, this program amounts to a digital cultural reader and workbook. Of 
course, this is symptomatic of much courseware today. As Blake (1999) notes, "Most CD-ROM programs 
minimally do something in response to users' clicks, typing, or other keyboard/mouse actions. This 
minimal reaction often constitutes the sole basis for labeling the program as 'interactive'" (p. 11). Indeed, 
some of the features of task-based instruction, such as working in pairs and sharing of information, are 
Reviewed by Karina Collentine Review of Conexiones: Interactive CD-ROM  
 
Language Learning & Technology 28 
limited or not currently possible in computer-assisted language learning (CALL). However,  Conexiones 
fails to capitalize on the features of task-based instruction which are possible in CALL, namely, providing 
non-linguistic goals for activities, attempting to draw students' attention to linguistic form while they are 
engaged in meaning-based communication, and including a variety of language functions. The author 
could well have provided opportunities for users to create a Web-based travel brochure, a health pamphlet 
on how laughter can release stress, or a forum for producing and recording a radio commercial (in 
QuickTime). In addition, while the topics of the Kiosk passages tie in nicely with the textbook's cultural 
themes, the reading activities are not task-based because there is no non-linguistic goal (cf. Shrum & 
Glisan, 1994). Indeed, the only task involved is an academic one, namely, answering comprehension 
questions.  
The Conexiones package does not seem to be informed by recent reading research and pedagogy. More 
effective methodology would have employed widely accepted frameworks for approaching reading 
comprehension, such as the procedural model for integrative reading (Swaffar, Arens, & Byrnes, 1991). 
Because the Kiosk sections contain no pre-reading activities or guidance as to effective reading strategies 
that a learner can employ, students are more likely to rely heavily on bottom-up processes (O'Malley & 
Chamot, 1990).  
Furthermore, there is no feedback provided to the student concerning the accuracy of responses. Current 
technology allows the application designer to include context-sensitive routines (e.g., natural language 
processing; Nagata, 1996) that linguistically and semantically assess the appropriateness of a user's 
response. For instance, the user may believe that an answer in the Let's Chat section such as "My favorite 
sport is baseball" to the question "What is your favorite sport?" is wrong because it does not match the 
answer provided by the interviewee ("I like soccer"). The learner is not provided with any means to 
distinguish between ungrammatical responses and those that are grammatical but that differ from the 
example given.  
Another unique feature of today's technology lies in its ability to provide a non-linear, exploratory 
learning experience of the target language (Berge & Collins, 1995; Salaberry, 1996). This possibility is 
largely unexploited in Conexiones. The student can access the lessons, as well as the activities within 
lessons, in any order. For example, a student can select to complete Lesson 2 before Lesson 1, or the Let's 
chat section before the Mail section. However, within any section, the learner must progress linearly, from 
item 1 through item 5.  
Concerning the language, the editorial process seems to have eliminated the majority of typographical 
errors, although some still exist. For instance, in the Mail section of Lesson 3, an accent mark is missing 
in the first sentence of the e-mail message "¿Como [sic] estás?" (How are you?), while in the Kiosk 
section of the same lesson a typographical error can be found in "Y ¿por qué cita el texto ae [sic] 
gobierno británico?" (And, why does the text quote the British government?).  
Regarding the reference tools, this reviewer finds that the lack of an English to Spanish dictionary, a tool 
that students might use in composing a response to an e-mail message in the Mail section, is a major 
oversight. Nevertheless, the dictionary contains an impressive number of words in Spanish with their 
English equivalents, including a range of high to low frequency terms. The verb charts are a nice addition 
to this software program. However, while the irregular verb chart is extensive, the stem-changing list is 
limited to -ir verbs, with even some common verbs such as servir (to serve) omitted.  
SUMMARY  
To its credit, Conexiones is not simply a drill-and-practice expansion of the textbook. The depth and 
breadth of the cultural information is noteworthy among ancillary packages. Nevertheless, the lack of the 
promised task-based activities, of interactivity, and of recognition of effective approaches to reading 
Reviewed by Karina Collentine Review of Conexiones: Interactive CD-ROM  
 
Language Learning & Technology 29 
categorizes this package more as a cultural supplement that resides on a CD-ROM than as a multimedia 
language learning experience.  
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER  
Karina Collentine (Ph.D., University of Texas at Austin) is on the Spanish faculty at Yavapai College in 
Prescott, Arizona. She has developed multimedia software to teach Spanish grammar and written on 
CALL.  
e-mail: karina_collentine@yavapai.cc.az.us  
REFERENCES  
Berge, Z., & Collins, M. (Eds.). (1995). Computer mediated communication and the on-line classroom in 
distance learning. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press.  
 
Blake, R. J. (1999). Nuevos destinos: A CD-ROM for advanced beginning Spanish. CALICO Journal, 17, 
5-24.  
 
Garza, T. J. (1996). The message is the medium: Using video materials to facilitate foreign language 
performance.  Texas Papers in Foreign Language Education, 2, 1-18.  
 
Long, M. (1985). A role for instruction in second language acquisition: Task-based language training. In 
K. Hyltenstam & M. Pienemann (Eds.), Modelling and Assessing Second Language Acquisition (pp. 77-
99). Clevedon, England: Multilingual Matters.  
 
Nagata, N. (1996). Computer vs. workbook instruction in second language learning. CALICO Journal, 
14, 53-75.  
 
Nunan, D. (1989). Designing tasks for the communicative classroom. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.  
 
O'Malley, J. M., & Chamot, A. U. (1990). Learning strategies in second language acquisition. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  
 
Pica, T., Kanagy, R., & Falodun, J. (1993). Choosing and using communication tasks for second language 
instruction and research. In G. Crookes & S. Gass (Eds.), Tasks and language learning: Integrating 
theory and practice (pp. 9-34). Philadelphia, PA: Multilingual Matters.  
 
Salaberry, M. R. (1996). A theoretical foundation for the development of pedagogical tasks in computer-
mediated communication.  CALICO Journal, 14, 5-34.  
 
Shrum, J. L., & Glisan, E. W. (1994). Teacher's handbook: Contextualized language instruction. Boston, 
MA: Heinle and Heinle Publishers.  
 
Swaffar, J., Arens, K., & Byrnes, H. (1991). Reading for meaning. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.  
 
Vigil, V. (1987). Authentic texts in the college-level Spanish I class as the primary vehicle of instruction. 
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Texas at Austin.  
 
Zayas-Bazán, E., Bacon, S., & García, D. (1999). Conexiones: Comunicación y cultura. Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice Hall.  
