Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num2/kramsch/default.html 
September 2000, Volume 4, Number 2 
pp. 72-95 online 
(page numbers in PDF differ and should not be used for reference) 
 
Copyright © 2000, ISSN 1094-3501       72 
AUTHENTICITY AND AUTHORSHIP IN THE COMPUTER-MEDIATED 
ACQUISITION OF L2 LITERACY 
Claire Kramsch 
University of California, Berkeley 
Francine A'Ness 
Dartmouth College 
Wan Shun Eva Lam 
University of California, Berkeley 
ABSTRACT 
This paper examines what becomes of the two tenets of communicative language teaching--
authenticity of the input and authorship of the language user--in an electronic environment. After 
a brief review of relevant research in textually-mediated second language acquisition, we analyze 
two cases of computer-mediated language learning: a) the construction of a multimedia CD-ROM 
by American college learners of Spanish, and b) the use of Internet relay chat by a Chinese high 
school learner of English. We discuss what kind of L2 literacy the students acquire through the 
computer medium. We find that a communicative approach based on the use of authentic texts 
and on the desire to make the learners author their own words has been changed by the physical 
properties of the electronic medium and the students' engagement with it. Authenticity and 
authorship have given way to agency and identity and the presentation of self. Indeed, computer-
mediated communication leads us to rethink the authentic, the authorial, and, ultimately, the 
communicative itself. 
 
 
Authenticity and authorship have been the two poles between which the teaching of reading and writing 
in a foreign language has oscillated in the last 20 years. Since the 1980s, communicative pedagogies have 
stressed the importance of teaching authentic texts used by native speakers in culturally authentic contexts 
of use, rather than pedagogically doctored texts. Omaggio Hadley's injunction in 1986 (p. 41), "A 
proficiency-oriented methodology emphasizes the use of authentic language in instructional materials 
wherever and whenever possible," was reformulated in much the same terms in 1993 (p. 82), "The 
contexts for language practice should be devised, as much as possible, from culturally authentic sources," 
that is, from sources sanctioned by the authority of native speaker use. Through the use of authentic 
materials for listening and reading instruction, learners should be able to acquire "usable skills" in real-
life situations (see also Grellet, 1981, p. 7; Higgs, 1982; Nunan, 1989, p. 54; Rivers, 1983; Savignon, 
1983). 
Early on, and especially in British educational research, the concept of authenticity became contrasted 
with that of authorship. Breen and Candlin (1980), then Breen (1985) reminded educators that the 
classroom has its own authenticity, which is as important as the authenticity of the target culture. As 
Widdowson pointed out, authentic texts are often texts that have been "authorized" by some institutional 
"authority" who holds the copyright to it and sometimes also the monopoly on its interpretation. But, he 
adds, "although an authorized text and an authentic text can be seen as the same thing, an authorized 
interpretation is entirely different from an authentic one. They are, indeed, contradictory…[T]o accept an 
authorized interpretation of a poem is to deny the possibility of an authentic reaction to it" (Widdowson, 
1992, p. 149). Language learners cannot understand authentic texts if they don't "authenticate [them] on 
their own authority" (Widdowson, 1992, p. 150), that is, reconstruct the text on their own terms. This is 
Kramsch, A’Ness, & Lam Authenticity and Authorship in the Computer-Mediated…  
 
Language Learning & Technology 73 
not an automatic process; learners have to learn how to authenticate native speakers' texts and author their 
own (Kramsch, 1993, 1998; Widdowson, 1990, p. 46, 1998). 
These two aspects of communicative language learning--authenticity of the text, authorship of the 
language user--seem well served by the electronic medium. Hypertext, multimedia, the World Wide Web, 
are revolutionizing the acquisition of L1 literacy by giving learners access to an unlimited database of 
authentic materials at the same time as it gives them the opportunity to gain an authorial voice outside the 
authority of the teacher and the educational institution (Bolter, 1990; Crook, 1994; Herring, 1996; Jones, 
1995, 1997; Lemke, 1998; Purves, 1998; Reinking, McKenna, Labbo, & Kieffer, 1998). Some researchers 
have started examining the effects of the computer on the acquisition of L2 literacy (e.g., Chun & Plass, 
1996; Kern, 1995, 2000; Kern & Warschauer, 2000; Kramsch & Andersen, 1998; Thorne,1999), and they 
found that it increased the learners' self-confidence, motivation, and communicative competence. 
But do these concepts remain unchanged when one switches from print literacy to electronic literacy? In 
print, cultural authenticity and learner creativity are defined by an identifiable authority, be it the 
publisher or the institution. The authority of the school and the academic disciplines, which has 
traditionally been based on print literacy, serves to both sanction and constrain learners' authorial 
creativity; it schools them into being creative within the norms of expression and interpretation imposed 
by the academy, the literate readership, and the sheer technical constraints of the publishing industry. 
What happens when literacy skills are taught in a deschooled environment, that has different rhetorical 
norms and conventions, an inordinately larger public audience, an immensely enhanced speed and ease of 
delivery, and where the integrity and permanence of texts are no longer assured? In short, what happens 
when the acquisition of L2 print literacy becomes L2 electronic literacy? 
In this article, the authors look at what becomes of the two pillars of communicative language pedagogy, 
authenticity and authorship, in an electronic environment. After a brief review of relevant research, we 
focus our investigation on two cases of computer-mediated language learning (CmLL) in Spanish and in 
English as a Second Language (ESL). We discuss what kind of L2 literacy the students acquire through 
the computer medium and how it forces us to rethink the authentic, the authorial, and, ultimately, the 
communicative. 
THEORETICAL PERSPECTIVES 
Two areas of research converge to inform our reflection here: recent research in Second Language 
Acquisition (SLA) and recent insights in the nature of media texts. Whereas most of SLA research in the 
1970s and 1980s linked authenticity to the use of the spoken language in conversational interactions, 
recent trends in SLA are shifting attention to written language and the notion of text, in short, to L2 
literacy (e.g., Byrnes, 1998; Kern, 2000; Swaffar, Arens, & Byrnes, 1991). 
It is one thing to get along orally in everyday conversations; it is quite another to know how to deal with 
written texts in authentic contexts of use. The push for cultural authenticity has led since the end of the 
1980s to a push for "content-based instruction" (Jurasek, 1988; Krueger & Ryan, 1993; Met, 1991; Snow, 
Met, & Genesee, 1989; Stryker & Leaver, 1997; Swaffar, 1999) where linguistic form is subordinated to 
authentic disciplinary content of a textual kind (e.g., French history taught in French). Language is made 
as locally relevant as possible for the conveyance of disciplinary information; disciplinary expertise forms 
the background knowledge necessary to understand texts (see, e.g., the foreign-languages-across-the-
curriculum movement). At the same time, and under the growing pressure from psycholinguists (e.g., 
Doughty, 1991; Long, 1990; Schmidt, 1995) who have insisted all along that communication cannot take 
place without paying attention to one of its major components, that is, grammar (Canale & Swain, 1980), 
we witness now, after two decades of focus on spoken meanings often at the expense of grammar, a 
renewed interest in "focus on form" or FonF (Doughty & Williams, 1998). Form is seen as constitutive of 
the meaning of spoken and written texts. 
Kramsch, A’Ness, & Lam Authenticity and Authorship in the Computer-Mediated…  
 
Language Learning & Technology 74 
 
Even though the thrust of the FonF pedagogy is restricted to grammatical form and is applied to the 
design of grammatical tasks (e.g., VanPatten, 1995), it has already been taken as an opportunity to pay 
greater attention to other formal aspects of communication, such as discourse form and textual form, in 
the creation of meaning. For example, it is not a discourse triviality that Napoleon Bonaparte should have 
said in 1799, "Je suis la revolution," (I [unstressed pronoun] am the revolution) and not "La revolution, 
c'est moi" (I [stressed pronoun] am the revolution). Echoing Louis XIV's famous statement, "L'Etat c'est 
moi" (I [stressed pronoun] am the State) at a time when he wanted to show his loyalty to the French 
Republic would have sent the wrong message to his constituency. Similarly, awareness of genre, register, 
and even poetic and visual structure (Carter, 1999; Hanauer,1999; Widdowson, 1992) are gaining 
increased importance in the teaching of texts. The advent of computer technology in language teaching 
thus coincides with a renewed interest among foreign language educators in the text, as the site where 
content and form converge for authentic communication (Kramsch & Andersen, 1999). 
 Communication 
We know what communication means when we deal with written texts of a conventionalized format: texts 
that are fixed by the rules of typography, orthography, cohesion, genre; texts whose authorial intentions 
are clearly identifiable, whose intended readers are easily recognizable. But what becomes of 
communication in electronic texts?1 
In his reflections on media texts, David Graddol (1994) identifies three models of language description 
that have been used, and are still used, by scholars from various disciplines--linguistics, literary theory, 
media and cultural studies, and anthropology. Each model has its own conception of both communication 
and the language user. 
Model 1, a structuralist model of language derived from the study of written Latin, focuses on the 
material substance of language, the grammatical and lexical features of the sentence, that can be analyzed 
and taught as building blocks to communication.  Meaning in this model is predominantly seen as 
referential meaning; the information that is retrieved, sent, and exchanged in spoken interaction or in 
interaction with written texts. It is the transmission model of language still espoused by many language 
teachers. Historically, it is from this model of language that emerged the notion of author (from the Latin 
augere, auctus: to augment, to create), as the one who augmented the Scriptures through his written 
commentaries, or added to the pool of knowledge through his writings. Authorship, a legal term, was 
granted by institutions like the Church and the Academy that guaranteed the authority of authorized 
versions. Communication in this model depends on everyone agreeing to use words to mean the same 
thing, codified within the standard language promoted by the academy. The language learner is an 
idealized, standardized, non-native speaker anxious to abide by the rules of the standard native speaker. 
Model 2, a social model, sees language as embedded in its social context. In this model, linguistic form 
alone cannot determine meaning, rather, one has to take the social and cultural context of communication 
into account. This is a model inspired by research done in anthropology and sociology, as well as in 
literary studies. In some languages like Japanese, social meanings might be more codified in the grammar 
than in other languages, but, in general, model 2 acknowledges that form and meaning vary according to 
the setting, the situation, the intentions, and the purposes of the language users. Historically, this model of 
language foregrounds authenticity (from the Greek authentes: one who does a thing himself) rather than 
authority. By advocating that learners "authenticate texts on their own authority," Widdowson (1992, p. 
150) is using a social model of language, in which authority doesn't reside in the texts nor in the native 
institutions that authorized these texts, but in the authentic interaction between readers and texts. 
Communication in this model sees meaning arise out of the interaction between text and social context, 
within the norms of interaction and interpretation imposed by a community of language users. The 
Kramsch, A’Ness, & Lam Authenticity and Authorship in the Computer-Mediated…  
 
Language Learning & Technology 75 
language user in this model is "a humanist, rational being who displays communicative competence; who 
negotiates a social world and is responsible for personal actions" (Graddol, 1994, p. 16). 
Model 3 is, according to Graddol, a post-modern model of language as it informs media texts. This model 
takes a broader semiotic view of what language consists of. Born out of media and cultural studies, it is 
concerned with "signs" rather than words. Music, pictures, clothing, belong to "signifying practices" or 
processes of human communication of which the linguistic system is only one. In this model, "the 
boundary between language and non-language is blurred" (Graddol, 1994, p. 17). This model of language 
is concerned pre-eminently with texts, not with sentences as model 1, or interactions as model 2, but 
rather, it sees text as a combination of many semiotic systems (e.g., words, typographical conventions, 
layout, photographs, graphs, diagrams) that are uniquely historicized. That is, they are socially and jointly 
constructed by many people bound by relations of power and social roles in a certain place and at a 
certain time. Language users are often described as "speaking subjects," whose "subjectivity" or identity 
is constructed through discourse. Texts are viewed as speaking with many "voices" (p. 18). 
Communication in this model is a site of struggle to be heard, noticed, understood, and to "maximize the 
acquisition of symbolic profit" (Bourdieu, 1982, p. 76). In this model, authenticity and authorship acquire 
a new meaning, as Graddol (1994) remarks 
[T]exts are not simply read and understood, but consumed, used, exploited ... a text will take on a 
different life, new functions and new meanings, according to the social activities in which it is 
embedded…The postmodern language user cannot be said to have particular ideas, intentions and 
meanings which then become encoded in language, since language users are not the authors of 
their own meanings: they use the words of others, their utterances and texts are populated with 
other voices, and they cannot guarantee how their texts will be received and interpreted. (p. 19) 
It is precisely because of this uncertainty and the vagaries of reception and interpretation in a post-modern 
age, that the focus in this model shifts from authenticity and authorship to goal-oriented action and 
agency, that is, the ability to act upon others and influence their thinking. 
In each of Graddol's three models, language is linked to specific technologies for the production and 
reproduction of semiotic systems--the pen or the printing press, the tape recorder, television, the 
computer--with their concomitant political economies; each has its own conventions and constraints, its 
own notions of ownership and gate-keeping mechanisms, its own ideological overlays (Kramsch, 1997). 
Since they represent different stages in the development of technology, they each seem to build on the 
previous one, reframing, amplifying, or attenuating aspects of communication found in previous 
technologies. Thus, there is a temptation to think that computer mediated literacy (CmL) is different from 
print literacy in degree, but not in kind. Those who hold that view make the following arguments: like 
print literacy, CmL has its constraints which learners need to abide by. They too need to authenticate the 
electronic "spoken" or written texts they read on the screen, they too need to become authors if they are to 
make sense of the (virtual) world around them. Computer learners do this by learning the language variety 
of their electronic interlocutors, the rhetorical conventions of electronic genres, and by interacting with 
people and written texts on line. In other words, the computer fosters the same kind of literacy as before, 
only now with a broader readership that has easier and speedier access to texts. The computer, they argue, 
is a facilitator, an enhancer of a textual literacy that is fundamentally the same as our traditional print 
literacy. 
Proponents of the first two models would agree with these statements, because they view the 
technological object and the individual subject as two totally separate realms. It is not the electronic 
medium that changes things, they say, but human users. Those who espouse Graddol's third model take a 
rather different view. If texts are indeed indissociable from the "activities in which they are embedded," 
they argue, if language as semiotic system is inseparable from the events it encodes, then the computer as 
semiotic medium is itself part of literacy events. It is not a neutral technological object that we can 
Kramsch, A’Ness, & Lam Authenticity and Authorship in the Computer-Mediated…  
 
Language Learning & Technology 76 
"master" for our individual or institutional benefit. It is itself an historical event, embedded in the same 
network of discourse practices and institutional constraints as we are ourselves. For example, by talking 
about "(hyper)texts," "readers," and "word processors," by referring to "chatrooms" in which we "read 
each other's messages" and "interact with one other," we have already imposed a print literacy vocabulary 
on the electronic medium, thus creating the very illusion that a change in technology does not change the 
activity itself. By saying, "it is not the electronic medium per se that changes literacy practices, but its 
enlarged readership, its speed of delivery, the multiple scales of its texts, their ease of access," we talk as 
if readership, time, scale, ease of access, were not constitutive of the medium, as if the medium were 
"only" the hardware. Yet, McLuhan warned 40 years ago that the medium was the message (McLuhan, 
1962). 
Since then, that insight has been expanded and deepened. Recent work in the politics of science (Latour, 
1999), multimedia literacy (Lemke, 1998), and the relationship of technology and ideology (Reinking et 
al., 1998) has shown that quantitative changes bring about qualitative changes as well. Change the scale 
and you change the nature of the activity (Lemke 2000, in press a, in press b). Moreover, in a global age 
of electronic communication, objects and subjects can no longer be viewed as neatly separated--indeed, 
they have never been. Throughout the history of technological discoveries, we have been shaped by our 
artifacts as much as we have shaped them. 
In Pandora's Hope (1999), the sociologist and philosopher of science Bruno Latour argues that, in order 
to understand the way technology mediates our actions, we have to understand "the mediating role of all 
the actants mobilized" in the process (p.181). By being "actants" (i.e., agents in a web of other agents that 
include both human beings and technological objects), we find out who we are and who we are making 
ourselves to be. Taking as an example a killer with a gun, Latour asks 
Who or what is responsible for the act of killing? Is the gun no more than a piece of mediating 
technology? ... Which of them, the gun or the citizen, is the actor in this situation?  Someone else 
(a citizen-gun, a gun-citizen) .... You are a different person with the gun in your hand; the gun is 
different with you holding it. You are another subject because you hold the gun; the gun is 
another object because it has entered into a relationship with you. The gun is no longer the gun-
in-the-armory or the gun-in-the-drawer or the gun-in-the-pocket, but the gun-in-your-hand, aimed 
at someone who is screaming. . .(You only wanted to injure but, with a gun now in your hand, 
you want to kill) ... The twin mistake of the materialists and the sociologists is to start with 
essences, those of subjects or those of objects ... [But] It is neither people nor guns that kill. 
Responsibility for action must be shared among the various actants." (p.178-180) 
Action, Latour argues, is what defines our existence and, according to him, "existence is action" (p.179). 
In our actions, we make and are made by our tools. The physical characteristics of computer hardware, 
rather than being separate from the software and from us, its users, in fact define our actions, that is, our 
existence. In particular, they bring about fundamental changes in the way we use language and other 
semiotic systems to represent ourselves to ourselves and to others, and in the way we represent the world. 
This paper intends to document some of these changes by examining two case studies that involve the 
acquisition and use of a foreign language by language learners on the computer. 
AUTHENTICITY IN THE CREATION OF MULTIMEDIA 
In Fall 1997, co-author Francine A'Ness embarked on a project to create with her undergraduate students 
a CD-ROM for the teaching of Latin American culture. We let her tell her story in her own words: 
I had been collecting and collating visual materials for Spanish 113 (slides, videos, 
transparencies, music) and diligently filing them away for use in next year's class. I thought that 
by digitizing the data with my students and storing it in some logical fashion on a CD-ROM, we 
Kramsch, A’Ness, & Lam Authenticity and Authorship in the Computer-Mediated…  
 
Language Learning & Technology 77 
could create a useful teaching aid that could also serve to better protect and preserve these newly-
gathered materials. The students themselves were thrilled at the idea of making a durable and 
public product that could be used by future undergraduates and their instructors. I was sure the 
students would improve their Spanish and their knowledge of Latin American culture in the 
process. 
We began working on the general structure. Using the multimedia authoring program Toolbook, 
we set about conceiving the navigational frame and considering the basic organizing principles of 
our text. It was to be like a great city, with multiple points of entry and departure. Its three 
dimensionality would privilege no one region, topic, or time period and our readers would be at 
liberty (or so we thought) to explore each site at will and in whatever order they chose. Just as we 
believed we had absolute creative freedom as authors, we also believed we could grant a similar 
degree of autonomy to our readers. At the click of a button, they would be able to navigate freely 
across time and space, pausing to take in topics of interest, since, rather than just spreading our 
information across an indefinite number of pages or screens, we would embed it, layer upon 
layer, behind images, icons, and hotwords. The whole text would be a complex network of 
interlinking topics, designed with the purpose of highlighting, both visually and theoretically, the 
common ties that unite the many cultures of Latin America. 
We settled for dividing Latin America up into three navigational frames: one geographical, one 
historical, one cultural. We then had to consider how to represent Latin America within these 
parameters and how to name the various parts. At first we opted for five regions, that I could 
effectively argue were (historically speaking) culturally compatible: Brazil and the Caribbean, the 
Andes and the Amazon, the Southern Cone, Mexico and Central America, and the North. The 
latter we included so that Latin America's complex ties with the U.S. could be investigated, and 
issues such as migration, territorial annexation, or political intervention could be more easily 
addressed. 
We chose to place a small map of Latin America, divided up 
into the five regions, at the bottom right-hand corner of each 
page and have each region and its corresponding pages color-
coded. To navigate from one region to another, the reader 
simply clicks on the desired area and is instantly transported to 
another part of Latin America. Not only is each region a 
different color but the borders between them are fuzzy and 
overlap. In a short introductory pop-up text-field, we draw the 
reader's attention to the difficulties of dividing up such a 
complex area as Latin America. This is not just because of the 
instability of geopolitical frontiers. Borders tend to denote 
rigid differences between nations and regions, whereas 
cultures regularly migrate across borders, and have a tendency 
to interact and to modify continually each other. Hence the 
overlapping borders on our CD-ROM. 
 
 After the regions, we proceeded to think up broad cultural categories to store the information we 
had gathered. We settled for Language and Literature, Maps and Migrations, Rituals and Fiestas, 
and Music and the Arts. The final navigational component was a timeline which divided the 
evolution of Latin America into five broad historical periods: pre-colonial, colonial, national, 
revolutionary, and modern. You may begin, for example, by looking at Maps and Migrations in 
the pre-colonial period in Mesoamerica. Then, if you go to the map and click on the Andes, you 
will rapidly be taken to other screens that deal with a similar topic only in a different region. If 
Kramsch, A’Ness, & Lam Authenticity and Authorship in the Computer-Mediated…  
 
Language Learning & Technology 78 
you look at art in Mexico during the revolutionary period and then click on pre-colonial, you will 
remain in Mexican art but simply move back in time. With the navigational frame designed and 
fully functional we really felt as though we were making progress. The students next each chose 
individual modules to work on to fill the frame and set to work. 
For the duration of the semester-long project, the students kept journals in Spanish to describe 
their progress or to vent their frustrations when the technology failed them. In the early pages of 
their journals they were all enthusiastic and viewed the computer in a very positive light. For 
them, it was an empowering and democratic medium. They admitted that they were excited by 
the novelty of the project and felt liberated from the "burden" of writing "normal," "traditional," 
or "conventional" end-of-term papers. One student wrote "me atrae la idea de hacer algo 
completamente nuevo y algo que será útil para otros estudiantes en el futuro" (I like the idea of 
doing something completely new and something that will be useful to other students in the 
future). Many students thought they could be "more creative" working with multimedia and, 
without exception, everyone assumed that being able to include moving images and sound in their 
projects would allow them to generate representations of Latin American culture that were "más 
real" (more real) or "más auténtica" (more authentic) than the ones they simply viewed in a book. 
Finally, more than half the students felt the project as a whole had a pragmatic side, providing 
them with an opportunity to learn useful computer skills that would have a practical relevance 
beyond the classroom. 
The journals clearly show that the students enjoyed the whole project. It was original, useful, 
challenging, and fun. Over time, however, they became more wary of the medium and more 
sensitive to the critical issues it raised. For example, they realized that the editorial decisions they 
had made and the categories they had chosen early on were both empowering and constraining, 
not only vis-à-vis Latin American culture, towards which they wanted to be accurate and fair (all 
the while that they were actively shaping its representation), but also towards their own future 
decisions. Any additional material they wanted to use had from then on, to fit into one of the pre-
determined categories; there was no turning back, short of changing the whole navigational 
frame. By creating a frame and linking each section at the outset, we had inextricably gridlocked 
Latin America. And while the grid was useful for organizational purposes, it was still a grid and 
therefore politically compromised. Suddenly, the students were discussing the relationship 
between power and grid configurations that the CD-ROM project seemed to embody so clearly. 
This is not surprising since a number of critics have noted the ways in which hypertext or 
hypermedia literalizes many of the concerns of poststructuralist literary and cultural theory 
(Landow, 1997; Lanham, 1994). 
Furthermore, the very detail that had drawn them to the project--the fact that their finished texts 
would be both durable and public--made them continually stop and think. They stopped to think 
about the creative process, about the relationship between a text and its readers, about their 
responsibility as authors, about the relative merits of the written or spoken word over a still or 
moving image, about combining media to create new readings, and about power and control. 
Gradually, they realized that with power comes responsibility. Each module they were creating 
was to be a window onto some aspect of Latin American culture for future generations of 
students. Many of them started to experience a form of authorial anxiety stemming from the 
tension they felt between creative license and an ethical imperative to another culture. While the 
students wanted to be creative with their projects as the computer seemed to invite them, they 
also felt compelled to be accurate and fair. Rather than have this anxiety be a problem, I 
encouraged them to reflect upon the nature of this creative tension, magnified no doubt by the 
computer, and consider it to be at the heart of the politics of representation--part and parcel of 
being an author in any medium, be it a traditional term paper or a trendy multimedia hypertext. 
Kramsch, A’Ness, & Lam Authenticity and Authorship in the Computer-Mediated…  
 
Language Learning & Technology 79 
 
An intriguing observation that appeared repeatedly in the students' journals, both critically and 
uncritically, was the idea that "clickability" translated into "credibility" and that the technology 
was taking on an authenticity of its own. One student wrote, "poder cliquear sobre una imagen o 
ciertas palabras especiales y ver que algo cambia hace que todo parezca mucho más real" (Being 
able to click on an image or a certain special word and watching something [on screen] change, 
makes everything seem much more real). Without exception, the same sentiment was echoed by 
the others, but what is interesting is their conflicting opinions about authenticity. The student 
quoted above appears to be celebrating the computer's ability to make everything appear more 
real. Another student, however, clearly recognizes that it is her active involvement and 
manipulation of the primary texts that generate a feeling of authenticity. It is the experience of 
making a multimedia document on Latin American culture rather than the document itself that 
lends the project an air of authenticity. She concludes her journal with the following insight, 
"antes de hacer este proyecto yo era muy poco crítica de la información que veía en el internet ... 
Ahora sé, y no porque alguien me lo ha dicho, sino porque lo he vivido, que detrás de cada página 
hay una persona como yo, imperfecta y algo prejuiciada, que está manipulando la información." 
(Before working on this project I was very uncritical about what I saw on the Internet. Now I 
know, and not because someone taught it to me, but because I lived it myself, that behind every 
page there is someone just like me, imperfect and a little prejudiced, manipulating the 
information). 
The aesthetic and ethical dilemmas described by A'Ness and highlighted in her students' journals are 
particularly well illustrated in the work of two students, Lucy and Helen, who chose to focus on fiestas in 
celebration of the Virgin. Originally, they were going to concentrate on just one Virgin from Lucy's home 
country of Nicaragua. However, the ease of creating hypertextual links prompted them to include a 
section on Mexico's more famous Virgen de Guadalupe and the lesser known Virgen de las Lajas from 
Colombia. They opted to place their opening page under the categories  Rito y fiesta (Rituals and Fiestas) 
and Epoca moderna, (modern period) because such categories already existed, whereas a category like 
gender had not been created--a significant fact in itself, as we shall later. They then had to decide how to 
arrange the information they had researched in both an eye-catching and informative way. Lucy's journal 
shows that they were still very much thinking of a CD-ROM as they would an illustrated textbook: "El 
CD-ROM me parecía más bien un tipo de libro ilustrado donde los dibujos mantienen el interés de los 
lectores o hacen hincapié en algo importante pero que jamás toman precedencia sobre la palabra escrita" 
(The CD-ROM seemed to me to be a type of illustrated book, where the pictures are often there to keep 
the readers' interest or to emphasize a point but they never take precedence over the written word). Lucy 
in her journal entry still clearly distinguishes between the role of the author and that of the reader; the 
word "book" implies pages, the primacy of the written word, the supplemental and often ornamental 
nature of images. Like the other students, Lucy had a print literacy mentality and an understanding of 
language similar to Graddol's models  1 or 2 discussed previously. 
But soon Lucy and Helen realized that filling the screen with text and a scroll bar was not necessarily the 
optimal use of multimedia technology. With digitization and the authoring program, they could 
manipulate and juxtapose visual, written, and even aural information in a myriad of ways. Through 
Spanish, they could learn not only how to compose texts, but how to create and manipulate hypertexts and 
various representations of Spanish speaking cultures. If we study the four screens they composed on the 
cult of the Virgin in Latin America we notice an increased engagement with the medium and its potential 
for alternative modes of representation. 
The first and simplest screen is a general index page about the cult of the Virgin Mary in Latin America. 
They scanned a small devotional prayer card that shows the veiled head and shoulders of the Virgin and 
they enlarged it so that it could take center stage on their page. They then had to find a way to include all 
Kramsch, A’Ness, & Lam Authenticity and Authorship in the Computer-Mediated…  
 
Language Learning & Technology 80 
their introductory information without crowding out the image or running out of space. This was where 
the use of hot words first came in handy to embed extra information. The first hot word they created was 
marianismo (the cult of Mary). When you click on this word a definition appears in a small text field that 
floats above the Virgin held by two angels. The students explain in their journals that when they tried 
having the text field without any ornamentation it appeared a little bland. They solved the problem by  
cropping the two angels from another devotional postcard devoted specifically to the Virgen de 
Guadalupe. That these two figures were removed from the (authentic) context of one prayer card and 
placed into the (inauthentic) context of another did not cause them undue concern. 
The index page contains three additional hot words that hyperlink to the remaining three screens of the 
project. They correspond to the three geographical locations under scrutiny: Leon in Nicaragua, 
Colombia, and Mexico. That Leon comes first and is the only town mentioned shows Lucy's desire to 
foreground the Virgin from her hometown and encourage the reader, if possible, to visit that page first. 
She soon realized, though, that granting the reader the navigational freedom the medium presupposes, 
limits the control an author has over the reception of her material. While she wanted to be artistic and use 
her imagination in the presentation of the material, she also wanted to make sure that the main idea of 
their project was clear and repeatedly presented in a logical fashion. She expresses her frustration about 
this in her journal: 
La autora tiene tan poco control sobre cómo los lectores van a utilizar su texto. Hay una manera 
correcta de leer un trabajo escrito y eso es linealmente. Pero en el CD-ROM, con la excepción de 
poder guiar el lector por medio de las 'palabras calientes,' la autora no tiene el mismo control. 
(The author has so little control over how a reader will use her text! There is a correct way to read 
a written paper and that's linearly ... But in the CD-ROM, apart from being able to guide a reader 
through the use of hot words, the author does not have this same control). 
Both Helen and Lucy had been trained in school to see the subtle ways in which writers "manipulate" (to 
use Lucy's word) their information and control their readers. In no class, however, had they been taught to 
deconstruct the intertextual subtleties of hypermedia. Working hard to regain some authorial control and 
predict the reception of their work, they repeatedly looked for ways to guide their readers through a set 
path while giving the semblance of absolute interactive freedom. This became increasingly evident as 
they designed the next screens. 
The second screen is dedicated to the Fiesta de la Virgen de la Purisima Concepcion in Leon, Laura's 
home-town virgin. To establish a coherence between their index and the three subsequent screens they 
placed the Virgin once again in the center and put the text around her or embedded behind a series of hot 
words or "hot" object fields (images). The image used is a photograph of a gold medallion taken from a 
book. It has been cropped from its chain during scanning and reframed on a pale blue background. This 
second page is a little "hotter" than the previous one in that there are now three hot words that correspond 
to three interchangeable pop-up text fields. The three words altar(altar), grito (shout), and gorra (cap), 
explain in more detail the ritual that takes place during the festivities in celebration of this Virgin. By 
embedding the information in this way, the students found ingenious ways to store a lot more text than 
can actually fit on the screen, thus exploiting the potential of Graddol's model 3 discussed above. They 
could not guarantee, however, as Graddol pointed out, that their readers would spend the time actively 
looking for this extra information and that they would interpret their text the way it was intended. 
 To leave this page there are only two choices: back to the index page or forward to the Virgen de 
Guadalupe. This third page is "hotter" still. The visual logic of the previous two pages is repeated with a 
vibrant image of Mexico's national Virgin in the center. The image was taken once again from a 
devotional prayer card but this time it was considerably manipulated for artistic as well as narrative ends 
during the scanning process. In the original image the Virgin is flanked by four small angels. In each of 
the four corners there is a miniature scene that depicts the story of her appearance to the peasant Juan 
Kramsch, A’Ness, & Lam Authenticity and Authorship in the Computer-Mediated…  
 
Language Learning & Technology 81 
Diego. In order to make their page more interactive and less crowded, Lucy and Helen decided to divide 
up the original card into five separate object fields. First, the four miniatures were separately cropped 
from the original and their edges blurred to conceal the joints. The four angels were erased by blurring 
(these are the same angels that appear on the first screen), and the Virgin was left standing alone like the 
two Virgins that had gone before. The four miniatures were then imported one by one and given 
individual functions, that is to say, they were made hot or clickable. Placed symmetrically in each corner 
of the CD-ROM page they evoke but do not mirror their original setting on the devotional card. A 
heading was placed underneath which, when clicked upon, prompts a brief narrative passage to appear. 
The headings are numbered so as to encourage the reader to follow the story in a chronological way. 
Clicking on the images serves exactly the same purpose, but using a different route. The Virgin was 
positioned at the center and also made hot. When you click on her she  enlarges to dominate the whole 
page  . This predominance of the Virgin, her central position on the page, and her increasing "hotness" 
reveal quite explicitly the authorial meaning that Lucy and Helen wish to bring across their whole 
module. Moreover, it shows how, as they progressed and became more aware of both the technological 
constraints and the potentials of their new medium of representation, they experimented with and adapted 
more to the medium's logic or rhetoric of representation. 
The final page is dedicated to Colombia's Virgen de la Lajas. The central image the students used for this 
page was obtained from the Internet. It was downloaded, translated from a gif file into a bitmap for 
Toolbook, manipulated in Photoshop, and imported in a somewhat altered fashion into Lucy and Helen's 
project. The Virgin of las Lajas appears floating in a cave and is flanked by two saints, Francis of Assisi 
and Domingo de Guzman (a local saint), who stand praying and looking up at her in adoration. The image 
was too big for the CD-ROM, so it was cropped. Once again, to give the impression that the Virgin is 
appearing not only to the saints, but also to the reader, the two saints were cropped from the picture, 
isolated into two separate object fields and enlarged. In Photoshop they were then lightened to the point 
of almost becoming translucent and their edges blurred to give them an ethereal quality. They were then 
placed on the CD-ROM page opposite each other (again evoking their position in the original painting) 
and text superimposed upon them. The fact that they are so light does not only lend a symbolic air to the 
representation but also, for pragmatic reasons, allows the text to be clearly legible on top. 
The Virgin, who now stands alone, was placed center stage for the fourth and final time. The final effect 
the students produced, to continue the logic that they had established on the previous page, was to make 
this Virgin hot, but not the saints. When the Virgin is clicked on, she appears again but this time larger. 
What is more, the saints are now duplicated. Not only has the computer allowed Lucy and Helen to grant 
representational "agency" to the Virgin and not to the saints (since if you click on them nothing happens), 
but they have also generated a re-reading or re-representation of the original image that they found on the 
Internet. In the new reading, the Virgin, aloft in her glory, is worshipped, not by two but by what appears 
to be a veritable crowd of saintly male figures. 
It is clear from this project that the students were never simply archiving authentic materials but actively 
recontextualizing them to create new and oftentimes quite personalized effects and alternative readings of 
Latin American culture. We could argue that Lucy and Helen have consciously sought out ways to assert 
both a feminist rendition of the Virgin Mary in Latin America (even though their navigational frame did 
not include a category on gender), as well as one that decenters the more famous Virgen de Guadalupe in 
favor of Nicaragua's Virgen de la Purissima. One could say that they shifted away from Graddol's first 
two models of language to his third model and its implications. After completing their module, Helen 
concluded, quite rightly, that multimedia "te hace pensar en las maneras en que se representa la 
información" (It really makes you think about how knowledge is represented). 
Kramsch, A’Ness, & Lam Authenticity and Authorship in the Computer-Mediated…  
 
Language Learning & Technology 82 
AUTHORSHIP ON LINE 
The issue of authorship emerges again but in a different form in the use of the World Wide Web by 
learners of English as Second Language. In a study of young Hong Kong immigrants in California high 
schools, co-author Eva Lam came across a high school senior from Hong Kong named Almon, who 
expressed frustration over the fact that his English was still lagging behind, even though he had been in 
the country for six years. He felt discriminated against in school because of his Chinese accent and was 
worried about his future life and career prospects because of his inability to speak English like a native. 
He said in an interview in Cantonese (code-switch to English in italics) 
The Chinese are prospering quite okay here. The problem is mainly with discrimination. The 
Chinese have more problems with English, and so it's more difficult for them to find jobs. Even 
those who have been here for a long time don't speak like the native-born Americans ... English is 
my biggest problem ... it's like this place isn't my world. I don't belong here. I guess it's going to 
be very hard for me to develop my career here. And I have a feeling that my English won't be that 
good even in ten years. 
In the latter part of his senior year, Almon became actively involved with the Web, completed a personal 
home page on a Japanese pop singer, compiled a long list of names of his on-line chatmates in several 
countries around the world, and wrote regularly to a few e-mail pen pals. His writing ability in English 
improved dramatically and he felt increasing pride in expressing himself in English. Contrasting the 
difference before and after his Internet involvement, he said 
I can express myself much more easily now…It's not a matter of typing skill, it's the English ... 
Now I've improved, it's because of ICQ or e-mail or other reasons ... Before I was the type who 
hated English, really, I didn't like English. Maybe it was a kind of escapism, knowing I wasn't 
doing well at it, and so I used hating it as a way to deal with the problem. But I think it's easier for 
me to write out something now ... (to) express better. 
This qualitatively different relationship to English came with a newly discovered ability to express 
himself in writing via the electronic media, which also helped him to overcome some of his fear and 
worry about the future 
I have kind of changed my determination. I'm not as fearful, or afraid of the future, that I won't 
have a future ... When I was negative, I felt the world doesn't belong to me, and it's hard to 
survive here. And I felt not many people understand me, or would. I didn't feel like I belong to 
this world ... But now I feel there's nothing much to be afraid of. It really depends on how you go 
about it. It's not like the world has power over you. It was (names of a few chatmates and e-mail 
pen pals) who helped me to change and encouraged me. If I hadn't known them, perhaps I 
wouldn't have changed so much ... Yeah, maybe the Internet has changed me. 
Given the changes that Almon experienced through writing on the Internet, our question is, What kind of 
author was Almon becoming on the Internet? 
First, Almon constructed a personal Website through an international server called "GeoCities" 
(http://www.geocities.com/main/help/geotour) advertised as follows:2 
Welcome to GeoCities, the largest and fastest-growing community on the Internet ... At 
Geocities, we provide members with free e-mail accounts, home pages and the best page building 
tools and online help resources to make personal publishing and community building as easy as 
writing a letter to a friend. More than 2 million people have already joined, and thousands more 
are signing up every day .... GeoCities is a thriving online community of people just like you. We 
call our members "homesteaders" because they've staked a claim on their own plot of "land" on 
the Internet .... There are 15 themed avenues (Entertainment, Arts & Literature, Sport & 
Kramsch, A’Ness, & Lam Authenticity and Authorship in the Computer-Mediated…  
 
Language Learning & Technology 83 
Recreation etc.) ... From the neighborhoods, you can peruse the best home pages, visit our 
exciting, interactive avenues, or just cruise the suburbs. 
From this ad, we can see that Web technology offers not only the virtual base for the construction, storage 
and retrieval of electronic texts, but also a full-fledged metaphor for the building of social and cultural 
communities. The fusion of the words "home" and "page" merges the two overlapping tropes of 
rootedness and literacy into an American life-style that is exported over the Internet. One can "peruse" 
texts (or homepages) by "cruising" down the neighborhoods and suburbs of contexts (or themes). The 
names and themes of the over 40 neighborhoods (with branches called suburbs) are characteristically 
empty stereotypes, or lieux de mémoire, devoid of all historical memory. For example, 
Paris is the neighborhood of: Romance, poetry, and the arts 
 Broadway: Theater, musical, show business 
 Athens: Education, literature, poetry, philosophy 
 Vienna: Classical music, opera, ballet 
 Madison Avenue: Advertising 
 Silicon Valley: Hardware, software, programming 
 Wellesley: A community of women 
 Tokyo: Anime and all things Asian 
Almon chose to settle his homepage in "Tokyo," where a global community of Asians gathers around 
Japanese pop culture. Almon's on-line chatmates are located in such diverse sites as the US, Malaysia, 
Japan, Hong Kong, and Canada. 
Almon designed his homepage on Ryoko, a teenage pop singer, by using materials and sources from 
magazines and other Web sites on Japanese pop (J-pop) music and celebrities. He chose a pseudonym, 
Mr. Children (also the name of a J-pop music group), to designate himself, hence the home page is called 
"Mr. Children's Ryoko Page." It appears on the computer screen with a main page that presents a written 
introduction, an animated cartoon picture of Ryoko next to her name in Japanese kanji (Chinese 
characters in Japanese script), and a song of hers playing in the background. A side panel shows a list of 
buttons indicating the other parts of the homepage that can be opened by clicking on them: a profile of 
Ryoko; a history page with her biographical information; a myriad selection of photos; a music section 
with her songs that can be listened to on-line or downloaded to one's computer; several video clips; a 
section called "My Favorite Links" which provides linkages to other personal and institutional Web sites 
on J-pop music, particular singers like Ryoko, Japanese animations, and so forth; and a page with search 
engines that one can use to look up other items on the Internet. A guestbook is provided for visitors to 
sign their comments or view other people's comments. 
In the written text on the main page that first comes on the computer screen, Almon presents the topic of 
his home page, Ryoko Hirosue, and introduces himself as Mr. Children. Almon highlights his ownership 
of the homepage by the use of the first-person possessive in "my site" and "my homepage," and 
establishes himself as a knowledgeable and helpful member of the international J-pop community in 
statements like, "No problem!^_^ you'll find out anythings about her in my site." Multiple channels of 
communication are provided in the second paragraph, in the forms of e-mail and on-line chat, for Mr. 
Children and his readers/visitors to establish and maintain contact. Clearly, the homepage represents not 
only the singer Ryoko, but also Mr. Children, a participant in J-pop culture. 
In the section "My Favorite Links," associations are formed with other homepages on Ryoko and various 
aspects of J-pop music, including animation (anime), and extended out to other interests of Internet users, 
Kramsch, A’Ness, & Lam Authenticity and Authorship in the Computer-Mediated…  
 
Language Learning & Technology 84 
friends' homepages, and computer games, a few of which contain the Chinese language. With regard to J-
pop music, not only is there a presentation of factual information, but active exhortation to galvanize the 
J-pop fans community. This is exemplified in the use of imperatives (e.g., "Let join there...," "Go check it 
now...," "Must Visit") and the modal auxiliary verb "can" (e.g., "A lot of Ryoko's pictures you can get 
here," "You can try to hear the brand-new songs...," "Here you can download a tons of mp3 files of song," 
"You can find all TK family official homepage here"). A promotional rhetoric runs through the page, both 
to advertise for the music culture and industry, and to promote oneself in this culture, as can be seen in 
Almon's adoption of the name Mr. Children. The descriptor for the link to the homepage of the music 
group "Mr. Children innocent world" reads, "Please don't mistake this, this is not my home page. This is a 
regular Mr. Children page. Check it out, and see why I like this group so much [italics added]. They are so 
great!!!" Here one finds the adoption of an iconic figure in the music industry as an identification badge 
for a J-pop fan. The advertising discourse of the global music and high-tech industry becomes a vehicle 
for Almon to introduce himself as a knowledgeable and valued member of the global J-pop community, 
and to participate in promoting its interests and resources. 
The formation of gendered social roles emerges in another form of electronic communication--the 
dialogic exchange of on-line chat and e-mail. Almon says he prefers female pen pals because they are 
better able "to help somebody grow in self-knowledge and confidence." Female pen pals take on a 
nurturing, motherly, supportive role. Here is a posting of Almon to Ying, a Chinese female pen pal from 
Hong Kong (written in English although in other instances, he frequently code-switches to Chinese). 
Almon had presented himself as a shy person in need of support and Ying had responded accordingly: 
Almon. Hum... you said you can share my happiness or sadness, that's great. It is a very important thing to 
be a good pal. So don't try to hide when I need to share things with you, okay. Also I would like to listen, 
if you have anything you want to share too... 
Here is an exchange with Ada, a Hong Kong Chinese living in Canada: 
Almon I have some photo scans of my childhood and fellowship, I don't know if you 
are interesting to take look… 
Ada oh... i'm interested... I'm curious to see how you look when you're young. 
Almon Ok, I hope you don't feel sick by look at my pic. hehe ^^ [raised 
eyebrows/smile] 
Ada I'm sure I won't... 
Almon the pic is very blur... 
Ada You are very happy and cute when you're small :>  
 [smile] 
Almon Yeah, I like my smile when I was a kid. But, I don't know will I smile like that 
again ... hee hee. 
Ada ...you'll have a smile like the one you had when you're a baby ... if you can be as 
simple as a baby... 
 I mean it in a nice way... 
 Remember Jesus told us that we have to be like a child if we want to go to 
heaven. 
Almon  
Yes, I'm 100% agreeing what you're saying. That's what I always thinking, so I 
very like the people childlike outside, but also mature inside... 
 
Kramsch, A’Ness, & Lam Authenticity and Authorship in the Computer-Mediated…  
 
Language Learning & Technology 85 
Seiko, a Japanese female living in the US, gives Almon advice to which he responds 
Seiko, arigatoo for your advice to me (>_0) [eyewink] I will try to more open myself, and be 
more talkative. But, it takes time to change. Hey, you know what, something can always control 
my sentiments. Can you guess it? .. Yeah, right. It's music. 
If we examine these postings, they sound both very personal and very much like a role-play. The hedges 
and qualifiers: "you know what?" "Can you guess it?" "hehe," "oh," "hum," "okay," and the ellipses that 
signal pauses and hesitation, as well as the emoticons of the genre (">_0"), establish a distance between 
Almon the author and Almon the narrator, between the world that is spoken about and the world in which 
the speaking occurs (Goffman, 1981, p. 147). 
The distancing of the author and narrator also allows for a mutual adoption of the supportive, nurturing 
role across gender lines in the context of intentional friendship-making over the Internet. This is seen, for 
example, in an on-line circular posting between Almon and Ada, where the 1st and 2nd person pronouns 
serve as the deictics for narrative roles that can be associated at will with any speaker: 
You are my friend and I hope you know that's true 
 No matter what happens I will stand by you. 
 I'll be there for you whenever you need. 
 To lend you a hand to do a good deed. 
 So just call on me when you need me my friend 
 I will always be there even to the end. 
 Forward this promise to all your friends to show your 
 Friendship and see who sends it back. 
In this next excerpt of an e-mail exchange, Almon consoles Ying after she has expressed frustration over 
her relationship with her boyfriend: 
Ying, I hope you don't mind. I don't know how to say things to cheer up others. But I really hope 
you will feel better. Don't be troubled by those people who are not true to you ... You're so kind 
and understanding ... You'll surely find somebody who truly loves you ... I give you my blessing! 
Here we see a bracketing by the author of his own authorial authority through the use of hedges: "I 
hope...," "I don't know...," "I really hope..." It is as though the utterances that follow the initial qualifiers 
do not belong to the speaker in the normal sense, but are an animation of a gendered voice that happens to 
be associated with the speaker in this situation. In fact, one has the feeling that Almon is crossing gender 
lines and is taking on the nurturing, supporting voice usually associated with the female identity 
The gender roles adopted by the interlocutors reinforce the impression of a rhetorical or textual identity 
that is being developed and that is related to but different from the biographical identity of the authors. 
Werry (1996, p. 59) notes the interplay between involvement and detachment in the synchronous 
communication of Internet relay chats: 
When communicating on IRC there is a different sense of connection to the word; it does not 
belong to the speaker in the sense that a spoken word does. Yet at the same time, words exist in a 
temporal framework which approximates oral discourse, which requires interactivity and 
involvement, and which invites the fabrication of the texture and signature of an individual 
speaker's voice. 
Kramsch, A’Ness, & Lam Authenticity and Authorship in the Computer-Mediated…  
 
Language Learning & Technology 86 
Almon tries to explain this to one of his pen pals: 
I believe most people has two different "I", one is in the realistic world, one is in the 
imaginational world. There is no definition to define which "I" is the original "I", though they 
might have difference. Because they both are connect together. The reality "I" is develop by the 
environment changing. The imaginative "I" is develop by the heart growing. But, sometime they 
will influence each other. For example me, "I" am very silent, shy, straight, dummy, serious, 
outdate, etc. in the realistic world. But,"I" in the imaginational world is talkative, playful, 
prankish, naughty, open, sentimental, clever, sometime easy to get angry, etc... I don't like the "I" 
of reality. I'm trying to change myself. 
But, I think you usually would see "I" in imaginational world because I'm very open to writing e-
mail to people. ^-^ [Japanese emoticon for smile] How about you?? Do you have two different 
"I"?? hee hee. 
 The question arises, of course, as to the originality of the narrative self developed through these 
networked electronic chats. Many of these students' postings display quite conventional narrative roles, 
they borrow their codes from Madison street advertising (e.g., GeoCities promotional talk), adolescent 
Internet talk (e.g., emoticons, oral forms of language), popular psychology (e.g., the need to share and 
care, to change oneself), and religious discourse (e.g., references to Jesus). One could characterize these 
borrowings as so many "animations" of other people's discourses (Goffman, 1981) or of multiple "voices 
in the text" (Fairclough, 1992; Thompson, 1996), and one may wish that Almon would acquire a more 
"proper" kind of English. Yet it is precisely this "worldliness" of English and the discourses that adhere to 
its global spread (Pennycook, 1998) that have provided Almon with the linguistic tools to enter into a 
multicultural world of Japanese pop culture where he finds a community that understands and supports 
him. The kind of English that Almon acquired through his Internet involvement is the "global English" of 
adolescent pop culture, not the standard English taught in ESL classes. Whereas classroom English 
contributed to Almon's sense of exclusion or marginalization (his inability to speak like a native), which 
paradoxically contradicts the school's mandate to prepare students for the workplace and civic 
involvement, the English he acquired on the Internet enabled him to develop a sense of belonging and 
connectedness to a global English-speaking community. Almon is not only learning more English, but 
more relevant and appropriate English for the World Wide Web community of which he sought to 
become part.3 
DISCUSSION 
What kind of L2 literacy did the students acquire in these two case studies? The case study of the Latin-
American culture CD-ROM showed that enhanced access to texts of various kinds becomes knowledge 
only if, as Widdowson (1990) exhorted, the text is actively transformed by the students themselves into a 
coherent context for which the students take full authorial responsibility. But what is the extent of this 
responsibility with the electronic medium? In the same manner as the classroom has its own pedagogic 
authenticity (Breen,1985), the medium itself imposes it own aesthetic logic on the creation of the 
material. Many of the decisions made by Lucy and Helen were prompted by the nature of hypertext itself 
(e.g., ease of hot links, cross-referencing, fluidity of formats, size of screen, color codings). The very 
procedural power that was theirs to design the architecture of the program (e.g., the three axes of time, 
space, theme) created a categorical grid to which they were subsequently bound; all the more so as it was 
a group effort that committed many individuals to abide by the same "story grammar" once they had 
created it. 
The narrative freedom they had dreamed of exercising when authoring the program was further 
constrained by the uncertainty regarding the audience and the purposes to which the program would be 
put. By going from slides trays and material files for a specific instructor's personal use, to an electronic 
Kramsch, A’Ness, & Lam Authenticity and Authorship in the Computer-Mediated…  
 
Language Learning & Technology 87 
storage device for future incarnations of a specific course, to a CD-ROM for the general use of unknown 
professors and their students with unknown syllabi and lesson plans, authorial freedom turned into 
authorial qualms. As in Graddol's third model of language, the enhanced facility afforded by the medium 
itself--the ease of intertextual associations, the flexible order of hotlinks, the manipulability of images--
loosened the relationship between author and reader. The increased diversity and multiplicity of users of 
the program, the increased variety of their purposes and interests, their differing levels of computer 
literacy, brought about changes in the way the students conceived of their subject matter. It was not just 
like creating an illustrated book, it became a very different literacy event. 
Hypertext technology enhanced not only the information value of the texts they chose, but their 
representational meaning as well. The juxtaposition of multiple written and visual texts on the screen and 
their hot links to other texts was in itself carrying a meaning that the authors wanted the readers to 
discover (such as the prominence Lucy wanted to give to the Virgin de las Lajas), but the readers would 
not necessarily accept this and other intended orderings. Not only was the interpretation of these texts up 
for grabs, but so was their social and historical context. As Bruno Latour pointed out on the example of 
handguns: change the place, change the time, and you change the object itself. The different space and 
time scale of the hardware seemed to impose upon the software a different conception of the social and 
historical dimensions of textual representation. 
For example, the representation of the Virgin by the students was no more and no less authentic than the 
devotional card of the Virgin Mary, itself a composite of a calendar illustration and a cheap painting 
reproduction. But, in creating their CD-ROM pages, the students colonized local spaces, that is, they 
transformed the local Virgin, worshipped by local saints and angels, into a global Virgin that could be 
enlarged on demand for the benefit of a group of learners whose purpose was not to worship, but to learn 
about worshipping practices and the role of woman and mother in Latin-American culture. The creation 
of the Latin-American CD-ROM confronted students with the necessity of dealing with the often 
contradictory demands of local versus global authenticity (e.g., the Virgin as an object of local religious 
practices vs. the Virgin as an icon of Latin American culture). 
One could argue that the same conflicting demands arise with a printed textbook. But in a textbook, the 
author has chosen to represent the Virgin with or without angels, with or without saints, with or without 
context, for a very specific purpose. In a CD-ROM, that choice is left to the users, who can change the 
meaning of the whole by changing the sequence, the scale, and the position of the parts on the screen. 
Global authenticity on the computer becomes conflated with authorship, that is, with the power to 
manipulate objects and texts as so many icons. Through the electronic medium, authorship becomes the 
privilege of any language user, at equal par with any other. The reason why students believed that 
multimedia was more authentic than a written text may be because they had more power to author it, both 
as creators and as consumers. 
 In a post-modern model of language, the concept of authorship is closely related to that of agency. In 
Hamlet on the Holodeck, Janet Murray (1997) reflects on the relationship between these two concepts.4 
Unlike the print medium that has become for most readers a means of retrieving or interpreting 
information, the computer, she says, is 
first and foremost a representational [italics added] medium, a means for modelling the world 
that adds its own potent properties to the traditional media it has so quickly assimilated (p. 284) 
.... There is a distinction between playing a creative role within an authored environment and 
having authorship of the environment itself ... Authorship in electronic media is procedural. 
Procedural authorship means writing the rules by which the texts appear as well as writing the 
texts themselves. It means writing the rules for the interactor's involvement, that is, the conditions 
under which things will happen in response to the participants' actions. It means establishing the 
Kramsch, A’Ness, & Lam Authenticity and Authorship in the Computer-Mediated…  
 
Language Learning & Technology 88 
properties of the objects and potential objects in the virtual world and the formulas for how they 
will relate to one another. (p. 152-53) 
Agency, says Murray, is the power to take meaningful action and to see the results of our decisions and 
choices (1997, p. 126). "The constructivist pleasure is the highest form of narrative agency the medium 
allows" (p. 149). The pleasure of agency is much more than the pleasure that comes from clicking on 
hotlinks or even being the author of your own sentences. It has to do with the power to construct a 
representation of reality, a writing of history, and to "impose reception" of it by others (Bourdieu, 1982, p. 
20) by virtue of being computer literate, that is, of holding a legitimate technological expertise. In our 
case study, we found that hyperlinking of texts on the CD-ROM not only made the students curious about 
each other's projects in a way that perhaps they would not have been with final papers, but that it also 
generated a healthy degree of competition among them. As readers are at relative liberty to browse 
through the program in the order they choose, the students wanted to find ways to make their index page 
as eye-catching and as enticing as possible. Authors of written language have always had the pleasure of 
influencing a public readership once their writings got the sanction of public institutions and the 
publishing industry. Now this pleasure is shared by anyone who has access to a computer and is familiar 
with the procedural and rhetorical conventions of the genre.5 No doubt the experience of representing the 
world has educational value in itself, as Willis (1993) points out, "Making (not receiving) messages and 
meanings in your own context and from materials you have appropriated is, in essence, a form of 
education in the broadest sense" (p. 136). But because the computer can disseminate one's representation 
of the world inordinately more speedily and economically than the print medium, the feeling of agency is 
inordinately enhanced. 
The concept of agency can help us understand the sense of "empowerment" that Almon experiences in his 
on-line chats on the Internet. Not only can he create his own frame to navigate the GeoCities server, but 
he can display an authenticity of feelings, experiences, and memories that he could not express as easily 
with any other medium. This combination of utmost distance and utmost intimacy, of seriousness and 
playfulness, authenticity and simulation, has been addressed by Sherry Turkle in her book  Life on the 
Screen: Identity in the age of the Internet(1995). Turkle notes the gap that electronic technologies have 
introduced between the modes of knowing still prevalent until the late 1980s (the generation of the 
teachers) and that of the 1990s (the generation of the students). In our computer age, Turkle argues, 
students are less and less interested in accessing deep truths about themselves and the world, nor in 
finding out how the rules and the world work, be they rules of grammar, rules of play, or rules of 
intercultural communication. Rather, "taking things at interface value" (Turkle,1995), they seem to be 
more invested in playing the communicative or interactive game itself. The motto of the era seems to be 
"you learn to play by playing, not by learning how to play." The kind of language experience fostered by 
Graddol's model 1, in which rules are learned first and then put to use in conversation, has given way to a 
learning by doing, and learning to meet the demands of doing in specific contexts, to solve immediate 
problems together in the small culture of communities of practice (Holliday, 1999; Lave & Wenger, 1991; 
Uber Grosse & Leto, 1999; Wenger, 1999). Rather than an object of reverence or study in itself, language 
is viewed as a tool which brings people together and creates intimacy (Harmon, 1999). What is important 
is how you relate, emotionally, and physically, to that world (Grossberg, 1997), not how you understand 
its deep rational inner workings. 
Furthermore, as Graddol noted above, the words one uses might not be one's own to start with. In the 
same manner as Almon recycles phrases and expressions heard elsewhere, learning a language becomes a 
matter of assembling a patchwork of discourses taken from various contexts and resignifying them within 
the local situation of the exchange. Authenticity and authorship in the old sense become of secondary 
relevance. Almon the author becomes reconceived as the narrator who weaves (Latin tessere) 
prefabricated parts into a new tapestry or text. He might only be the animator of other people's words, but 
as a narrator he has the ability to be both himself and a textual version of himself, as he so eloquently 
Kramsch, A’Ness, & Lam Authenticity and Authorship in the Computer-Mediated…  
 
Language Learning & Technology 89 
describes. The use of the electronic medium has changed his sense of identity from a deficient user of 
local American English, to a competent user of global English, or at least a particular variety thereof. 
Internet relay chat offers its users the opportunity to develop several identities that might seem to be at 
odds with one another, as Almon's real "I" and Almon's fictional "I", but, in the virtual world of the 
Internet, these identities can be articulated in a coherent multimedia narrative. (Kramsch & Lam, 1999; 
Scollon, 1996). In her theorization of the global and the local, feminist geographer Doreen Massey 
criticizes the popular conception of the global as a set of enveloping forces and flows that impinge on the 
local. Instead, local specificity may be more accurately conceived as created out of the multiple relations 
that stretch beyond geographical borders. "[If] the spatial is thought of in the context of space-time and as 
formed out of social interrelations at all scales, then one view of a place is as a particular articulation of 
those relations, a particular moment in those networks of social relations and understandings" (Massey, 
1994, p. 5). Applied to issues of language and identity in networked computers, Massey's articulation of 
the global and the local makes room for the creation of textual identities that originate from dominant 
global discourses, but re-articulate the global on the local level. In the case of Almon, the fictional "I," or 
narrative self, might be viewed in some instances as blurring the boundaries of stereotypical gender roles, 
and destabilizing the national borders that define his social identity as a "minority." Networked electronic 
technology may indeed hold the potential of bringing the textual and the social into creative tension with 
each other, and of reinstating the value of role play, theatricality, fictionalization in language learning. In 
this decentered perspective, where truth and language do not necessarily coincide, language could be 
described as "verbal art," a phrase that captures its function as both reference and representation, and 
language learning as initiation to a new symbolic universe of signs and meanings. 
CONCLUSION 
In our attempt to reframe the notions of authenticity and authorship in CmLL we have had to resignify 
these concepts into agency on the one hand, and identity on the other. A communicative approach based 
on the use of authentic texts and on the desire to make the learners author their own words has been 
changed by the physical properties of the electronic medium and the students' engagement with it. The 
powerful appeal of the computer is due to its promise of granting agency and a stronger sense of identity 
to its users because of its different space and time scales, its easy intertextuality, and its speed of access. 
The unique characteristic of communication through multimedia or on the Internet is not, as with a 
printed text, the fact that it puts the reader in touch with a pre-determined authorial intention; it is not, as 
in face-to-face conversations, the fact that it allows learners to negotiate meaning in interaction with 
embodied interlocutors in identifiable social contexts. Multimedia and the Internet enable learners to find 
a voice for themselves at the intersection of multiple time scales, to represent their own version of reality 
through multimodal texts, and to confront a broad public audience with that reality. 
It remains to be seen how foreign language pedagogy will adapt to such a paradigm shift. The case studies 
presented here potentially challenge the institutional authority of the academy, based on traditional 
notions of text as repository of knowledge, and of communication as mainly exchange of information. 
They suggest that language learning via computers does not do away with the definition of 
communication given by Breen and Candlin (1980, p. 92) as the expression, interpretation, and 
negotiation of meaning, but that it resignifies "meaning." What gets negotiated via the computer is not 
only information, but also and importantly "the representation of self and other." The use of computers in 
multimedia environments (including electronic communication) is slowly but surely transforming our 
conceptions of foreign language learning by changing the very notions of who we are and how we 
represent ourselves through language.6 
 
Kramsch, A’Ness, & Lam Authenticity and Authorship in the Computer-Mediated…  
 
Language Learning & Technology 90 
NOTES 
1. Of course, seen from a communicative perspective, as Rick Kern points out, electronic texts 
might not be very different from paper texts to the extent that they, too, are differentiated by 
function, audience, context (personal communication, 2000). (In terms of communication, an e-
mail message is very different from a Web page, a chat transcript, or a newsgroup list!) And yet, 
they all share the same non-material, virtual technology which differentiates them in fundamental 
ways from material-based print technology, as Bruno Latour (1999) would argue.  
2. GeoCities has since been merged with Yahoo!, and the GeoCities link given here is no longer 
accessible.  
3. According to the motto, "Tell me what you need English for, and I will tell you what English you 
need" (Hutchinson & Waters, 1987, p. 8).  
4. Janet Murray (1997) identifies four essential properties of multimedia which might account for 
the sense of agency the students experienced: "Multimedia is 'procedural' (rules-based), 
'participatory' (interactive to varying degrees), 'spatial' (it can represent space we can move 
through by interactional navigation), and 'encyclopedic' (it has the capacity and generates the 
expectation to store and retrieve information far beyond what was possible before" (p. 87). The 
students in Francine's class discovered this logic and tested its representational and narrative 
potential largely through a process of trial and error.  
5. For the moment, there are no gate-keeping mechanisms for the use of electronic technology in 
education. For example, students are not required to show that they know the procedural and 
rhetorical conventions of electronic authorship before they are given to "read" multimedia texts 
nor are such conventions explicitly taught. Lucy and Heather were only starting to discover, 
through trial and error, that such conventions do indeed exist and what they are.  
6. Some anonymous reviewers have expressed reservations about the usefulness of computers in 
education, unless human reflection, outreach, and collaboration are activated through their use. It 
has not been our intention here to promote computer-mediated literacy over print literacy. Rather, 
we have tried to highlight the changes brought about by the new medium in the way language 
learners think, behave, and use the language for communication. Whether computers are actually 
used to teach foreign languages or not, the computer is already having an impact on the way our 
students think and "language" the world around them at the beginning of this 21st century.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We wish to thank Frances Christie, Meg Gebhard, Jim Gee, Jay Lemke, Steve Thorne, Greta Vollmer, as 
well as Rick Kern and two anonymous reviewers for valuable feedback on earlier versions of this paper. 
Claire Kramsch extends special thanks to Peter Patrikis and Bob Blake for the opportunity to present this 
paper respectively at a conference on "Transformations: Computers, Foreign Languages, and 
Undergraduate Education" at M.I.T in October 1999, and, with Eva Lam, at a conference on Advanced 
Literacy at UC Davis in February 2000, where many new insights were gained. Francine A'Ness wishes 
to thank Mark Kaiser, Associate Director of the Berkeley Language Center, for his invaluable critical and 
technical support; Myrna Garcia Calderon, Gwen Kirkpatrick, and Julio Ramos for their support and 
encouragement; Andres Ramos for his collaboration and expertise during the design phase of the project; 
and all the students of Spanish 113 who were brave enough to try something new. Eva Lam wishes to 
thank Almon for helping her to learn about the many facets of social life on the Internet. 
Francine's research was supported by a graduate research fellowship from the Berkeley Language Center 
and Eva's research was conducted under a grant from the Graduate School of Education at UC Berkeley 
during the academic year 1997-98. 
Kramsch, A’Ness, & Lam Authenticity and Authorship in the Computer-Mediated…  
 
Language Learning & Technology 91 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Claire Kramsch is Professor of German and Foreign Language Acquisition at the University of California 
at Berkeley and Director of the Berkeley Language Center. Her latest books include Context and Culture 
in Language Teaching (1993) and Language and Culture (1998). 
 E-mail: ckramsch@socrates.berkeley.edu  
 
Francine A'Ness is an Assistant Professor of Spanish at Dartmouth College. She teaches Spanish and 
specializes in Latin American literature, theatre, and performance. She is very interested in the uses of 
theatre and technology for incorporating culture into second language acquisition. 
E-mail: francine.M.A'Ness@Dartmouth.edu  
 
Wan Shun Eva Lam is a Ph.D. candidate in the language, literacy, and culture division of the Graduate 
School of Education at the University of California at Berkeley. Her areas of specialization include 
literacy theory, language and culture, and the role of bilingual development in second language 
acquisition. 
 E-mail: evalam@uclink4.berkeley.edu 
REFERENCES 
 
Bolter, J. D. (1990). Writing space: The computer in the history of literacy. Hillsdale, NJ: L. Erlbaum. 
 
Bourdieu, P. (1982). Ce que parler veut dire. Paris: Fayard. 
 
Breen, M.P. (1985). Authenticity in the language classroom. Applied Linguistics, 6(1), 60-70. 
 
Breen, M. P., & Candlin, C. N. (1980). The essentials of a communicative curriculum in language 
teaching.  Applied Linguistics, 1(2), 89-112. 
 
Byrnes, H. (1998). Constructing curricula in collegiate foreign language departments. In H. Byrnes (Ed.), 
Learning foreign and second languages. Perspectives in research and scholarship (pp. 262-296). New 
York: MLA. 
 
Canale, M., & Swain, M. (1980). Theoretical bases of communicative approaches to second language 
teaching and testing. Applied Linguistics, 1, 1-47. 
 
Carter, R. (Ed.). (1999). Literature and language awareness. Special issue of language awareness, 8(1). 
 
Chun, D. M., & Plass, J.L. (1996). Effects of multimedia annotations on vocabulary acquisition. Modern 
Language Journal, 80(2), 183-198. 
 
Crook, C. (1994). Computers and the collaborative experience of learning. London: Routledge. 
 
Doughty, C. (1991). Second language instruction does make a difference: Evidence from an empirical 
study of SL relativization.  Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 13, 431-469. 
 
Doughty, C., & Williams, J. (Ed.). (1998). Focus on form in classroom second language acquisition. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Kramsch, A’Ness, & Lam Authenticity and Authorship in the Computer-Mediated…  
 
Language Learning & Technology 92 
 
Fairclough, N. (1992). Discourse and social change. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press. 
 
Goffman, E. (1981). Forms of talk. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 
 
Graddol, D. (1994). Three models of language description. In D. Graddol & O.Boyd-Barrett (Eds.), 
Media texts: Authors and readers (pp. 1-21). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
 
Grellet, F. (1981). Developing reading skills.Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
 
Grossberg, L. (1997, May 6-10).  Globalization, media and agency. Paper presented at the transnational 
and transdisciplinary workshop "The Relocation of Languages and Cultures" at Duke University, 
Durham, NC. 
 
Hadley, A. O. (1993). Teaching language in context (2nd ed.). Boston: Heinle and Heinle. 
 
Hanauer, D. (1999). Attention and literary education: A model of literary knowledge development. 
Language Awareness, 8(1), 15-29. 
 
Harmon, A. (1999, February 20). Internet changes language for J & L. New York Times, p. A15. 
 
Herring, S. C. (Ed.). (1996). Computer-mediated communication: Linguistic,social and cross-cultural 
perspectives. Philadelphia: Benjamins. 
 
Higgs, T. V.(Ed.). (1982). Curriculum, competence, and the foreign language teacher. Skokie, IL: 
National Textbook. 
 
Holliday, A. (1999). Small cultures. Applied Linguistics, 20(2), 237-64. 
 
Hutchinson, R., & Waters, A. (1987). English for specific purposes. A learning-centered approach. 
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
 
Jones, S. G. (Ed.). (1995). Cybersociety: Computer mediated communication and community. London: 
Sage. 
 
Jones, S. G. (Ed.). (1997). Virtual culture. Identity and communication in cybersociety. London: Sage. 
 
Jurasek, R. T. (1988). Integrating foreign languages into the college curriculum. Modern Language 
Journal, 72, 52-58. 
 
Kern, R. (1995). Restructuring classroom interaction with networked vomputers: Effects on quantity and 
characteristics of language production. Modern Language Journal, 79(4), 457-76. 
 
Kern, R. (2000). Literacy and language teaching. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
 
Kern, R., & Warschauer, M. (Eds.). (2000). Netword-based language teaching: Concepts and practice. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
 
Kramsch, C. (1993). Context and culture in language teaching. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
 
Kramsch, C. (1997). Language teaching in an electronic age. In G. M. Jacobs (Ed.), Language classrooms 
Kramsch, A’Ness, & Lam Authenticity and Authorship in the Computer-Mediated…  
 
Language Learning & Technology 93 
of tomorrow: Issues and responses (pp. 105-117). Singapore: SEAMEO Regional Language Centre. 
 
Kramsch, C. (1998). Language and culture. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
 
Kramsch, C., & Andersen, R. (1998). Teaching text and context through multimedia. Language Learning 
and Technology, 2(2), 31-42. Retrieved July 12, 2000, from the World Wide Web:  
http://llt.msu.edu/vol2num2/article1/index.html. 
 
Kramsch, C., & Lam, E. (1999). Textual identities: The importance of being non-native. In G.Braine 
(Ed.), Non-native educators in English language teaching (pp. 57-72). Mahwah, NJ: L. Erlbaum. 
 
Krueger, M., & Ryan, F. (1993).  Language and content: Discipline-based approaches to language study. 
Lexington, MA: D.C. Heath. 
 
Landow, G. P. (1992, 1997). Hypertext: The convergence of contemporary critical theory and technology. 
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. 
 
Lanham, R. A. (1994). The electronic word: Democracy, technology and the arts. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press. 
 
Latour, B. (1999). Pandora's hope. Essays on the readlity of science studies. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 
 
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning. Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press. 
 
Lemke, J. L. (1998). Metamedia literacy: Transforming meanings and media. In D. Reinking, M. C. 
McKenna, L. D. Labbo, & R. D. Kieffer (Eds.), Handbook of Literacy and Technology (pp. 283-302). 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 
Lemke, J. L. (2000). Multimedia demands of the scientific curriculum. Linguistics and Education, 10(3), 
1-25. 
 
Lemke, J. L. (in press a). Ideology, intertextuality, and the communication of science. In P.Fries, 
M.Cummings, D.Lockwood, & W.Spruiell (Eds.), Relations and function in language and discourse. 
London: Cassell. 
 
Lemke, J. L. (in press b). Across the scales of time: Artifacts, activities, and meaning in ecosocial 
systems.  Mind, culture, and activity. 
 
Long, M. (1990). Focus on form: A design feature in language teaching methodology. In K. de Bot, C. 
Kramsch, & R.Ginsberg (Eds.), Foreign language research in cross-cultural Perspective  (pp. 39-52). 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
 
Massey, D. (1994). Space, place, and gender. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press. 
 
McLuhan, M. (1962). The Gutenberg galaxy. The making of typographic man. Toronto: University of 
Toronto Press. 
 
Met, M. (1991). Learning language through content: Learning content through language. Foreign 
Language Annals, 24, 281-295. 
Kramsch, A’Ness, & Lam Authenticity and Authorship in the Computer-Mediated…  
 
Language Learning & Technology 94 
 
Murray, J. H. (1997). Hamlet on the Holodeck: The future of narrative in cyberspace. Cambridge, UK, 
MA: MIT Press. 
 
Nunan, D. (1989). Designing tasks for the communicative classroom. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press. 
 
Omaggio, A. C. (1986). Teaching language in vontext. Proficiency-oriented instruction.Boston: Heinle 
and Heinle. 
 
Pennycook, A. (1998). English and the discourses of colonialism. London: Routledge. 
 
Purves, A. (1998). Flies in the web of hypertext. In D. Reinking, M. C. McKenna, L. D. Labbo, & R. D. 
Kieffer,  Handbook of literacy and technology (pp. 235-252). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 
Reinking, D., McKenna, M. C., Labbo, L. D., & Kieffer, R. D. (Eds.). (1998).Handbook of literacy and 
technology. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
 
Rivers, W. M. (1983). Communicating naturally in a second language. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press. 
 
Savignon, S. J. (1983). Communicative competence: Theory and classroom practice. Texts and contexts 
in second language learning. Reading, MA: Addison Wesley. 
 
 
Schmidt, R. (1995). Attention and awareness in foreign language learning. Honolulu, HI: University of 
Hawai`i Press. 
 
Scollon, R. (1996). Discourse identity, social identity, and confusion in intercultural communication. 
Intercultural Communication Studies, 6(1), 1-16. 
 
Snow, M. A., Met, M., & Genesee, F. (1989). A conceptual framework for the integration of language 
and content in second/foreign language instruction. TESOL Quarterly, 23, 201-217. 
 
Stryker, S. B., & Leaver, B. L. (Eds.). (1997). Content-based instruction in foreign language education: 
Models and methods. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press. 
 
Swaffar, J. (1999). The case for foreign languages as a discipline. ADFL Bulletin, 30(3), 6-12. 
 
Swaffar, J., Arens, K., & Byrnes, H. (1991). Reading for meaning. An integrated approach to language 
learning.  Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
 
Thompson, G. (1996). Voices in the text: Discourse perspectives on language reports. Applied 
Linguistics, 17(4), 501-30. 
 
Thorne, S. (1999). An activity theoretical analysis of foreign language electronic discourse. Unpublished 
doctoral dissertation, University of California, Berkeley. 
 
Turkle, S. (1995). Life on the screen: Identity in the age of the Internet. New York: Simon and Schuster. 
 
Uber Grosse, C., & Leto, L. J. (1999). Virtual communities and networking in distance learning. TESOL 
Kramsch, A’Ness, & Lam Authenticity and Authorship in the Computer-Mediated…  
 
Language Learning & Technology 95 
Matters, 9(1), 1, 5. 
 
VanPatten, B. (1995). Attending to form and content in the input. An experiment in consciousness. 
Studies in Second Language Acquisition 12, 287-301. 
 
Wenger, E. (1999). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press. 
 
Werry, C. (1996). Linguistic and interactional features of internet relay chat. In S. Herring (Ed.), 
Computer-mediated communication: Linguistic, social and cross-cultural perspectives (pp. 47-63). 
Philadelphia: Benjamins. 
 
Widdowson, H. G. (1990). Aspects of language teaching. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
 
Widdowson, H. G. (1992). Practical stylistics. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
 
Widdowson, H. G. (1998). Context, community, and authentic language. TESOL Quarterly, 32(4), 705-
716. 
 
Willis, P. (1993). Common culture. San Francisco, CA: Westview Press. 
 
