Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
46
Language Learning & Technology
Vol. 5, No. 1, January 2001, pp. 46-54
REVIEW OF LAB MANAGEMENT SOFTWARE FOR THE MAC
Product nameProduct type &
cost
System requirementsFeatures Techni
cal
suppor
t
MacLogin Shareware
utility $10 per
work station
Minimum System 7 or
newer, 500k free RAM
Log-in,
messaging and
server control
Not
availabl
e
Simplewave Shareware
utility $150
Minimum System 7 or
newer, 100k free RAM
Maintains
integrity of
client machines
Not
availabl
e
RevRdist Freeware utilityMinimum System 6 or
newer, 1MB free RAM
Maintains
integrity of
client machines
Not
availabl
e
MacAdministrat
or
Commercial
administrative
environment, for
pricing
information
contact supplier
Administrator machine:
System 7.5 or newer, 5
MB free RAM.
Client machines: System
7 or newer 2MB free
RAM
User level
access
restrictions,
machine
replication,
protect of file
and folder
structures
Availab
le
AtOnce Commercial
management
utility $600
Minimum System 6 or
newer, AppleTalk 1MB
free RAM
Protection of
hard disc,
recording of
user activity,
provides
networking
without the need
for a server
Availab
le
Apple Network
Assistant
Commercial
administrative
environment, for
pricing
Administrator machine:
System 7.6.1or newer 8
MB free RAM. Client
machines: System 7.1 or
Multi-level
administrator
access, network
performance
Availab
le
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
47
information
contact supplier
newer 4 MB free RAMtesting, support
for AppleTalk
networks
KeyServer Commercial
software license-
monitoring tool,
$40 for 10
machines
(academic rate)
All versions of the Mac
operating system, 1MB
free RAM
Limits the
number of users
who can launch
a software
application
Availab
le
FolderBolt ProCommercial
security utility,
for pricing
information
contact supplier
Minimum System 7 or
newer, 16MB free RAM
Protection of all
folders in a
networked lab
Availab
le
Reviewed by Mark Peterson, Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
The growth of interest in computer-assisted language learning (CALL) and the greater
availability of language learning software have been accompanied by a proliferation of
CALL centers, computer-based facilities designed to provide learners with access to this
software. In recent years, the emergence of computer-mediated communications (CMC)
technologies and their ever-increasing use in language teaching and learning (Paramskas,
1999; Peterson, 1997), together with an increasing number of users, has placed new demands
on CALL labs and lab managers. A common response to these circumstances has been the
implementation of lab management software tools. These tools provide management features
such as remote control, network security, data collection, and troubleshooting. This review
will provide an overview of some of the major software management applications compatible
with the Mac OS operating system; lab management software available for the PC will not be
discussed. The software discussed here is not unique to CALL labs. Nonetheless, it is hoped
that the discussion of this software will prove valuable for CALL lab managers and
administrators.
LAB MANAGEMENT SOFTWARE: FACTORS TO CONSIDER
Although the institutional environment faced by the individual lab administrator varies, a
number of factors should be borne in mind by practitioners considering the implementation
of lab management software applications. Institutional requirements and resources will be a
primary concern of lab managers. Thus, the individual lab manager must consider whether
the purchase of software management tools is justified, given the size of the lab and usage
requirements. Because funding is often an issue for language programs, the cost of software
management applications may also be a decisive factor in the selection of tools: Using
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
48
 commercial software in large labs often requires expensive site license agreements, the cost
of which may be prohibitive for some institutions. This problem may be overcome to some
degree by the use of shareware or freeware programs.
The level of computer knowledge required to install and operate a management system may
also be a major concern for administrators as well as potential managers. Many of the
advanced features included in some lab software require extensive knowledge of computer
systems and networks. As a result, the implementation and operation of advanced
management tools often requires the presence of trained support staff (Smith, 1993). Thus,
the decision to implement such tools may have long-term budgetary implications. Regardless
of the software chosen, the need for trained personnel also highlights the importance of
planning and maintaining good relationships between managers, faculty and administrators
(McVicker, 1997). In the author’s experience (Peterson, 1999), relations between network
managers, administrators, and academic faculty should be fostered in order for a CALL
center to operate efficiently.
In addition, managers should consider the functionality and mix of software applications
required by their environment. Small labs with limited usage may require relatively few
management tools while large open-access labs may require more powerful tools with
extensive features such as remote control and monitoring. However, it is important to
remember that simplicity is an important goal, as simple systems are often more robust.
Thus, programs with numerous advanced features are not always preferable to simple
applications. Software compatibility is also a major issue to consider. For example,
practitioners should be aware that some of the newer software management packages are not
compatible with older versions of the Mac OS. This is frequently the case with older
shareware applications, many of which have not been updated to take account for upgrades
of the Mac OS.
Security considerations are another crucial factor in the choice of management tools
(Stevens, 1996). Large open-access labs often require software tools that can provide for
restrictions on user access. Restrictions required may include prevention of unauthorized
access and copyright violation.
Now that I have reviewed some of the major issues to take into consideration in the choice of
lab management software, I will describe the features of some of the most commonly used
Mac lab management packages and tools.
FREEWARE AND SHAREWARE LAB MANAGEMENT TOOLS
The following software applications are available either as freeware or as low-cost
shareware. Most of these applications offer more limited features than the commercially
produced management environments. However, these tools are usually reliable, easy to
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
49
install and operate. In addition, they have relatively small memory requirements. These
factors, combined with their low cost, make freeware and shareware applications attractive
choices for CALL lab managers seeking management systems.
MacLogin, a low cost shareware utility available in four versions, is designed to restrict
access to the network environment by enabling CALL center managers to control log-in,
messaging, and server mounting functions. An online manual for MacLogin is available at
their Web site.
Simplewave is a shareware system extension for the maintenance of lab computers. This
application provides basic maintenance of named client folders by synchronizing a local
start-up disk with a remote master folder. Potential users should note that this product is not
compatible with AppleShare Chooser (versions 3.8 or later) and that no upgrades are
planned.
RevRdist, a freeware utility produced at Purdue University, enables an administrator to
replicate and maintain the hard disks of client machines from a server mounted master folder
in order to prevent users from permanently changing the configuration of a networked Mac.
Unlike security packages, R vRdist does not prevent local users from reconfiguring the hard
disk. Instead it makes it easy to restore the configuration of networked Macs in lab at
prescheduled times, or as deemed necessary by the administrator. This product comes with a
HyperCard stack designed to facilitate installation of the software (see Figure 1). Th
RevRdist Web site also includes access to a listserv-based mailing list.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
50
Figure 1. RevRdist helper stack
COMMERCIAL LAB MANAGEMENT PACKAGES AND TOOLS
Commercially-produced software management applications offer a wider range of features
than shareware products, but they are often more expensive and require a higher level of
technical expertise to operate. Commercial products offer the advantages of flexibility,
frequent upgrades, and technical support, which are not always available with shareware
products.
MacAdministrator, the first complete Mac network-based lab administration software
package, allows the administration of a Mac lab from a single machine, through the use of
server and client software. Major features of MacAdministrator include control of access
through passwords and user level access restrictions, machine replication, and protection of
specified files and folder structures (see Figur  2). MacAdministrator also enables lab
managers to provide customized files to a specified user group, as well as full print and
software auditing, which not only offers the ability to control user printing and software
distribution, but also provides detailed usage reports for each user and application. FileM ker
Pro version 2.1 or newer, is necessary to view these reports.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
51
Figure 2. MacAdministrator folder control interface
AtOnce is a management utility designed to prevent damage to computers in a lab and to
facilitate the automation of various management functions. It can be customized to meet the
needs of individual practitioners and provides complete control over applications (see Figure
3). For example, interface consistency can be maintained on all machines in a lab, and menu
bar options may be disabled in selected applications. AtOnce also permits protection of the
hard disk, recording of user activity, and the operation of a networked environment without a
server.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
52
Figure 3. AtOnce control panel
Apple Network Assistant allows centralized control and distribution of applications across a
network. Other features of this software include provision of multi-level administrator
access, network performance testing, and support for AppleTalk networks and TCP/IP. In
addition, Apple Network Assistant offers administrators various innovative features such as
the ability to control the screens of client machines, and the means to converse with users
using either text or voice. (see Figur 3) The Web site for this product provides extensive
links including a discussion forum and a FAQ page.
KeyServer is a cross-platform software license-monitoring tool designed to prevent software
copyright violation while also reducing licensing costs. The program limits the number of
users who can launch a network-based application simultaneously This permits a given
application to be used on multiple computers without requiring that licenses be purchased for
ever single machine. KeyServer also provides restrictions on access through multi-level
administrative passwords.
FolderBolt Pro enables a lab administrator to prevent tampering with the hard drive of a
machine thus limiting desktop configuration damage by shared users. This product provides
protection for Mac labs at the folder level. Folders may be locked completely, made read-
only, or password protected. In addition, FolderBolt may be configured to prevent changes to
the system, extensions, control panels, or chooser (Stevens, 1996). FolderBolt requires OS
system 7 or newer.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
53
CONCLUSION
The software discussed here represents a sample of the growing number of software
management solutions available to practitioners. Given the great variety of CALL center
needs and resources, the author has refrained from recommending particular products.
Instead, because the specific circumstances of CALL labs must be taken into account when
choosing management software, this review has focused on informing educators of the
software solutions available. Future years may see a further increase in the number and
sophistication of these tools, as the market continues to expand. However, the central
challenge facing the lab manager will remain the same: effectively managing the lab
environment through the selection and use of the most appropriate software. While the
specific programs may change, the issues discussed here will likely continue to be central in
the choice of software.
ABOUT THE REVIEWER
Mark Peterson holds a Master’s degree (M.Sc.) in TESOL & CALL from the University of
Stirling. At present he is a doctoral candidate at the University of Edinburgh and a faculty
member at Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (JAIST). In 1996, he
established (and now manages) a networked CALL lab.
E-mail: mark@jaist.ac.jp
REFERENCES
McVicker, J. (1997) Planning computer-based language learning resource centers.
Retrieved November 20, 2000 from the World Wide Web:
http://www.ohiou.edu/esl/teacher/labs.html.
Paramskas, D. M. (1999). The shape of computer-mediated communication. In K. Cameron
(Ed.), Computer Assisted Language Learning (Call): Media Design And Applications (p .
13-34). Lisse, The Netherlands: Swets & Zeitlinger.
Peterson, M. (1997). Language teaching and networking. System, 25(1), 29-37.
Peterson, M. (1999). Piloting and The creation of a CALL center: The case of Japan
Advanced Institute of Science and Technology. Computer Assisted Language Learning,
12(2), 163-170.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
54
Smith, M. (1993). Installing a Multimedia Laboratory: Some lessons to be learned. On-Call
8, 15-21.
Stevens, L. (1996). Batten Down the Hatches: Lab Managers Protect Macs. MacWeek, 10(6),
10-13
About LLT | Subscribe | Information for Contributors | Masthead | Archives
