202
Language Learning & Technology
Vol. 5, No. 1, January 2001, pp. 202-232
THE EFFECT OF MULTIMEDIA ANNOTATION MODES ON L2 VOCABULARY
ACQUISITION: A COMPARATIVE STUDY
Khalid Al-Seghayer
University of Pittsburgh
ABSTRACT
One aspect of second language teaching via multimedia to have received attention over the
past few years is the impact of glossing individual vocabulary words through different
modalities. This study examines which of the image modalities--dynamic v deo or still
picture--is more effective in aiding vocabulary acquisition. The participants, 30 ESL
students, were introduced to a hypermedia-learning program, designed by the researcher
for reading comprehension. The program provides users reading a narrative English text
with a variety of glosses or annotations for words in the form of printed text, graphics,
video, and sound, all of which are intended to aid in the understanding and learning of
unknown words. A within-subject design was used in this study with 30 participants being
measured under three conditions: printed text definition alone, printed text definition
coupled with still pictures, and printed text definition coupled with video clips. In order to
assess the efficacy of each mode, a vocabulary test was designed and administered to
participants after they had read the English narrative. Two types of tests were administered:
recognition and production. In addition, a face-to-face interview was conducted, and
questionnaires were distributed. Results of the both tests were analyzed using analysis of
variance procedures. The investigation has yielded the conclusion that a video clip is more
effective in teaching unknown vocabulary words than a still picture. Among the suggested
factors that explain such a result are that video better builds a mental image, better creates
curiosity leading to increased concentration, and embodies an advantageous combination of
modalities (vivid or dynamic image, sound, and printed text).
INTRODUCTION
In the realm of second language acquisition (SLA), the most recent effort to enhance the process of
language learning has involved computer technology. In this regard, Garrett (1989) points out that
the adoption of computer technology in foreign language education is part of a larger phenomenon
known as the “new humanism” and “represents one of the most exciting developments coming out
of the participation of advanced technology in education.” Garrett contends that “new humanism”
is an attitude whereby technology helps to integrate the efforts of researchers from different fields.
Technology enables the humanists to investigate traditional concerns in novel approaches,
exploiting technology potential to build on the values of a given sphere and to create “ principled
connections” among the discipline of the humanities (p. 104). 
Since the initial introduction of computers into the field of second/foreign language education, a
large number of practitioners have concurred that this technology holds great potential for language
learning (Levy, 1997; Muyskens, 1997; Pennington, 1996; Warschauer, 1996; Warschauer &
203
Healey, 1998). This belief leads to what is known as C mputer-Assisted Language Learning,
more commonly referred to as CALL. Even though the field is still young, many language
educators are endorsing its use as an essential component in language teaching. Embracing the use
of computers seems to be due to the fact that computers are capable of performing multiple tasks
and thus are more than simply text processors. The computer can organize, select, and present
multiple sensory components.
Among the concerns often raised in the domain of CALL is how to use the potential of a computer
to enhance the language learning process and how to use different media types in teaching and
learning. The concern has been narrowed to the investigation of the efficacy of presenting
information using multiple modalities, such as text, audio, still picture, and dynamic videos in the
field of SLA. An area that has recently received attention is h  impact of glossing individual
vocabulary via annotations embodied by different modes and media. Researchers were inspired by
the premise that a variety of glosses for words in various modalities, such as printed text, graphics,
dynamic video, and sound, might have differing capacities to facilitate vocabulary acquisition and
retention. (Chun & Plass, 1996; Davis & Lyman-Hager, 1997; Lyman-Hager, Davis, Burnett, &
Chennault,1993; Martinez-Lage, 1997).
In the context of second language vocabulary acquisition, this study investigates the relative
efficacy of two different annotation modes in a multimedia environment: the printed text definition
coupled with a still picture,and the printed text definition coupled with a dynamic video clip. The
study’s focal issue is to determine which mode of imagery--still picture or dynamic video--is more
effective in aiding vocabulary acquisition.
This paper will first summarize research done over the years on the impact of multimedia
annotations on second la guage vocabulary acquisition.  Next, the comparison study will be
discussed, together with its outcome and implications. Finally, suggestions for further research on
the matter will be offered.
SURVEY OF RELATED LITERATURE
A brief overview will be given of previous research on second language vocabulary acquisition
enhanced by multimedia annotations. The overview will focus on three issues: the value and effect
of multimedia annotations, the impact of electronic glossing, and the efficacy of dynamic videos
and static pictures. In addition, related theories such as generative theory and dual-coding theory
will be discussed. The results of the existing empirical studies and the assumptions and theories
204
they embody, along with the assumptions of the foregoing theories, constitute the theoretical basis
for this study.
The Value and Effect of Multimedia Annotations
The literature addressing multimedia annotations includes their presentation via printed text, as well
as their presentation via the modes of audio delivery, of dynamic video imagery, and of still
pictorial imagery. Of chief concern will be the modes that present imagery.
In discussing the utility of multimedia nnotations, Davis (1989) notes that glossing through
hypertext offers two features: (a) glosses are invisible and therefore do not interrupt the reading
process; and (b) readers can obtain as much or as little information as desired regarding a particular
concept or word mentioned in the text under study.
Jacobs (1994) also states that computerized glossing is an effective means that aids L2 vocabulary
acquisition. Learners and researchers alike can benefit from glossing delivered through the
computer. Learners are provided with access to glosses of unknown vocabulary items and a list of
the accessed items is created automatically. Researchers can xaminethe created list to obtain
information about individual learners such as their reading strategies and behaviors.
Chun and Plass (1996) emphasize that associating lexic l items with different ypes of media
fosters richness of recall cues and increases the likelihood of retention. The rationale is that because
words are coded dually in two modes, they are learned better than those coded only in one mode.
Dual coding provides more paths for retrieval, and as such, helps learners build two types of recall
cues in memory.
Unlike traditional marginal glossing in the printed form, the computerized gloss is appealing, as
pointed out by Davis and Lyman-Hager (1997), because the computer’s capacity permits us to
store more extensive glossing than a printed format does. Furthermore, a computerized gloss does
not interrupt the reading process because the glossed item is invisible until the reader clicks on the
target word.
Martinez-Lage (1997) contends that the value of multimedia annotations is attributable to different
factors. First, multimedia nnotations provide immediate access to the available annotated
information in a program including textual, audio, and visual annotations. This access provides
readers with the desired meaning immediately and allows them to pursue reading without
205
disturbing the reading process, a problem usually caused by stopping to look up words in a
dictionary. Second, multimedia annotations give access to images. Visual information attached to a
word enables readers to “confirm or reject hypotheses made about the meaning of a word” (p.
150). Finally, multimedia annotations provide an opportunity for readers to interact with the text
making them actively involved in the reading process. Martinez-Lage and Herren (1998) added two
aspects to the above merits of multimedia annotations. Multimedia annotations provide educators
with novel ways through which they can (a) offer their students a means that might help in
developing good reading strategies, and (b) help their students to move beyond the mechanical
aspects of the reading process.
Finally, Mayer and Sims (1994) state that one of the functions of a multimedia program is to help
learners construct referential connections between two forms of mental representation systems: the
verbal and the visual one. These referential connections are more easily built when both verbal and
visual materials are presented simultaneously.
Two prominent theories are believed to explain the value and effect of multimedia presentations in
language learning environments. Mayer (1997) proposes the generative theory of multimedia
learning, drawing on Wittrock’s generative theory and Paivio’s dual-coding theory. The
application of the generative theory1 of multimedia learning to vocabulary learning is based upon
the assumption that learners of a second/foreign language have two separate verbal systems (L1
and L2) and a common imagery system. There is a sugge tion that translations of words via
simultaneous verbal and visual presentations would not only link the two verbal systems, but that
this storage in the second verbal system would also have an additive effect on learning (Paivio &
Desrochers, 1980). Dual-coding theory (Paivio, 1971) is based on the assumption that memory
and cognition are served by two separate systems, one specialized for dealing with verbal
information, such as printed words, and the other for nonverbal information, such as pictures or
objects. Paivio and Begg (1981) assumed that the two systems are related to the sensory modality
as explained in Table 1.
Table 1. The Two Systems That Serve Memory
Symbolic Systems
Sensory Modality Verbal Nonverbal
Visual
Auditory
Tactual
Kinesthetic
Printed words
Speech sounds
Braille
Motor feedback from
writing
Picture or objects Environmental sounds
Feelable objects
Motor feedback from haptic exploration of
objects
From Pavio & Begg (1981, p. 68)
206
The two systems are presumed to be interconnected but capable of functioning independently.
Interconnectedness is the characteristic by which representations in one system can activate those in
the other. For instance, pictures can be named and words can evoke images. Independence is the
characteristic by which nonverbal and verbal memory codes are aroused either directly by pictures
and words, or indirectly by imagery and verbal encoding tasks. The relationship of the two
systems has been shown to have some positive effects on recall.
The attributes of multimedia annotation presented in the literature center around the dimensions of
reader control, the multiplicity and combination of modes, the immediacy of access, and the
absence of interruptions. The computer’s capacity to control and orchestrate various
modalities/media (e.g.,static pictures, so ndanimation, video) while affording critical human
interaction features such as reader control, immediacy of access, and absence of interruption, has
not been attainable through any other conventional instructional medium.
The Impact of Electronic Glossing on L2 Vocabulary Acquisition
The impact of electronic glossing on L2 vocabulary acquisition has also been investigated in the
literature. Lyman-Hager et al. (1993) conducted a
study to examine the impact of a multimedia program on vocabulary acquisition. The researchers
studied two groups: one composed of participants
who read an excerpt from a story by F. Oyono (1956), Une Vie de Boy, via computer, and another
composed of participants who read the story from
a conventional printed text. Both groups had access to glosses. The computer group had access to
multimedia annotations, while the traditional text group had access to a traditional book with gloss
bearing definitions identical to those available to the computer group. Immediately after reading the
story, participants were asked to write a recall protocol and, a week later, to take a vocabulary test.
The results demonstrated that students who worked with the multimedia program showed a better
ability to retain vocabulary than those who worked with the non-computerized text.
In order to examine the efficacy of multimedia annotations, to study incidental vocabulary learning,
and to explore the relationship between look-up behavior and vocabulary test performance, Chun
and Plass (1996) ran three studies with their second-year students of German using a multimedia
program called CyberBuch. This program provides annotations through pictures, printed texts, and
video. After reading the story, the students took a vocabulary test and wrote a recall protocol. The
results indicated that recall for visual annotations was higher than for words annotated with text
207
alone, with a higher rate for incidental learning of vocabulary, and no correlation between the type
of annotation looked up and performance on the vocabulary test. The authors postulated that dual
coding is the key factor that helped participants to perform better under the text-picture and text-
video conditions. They maintained that words annotated with both verbal and visual modes were
learned better than words annotated only with the verbal ones because learners were able to
construct referential connections between two forms of mental representation, the verbal and the
visual.
Davis and Lyman-Hager (1997) examined participants’ performance and attitudes pertaining to
computerized L2 reading glosses. Forty-two intermediate level students of French read a glossed
excerpt of Une Vie de Boy from a computer screen. The researchers administered a multiple-choice
task, a written recall protocol, and an exit interview in which they asked participants to indicate
their reaction to the program. Students showed positive attitudes toward the computerized glosses.
However, the researchers did not find evidence of a relationship between computer use and
comprehension. Although different types of glosses were available for consultation, they found
that students used primarily the English definition of individual words and expressions. Davis and
Lyman-Hager speculated that the positive attitude toward the computer-glossed format was based
upon three factors: (a) it provided a coherent understanding of a text due to a lessening of the
disruption of the reading process caused by conventional dictionary look-ups; (b) it made the
participants more independent since hey could find definitions by themselves without asking
others to help them; and (c) it contained more material than a traditional dictionary.
Lomicka (1998) investigated the way multimedia annotations influence the level of comprehension.
The participants were 12 college students in a second semester French course who read a text
under one of three conditions: full glossing, limited glossing, or no glossing. The results indicated
that computerized r ading with full glossing promoted a deeper level of text comprehension.
Lomicka proposed that the multimedia annotations were the key to text comprehension. More
specifically, the multimedia nnotations affected the generation of causal inferences and the
construction of a situation model. That is, the computerized glosses helped learners in the
construction of a situation model and led to the generation of causal inferences.
Thus, the existing multimedia annotation literature shows that computerized glossing does indeed
have an impact on vocabulary acquisition in particular, and reading comprehension in general. The
influence appears to stem from the availability of different types of information, the absence of
interruptions during reading, the generation of causal inferences, and the construction of a situation
model.
208
Two other points should also be noted. First, the available studies focused upon vocabulary
learning without considering in-depth research on multimedia annotations and factors associated
with them. In-depth research on multimedia annotations entails getting beyond retention to include
issues like designing multimedia nnotation in an individualized fashion to compensate for
differences in the learners’ verbal and visual abilities. The nstructional treatments for selected
verbal and visual modules should be designed on the basis of current theory and empirical findings
to compensate for specific individual differences. In this respect, a number of areas need to be
considered such as how to annotate electronic information, what issues need to be taken into
account to make effective electronic annotations, what techniques can be embedded in an electronic
environment to assure the absence of interruption and insure that readers will choose to use
available aids efficiently in their reading. Second, it is interesting to note that the most common
measures in glossing studies were recall protocols and post-reading tests. As pointed out by Myers
(1990), both recall protocols and other post-reading tests represent an off-line measure of the
product of comprehension. An exception was Lomicka’s (1998) study, which used online think-
aloud protocols.
L2 Vocabulary Learning via Video and Pictures
The effects of video and pictures on L2 vocabulary acquisition particularly within multimedia
environments have not been well explored. However, the effect of visual information on
comprehending texts and learning other skills has received wide research attention.
Omaggio (1979) conducted the first empirical study on the impact of pictures on reading
comprehension with beginning college French students. She found that pictures produced a
significant improvement in reading comprehension in 6rench. More recent research has narrowed
the focus to include studies on the effects of visual imagery on L2 vocabulary acquisition. In a
critical analysis of L2 vocabulary learning techniques, Oxford and Crookall (1990) stated that most
learners are capable of associating new information to concepts in memory by means of meaningful
visual images that make learning more efficient. Visual imagery is known to help learners package
information more efficiently than they could if using just words alone.  Moreover, the pictorial-
verbal combination involves many parts of the brain, thus providing greater cognitive power (p.
17).
A study by Snyder and Colon (1988) investigated the influence of both audio and visual aids on
facilitating second language acquisition. Two groups were taught for 7 weeks under two different
209
conditions. One was exposed to a standard curriculum with audio-visuals imited to overhead
transparencies, audiotapes with accompanying fill-in pictures, and slides. The other group was
exposed to a curriculum enriched with more audio-visual aids, such as additional overhead
transparencies, audio tapes and slides, as well as one bulletin board for reviewing material, and
another for students to bring in materials from home, pictures from magazines, cut-out dolls to
identify and reinforce names for parts of the body, and picture flash cards. After testing both
groups on the material covered, it was found that the group provided with additional audio-visual
aids performed significantly better in vocabulary retention.
Kost, Foss, and Lenzini (1999) carried out a study comparing the effects of pictorial and textual
glosses on incidental vocabulary growth for foreign language learners. Participants were asked to
read a passage under one of three glossing conditions: textual gloss alone, pictorial gloss alone,
and text combined with pictures. Performance on both production and recognition tests of 14
words was better for those who were allowed to use a combination of text and picture. The
theoretical explanation for such results, the authors argue, is that processing information requires
different degrees of cognitive effort. The two different representations allow plotting of the picture
into one mental model and thereby provide a “stronger bond” than the plotting of the words (p.
94).
Little research exists on the efficacy of video in the domain of L2 vocabulary acquisition. Neuman
and Koskinen (1992) state that captioned video with sound provides a semantically enriched
context where the visual and the audio lend meaning to the printed words on the screen. Their
study compares learning vocabulary through watching television, through reading and listening to
a document, and through listening alone. Their r sults indicated that words were learned and
retained best from watching television.
Brown (1993) used a videodisc to evaluate the effects of word frequency and saliency, or
importance. In terms of frequency, the author examined two issues: whether the particular context
in which the word appears makes a difference, and whether the general frequency of a word in the
language permits accurate prediction if the word is going to be learned or not. With respect to word
saliency, the author considered two issues: (a) whether giving the word to be learned an emphasis
in the program would lead learners to acquire it, and (b) whether presenting the concept in the
instructional material but delaying presenting the word associated with it until it appeared in an
exercise or gloss would lead learners to acquire that word. Brown found that there was a
relationship between word learning and the general frequency index of words learned, but that the
specific frequency of words in the videodisc program was not as significant as their general
210
frequency. In terms of word saliency, she found that word learning was facilitated when concepts
were activated by a visual image prior to the presentation of the corresponding word in written
form. Brown ascribed this finding to the fact that evoking the concept in the form of an image
before the word-form appeared made the vocabulary easier to remember.
Duquette and Painchaud (1996) compared listening to a dialogue with and without visual aids in
order to determine which would better allow learners to guess the meaning of new words.
Participants listened to a dialogue on the subject of driving a car under two conditions. Under the
first condition, they listened to a dialogue while a videotape played. Under the second condition,
they listened to the same dialogue with only an audiotape. Results indicated that the learners in the
video group made gains on 8 unfamiliar words out of a total of 40, whereas the audio- only group
learned only 3. The authors peculated that the “match between prominent visual cues and
linguistic ones allows for the inference of unfamiliar words” (p. 158).
The only study that undertook to compare the effect of video clips and static pictures on
comprehension and retention of a written passage was carried out by Hanley, Herron, and Cole
(1995). Their study showed that a video clip is a more effective organizer than a picture. Twenty-
eight college students of French, divided into two groups, took part in the study. Group One was
shown a short video clip with French narration. Group Two was presented the same narrative with
the teacher reading it aloud while presenting four still pictures of the context. The stude ts in
Group One performed significantly better on a comprehension and retention test than those i
Group Two. The authors contended that the video clip proved to be more effective in aiding
comprehension and retention because video aids in “conceptualizing language,” that is, linkin
language form to meaning ( p. 63).
General observations can be made about the literature pertaining to the use of video and pictures to
teach new vocabulary. It is important that selected pictures and video segments depict meanings
precisely and do not contain too much information. In other words, they should be simple
illustrations.  The research did not compare the effects of videos and pictures on L2 vocabulary
acquisition. Both seemed more effective than other modes of presentation, particularly audio. This
is simply because students can visualize what the word means and relate the words to actual
objects.
This survey of the literature thus makes a strong case for the use of multimedia annotations. The
studies unanimously support the use of multimedia to enhance L2 vocabulary acquisition because it
is a single interactive presentation environment for diverse instructional resources including printed
211
texts, photographs, slides, dynamic audio, and dynamic video. The varied and interactive nature of
multimedia instruction makes reading, listening, and speaking both engaging and enjoyable.
Additionally, the immediacy of access and student independence make learning more efficient and
effective.  Finally, the combination of media enhances learning because words are dually coded
resulting in referential connections that are constructed between the verbal and visual systems.
Multiple studies demonstrate that both dynamic video and still pictures are more effective than
instructional modes that lack imagery. However, no study has been conducted with the main aim
of comparing the efficacy of dynamic video with that of still pictures. Because ach mode is
powerful and available, determining which is more effective is a compelling question. The
following study attempts to address this issue.
THE STUDY
A key issue in L2 vocabulary acquisition is whether or not learning would be improved if
information about an individual lexical item were to be presented simultaneously via multiple
modes. Although there are studies of the efficacy that multimodal glosses within a computer
program have on vocabulary acquisition, to date there do not seem to be studies focusing, as the
main objective, on comparing the efficacy of different ypes of pictorial annotations. More
specifically, no investigation has been done on the difference between the impact of static pictures
and dynamic video on learning annotated words. Therefore, this study was designed to investigate
the effects of different types of annotations on vocabulary acquisition on the macro scale, and to
compare the efficacy of printed text definition coupled with still pictures as opposed to video on the
micro scale.
The central question which guided this study is Which is more effective for facilitating vocabulary
acquisition: video mode or static picture?  Due to the contextual richness, meaningfulness, facility
of recall, and cultural authenticity of video, the researcher hypothesized that video is a more
effective tool to foster the acquisition of new words in a foreign language. It was anticipated that
video annotations would be more effective in teaching unknown vocabulary than still picture
annotations. Consequently, it was anticipated that the participants’ performance on the vocabulary
test will be significantly higher for words that had been annotated with video clips than for words
annotated with pictures. Nevertheless, in analyzing the data, a null hypothesis of no difference was
tested. It was expected, however, that this null hypothesis would be rejected in favor of the
directional hypothesis that video clip annotations are more effective than still picture annotations.
212
METHOD
Participant Selection
To test the aforementioned hypothesis, a convenience sample was selected consisting of 30 ESL
participants (17 males, 13 females) who were enrolled in the English Language Institute (ELI) at
the University of Pittsburgh. They can be grouped according to their native language as follows:
13 Arabic, 4 Japanese, 6 Korean, 3 Spanish, and 4 Thai speakers. The distribution according to
country is shown in Table 2. They were selected with regard to their proficiency level and length of
time studying English in the US. They were placed in level three, the intermediate level, based on
their performance on the reading section of the institution’s placement test. They all scored in the
range of 70 (out of 100 points) on the reading section.  Each of them had spent at least two
semesters in the host environment and had attained intermediate-proficiency TOEFL scores of 450-
500. The participants’ instructor indicated that they had intermediate proficiency in reading
regardless of their language backgrounds. The participants were asked to provide demographic
information about their background, length of time studying English, length of stay in the United
States, and their TOEFL score. Since this was a within-subject design, all participants were
exposed to the same treatment conditions. Note that the participants had different language
backgrounds. However, since a within-subject design was used in this study, each participant
served as his/her own control, and these different language backgrounds were therefore controlled.
Table 2. Characteristics of Participants
Country Male Female Total
Japan 1 3 4
Korea 2 4 6
Kuwait 5 - 5
Saudi Arabia 7 1 8
Spain - 3 3
Thailand 1 3 4
Total 17 13 30
Materials
Software: Overview of Content and Organization. The interactive multimedia computer
program used in this study was designed by the researcher to enhance L2 vocabulary acquisition
by providing readers with the meaning of a target word via hypermedia links to multiple
modalities.  The computer program provided students who were reading a narrative English text
with annotations for target words in various modes--text, graphics, video and sound--all of which
213
were intended to aid in the understanding and learning of unknown words. Instead of a traditional
gloss, the program provided various multimedia links. Users could read the target word’s printed
textual definition, hear its pronunciation, or view its meaning via a still picture or video.
The program was written in an HTML editor called Dreamweaver 2.0 (1998) and then published
on CD-ROM. HTML was chosen as theprogramming language because it provides for easy
integration of hypermedia, and it is suitable for both PC and Mac platforms. The audio component
was processed with Cool Edit Pro 1.0 (1997), the pictures were processed with Adobe Photoshop
5.0 (Adobe, 1998), and the video clips were processed with Adobe Premiere 5.0 (Adobe, 1998).
For further description concerning other aspects of the program see Appendix A.
Target Word Criteria. The annotated words were controlled for frequency, grammatical
category, morphological category, and visual complexity, and for whether they involved concrete
or abstract concepts. With respect to conceptual quality or type, using the word frequency corpora
of Francis and Kucera (1982), it was found that the 10 video words had a mean of 26 occurrences
per million words, the picture words had a mean of 24 occurrences per million words, and the text
words had a mean of 27 occurrences per million words. In terms of grammatical category, the
selected words for video clips, pictures, and text shared the same characteristics. Each of them had
one adjective, two verbs, and seven nouns. Regarding visual complexity, the selected words
ranged from 4 to 10 letters in length. The average length of the selected words in each group was
as follows: 8 for picture words, 7.5 for both video and for text words. The selected video clips,
pictures, and text words all invo ved concrete concepts. A tracking device was built into the
program to ensure that our English definition and annotated modes were exclusively consulted by
the participants.
Passage. A narrative passage from Mundahl (1993) was especially adapted selected for this
study. The passage tells of a Native American boy who belongs to a tribe called the Lakota. The
Lakota people lived on the land that is now a part of the United States. Their culture was closely
connected to the Earth. They taught their children that the Earth was their mother, and that they
were its caretakers. In this story, a young Lakota boy grows old and watches his world vanish.
The text seemed appropriate for intermediate-level ESL learners after applying three criteria in
addition to the cloze procedure: syntactic complexity, text length, and content.
The selected passage met the criterion of appropriate syntactic complexity for intermediate ESL
learners because it consisted of short, uncomplicated sentences. The mean length of the sentences
was seven words, and the percentage of simple sentences in the passage was 79%. By contrast,
214
the percentage of complex sentences was 1% while that of compound sentences was 20%. The
high percentage of simple sentences thus made the story appropriate for intermediate ESL learners.
The adapted text was also selected based upon its length. It had about 1,300 words. Learners at
this level are not trained to read long passages. In the English Language Institute (ELI) at the
University of Pittsburgh, they are usually assigned passages of about this length. In addition, since
learners were asked to perform multiple tasks, a decision was made not to engage them in a long
reading.
With regard to the content, there was no reason to assume that any group of ESL learners knew
more or less about Native American culture in general, and that of the Lakota tribe in particular than
any other group. Therefore, it seemed reasonable to expect that ESL learners with similar residency
experience in the US were roughly comparable in their background knowledge of the passage
topic. Although the passage contained culture-specific content, it did not require that its readers
have much background knowledge about the Lakota tribe. Moreover, the passage provided simple
descriptions and explanations for culture-specific events and terminology.
A cloze procedure was also employed to estimate the difficulty of the text. Four intermediate levels
students who did not take part in this study, were introduced to the cloze procedure and asked to
supply every deleted fifth word in each sentence starting with the second sentence. After
multiplying the total number of exact word replacement by two, the students’ cloze score was
65%. This indicated that the selected passage met the intermediate-level competency.
Design
It was decided to employ a within-subject design, allowing the same participants to be exposed to
the same treatment conditions and then assessing them on the dependent variable after they
participated in the experimental treatment. They were asked to read the story included in the
multimedia program, to take a vocabulary test, to respond to a questionnaire, and participate in a
short interview. In other words, the independent variables, that is, printed text definition alone,
printed text definition coupled with still pictures, and printed text definition coupled with video
clips, were experimentally manipulated by exposing all participants to the experimental treatment
condition. The dependent variable, that is, acquiring new words in a foreign language, was
measured by two types of vocabulary tests. The Friedman test, a non-parametric analog to a
repeated-measures one-way ANOVA, was employed to see if there were significant differences
between printed text definitions coupled with video clips, printed text definitions coupled with
215
pictures, and printed text definition alone. All the null hypotheses were tested at a .05 level of
significance.
Procedures
The experimental procedure consisted of five different phases.
1. First, participants met individually with the researcher at a computer lab where each was 
asked to fill out a background questionnaire and then given a brief introduction to the 
program, its objectives, and its methods. The investigator demonstrated to each participant 
how the program worked, that is, how to move from one section of the story to another, 
and how to click on an annotated word. The investigator also showed each participant that 
clicking on words allowed them to hear the selected word pronounced, read a definition, 
and see either a picture or a video clip. They were told that they could consult the annotated 
words whenever they wished and as many times as they wished.
2. Second, each participant read the story individually, using the multimedia program which 
contained multimodal annotations for the more difficult vocabulary items. Participants spent
approximately 30 minutes reading the story.
3. Third, after reading the story, participants were asked to take a vocabulary test (described 
in the next section). Participants spent approximately 15 minutes completing the test.
4. Fourth, participants were asked to respond to a questionnaire asking them to indicate which
type of annotation mode helped them learn the annotated words best.
5. Finally, participants engaged in a short interview in which they were asked to indicate 
whether the particular mode conveyed the meaning of the lexical item.
Instruments
Vocabulary Test. A vocabulary test was designed in order to assess the effect of each mode.
The participants were asked to take this test after
reading the story. They were not informed in advance that they would be tested because it was
assumed that if they knew, they would consciously try
to learn the new words. It was hoped that attempting to prevent the participants from making such
a conscious effort would create a more natural
reading environment.
Two types of tests were administered: recognition and production.
216
•  The recognition test required participants to answer multiple-choice items with four
alternatives. The test consisted of 21 English words that were annotated in the story, for which
the participants were asked to select the corresponding English equivalent . Out of the 21
words, 5 were annotated with a textual definition, 5 with text and image, and 5 with text and
video (see Figure 1).
Figure 1. Example of the Recognition Test
•  The production test, on the other hand, required the participants to briefly define in English, 6
selected words that were annotated in the story.  Out of the six words, two were annotated with
only text information (i.e., a definition), two with both text and image, and two with text and
video (see Figure 2).
217
Figure 2. Example of the Production Test
The test design took several issues into account. A criterion was established for the words to be
tested. Therefore, words were selected according to their importance to the story, level of
difficulty, and part of speech (i.e.,6 verbs, 6 nouns, 9 adjectives/adverbs). In addition, the
participants’ instructor was consulted to see whether the students had prior familiarity with these
words.
The testing was parallel to the modality in which information was presented to the users in the
program. Hence, the vocabulary test displayed images, video clips, and definitions, as did the
program. Students were asked to indicate whether they knew the word before they read the story.
They were asked to select the best corresponding English word from the list after having read the
story. They were also informed that once they had selected an answer they could not change it and
that they would not be told whether or not their answer was correct. Students’ answers were
automatically sent to the investigator’s e-mail account. The reliability of the recognition and
production tests using Kuder-Richardson KR-20 was 0. 70.
Because the recognition test involved discrete-point items that have only one correct answer, a
correct answer received 1 point and an incorrect answer received 0 points. The same procedure
was applied to the production test. For the production text, 1 point was given to a correct or
partially correct answer.
218
Questionnaire
A questionnaire was employed to determine the most effective annotation modes. Participants were
asked to rate the helpfulness of each of the three links on a scale of 1-3, with 1 indicating a very
helpful link and 3 indicating the least helpful link. Responses from the questionnaires were
analyzed and converted into percentages to indicate the type of annotation that the participants first
remembered when reading the word on the test and to indicate the type of definition used as the
retrieval cue to recall the word.
Interview
In order to determine the most effective annotation modes from the participants point of view,
informal individual 15-minute face-to face interviews were conducted. During the interviews, they
were asked one closed-ended question and three open-ended questions. The closed-ended question
was asked to query participants as to whether or not the three types of annotations conveyed the
meaning of a selected lexical item. They were given the choice of agreeing, disagreeing, or taking
the position of undecided. The participants were also asked three open-ended questions:
(a) Which of the three modes helped you to learn the target word best?
(b) Which of the three modes conveyed the meaning of a selected item?
(c) What are the technical features that computerized glossing has and that helps you, as a
language learner, to learn unfamiliar words?
The open-ended questions were used to allow for more freedom of response, to permit follow-up
by the interviewer, to elicit more information from
the interviewees, and to check the accuracy of the answers to the closed-ended question.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
As stated earlier, this study was carried out to determine which is the more effective annotation
mode: text with dynamic video or text with still pictures. In order to reach a conclusion, three
instruments were employed. A vocabulary test was administered, questionnaires were distributed,
and a face-to-face interview was conducted. The results obtained for each of the foregoing will be
considered in turn.
219
The learning outcome as measured by the vocabulary test was analyzed for each of the 21 words
tested. Table 3 shows the overall results on both the recognition and production vocabulary tests.
The figures show that words presented under the printed text definition coupled with video clips
produced the best results among the three. The mean and percentage of correct answers for words
with video and text annotations were 4.3 (87%), compared to 3.3 (67%) for words with picture
and text, and 2.7 (53%) for text alone. Table 3 also shows the standard deviations for each of the
three modes. For video it was .759 and for picture it was .952. By contrast, for text alone it was
1.586, indicating that these scores were more heterogeneous than the scores for the other two
conditions.
Table 3. Overall Results on Both Recognition and Production Vocabulary Test
Video & Text Picture & Text Text
Participants 30 30 30
# Items 7 7 7
% correct answers 87% 67% 53%
Mean 6.1 4.7 4.03
SD .759 .952 1.586
Minimum 5 3 2
Maximum 7 7 7
By looking at the frequency scores of each mode, one can conclude that most of them were
moderate for the video annotation. The range of the scores for text-annotated words was greater
than that for the scores on the picture annotated words.
Table 4. Frequencies
Video Picture Text
Score Freq. Percent Score Freq. Percent Score Freq. Percent
5 7 23.3 3 2 06.7 2 5 16.7
6 13 43.3 4 12 40.0 3 8 26.7
7 10 33.3 5 10 33.3 4 8 26.7
6 5 16.7 5 2 06.7
7 1 03.3 6 4 13.3
7 3 100.0
In order to see whether there was a difference on vocabulary scores generated from the three
modes of annotation, the Friedman test, a non-parametric analog to a repeated-measures one-way
ANOVA was utilized. The non-parametric test was used for two reasons. First, the distribution of
scores across the annotation modes did not meet the normality assumptions required for ANOVA.
Second, the number of score levels obtained within each annotation mode was not sufficiently
220
continuous for an analysis-of-variance approach; however, they were ordinal in nature and so were
appropriate for a non-parametric rank test.
Using the Friedman test, it was found that the vocabulary scores were not all equal across the three
annotation conditions, X2 (df= 2, N= 30) = 28.876, p< 0.001. To determine specific differences
among the three annotation conditions, three pair-wise comparisons were performed using
Wilcoxon matched-pair signed-rank tests, adjusting the Type I error rate of 0.05 for the multiple
comparisons using the Bonferroni multiple-comparison procedure. Thus, the nominal alpha level
for all three tests was 0.0167. It was found that performance on the text-plus-video was
significantly better than on the text-plus-picture condition (z= 4.018, p< 0.001), indicating that the
video condition is more effective than the picture condition. It was also found that the performance
on the text only condition, and the text-plus-video condition was significantly different (z= 4.219,
p< 0.001), showing that the former is more effective than the latter. However, there was no
significant difference between performance on the text-plus-picture condition and text alone
treatment in the printed text definition coupled with picture condition and the text definition alone
condition (z= 2.038, p= 0.042).
The results of the study are consistent with the conclusion proposed by the dual coding theory, as
suggested by Paivio (1986). The dual coding theory states that when both verbal and visual
materials are presented, learners can construct referential connections between these two forms of
mental representation, and thus learn more effectively. As expected, all the words that were dually
coded (i.e., those with picture plus text and those with video plus text annotations) were learned
better than words with text only definitions. However, words with text and video annotations were
remembered better than words with text and picture.
The results of the present study differ from to those obtained by Chun and Plass (1996). Chun and
Plass examined incidental vocabulary learning, the effectiveness of different types of annotations
on vocabulary acquisition, and the relationship between look-up b havior and performance on
vocabulary tests. Their results showed that across the three studies annotations including printed
text with still imagery were remembered better than annotations including printed text with video.
An analysis of the mean scores for correct answers on the vocabulary test showed a significant
difference between scores for words associated with a picture and printed text, and those
associated with a text definition and video. Words with still pictures and definitions were recalled
significantly better than words with video and definitions. Chun and Plass postulated the following
theoretical explanations for their findings. Since pictures can be viewed for as long as the learner
wishes, they allow for the development of a mental model of the information.  By contrast,
221
because video presentations are usually short, they do not allow the information to be established
in long-term memory. Chun and Plass state that “the pace of the presentation of information is not
sensitive to the cognitive constraints of the learner, and its transient character, therefore,
does not allow the student to reflect and to refresh short-term memory” (p. 193). The current
study, on the other hand, reported the opposite finding,that is, that participants performed better in
both recognition and production vocabulary tests on the words that had textual definitions and
video. The analysis of the mean scores for correct answers on the vocabulary test showed a
significant difference between scores for words annotated with text-plus-video and text-plus-
picture. The suggested theoretical explanations will be discussed below.
The difference in results between the effect of pictorial versus video glosses obtained in this study
and those obtained by Chun and Plass (1996) can be attributed to a number of issues including the
mother tongue of the participants, the target language, the type of visual aids, and the type of tests
through which the learning outcome was assessed. The participants in the Chun and Plass study
were native speakers of English studying German as a foreign language. The textual definitions
were presented in English. By contrast, the participants in this study came from different linguistic
backgrounds and were studying English as a second language. The textual definition was
presented in the target language, (i.e., English). In addition, the selection of visual aids could have
also had an effect. It could be that Chun and Plass selected still pictures that were familiar to the
participants and included video scenes that were related to German culture. As a result, pictures
were more helpful as retrieval cues for these participants. In the current study, however, an attempt
was made to select visual aids (pictures and video clips) that were not associated with a particular
culture. The difference in results could be also traced back to the nature of the assessment used in
the two studies. Chun and Plass utilized a vocabulary recognition test that required learners to
provide an English equivalent. In the first two studies, they asked the participants to indicate the
appropriate English equivalent without accompanying pictures or video clips. In the third study,
they presented either a picture or a video clip and asked the participants to choose the German word
(from a list of six) that corresponded to the picture, video, or definition. By contrast, the current
study employed both production and recognition tests. The recognition test required the
participants to select an answer out of a list of four items. The production test, on the other hand,
required the participants to briefly define in the target language (i.e., English), a selected word
used in the story. The test paralleled the modality in which information was presented to the user in
the program. Hence, the vocabulary test, like the program, displayed images, video clips, and
definitions.
222
The second instrument employed to determine the most effective annotation modes was a
questionnaire. Participants were asked to rate the helpfulness of each of the three links on a scale of
1-3, with 1 indicating the very helpful link and 3 indicating the least helpful link. Responses from
the questionnaires were analyzed and converted into percentages to indicate the type of annotation
that the participants first remembered when reading the word on the test and to indicate the type of
definition used as the retrieval cue to recall the word. As Figure 3 shows, in the case of the video
condition, 86.6% of the participants rated video as very helpful while 70% rated pictures as a very
helpful mode. By contrast, only 10% of the participants said the textual definitions were v ry
helpful. In fact, 60% said the textual condition was the least helpful as compared to 10% and 3.3%
for the picture and video respectively.
Figure 3. Participants’ perspective regarding which of the three media links helped them learn
words best
The qualitative ratings or results correspond to the performance on the vocabulary test. Words
annotated with video were reported to be more helpful than other types of annotation. Furthermore,
video clips were used as the retrieval cue for remembering vocabulary words. The overwhelming
majority of students’ responses indicated that video annotations provided the best retrieval cue for
remembering the meaning of a word.
The last instrument employed to determine the most effective annotation modes was a face-to face
interview. Participants were asked a question to determine whether or not the type of annotations
conveyed the meaning of a selected lexical item. They were given the choice of agreeing,
disagreeing, or taking the position of undecided. As shown in Figure 4, participants agreed (90%)
that the video clips showed the meaning of a word more clearly than other links. Almost all
participants agreed that both the video (90%) and the still picture (76%) links showed what the
223
words mean. However, for the textual definitions, they gave different opinions. About 46.6%
agreed, 30% disagreed, and 23.33% were undecided.
Figure 4. Participants’ perspective regarding which type of annotations conveyed the meaning of a
selected lexical item
The participants were also asked three open-ended questions. In their responses to the first
question, participants acknowledged the helpful contextual support offered by still pictures, and
even more so, by video clips. The following are examples of their comments indicating which of
the three media helped them to learn the target word best. “Watching live action helped me
remember the meaning of these words.” “My curiosity pushes me to watch the video to the end
because I wanted to know what is going to happen.” “Pictures enable me to visualize the meaning
of the word.”
In their answers to question two, participants indicated that video clips reflected more closely the
meaning of the target word than the other two modes.  The following statements are examples
made by the participants indicating which of the three media depicted the meaning of the target
word. “Video explains to me exactly what the word means.” “Video clips matches with the
meaning of the word better than pictures.” “Pictures are good, but I like the videos because they
show me the meaning of the word.”
224
In their replies to question three, participants enumerated a number of technical features of
computerized glosses. The following are examples of the participants’ answers as to the technical
features of computerized glosses that helped them learn unfamiliar words. “I can get the meaning
of the word right away. I don’t have to stop reading and then look up the word in the dictionary.”
“When studying vocabulary in a program like this, I can hear the pronunciation of the word and
see a picture explaining the meaning to me.” “ I can check the meaning as many times as I want and
that does not take me a long time to do.”
The above results show that words that had only printed textual annotations received the lowest
scores across the three sources of data. By contrast, words annotated both visually and textually
had high scores. This result confirms the value of multimedia learning and of dual coding which
suggests that words annotated with both textual and visual modes of information are learned better
than those annotated with only the textual mode. In this regard, Underwood (1989) suggested that
“a commonplace principle of human learning is visual memory. We remember images better than
words, hence we remember words better if they are strongly associated with images” (p. 19). The
results concur with those of previous studies, particularly Kost et al. (1999), who showed that
performance on both production and recognition tests of fourteen words was better for those who
were allowed to view pictures. This is also true of the work of Duquette and Painchaud (1996),
whose results showed that participants were able to learn the meaning of new words with the help
of visual aids. Listening to a dialogue with a videotape enabled participants to acquire 8 unfamiliar
words out of a total of 40. By contrast, the other group, which was given another presentation,
learned just three unfamiliar words.
What needs to be studied carefully, however, are the results obtained from video annotations as
opposed to those from pictures. The learning outcome measured by the vocabulary test and the
participants’ reports favors video over picture annotations. According to the available data, the
dynamic mode (video) is more effective than pictures. This could be attributed to the fact that
dynamic stimuli are more easily remembered and more effective in helping learners to build mental
images because they more readily depict connections or provide a gestalt. The results of the current
study agree with those of Hanley et al. (1995) who attempted to compare the effect of video clip
and pictures on comprehension and retention of a written passage.  Their study showed that a
video clip is a more effective organizer than a picture. The experimental group that was shown a
short video clip with French narration scored significantly higher than the control group that was
exposed to still pictures with the narrative read by a teacher. The authors contended that the video
clips proved to be more effective in aiding comprehension and retention because they facilitated
“conceptualizing language,” that is, linking language form to meaning.
225
Another explanation for the present findings is that the participants’ attention and concentration
were higher when watching the video presentation because they wanted to know what was going
to happen in the next segment of the video clips. This could havemade presenting the target
vocabulary in the form of a video a more memorable experience and, in the long run, a better
retrieval cue. Research evidence suggests that the stimulation of curiosity enhances the acquisition
of information (Day, 1982; McCombs, 1972).
A further explanation as to why video facilitates vocabulary learning can be attributed to the
redundancy hypothesis proposed by Sherwood, Kinzer, Hasselbring, & Bransford (1987) who
suggested that video coupled with a related text helped students retain information because they
received the same information twice. This between-channel redundancy might facilitate information
processing, reduce error and information loss, and increase recall. In addition, video’s contextual
richness and cultural authenticity might make the information more meaningful, and hence more
memorable.
CONCLUSIONS
This study explored the efficacy of multimedia annotations for learning unknown lexical items. The
results of this investigation suggest that a video clip in combination with a text definition is more
effective in teaching unknown vocabulary than a picture in combination with a text definition.
Participants learned and recalled more words when video clips were provided than when pictures
were made available. The variety of modality cues can reinforce each other and are linked together
in meaningful ways to provide an in-depth experience. Among the possible factors that may
explain these results were the following: video better helps learners build a mental image, curiosity
increases concentration, and video’s combination of modalities (dynamic image and sound)
facilitate recall. These results are viewed as a starting point for further exploration into the use of
video-based technology within multimedia environments.
Pedagogical and Theoretical Implications
The aforementioned findings a d discussion have pedagogical nd theoretical implications for
language learning and for learning with multimedia in general. Furthermore, they direct our
attention to some important designing principles that need to be taken into consideratio  when
developing instructional multimedia materials.
226
As far as pedagogical implications are concerned, what has been mentioned above constitutes
evidence addressing the design of multimedia instruction for second-language learning. Stated
more specifically, what has been presented above demonstrates that exposing learners to multiple
modalities of presentation (i.e., printed text, sound, picture, or video) produces a language-
learning environment which can have a real impact on learning. Another pedagogical implication
that can be drawn on the basis of the above findings is that “organizing information in working
memory seems to be aided by learners making connections between the verbal and visual system,
and this helps in linking information to components of the mental model in long-term memory”
(Chun & Plass, 1996, p. 517).
Assuming that students are accustomed to traditional glosses and might not know how other types
of glosses foster vocabulary learning, instructors need to spend some time training students to use
software in the most beneficial way. Instructors need to explain to the students the efficacy of
multimedia nnotations in order to ensure that all informational categories available will be
consulted by them. Thus, teachers hould encourage their learners to exploit the different
modalities when looking up the meaning of unfamiliar words. Instructors and program developers
should consider including interesting and relevant visual material in their programs in order to
increase learners’ motivation to allocate the required mental effort to learn the unknown words.
As far as theoretical implications are concerned, the study’s results support the generative theory of
multimedia learning (Mayer, 1997). The basic theme of this theory is that the design of multimedia
instruction affects the degree to which learners engage in the cognitive processes required for
meaningful learning within the visual and verbal information processing system (Mayer, 1997).
This theory suggests that presenting the explanation in words and corresponding illustrations is
effective because it helps guide learners’ cognitive processes. In vocabulary learning, learners tend
to build visual and verbal cues for retrieving stored information from memory. Storing information
in memory is not supposed to be a difficult task, but retrieving it is expected to be difficult. In
order to make the task easy for learners, we can provide multiple retrieval cues by integrating two
different forms of mental representations.
In order to create effective multimedia instructional materials, two principles need to be considered.
The first principle is that instructional materials designed to accommodate individual differences
should combine the use of integrated media. Pusack and Otto (1997) contend that it is important to
consider that students may have personal modes or combinations of modes that work best for them
as individuals; thus, we must never assume that specific media will be put to the same use or have
the same effect on all students. The second principle that needs to be taken into consideration is
227
that, as indicated by Chun and Plass (1997), the selection of the mode of presentation should be
based on how it best supports a particular cognitive process. Cognitive processes are said to be
supported by the characteristics of the particular mode. Therefore, an instructional designer should
make a sound judgment regarding which mode of presentation is more suitable to a given learning
situation.
It seems appropriate to conclude this section on implications and design principles by stressing the
importance of media combinations in language learning. Information is easy to conceptualize, and
the rich learning environment that multimedia instruction creates captures the learners’ attention.
Thus, the study of multimedia annotations should at least partially provide curriculum designers,
program developers, and teachers with a better understanding of what accounts for students’
success in acquiring target language vocabulary.
Limitations
There were some limitations to this study. First, the small size of the sample population (N=30)
sheds doubt on the validity of the observed significance. A replication study with a greater number
of subjects is needed in order to obtain reliable and generalizable results. Second, assessment of
the learning outcome was measured only with multiple-choice and production tests. The problem
lies with the need to devise alternative assessment techniques that tap various aspects of vocabulary
knowledge. Third, the study does not consider analyzing the online individual performance data
such as the user’s study path and reaction time when interacting with a given item. Such an
examination would provide qualitative information about the cognitive process underlying the
participant’s learning activity. Finally, only short-term retention was studied. It would be
interesting to examine the effects of different modes of annotation on long-term retention.
Suggestions for Future Research
This study represents a preliminary effort to empirically examine the efficacy of multimedia
annotations on L2 vocabulary acquisition by comparing two modes of annotation embedded in a
multimedia program: video clip versus still picture. Further research is ne d d for a thorough
understanding of this issue and for confirmation of the findings. This is especially true when
considering that there may be additional variables that would add different intrapersonal effects
based on learning style preferences which were excluded from this study. It is recommended that
this study be replicated with a larger number of participants from the same background. It would
be interesting to compare results across levels of proficiency. Another aspect to be investigated is
the method by which non-concrete items can be visualized or represented by non-textual
228
annotations. These suggested avenues of research might shed more light on L2 vocabulary
acquisition involving the computer. They should enlighten us as to which combinations of media
will enhance L2 vocabulary learning the most. Finally, it is hoped that the outcome of this study
will be of some use to future research studies.
APPENDIX A: Further Description Concerning Other Aspects of the Program
Screen layout design principles were considered. The screen was divided into four frames. The top
frame was reserved for the title of the story, the left frame was reserved for the text, the right frame
was used for the visual aids, and the bottom frame was used for navigation. Several aesthetic
features were employed in the screen display such as colors, stars, boldface, and graphics.
Different colors were deliberately assigned to different sections to maintain the users’ interest and
attention. Bright colors that could annoy and distract the users were avoided.
The adapted text had six sections presented on the left side of the screen. Each section was
accompanied by a picture on the right side representing the theme of the section. For example, the
first section in the narrative portrayed the ways through which a boy’s father taught him the history
of his nation. Hence, a picture was selected to reflect this theme. While going over the story, users
could look up any of the annotated words. Thirty words were annotated and each annotated word
was marked with an asterisk (*). All the textual definitions for the annotated words were taken
from The Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English (1987). Ten words had additional
glosses in the form of color pictures, and 10 had additional glosses in the form of short videos. In
order to look up a gloss, students clicked on the word, causing the annotations (definition, picture,
video) to appear on the right side of the screen (see Figure 5). All annotations were accompanied
by an audio component, that is, a native speaker pronouncing each individual word. The following
are some examples of different types of annotations.
If users decided to click on the word ripe, they would read only the definition (ripe: [fruit] ready to
be eaten) and hear the word pronounced. If users chose to click on the word melt, they would read
the definition (to cause a solid to become liquid: the sun melted the snow), see a color picture
(illustrating melted snow), and hear the word pronounced. If users clicked on the word lullaby,
they would read the definition (a pleasant song used for putting children to sleep), watch a 20-
second video segment, showing a women putting a baby on her lap and singing a lullaby to put it
to sleep, and hear the word pronounced.
Figure 5. Example of an annotated word accompanied by a color picture
229
NOTE
1.The generative theory of multimedia learning draws on two studies. The first is
Wittrock’s (1990) study of generative theory. The second is Paivio’s (1986) study of dual-
coding theory as well as extensions of studies that test the conditions under which the
presentation of visual and verbal material promotes learning.
The generative theory of multimedia posits that learners engage in three major processes--
selecting, organizing, and integrating--when they are presented with visual and verbal
information such as illustrations and text. When presented with text, the learner must first
select relevant words to be retained as a text base in verbal working memory. When
presented with illustrations, the learner must select relevant images to be retained as an
image base in visual working memory. Second, the learner must organize the text base into
a coherent verbal representation and the image base into a coherent visual representation.
Third, the learner must integrate the verbal and visual representations by making one-to-one
connections between the features of the two. According to the generative theory,
meaningful learning is enhanced when a learner can construct and coordinate visual and
verbal representations of the same material.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I am indebted to Dr. Richard Donato for his guidance, support, and enc uragement. Heartfelt
thanks are also expressed to Dr. Keiko Koda for her encouragement and insightful suggestions that
shaped the first draft of this manuscript. My deepest gratitude is extended to the anonymous
reviewers for their valuable suggestions.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Khalid Al Seghayer is a PhD candidate in the Language and Literacy Program with a specialization
in Foreign Language Education/ Applied Linguistics in the Department of Instruction and Learning
at the University of Pittsburgh. His research interests include Computer-Assisted Language
Learning and Second Language Reading Acquisition.
E-mail:    khast5+@pitt.edu   
REFERENCES
Adobe Photoshop 5.0 [Computer Software]. (1998). Mountain View, CA: Adobe Systems.
Adobe Premiere 5.0 [Computer Software]. (1998). Mountain View, CA: Adobe Systems.
Ausubel, D. (1978). Educational Psychology: A Cognitive View. New York: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston.
Brown, C. (1993). Factors affecting the acquisition of vocabulary: Frequency and saliency of
words. In T. Huckin, M. Haynes, & J. Coady (Eds.), Second language reading and vocabulary
learning (pp. 263-286). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Chun, D., & Plass, J. (1996). Effects of multimedia annotations on vocabulary acquisition. The
Modern Language Journal, 80(2), 183-198.
230
Chun, D., & Plass, J. (1997). Research on text comprehension in multimedia environments.
Language Learning & Technology, 1(1), 60-81.  Retrieved November 30, 2000 from the World
Wide Web:   http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/chun_plass/default.html  .
Cool Edit Pro1.0 [Computer Software]. (1997). Phoenix, AZ: Syntrillium Software Corporation.
Davis, N. (1989). Facilitating effects of marginal glosses on foreign language reading. The
Modern Language Journal, 73(1), 41-48.
Davis, N., & Lyman-Hager, M. (1997). Computers and L2 reading: Student performance, student
attitudes. Foreign Language Annals, 30(1),58-72.
Day, I. (1982). Curiosity and the interested explorer. Performance and Instruction, 21(4), 19-22.
Dreamweaver 2.0 [Computer Software]. (1998). San Francisco, CA: Macromedia, Inc.
Duquette, L., & Painchaud, G. (1996). A Comparison of vocabulary acquisition in audio and
video contexts. The Canadian Modern Language Review, 54(1) 143-172.
Francis, W., & Kucera, A. (1982). Frequency analysis of English usage: lexicon and grammar.
Boston: Houghton Mufflin Company
Garrett, N. (1989). Computers in foreign language teaching and research: A new humanism. In
William H. Graves (Ed.), Computing across the curriculum: Academicperspectives (pp. 101-
139). McKinney, TX:Academic Computing Publications, Inc.
Hanley, J., Herron, C., & Cole, S. (1995). Using video as advance organizer to a written passage
in the FLES classroom. The Modern Language Journal, 79(1), 57-66.
Jacobs, G. (1994). What lurks in the margin: Use of vocabulary glosses as a strategy in second
language reading. Issues in Applied Linguistics,4(1), 115-137.
Kost, C., Foss, P., & Lenzini, J. (1999). Textual and pictorial gloss: Effectiveness on incidental
vocabulary growth when reading in a foreign language. Foreign Language Annals, 32(1), 89-113.
Levy, M. (1997). Computer-assisted language learning: context and conceptualization. Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press.
Lomicka, L. (1998). To gloss or not to gloss: An investigation of reading comprehension online.
Language Learning and Technology, 1(2), 41-50.
Longman dictionary of contemporary English. (1987). London: Longman.
Lyman-Hager, M., Davis, N., Burnett, J., & Chennault, R. (1993). Us Vie de Boy: Interactive
reading in French. In F. L. Borchardt & E.M.T. Johnson (Eds.), Proceedings of CALICO 1993
Annual Symposium on Assessment (pp. 93-97). Durham, NC: Duke University.
Martinez-Lage, A. (1997). Hypermedia technology for teaching reading. In M. Bush & R. Terry
(Eds.), Technology enhanced language learning (pp. 121-163). Lincolnwood, IL: National
Textbook Company.
Martinez-Lage, A., & Herren, D. (1998). Challenges and opportunities: Curriculum pressures in
the technological present. In J. Harper, M. Lively, & M.Williams (Eds.), The coming of age of the
231
profession: Issues and emerging ideas for teaching of foreign languages (pp. 141-167). Boston:
Heinle & Heinle Publishers.
Mayer, E. (1997). Multimedia learning: Are we asking the right questions? Educational
Psychologist, 32(1), 1-19.
Mayer, E., & Sims, K. (1994). For whom is a picture worth a thousand words? Extensions of a
dual-coding theory of multimedia learning. Journal of Educational Psychology, 86(3), 389-401.
McCombs, L. (1972). The validation of a measure of state epistemic curiosity in a computer-
assisted learning situation. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Psychological
Association, Honolulu, HI.
Mundahl, J. (1993). Tales of dreams, A multicultural reader. New York: Addison Wesley
Publishing Company, Inc.
Muyskens, J. (Ed.). (1997). New ways of learning and teaching: focus on technology and foreign
language education. Boston: Heinle & Heinle Publishers.
Myers, L. (1990). Causal relatedness and text comprehension. In D. A. Balota, G. F. d’Arcais, &
K. Rayner (Eds.), Comprehension process in reading (pp. 361-375). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Neuman, B., & Koskinen, P. (1992). Captioned television as comprehensible input: Effects of
incidental word learning from context for language minority students. Reading Research Quarterly,
27(1), 95-106.
Omaggio, C. (1979). Picture and second language comprehension: Do they help? Foreign
Language Annals, 12(2), 107-116.
Oxfored, R., & Crookall, D. (1990). Vocabulary learning: “A critical Analysis of techniques.”
TESL Canada Journal 7(2), 9-30.
Oyono, F. (1956). Une Vie de Boy. Paris: Julliard.
Paivio, A. (1971). Imagery and verbal processes. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
Paivio, A. (1986). Mental representation: A dual-coding approach. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Paivio, A., & Begg, I. (1981). Psychology of language. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Paivio, A., & Desrochers, A. (1980). A dual -coding approach to building memory.  Canadian
Journal of Psychology, 34(4), 388-899.
Pennington, M. (Ed.). (1996). The power of CALL. Houston, TX: Athelstan.
Pusack, J., & Otto, S. (1997). Taking control of media. In M. Bush & R. Terry (Eds),
Technology enhanced language learning (pp. 1-64). Lincolnwood, IL: National Textbook
Company.
Sherwood, R. D., Kinzer, C. K., Hasselbring, T. S., & Bransford, J. D. (1987). Macro-contexts
for learning: Initial Findings and issues. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 1(2), 93-108.
232
Snyder, H., & Colon, I. (1988). Foreign language acquisition and audio-visual aids.  Foreign
Language Annals, 21(4), 343-384.
Underwood, J. (1989). HyperCard and interactive video. CALICO, 6(3),7-20.
Warschauer, M. (1996). Computer-assisted language learning: An introduction. In S. Fotos (Ed.),
Multimedia language teaching (pp. 3-20). Tokyo: Logos International.
Warschauer, M., & Healey, D. (1998). Computers and language learning: An overview.
Language Teaching, 31, 57-71.
Wittrock, C. (1990). Generative process of comprehension. Education Psychologist, 24(4), 345-
376.
About    LLT   |    Subscribe   |   Information    for     Contributors   | Masthead |  Archives   
