Language Learning & Technology May 2001, Vol. 5, Num. 2
http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num2/announcements/default.html pp. 13-18
Copyright ª  2001, ISSN 1094-3501 13
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS
This page includes announcements from the organizations sponsoring LLT.
University of Hawai’i National Foreign Language Resource
Center (NFLRC)
Less commonly taught languages, particularly those of Asia and the Pacific, are the focus of the
University of Hawai`i National Foreign Language Resource Center, which engages in research and
materials development projects and conducts Summer Institutes for language professionals among its
many activities.
PACIFIC SECOND LANGUAGE RESEARCH FORUM ( PacSLRF)
2001 The NFLRC is pleased to co-sponsor the upcoming PacSLRF 2001
Conference, which will be held at the Imin Conference Center on the
University of Hawai'i at Manoa campus October 4-7, 2001. This
international conference will focus on the acquisition of second languages
in instructed and naturalistic settings, particularly in East Asian, Southeast
Asian, and Pacific languages. Questions? Contact us at pacslrf@hawaii.edu.
2001 SUMMER INSTITUTES
•  Developing Web-based Foreign Language Learning Environments (June 11-22)
•  Web-based Workshops for Advanced Reading & Writing Development & Maintenance (July 2-13) is
a free on-line professional development opportunity for non-native-speaking teachers of Chinese and
Korean language at the K-16 level
•  Korean Pedagogy Workshop: Task-Based Language Teaching (July 30-August 1) will be run in
association with the 6th annual meeting of the American Association of Teachers of Korean
NEW PUBLICATIONS FROM THE UH NFLRC
•  A Focus on Language Test Development: Expanding the Language Proficiency Construct Across a
Variety of Tests by T. Hudson & J. D.Brown (Eds.). This volume presents eight research studies
which introduce a variety of novel, non-traditional forms of second and foreign language assessment.
To the extent possible, the studies also show the entire test development process, warts and all. These
language testing projects not only demonstrate many of the types of problems that test developers run
into in the real world but also afford the reader unique insights into the language test development
process.
•  Motivation and Second Language Learning by Z. Dörnyei & R. Schmidt (Eds.). This volume, the
second in this series concerned with motivation and foreign language learning, includes papers
presented in a state-of-the-art colloquium on L2 motivation at the American Association for Applied
Linguistics Conference (Vancouver, 2000) and a number of specially commissioned studies. The 20
chapters, written by some of the best known researchers in the field, cover a wide range of theoretical
and research methodological issues, and also offer empirical results (both qualitative and quantitative)
concerning the learning of many different languages (Arabic, Chinese, English, Filipino, French,
German, Hindi, Italian, Japanese, Russian, and Spanish) in a broad range of learning contexts
(Bahrain, Brazil, Canada, Egypt, Finland, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Japan, Spain, and the US).
Additions have also been made to the NFLRC NetWorks collection of online publications. Check out our
other publications at http://www.LLL.hawaii.edu/nflrc/publication.html.
News from Sponsoring Organizations
Language Learning & Technology 14
Michigan State University Center for Language Education
and Research (CLEAR)
CLEAR’s mission is to promote foreign language education in the United States. To meet its goals,
CLEAR’s projects focus on foreign language research, materials development, and teacher training.
FOREIGN LANGUAGE RESEARCH
·  Acquisition of Prosody by English-Speaking Learners of French
·  Feedback and Interaction
·  Longitudinal Analysis of Foreign Language Writing Development
·  Folk Linguistics: Perceptions of L2 Learning & Teaching
MATERIALS DEVELOPMENT
Products
·  Business Chinese (CD-ROM)
·  Modules for Assessing Socio-Cultural Competence for German (CD-ROM)
·  Pronunciación y fonética (CD-ROM)
·  African Language Tutorial Guide (guide and video)
·  Foreign Languages: Doors to Opportunity (video and discussion guide)
·  Task-based Communicative Grammar Activities for Japanese and Thai (workbook)
·  Test Development (workbook and video)
Coming Soon!
·  Business Language Packets for High School Classrooms (French, German, and Spanish)
·  Portuguese Pronunciation and Phonetics CD-ROM
·  Modules for Assessing Socio-Cultural Competence for Russian (CD-ROM)
·  Thai Tutorial Guide
Game-O-Matic
The Game-O-Matic is a suite of wizards that create Web-based activities for language learning and
practice. Teachers can make original Game-O-Matic games by visiting http://clear.msu.edu/dennie/matic/.
Have a new idea for a Game-O-Matic activity? Contact Dennie Hoopingarner at hooping4@msu.edu.
Newsletter
CLEAR News is a biyearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. Contact
the CLEAR office to join the mailing list or see it on the Web at http://clear.msu.edu/clearnews/.
TEACHER TRAINING
2001 Summer Workshops
Every summer, CLEAR offers teacher development workshops for foreign language educators to help
strengthen and expand their teaching skills. CLEAR offers stipends to help defray the workshop fees and
travel/accommodation expenses. For more information, see CLEAR’s Web site at http://clear.msu.edu.
·  Using Communicative Activities in a Grammar-Based Curriculum (June 20-23)
·  Putting Your Course Online (June 26-30)
·  Making a Language-Learning CD-ROM: Introductory Techniques (July 10-4)
·  Making a Language-Learning CD-ROM: Advanced Techniques (July 17-21)
·  Promoting Student Motivation and Interest in Foreign Languages (July 22-24)
·  Using Authentic Materials in the Foreign Language Classroom (July 25-28)
News from Sponsoring Organizations
Language Learning & Technology 15
For more information, contact:
Center for Language Education And Research (CLEAR)
A712 Wells Hall
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824-1027
Phone: 517/432-2286
Fax: 517/432-0473
Email: clear@msu.edu
Apprentissage des Langues et Systèmes d'Information et
de Communication (ALSIC)
ALSIC (Language Learning and Information and Communication Systems) is an electronic journal in
French for researchers and practitioners in fields related to applied linguistics, didactics,
psycholinguistics, educational sciences, computational linguistics, and computer science. The journal
gives priority to papers from the French-speaking community and/or in French, but it also regularly
invites papers in other languages so as to strengthen scientific and technical exchanges between linguistic
communities that too often remain separate. The editorial board of ALSIC invites you to contact them for
any prospective contributions at the following electronic address: alsic@lifc.univ-fcomte.fr.
The Australian Technology Enhanced Language Learning
Consortium (ATELL)
Contacts: Dr. Mike Levy, The University of Queensland (mlevy@lingua.arts.uq.edu.au)
Prof. Roly Sussex, The University of Queensland (sussex@lingua.arts.uq.edu.au)
ATELL is an informal collaboration of Australian language teachers involved in technology-enhanced
language learning and teaching. It has recently been moved to The University of Queensland, where Dr.
Mike Levy and Professor Roly Sussex are developing the concept in collaboration with Mr. Greg
Dabelstein, coordinator of the CALL special interest group of the Association of Modern Language
Teachers' Associations of Australia (AFMTLA). We intend to establish a network of complementary and
collaborating resources for teachers and learners in the TELL domain in schools and tertiary institutions.
There will be a Web site, which will include information, collaboration, and resources such as
·  a register of Australian TELL experts
·  links to other sites with TELL-related information and materials
·  links to reviews of hardware, software, courseware
·  a section for FAQs (Frequently Asked Questions)
·  what's new -- ideas, research, materials
·  a register of projects, current and past, in TELL research, development, implementation
·  software modules, libraries, and related resources for developers
·  audio and video files for language learning support
·  policies and discussion
·  special interest groups
In addition, we are reviving the ATELL mailing list, whose e-mail location is atell@lingua.arts.uq.edu.au.
ATELL is supported by the Language Laboratory at the University of Queensland.
News from Sponsoring Organizations
Language Learning & Technology 16
Center for Advanced Research on Language Acquisition,
University of Minnesota (CARLA)
CARLA is one of nine National Language Resource Centers whose role is to improve the nation's
capacity to teach and learn foreign languages effectively. Launched in 1993 with funding from the
national Title VI Language Resource Center program of the U.S. Department of Education, CARLA's
mission is to study multilingualism and multiculturalism, to develop knowledge of second language
acquisition, and to advanced the quality of second language teaching, learning, and assessment by
conducting research and action projects sharing research-based and other forms of knowledge across
disciplines and education systems extending, exchanging, and applying this knowledge in the wider
society. CARLA's research and action initiatives include a focus on the articulation of language
instruction, content-based language teaching through technology, culture and language studies, less
commonly taught languages, language immersion education, second language assessment, second
language learning strategies, and technology and second language learning. To share its latest research
and program opportunities with language teachers around the country, CARLA offers the following
resources: a summer institute program for teachers; a database which lists where less commonly taught
languages are taught throughout the country; listservs for teachers of less commonly taught languages and
immersion educators; a working paper series; conferences and workshops; and a battery of instruments in
French, German, and Spanish for assessing learners' proficiency in reading, writing, speaking, and
listening at the intermediate-low level on the ACTFL scale. On May 17-19, 2001, CARLA will sponsor
the Second International Conference on Language Teacher Education  which will bring together teacher
educators from a variety of language teaching contexts to discuss and share research, theory, and best
practices and to initiate and sustain meaningful professional dialogue across languages, levels, and
settings. Check out these and other CARLA resources on the CARLA Web site at
http://carla.acad.umn.edu.
The Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL)
The Center for Applied Linguistics is a private, nonprofit organization that promotes and improves the
teaching and learning of languages, identifies and solves problems related to language and culture, and
serves as a resource for information about language and culture. CAL carries out a wide range of
activities in the fields of English as a second language, foreign languages, cultural education, and
linguistics. These activities include research, teacher education, information dissemination, instructional
design, conference planning, technical assistance, program evaluation, and policy analysis. Publications
include books on language education, online databases of language programs and assessments, curricula,
research reports, teacher training materials, and print and online newsletters.
Major CAL projects include the following:
·  ERIC Clearinghouse on Languages and Linguistics
·  National Clearinghouse for ESL Literacy Education
·  Refugee Service Center
·  Pre-K-12 School Services
CAL collaborates with other language education organizations on the following projects:
·  Center for Research on Education, Diversity & Excellence
·  Improving Foreign Languages in the Schools Project of the Northeast and Island Regional
Laboratory at Brown University
News from Sponsoring Organizations
Language Learning & Technology 17
·  National Capitol Language Resource Center
·  National K-12 Foreign Language Resource Center   
·  National Network for Early Language Learning
New publications from the ERIC Clearinghouse on Languages and Linguistics
·  Foreign Language Teaching: What the United States Can Learn from Other Countries, by Ingrid
Pufahl, Nancy C. Rhodes, and Donna Christian. This paper reports on an exploratory study in
which educators from 19 countries responded to a series of questions about methodologies,
strategies, and policies in their countries that could help to improve language teaching in the
United States.
·  Lessons Learned: Model Early Foreign Language Programs, by Douglas F. Gildow and Lucinda
E. Branaman. This book describes seven successful foreign language programs in grades K-8 and
offers practical guidelines and suggestions to help others implement similar strategies.
·  The latest ERIC/CLL Resource Guides Online include Linguistics, Second Language Proficiency
Assessment, and Dialects in Education.
·  Recent ERIC/CLL Digests cover a range of topics in ESL, foreign language, and bilingual
education.
News from the National Center for ESL Literacy Education
As of January 2001, NCLE is now known as the National Center for ESL Literacy Education. This
change in name from Clearinghouse to Center better reflects the work NCLE now does in the field of
adult ESL and the range of services that is provides. These include technical assistance to programs;
professional development of program staff; the writing and producing of books, reports, and papers; and
the development of on-line resources for adult ESL. Recent additions to the NCLE Web site include a
new resource collection on assessment and evaluation in adult ESL, the latest issue of NCLE’s twice-
yearly newsletter NCLE notes, lesson ideas for integrating civics education in adult ESL instruction, and
new Digests and Q&As on dialogue journals, Civics education and adult ESL, and reflective teaching for
adult ESL practitioners.
Computer Assisted Language Instruction Consortium
(CALICO)
Since its inception in 1983, CALICO has served as an international forum for language teachers who
want to develop and utilize the potential of advanced technology to support their teaching and research
needs. Through its Annual Symposia, Special Interest Groups (SIGs), CALICO Journal, CALICO
Monograph Series, CALICO Resource Guide, and numerous other publications, CALICO provides both
leadership and perspective in the ever-changing field of computer-assisted instruction. The strength of
CALICO derives from the enthusiasm, creativity, and diversity of its members. It comprises language
teachers and researchers from universities, military academies, community colleges, K-12 schools,
government agencies, and commercial enterprises. To learn more about CALICO activities and how to
participate in them, visit the CALICO homepage at http://www.calico.org.
News from Sponsoring Organizations
Language Learning & Technology 18
European Association for Computer Assisted Language
Learning (EUROCALL)
EUROCALL is an association of language teaching professionals from Europe and worldwide aiming to
·  Promote the use of foreign languages within Europe
·  Provide a European focus for all aspects of the use of technology for language learning
·  Enhance the quality, dissemination, and efficiency of CALL materials
We also disseminate information via the ReCALL Journal and other publications, organise special interest
meetings and annual conferences, and work towards the exploitation of electronic communications
systems. For those involved in education and training, EUROCALL provides information and advice on
all aspects of the use of technology for language learning.Forthcoming EUROCALL conference:
EUROCALL 2001 will be held at University of Nijmegen, The Netherlands, from 30 August to 1
September 2001.
For full details, contact us at http://www.eurocall.org.
International Association for Language Learning Technology
(IALL)
Established in 1965, IALL is an organization of professionals in a variety of fields who are committed to
supporting and extending language learning, teaching, and research through the use of technology. Its
members include directors and staff of language labs, resource or media centers and grant projects,
language teachers at all levels, developers and vendors of hardware and software, and interested others.
IALL offers biennial conferences, regional groups and meetings, the LLTI listserv (Language Learning
and Technology International), publications such as IALL Journal, IALL Lab Design Kit, and IALL Lab
Management Manual, and a Foreign Language Software Database. The 2001 meeting of IALL will be
held at Rice University (Houston, TX) May 22-26. For membership, meeting, publication, or listserv
information, including contact people, visit the IALL Web site at http://iall.net.
