Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
20
Language Learning & Technology
Vol. 5, No. 1, January 2001, pp. 20-31
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS
This page includes announcements from the organizations sponsoring LLT. More
complete listings of announcements can be found at the Applied Linguistics Virtual
Library, the Agora Language Marketplace, and the Centre for Language Teaching
and Research's International Conference Schedule.
University of Hawai'i National
Foreign Language Resource Center
(NFLRC)
Less commonly taught languages, particularly those of Asia and the Pacific, are the
focus of the University of Hawai`i National Foreign Language Resource Center,
which engages in research and materials development projects and conducts Summer
Institutes for language professionals among its many activities.
2001 SUMMER INSTITUTES
•  In Developing Web-based Foreign Language Learning Environments (June
11-22), participants will acquire a working knowledge of a variety of issues in
Web-based foreign language course design. Working adaptively from an
existing model, each team of participants (representing different languages
from around the world) will design and produce a prototype for a freestanding
Web-based language course for advanced learners, comprising a curricular
outline, an interface design (or "course shell"), and at least one functional unit.
Participants will also commit to participate in a videoconference in December
2001 to share the results of the implementation of the course designed at the
workshop.
•  Web-based Workshops for Advanced Reading & Writing Development &
Maintenance (July 2-13) will serve as an o line professional development
opportunity for non-native-speaking teachers of Chinese and Korean
language at the K-16 level. As part of our mission to serve the development
and enhancement of Asian language and area studies in the US, the University
of Hawai'i NFLRC and National Resource Center for East Asian Studies will
be offering 2 two-week intensive language courses in Chinese and Korean.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
21
The intensive courses, to be delivered entirely over the World Wide Web
using a tested and proven pedagogic model, will focus on the development
and/or maintenance of communicative language skills at the Advanced level,
with strong emphasis on written communication meeting high standards of
literacy.
·  The Korean Pedagogy Workshop: Task-based Language Teaching (July 30-
August 1) will run in association with the 6th annual meeting of the American
Association of Teachers of Korean (AATK) in Honolulu in early August. This
three-day workshop will provide an overview of the rationale for Task-Based
Language Teaching (TBLT), review the six basic stages in designing,
implementing, and evaluating a TBLT program, and then shift to an
exploration of several problems currently facing any task-based approach.
Parts of the materials design and use segments will be in Korean, but the
institute as a whole will be conducted in English, via a mix of informal lecture
presentations and demonstrations, classroom discussion of required readings,
and project work in small groups.
For more information about our Summer Institutes, please visit
http://www.LLL.hawaii.edu/nflrc/institutes.html
PACIFIC SECOND LANGUAGE RESEARCH FORUM (PacSLRF) 2001
The NFLRC is pleased to co-sponsor the upcoming PacSLRF 2001 Conference,
which will be held at the Imin Conference Center on the University of Hawai'i at
Manoa campus on October 4-7, 2001. This international conference will focus on the
acquisition of second languages in instructed and naturalistic settings, particularly in
East Asian, Southeast Asian, and Pacific languages. Paper, poster, and colloquium
proposal submissions are welcome!
For more information about the PacSLRF Call for Papers (deadline - April 30, 2001),
plenaries, invited colloquia, daily schedule, registration, lodging, & social events,
please visit the PacSLRF Web site at http://www.LLL.hawaii.edu/pacslrf/.
Questions? Contact us at pacslrf@hawaii.edu.
NEW PUBLICATIONS FROM THE UH NFLRC
·  Motivation and Second Language Learning This volume, the second in this
series concerned with motivation and foreign language learning, includes
papers presented in a state-of-the-art colloquium on L2 motivation at the
American Association for Applied Linguistics Conference (Vancouver, 2000)
and a number of specially commissioned studies. The 20 chapters, written by
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
22
some of the best known researchers in the field, cover a wide range of
theoretical and research methodological issues, and also offer empirical results
(both qualitative and quantitative) concerning the learning of many different
languages (Arabic, Chinese, English, Filipino, French, German, Hindi, Italian,
Japanese, Russian, and Spanish) in a broad range of learning contexts
(Bahrain, Brazil, Canada, Egypt, Finland, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Japan,
Spain, and the US). AVAILABLE EARLY 2001
·  Keys to Chinese Character Writing (text + video) This s lf-paced tutorial text
plus video is designed to address common problems students face when
learning to write Chinese characters. Its systematic instruction in Chinese
characters covers the principles of character structure, the basic strokes, and
proper stroke order. The most frequently used radicals are thoroughly covered,
providing solid grounding for dictionary work.
·  By popular demand, KAN NA! Authentic Chinese Reading and HANGUL-
RO BOJA! Authentic Korean Reading on CD-ROM are now available in PC
versions as well as Mac.
Other new publications from the NFLRC include a number of additions to the
NFLRC NetWorks collection of online publications.
Check out our many other publications at
http://www.LLL.hawaii.edu/nflrc/publication.html.
Michigan State University Center for
Language Education and Research
(CLEAR)
CLEAR's mission is to promote foreign language education in the United States. To
meet its goals, CLEAR's projects focus on foreign language research, materials
development, and teacher training.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
23
FOREIGN LANGUAGE RESEARCH
·  Acquisition of Prosody by English-Speaking Learners of French
·  Feedback and Interaction
·  Longitudinal Analysis of Foreign Language Writing
·  Folk Linguistics: Perceptions of L2 Learning & Teaching
MATERIALS DEVELOPMENT
Products
·  Business Chinese (CD-ROM)
·  Extended Oral Proficiency Assessment Modules for German (CD-ROM)
·  Pronunciación y fonética (CD-ROM)
·  African Languages Tutorial Guide (guide and video)
·  Foreign Languages: Doors to Opportunity (video and discussion guide)
·  Task-based Communicative Grammar Activities for Japanese and Thai
(workbook)
·  Test Development (workbook and video)
Coming Soon!
·  Business Language Packets for High School Classrooms (French, German,
and Spanish)
·  Portuguese Pronunciation and Phonetics CD-ROM
·  Thai Tutorial Guide
Newsletter
CLEAR News is a biyearly publication covering FL teaching techniques,
research, and materials. Contact the CLEAR office to join the mailing list
or see it on the Web at http://clear.msu.edu/clearnews/.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
24
TEACHER TRAINING
Summer Workshops
Every summer, CLEAR offers teacher development workshops for foreign
language educators to help strengthen and expand their teaching skills.
CLEAR offers stipends to help defray the workshop fees and
travel/accommodation expenses. For more information, see CLEAR's Web
site at http://clear.msu.edu.
2001 Summer Workshops
·  Using Communicative Activities in a Grammar-Based Curriculum
(June 20-23)
·  Putting Your Course Online (June 26-30)
·  Making a Language-Learning CD-ROM: Introductory Techniques
(July 10-4)
·  Making a Language-Learning CD-ROM: Advanced Techniques
(July 17-21)
·  Promoting Student Motivation and Interest in Foreign Languages
(July 22-24)
·  Using Authentic Materials in the Foreign Language Classroom
(July 25-28)
Onsite Technology Training Workshops
In the spring of 2000, CLEAR began offering technology training
workshops to foreign language educators at their home institutions. The
workshops are tailored to fit the needs of the participants and the
technology available at their institutions. Once again this year, CLEAR is
offering these workshops. For more information, contact Jane Ozanich at
ozanichj@msu.edu.
Visit CLEAR's Web site (http://clear.msu.edu) or contact the CLEAR office (517-
432-2286 / clear@msu.edu) for more information.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
25
Apprentissage des Langues et
Systèmes d'Information et de
Communication (ALSIC)  
ALSIC (Language Learning and Information and Communication Systems) is an
electronic journal in French for researchers and practitioners in fields related to
applied linguistics, didactics, psycholinguistics, educational sciences,
computational linguistics, and computer science.
The journal gives priority to papers from the French-speaking community and/or
in French, but it also regularly invites papers in other languages so as to
strengthen scientific and technical exchanges between linguistic communities that
too often remain separate. The editorial board of ALSIC invites you to contact
them for any prospective contributions at the following electronic address:
alsic@lifc.univ-fcomte.fr.
The Australian Technology Enhanced
Language Learning Consortium (ATELL)
Contacts:Dr. Mike Levy, The University of Queensland (m evy@lingua.arts.uq.edu.au)
Prof. Roly Sussex, The University of Queensland (su sex@lingua.arts.uq.edu.au)
ATELL is an informal collaboration of Australian language teachers involved in
technology-enhanced language learning and teaching. It has recently been moved
to The University of Queensland, where Dr. Mike Levy and Professor Roly
Sussex are developing the concept in collaboration with Mr. Greg Dabelstein,
coordinator of the CALL special interest group of the Association of Modern
Language Teachers' Associations of Australia (AFMTLA). We intend to establish
a network of complementary and collaborating resources for teachers and learners
in the TELL domain in schools and tertiary institutions.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
26
There will be a Web site, which will include information, collaboration, and
resources such as:
·  a register of Australian TELL experts
·  links to other sites with TELL-related information and materials
·  links to reviews of hardware, software, courseware
·  a section for FAQs (Frequently Asked Questions)
·  what's new -- ideas, research, materials
·  a register of projects, current and past, in TELL research, development,
implementation
·  software modules, libraries, and related resources for developers
·  audio and video files for language learning support
·  policies and discussion
·  special interest groups
In addition, we are reviving the ATELL mailing list, whose e-mail location is
atell@lingua.arts.uq.edu.au.
ATELL is supported by the Language Laboratory at the University of
Queensland.
Center for Advanced Research on
Language Acquisition, University of
Minnesota (CARLA)
CARLA is one of nine National Language Resource Centers whose role is to
improve the nation's capacity to teach and learn foreign languages effectively.
Launched in 1993 with funding from the national Title VI Language Resource
Center program of the U.S. Department of Education, CARLA's mission is to
study multilingualism and multiculturalism, to develop knowledge of second
language acquisition, and to advanced the quality of second language teaching,
learning, and assessment by conducting research and action projects sharing
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
27
research-based and other forms of knowledge across disciplines and education
systems extending, exchanging, and applying this knowledge in the wider society.
CARLA's research and action initiatives include a focus on the articulation of
language instruction, content-based language teaching through technology,
culture and language studies, less commonly taught languages, language
immersion education, second language assessment, second language learning
strategies, and technology and second language learning.
To share its latest research and program opportunities with language teachers
around the country, CARLA offers the following resources: a summer institute
program for teachers; a database which lists where less commonly taught
languages are taught throughout the country; listservs for teachers of less
commonly taught languages and immersion educators; a working paper series;
conferences and workshops; and a battery of instruments in French, German, and
Spanish for assessing learners' proficiency in reading, writing, speaking, and
listening at the intermediate-low level on the ACTFL scale.
On May 17-19, 2001, CARLA will sponsor the Second International Conference
on Language Teacher Education which will bring together teacher educators from
a variety of language teaching contexts to discuss and share research, theory, and
best practices and to initiate and sustain meaningful professional dialogue across
languages, levels, and settings.
Check out these and other CARLA resources on the CARLA Web site at
http://carla.acad.umn.edu.
The Center for Applied Linguistics
(CAL)
News from the ERIC Clearinghouse on Languages and Linguistics
Visit the Directory of Resources for Foreign Language Programs at
http://www.cal.org/ericcll/ncbe/fldirectory. An nline, searchable database, the
directory includes national associations, professional organizations, state foreign
language offices, funders, publishers of language learning materials, centers,
clearinghouses, instructional materials Web sites, online publications, databases,
regional conferences, and listservs.
Also new on ERIC/CLL's Web site is a collection of papers about what teachers
of English language learners need to know about language. The papers describe
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
28
the reasons that educators need to know about language, the kinds of knowledge
about language that they need, and an inventory of courses and course topics.
Read the papers on the Web at http://www.cal.org/ericcll/teachers/index.html.
ERIC/CLL has published a new book, Lessons Learned: Model early foreign
language programs. This is the first book in our new professional practice series.
To read about this book and upcoming titles in the series, and to purchase the
book, visit www.practiceseries.com
News from the National Clearinghouse for ESL Literacy Education (NCLE)
"NCLE Resource Collections: Learning Disabilities and Adult ESL" is the first in
a series of resource collections that will be published on the NCLE Web site to act
as gateways to information on specific topics in adult ESL.
NCLE has published new papers on "Adult English Language Learners with
Learning Disabilities," "Finding and Evaluating Resources on the World Web,"
"Integrating Technology into Adult ESL Instruction," "Online Professional
Development for Adult ESL Educators," and "Reading Research on Adult English
Learners." Visit the "What's New" section of NCLE's site at
http://www.cal.org/ncle/whatnew.htm for links to these and other publications.
Other CAL Resources
"Training Others to Use the ESL Standards: A Professional Development
Manual" was created for staff developers, teacher trainers, teacher education
faculty, and others who deliver pre- and in-service programs to practicing
teachers. The book is one in a series of publications on CAL's ESL standards
work in collaboration with the Teachers of English to Speakers of Other
Languages (TESOL). Contact TESOL at http://www.tesol.org to order.
------------------
The Center for Applied Linguistics promotes and improves the teaching and
learning of languages, identifies and solves problems related to language and
culture, and serves as a resource for information about language and culture. CAL
is a private, nonprofit organization that carries out a wide range of activities in the
fields of English as a second language, foreign languages, cultural education, and
linguistics. These activities include research, teacher education, information
dissemination, instructional design, conference planning, technical assistance,
program evaluation, and policy analysis. Publications include books on language
education, online databases of language programs and assessments, curricula,
research reports, teacher training materials, and print and online newsletters.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
29
CAL builds knowledge and applies it to real world issues through publications, a
World Wide Web site at http://www.cal.org, "Language and Literacy in Public
Life" events, and in many other ways. CAL responds to current needs in language
education with accurate, accessible, and timely language resources.
Major CAL projects include the following:
·  ERIC Clearinghouse on Languages and Linguistics
·  National Clearinghouse for ESL Literacy Education
·  Refugee Service Center
·  PreK-12 School Services Center (contact
http://www.cal.org/schoolservices for information)
CAL collaborates with other language education organizations on the following
projects:
·  Center for Research on Education, Diversity, & Excellence
·  Improving Foreign Languages in the Schools Project of the Northeast and
Islands Regional Laboratory at Brown University
·  National Capital Language Resource Center
·  National K-12 Foreign Language Resource Center
·  National Network for Early Language Learning
For more information about CAL projects and services, visit http://www.cal.org.
Computer Assisted Language
Instruction Consortium (CALICO)
Since its inception in 1983, CALICO has served as an international forum for
language teachers who want to develop and utilize the potential of advanced
technology to support their teaching and research needs. Through its Annual
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
30
Symposia, Special Interest Groups (SIGs), CALICO Journal, CALICO
Monograph Series, CALICO Resource Guide, and numerous other publications,
CALICO provides both leadership and perspective in the ever-changing field of
computer-assisted instruction.
The strength of CALICO derives from the enthusiasm, creativity, and diversity of
its members. It comprises language teachers and researchers from universities,
military academies, community colleges, K-12 schools, government agencies, and
commercial enterprises. To learn more about CALICO activities and how to
participate in them, visit the CALICO homepage at http://www.calico.org
European Association for Computer
Assisted Language Learning
(EUROCALL)
EUROCALL is an association of language teaching professionals from Europe
and worldwide aiming to
·  Promote the use of foreign languages within Europe
·  Provide a European focus for all aspects of the use of technology for
language learning
·  Enhance the quality, dissemination, and efficiency of CALL materials
We also disseminate information via the ReCALL Journal and other publications,
organise special interest meetings and annual conferences, and work towards the
exploitation of electronic communications systems. For those involved in
education and training, EUROCALL provides information and advice on all
aspects of the use of technology for language learning.
Forthcoming EUROCALL conference:
·  EUROCALL 2001, University of Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 30 August
to 1 September 2001
For full details, contact us at http://www.eurocall.org.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
31
International Association for
Language Learning Technology
(IALL )
Established in 1965, IALL is an organization of professionals in a variety of fields
who are committed to supporting and extending language learning, teaching, and
research through the use of technology. Its members include directors and staff of
language labs, resource or media centers and grant projects, language teachers at
all levels, developers and vendors of hardware and software, and interested others.
IALL offers biennial conferences, regional groups and meetings, the LLTI listserv
(Language Learning and Technology International), publications such as IALL
Journal, IALL Lab Design Kit, and IALL Lab Management Manual, and a
Foreign Language Software Database.
The 2001 meeting of IALL will be held at Rice University (Houston, TX) on May
22-26. For membership, meeting, publication, or listserv information, including
contact people, visit the IALL Web site at http://iall.net.
Home | About LLT | Subscribe | Information for Contributors | Masthead | Archives
