Language Learning & Technology May 2001, Vol. 5, Num. 2
http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num2/from_the_spec_issue_ed.html p. 2-3
Copyright ª  2001, ISSN 1094-3501 2
From the Special Issue Editor
It gives me great pleasure to introduce this special issue of Language Learning &
Technology focusing on the theory and practice of computer-based language testing.
This issue contains three articles, two commentaries, and a response to one of the
commentaries.
Articles
In the first article, "Comparability of Conventional and Computerized Tests of Reading
in a Second Language," Yasuyo Sawaki investigates various issues surrounding the
effect of mode of presentation, that is, computer versus paper-and-pencil, on reading test
performance. After an extensive survey of literature in cognitive ability as well as
language assessment, ergonomics, education, psychology, and L1 reading, Sawaki
concludes that it is difficult to generalize the results of these studies to L2 reading
assessment. She emphasizes the need for further investigation of mode of presentation
in L2 reading assessment, as well as consideration of mode of presentation in construct
validation of computerized tests of L2 reading.
In the second article, "Comparing Examinee Attitudes Toward Computer-Assisted and
Other Oral Proficiency Assessments," Dorry Kenyon and Valerie Malabonga report on
the results of a study of examinee reactions to a tape-mediated Oral Proficiency
Interview (SOPI), and a Computerized Oral Proficiency Interview (COPI). The authors
found that due to the adaptive nature of the COPI, the examinees, particularly those at
the lowest proficiency levels, felt that the COPI was less difficult than the SOPI.
The third article, "Web-Based Language Testing" by Carsten Roever, describes what
Web-based language tests are, how they differ from traditional computer-based tests,
and what uses they can have in language testing. After a brief review of computer-based
testing, Roever categorizes WBTs as low-tech and high-tech, with low-tech tests
currently being the most feasible. Consequently, his article describes item types for low-
stakes low-tech WBTs, and discusses a variety of validation concerns specific to WBTs.
Commentaries
In the fist commentary, "Language Testing and Technology: Past and Future,"
Micheline Chalhoub-Deville situates the developments in computer-based testing within
the context of language testing in general. In particular, she points out that whereas the
language testing field has for some time promulgated performance-based assessment,
CATs for the most part have yet to adequately meet the challenges inherent in
proficiency-based testing.
The second commentary, "Concerns with Computerized Adaptive Oral Proficiency
Assessment" by John Norris, discusses the technical and methodological innovations
embodied in the COPI that make it an improvement over other types of technology-
mediated tests such as the SOPI. At the same time, he expresses his concern about the
ability of Computer-based Tests (CBTs) in general, and COPI in particular, to provide
appropriate means for measuring the complex array of skills underlying L2 speaking
proficiency with particular reference to the validity of the ACTFL Guidelines.
Irene Thompson From the Special Issue Editor
Language Learning & Technology 3
In their response to Norris' commentary, Kenyon, Malabonga, & Carpenter clarify some
points brought up by him about the design features of the COPI and express their
agreement with him about the need to conduct further analyses of the test. At the same
time, while agreeing with him about the need to validate the ACTFL scale, they point
out that from a policy and practice perspective, the ACTFL scale continues to be the
only currently available widely accepted common metric for the assessment of speaking
ability.
Columns
The two columns in this special issue are also dedicated to the theme of computers in
language testing. "On the Net," by Jean Leloup and Robert Ponterio, provides a detailed
guide to Glen Fulcher's Resources in Language Testing WWW page -- a comprehensive
site for those seeking information on a variety of topics related to L2 testing.
"Emerging Technologies," by Robert Godwin-Jones, provides a description of some of
the mostly widely used authoring tools and applications for designing language tests. A
helpful list of Web-based testing resources, testing organizations, language tests, and
authoring tools is included.
In keeping with the theme of these special issues, our reviews focus on the topic of
computers in language testing.
In the first review, Marisol Fernández-García reviews Issues in Computer-Adaptive
Testing of Reading Proficiency (1999) edited by Micheline Chalhoub-Deville. This
comprehensive volume presents a variety of perspectives on the use of CAT for reading
assessment and, according to the reviewer, is likely to become an indispensable
reference for language teachers, testers, and learners.
In the second review, John Norris reviews the second edition of Computerized Adaptive
Testing: A Primer (2000) edited by Howard Weiner. It consists of 10 chapters that
provide a thorough coverage of the theoretical, statistical, and practical foundations of
CATs. According to the reviewer, no other single source is as inclusive as this book.
In the third review, Paula Winke and David MacGregor review version 5 of Hot
Potatoes -- a template-based authoring program that uses HTML and JavaScript to
support the development of six different types of Web-based exercises that feature some
form of feedback. According to the reviewers, this user-friendly program is not intended
as testing software.
In the fourth review, Charlene Polio describes Test Pilot, a useful authoring application
for designing tests and administering them from a Web server. Among the attractive
feature of this program, which was not specifically designed for language testing, are (a)
it is user-friendly in that it requires no programming skills or knowledge of HTML, (b)
authoring can be done on- or offline, (c) it supports multimedia, (d) test takers need only
an Internet connection and a Web browser, (e) it allows item banking, (f) it supports
computer-adaptive testing.
We hope you will find this special issue interesting and informative, and we look
forward to your comments and future contributions.
Irene Thompson,
Special Issue Editor
