Language Learning & Technology v5n1 2001
1
Language Learning & Technology
Vol. 5, No. 1, January 2001, pp. 1-3
FROM THE EDITORS
The Editors are pleased to introduce the first issue of 2001, Volume 5, Number 1, which
contains five articles on a broad variety of topics. The first two articles involve different
forms of communication among learners which promote literacy development, and the
third examines the use of e-mail and word processing for improving writing. The last two
articles are concerned with vocabulary acquisition, first in children's software, and
second, using multimedia annotations in software for L2 adult learners.
The first article by Gilberte Furstenberg, Sabine Levet, Kathryn English, and Katherine
Maillet is entitled "Giving a Virtual Voice to the Silent Language of Culture: The Cultura
Project." It presents a Web-based, cross-cultural, curricular initiative, Cultura, with
particular emphasis on the ways in which the Web can be used to reveal invisible aspects
of a foreign culture and to empower students to construct their own approach to cross-
cultural literacy. The authors report on the participation of almost 150 students in two
countries and assess how the project has contributed to the learners' cross-cultural
literacy.
In the second article, "Exchanging Ideas with Peers in Network-Based Classrooms: An
aid or a pain?" Sima Sengupta explores the nature of peer exchanges in two partially
network-based classes and the conflicts learners face in this situation. Analyses of both
the linguistic and the personal dimensions of peer exchanges reveal how learners used the
available technology to interact with peers and their perception that this mode of delivery
extended their traditional notions of learning. The data indicate that students also develop
a sense of personal accountability arising from the high visibility of the Web.
The third article by Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas and Donald Weasenforth, "E-mail and
Word Processing in the ESL Classroom: How the medium affects the message,"
investigates the question of whether electronic mail writing can improve academic
writing abilities. The authors compared ESL learners' electronic mail and word-processed
writing and found no obvious differences between the two types of writing. However, the
electronic mail texts were significantly shorter than the word-processed texts, and text-
initial contextualization was more prominent in the word-processed than in the electronic
mail texts. They suggest that e-mail may not be the most appropriate vehicle for
improving academic writing, particularly during the drafting and revision stages of
writing. However, if the drafting and revising were done in a word processor and then e-
mailed, this might be a more suitable way to use electronic mail for improving writing.
In the fourth article, "Can Software Support Children's Vocabulary Development?" Julie
Wood examines 16 well-reviewed software products designed for elementary grade
students based on a set of guidelines derived from research. The guidelines included
Language Learning & Technology v5n1 2001
2
assessment, for example, of whether instruction relates the new to the known, whether it
promotes active, in-depth processing, whether it provides multiple exposures of new
words; whether it teaches students to be strategic readers, and finally, whether it
promotes additional reading. Findings indicated that the potential of technology to help
students understand word meanings has yet to be fully exploited, as many of the products
often merely varied a drill and practice routine rather than actually helped students really
know a word.
Finally, in the fifth article, " The Effect of Multimedia Annotation Modes on L2
Vocabulary Acquisition: A Comparative Study," Khalid Al Seghayer examines which of
the image modalities -- dynamic video or still picture -- is more effective for L2
vocabulary acquisition. The study found that a video clip is more effective in teaching
unknown vocabulary words than a still picture. The author suggests that videos might
help learners build better mental images and create curiosity on the part of the learner that
might lead to increased concentration. In addition, the combination of modalities present
in the video clips (visual image, background sounds that enhance accompanying video,
textual definition, and pronunciation) could also be factors that enhance memory and
learning.
Our On the Net column by Jean W. Leloup and Robert Ponterio presents an annotated list
of "collection sites" for FL educators who are looking for on-line materials and resources.
The selected collection sites are categorized by subject areas and themes. FL educators
will discover much to use in their classroom as part of projects, as ancillaries to textbook
materials, to further their own knowledge, and to assist students in their FL learning.
In our Emerging Technologies column, Bob Godwin-Jones addresses the issue of
accessibility of Web pages to users with special needs. He provides links to the W3C, the
standards-setting body for the World Wide Web and outlines the main considerations for
design practices of Web sites that ensure the widest accessibility.
Our Reviews section begins with a review by Peter Lafford of The Internet, a volume
from the Oxford series Resource Books for Teachers, which provides a practical manual
for the language teacher who wants to use the Internet as a resource in the classroom.
The second review, by Tomoaki Tatsumi, evaluates Real English, a series of CD-ROM-
based multimedia English lessons by the Marzio School and Ipse Communication, and
recommends it as ancillary material for classroom or self-study learners at the beginning
level.
In the third review, Mark Peterson provides an overview of lab management software for
the Macintosh and reviews eight available tools, both in the freeware/shareware and the
commercial domains.
It is hard to believe, but Language Learning and Technology is in its fifth year of
publication. We are very grateful to our fine Editorial Board and would especially like to
Language Learning & Technology v5n1 2001
3
thank all of the outgoing board members who have served and supported LLT so well
during its first few years: David Bickerton, Diane Birckbichler, Robert Bley-Vroman, Jim
Cummins, Otmar Foelsche, Nina Garrett, Kazumi Hatasa, Debra Hoven, and Ted Yao.
They have undoubtedly contributed to its present stature and success.
We are also pleased to announce that starting with this issue, readers will have the option
of downloading PDF files of individual articles, as well as a PDF file containing the
entire issue. The editors would like to thank our Editorial Assistant, Pamela DaGrossa,
and our Web Production Editor, Dennie Hoopingarner, for making this opportunity a
reality.
We hope you will continue to support our journal by sending us manuscripts,
commentaries, and reviews, and by taking out a free subscription. We look forward to
seeing you again in May 2001, when Volume 5, Number 2 appears. It will be a special
issue of LLT on "Computer-Assisted Language Testing," to be edited by Irene
Thompson.
Dorothy Chun, Irene Thompson,
& Mark Warschauer, Editors
About LLT | Subscribe | Information for Contributors | Masthead | Archives
