Language Learning & Technology v5n1 2001
4
Language Learning & Technology
Vol. 5, No. 1, January 2001, pp. 4-10
ON THE NET
Sites for Soar(ing) Eyes
Jean W. LeLoup
SUNY Cortland
Robert Ponterio
SUNY Cortland
Recent counts by search engines tell us that the Internet currently boasts well over a
billion Web sites, most of which could disappear tomorrow and leave it much the better.
On the other hand, because of its worldwide nature and the wide variety of Web pages
created each day in the languages that we teach, the Internet is a potential gold mine of
sites that may be of use to foreign language (FL) professionals. Finding the shining
nuggets hidden among all the pebbles can represent a daunting challenge to the
experienced surfer, let alone the techno-newbie. The task is worthwhile because access to
authentic materials and target language (TL) input available on the Internet is
unprecedented, and FL teachers can find much to supplement and support their curricula.
Among the resources readily available on the net are: TL newspapers and magazines,
tourism information, museums, home pages of educational, governmental, and
commercial institutions in TL countries, live radio and television shows in the TL, and
even lesson plans created to employ the aforementioned resources. So many resources, so
little time.
Where to begin? Happily, several FL professionals and individuals with an interest in this
field of study have undertaken the enormous task of creating pages that pull together
numerous sites that serve as wonderful ancillaries to FL teaching materials. These people
have actually taken the time to categorize these sites by subject areas and interest: bless
them! Thus, when you are looking for materials and information on the Web to use in
your FL classes, rather than reinventing the wheel, you can just go to one of these
"collection sites" as we call them. A good number of worthwhile collection sites exist due
to a cadre of professionals or aficionados who truly care about providing good
information and a service to their colleagues and fellow human beings. One man's ceiling
is another man's floor, so there can be no one right way to organize a collection or to
evaluate the potential value of a Web page. A variety of collection sites can help meet our
own variety of needs and satisfy our different preferences. This column will mention
several such sites and highlight one in particular as a very good example and resource for
FL educators.
Language Learning & Technology v5n1 2001
5
Some collection sites have a particular theme or focus.  For example, COMFM boasts
links to 4685 live radio stations and 401 live television stations. Organizing live audio
and video media by type and by country can help the teacher track down programming of
particular interest.
The Linguist List: Dictionaries provides links to dictionaries and dictionary projects in a
wide range of languages from Albanian to Urdu.
Language Links is a good example of a collection site intended for foreign language
teachers. Its focus is materials for use by teachers and learners of languages offered at the
University of Wisconsin. This is important as an indication that the site has the specific
needs of such learners in mind. Of particular interest is an area entitled Teaching with the
Web. This section offers Web activities, including language-specific activities, teaching
resources, online publications on the topic, and links to learning centers and associations. 
Language Links is maintained by Lauren Rosen.
Language Learning & Technology v5n1 2001
6
The UR-CVANET GLOBAL VILLAGE is a joint project of the University of Richmond
and Central Virginia's Community On Line.  This site has collections of links for 12
languages (including Arabic, Chinese, Esperanto, French, German, Italian, Japanese,
Portuguese, Russian, and Spanish), a multilingual resource link and a section on FL
pedagogy.  Janice B. Paulsen is the Webmaster.
The VCU Trail Guide at Virginia Commonwealth University is a fine example of a
collection maintained by a language department at a university. The Trail Guide theme
works nicely as it shows us the way to a small but useful sample of materials.  It also
includes some additional "collection" sites, as well as links to language studies
Language Learning & Technology v5n1 2001
7
information and language/literature sites for the FLs offered at the university.  Robert
Godwin-Jones maintains this well organized site.
These sites are just a few examples of those that are available to the FL professional.
Selecting the most useful is often as much a matter of personal taste as of intrinsic quality
or completeness. Where one teacher may appreciate having a very extensive selection of
links, another may prefer to see a more limited collection of only the very best or most
appropriate sites that may provide a better fit with the FL curriculum. Another may put a
premium on clear and informative critiques of each link. Attention to appearance may be
an important consideration for some, while others may care little for style if the substance
offers high quality or extensive volume. We recommend trying out many collections to
find those that best fit our own particular preferences. To this end, our own FLTEACH
resource site includes a collection of collections that might serve as a practical starting
point in this search.
Sample "Collection Site" In-Depth
Anyone who has spent any time at all on FLTEACH (Foreign Language Teaching
Forum) is familiar with the name Eva Easton. Many wonder if she lives inside her
computer, making frequent forays onto the Internet in search of sites that will answer a
plea for help. With amazing alacrity, Ms. Easton responds to posts requesting information
on any number of FL-related topics with suggested sites offering possible answers. She is
most generous with her assistance in finding information, and she is clearly a wizard at
locating resources. Fortunately for us FL teachers, she has harnessed much of this
expertise and information and placed it on the web at http:// le ston.com/.
Below is a slightly more in-depth description of Eva Easton's site. This should give you
an idea of how a number of "collection sites" are organized and the possibilities they may
offer.
Language Learning & Technology v5n1 2001
8
English Online is an extensive portion of the site.  Here Ms. Easton has gathered
materials for learning and teaching English that encompass just about any category
imaginable, addressing language, culture, pedagogy, and a broad range of syllabus topics.
Subcategories under this portion are
Business English
World English
Etymology
Grammar
Reading
Writing
Speaking
Pronunciation
Listen to English
Vocabulary
Quizzes - Tests
English for Speakers of ...
English for Specific Purposes
ESL Websites
Why Study Languages
Search Engines
Classroom Management
Methods ...
Lesson Plans
Mail Lists
Distance Ed
Internet for Teachers
FL Bookstores - Publishers
Language Humor
Art
Banking - Currency
Calendars - Clocks
County Studies
Flags 
Maps
Geography
Government:  U.S.
Government: World 
History
Holidays
Law - Medicine
Libraries - Museums
Live Cams
Medicine
Military
Movies - Scripts
Music ~ Lyrics
News(papers)
Politics
Radio - TV
Religion
Science - Math
Sports
Telephone
Travel
Weather
Language Learning & Technology v5n1 2001
9
In addition to the English language resources, the Languag s Online portion of the site
offers an extensive listing of other languages:
Albanian English Italian Russian
Chinese French Latin Spanish
Croatian German Polish Other Languages
There are materials for teaching and learning for all of the above languages. Many of
these language sections include links to sites on the language itself; reading and listening
to the language; movies and music in the language; sites with information about the
history/geography, government/politics, business, religion, art, famous people, literature,
holidays of the TL people; quizzes, dictionaries, and e-mail lists for teachers and other
aficionados of the particular language.
Under the methods rubric for both English and other languages, the Language
Classroom section includes links to more useful information, including the following
subcategories:
Why study languages? 
Education 
Quizzes 
Create Online Quizzes 
Lesson Plans 
Teaching Methods 
Multiple Intelligences / TPRS 
Home Schooling 
Key Pals / Mail Lists 
Materials for ESL
Classroom Management 
Grade-Keeping 
Standards & Testing 
Cheating 
Schools Worldwide 
Teacher Exchange 
Distance Education 
Internet for Teachers 
FL Bookstores / Publishers
Of special interest here is Why study languages, a topic not found on many other
collection sites. We FL teachers are frequently called upon to defend our position in the
school curriculum to superintendents, principals, parents, and our own students. The links
gathered here provide much "ammunition" for this fight. In particular, the ADFL/MLA
brochure, entitled "Knowing Other Languages Brings Opportunities" can be downloaded
here.
Also going beyond the collection of materials, a section on Teachi g Methods seeks to
help the FL teacher develop professionally. Here Eva Easton presents links to
Language Learning & Technology v5n1 2001
10
information on, and examples of, methods and techniques for FL instruction. The needs
of beginning teachers are addressed in particular, and we all know that helping new
teachers survive those critical first years should be one of our goals. Those interested in
multiple intelligences, distance education, particular approaches to FL instruction, and
even home schooling will also find additional links to enable further exploration.
Finally, recognizing that the FL teacher is almost by nature a world traveler, The
Independent Traveler Online s a final section that provides links to important travel
information such as
Airlines 
Cars, Trains, Subways 
Dorms & Hotels 
Embassies 
Languages 
Maps 
Media 
Medical 
Money 
Packing 
Passports
New York City
Italy
Clearly, Eva Easton’s site has much to offer FL teachers and other FL aficionados.  It is a
collection of hundreds of sites that educators can use in their classroom as part of
projects, as ancillaries to textbook materials, to further their own knowledge, to assist
students in their FL learning.  “Collection sites” -- those we have mentioned here and the
numerous others that exist -- are a real boon to busy FL teachers who would like to be
able to find this information but do not have the time or do not yet know how to search
for it on the net. Even those of us with expertise in tracking down those hard to find
jewels can benefit from the efforts of our colleagues. Our thanks goes to Ms. Easton and
to all the others who have done so much of our work for us.  We can now virtually soar to
new heights, launched, as it were, from the shoulders of giants.
Home |About LLT | Subscribe | Information for Contributors | Masthead | Archives
