Language Learning & Technology September 2001, Vol. 5, Num. 3
http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num3/from_the_spec_issue_ed.html p. 2-3
Copyright ª  2001, ISSN 1094-3501 2
From the Special Issue Editors
This Special Issue of Language Learning and Technology has been in the making for
many months. We feel it has been worth the effort, and hope that our readers do, too. If
you've never used corpus tools in your teaching or learning, we hope that the Special
Issue inspires you to investigate further (the research bibliography that has been
launched with this special edition should be helpful to this end). If you have been
working with this kind of resource for some time, we are sure that you will find articles
here that will help you extend and deepen your understanding of the potential of corpora
and corpus tools.
The Articles
There are nine major articles in this edition of LLT -- making it one of the largest that
the Journal has produced -- and they cover four broad areas of interest to language
teachers and students. These concern the kinds of corpus that are most helpful for
language learning and teaching; practical applications of corpus resources in special
purposes teaching; using corpora in grammar teaching and language awareness raising;
and finally the value of parallel aligned corpora (multi-lingual resources which are
receiving growing interest in teaching and translation studies) in language learning and
teaching.
In the first section, Lee's piece on problems that can arise for teachers and researchers
who want to use the British National Corpus (BNC) is of particular relevance as his
account of the problematic area of genre offers a comprehensive guide to the topic. The
article is not uncontentious, however, as is made clear by Aston's response in which,
while valuing Lee's contribution, he also points out reasons why the BNC has been
structured as it is, and gives insights into how teachers can make fuller use of what it
offers.
Following this account of issues associated with one of the most important English
language corpora, Kennedy and Miceli discuss some of the ways in which language
learners can benefit from the investigative approaches which corpus use encourages in
language education, and Thompson and Tribble outline a practical application of corpus
research methods in helping learners gain mastery of a central skill in academic writing
-- citation. These two articles are followed by a further practically oriented paper in
which Curado demonstrates the value of corpus informed teaching and learning in ESP,
in particular in relation to vocabulary development.
The third section of the Special Issue considers matters more closely related the
research/language teaching interface. Mollering's article on German modal particles
provides a very clear account of ways in which a corpus can be used in language
description. Murphy's paper on "emergent texture" demonstrates how a corpus based
approach can provide significant information about interlanguage development. Finally,
in section four there are two papers dealing with applications of parallel aligned corpora.
Wang's innovative piece shows that what might be considered a purely academic
resource can offer learners very real benefits, and St.John's article provides a neat
demonstration of the practical relevance of parallel corpus informed teaching with
beginner students of German.
Christopher Tribble and Michael Barlow From the Special Issue Editors
Language Learning & Technology 3
The Columns
In On the Net, Jean LeLoup and Robert Ponterio provide guidance for "Finding Song
Lyrics Online," a wonderful way to bring authentic language materials into the
classroom for use in learning vocabulary, grammar, and topical information. And in
keeping with our Special Issue topic, Robert Godwin-Jones brings us information on
"Tools and Trends in Corpora Use for Teaching and Learning" in his Emerging
Technologies column.
The Journal's sponsors are key in publicizing and otherwise supporting the journal.
Please take a moment to find out what these organizations do and what are contributing
to the field of language learning and technology under Announcements.
Jennifer Leeman, the Reviews Editor, brings us reviews of three books and one software
program this issue. John Lawler reviews Botley, Mcenery, & Wilson's Multilingual
Corpora in Teaching and Research; József Horváth comments on Patterns and
Meanings: Using Corpora for English Language Research and Teaching by Alan
Partington; and Paul Thompson reviews Exploring Academic English: A Workbook for
Student Essay Writing. Finally, Randi Reppen appraises MonoConc Pro and WordSmith
Tools, software programs which are mentioned throughout this issue.
As editors, we have had the difficult task of selecting from a large number of
contributions -- an indication of itself of the growing interest in this area. However, we
have had wonderful support from the LLT team -- in particular Pamela DaGrossa,
Managing Editor, and, of course, the Journal's General Editor Mark Warschauer, so
many thanks to them. Also, we wish to thank the anonymous reviewers who have so
generously given their time and professional insight. We hope that they (and you) feel
that this special edition justifies their support.
Christopher Tribble
King's College London University (UK)
School of Linguistics and Applied Language Studies, Reading University (UK)
Michael Barlow
Rice University, Texas (USA)
