Language Learning & Technology vol5num1 2001
32
Language Learning & Technology
Vol. 5, No. 1, January 2001, pp. 32-36
REVIEW OF THE INTERNET
The Internet
(from the series Resource Books for Teachers, Alan
Maley, Ed.)
Scott Windeatt, David Hardisty, & David Eastment
2000
ISBN 0-19-4372235
US $13.95
136 pp.
Oxford University Press
New York, NY, USA
Reviewed by Peter Lafford, Arizona State University
Many scholars have argued in favor of using content-based materials to teach a second
language, rather than focusing narrowly on the acquisition of particular structures (Genesee,
1987; Guntermann, 1993; Terrell, 1986). While textbooks and readers offer selected articles
and topics as a basis for language-learning activities and discussions, the Internet and the
World Wide Web provide a virtually inexhaustible source of authentic target-culture
materials, infinitely responsive to the interests of the student. The challenge for the instructor
is to come up with well-defined activities, and to locate appropriate Web sites for student
interaction. The Internet, in the Oxford series R ource Books for Teachers, provides a
practical manual for the language teacher who wants to use the Internet as a resource in the
classroom. Recognizing that teachers' reactions to the Internet range from anxiety and
confusion to uncritical enthusiasm with similarly disparate Internet ability, Windeatt,
Hardisty, and Eastment seek to provide material useful to both the novice and the expert.
There is a corresponding Web site (http://www.oup.com/elt/rbt.internet) with downloadable
worksheets, quarterly updates of the links and information in the book, and opportunities for
feedback.
In the Introduction, the authors explain their perception that the feature which sets the
Internet apart from more traditional CALL is that the Internet is a "medium of exploration"
(p. 6). As a result, the activities they provide are designed to encourage exploration by
students and teachers while also offering language practice and opportunities to refine web-
related computer skills. This is a complex undertaking, but one which is broken into logical
and manageable steps in this volume.
Language Learning & Technology vol5num1 2001
33
In addition to establishing the foundation for the rest of the book, the Introduction considers
methodological issues such as lesson management and the incorporation of both pre-
computer and post-computer activities. According to the authors, pre-computer work
includes the use of advanced organizers (Ausubel, 1968; Terrell, 1991) to focus on upcoming
lexical items and grammatical structures so that they are more likely to be "noticed" in the
input (Schmidt, 1990), and, therefore, have a better chance of becoming "intake" (Corder,
1967). Prior to beginning the computer work, instructors are also encouraged to demonstrate
exactly what students will encounter and what they will be expected to do. The authors also
recommend the use of written instructions to clarify procedures and expectations for
activities, and they emphasize the importance of considering student interaction patterns
which arise during the completion of a given computer-based activity. Specifically,
instructors should consider whether working individually or in groups of two or three on one
computer is more appropriate for attaining the goals of a particular activity. According to the
authors, post-computer work should offer students the opportunity to take away some record
of their Internet-based work activities. For example, worksheets, or even Web page print-outs
can provide the basis for follow-up classroom activities which link the Internet activities to
the rest of the curriculum.
However, the Introduction, and the argument in favor of incorporating the Internet in second
language (L2) classes, could have been made stronger by pointing out that the Internet can
provide the foundation for the types of activities espoused by scholars of second language
acquisition. Specifically, the use of e-mail, bulletin boards, and Internet relay chat can
provide opportunities for output and interaction (including negotiation of meaning and the
use of communicative strategies), which are currently believed to promote SLA (Long, 1981,
1996; Pica, 1987, 1994, 1996; Swain 1985, 1993, 1995). Similarly, the Internet offers a
wealth of authentic materials which can provide learners with input.
The rest of the book is divided into three chapters. Chapter 1, "Core Internet Skills," provides
activities designed to familiarize readers with search techniques and ways of organizing
information from the World Wide Web. Chapter 2, "Focus on Language," presents activities
spotlighting vocabulary and grammar. The activities in chapter 3, "Focus on language skills,"
target the four skills and include exercises which introduce intermediate and advanced L2
students to translation and interpretation techniques. The six appendices include a glossary of
Internet terms (which appear in bold on first use in the text), two instructional sections (one
concerns the Web and the other discusses the use of computers for communication), listings
and links to Internet teaching and software resources, a bibliography, and updates to the
"Activity Links" (the Web sites suggested for use in the activities in chapters 1, 2, and 3).
Each chapter introduces the focus of that unit, followed by a series of activities, conveniently
listed in the table of contents with language level and estimated time required for completion.
The activities have catchy titles such as "Tough Questions, Cross Words," "The Play's the
Thing," and "Fingers Crossed." Each activity provides a cookbook-style listing of the
following: level, time required, goals, technical requirements (e.g., equipment, software,
special knowledge), preparation required, step-by-step instructions, follow-up activities (in or
Language Learning & Technology vol5num1 2001
34
outside of class), variations (for different levels of students, numbers of computers or
different types of materials), and notes. In addition, some of the activities have a table or
worksheet for the student to fill out. The worksheet appears not only printed in the book, but
also as a downloadable Word file on the corresponding Web site. In order to save the teacher
from wrestling over any copyright issues, Oxford University Press has considerately
identified each table as "Photocopiable © Oxford University Press."
The authors have taken care to present complete, self-contained activities which can also
serve as starting points for further discussion and learning. A teacher with once-a-week
access to the computer lab could easily rely on The Internet for the weekly lab activity. Even
with more frequent access, one would have to work hard to exhaust the activities in the book.
Thirteen activities are classified as being for students at the "elementary" or "elementary and
above" levels, and another six deemed appropriate for "all" levels. Twenty-seven activities
are for "intermediate," "intermediate and above," or "intermediate and advanced," and three
are expressly "advanced" activities. Of course, regardless of the suggested level or skill-
focus, the teacher is free to tailor any activity to the individual class. For example, more
emphasis could be given to the integration of the skills, as in the Learning Scenario approach
of the National Foreign Language Standards espoused by ACTFL and other language
teachers associations. The Internet is especially useful for integrating the skills because of its
flexibility, the variety of source material (audio/written texts to be used as input), and the
multiple platforms (e-mail, bulletin boards, and Internet relay chat) that it provides for
student production and interaction with other learners and native speakers of the target
language.
One outstanding feature of the book is its clarity of writing and "jargon-less" explanations for
language teachers who may not have much experience with Internet technologies. In
addition, the volume is characterized by uncluttered, easy-to-read layouts and effective use of
font changes to highlight the infrastructure of the activities.
Written for classrooms where English is the target language, this volume will likely be useful
for L2 teachers of other languages, provided they are willing to carry out the additional
ground work required. In other words, the ideas presented in The I t rnetcan be adapted to
the teaching of almost any language, although instructors will have to find appropriate target
language Web sites and create language-specific worksheets and materials.
While this is a book explaining the wonders of the Internet, it is somewhat disappointing that
the contact information for the organizations in the appendix was not all verified before
publication, a task which could have been easily accomplished using the Internet. It is hard to
overlook that the entries for two leading language-professional organizations in the United
States, (i.e., TESOL and CALICO) are out-of-date. While the URLs are accurate, the contact
information and mailing addresses changed in July 1999 for TESOL, and in early 1998 for
CALICO. Fortunately, the authors will be able to update the information on the book's
companion Web site, where feedback and suggestions are also solicited. Another
inconvenience of the Web site is the fact that it contains only the activity links which have
Language Learning & Technology vol5num1 2001
35
changed since publication of the book, rather than all of the suggested links for the activities.
While some of the URLs provided are short and easy enough to enter manually, others are
fairly long, and thus are prone to human input errors. It would be more convenient to have
them all as links on the Web site. These minor details, however, do not detract from the
overall success of the book.
The Internet focuses specifically on how the Internet can be used in the language classroom.
Unlike Williams' (1999) The Internet for Teachers, from the popular "…for Dummies" series,
which concentrates on the technology of the Internet in teaching, and Gitsake and Taylor's
(1999) Internet English, a WWW-based intermediate conversation textbook for students, the
authors of The Internet sought to create an internet cookbook for the language teacher. Mix
the ingredients strictly according to the recipes in the book, or add a dash of your own
inspiration, and your students will have a rewarding internet-mediated L2 experience.
ABOUT THE REVIEWER
Peter A. Lafford is Director of the Language Computing Laboratory in the Department of
Languages and Literatures at Arizona State University. He taught French, Spanish, and
English as a Second Language before becoming involved with CALL in 1984. Since that
time, he has been involved in software development and language-learning technology. He
has published articles and reviews on computer-assisted language learning and CALL
software and has made numerous presentations on CALL and the use of technology in
language teaching.
E-mail: Peter.Lafford@asu.edu
REFERENCES
Ausubel, D. (1968). Educational Psychology: A cognitive view. New York: Holt, Rinehart
and Winston.
Corder, S. P. (1967). The Significance of Learners' Errors. International Review of Applied
Linguistics, 5,160-170.
Genesee, F. (1987). Learning through Two Languages. New York: Newbury House.
Gitsake, C., & Taylor, R. P. (1999). Internet English: WWW-Based Communication
Activities. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Guntermann, G. (1993). Foreign Language Teachers and the Challenge of Cultural
Competence. In B. Lafford & M. Shockey (Eds.), Culture and Content: Perspectives on the
Acquisition of Cultural Competence in the Foreign Language Classroom (pp. 1-5). Tempe,
AZ: Southwest Conference on Language Teaching.
Language Learning & Technology vol5num1 2001
36
Long, M. (1981). Input, Interaction and Second Language Acquisition. Annals of the NY
Academy of Sciences, 379, 259-278.
Long, M. (1996). The role of the linguistic environment in second language acquisition. In
W. C. Ritchie & T. K. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of Second Language Acquisition (Vol. 26,
pp. 413-468). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Pica, T. (1987). Interlanguage Adjustments as an Outcome of NS-NNS Negotiation
Interaction. Language Learning, 38, 45-73.
Pica, T. (1994). Questions from the language class: Research perspectives. TESOL Quarterly,
28(1), 49-81.
Pica, T. (1996). Do second language learners need negotiation? International Review of
Applied Linguistics, 34(1), 1-19.
Schmidt, R. W. (1990). The Role of Consciousness in Second Language Learning. Applied
Linguistics, 11(2), 129-158.
Swain, M. (1985). Communicative Competence: Some Roles of Comprehensible Input and
Comprehensible Output in its Development. In S. Gass & C. Madden (Eds.), Input in Second
Language Acquisition (pp. 235-253). Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Swain, M. (1993). The Output Hypothesis. T  Canadian Modern Language Review, 50,
158-164.
Swain, M. (1995). Three functions of output in second language learning. In G. Cook & B.
Seidlhofer (Eds.), Principle and Practice in Applied Linguistics: Studies in Honour of H. G.
Widdowson (pp. 125-144). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Terrell, T. (1986). Acquisition in the Natural Approach: The Binding/Access Framework.
Modern Language Journal, 70(3), 213-227.
Terrell, T. (1991). The Role of Grammar in a Communicative Approach. Modern Language
Journal, 75(1), 52-63.
Williams, B. (1999). The Internet for Teachers (3rd ed.). Foster City, CA: Hungry Minds
(formerly IDG Books Worldwide).
About LLT | Subscribe | Information for Contributors | Masthead | Archives
