Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
166
 Language Learning & Technology
Vol. 5, No. 1, January 2001, pp. 166-201
CAN SOFTWARE SUPPORT CHILDREN'S VOCABULARY DEVELOPMENT?
Julie Wood
Harvard University
ABSTRACT
A number of software programs on the market claim to foster literacy
development. However, we know little about the pedagogical underpinnings of
such products, particularly the extent to which they are aligned with current
research for both L1 and L2 learners. This study "lifts the lid off" 16 well-
reviewed software products designed for elementary grade students -- those
products that make explicit claims about developing students' lexical knowledge
and those that do not. The study also examines the potential of technology (e.g.,
hypertext, animations) to enhance vocabulary learning.
The following guidelines, derived from research, were used to examine each
product. Does instruction relate the new to the known? Does it promote active in-
depth processing? Does it provide multiple exposures of new words? Does it
teach students to be strategic readers? And does it promote additional reading?
Findings indicated that many products that made no explicit claims about
fostering vocabulary learning, in fact, incorporated more guidelines than many
that made explicit claims. Those in the latter group often merely varied a drill and
practice routine rather than helping students really knowa word. Findings also
indicated that the potential of technology to help students understand word
meanings has yet to be fully exploited.
… anybody who writes down to children is simply wasting ... time. You have to
write up, not down. Children are demanding … Children love words that give
them a hard time, provided they are in a context that absorbs their attention. --E.
B. White (1969)
INTRODUCTION
Literacy experts share the belief that vocabulary knowledge and the ability to comprehend
text are inextricably linked -- that the breadth and depth of a student's vocabulary is a key
predictor of his or her ability to understand a wide range of texts (e.g., Anderson & Freebody,
1981; Thorndike, 1973). This is true for both native speakers (L1) of English and second
Language (L2) learners (Coady, 1993; Stoller & Grabe, 1993).
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
167
In today's classrooms, vocabulary instruction is increasingly supplemented by software
products, yet little is known about the underlying teaching strategies employed by these
products or the nature of the vocabulary they present. The present study represents an
extensive analysis of both the underlying teaching strategies employed by a variety of
software products and the kinds of words they present to L1 and L2 students.
How can software packages and their potential impact on vocabulary development be
assessed objectively? In this study I establish criteria for the effectiveness of vocabulary
teaching and evaluate samples of available software chosen for their potential effectiveness
given existing research. I have also examined the character and grade levels of vocabulary
words presented in these products.
In this paper, I present the findings from a content analysis of 16 software products, designed
for students in third to fifth grade, which have been highly recommended by teachers and
other proponents of educational technology. Because these introduce a substantial number of
new vocabulary words, they lend themselves to intensive examination. I have focused on
grades 3 through 5 because traditionally, vocabulary development begins to play an
important role in reading comprehension during this period; in third grade the instructional
emphasis shifts from decoding to the reading of more complex narrative and expository
passages.
The number of software products on the market is growing exponentially. In 1996, a record-
breaking 693 educational software titles were released ("The Bright Future of Children's
Software," 1997). In reviewing 16 software products for this study I have tried to "lift the lid"
off each and peer inside, applying a literacy perspective. In so doing, I have tried to discern
the elaborate webs that lie beneath the surface "flash": here a connection to semantically-
related words to describe Ancient Rome; there a connection to dialogue from Charl tte's
Web. What sorts of vocabulary words do these products emphasize? What sort of connective
tissue is used to connect vast networks of ideas? What sort of support structures, if any, are in
place for learners who hope to increase their vocabulary by engaging with these products?
This study was also driven by my desire to understand the relationship between what
computer advocates tell us (and what many of us believe intuitively) about the potential for
software products that can broaden our understanding of the world and what software
companies actually deliver. By taking a penetrating look at this relationship, determining the
ways in which software can contribute to vocabulary learning, and in what ways it loses its
pedagogical bearings, we can better advise the designers of such products. Given the
tremendous increase in the use of computers and educational software in classrooms, there is
much at stake. It is urgent that the literacy community accept responsibility for the critical
evaluation of the tools that teachers will use to help teach the next generation of children to
read.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
168
I synthesize the findings of this content analysis with regard to the nature of the vocabulary
being taught, and I systematically investigate the extent to which the explicit and implicit
vocabulary instruction reflects research findings about effective teaching strategies.
While my analysis offers a window on the nature of the words presented via software as
receptive vocabulary (through reading and listening), their level of difficulty, and the
pedagogical underpinnings of each product, an evaluation of the efficacy of each product is
more difficult and beyond the scope of this study. At this preliminary stage of analysis, we
can only speculate about each product's potential for enhancing vocabulary development, on
the basis of the data derived from a close examination of each product.
The following three research questions were the focus of this study:
1. Explicit pedagogical strategies. What explicit strategies for teaching vocabulary are
used by 6 out of 16 products in this study? How consistent are these strategies with
those recommended by the literacy community for developing vocabulary?
2. Implicit pedagogical strategies. What implicit strategies for teaching vocabulary are
used by 10 out of 16 products in this study? How consistent are these strategies with
those recommended by the literacy community for developing vocabulary?
3. Innovative qualities of media. In what ways can innovative, media-based teaching
strategies (e.g., hypertext, animations) contribute to vocabulary instruction in all 16
products in this study?
In examining each research question, I have drawn upon my work as an elementary school
teacher, reading consultant, developer and author of materials (both print-based and
multimedia) for educational publishers, and my academic studies. In addition, working with
reading-disabled students as Director of the Harvard Literacy Laboratory has intensified my
quest to devise rational ways to evaluate the plethora of educational software on the market.
By using empirical evidence about literacy learning as the main criteria, one can make
knowledgeable decisions about which software products are likely to both motivate students
and support their development as readers and writers.
BACKGROUND TO THE STUDY
Theoretical Framework
The interactionist view of language processing, which draws heavily on Piaget's (1971)
theory of accommodation, guides my research. This theory posits that children construct
meaning by assimilating information into their existing schemata as well as by
accommodating existing schemata to new knowledge. Piaget's definition of schema also
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
169
applies to the reading process: To comprehend texts, readers must integrate new knowledge
into a network of prior knowledge (e.g., Anderson & Pearson, 1984; Wilson & Anderson,
1986). Thus, reading is an active process in which the reader interacts with text and
constructs meaning, making sense of new information by relating it to the known.
How Does Activating Readers' Schemas Improve Their Comprehension?
Wilson and Anderson (1986) hypothesize that activating schemas aids the reader by allowing
him or her to analyze print while using prior knowledge to construct meaning from written
text. In essence, a schema "provides ideational scaffolding -- text fits into slots within the
schema, directs allocation of attention, enables inferential elaboration, allows orderly
searches of memory, facilitates editing and summarizing, and permits inferential
reconstruction" (Wilson & Anderson, 1986, pp. 35-36). Thus, we can infer that ideational
scaffolding also aids the reader in vocabulary development -- that new words are assimilated
into existing slots within the readers' schema allowing for vocabulary growth which enhances
readers' ability to comprehend text.
Reading and Language as Developmental Processes
Vocabulary development is a dynamic process. Current educational theory holds that reading
and language arts are ongoing developmental processes, shaped and molded by both home
and school environments. According to Carroll (1977), language comprehension must be
central to any discussion of reading comprehension. Further, Carroll asserts, the acquisition
of vocabulary, language, and literacy cannot be viewed as separate events; together they form
the basis of a synergistic process in which language development provides a foundation for
vocabulary development, which in turn stimulates cognitive growth.
Dynamic Nature of Word Knowledge
What do we mean when we say a child knows a word? Is it enough for children to be able to
use a new word in a sentence and provide a definition? Stahl (1985, 1986) has identified
three levels of word mastery: (a) association processing (which involves introducing a
synonym for the new word or showing how it relates to a particular text); (b) comprehension
processing (which helps students demonstrate their understanding of a new word through
activities, e.g., finding an antonym, filling in blanks with the appropriate word, classifying
the word -- in short, demonstrating an understanding beyond rote memorization); and (c)
generation processing (which involves using a word in a novel way that reflects deep
understanding of its meaning). Within Stahl's framework, generation processing is the most
cognitively challenging since it requires a student to retrieve a new word spontaneously and
use it correctly in a novel context, a much more difficult task than reciting a definition.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
170
The Debate About Effective Vocabulary Teaching
The argument over the most effective vocabulary teaching strategy has been referred to as the
"fertility versus futility debate" (cf. Baumann & Kame'enui, 1991). Advocates of fertile
vocabulary instruction cite several empirical studies suggesting the greater efficacy of direct
instruction. Those on the futile side of the debate argue in favor of vocabulary development
within a broader educational framework that provides opportunities for students to map word
meanings onto existing schemas (e.g., Nagy, Anderson, & Hermann, 1987).
In this study, I followed in the tradition of Chall, Snow, Barnes, Chandler, Goodman,
Hemphill, & Jacobs (1982) who advocate teaching practices that combine both direct
instruction of unfamiliar words and incidental learning of vocabulary in natural contexts.
Chall et al. argue that neither explicit instruction of a specific subset of word meanings nor
incidental learning of vocabulary through literacy practices, such as extensive reading, is a
sufficient strategy for vocabulary learning when used exclusively. Instead, rich learning
environments that promote deep understandings of words and their semantic relationships are
best created by applying both approaches in concert. For this reason, I have paid special
attention to products that have successfully combined these two approaches in thoughtful
ways.
Implications of the Research for L2 Learners
Many experts in second language acquisition lament the fact that few experts have turned
their attention to the relationship between vocabulary learning and comprehension
(Bensoussan & Laufer, 1984; Coady, 1993; Meara, 1980, 1984). Recently, however, several
experts concur that there are many parallels in language learning -- specifically related to
theory and instructio -- between L1 and L2 students. Such practices include teaching students
how to figure out words in context, providing multiple exposures to new words in a variety
of contexts, and explicit instruction of core vocabulary (Coady, 1993). Further, many experts
now believe that, as with L1 learners, L2 readers learn best through the interactive model of
reading, which involves both a top-down and bottom-up processing model. This model
provides students with the tools they need to decode words and retrieve their meaning at the
bottom-up level and interpret what they read through a top-down process. As studies have
shown with L1 readers, proficient readers are more adept in constructing meaning from text
(Coady, 1993) than those who struggle with decoding. As Stanovich (1986, cited in Coady,
1993) explains, good readers can devote more of their attention to cognitive processes than
struggling readers because they automatically recognize words and have greater lexical
knowledge, thereby increasing their understanding of texts. In sum, experts advocate
increased emphasis on vocabulary teaching for both native and non-native speakers of
English, using both implicit and explicit teaching strategies (Stoller & Grabe, 1993).
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
171
Establishing Evaluative Criteria
Working within the interactionist view of language processing, I have developed five criteria
for evaluating the nature of the vocabulary instruction in each software product in my study
(Appendix A). In developing my criteria I have synthesized the research findings on
vocabulary and reading comprehension, drawing heavily from the work of Baumann and
Kame'enui (1991), Beck and McKeown (1991), Lipson and Wixson (1991), Nagy (1989),
and Stahl and Fairbanks (1986). Analysis of these studies and other experimental data
suggest that particular strategies are more successful than others.
Guideline 1: Does it relate the new to the known?
Guideline 2: Does it promote active, in-depth processing? This includes (a) association
processing, (b) comprehension processing, and (c) generation processing.
Guideline 3: Does it provide multiple exposures of new words?
Guideline 4: Does it teach students to be strategic readers?
Guideline 5: Does it promote additional reading?
RESEARCH DESIGN FOR A CONTENT ANALYSIS
Overview of the Software Products in My Sample
I included 16 software products in my study, a number large enough for purposes of
reliability, yet consistent with the time and resource constraints of a paper. It is important to
note that all these titles are still commercially available as of this writing, although some
have been updated.
I divided the 16 titles into two different categories as follows:
Direct-Approach Group. Programs whose publishers make explicit claims about
vocabulary instruction (n=6), presumably for native English speakers. These products
include a variety of approaches, such as browsing through an interactive dictionary,
studying word origins, and learning grammar.
Indirect-Approach Group. Programs that make no xplicit claims about teaching
vocabulary, but do incorporate unfamiliar words in thematically organized environments
in children's literature, science, and social studies (n=10).
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
172
METHODOLOGY
Process for Selecting Products
I wanted to sample the entire field. In so doing, I reviewed over 40 potential software titles
before making final selections for each category. The process of selecting a representative
sample by previewing a wide range of titles allowed me to establish the following criteria: (a)
appropriateness for the target age group; (b) the publisher's overall claims about the skills
they purport to teach; and (c) outstanding reviews given by impartial publications such as
The Computer Museum Guide to the Best Software for Kids (Miranker & Elliott, 1995) and
Children's Software Revue. S ch reviews, which often take into account children's responses
to a particular piece of software, also served as a filter for eliminating products that may be
educationally sound but inherently boring. That is, the reviewers have already evaluated each
product's "kid appeal." Let me add, however, that the process was not completely
straightforward; although some products appeared to be strong candidates for my study at
first, upon closer examination I rejected them for reasons such as not presenting enough
potentially new words, an overwhelming number of navigational options, or a propensity for
crashing. And unfortunately, given that the software was designed for L1 vocabulary
learners, I was unable to analyze the 16 products from the standpoint of English language
learners.
Process for Selecting Target Words
From each software product in the Direct-Approach Group, I randomly selected a subset of
36 representative target words. I believe this number is high enough to ensure adequate
coverage but low enough to be manageable within the scope of this study.
The words I selected for each product represent a subset of those that are highlighted (by the
publisher) within on-screen text. In each case, I made a final selection after extensive
exploration of the product to determine its scope and the mechanisms through which it
introduces new words (see App ndix B). In Midnight Rescue! for example, I first played
several rounds of the game and examined support material (i.e., the "Hard Words" icon that
serves as a glossary). Then I selected 36 highlighted words (e.g., evidence, tournament) from
comprehension passages that are central to the game. This procedure allowed me to
approximate a typical student experience and select a subset of the words the student would
be likely to encounter.
Selecting software in the Indirect-Approach Group was more complex, since target words
have not always been highlighted by the publisher. For products that do contain ighlighted
words I proceeded as with the Direct-Approach Group. For products that do not contain
highlighted words, I systematically analyzed the thematic content and selected 36 lexically
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
173
challenging words that are supported by online text and support material (see Appendix B).
In Planetary Taxi, for example, I first played four games which allowed me to access
information about each planet and the solar system. Next, I examined content-specific words
(e.g., Venus, gravity) which are contextualized through the informational passages students
would be expected to read in order to deliver their "passengers" to the right planets. In
addition to content-specific vocabulary words, I also selected several general vocabulary
words (e.g., temperature, diameter) which are also emphasized in the accompanying
material.
Determining the Level of Difficulty of Each Target Word
Before attempting to understand how each word was taught, it was necessary to examine the
nature of each of the 576 target words and determine its level of difficulty by consulting
these word lists:
1. The Dale List of 3,000 Familiar Words (Chall & Dale, 1995) which lists the words
that teachers believe can be read and understood by 80% of children in fourth grade.
2. The Ginn Word Book for Teachers (Johnson, Moe, & Baumann, 1983), which
categorizes 9,000 words according to grade level (1-6), based on difficulty and
frequency of use in texts and oral language. I have used the "textbook ratings" as they
are more closely applicable to educational software than ratings from storybooks and
speech.
3. The Living Word Book (Dale & O'Rourke, 1981), a word difficulty measure which
classifies 44,000 words according to grade level (4-12). This resource proved
particularly valuable for examining words with multiple meanings. For example, the
word keep, a target word in the Macmillan Multimedia Dictionary, when used as a
verb is rated at the fourth grade level; however, when ke p is us d as a noun (as in the
stronghold of a castle), it is rated at the 12th grade level -- eight levels higher!
First, I recorded the ratings recommended by these word lists for all potential target words in
all 16 products to establish whether they are likely to be unfamiliar at a particular grade level
(see Appendixes C1-C16). Second, I described the instructional presentation of each target
word using the Taxonomy of Vocabulary Teaching (see Appendixes D1 and D2). Third, I
analyzed each target word's instructional presentation according to the Criter a for
Evaluating Teaching Strategies in Selected Software Products (Appendix A). Last, I
analyzed the qualitative ratings from the criteria evaluation scale to determine the extent to
which the software products in both the Direct-Approach Group and the Indirect-Approach
Group are consistent with recommended strategies for teaching vocabulary.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
174
Reliability of Coding
I did all the coding for the products in this study. To assess external reliability for my results
on both the Taxonomy of Vocabulary Teaching and the Criteria for Evaluating Teaching
Strategies, a second coder, Kelly Hasson (an experienced elementary school teacher and
recent graduate of the Harvard Graduate School of Education Master's program), also
evaluated approximately one third of the software products in each category (n=5), and one
third (n=12) of all selected target words, using criteria identical to mine. The first interrater
reliability was 0.51, using Cohen's Kappa, which was applied to an agreement matrix to
adjust for the factor of chance agreement when determining reliability (Bakeman & Gottman,
1986). However, analysis of the agreement matrix indicated systematic clusters off the
diagonal, indicating a confusion between the categories seldom and occasionally due to a
lack of sufficient distinction between the two codes. Therefore, these two categories were
collapsed and the Cohen's Kappa recalculated to produce an interrater reliability of 0.69
percent, which is within acceptable limits.
Synthesis of Coded Information
Synthesis involved (a) comparing the percentages of recommended teaching strategies
employed by products in each category and (b) examining both recommended print-based
strategies embedded in products and commonly used untested media-based strategies
(Appendix E).
Table 1: Percentages of Target Words at Each Grade Level
PRODUCT Target
Age *
Dale
List
Gr.
1
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13+ Not
liste
d
Direct-Approach Group
Let's Explore
the Farm
3-8 61% 0% 0% 8% 17% 3% 6% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 3% 3% 3%
Macmillan
Dictionary
6-12 42% 0% 0% 6% 17% 3% 14% 0% 0% 0% 8% 0% 11% 0% 0%
Recess in
Greece
7-12 8% 0% 0% 14% 14% 0% 8% 0% 6% 0% 3% 0% 6% 6% 36%
Grammar Rock6-10 39% 0% 14% 11% 11% 3% 6% 0% 6% 0% 3% 0% 0% 6% 3%
Midnight
Rescue!
7-10 11% 0% 6% 19% 17% 17% 8% 0% 19% 0% 0% 0% 3% 0% 0%
Word Attack 310-adult 6% 0% 0% 6% 8% 3% 8% 0% 14% 0% 19% 0% 17% 17% 3%
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
175
Indirect-Approach Group
Alien Tales 9-13 11% 3% 0% 14% 42% 14% 11% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 0% 6% 0%
Ancient Lands8-adult 0% 0% 0% 0% 31% 0% 14% 0% 17% 0% 11% 0% 8% 6% 14%
Encyclopedia of
Nature
8-adult 11% 3% 0% 0% 19% 3% 14% 0% 14% 0% 6% 0% 19% 3% 8%
Multimedia Bug
Book
5-10 6% 0% 0% 3% 31% 0% 11% 11% 11% 0% 17% 6% 6% 8% 8%
Planetary Taxi8 and up11% 0% 3% 9% 17% 8% 11% 0% 6% 0% 0% 0% 3% 6% 17%
Reading Search7-10 14% 0% 8% 3% 33% 0% 22% 0% 3% 0% 0% 0% 12% 6% 0%
Way Things
Work
8-adult 25% 0% 3% 0% 14% 3% 11% 0% 3% 0% 8% 0% 8% 0% 28%
What's the
Secret?
7 and up8% 0% 2% 6% 22% 0% 19% 0% 6% 0% 8% 0% 14% 8% 8%
Wrath of the
Gods
9-adult 6% 0% 0% 11% 17% 8% 8% 0% 14% 0% 3% 3% 0% 6% 25%
Zurk's
Rainforest Lab
5-9 11% 0% 8% 11% 6% 0% 3% 0% 17% 0% 3% 0% 6% 17% 17%
* As recommended by the publisher
MATERIALS
Determining a Grade Level for Each Target Word
To guide my analysis I developed the following three criteria in an attempt to resolve several
dilemmas that emerged from the data. Briefly, these included: (a) Nouns Versus Proper
Nouns, (b) Complex Target Words, and (c) Compound Words.
Analysis of Target Words
The analysis of the sample target words in this study includes a close examination of (a) the
way in which each product organizes potentially new vocabulary words, and (b) the level of
difficulty of each of 576 sample target words culled from 16 software products. (See
Appendices C1-C16 for a complete list of target words and their grade levels in each
product.)
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
176
Summary of Sample Target Word Analysis
The 576 sample target words in this study provide a prism through which to examine the
nature of vocabulary words used in educational software products currently found in today's
schools (Figure 1). Five salient patterns emerged in most of the 16 products studied.
1. Sample vocabulary words frequently reflect a wide range of levels of difficulty,
sometimes spanning as many as 13-15 grade levels within one product. In many
products, potentially new words far exceed the reading levels of the intended
audience.
2. The sample target words in four out of six products in the Direct-Approach Group are
presented without a central content area focus. In contrast, the organization of all 10
products in the Indirect-Approach Group reflect thematic relationships, typically with
hyperlinks to semantically-related words.
3. Many of the products in the Direct-Approach group emphasized general vocabulary
words (e.g., carrot, December), as opposed to products in the Indirect-Approach
Group, which often emphasized subject-specific vocabulary (e.g., discus, papyrus).
4. Many sample target words -- from products in both groups -- are either unlisted in the
published word lists used in this study or are listed at advanced levels. However,
these more obscure words are not necessarily lexically complex. Given that the
published lists draw heavily upon word frequency, which doesn't allow for individual
rates of word learning, a child who has a great interest in bugs may already have
learned names such as praying mantis (listed at grade 8), and cicada (listed at grade
13) by reading books about his or her hobby; learning these words does not represent
a task involving lexical complexity. Thus, it is unfortunate that these published lists
do not differentiate between words that are simply labels for content-specific items
and words that are in fact infrequently encountered because they refer to more
sophisticated concepts (e.g., d mocracy).
5. With the exception of Recess in Greece, sample target words in the Direct-Approach
Group tend to be more consistent with the developmental levels of the intended
audience than are those in the Indirect-Approach Group. In the latter group, 8 out of
10 products contain as many as 8-28% exotic words each.
Close examination of the sample target words provides insights about the nature and level of
difficulty of the vocabulary words used in the products in this study raises important
questions about the general utility of these words. Will an understanding of the new
vocabulary emphasized in each product serve students well in particular "domains of
knowledge" (c.f. Beck & McKeown, 1991, p. 810)? Or will trying to grasp the meanings of
these exotic words frustrate children who are not yet ready to deduce their meanings?
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
177
Moreover, critical questions remain about the way in which these sample target words are
presented to students, the availability of online scaffolding for a wide range of learners, and
the potential of multimedia to add an important dimension to vocabulary development.
RESULTS
In the present content analysis of each software product in both the Direct-Approach Group
and the Indirect-Approach Group, I evaluated the extent to which each product's underlying
pedagogy conforms to the five guidelines recommended by literacy experts.
In general, analysis of the software in the Direct-Approach Group (T ble 1) revealed an
underlying pedagogy consistent with many of the teaching strategies found in traditional
print products (e.g., rote memorization of word meanings, fill-in-the-blank puzzles, and
matching words to their definitions).
Analysis of software in the Indirect-Approach Group falls under the rubric of a more
incidental teaching model for vocabulary instruction, although in many cases direct
instruction is available through online glossaries or characters who offer word meanings.
Research has shown that children can be taught new word meanings through rote methods
involving synonyms and definitions (e.g., McKeown, Beck, Omanson, & Pople, 1985; Pany
& Jenkins, 1978; Stahl, 1983). Operating within the interactionist view of language
processing, in which a deeper understanding of words is the objective, it may be that
software products in the Indirect-Approach Group prove to be a more effective means of
achieving this goal than software in the Direct-Approach Group. However, in the case of L2
learners, one can speculate that there is great value in the repetition and immediate access to
definitions for unknown words, especially when those words are rarely used in English (cf.
Stoller & Grabe, 1993).
While a qualitative description of software in both categories in response to each guideline is
beyond the scope of this study, I would be happy to provide a detailed analysis for interested
readers.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
178
First-Order Answers to the Research Questions of Section 1
For Research Questions 1 and 2 the data are combined and distilled in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Following recommended guidelines for teaching vocabulary: Software in both
groups
As Figure 1 demonstrates, overall, products in the Indirect-Approach Group adhere more
closely to recommended literacy practices than those in the Direct-Approach Group. (See
Appendix Ffor a ranking of products according to the five recommended guidelines).
Products in both groups employ a limited number of vocabulary learning strategies, with
heavy reliance on relating the new to the known, association processing, comprehension
processing, and providing multiple exposures. Instances of activities which require deep
thinking, such as full concept knowledge (Kame'enui, Dixon, & Carmine, 1987) and
generation processing (Stahl, 1986) are rare. The same is true in regard to instances in which
these software products stimulate interest in further reading about a related topic.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
179
Research Question 3
My third research question asked: In what ways can innovative, media-based teaching
strategies (e.g., hypertext, animations) contribute to vocabulary instruction in all 16 products
this study? The most salient findings are summarized below.
Animations. Many of the animations reviewed were gratuitous in nature, attempting to
captivate children but not to illuminate word meaning: for example, a Greek statue that
comes to life and tells a joke or a flamboyant quiz show host whose speech is full of puns.
Some animations, however, played a more central role in adding visual (and often auditory)
information to word meanings. In What's the Secret?, for example, an animation is used to
show the laws of physics at work (including technical terms) in propelling a roller coaster.
Similarly, in Zurk's Rainforest Lab, nimations allow the user to "travel" from the floor of the
rainforest to the tops of trees to learn the names of the changing flora and fauna.
Video Clips of Related Information. The majority of products offered video clips that are
primarily educational in content. Such clips offer vivid demonstrations aimed at helping
children grasp sophisticated concepts. Video clips are typically accompanied by voice-over
text that elaborates a relevant theme (e.g., Planetary Taxi offers NASA footage accompanied
by a voice-over describing the features of a particular planet). When such clips are directly
related to content they make a valuable contribution that is unparalleled in print products.
Sound Components. Although many sound components merely provide entertainment value,
some are designed to foster multi-modal vocabulary learning. In the latter group, sound is
used for educational purposes; a click of the mouse causes a word to be pronounced, a
narrator to read aloud, or a character to provide a narrative thread to help the learner
contextualize the passages. The potential for this feature to reinforce vocabulary knowledge
is enormous, particularly for L2 learners and children with special needs.
Hyperlinks to Related Information. The most important, innovative feature of the software
in this study consists of hyperlinks, a radical departure from linear text. Through hyperlinks,
users are encouraged to access a wealth of related information, often in the form of icons
labeled, for example, "click here to find out more." In contrast to a traditional book format,
hyperlinks beckon readers to digress from the treatment at hand and search through related
data bases. For example, a child who explores camcorders in The Way Things Work is
offered hyperlinks to the scientific principles underlying a camcorder, related inventions, and
inventors. Such hyperlinks may promote vocabulary learning by allowing children to (1)
more readily tap into prior knowledge, (2) create semantic webs, (3) experience a new word
in a variety of contexts, and (4) take charge of their own learning by selecting the links that
satisfy their curiosity.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
180
Ability to Create One's Own Pathway Through Information. It is often through the use of
hyperlinks (above) that students have opportunities to pursue their own interests via software.
Young entomologists, for example, can search for information about specific insects in the
Multimedia Bug Book, while enthusiastic readers can select which books they'd like to be
quizzed on in Alien Tales. Thus, software can be a powerful ally for students who wish to
pursue particular topics -- learning new words, then, becomes a natural adjunct to self-
selected explorations.
The Ability to Pause, Repeat Information, or Replay Video Clips. These capabilities make
software virtually "flunk proof." Such features have great potential for teaching new words to
children who benefit from several repetitions using a variety of modalities.
Hints or Clues Related to Word Meaning. A stock device employed by many products in
this study is a character who serves as a "tour guide." These guides typically offer two
different kinds of advice, navigational and content-specific. The former is important for
finding one's way through the software, but is unrelated to word learning. The latter can
provide scaffolding for word learning by offering segues from one "scene" to another, clues
about finding more information, and explicit definitions.
Pragmatically speaking, hints and clues prevent users from becoming stuck on one task. They
can point children in the right direction and help them interpret information once they get
there.
Multimodal Presentation of Information. Pr ducts that emphasize multimodal learning,
often by combining many of the features discussed above, perhaps make the greatest
contribution to dynamic vocabulary learning. Mulitimodal features not only help keep
children actively engaged in their own learning, but also accommodate a range of learning
styles by offering several entry points: When children can see new words in context, hear
them pronounced, type them into a journal, and cut and paste an accompanying illustration
(or create their own), the potential for learning can be dramatically increased.
Online Definitions, Glossaries, or Thesauruses. These traditionally-based reference tools
are strongest when they are enhanced by voice-over readings and illustrations. As in their
print counterparts, however, there is an overreliance on words that may be significantly more
difficult than the target word.
Although these resources supply the potential for on-the-spot word learning, these tools
could be strengthened by using definitions that make greater use of analogies and other
strategies that would more effectively tap into students' prior knowledge lexical repertoires.
In sum, many of the key features these multimedia products use to scaffold the process of
gaining word knowledge hold great promise. In the words of Rose (1995), "Children … need
plenty of opportunities for guided practice with the scaffolds that will allow them to succeed
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
181
in real acts of meaning making" (p. 7). It is only through future studies involving both L1 and
L2 learners that we will be able to more accurately pinpoint the importance of the special
features found in many software products, and determine which are most effective for
vocabulary learning.
CONCLUSIONS
I have drawn three main conclusions from this study related to the nature of the 576 sample
target words in the study (both in the Direct-Approach and Indirect-Approach Groups),
overall strengths and weaknesses of the 16 product examined, and the potential of many
products in this study to scaffold students' vocabulary learning when embedded in a
supportive context.
The Nature of the Vocabulary Words Found in the Products in this Study
Six salient patterns were found in most of the 16 products studied.
1. Sample vocabulary words frequently reflect a wide range of levels of difficulty,
sometimes spanning as many as 15 grade levels within one product. In many
products, potentially new words far exceed the reading levels of the intended
audience. This approach could impede learning for L2 learners for whom learning
high-frequency words is often more beneficial than learning rare, or advanced
vocabulary (Stoller & Grabe, 1993).
2. A related problem is that although the topic may be of interest for a target age group,
a lack of lexical knowledge may prevent L2 learners from using the software in
meaningful ways.
3. The sample target words in four out of six products in the Direct-Approach Group are
presented without a central content area focus. In contrast, in the Indirect-Approach
Group all 10 products are organized to reflect thematic relationships, typically with
hyperlinks to semantically-related words.
4. Many of the products in the Direct-Approach group emphasized general vocabulary
words, as opposed to products in the Indirect-Approach Group, which often
emphasized subject-specific vocabulary.
5. Many sample target words -- from products in both groups -- are either unlisted in the
published word lists used in this study or are listed at advanced levels. However,
these more obscure words are not necessarily lexically complex. Perhaps this finding
relates to the fact that most of the products in this group are content specific in
contrast to the reading/language arts products which tend to be more general in
nature.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
182
6. With the exception of Recess in Greece, sample target words in the Direct-Approach
Group appear to be more consistent with the developmental levels of the intended
audience than are those in the Indirect-Approach Group.
Strengths and Weaknesses of the Software Products in this Study
Software products in the Indirect-Approach Group, on balance, adhere more closely to
recommended literacy practices than do those in the other group. The differences between the
two categories are particularly pronounced for three guidelines: (a) Relate the new to the
known; (b) Promote active, in-depth processing; and (c) Teach students to be strategic
readers.
Software products in both categories rely heavily on a limited range of teaching strategies.
Strategies involving definitional information about new words are the most prevalent, while
those requiring more cognitive demands are rare. Commonly used strategies involve rote
learning devices, such as matching words with definitions, answering multiple choice
questions, and filling in blanks, with few opportunities for deep processing of new words.
The Potential Contribution of Media
My analysis suggests that new technologies offer great potential to enhance vocabulary
instruction. Some capabilities are unique to technology; they cannot be accomplished through
print products. At present, however, these capabilities have yet exploited to the fullest extent.
Game-like formats, for example, can be more effective at capturing children's attention than
textbooks and workbooks; they provide external stimulation, rich graphics, and online
rewards. However, while games can provide multiple exposures to new words and activate
prior knowledge, they are often formulaic, relying heavily on gimmicks.
Hyperlinks can offer students rich opportunities to encounter new words in multiple contexts
by allowing them quick access to text and graphic. In What's the Secret? for example,
children who wish to learn more about bees can study bee stings, a bee's anatomy, and killer
bees. Such extensions, when well designed, can add great depth particularly in the area of
content-specific vocabulary words.
Devices that allow users to click on words to hear them pronounced (and sometimes
defined), can enhance understandings about new words. Such "hot spots" can be a powerful
learning tool, particularly when used in combination with other modalities. What all of the
products in this study lack, however, is a means for students to record and listen to their own
voices for further reinforcement.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
183
Animations can demonstrate the inner-workings of the human heart, and provide us with a
glimpse of life in Ancient Egypt. When animations are combined with interesting and
informative narrations, the potential for word learning is greatly increased.
New technologies can also provide immediate access to vast amounts of information. In
Planetary Taxi, for example, students can access NASA videos, models of the solar system,
and information about individual planets through text, photographs, and voice-over narration.
My content analysis has also illuminated what elements are not yet present in these software
products. Considering the protean capabilities of new technologies, it is now within our grasp
to design more powerful tools to develop students' lexical knowledge. Possibilities include:
1. To stimulate the deep processing of new words. My study raises questions about
whether children are involved in these products in ways that capture their minds. As
Perkins (1996) points out in describing the limitations of what he terms "technoglitz,"
Deep learning calls for more than software worlds to explore. It
calls for a crisp vision of meaningful goals, tasks that demand
thoughtful engagement [italics added] and serve those goals,
informative feedback that advances learners' understanding and
capabilities, connections to students' everyday lives and to diverse
subject areas... (p. 32)
Perkins' call for "thoughtful engagement" pinpoints what is lacking in much of the
software in this study. If, as in Midnight Rescue! and Word Attack 3, the games prove
more enticing than the content, and if, as in Planetary Taxi and Alien Tales, the
flamboyant characters and special effects compete with subject matter for attention,
much of the educational value is lost. New software should be developed and
evaluated with an eye toward the ways in which it can stimulate "deep learning."
2. To provide opportunities to apply new words to novel situations, including those
involving writing. Only three software products connect reading with writing. The
absence of online journals and notebooks, word processing capabilities for
composition, and other opportunities for written expression, drastically limit
opportunities for learners to use new words in authentic literacy contexts. One can
speculate that as technological tools become more powerful they will be able to do
more than check for matching items, correct responses in fill-the-blank formats, and
crossword puzzles. At present, however, the feedback mechanisms that are often
employed by developers are rather primitive.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
184
3. To foster independent reading on related topics. The availability of online
annotated bibliographies or students' own book reviews could encourage them to seek
additional information using books.
4. To encourage students to express new knowledge in ways that help shape and
mold products according to their individual learning needs. Activities such as
reading into a microphone, writing responses in journals, and creating informational
slide shows with original narration offer students powerful ways to express their
ideas. Current products offer students few ways to leave their unique imprint on the
activities they have engaged in.
5. Accommodation of all types of learners, including those who are physically
challenged. The products in this study have not begun to meet the industry standards
established by products such as WiggleWorks (1994), in which students can select
different modes of learning based on individual needs. As products such as
WiggleWorks clearly demonstrate, software has the ability to offer options for
customization through, for example, read-aloud features, different type sizes, and
special modifications for people who have difficulty manipulating a mouse. The
developers of the products reviewed here have missed a critical opportunity to exploit
media's capabilities to better serve all types of learners.
6. Encouragement of students to engage in projects that promote verbal
expression, writing of new words, and other forms of creative expression away
from the computer. Computers can only do so much. What happens when children
finish working with a piece of software and engage in other classroom tasks? The
software products in this study, with the exception of What's the Secret? with its
annotated bibliographies and project ideas, have not attempted to create a bridge
between the online activities and extensions that would call into play newly-acquired
lexical knowledge.
Limitations of the Study
Although this content analysis suggests the enormous potential of media to foster vocabulary
development, more comprehensive studies are needed. It is crucial that a research agenda for
the future include evaluating the efficacy of these products when used with a wide range of
learners.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
185
DISCUSSION
Can L1 and L2 children learn vocabulary best through the computer? Not in my estimation.
The present results suggest caution in relying on computers alone to foster vocabulary
growth; teachers are sorely needed to help mediate vocabulary learning through these new
technological tools. Teachers can interact with students in ways that "smart machines"
cannot--they can provide a meaningful context for students to apply their new understandings
about words through authentic literacy tasks. They can capitalize on students' interests by
matching them to software products that introduce specialized vocabulary words, building on
their interests, and ultimately helping them fill in lexical gaps. The child who is interested in
Mars, for example, can explore Plan tary Taxi and be transported to multimedia activities
based on this topic.
Additionally, teachers can speak to the social nature of vocabulary learning by engaging
students in conversations that allow them to apply new word knowledge. Teachers can
facilitate deep processing of new vocabulary within the framework of the interactionist view
of language development through which social interactions play a key role. In so doing, they
can help students connect word meanings to the semantic networks already in place.
Another strategy for using computers to help promote deep understandings of new words
involves the widespread availability of communication tools, such as the Internet and its
accompanying e-mail capabilities. Teachers are increasingly tapping into this medium to
promote innovative, literacy-related projects such as computer-mediated cultural exchanges
(e.g., Sayers, 1995), book discussions with peers, and "conversations" with well-known
children's authors through the BOOKREAD project (Jody & Saccardi, 1996). Such
interactions support vocabulary growth by offering novel, authentic contexts for
communication, which can promote deep processing of new words.
This study underscores the need for educators to be involved in the overall design of
software; they are the ones who will ultimately be integrating educational products into
existing curricula. An historical look at basal readers shows that although reading textbooks
have had a long and tumultuous history, the companies that develop them have always
included literacy experts from around the country in the role of series authors. Such authors
are involved in every aspect of product design and development; they are responsible for
creating a blueprint that will establish the pedagogical foundation of a kindergarten through
grade 8 reading series. As part of their role, these authors also suggest ways to incorporate
pertinent research findings and effective teaching practices into the overall design. I have
observed this process from close range as an editor of basal readers and can vouch for the
degree of influence authors wield over the series as a whole.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
186
In contrast, several of the software products in this study seem to have been developed
independently by software designers. Once users get beyond the sweeping educational claims
on the package and skillfully-rendered characters, they discover that the educational
underpinnings are often not strong enough to support in-depth learning; there is sometimes
more sleight of hand than substance. As Papert of MIT (1996) points out, hundreds of badly
produced "edutainment" products on the market were designed for profit, not for learning.
Finally, if our goal is to create software products that support a diverse population, then I
believe software designers need to have a first-hand understanding of various types of
discourse patterns, cultural values, and interactional styles of the potential users (c.f. Fradd &
Lee, 1999). In a sense, software products can serve as a powerful transmitter of knowledge;
as such they should reflect diverse languages and cultures (Bartolomé, 1998).
Only through further research about using media to support vocabulary learning can we hope
to understand its potential to foster in-depth knowledge about words. Close collaboration
between educators and developers is critical if we are to then bridge the chasm between
theory and practice and create products that reflect prevailing beliefs about effective
vocabulary instruction for a multicultural population.
APPENDIX A: Criteria for Evaluating Vocabulary Teaching Strategies in Selected
Software Products
Title of Software Being Evaluated ________________________________
Guidelines for Vocabulary Instruction
Guideline 1: Relate the new to the knownnever seldom
occasio
nally
frequent
ly always
New vocabulary words are presented in a
way that builds on students' previously
acquired word knowledge; instruction
helps students map new word meanings to
their own experiences.
Guideline 2: Promote active, in-depth
processing never seldom
occasio
nally
frequent
ly always
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
187
Students are encouraged to become
involved in constructing the meanings of
new words rather than being taught
through rote memorization of word
meanings for greater retention (cf. Craik &
Lockhart, 1972).
Within this framework, three levels
have been identified (Stahl, 1986):
association processing which involves
introducing a synonym for the new
word or showing how it relates to a
particular context; comprehension
processing which helps students apply
their understanding of a new word to a
particular context; and generation
processing which helps students use the
new word in a novel way that
demonstrates a deep understanding of
its meaning.
Guideline 3: Provide multiple exposuresnever seldom
occasio
nally
frequent
ly always
Students are repeatedly exposed to
information about word meanings as well
as multiple exposures to words in a variety
of contexts and settings.
Guideline 4: Teach students to be strategic
readers never seldom
occasio
nally
frequent
ly always
Students are encouraged to develop an
awareness of various independent
strategies they can to learn the meanings of
new words and become actively engaged in
their own learning.
Guideline 5: Promote additional readingnever seldom
occasio
nally
frequent
ly always
Students are encouraged to extend their
learning through independent reading
(Nagy, 1988).
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
188
NOTE: To create these criteria, I have drawn upon and expanded the guidelines proposed by
Lipson & Wixson's (1991) Assessment & instruction of reading disability: An interactive
approach.
APPENDIX B: Software Titles
Software Titles in the Direct-Approach Group1
1. Let's Explore the Farm (Humongous). This interactive2 experience offers children (ages
3-8) opportunities for creative play while visiting a farm. Options include visiting a big red
barn, watching a cow being milked, and looking inside a chicken coop. As children click
objects related to each topic, Buzzy the Knowledge Bug reads the printed description. Five
games help children improve their spelling, sharpen their memory skills, learn to mix colors,
and increase vocabulary.
2. Macmillan Dictionary for Children (Simon & Schuster). This multimedia dictionary
(ages 6-12) features over 12,000 words, 1,000 pictures, and 400 sound effects. Some pages
include hyperlinks3 which offer connections to semantically related words or word
derivations. Several word games are included.
3. Recess in Greece (Morgan Interactive). Children (ages 7-12) are introduced to Greek
civilization and learn how it has influenced the modern world through word origins, math,
mythology, philosophy, and the arts. The activities revolve around Morgan, a rambunctious
chimp, who is pulled through the classroom chalkboard into ancient Greece. The students'
mission is to help Morgan return to the 20th century. They encounter quizzes along the way
(e.g., "word builder," which tests knowledge of Greek roots found in many words in
English).
4. Schoolhouse Rock: Grammar Rock (Creative Wonders). Children (ages 6-10) practice
grammar skills that have been introduced through selecting tunes on a video juke box. Users
then visit the "Verb Theatre," "Lolly's Adverb Shop," "Pronoun Pet Shop," and seven other
learning centers designed to develop vocabulary and improve reading skills. (Based on the
Emmy award-winning television series.).
5. Super Solvers: Midnight Rescue! (The Learning Company). Children (ages 7-10) are
challenged to catch the Master of Mischief by using thinking, reading, and reasoning skills
during a timed video game format. The program emphasizes reading for main ideas, recalling
key facts, drawing inferences, and building vocabulary.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
189
6. Word Attack 3 (Davidson). Advertised as a "vocabulary builder," students (ages 10 to
adult) engage in crossword puzzles and arcade games to master definitions, spellings, and
pronunciations of thousands of new words categorized by subject and level of difficulty.
Software Titles in the Indirect-Approach Group
1. Alien Tales (Broderbund). This is a game designed to focus on three areas: building
interest in good literature, reinforcing reading comprehension, and developing deductive
reasoning skills. Children (ages 9-13) must outsmart comical extraterrestrials who pose as
the authors of outstanding children's literature (e.g., Charlotte's Web). Contains excerpts
from over 30 classics and Newbury Award Winners.
2. Ancient Lands (Microsoft). Children (age 8-adult) explore the ancient world and learn
what life was like, for example, soldiers and servants, through rich images, sound,
animation, interactive articles, and videos which span the period from the dawn of Egypt
to the fall of Rome.
3. Eyewitness Encyclopedia of Nature (DK Multimedia). Children (age 8-adult) learn about
the world of nature by exploring hundreds of species of animals and plants and the
habitats in which they live. Users can access hundreds of illustrated articles on all the
major animal and plant groups. Over 2 hours of video included, and 70,000 words
presented.
6. Multimedia Bug Book (Swifte). Children (age 5-10) help capture bugs that have escaped
by learning to identify them, describe them, and keep them captive. Children are
encouraged to conduct an in-depth study of each species by exploring related sounds,
video clips, and photographs.
7. Planetary Taxi (Voyager). Children (age 8 and up) become taxi drivers in outer space.
To deliver their passengers to the correct planetary destinations children must find the
answers to scientific questions (e.g., Where does a golf ball fly the farthest or freeze the
fastest?). NASA footage of recent space missions included.
8. Reading Search (Great Wave). Children (age 7-12) go back in time to serve as field
agents who help retrieve lost folktales. They explore the Mayan civilization, a Tlingit
tribe, and an ancient Chinese Dynasty palace, using their reading and cognitive skills to
find clues and gather artifacts.
7. The Way Things Work (Houghton Mifflin). Based on the trade book by David Macaulay,
this software allows students (age 8-adult) to explore science and technology by looking
at various machines (e.g., a gearbox, a camcorder) and learning about their inner-
workings and scientific principles.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
190
8. What's the Secret? (3M Software). Based on the PBS science show for children, Newton's
Apple, this software provides children (age 7 and up) with ways to explore everyday
mysteries (e.g., What makes bees sting? What happens during a heart transplant?). What's the
Secret? aims to help children explore the interconnected worlds of science and nature by
choosing their own paths through subjects such as physics, math, and acoustics.
9. Wrath of the Gods (Luminaria). Students (ages 9-adult) take on the role of a hero on a
quest to regain their kingdom in this adventure game based on Greek myths. Life-like
characters and photo-realism create the sense of being in a movie while solving ancient
mysteries.
10. Zurk's Rainforest Lab (Soleil). A rainforest adventure designed to motivate children
(ages 5-9) to learn about life science, math, and language skills while simultaneously
developing reading, writing, and critical thinking skills. Children can alternate among three
languages (English, Spanish, and French) as they explore a photo album or jungle scene,
participate in an egg hunt, and solve a sorting activity or pattern puzzle.
NOTES
return1The product descriptions in both categories have been culled from packaging,
advertising copy, and my own review.
return2The term interactive is used throughout this study to refer to an option offered the
user to modify the direction a program takes according to his or her needs and interests. In
Alien Tales, for example, students can select their opponent, a decision that alters the
course of the game as well as the particular book to be featured.
return3Hyperlinks are a form of interactivity. The user clicks a mouse on "hot spots" and is
instantly transported to databases (e.g., textual information, video material, or
photographs). Often such hyperlinks provide ready access to other related hyperlinks, and
so on.
APPENDIX C: Grade Level Analysis of Target Vocabulary Randomly Selected from
Various Software
APPENDIX C1 Let's Explore the Farm (Direct-approach Group)
APPENDIX C2 Macmillan Dictionary (Direct-approach Group)
APPENDIX C3 Recess in Greece (Direct-approach Group)
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
191
APPENDIX C4 Schoolhouse Rock: Grammar Rock (Direct-approach Group)
APPENDIX C5 Living Word Book (Direct-approach Group)
APPENDIX C6 Word Attack 3 (Direct-approach Group)
APPENDIX C7 Alien Tales (Indirect-approach Group)
APPENDIX C8 Ancient Lands (Indirect-approach Group)
APPENDIX C9 Eyewitness Encyclopedia of Nature (Indir ct-approach Group)
APPENDIX C10 Multimedia Bug Book (Indirect-approach Group)
APPENDIX C11 Planetary Taxi (Indirect-approach Group)
APPENDIX C12 Reading Search (Indirect-approach Group)
APPENDIX C13 The Way Things Work (Indirect-approach Group)
APPENDIX C14 What's the Secret? (Indirect-approach Group)
APPENDIX C15 Wrath of the Gods (Indirect-approach Group)
APPENDIX C16 Zurk’s Rainforest Lab (Indirect-approach Group)
APPENDIX D1: Taxonomy of Methods for Teaching Vocabulary - Traditional Methods
for Introducing or Reinforcing Words (Adapted from Watts [1995])
Target Word _____________________________
Software Program _____________________________
Level of difficulty ____________ according to ____________ Dale-Chall 3,000 words
_____ Ginn Lexicon
_____ Living Word Vocabulary.
_____ Other (specify source)
_____ Definitional
_____ Dictionary
_____ Glossary
_____ Thesaurus
_____ Word Bank/Data base of words
_____ Read _____ Heard _____ Written _____ Spoken
_____ Contextual
_____ Sentence
_____ Passage
_____ Fill-in-blank
_____ Discussion
_____ Picture
_____ Read _____ Heard _____ Written _____ Spoken
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
192
_____ Organizational/Based on Semantic Framework
_____ Semantic Map/Semantic Network
_____ Semantic Feature Analysis
_____ Categorization/Classification
_____ Analogies
_____ Examples/Non-Examples
_____ Synonyms/Antonyms
_____ Homophones
_____ Figurative Language
_____ Word Play
_____ Mnemonics
_____ Paired Association
_____ Keyword Methods
_____ Structure
_____ Roots & Affixes
_____ Compound Words
_____ Contractions
_____ Etymology/Derivation
Comments:
APPENDIX D2: Taxonomy of Methods for Teaching Vocabulary - Technical Features
Used to Introduce or Reinforce Word Meaning
Continuation of evaluation of _____________ (vocabulary word)
_____ Animation(s)
1.
2.
3.
_____ Video clips of related info. with voice-over incorporating target word
1.
2.
3.
4.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
193
_____ Sound components (e. g., pronouncing word, reading text)
1.
2.
3.
_____ Hyperlinks to related information (i.e., semantic webbing capabilities)
1.
2.
3.
_____ Ability to create one's own pathway through information
1.
2.
3.
_____ Ability to pause, repeat information, or replay video clips
_____ Hints or clues related to word meaning via messages or characters.
1.
2.
3.
_____ Multimodal presentation of information; combination of at least 2 elements: peech,
sound, visual, and tactile (e.g., dragging objects or writing)
1.
2.
3.
4.
_____ On-line definition, glossary, or thesaurus
1. sound capabilities?
2. exemplar sentence?
_____ Other
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
194
APPENDIX E: Coding - Vocabulary Teaching Strategies in Selected Software Products
(Guidelines 1-5)
Guideline 1: Relate the New to the Known
Never used If 0 words (out of 36) use this strategy.
Seldom Used If 1-11 words (out of 36) use this strategy.
Occasionally UsedIf 12-24 words (out of 36) use this strategy.
Frequently Used If 25-35 words (out of 36) use this strategy.
Always Used If 36 words (out of 36) use this strategy.
Guideline 2: Promote Active, In-depth Processing
2a: Association Processing:
Using the same parameters as Guideline 1, the number of target words that provide
definitional information, synonyms,antonyms.
2b: Comprehension Processing:
Using the same parameters as Guideline 1, the number of target words that provide
opportunities to apply new word knowledge to journals on-line games, and/or
experiments.
2c: Generation Processing:
Using the same parameters as Guideline 1, the number of target words that provide
opportunities to reflect on new word knowledge and apply it to a novel context or to
another domain (e.g., art, writing, music).
Guideline 3: Provide Multiple Exposures
Never used If only one entry point for learning target words is provided.
Seldom Used If 2 entry points for learning target words are provided.
Occasionally UsedIf 3-4 entry points for learning target words are provided.
Frequently Used If 5-6 entry points for learning target words are provided.
Always Used If 7 or more entry points for learning target words are provided.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
195
Guideline 4: Teach Students to Be Strategic Readers
Never used If 0 opportunities to practice strategic reading skills (e.g.,
skimming texts to find word meanings, using a glossary, creating
a word web, applying morphemic analysis, using context clues)
are offered.
Seldom Used If 2 strategies are offered.
Occasionally UsedIf 3 strategies are offered.
Frequently Used: If 4 strategies are offered.
Always Used If 5 or more strategies are offered.
Guideline 5: Promote Additional Reading
Never used If children are encouraged to read
books about related topics in 0
instances (on line).
Seldom Used If children are encouraged to read
books about related topics in 1 instance
(on line).
Occasionally
Used
If children are encouraged to read
books about related topics in 2
instances (on line).
Frequently
Used
If children are encouraged to read
books about related topics in 3
instances (on line).
Always Used If children are encouraged to read
books about related topics in 4 or more
instances (on line).
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
196
APPENDIX F: Ranking of Software Products According to Criteria Used in this Study
Title Score Group
Planetary Taxi 19 Indirect Approach
What's the Secret? 18 Indirect Approach
Multimedia Bug Book 17 Indirect Approach
Encyclopedia of Nature 16 Indirect Approach
Zurk's Rainforest Lab 16 Indirect Approach
Alien Tales 15 Indirect Approach
Ancient Lands 15 Indirect Approach
Way Things Work 14 Indirect Approach
Recess in Greece 12 Direct Approach
Schoolhouse Rock 12 Direct Approach
Word Attack 3 11 Direct Approach
Wrath of the Gods 11 Indirect Approach
Macmillan Dictionary 10 Direct Approach
Reading Search 8 Indirect Approach
Let's Explore the Farm 8 Direct Approach
Midnight Rescue 7 Direct Approach
Note: Rankings were calculated according to the evaluation forms found in Appendix A,
Criteria for Evaluating Vocabulary Teaching Strategies in Selected Software Products. The
points were counted as follow: 0 for never, 1 for seldom, 2 for occasionally, 3 for frequently,
and 4 for always; thus a high rating indicates a product that adheres closely to the criteria
used in this study.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
197
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Julie Wood, Lecturer in Education, Harvard Graduate School of Education is a researcher
and instructor in education, specializing in both early literacy and technology in schools. She
has taught elementary school and has developed educational products, both print and media-
based, for teachers and children. Her areas of expertise include children's literacy
development, the integration of new technologies into educational settings and teacher
professional development in the use of technology. She is a cofounder of a summer Literacy
Institute for struggling readers and writers in a charter school in Dorchester, Massachusetts,
Director of the America Reads program at MIT, and a contributing editor for Instructor
Magazine. Currently she is writing a book, CyberKids: Struggling Readers and Writers and
How Computers Can Help, for Heinemann Publishers.
E-mail: woodju@gse.harvard.edu
REFERENCES
Alien Tales. [CD-ROM]. (1995). Broderbund.
Ancient Lands. [CD-ROM]. (1994) Microsoft
Anderson, R. C., & Freebody, P. (1981). Vocabulary knowledge. In J. T. Guthrie (Ed.),
Comprehension and teaching: Research perspectives (p . 71-117). Newark, DE:
International Reading Association.
Anderson, R. C., & Pearson, P. D. (1984). A schema-theoretic view of basic processes in
reading comprehension (Technical Report No. 306). Cambridge, MA: Bolt, Beranek and
Newman, Inc.
Bakeman, R., & Gottman, J. M. (1986). Observing interaction: An introduction to sequential
analysis. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Bartolomé, L. I. (1998). The misteaching of academic discourses: The politics of language in
the classroom. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Baumann, J. F., & Kame`enui, E. J. (1991). Research on vocabulary instruction: Ode to
Voltaire. In J. Flood, J. M. Jensen, D. Lapp, & J. R. Squire (Eds.), Han book of research on
teaching the English language arts (pp. 604-632). New York: Macmillan.
Beck I. L., & McKeown, M. G. (1991). Conditions of vocabulary acquisition. In R. Barr, M.
L. Kamil, P. Mosenthal, & P. D. Pearson (Eds.), Handbook of reading research: Volume II
(pp. 789-814). White Plains, NY: Longman.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
198
Bensoussan, M., & Laufer, B. (1984). Lexical guessing in context in EFL reading
comprehension. Journal of Research in Reading, 7, 15-32.
The bright future of children's software. (1997, December 1996/January). Childre 's
Software Revue, 4(6), 1-3.
Carroll, J. B. (1977). Developmental parameters of reading comprehension. In J. T. Guthrie
(Ed.), Cognition, curriculum, and comprehension. Newark, DE: IRA.
Chall, J. S. & Dale, E. (1995). Readability revised: The new Dale-Chall readability formula.
Cambridge, MA: Brookline Books.
Chall, J., Snow, C., Barnes, W., Chandler, J., Goodman, I., Hemphill, L., & Jacobs, V.
(1982). Families and literacy: The contribution of out-of-school experiences to children's
acquisition of literacy. A final report to the National Institute of Education. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard Graduate School of Education.
Coady, J. (1993). Research on ESL/EFL vocabulary acquisition: Putting it in context. In T.
Huckin, M. Haynes, & J. Coady (Eds.), Second language reading and vocabulary learning
(pp. 3-23). Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing.
Craik, F., & Lockhart, R. (1972). Levels of processing: A framework for memory research.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 11, 671-684.
Dale, E., & O'Rourke, J. (1981). The living word vocabulary. Chicago: World Book-
Childcraft International.
Encyclopedia of Nature. [CD-ROM]. (1997). DK Multimedia.
Fradd, S. H., & Lee, O. (1999, Aug./Sept.). Teachers' roles in promoting science inquiry with
students from diverse language backgrounds. Educational Researcher, 28(6), 14-20.
Jody, M., & Saccardi, M. (1996). Computer conversations: Readers and books online.
Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English.
Johnson, D. D., Moe, A. J., & Baumann, J. F. (1983). The Ginn word book for teachers.
Boston: Ginn.
Kame`enui, E. J., Dixon, D. W., & Carmine, R. C. (1987). Issues in the design of vocabulary
instruction. In M. G. McKeown & M. E. Curtis (Eds.), The nature of vocabulary acquisition
(pp. 129-145). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Let's Explore the Farm. [CD-ROM]. (1995). Humongous Entertainment.
Macmillon Dictionary. [CD-ROM]. (1996). Simon & Schuster.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
199
McKeown, M., Beck, I., Omanson, R., & Pople, M. (1985). Some effects of the nature and
frequency of vocabulary instruction on the knowledge and use of words. Reading Research
Quarterly, 20, 522-535.
Meara, P. (1980). Vocabulary acquisition: A neglected aspect of language learning.
Language Teaching and Linguistics: Abstracts, 221-246.
Meara, P. (1984). Word recognition in foreign language. In A. K. Pugh & J. M. Ulign (Eds.),
Reading for professional purposes: studies and practices in native and foreign language (pp.
97-105). London: Heinemann.
Midnight Rescue. [CD-ROM]. (date unavailable). Learning Company.
Miranker, C., & Elliott, A. (1995). The Computer Museum guide to the best software for kids.
New York: HarperCollins.
Multimedia Bug Book. [CD-ROM]. (1995). Workman-Swift.
Nagy, W. E. (1989). Vocabulary instruction and reading comprehension. In ERIC Digest, 4.
Bloomington, Indiana: ERIC Clearinghouse on Reading, English, and Communication.
Nagy, W. E., Hermann, P. A., & Anderson, R. C. (1985). Learning words from context.
Reading Research Quarterly, 20, 233-253.
Nagy, W. E., Anderson, R. C., & Hermann, P. A. (1987, Summer). Learning word meanings
from context during normal reading. American Educational Research Journal, 24, 237-270.
Nagy, W. W. (1988). Teaching vocabulary to improve reading comprehension. Urba a, IL:
ERIC Clearinghouse on Reading and Communication Skills and the National Council of
Teachers of English.
Pany, D., & Jenkins, J. R. (1978). Learning word meanings: A comparison of instructional
procedures and effects on measures of reading comprehension with learning disabled
students. Learning Disability Quarterly, 1, 21-32.
Papert, S. (1996). The connected family: Bridging the digital generation gap. Atlanta, GA:
Longstreet Press.
Perkins, D. N. (1996, June). Why we can't let the technological tail wag the pedagogical dog.
Education Bulletin XXXX(2), p. 32, Cambridge, MA: President and Fellows of Harvard
College.
Piaget, J. (1971). Psychology and epistemology. New York: Grossman.
Planetary Taxi. [CD-ROM]. (1994). Voyager.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
200
Reading Search. [CD-ROM]. (1996). Great Wave.
Recess in Greece. [CD-ROM]. (1994). Morgan Interactive.
Rose, D. (1995). Scholastic literacy research paper: Apprenticeship and Exploration. New
York: Scholastic Inc.
Sayers, D. (1995). Blueprints from the past: The intercultural learning networks of Celestin
Freinet and Mario Lodi. In J. Cummins & D. Sayers (Eds.), Brave new schools: Challenging
cultural illiteracy through global learning networks (pp. 119-140) NY: St. Martin's Press.
Schoolhouse Rock. [CD-ROM]. (1995). Creative Wonders.
Stahl, S. (1983). Differential word knowledge and reading comprehension. Journal of
Reading Behavior, 15(4), 33-50.
Stahl, S. A. (1985). To teach a word well: A framework for vocabulary instruction. Reading
World, 24(3), 16-27.
Stahl, S. A. (1986). Three principals of effective vocabulary instruction. Journal of Reading,
29, 662-668.
Stahl, S. A., & Fairbanks, M. (1986). The effects of vocabulary instruction: A model-based
meta-analysis. Review of Educational Research, 56, 72-110.
Stoller, F. L., & Grabe, W. (1993). Implications for L2 vocabulary acquisition and instruction
from L1 vocabulary research. In T. Huckin, M. Haynes, & J. Coady (Eds.), Second language
reading and vocabulary learning (pp. 24-45). Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing.
Thorndike, R. (1973). Reading as reasoning. Reading Research Quarterly, 9, 135-147.
The Way Things Work. [CD-ROM]. (1996). DK Multimedia.
Watts, S. M. (1995). Vocabulary instruction during reading lessons in six classrooms.
Journal of Reading Behavior, 27(3), 406.
What's the Secret? [CD-ROM]. (1995). 3M Learning Software.
White, E. B. (1969) The art of the essay. Paris Review 48. Flushing, NY: Paris Review Inc.
Wiggleworks. (1994). [CD-ROM]. New York: Scholastic.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
201
Wilson, P. T., & Anderson, R. C. (1986). What they don't know will hurt them: the role of
prior knowledge in comprehension. In J. Orasano (Ed.), Reading Comprehension from
Research to Practice (pp. 31-48). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum Associates.
Word Attack 3. [CD-ROM]. (1995). Davidson.
Wrath of the Gods. [CD-ROM]. (1993. Luminaria.
Zurk's Rainforest Lab. [CD-ROM]. (1994). Soleil.
About LLT | Subscribe | Information for Contributors | Masthead | Archives
