Language Learning & Technology May 2001, Vol. 5, Num. 2
http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num2/review2/default.html pp. 23-27
Copyright ª  2001, ISSN 1094-3501 23
REVIEW OF
COMPUTERIZED ADAPTIVE TESTING: A PRIMER (Second Edition)
Computerized Adaptive Testing: A Primer (Second Edition)
Howard Wainer (Ed.)
with Neil J. Dorans, Daniel Eignor, Ronald Flaugher, Bert F. Green,
Robert J. Mislevy, Lynne Steinberg, and David Thissen
2000
ISBN 0-8058-3511-3
US $89.95; US $45.00 (discounted price available for orders on the Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates Web site: http://www.erlbaum.com)
335 pp.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
Mahwah, NJ, USA
Reviewed by John M. Norris, University of Hawai‘i at Manoa
As is the case in other sub-disciplines of applied linguistics, the availability of increasingly efficient,
accessible, and powerful technology has led to increased interest in potential applications of computers in
the field of language assessment (Alderson, 2000; Brown, 1997). While not all language testers will agree
with Chalhoub-Deville and Deville's (1999) claim that "computerized assessment of individuals [is] more
efficient and accurate than assessment using traditional paper-and-pencil (P&P) tests" (p. 273), it is
apparent that, for particular purposes in language assessment, computer-based testing (CBT) can offer
distinct advantages. These include individualized and efficient administration, instantaneous scoring,
continuous accessibility of assessment, and the accurate measurement of previously inaccessible
constructs such as reaction times. Computerized adaptive testing (CAT) is a unique type of CBT which
enables greater precision and efficiency in some forms of assessment by first estimating an examinee's
proficiency level (typically on the basis of initial item responses) and then adapting to it, presenting only
those items that are expected to give the most information about that individual (i.e., neither overly easy
nor overly difficult items). It has also been argued that CATs will prove advantageous for certain
language assessment purposes (Chalhoub-Deville, 1999; Chapelle, 2001; Dunkel, 1999). However, for
language testers to be able to evaluate whether CATs (or CBTs, for that matter) can meet their needs, and
are worth the effort and expense, it is essential to first come to terms with the theory and practice
underlying the development, use, and validation of computerized assessment.
Just such insights into the fundamental workings of CATs are offered by Computerized Adaptive Testing:
A Primer. This is the second edition of a book that first appeared in 1990, the purpose of which is to
describe "how to build, maintain, and use a computerized adaptive testing system (a CAT)" (p. 1). The
second edition features two new chapters (2 and 10) and one updated chapter (4), which address what has
been learned from the operational use of CATs over the past decade, while the remainder of the book (not
updated) maintains the original focus on the psychometric foundations for adaptive testing. Although the
book offers very sophisticated treatment of most issues in CAT development and use, as well as a
chapter-by-chapter illustration of concepts via the hypothetical example "Gedanken Computerized
Adaptive Test" (GCAT), this is not a manual for test construction; readers will not be able to build their
own tests on the basis of the information in this book alone. Nevertheless, the authors of each of the ten
chapters, all experts who have been engaged in CAT research for several decades now, do provide
thorough coverage of the theoretical fundamentals and collective wisdom that form an essential
knowledge base for anyone intent on working with CATs.
John M. Norris Review of Computerized Adaptive Testing: A Primer
Language Learning & Technology 24
Chapters 1-3 briefly outline a range of issues that test developers should consider prior to embarking on
the creation and use of computerized adaptive testing systems. Chapter 1, "Introduction and History"
(Wainer), provides an excellent historical overview of mental testing, followed by a summary of the basic
rationale, advantages, and problems for adaptive testing. It also underscores the book's focus on large-
scale ability testing, that is, tests for making decisions about the abilities of large numbers of examinees
with respect to rather homogeneous ability constructs (such as the Scholastic Aptitude Test), since most
interest and research in adaptive testing has been associated with such purposes. Chapter 2, "System
Design and Operation" (Green), gives a short overview of the system design considerations for
administration and scoring of CATs (or other CBTs, for that matter), including hardware and software
demands as well as features of the unique human-computer interactive test environment. These issues
should be of particular concern for language testers; consider, for example, the variability in examinee
performances on a web-based listening test caused by memory capacity differences in computers used to
access the test. Chapter 3, "Item Pools" (Flaugher), addresses issues in the selection of test items and the
creation of large item pools essential for adaptive testing, and it features an extended description of item
selection for the hypothetical GCAT. On the whole, chapters 1-3 do a good job of introducing CATs and
linking them with general assessment practice. The only major weakness in these chapters is the lack of
reference to related resources. For example, chapter 3 mentions that a test's content domain should first be
defined and sound items then written, reviewed, and pre-tested, but it does not address how this is to be
done or where a reader might locate further information (for relevant guides in language testing, see
Bachman & Palmer, 1996; Brown, 1996; Lynch & Davidson, 1994).
Chapters 4-7 form the core of the book, treating in detail the theoretical and statistical foundations for
computerized adaptive testing. Chapter 4, "Item Response Theory, Item Calibration, and Proficiency
Estimation" (Wainer & Mislevy), explains how Item Response Theory and Bayesian procedures are
utilized to estimate both examinee proficiency and item difficulty according to a common scale, a
capability which forms the crux of adaptive testing. Chapter 5, "Testing Algorithms" (Thissen &
Mislevy), offers a very clear treatment of the role of algorithms in determining how to start the test (with
which item), how to continue the test (which item comes next), and how to stop the test (when to stop
presenting items). Chapter 6, "Scaling and Equating" (Dorans), addresses the unique scores produced by
CATs and the scales used to interpret them, followed by discussion of how CAT scores may be equated
with other measures (e.g., paper and pencil tests). The usefulness of this chapter is limited by an overly
technical discussion, as well as by a GCAT example that should have been edited for gender bias in
language use. Finally, chapter 7, "Reliability and Measurement Precision" (Thissen), offers a very
effective explanation of classical test theory and item response theory perspectives on reliability. This
chapter details the different sources of measurement error associated with CATs and illustrates the crucial
point that different ability estimates (scores) on a single test do not necessarily share the same degree of
reliability (the implications of this issue extend well beyond CATs; see AERA, APA, & NCME, 1999).
While these chapters present a great deal of accumulated knowledge central to the understanding of
adaptive testing, potential readers should realize that all four chapters make extensive use of mathematical
equations and that authors are variably successful at incorporating statistical explanations into conceptual
and practical discussion. Readers without a solid background in mathematics, statistics, and basic test
theory will likely find these chapters extremely challenging.
Chapters 8-10 shift from a psychometric focus on the development of CATs to a discussion of challenges
and caveats for the use of CATs. Chapter 8, "Validity" (Steinberg, Thissen, & Wainer), presents several
strategies for validating inferences based on CAT scores, emphasizing the use of correlation, regression,
and factor analysis, and it treats validity questions of specific interest to adaptive testing (e.g., predictive
validity, multidimensionality). Unfortunately, this chapter was not updated for the second edition and thus
does not incorporate critical discussions about test validation that have taken place since Messick's (1989)
comprehensive treatment, nor the associated fundamental changes to validation theory and methodology
John M. Norris Review of Computerized Adaptive Testing: A Primer
Language Learning & Technology 25
(e.g., Linn, 1997; Messick, 1994; Moss, 1998; Shepard, 1993, 1997). Chapter 9, "Future Challenges"
(Wainer, Dorans, Green, Mislevy, Steinberg, & Thissen), summarizes the unique challenges that remain
to be dealt with in CAT research and development, including time constraints, cheating, item omission,
model fit, multidimensional constructs, testlets, test equating, legal challenges, and expense. To some
extent, chapter 10, "Caveats, Pitfalls, and Unexpected Consequences of Implementing Large-Scale
Computerized Testing" (Wainer & Eignor), takes up where the 1990 edition left off, by looking into the
problems that have been encountered with the use of large-scale CATs, such as the overuse of a small set
of items, test security issues, the need for CATs to be continuously accessible (as opposed to following a
regulated administration schedule a few times per year), and the economic realities of CAT development.
The fascinating final section utilizes what test developers have learned in the past 10 years to identify
exactly which testing situations are good or bad candidates for computerization, with some very
surprising answers.
Although each of the chapters makes a valuable contribution to understanding CATs, potential readers
should be aware of several infelicities that detract from the overall usefulness of the book. First,
references to related literature and other resources are limited and not up-to-date (and there is no direct
reference to language assessment, besides passing mention of the TOEFL). Readers will also find no
mention of the many widely accessible and helpful resources available on the Web, including tutorials,
downloadable software, research projects, and other information directly applicable to the development
and use of CBTs and CATs (see this review's appendix for Web-based resources with direct relevance to
computer applications in language assessment).
Second, the utility of the hypothetical GCAT examples for further illustrating the development and use of
CATs is uneven from chapter to chapter. For example, the comprehensibility of material presented in
several chapters (5, 7, and 8) is much enhanced by GCAT examples that show the application of concepts
to actual assessment problems. For other chapters, the GCAT example proves less helpful, as authors
seem to have misplaced the goal of illustrating and instead utilize the example to further explain chapter
concepts. Indeed, it is frequently unclear what the difference is supposed to be between portions of the
text and graphs/tables that appear in gray shading (intended to designate the GCAT example) and non-
shaded portions.
Finally, while the "Exercise/Study Questions" at the end of each chapter provide a good summary of the
main points, they do not engage the reader in extension or application exercises. There is no attempt to
didacticize any of the chapter material, and these sections never depart from a predictable display
question format, of the sort that might appear on a short-answer test from a teacher who is not particularly
interested in students' abilities to use what they have learned.
This book concludes by turning a critical eye on computerized adaptive testing, asking whether any
potential benefits actually outweigh the problems (like cost, security risks, bias, etc.) that have been
observed in operational test use. It is now imperative for the field of language assessment to do the same.
Language testers have begun to operationlize a variety of CATs, including placement exams for FL
programs, large-scale academic language ability testing, and L2 proficiency assessment involving
receptive as well as productive skills (Chalhoub-Deville, 1999; Chalhoub-Deville & Deville, 1999;
Chapelle, 2001; Dunkel, 1991, 1999). However, such tests face the same problems as those raised in the
conclusion to this book, and a number of additional questions remain to be answered about the role for
CATs in language assessment, including
·  To what extent are language learning/ability constructs, most of which are multi-dimensional in
nature, amenable to adaptive models that assume the testing of unidimensional phenomena?
·  How can computerized adaptive testing (or CBTs) respond to the increasing demand for
performance assessments in language education and professional contexts (e.g., McNamara,
1996; Norris, Brown, Hudson, & Yoshioka, 1998)?
John M. Norris Review of Computerized Adaptive Testing: A Primer
Language Learning & Technology 26
·  Are computerized versions of previously existing tests (e.g., "New" TOEFL) doing a better and
more efficient job of addressing the inferences we need to be making, and if not, is the
effort/expense warranted?
Although such questions are not directly addressed in this book, Computerized Adaptive Testing: A
Primer should nevertheless be required reading for anyone attempting to answer these and related
questions. It has assembled the necessary theoretical, statistical, and practical foundations not provided in
any other single resource, and it will enable language testers to evaluate the extent to which CATs are
appropriate for the kinds of inferences and purposes we need to address in language assessment.
APPENDIX
Web-Sites Related to Computer Applications in Language Assessment
http://carla.acad.umn.edu/CAT.html (University of Minnesota, Center for Advanced Research on
Language Acquisition; computer-adaptive language testing project)
http://ericae.net/scripts/cat/catdemo.htm (ERIC Clearinghouse on Assessment and Evaluation; interactive
CAT tutorial)
http://web.uvic.ca/hrd/halfbaked/#latest (Hot Potatoes; computer-based testing software and information)
http://www.ets.org/cbt/index.html (Educational Testing Service; computer-based testing information)
http://www.lll.hawaii.edu/nflrc/cbt.html (University of Hawaii, National Foreign Language Resource
Center; research and development on computer-based tests for less commonly taught languages)
http://www.rasch.org/index.htm (Institute for Objective Measurement; software and information on Item
Response Theory)
http://www.toefl.org/cbtindex.html (computer-based Test of English as a Foreign Language; main
information page and example test items)
http://www2.hawaii.edu/~roever/wbt.htm (information and links on Web-based language testing)
ABOUT THE REVIEWER
John Norris is a student in the Ph.D. program in SLA at the University of Hawai`i. He has worked as an
ES/FL teacher in Brazil and Hawaii, and he has lectured on language assessment, curriculum
development/evaluation, and research methods in Brazil, Japan, Spain, and the US. His research has been
reported in journals such as Language Learning and Language Testing, as well as in several co-authored
books with the University of Hawai`i Press.
E-mail: jnorris@hawaii.edu
REFERENCES
American Educational Research Association, American Psychological Association, & National Council
on Measurement in Education (1999). Standards for educational and psychological testing. Washington,
DC: American Educational Research Association.
Alderson, J. C. (2000). Technology in testing: The present and the future. System, 28, 593-603.
Bachman, L. F., & Palmer, A. S. (1996). Language testing in practice: Designing and developing useful
language tests. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Brown, J. D. (1996). Testing in language programs. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
John M. Norris Review of Computerized Adaptive Testing: A Primer
Language Learning & Technology 27
Brown, J. D. (1997). Computers in language testing: Present research and some future directions.
Language Learning & Technology, 1(1), 44-59. Retrieved January 15, 2001 from the World Wide Web:
http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/brown/default.html.
Chalhoub-Deville, M. (Ed.). (1999). Issues in computer adaptive testing of reading proficiency. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Chalhoub-Deville, M., & Deville, C. (1999). Computer adaptive testing in second language contexts.
Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 19, 273-299.
Chapelle, C. (2001). Computer applications in second language acquisition: Foundations for teaching,
testing, and research. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Dunkel, P. A. (Ed.). (1991). Computer-assisted language learning and testing: Research issues and
practice. New York: Newbury House.
Dunkel, P. A. (1999). Considerations in developing or using second/foreign language proficiency
computer-adaptive tests. Language Learning & Technology, 2(2), 77-93. [Retrieved January 15, 2001
from the World Wide Web: http://llt.msu.edu/vol2num2/dunkel/default.html.
Linn, R. L. (1997). Evaluating the validity of assessments: The consequences of use. Educational
Measurement: Issues and Practice, 16(2), 14-16.
Lynch, B., & Davidson, F. (1994). Criterion-referenced language test development: Linking curricula,
teachers, and tests. TESOL Quarterly, 28, 727-743.
McNamara, T. (1996). Measuring second language performance. New York: Longman.
Messick, S. (1989). Validity. In R. J. Linn (Ed.), Educational Measurement (pp. 13-103). New York:
American Council on Education/Macmillan.
Messick, S. (1994). The interplay of evidence and consequences in the validation of performance
assessments. Educational Researcher, 23(2), 13-23.
Moss, P. (1998). The role of consequences in validity theory. Educational Measurement: Issues and
Practice, 17(2), 6-12.
Norris, J. M., Brown, J. D., Hudson, T. D., & Yoshioka, J. K. (1998). Designing second language
performance assessment. Honolulu: University of Hawai`i Press.
Shepard, L. (1993). Evaluating test validity. In L. Darling-Hammond (Ed.), Review of research in
education (pp. 405-450). Washington, DC: American Educational Research Association.
Shepard, L. (1997). The centrality of test use and consequences for test validity. Educational
Measurement: Issues and Practice, 16(2), 5-13.
