Language Learning & Technology May 2001, Vol. 5, Num. 2
http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num2/from_the_editors.html p. 1
Copyright ª  2001, ISSN 1094-3501 1
From the Editors
This is a special issue of Language Learning & Technology on computer-assisted
language testing. Irene Thomas has written an introduction to this issue.
We have several important personnel changes to announce. Dr. Thompson is stepping
down as a General Editor of the journal and instead becoming an Associate Editor. We
thank Dr. Thompson for her three years of service as a General Editor, and we're
grateful that she will continue to offer her expertise as an Associate Editor. Richard
Kern of the University of California, Berkeley, is joining the staff as an Associate
Editor. Dr. Kern has been on the editorial board of the journal since it was founded and
previously guest edited a well-received special issue on literacies and technologies.
Finally, Pam DaGrossa, who has served as Editorial Assistant for the last two years will
now become Managing Editor. The journal has benefited greatly from Ms. DaGrossa's
editorial and managerial expertise, and we are grateful that she will now be making an
even more substantial contribution. An updated listing of the staff is available on the
journal masthead.
Most of the work on the journal is done by volunteers and this is an excellent time to
thank all of those who have contributed, including not only those listed above, but the
remaining staff, advisory board, editorial board, reviewers, and contributors. It is the
work of all these people who have made the journal so successful.
Please take a moment to subscribe to the journal if you have not yet done so. Your
subscriptions help us demonstrate to our funders the broad readership and influence of
our publication.
Finally, we'rehappy to announce an upcoming special issue on Telecollaboration, to be
edited by Julie Belz of Pennsylvania State University. We look forward to your
contributions to that issue.
Mark Warschauer and Dorothy Chun
Editors
