Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
135
Language Learning & Technology
Vol. 5, No. 1, January 2001, pp. 135-165
E-MAIL AND WORD PROCESSING IN THE ESL CLASSROOM: HOW THE
MEDIUM AFFECTS THE MESSAGE
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas
American University
Donald Weasenforth
The George Washington University
ABSTRACT
Computer-based media place new demands on language which can promote
variations in language use (cf. Halliday, 1990). Electronic mail has assumed
functions and formal features associated with spoken language as well as formal
writing (Davis & Brewer, 1997; Maynor, 1994; Murray, 1996). This has
implications for language instructors: If electronic mail does engender features of
both written and spoken language, it is questionable that electronic mail writing
will improve academic writing abilities. The present study attempts to provide
insights into this issue. Non-native students in an intermediate pre-academic ESL
course responded to writing prompts using electronic mail and word processing.
Their writing was examined for (1) differences in use of cohesive features
(Halliday, 1967; Halliday & Hasan, 1976), (2) length of text produced in each
medium, and (3) differences in text-initial contextualization. Results indicate no
obvious differences between students' electronic mail and word-processed
writing. However, the electronic mail texts were significantly shorter than the
word-processed texts, and text-initial contextualization was more prominent in the
word-processed than in the electronic mail texts. The findings raise the question
of whether electronic mail benefits students in terms of academic writing
development.
INTRODUCTION
Halliday (1990) notes that "when new demands are made on language … [and when] we are
making language work for us in ways it never had to do before, it will have to become a
different language in order to cope" (p. 82). It is arguable that computer-based media present
new demands which have the potential of promoting variations in language use as Halliday
predicts. Perhaps the demands are not novel per se, but it is rather the blurring, the
amalgamation, of previous demands which may result in linguistic variations. Take, for
instance, computer communication systems which have placed demands, often associated
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
136
with spoken language, on the production of written language. This reassignment is most
observable in synchronous computer-mediated communication such as MOOs (MUD Object
Oriented), MUDs (Multi-User Domain), and Chat. While the language takes on a written
form, it is constrained by temporal limitations which require immediate responses.
Conversely, this type of synchronous communication, which can be considered an essentially
oral language (Collot & Belmore, 1996), is also constrained by norms -- including spelling
norms -- most often associated with written language.
A similar blending of demands is imposed on asynchronous media such as some forms of
electronic mail (Tella & Mononen-Aaltonen, 1998). The temporal constraint is usually not as
acute as it is for synchronous communication, but e-mail nonetheless engenders an
involvement/immediacy which other types of non-mediated writing do not (Danet, 1999). E-
mail is also often subject to conventions restricting written language usage.
In addition to the various demands, Halliday (1990) further points out that variation in the
functions which language serves is a factor of variation in language use. E-mail, as an
example, has assumed functions which are in some cases associated with spoken language
and in other cases associated with formal writing. One can, for instance, e-mail someone
instead of telephoning or writing a letter or memorandum (Baron, 1998; Danet, 1999; Davis
& Brewer, 1997).
A question which then follows in light of the integration of demands and functions imposed
on computer-mediated communication is whether the formal properties of the language used
vary accordingly as Halliday (1990) predicts. Of further interest is whether such variations in
the formal properties of computer-mediated language constitute a distinct genre or register.
Research suggests that e-mail does exhibit distinct linguistic properties (Baron, 1998). Much
recent literature describes e-mail as a hybrid of oral and written features (DuBartell, 1995;
Marcus, 1995; Maynor, 1994; Murray, 1996; Uhlirova, 1994; Yates & Orlikowski, 1993).1
As Davis and Brewer (1997) point out, it is probably too early to identify e-mail, or some
type of e-mail, as a distinguishable genre or register. Because e-mail is still a relatively new
medium which continues to change by incorporating hypertextual features as well as audio
and visual material, there is not yet enough research on which to base such a judgment.
Of importance to language instructors are implications that these issues have for teaching and
learning a language. Instructors should consider the possible results of incorporating e-mail
into their classrooms. An assumption that is sometimes made by composition instructors is
that the incorporation of e-mail writing exercises in curricula will necessarily have beneficial
effects on students' academic composition abilities. However, if e-mail does engender
features of both written and spoken language, it is questionable that their e-mail writing will
necessarily improve their academic writing abilities. In order to address this question, this
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
137
study investigates whether student-produced writing in e-mail and word processing is similar
or different with respect to the occurrence of coherence features, text length, and
contextualizing information.
REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE
Research into the nature of e-mail writing, following Baron's (1984) claim that computer-
mediated communication influences not only what is expressed but also how it is expressed,
has invariably pointed to the hybrid nature of e-mail, which combines features of spoken as
well as written discourse (DuBartell, 1995; Marcus, 1995; Maynor, 1994; Murray, 1996;
Uhlirova, 1994; Yates & Orlikowski, 1993). Murray (1988) warns that the orality-literacy
distinction with respect to e-mail must be considered carefully because some e-mails may
share many characteristics of spoken language, and other e-mails may share characteristics of
written language -- just as some writing (e.g., a note to a family member) may be more oral
in nature than other writing (e.g., a term paper). Thus, according to Murray (1988), it is "the
result of the specific context of the situation" (p. 370) which determines oral or written
features in any discourse.
Nevertheless, a number of studies investigating asynchronous e-mail writing and word-
processed writing have found that comparable writing, when done in both media, differs
(Lepeintre, 1995; Murray, 1995, 1996; Yates & Orlikowski, 1993). Tella (1992) investigated
cohesive structures, lexicon, and rhetorical features (i.e., style, organization, and phatic
elements) in the e-mail writing of Finnish secondary students writing in English. The results
suggest that e-mail texts resemble oral communication in that ellipsis and colloquialisms
were more prominent in e-mail texts than in word-processed essays. A greater occurrence of
cohesive lexical items was observed in word-processed texts. In addition, Tella found that in
general the students' word-processed texts were longer than their e-mail texts.
Lepeintre (1995), in a study with university students learning English as a second language,
investigated the salience and deployment of textual features which Ochs (1979) associates
with planned and unplanned speech.2 Sh  found that phrase structures were more common in
the students' e-mail messages than in their in-class essays and suggests, similarly to Tella
(1992), an investigation of cohesive lexical items and syntactic features as potential
differentiators between students' e-mail and word-processed writing.
Cohesion has been the focus of numerous studies investigating the nature of written
discourse (see, e.g., Biber, 1988; Chafe, 1985; Morrow, 1989). It is defined as "the use of
explicit linguistic devices to signal relations between sentences and parts of texts" (Connor,
1996), these devices being linguistic "resources ... for creating texture" (Halliday & Hasan,
1976, p. 2). Such "text connectives, which help readers recognize how texts are organized,
and how different parts of the text are connected to each other functionally or semantically"
(Connor, 1996, p. 49), are referred to as cohesive ties (Halliday & Hasan, 1976). According
to Halliday and Hasan,
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
138
The concept of a tie makes it possible to analyze a text in terms of its cohesive
properties, and give a systematic account of its pattern of texture ... Various types
of question [sic] can be investigated this way, for example concerning the
difference between speaking and writing, [italics added] the relationship between
cohesion and the organization of written texts into sentences and paragraphs, and
the possible differences among different genres [i alics added] and different
authors in the numbers and kinds of ties they typically employ. (p. 4)
The use of cohesive ties has been found to differ not only for spoken and written discourse
(cf. Beaman, 1984; Biber, 1988, 1992; Gumperz, Kaltman, & O'Connor, 1984), but also
cross-culturally (Connor, 1996; Johns, 1984; Scarcella, 1984). Thus, it is reasonable to
assume that the "packaging of information in sentences and in texts" (Biber, 1992, p. 215) is
also likely to differ when two different writing media are involved, as in e-mail and
traditional word processing. Gonzalez-Bueno (1998) observes that language produced
electronically results in "discourse somewhat different from both written and oral
communication" (p. 58), and Murray (1988) suggests that such differences may be the result
of the context of the situation. In other words, "audience factors, topic factors, and setting
factors" (p. 355) combined may be responsible for differences in cohesion and other syntactic
features in e-mail and word-processed writing. Thus, an awareness of who one's audience is,
what knowledge can be assumed to be shared with that audience, as well as the mode of
transmission of information to that audience may influence the discourse output. Connor
(1996) also reports on cross-cultural differences in rhetorical organization as well as
linguistic features such as cohesive devices. However, none of the research she cites
investigates the effect of the specific medium on the writing produced by non-native speaker
students.
Another way in which cohesion is created in texts is through distribution of information in
sentences. According to Halliday (1967), each sentence consists of two information units: the
topic, which in English typically corresponds to the subject noun phrase, and the comment,
which provides information about the topic and corresponds to the remainder of the sentence
in what Halliday calls the "unmarked sequence" (p. 211). This distinction between topic and
comment has also been referred to as the given-new distinction, with given information being
that which the reader can be assumed to know and recover from preceding text, and new
information being what the reader does not know and cannot recover from the text (Chafe,
1976; Vande Kopple, 1986). It has been found that if the topic, that is, given information,
occurs before the comment, that is, new information, in a sentence, information from a text
can be better recalled and is perceived as more cohesive (Faigley & Witte, 1983; Kieras,
1980; Thompson, 1985; Vande Kopple, 1986). Given information, recoverable from
preceding text, is realized in the subject position of sentences through lexical means
(Halliday & Hasan, 1976). This concept also extends to assumptions about the consciousness
of addressees (Chafe, 1976). In that broader sense, writers need to distinguish between
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
139
"knowledge which the speaker assumes to be in the consciousness of the addressee at the
time of [writing]" and "what the [writer] assumes he [or she] is introducing into the
addressee's consciousness" (Chafe, 1976, p. 30).
Our own analysis into ESL students' e-mail and word-processed writing has shown that
students' use of grammatical and lexical cohesive devices may be influenced by a complex
interplay of medium, task situation and audience, and native language, as well as language
proficiency and familiarity with e-mail (Biesenbach-Lucas & Weasenforth, 1997). A more
focused investigation of inter- and intra-sentential linking devices (Biesenbach-Lucas &
Weasenforth, 1998) found that these links did not clearly differentiate between the two media
although they occurred slightly more frequently in e-mail writing. The same study also found
that students provided more text-initial contextualization -- that is, topic-related background
information -- for the reader in word-processed texts than in e-mail texts, thus suggesting
awareness of perceived audience differences. In another study (Biesenbach-Lucas, Meloni, &
Weasenforth, 2000), which extends the analysis to a larger number of students, only some
cohesive devices were found to differentiate between writing done in the e-mail and word-
processed medium, while text length clearly differentiated between the two media with word-
processed writing being longer.
STATEMENT OF PURPOSE
With an interest in determining to what extent students' use of e-mail might be beneficial in
developing their proficiency in writing academic essays, the present study was designed to
contrast students' academic writing assignments, produced via e-mail and word processor. It
was expected that students' texts would be different with respect to selected cohesive features
as well as length and inclusion of contextual material. These textual characteristics are
identified and discussed along with guiding hypotheses in the following section.
METHODS
Textual Features
Cohesive devices function as "textual metadiscourse" (Vande Kopple, 1985), which has "an
enabling function, that of creating a text" (Halliday, 1973, p. 66). While not focusing on
content or attitudinal aspects, cohesive devices help readers make sense out of propositional
information by providing explicit links among ideas the writer presents. According to Connor
(1996), cohesive devices have been the object of frequent investigations because they are
"easy to quantify" (p. 82) and thus provide an objective quantitative comparison between
texts (cf. Halliday & Hasan, 1976). Therefore, cohesion has been examined with respect to
textual differences (cf. Biber, 1988, 1992; Biesenbach-Lucas, 1994) and cross-cultural
differences among writers from different language backgrounds (cf. Connor, 1996).
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
140
In the present study, cohesive devices are examined following two frameworks: Halliday and
Hasan's (1976) influential work on cohesive ties, and Halliday's (1967) theory of information
distribution in texts. The following assumptions guided the investigation: (a) if e-mail is
indeed a hybrid of spoken and written discourse as some research suggests (e.g., DuBartell,
1995; Maynor, 1994), one could expect cohesive devices typically associated with spoken
discourse in students' e-mail writing; (b) if the medium of e-mail produces its own "new
register" (Halliday, 1990, p. 44), this difference may be evident in the ways in which writers
connect ideas in grammatically and lexically meaningful ways; (c) if the context of the
situation and the audience as well as students' cultural background influence how writers
encode information (cf. Connor, 1996; Murray, 1988), one might expect similar use of
cohesive devices as both e-mail and word-processed writing situations shared some
characteristics to be outlined further below; (d) if writers need to make assumptions about
what information is shared with their readers and what is not, one might expect that those
assumptions are reflected in the resulting texts by including less context for an audience
which is familiar with the topic. This might be the case for the readers of the students' e-mail
texts, but not for the potentially broader audience of readers of students' word-processed
texts.
The following provides a list of cohesive features analyzed, together with a brief overview of
relevant research on each feature. In addition, examples from the non-native speaker students'
e-mail (EM) and word-processed (WP) texts are provided to illustrate the features.3
Inter- and Intra-Sentential Cohesion
Halliday and Hasan (1976) label this category "conjunction" (p. 226). In their framework,
conjunctive ties are identified based on semantic categories (additive, adversative, causal,
temporal). However, in the present study, such ties are identified based on their grammatical
function in the sentence or clause, which corresponds to the terminology typically applied in
ESL/EFL textbooks and to the curricular content that is taught in the classes of students
participating in this study.
Sentence Connectors. These are lexical items which connect two independent
sentences/clauses, such as however, therefore, and moreover (they are often called
"conjuncts"). They explicitly mark logical relations between sentences/clauses and are
associated with discourse with a highly informational focus, such as academic prose (Biber,
1988).
Moreover, it is very difficult for the government to translate English to these
minorities. (WP)
Morrow (1989) suggests that cohesive ties marking relationships between ideas tend to be
more explicitly marked through sentence connectors in formal academic discourse, and Ochs
(1979) notes that sentence connectors are associated with planned rather than unplanned
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
141
discourse. Thus, sentence connectors could be expected to be more frequent in the students'
word-processed writing than in their e-mail writing. However, our own research
(Biesenbach-Lucas et al., 2000) has found sentence connectors to be more salient in ESL
students' e-mail writing, contrary to expectations.
Clause Coordinators. These lexical items connect two independent clauses: and, or, but, yet,
so, and for. In the present analysis, only those coordinators connecting clauses were included
in our frequency counts; those simply connecting phrasal material were not counted:
America has to be multiculturalism. And America has to be multiple languages ...
(EM)
Considered "general purpose connective[s]" (Biber, 1988, p. 245), clause coordinators were
expected to be the most frequently used connecting device in both e-mail and word-
processed essays. Biesenbach-Lucas (1994) found clause coordinators to occur most
frequently in scientific journal articles and popularized versions of those articles. In addition,
clause coordinators were also expected to be more frequent in e-mail than word-processed
writing since the simple chaining of ideas in coordinating fashion has been found to be more
typical of spoken than of written discourse (Chafe, 1982, 1985).
Clause Subordinators. These lexical items connect an independent clause and a dependent
clause, such as when, because, while, even though, and if. Similar to sentence connectors,
they explicitly indicate informational relations in texts.
The United States has many religion because there are many different immigrants
here. (EM)
Biber (1988) reports that research investigating the use of subordinate clauses has been
inconclusive. Some studies suggest that certain subordinators are more frequent in written
than in spoken discourse (Altenberg, 1984; Tottie, 1985) while other studies suggest the
opposite (Beaman, 1984; Biber, 1986; Tottie, 1985). It was hoped that the present study
would shed light on the potentially differential use of this feature.
Phrase Subordinators. These lexical items, such as because of, according to, and in spite of,
connect phrasal material with an independent clause.
Many times, people have hard time immigrate to other country, because of
immigration regulations of country. (WP)
Biesenbach-Lucas (1994) found phrase subordinators to be infrequently used in written
academic discourse. Thus, among the sentence/clause connecting devices, they were
expected to be used least frequently in both e-mail and word-processed texts.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
142
Demonstrative Reference
Demonstrative Pronouns. According to Halliday and Hasan (1976), this, these, that, and
those create referential cohesion in a text by referring to a previous referent in the text, either
a single entity or an entire concept (Kurzon, 1985):
If America still lets more the immigrants to come, the more unemployment will
be increasing. This will effect on criminal problems, homeless an probably famine
in the US. (EM)
Chafe (1985) has found that directly recoverable nominal referents of demonstrative
pronouns are often missing in spoken discourse, but not in written discourse, due to the faster
production and the lack of editing associated with speech. However, Ochs (1979) has noticed
that demonstrative pronouns often replace articles in unplanned discourse. Therefore,
demonstrative pronouns might be slightly more frequent in students' e-mail writing than in
their word-processed writing. Biesenbach-Lucas (1994) has found that demonstrative
pronouns occur infrequently in formal academic discourse; therefore, they might occur
infrequently in the students' word-processed writing, particularly when compared to other
devices that also contribute to textual cohesion.
Demonstrative Noun Phrases. These are demonstrative pronouns followed by a noun phrase,
such as these new policies. They create cohesion in similar ways to demonstrative pronouns
as they also refer back to a previously mentioned entity or concept in the text:
The studying of diversity of religions in the country is important to the
government, native people, and immigrants themselves. For the government, this
research project helps the govenment to plan how to deal with them. (EM)
Demonstrative noun phrases have been found to be preferred to demonstrative pronouns in
academic writing (Biesenbach-Lucas, 1994). In a study investigating the use of cohesive
devices by ESL students writing in both e-mail and word-processed media, demonstrative
noun phrases were found to occur more frequently in word- processed writing (Biesenbach-
Lucas et al., 2000).
Lexical Cohesion
These categories fall under what Halliday and Hasan (1976) refer to as "reiteration" (p. 277).
"All these instances have in common the fact that one lexical item refers back to another, to
which it is related by having a common referent" (p. 278). In the present study, in order to
investigate information distribution and resulting cohesion, all instances of lexical cohesion
are examined in their occurrence in the position of topic, or given information, that is, the
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
143
subject position in the sentence (cf. Faigley & Witte, 1983; Vande Kopple, 1986; Weisberg,
1984). The subject position was defined as either the first sentence element, or the first
element after an adverbial phrase or after an inter- or intra-sentential cohesive device that
provided a transition.
Lexical Repetition. I  the present study, lexical repetition is defined as the repetition of the
exact same noun or noun phrase.
Even though [the Chinese] are a small number of people, the U.S. must not ignore
them. So, the U.S. must not change basic immigration policy. (EM)
Weisberg (1984) found lexical repetition to be the most frequently used cohesive device in
this category for the written academic texts he examined. Similarly, this type of cohesion has
been found to be favored in written academic discourse by native speaker writers in order to
avoid ambiguity (Biesenbach-Lucas, 1994). Biber (1992) in comparing spoken and written
genres found fewer lexical repetitions in spoken discourse than in written discourse. It was
hoped that the present study would provide additional evidence for the relative occurrence of
lexical repetition in spoken and written texts.
Synonyms. Synonyms are defined as the use of an equivalent noun or noun phrase.
In many countries, it always has many people who come from different culture
mixing together. The mingle took place for long times. (WP)
Weisberg (1984) found far fewer synonyms than lexical repetition in the academic writing he
examined, but synonyms were the second most frequently used cohesive device in this
category. Halliday (1990) suggests that more synonymous verbs are used in speech than in
writing. In Biber's (1992) study the relative frequency of synonymous anaphoric items did
not reliably distinguish spoken genres from written ones. Since non-native students of
English may not have the lexical flexibility necessary to select appropriate synonymous
nouns or noun phrases, synonyms could be expected to occur infrequently in both the
students' e-mail and word-processed writing. Given the inconclusiveness of the literature and
the fact that no known investigation focuses specifically on synonymous nouns or noun
phrases, we took an exploratory stance, not positing a hypothesis regarding the relative
frequency of synonyms.
Pronouns. In the present study, the following pronouns were considered: he, he, it, they, one
of them, some of them, and most of them. These refer to an explicitly mentioned item in the
previous sentence/clause.
Nowadays, there are many immigrants from another countries come to the U.S;
they also bring their religion with them. (EM)
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
144
Biber (1988) notices that in speech these pronouns are often used imprecisely, making it
difficult to recover the referent. Biber (1992) found that "spoken genres tend to have more
referring expressions than written genres" (p. 226). Weisberg (1984) found them to be the
third most frequently used cohesive device in this category. The present study may show
whether this feature is used differently in e-mail and word-processed writing.
Ellipsis. Ellipsis is defined as the omission of any implied lexical item which would be in the
subject position of the following clause. Although omitted, the implied referent is directly
recoverable in the preceding clause.
We know exactly that the U.S. postal Service should or Ø should not issue a
Jewish stamp... (WP)
The effect of ellipsis is that it compacts the surface structure without disrupting clarity.
Biesenbach-Lucas (1994) found ellipsis to occur infrequently in formal academic texts. Tella
(1992) found ellipsis to be more prominent in e-mail than in word-processed texts. Therefore,
ellipsis was expected to be more frequent in students' e-mail than in their word-processed
writing.
Text Length
Previous research regarding variations in text length is inconclusive. While some research
(Hidi & Hildyard, 1983; Lepeintre, 1995; Wang, 1993) indicates that e-mail is generally
longer than word-processed texts, Tella (1992) and Biesenbach-Lucas and Weasenforth
(1997) have found that students' e-mail texts tended to be shorter. It was hoped that the
present study would provide further evidence in terms of identifying trends in the length of
texts. Text length was defined in this study as the number of words per text.4
Contextualization
Tella (1992) and Biesenbach-Lucas and Weasenforth (1997) have suggested that e-mail
writing appears to be less contextualized and organized than word-processed writing. In the
present study, it was assumed that the students might contextualize e-mail and word-
processed writing differently based on their assumptions of the immediate readership of their
essays. In other words, since e-mail is a rather private medium of communication between
sender and recipients, and since the students in our study knew that their teachers were
familiar with the text given as a prompt for their e-mail response, students might also be
expected to take this awareness for granted and not perceive a necessity to provide
background information on the topic. In contrast, students might be expected to provide more
topic background in word-processed writing, given the potentially wider audience, which
may not be familiar with the topic.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
145
Therefore, each e-mail response and word-processed essay was examined for evidence of
writers' attempts at providing context initially in their writing for the reader. For the purposes
of this study, we restricted our investigation to basic contextualization clues although it
became apparent that essay-initial contextualization is much more complex than what the
present analysis suggests. In the present investigation, we defined those cases as a lack of
text-initial contextualization in which the writer immediately responded to the essay prompt
question by providing a personal opinion. In contrast, contextualization was achieved if the
writer made some attempt at letting the reader know something about the topic or the text to
which he/she referred to in the essay.
DATA COLLECTION
The present study was conducted over the course of one semester at The George Washington
University. It involved two intermediate, intensive ESL classes and two teachers from each
of these classes. Students were asked to write one assignment in e-mail (using Pi e [1992])
and one assignment using a word processor (using Word Perfect 6.1 [1995]) on each of three
topics: immigration, religion, and multiculturalism. These coincided with topics covered in
the students' textbooks used in their classes. For each assignment, students were first given
an authentic text on that topic and were asked to write a response in class to a prompt
provided by one of the teachers (see Appendix A). Students then sent their written responses
to both teachers. Three days later, students received another authentic text on the same topic
and were asked to write a response to a similar prompt using Word Perfect during class time
(see Appendix A). Again, it was made clear that the essays would be read by both teachers.
Thus, it was assured that the target audience was the same in both e-mail and word-processed
situations, and divergent results would not be due to divergent audiences. For the purposes of
the analysis, only the first drafts of both types of writing samples were considered.
The potential influence of a practice effect was considered; in other words, the students' e-
mail writing may have affected students' word-processed writing. In order to counteract this
effect, three days intervened between the writing tasks, thus minimizing the effect somewhat.
Also, while the prompts were on similar topics, they were not based on the same article, thus
making it more difficult to simply transfer the writing task to the second medium. As in
many authentic classroom situations where data collection is an issue, the present study had
to be integrated into an ongoing curriculum in order not to disrupt curricular goals. Access to
computer facilities was not universally available, and cooperating instructors were not
willing to give up too much of their own class time. These institutional restrictions thus
prevented a reverse study, in which students would have written the word-processed text
first, and then e-mail, but text prompt selection and a three-day interval between writing tasks
will likely have offset any pronounced practice effect.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
146
SUBJECTS
Fourteen students from two ESL classes participated in the study; five students were from
Thailand, three from Taiwan, two from China, two from Korea, one from Indonesia, and one
from Saudi Arabia. If all students had been present on all occasions for e-mail as well as
word-processed writing for the three topics, a total of 42 essay pairs (14 e-mail and word-
processed pairs for each topic) would have been obtained. However, due to student absences,
text pairs could not be collected in all instances. A total of 25 pairs were finally obtained. In
the analysis, all texts were considered; however, in cases where direct comparison of writers'
e-mail and word-processed texts was required, only the pairs were examined. Information
questionnaires were given to the students at the beginning of the semester to assess their
familiarity with e-mail and word processing and the extent of their experience.
Due to the small sample size, it is difficult to draw generalizations. The present study
represents an exploration into the differences between ESL students' e-mail and word-
processed writing. In this study, the students' writing was examined by looking at writing in
response to three topics to observe effects of medium across topics. Other research
(Biesenbach-Lucas et al., 2000) focuses on a much larger pool of subjects but only one of the
three topic areas.
ANALYSIS
The analysis involved establishing raw frequency counts and normalized counts for each of
the features. First, to obtain the raw count numbers, the actual occurrences of each feature
were identified -- at least two analysts per essay to guarantee reliability -- and tallied for each
individual essay. The tallies were then added and averaged for each group of e-mail and
word-processing texts (per topic), then for all e-mail responses and word-processed essays
together. Next, the raw counts were normalized to arrive at comparable frequencies.5 It was
decided to normalize text length to 100 words since all essays, with the exception of two,
were at least 100 words long. Normalized frequencies were determined for the features of
each individual essay; then averages were determined for each group of essays (per topic),
then for e-mail responses and word-processed essays as a whole.
RESULTS
Cohesive Features
Following Halliday (1990), the basic assumption guiding the present study has been that the
difference in the mode of production between e-mail and word processing "impose[s]
different grids on [the writing] experience" and that one does not "simply [duplicate] the
functions of the other" (p. 93). As a result, it was expected that different patterns of
grammatical and lexical cohesion would emerge in e-mail and word-processed texts. In other
words, writing was not considered "a new way of doing old things with language" (Halliday,
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
147
1990, p. 44) in an academic writing class, but rather the mode of production was expected to
result in different registers, "determined by what [writers were] doing at the time" (Halliday,
1990, p. 44). Cohesive devices had been selected as the target of this investigation since
cohesion is considered an important quality of academic discourse (Halliday & Hasan, 1976,
1990). This is evidenced in the curricular goals for pre-academic university ESL courses.
The analysis of the cohesive devices of this research appears to support some of our initial
assumptions while not upholding others. Our first assumption considered the potentially
hybrid nature of e-mail (e.g., Baron, 1998; DuBartell, 1995; Maynor, 1994) and speculated
that cohesive devices typically associated with spoken discourse might be more prominent in
the students' e-mail writing. However, no obvious differences between e-mail and word-
processed writing can be observed when the normalized averages for each feature are
considered (see Appendix B). Overall, all features occur with slightly greater frequency in
the students' e-mail texts than in word-processed texts, but since the frequencies involved are
so small (between 1 and 3 times per 100 words), these differences seem almost negligible.
Among all cohesive devices, grammatical cohesion in the form of sentence connectors,
clause coordinators, and clause subordinators, as well as lexical cohesion in the form of
pronoun referents, are used most often by the students, regardless of the medium in which the
texts were produced. The only notable exception is demonstrative noun phrases, which in this
study are used slightly more frequently in word-processed than in e-mail writing. It is also
the only feature for which the frequency trend is reversed. But again, the difference between
1.35 (the mean frequency for demonstrative noun phrases in all word-processed essays) and
0.92 (the mean frequency for demonstrative noun phrases in all e-mail responses) is too small
to be statistically significant (see Figur 1).
Figure 1. Normalized averages for features
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
148
These average frequencies, however, erroneously give the impression that all cohesive
devices were used by all writers in their e-mail writing as well as their word-processed
writing to similar extents. Yet, this is not the case. It was found that some writers exhibit
individual preferences for certain features while ignoring others. This means that a writer
may show a preference for demonstrative noun phrases in his/her word-processed writing but
may not at all -- or only infrequently -- choose this feature in his/her e-mail writing. Other
writers were found to have other preferences. These individual differences become conflated
when average frequencies for a small number of writers are considered (see Figures 2 and 3).
Thus, our assumption that both media, e-mail and word processing, might produce their own
"new register" (Halliday, 1990, p. 44) can at this point not be strongly supported, at least not
when considering grammatical and lexical cohesion.
Figure 2. Normalized counts for demonstrative pronouns
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
149
Figure 3. Normalized counts for sentence connectors
A third assumption concerned the context of the situation and audience as well as students'
cultural background, which might influence how writers encode information in the two
media (cf. Connor, 1996; Murray, 1988). Since both e-mail and word-processed writing took
place in the context of an academic learning environment, and since the majority of
participating students are Asian, one might in fact expect similarities in the use of cohesive
devices across the two media. As a matter of fact, four of the cohesive devices under
investigation are used by all writers in both media: sentence connectors, clause coordinators,
clause subordinators, and pronouns.
These particular ways of creating cohesion in text are apparently not so much a matter of
personal preference as a matter of what all non-native writers felt most comfortable using.
Sentence connectors, clause coordinators, and subordinators are very explicit means for
establishing intra- and inter-sentential relations (Halliday & Hasan, 1976, 1990). Similarly,
pronouns need to refer back to an obvious link in the text and are thus one of the most basic
ways of creating cohesion (Halliday & Hasan, 1976, 1990). The students in our study did,
however, also use pronouns where a direct referent would have been more appropriate, such
as in cases when the intended referent could not be recovered, or not be recovered easily, as
the example below illustrates.6 This seems to indicate that students perceive pronouns as a
prime means toward establishing texture and cohesion. An examination of whether or not
students' e-mail writing contains more unsupported pronouns than their word-processed
writing was not done in this study, but might warrant investigation.
I admit as much. Chinese who came in U.S. to make money on the pretext of
China's "one-child" policy and unemployed Cubans, all of them do more harm
than good in U.S. In addition, the Clinton administration failed to work out this
problem until now. She said "Our immigration policy hurts U.S. citizens." (EM)
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
150
It is interesting that lexical repetition, found to be so prevalent in academic writing (cf.
Biesenbach-Lucas, 1994; Weisberg, 1984), was infrequent in both e-mail and word-
processed texts, even though some students showed a preference for making textual
connections in this way. Overall, however, the general avoidance of exact lexical repetition
may indicate that non-native speakers interpret the repetition of the same noun, or noun
phrase, as demonstrating a lack of verbal flexibility, which they may also perceive as less
desirable. Pronouns may be the easiest way to circumvent what the students perceive as a
weakness as they may not have enough linguistic flexibility to select appropriate synonyms.
Overall, the present study has yielded no consistent pattern that clearly distinguishes students'
e-mail writing from their word-processed writing -- at least not for the cohesive features
investigated here.
Text Length
While e-mail writing does not apparently differ significantly from word-processed writing in
the students' use of the 12 cohesive features targeted in our study, they do differ with respect
to text length. Contrary to suggestions made by other researchers (Hidi & Hildyard, 1983;
Lepeintre, 1995), word counts of all available e-mail and word-processed essay pairs reveal
that, as hypothesized, the e-mail responses tend to be shorter than the corresponding word-
processed essays for all three topics on which the students wrote (Figure 4). This difference
is also statistically significant (in three of the four cases presented in Table 1), a finding
which is consistent with that of Tella (1992), who also found the word count for e-mail texts
to be lower than that for word-processed texts.
Figure 4. Average text lengths for each topic (for paired texts)
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
151
Table 1. Wilcoxen Matched-Pairs Signed-Ranks Test of Text Length
Texts (N=25) R Number S Rank Mean Rank
Immigration
(N=10)
+R
-R
z = -2.429, p<.05
8
1
43
2
5.375
2
Religion
(N=7)
+R
-R
z = -2.366, p<.05
7
0
28
0
4
--
Multiculturalism
(N=8)
+R
-R
z = -1.54, p>.05
5
3
29
7
5.8
2.33
All texts
(N=25)
+R
-R
z = -3.829, p<.01
20
4
284
16
14.2
4
In addition, it was found that all essays, both e-mail and word-processed, tended to get longer
over the course of the study. In other words, the e-mail responses and the word-processed
essays are shorter for the first two topics, immigration and religion, and longest for the last
topic, multiculturalism. In the e-mail condition, the responses to the text on religion were
actually the shortest of all three topics, possibly reflecting a generally lower interest in the
particular source text. While this may simply be a reflection of the students' greater interest
in the last topic, it can also be assumed that the writers had become more used to writing in e-
mail and word-processed conditions throughout the semester.
While it might be argued that a practice effect could account for the greater length of word-
processed texts, the text prompts -- even though on a related topic -- were not based on the
same texts. Thus, each writing constituted a new task, only differentiated in the medium of
production.
It is also interesting to note that particularly truncated writing, that is, texts of 120 words or
less, is more typical of students' e-mail than of their word-processed texts. This is confirmed
in a subsequent analysis (Biesenbach-Lucas et al., 2000), where a number of e-mail texts
remain below 100 words. A closer investigation of argument structure in the students' writing
(cf. Connor, 1996) might shed light on potential core information that is retained in e-mail
writing.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
152
Contextualization
The difference in text length between the students' e-mail and word-processed texts
precipitated a closer investigation into what might account for the greater text length in word-
processed writing. Guided by the assumption that writers need to consider what information
is shared with their readers and what is not, one might expect that those assumptions are
reflected in the resulting texts by including less context for an audience which is familiar
with the topic. It had been hypothesized that writers would demonstrate a greater concern for
providing background for the reader initially in the essay when addressing a potentially wider
audience, as in the word-processed writing condition. Our findings show that there is in fact a
distinct trend in the students' word-processed writing for initial contextualization of
information, unlike in their e-mail writing (Figure 5). More precisely, in their word-
processed essays, writers make an effort to provide some kind of background information on
the topic, which takes various forms, such as referring to the title of the source article, its
author, the author's point of view or message, or a general introduction to the topic. It is only
after this background has been provided that the writers proceed to respond directly to the
essay prompt, namely, whether or not they agree with the author's point of view. Apparently,
even though the writers know that their audience, the two teachers, are familiar with the
texts, they frame their word-processed essays in a way consistent with self-contained writing,
in which background needs to be established.
Figure 5. Topic contextualization provided initially in text
In contrast, in the e-mail responses, writers tend to begin right away by providing their
personal opinion; and in all cases the writers use explicit markers to signal their intent, for
example by writing  my opinion, I think, I agree with the author, or I disagree with the
author. In most cases, students react directly to the essay prompts by even repeating the
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
153
wording of the prompts as provided by the teacher, for example, In my opinion, her research
project is important. However, background is not established, nor is the author of the text
prompt identified, as the use of the possessive pronoun h rin the previous example
illustrates. Such background is most likely assumed as being shared with the audience, the
two teachers involved in each class. It is quite obvious that the absence of contextualizing
information also accounts for generally shorter texts, in this case the students' e-mail
responses.
In the following examples, students did not include text-initial contextualization. The
sentences represent the first sentence in the students' e-mail texts:
I agree with Ms. Yeh's position. (EM)
Here, the reader is clearly assumed to be familiar not only with Ms. Yeh's position and the
topic that this position refers to, but also with who Ms. Yeh is in the first place, as well as
that the prompt asked students to agree or disagree with her point of view. In the following
example, the student also begins immediately with a personal opinion. What is more, the
student explicitly assumes that the reader is familiar with the research project he is referring
to as well as whose research this is
In my opinion, her research project is important. Because we can learn about the
other religions in the whole world. (EM)
Similarly, the writer of the following e-mail text indicates that he is providing several
reasons, as indicated by the word first, clearly assuming that the reader knows what these
reasons refer to and what topic they concern. By the same token, the reader is expected to
know who Joan Beck is since the writer provides no other background but name only:
First, I do not agree with Joan Beck, because in the US there are more than 250
million living and many foreigners living in the US. (EM)
In contrast, text-initial contextualization does not assume the same kind of familiarity with
concepts referred to as is illustrated in the following example from a student's word-
processed texts:
It goes without saying that every country must have its common language to
announce its policy or execution. (WP)
Here, the initial information provided serves as a general introduction to the topic,
multiculturalism and multilingualism, but it does not refer to any specific elements from the
text prompt. In the following example, the writer provides a summary of the main point of
the text prompt, thus deliberately establishing shared information with the reader but not
assuming it:
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
154
The U.S. Postal Service is taking the unusual step of releasing a stamp
commemorating a religious holiday other than Chritmas, and plan to issue other
stamps in the future "to honor the country's increasing cultural and ethnic
diversity." (WP)
Similarly, the next example provides the title of the text prompt, its author, and the general
point made in the article. There would be no need to provide this information if the writer
assumes his audience to share it:
In the article, "Saying No To the Flow" written by Jim Hoagland, tell us about the
problem of immigration in the U.S. (WP)
To conclude, the students' e-mail and word-processed texts showed evidence of their
different assumptions about intended readership (cf. Chafe, 1976), which manifest
themselves in tendencies for different information presentation depending on the medium in
which texts are produced.
DISCUSSION
The results of this study indicate that the students' on-line and off-line texts could not be
distinguished in terms of the relative frequency of occurrence of the cohesive lexical items.
However, the two groups of texts were distinguished fairly clearly based on text length and
the amount of contextualization given text-initially. Factors which could have influenced the
results are the academic context, student characteristics, and choice of cohesive features.
The writing completed for this study was reading-based and written for instructors.
Furthermore, it was incorporated into a teaching unit for which students wrote other reading-
based essay responses. During the first part of the semester, students were made aware of
instructors' general expectations regarding textual organization. These included expectations
regarding textual organization including the use of cohesive features (cf. Halliday & Hasan,
1990). Students were taught, following typical academic conventions, to include three types
of information in their writing, including introductory information, a discussion, and
concluding information. Likewise, the course curriculum incorporated instruction of the use
of cohesive elements, particularly inter- and intra-sentential cohesive ties as well as lexical
cohesion (Halliday & Hasan, 1976). It would seem likely that students would address these
expectations in both responses produced for this study, especially since the stated audience of
their writing included their instructors.
The students' level of proficiency, their specialized preparation (i.e., English for Academic
Purposes) and first-language background (i.e., most students were Asian) may have restricted
their use of English to more formal registers and may have prevented their use of features
associated with more conversational registers. Also, some students' lack of familiarity with
the technology may have extended to not being aware of the sociolinguistic variations that
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
155
can occur between on-line and off-line texts. This unfamiliarity could have restricted the use
of whatever conversational features they had acquired although only a couple students
indicated -- in a questionnaire administered at the beginning of the study -- that they did not
often use email. Most students reported using email often with a number of types of
audiences.
It may be that a different selection of features associated with textual cohesion would
distinguish on-line and off-line texts. For example, during the analyses, we noted that deictic
features7 and lexical topicalization (similar to left dislocation) were prominent and could
possibly distinguish the texts.
In light of these various possible constraints on variation in textual features, it is interesting
to note some fairly clear distinctions found in the study. Variations in text length and
contextualization, as well as the occurrence of features such as salutations in students' on-line
texts, indicate that students employ different rhetorical strategies for on-line and off-line
writing. Danet (1999) argues that confusion about whether letter writing conventions should
be applied to e-mail in conjunction with a lack of adherence to conventions for writing in e-
mail accounts for the use of salutations, and other features associated with letter writing, in e-
mail. This is an issue which deserves further study, but in this study we focused on text
length and contextualization.
The longer texts, which tend in this study to be the word-processed texts, are longer in part
because of the inclusion of contextualizing material. The provision of such information,
especially text-initially, is consistent with academic writing conventions taught in EAP
composition courses. It is thus not surprising to find this type of information in students'
responses. What is interesting in these findings is the tendency for students not to include
contextualizing information in e-mail -- even when it is addressed to their instructors. This
observation suggests that some students viewed the media differently in terms of the types of
information required. This may be due to the notion of the immediacy of e-mail with the
related expectation that the instructors were familiar with the articles and the prompts and
that if some information was not clear that the instructor could easily e-mail the student for
clarification.
The observation of these distinctive characteristics raises the question as to whether e-mail is
an appropriate tool for students to use in writing academic essays. Aside from difficulties due
to the limited editing facilities in the Pine e-mail editor, if students tend not to contextualize
and develop their writing in e-mail -- for whatever reason -- e-mail may be an inappropriate
vehicle for promoting self-contained academic writing or, at least, aspects of it. Likewise,
instead of taming the technology to meet pedagogical objectives (Marcus, 1995), it may be
more reasonable to use the various technologies in ways for which they are better suited.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
156
Hawisher (1992) discusses misuses and appropriate uses of e-mail, arguing, for instance, that
e-mail can be effective in conferencing. Based on the results of our study, it appears that the
effectiveness of using e-mail during the drafting and revising stages of writing should be
questioned. It may be more effective to have students draft and revise their writing in a word
processor and then upload/download it in the event that the writing were to be mailed.
In general, it is not clear how writing in e-mail may benefit students in terms of producing
academic writing. A number of empirical studies have been done in business contexts
(Ferrara, Brunner, & Whittemore, 1991; Kurth, 1987; Metz, 1994; Murray, 1985, 1991,
1995; Sproull & Kiesler, 1986; Yates & Orlikowski, 1995; Yates, Orlikowski, & Okamura,
1997) to document the effectiveness of communication via e-mail in corporate contexts, but
relatively little has been done to document how students’ writing could be improved as a
result of using e-mail (Lepeintre, 1995; Stroble, 1987; Tella, 1992; Yoder, 1991). While there
is a growing body of literature which provides suggestions for classroom applications (Dik,
1986; Kumpf, 1986; Rosenthal, 1991; Warschauer, 1995) and which investigates affective
variables associated with classroom uses (Ingram, 1987; Tella, 1991), there is an acute need
for empirical research of the potential effects of e-mail use on students’ language acquisition.
In light of the informal observations made during this study, an investigation of other
features (e.g., deictics and topicalization) which appear to play a role in distinguishing
students’ on-line and off-line texts might be useful. A refined analysis of contextualization
likewise promises useful and interesting insight into possible differences of e-mail and word-
processed texts. Variations in deployment of features under consideration should be
examined qualitatively. Finally, a sociolinguistic analysis of the potential intersects of
students’ familiarity with e-mail and the linguistic and rhetorical textual variations should be
completed.
APPENDIX A: Sample Assignments
Sample Assignment for E-mail Reaction
EFL40 Oral Communication Reaction Writing/Article #5
MULTICULTURALISM: "DON'T SAY A WORD -- UNLESS IT'S IN ENGLISH"
Directions:
•  Read the attached article, "Don't Say a Word -- Unless It's in English."
•  Go to a computer and enter the GWIS2 system.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
157
·  Write your reaction to the article. Then e-mail it to your OC and your G/W
instructors.
Respond to the following question:
Joan Beck wants English to be made the official language of the United States.
Do you agree with her? Why or why not?
Sample Assignment for Word-Processed Reaction
EFL40 Grammar and Writing Reaction Writing/Article #6
MULTICULTURALISM: "Lingua Blanka"
Assignment for the Computer Lab on Friday, November 15th:
·  Use Word Perfect for this assignment.
·  Write your reaction to the article, "Lingua Blanka."
Respond to the following question:
Dennis Baron does not believe that English should become the official language
of the United States. He actually believes that English should be banned. Do you
agree or disagree with him? Why?
When you have finished this assignment, give a hard copy and your diskette to your
Grammar and Writing instructor. Your instructor will return your diskette next Monday after
making it available to your Oral Communication instructor.
[RETURN TO TEXT]
APPENDIX B: Average Normalized Counts
Textual Features
Normalized Counts for
E-mail Texts
Normalized Counts for
Word-processed Texts
Demonstrative Pronouns 0.24 0.19
Demonstrative Noun Phrases 0.92 1.35
Sentence Connectors 1.85 1.66
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
158
Clause Coordinators 1.72 1.37
Clause Subordinators 1.56 1.30
Phrase Subordinators 0.50 0.47
Discourse Particles 0.03 0.06
Lexical Repetition 0.81 0.64
Synonyms 0.11 0.10
Pronouns 2.29 2.05
Ellipsis 0.56 0.42
Summative Expressions 0.00 0.01
[RETURN TO TEXT]
NOTES
return1Biber and Finegan (1989, 1992) note the diachronic shift from literate to oral
characteristics in written texts.
return2These features were clausal vs. phrasal structures, left dislocation, repair, and
"nextness."
return3None of the student examples provided here have been edited.
return4In the word counts of the e-mail responses, the entire message was considered,
including salutations (beginning and end) and headings. For the word-processed essays,
each essay was considered in its entirety, including rewritten headings, salutations, and
rewritten essay prompts (except when the writer clearly indicated through bracketing or
different font style/size that a particular question was not intended as part of the text
proper but rather a reminder to the reader).
The following lexical items were counted as on  word:
·  possessives, e.g., Dr  Eck's [research]
·  abbreviated verb forms, e.g., I'm, don't, can't, that's, it's
·  proper names, including titles, e.g., Dennis Baron, Dr. Eck, Prof. Meloni,
Binbing Yu, Washington Post
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
159
·  hyphenated words (often in adjectival position), e.g., n -French, right-wing,
non-legalized, long-term, safe-haven, high-skilled, low-skilled, CD-Rom,
English speaking, anti-British, high-paid, under-developed, non-citizens
·  abbreviations/acronyms, e.g., INS, TOEFL, GWU, U.S., U.S.A. (but not United
States)
·  each item in dates, e.g., Au ust 4, 1986
·  each item in a percentage value, e.g., 600%
return5The formula for calculating normalized counts is the following:
(number of occurrences of feature / length of text) x 100
return6Pronouns with unrecoverable referents, i.e., pronouns in sentences/clauses not
immediately following the intended referent, were not counted in our study.
return7Deictics are features which anchor a text temporally and spatially. The use of now, for
example serves as a temporal deictic, referencing the time of writing. See Lyons (1979)
and Levinson (1983) for further discussion of deictics.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank Christine Meloni and Kenneth Stratton for their time and effort spent
in the analysis of students' texts which provide the basis for this research. We would also like
to thank the anonymous reviewers from Language Learning and Technology f r their helpful
comments on an earlier draft.
This paper is based on an earlier symposium presentation, "E-Mail and Wordprocessed Texts
of Non-Native Speakers: Distinguishable Text Types?" posted at
http://www.gwu.edu/~washweb/lucas.html.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas is Assistant Professor in the TESOL Program at American
University where she teaches courses in language teaching methodology, materials
preparation, testing/assessment, second language acquisition, and sociolinguistics. Her
research has focused on the analysis of e-mail, and the role of e-mail and related technology
in university level courses.
E-mail: sblucas@american.edu
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
160
Donald Weasenforth is Assistant Professor in the EFL Department at The George
Washington University where he teaches primarily advanced-level composition. His research
interests are written discourse analysis of electronic texts and critical linguistic analysis of
political documents.
E-mail: weasenf@gwis2.circ.gwu.edu
REFERENCES
Altenberg, B. (1984). Causal linking in spoken and written English. Studia Linguistica, 38,
20-69.
Baron, N. (1984). Computer mediated communication as a force in language change. Visible
Language, 18(2), 118-141.
Baron, N. (1998). Letters by phone or speech by other means: The linguistics of e-mail.
Language and Communication, 18, 133-170.
Beaman, K. (1984). Coordination and subordination revisited: Syntactic complexity in
spoken and written narrative discourse. In D. Tannen (Ed.), Coherence in spoken and written
discourse (pp. 45-80). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Biber, D. (1986). Spoken and written textual dimensions in English: Resolving the
contradictory findings. Language, 62, 384-414.
Biber, D. (1988). Variation across speech and writing. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Biber, D. (1992). Using computer-based text corpora to analyze the referential strategies of
spoken and written texts. In J. Svartvik (Ed.), Directions in corpus linguistics: Proceedings
of Nobel Symposium, Stockholm. August 4-8, 1991, (pp. 213-252). Berlin: Mouton.
Biber, D., & Finegan, E. (1989). Drift and the evolution of English style: A history of three
genres. Language, 65(3), 487-517.
Biber, D., & Finegan, E. (1992). The linguistic evolution of five written and speech-based
English genres from the 17th to the 20th centuries. In M. Rissanen, O. Ihalainen, & T.
Nevalainen (Eds.), History of Englishes: New Methods and Interpretations in Historical
Linguistics (pp. 688-704). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Biesenbach-Lucas, S. (1994). A comparative genre analysis: The research article and its
popularization. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Georgetown University, Washington, DC.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
161
Biesenbach-Lucas, S., Meloni, C., & Weasenforth, D. (2000). Use of cohesive features in
ESL students' e-mail and word-processed texts: A comparative study. Computer Assisted
Language Learning, 13(3), 1-17.
Biesenbach-Lucas, S., & Weasenforth, D. (1997). On-line and off-line texts of non-native
speakers: Distinguishable text types? In C. Meloni & L. Miller (Eds.), Procee ings of "E-
Mail, the Web, and MOOs: Developing the Writing Skills of University Students in
Cyberspace." Washington, DC: The George Washington University. Retrieved November
30, 2000 from the World Wide Web: http://www.gwu.edu/~washweb/lucas.html.
Biesenbach-Lucas, S., & Weasenforth, D. (1998). The appropriateness of e-mail in
composition instruction: A linguistic and rhetorical analysis. In V. Darleguy, A. Ding, & M.
Svensson (Eds.), Les Nouvelles Technologies Educatives dans l'apprentissage des langues
vivantes: Réfléxion théorique et applications pratiques [New instructional technologies in
modern language teaching: Theoretical reflection and practical applications] (pp. 80-90).
Lyon, France: Centre de Ressources en Langues.
Chafe, W. (1976). Givenness, contrastiveness, definiteness, subjects, topics, and point of
view. In C. N. Li (Ed.), Subject and topic (pp. 25-55). New York: Academic Press.
Chafe, W. (1982). Integration and involvement in speaking, writing, and oral literature. In D.
Tannen (Ed.), Spoken and written language: Exploring orality and literacy (pp. 35-54).
Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Chafe, W. (1985). Linguistic differences produced by differences between speaking and
writing. In D. R. Olson, N. Torrance, & A. Hildyard (Eds.), Literature, language, and
learning: The nature and consequences of reading and writing (pp. 105-123). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Collot, M., & Belmore, N. (1996). Electronic language: A new variety of English. In S. C.
Herring (Ed.), Computer-mediated communication: Linguistic, social and cross-cultural
perspectives (pp. 13-28). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Connor, U. (1996). Contrastive rhetoric: Cross-cultural aspects of second language writing.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Danet, B. (1999, October 7). "Feeling Spiffy": The Changing Language of E-Mail. Annu
Hugo Mueller Lecture presented at the American University, Washington, DC.
Davis, B. H., & Brewer, J. (1997). Electronic discourse: Linguistic individuals in virtual
space. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
162
Dik, D. (1986). The impact of technology on adult learning and development: An historical,
contemporary and futuristic perspective (Doctoral dissertation, The Union for Experimenting
Colleges and Universities, 1986). Dissertation Abstracts International 47, 08A.
DuBartell, D. (1995). Discourse features of computer-mediated communication: "Spoken-
like" and "written-like." In B. Warvik, S. K. Tanskanen, & R. Hiltunen (Eds.), Organization
in discourse (pp. 231-239). Turku: University of Turku.
Faigley, L., & Witte, S. P. (1983). Topical focus in technical writing. In P. V. Anderson, R. J.
Brockman, & C.R. Miller (Eds.), New essays in technical and scientific communication:
Research, theory, practice (pp. 59-68). Farmingdale, NY: Baywood.
Ferrara, K., Brunner, H., & Whittemore, G. (1991). Interactive written discourse as an
emergent register. Written communication, 8(1) -34.
Gonzalez-Bueno, M. (1998). The effects of electronic mail on Spanish L2 discourse.
Language Learning and Technology, 1(2), 55-70. Retrieved November 30, 2000 from the
World Wide Web: http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num2/article3/default.html.
Gumperz, J., Kaltman, H., & O'Connor, M. C. (1984). Cohesion in spoken and written
discourse: Ethnic style and the transition to literacy. In D. Tannen (Ed.), Advances in
Discourse Processes, Vol. 12 (pp. 3-19). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1967). Notes on transitivity and theme in English, Part 2. Journal of
Linguistics, 3,199-244.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1973). Explorations in the functions of language. London: Edward
Arnold.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1990). Spoken and written language. Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press.
Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1976). Cohesion in English. New York: Longman.
Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1990). Language, context and text: Aspects of language in
a social-semiotic perspective. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Hawisher, G. (1992). Electronic meetings of the minds: Research, electronic conferences,
and composition studies. In G. Hawisher & P. LeBlanc (Eds.), Reimagining computers and
composition: Teaching and research in the virtual age (pp. 81-101). Portsmouth, NH:
Heinemann.
Hidi, S., & Hildyard, A. (1983). The Comparison of oral and written productions in two
discourse types. Discourse processes, 6, 91-105.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
163
Ingram, J. (1987). Implementing and assessing computer-augmented teaching in the large
lecture course (Doctoral dissertation, Northwestern University, 1987). Di sertation Abstracts
International, 48, 10A.
Johns, A. (1984). Textual cohesion and the Chinese speaker of English. Language learning
and communication, 3(1), 69-74.
Kieras, D. E. (1980). Initial mention as a signal to thematic content in technical passages.
Memory and Cognition, 8(4), 345-353.
Kumpf, G. (1986). Microcomputer experiences of third grade students (Doctoral dissertation,
Ohio State University, 1986). Dissertation Abstracts International, 47, 05A.
Kurth, L. (1987). Message responses as functions of communication mode: A comparison of
electronic mail and typed memoranda (Doctoral dissertation, Arizona State University,
1987). Dissertation Abstracts International, 49, 03A.
Kurzon, D. (1985). Signposts for the reader: A corpus-based study of text deixis. Text, 5,
187-200.
Lepeintre, S. (1995). E-mail: Planned or unplanned speech? R trieved June 11, 1996 from
the World Wide Web: http://weber.u.washington.edu/~trans/da.html.
Levinson, S. (1983). Pragmatics. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Lyons, J. (1979). Deixis and anaphora. In T. Myers (Ed.), The development of conversation
and discourse (pp. 88-103). Edinburgh, UK: Edinburgh University Press.
Marcus, S. (1995, January). E-mailiorating student writing. Electro ic Learning, 18-19.
Maynor, N. (1994). The language of electronic mail: Written speech? In G. D. Little & M.
Montgomery (Eds.), Centennial usage studies (pp. 48-54). Tuscaloosa, AL. University of
Alabama Press.
Metz, M. (1994). Computer-mediated communication: Literature review of a new context.
Interpersonal computing and technology: An electronic journal for the 21st century, 2(2), 31-
49. Retrieved March 31, 1997 from the World Wide Web:
http://www.helsinki.fi/science/optek/1994/n2/metz.txt.
Morrow, P. R. (1989). Conjunct use in business news stories and academic journal articles.
English for Specific Purposes, 8, 239-254.
Murray, D. (1985). Composition as conversation: The computer terminal as medium of
communication. In L. Odell, & D. Goswami (Eds.), Writing in nonacademic settings (pp.
203-228). New York: The Guilford Press.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
164
Murray, D. (1988). The context of oral and written language: A framework for mode and
medium switching. Language in Society, 17, 351-373.
Murray, D. (1991). Conversation for action: The computer terminal as medium of
communication. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Murray, D. (1995). Knowledge machines: Language and information in a technological
society. London: Longman.
Murray, D. (1996, June/July). Technology is driving the future ... the steering is up to us.
TESOL Matters, 3.
Ochs, E. (1979). Planned and unplanned discourse. In T. Givon (Ed.), Disc urse and Syntax
(pp. 51-80). New York: Academic Press.
Pine 3.0 [Computer software]. (1992). Seattle, WA: University of Washington.
Rosenthal, B. (1991). Computer-mediated discourse in a writing workshop: A case study in
higher education (Doctoral dissertation, New York University, 1991). Dissertation Abstracts
International, 52, 06A.
Scarcella, R. (1984). Cohesion in the writing development of native and non-native English
speakers. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Southern California, Los Angeles.
Sproull, L., & Kiesler, S. (1986). Reducing social context cues: Electronic mail in
organizational communication. Management Science, 32, 1492-1512.
Stroble, E. (1987). Use of electronic mail to facilitate peer group response during the writing
process (Doctoral dissertation, University of Virginia, 1987). Dissertation Abstracts
International, 50, 05A.
Tella, S. (1991). Introducing international communications networks and electronic mail in
foreign language classrooms: A case study in Finnish senior secondary schools. Helsinki:
University of Helsinki. [Research Report 95].
Tella, S. (1992). Talking shop via e-mail: A thematic and linguistic analysis of electronic
mail communication. (Research Report 99). Helsinki: University of Helsinki. (ERIC
Document Reproduction Service No. ED 352 015)
Tella, S., & Mononen-Aaltonen, M. (1998). Developing dialogic communication culture in
media education: Integrating dialogism and technology. Helsinki: Media Education
Publications 7. Retrieved March 30, 1997 from the World Wide Web:
http://www.helsinki.fi/~tella/mep7.html.
Language Learning & Technology  vol5num1 2001
165
Thompson, I. (1985). The given/new contract and cohesion: Some suggestions for classroom
practice. Journal of Technical Writing and Communication, 15(3), 205-214.
Tottie, G. (1985). The importance of being adverbial: Focusing and contingency adverbials
in spoken and written English. In G. Tottie & I. Backlund (Eds.), E glish in speech and
writing: A symposium. Studia Anglistica Upsaliensia 60 (pp. 93-118). Stockholm: Almqvist
and Wiksell.
Uhlirova, L. (1994). E-mail as a new subvariety of medium and its effects upon the message.
In S. Cmejrkova & F. Sticha (Eds.), The syntax of sentence and text: Festschrift for Frantisek
Danes (pp. 273-282). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Vande Kopple, W. J. (1986). Given and new information and some aspects of the structures,
semantics, and pragmatics of written texts. In C. R. Cooper & S. Greenbaum (Eds.), Studying
writing: Linguistic approaches (pp. 72-111). Beverley Hills, CA: Sage.
Vande Kopple, W. J. (1985). Some exploratory discourse on metadiscourse. College
Composition and Communication. 36, 82-93.
Wang, Y. M. (1993). E-mail dialogue journaling in an ESL reading and writing classroom.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Oregon, Eugene.
Warschauer, M. (1995). E-mail for English teaching. Alexandria, VA: TESOL.
Weisberg, R. C. (1984). Given and new: Paragraph development models from scientific
writing. TESOL Quarterly, 18(3), 485-500.
Word Perfect 6.1 [Computer software]. (1995). Orem, UT: Novell.
Yates, J., & Orlikowski, W. (1993). Knee-jerk anti-loopism and other e-mail phenomena:
Oral, written, and electronic patterns in computer-mediated communication. Unpublished
manuscript, MIT Sloan School of Management. Retrieved March 31, 1997 from the World
Wide Web: http://ccs.mit.edu/CCSWP150.html.
Yates, J., Orlikowski, W., & Okamura, K.(1997). Explicit and implicit structuring of genres:
Electronic communication in a Japanese R & D organization. U published manuscript.
Retrieved March 31, 1997 from the World Wide Web: http://ccs.mit.edu/CCSWP188.html.
Yoder, M. (1991). Telecommunications in the classroom: Factors affecting implementation
(Doctoral dissertation, Boston University, 1991). Dissertation Abstracts International, 52,
03A.
About LLT | Subscribe | Information for Contributors | Masthead | Archives
