Language Learning & Technology May 2001, Vol. 5, Num. 2
http://llt.msu.edu/call_for_papers.html p. 109
Copyright ª  2001, ISSN 1094-3501 109
Call for Papers for Special Issue of LLT
Theme:  Telecollaboration
Guest Editor: Julie Belz
For this special issue, the editor seeks submissions of research articles focusing on telecollaboration --
defined here as the application of global communication networks within foreign and second language
education. Telecollaboration includes all uses of Internet communication tools (and additional
conferencing media) to support dialogue, debate, collaborative research, social interaction, and other
forms of communicative activity that may contribute to language development and cultural awareness.
Contributions focusing on intercultural and distance uses of telecollaboration are specifically encouraged.
Though not limited to the topics below, we are primarily interested in the following themes:
•  Theoretical research on telecollaborative projects
•  Cross-cultural and cross-linguistic studies of telecollaborative partnerships
•  Developmental studies of language learning in telecollaboration
•  Ethnographic investigations of telecollaboration
•  Investigations focusing on differences in internet communication tools as used in
telecollaborative partnerships, e.g. email discussion, chat, knowledge forum/threaded discussion,
and web-publication
•  Meta-commentaries on organizational aspects of telecollaboration
•  Social and institutional dimensions of telecollaborative partnerships
•  Theoretically-informed dialogues between instructors in telecollaborative partnerships
Please note that all articles published in LLT, including in this special issue, should either report on
original research or present an original framework that links previous research, educational theory, and
teaching practices.
Please send an e-mail of intent with a 250-word abstract by November 14, 2001 to Julie Belz
(jab63@psu.edu)
Language Learning & Technology is published exclusively on the World Wide Web. You may see
current or back issues, and take out your free subscription, at http://llt.msu.edu.
