Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num3/lee/
September 2001, Vol. 5, Num. 3. 3
pp. 37-72
Copyright ª  2001, ISSN 1094-3501 37
GENRES, REGISTERS, TEXT TYPES, DOMAINS, AND STYLES:
CLARIFYING THE CONCEPTS AND NAVIGATING A PATH THROUGH
THE BNC JUNGLE
David YW Lee
Lancaster University, UK
ABSTRACT
In this paper, an attempt is first made to clarify and tease apart the somewhat confusing
terms genre, register, text type, domain, sublanguage, and style. The use of these terms
by various linguists and literary theorists working under different traditions or
orientations will be examined and a possible way of synthesising their insights will be
proposed and illustrated with reference to the disparate categories used to classify texts in
various existing computer corpora. With this terminological problem resolved, a personal
project which involved giving each of the 4,124 British National Corpus (BNC, version
1) files a descriptive "genre" label will then be described. The result of this work, a
spreadsheet/database (the "BNC Index") containing genre labels and other types of
information about the BNC texts will then be described and its usefulness shown. It is
envisaged that this resource will allow linguists, language teachers, and other users to
easily navigate through or scan the huge BNC jungle more easily, to quickly ascertain
what is there (and how much) and to make informed selections from the mass of texts
available. It should also greatly facilitate genre-based research (e.g., EAP, ESP, discourse
analysis, lexicogrammatical, and collocational studies) and focus everyday classroom
concordancing activities by making it easy for people to restrict their searches to highly
specified sub-sets of the BNC using PC-based concordancers such as WordSmith,
MonoConc, or the Web-based BNCWeb.
INTRODUCTION
Most corpus-based studies rely implicitly or explicitly on the notion of genre or the related concepts
register, text type, domain, style, sublanguage, message form, and so forth. There is much confusion
surrounding these terms and their usage, as anyone who has done any amount of language research
knows. The aims of this paper are therefore two-fold. I will first attempt to distinguish among the terms
because I feel it is important to point out the different nuances of meaning and theoretical orientations
lying behind their use. I then describe an attempt at classifying the 4,124 texts in the British National
Corpus (BNC) in terms of a broad sense of genre, in order to give researchers and language teachers a
better avenue of approach to the BNC for doing all kinds of linguistic and pedagogical research.
Categorising Texts: Genres, Registers, Domains, Styles, Text Types, & Other Confusions
Why is it important to know what these different terms mean, and why should corpus texts be classified
into genres? The short answer is that language teachers and researchers need to know exactly what kind
of language they are examining or describing. Furthermore, most of the time we want to deal with a
specific genre or a manageable set of genres, so that we can define the scope of any generalisations we
make. My feeling is that genre is the level of text categorisation which is theoretically and pedagogically
most useful and most practical to work with, although classification by domain is important as well (see
discussion below). There is thus a real need for large-scale general corpora such as the BNC to clearly
label and classify texts in a way that facilitates language description and research, beyond the
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 38
very broad classifications currently in place. It is impossible to make many useful generalisations about
"the English language" or "general English" since these are abstract constructions. Instead, it is far easier
and theoretically more sound to talk about the language of different genres of text, or the language(s) used
in different domains, or the different types of register available in a language, and so forth.
Computational linguists working in areas of natural language processing/language engineering have long
realised the need to target the scope of their projects to very specific areas, and hence they talk about
sublanguages such as air traffic control talk, journal articles on lipoprotein kinetics, navy telegraphic
messages, weather reports, and aviation maintenance manuals. (see Grishman & Kittredge, 1986;
Kittredge & Lehrberger, 1982, for detailed discussions of "sublanguages").
The terminological issue I grapple with here is a very vexing one. Although not all linguists will
recognise or actively observe the distinctions I am about to make (in particular, the use of the term text
type, which can be used in a very vague way to mean almost anything), I believe there is actually more
consensus on these issues than users of these terms themselves realise, and I hope to show this below.
Internal Versus External Criteria: Text Type & Genre
One way of making a distinction between genre and text type is to say that the former is based on
external, non-linguistic, "traditional" criteria while the latter is based on the internal, linguistic
characteristics of texts themselves (Biber, 1988, pp. 70 & 170; EAGLES, 1996).1 A genre, in this view, is
defined as a category assigned on the basis of external criteria such as intended audience, purpose, and
activity type, that is, it refers to a conventional, culturally recognised grouping of texts based on
properties other than lexical or grammatical (co-)occurrence features, which are, instead, the internal
(linguistic) criteria forming the basis of text type categories. Biber (1988) has this to say about external
criteria:
Genre categories are determined on the basis of external criteria relating to the speaker's
purpose and topic; they are assigned on the basis of use rather than on the basis of form.
(p. 170)
However, the EAGLES (1996)2 authors would quibble somewhat with the inclusion of the word topic
above and argue that one should not think of topic as being something to be established a priori, but rather
as something determined on the basis of internal criteria (i.e., linguistic characteristics of the text):
Topic is the lexical aspect of internal analysis of a text. Externally the problem of
classification is that there are too many possible methods, and no agreement or stability
in societies or across them that can be built upon ... The boundaries between ... topics are
ultimately blurred, and we would argue that in the classification of topic for corpora, it is
best done on a higher level, with few categories of topic which would alter according to
the language data included. There are numerous ways of classifying texts according to
topic. Each corpus project has its own policies and criteria for classification … The fact
that there are so many different approaches to the classification of text through topic, and
that different classificatory topics are identified by different groups indicates that existing
classification[s] are not reliable. They do not come from the language, and they do not
come from a generally agreed analysis. However they are arrived at, they are subjective,
and … the resulting typology is only one view of language, among many with equal
claims to be the basis of a typology. (p. 17)
So perhaps it is best to disregard the word "topic" in the quote from Biber above, and take genres simply
as categories chosen on the basis of fairly easily definable external parameters. Genres also have the
property of being recognised as having a certain legitimacy as groupings of texts within a speech
community (or by sub-groups within a speech community, in the case of specialised genres). This is
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 39
essentially the view of genre taken by Swales (1990, pp. 24-27), who talks about genres being "owned"
(and, to varying extents, policed) by particular discourse communities.
Without going into the minutiae of the EAGLES' recommendations, all I will say is that detailed, explicit
recommendations do not yet exist in terms of identifying text types or, indeed, any so-called "internal
criteria." That is, there are as yet, no widely-accepted or established text-type-based categories consisting
of texts which cut across traditionally recognisable genres on the basis of internal linguistic features (see
discussion below). On the subject of potentially useful internal classificatory criteria, the EAGLES
authors mention the work of Phillips (1983) under the heading of topic (the "aboutness" or
"intercollocation of collocates" or "lexical macrostructures" of texts), and the work of Biber (1988, 1989)
and Nakamura (1986, 1987, 1992, 1993) under the heading of style (which the EAGLES' authors
basically divide into "formal/informal," combining this with parameters such as "considered/impromptu"
and "one-way/interactive"). However, the authors offer no firm recommendations, merely the observation
that "these are only shafts of light in a vast darkness" (p. 25), and they do not mention what a possible text
type could be (in fact, no examples are even given of possible labels for text types). At present, all corpora
use only external criteria to classify texts. Indeed, as Atkins, Clear, & Ostler (1992, p. 5) note, there is a
good reason for this:
The initial selection of texts for inclusion in a corpus will inevitably be based on external
evidence primarily … A corpus selected entirely on internal criteria would yield no
information about the relation between language and its context of situation.
The EAGLES (1996) authors add that
[the] classification of texts based purely on internal criteria does not give prominence to
the sociological environment of the text, thus obscuring the relationship between the
linguistic and non-linguistic criteria. (p. 7)
Coming back to the distinction between genre and text type, therefore, the main thing to remember here is
what the two different approaches to classification mean for texts and their categorisation. In theory, two
texts may belong to the same text type (in Biber's sense) even though they may come from two different
genres because they have some similarities in linguistic form (e.g., biographies and novels are similar in
terms of some typically "past-tense, third-person narrative" linguistic features). This highly restricted use
of text type is an attempt to account for variation within and across genres (and hence, in a way, to go
"above and beyond" genre in linguistic investigations). Biber's (1989, p. 6) use of the term, for example,
is prompted by his belief that "genre distinctions do not adequately represent the underlying text types of
English …; linguistically distinct texts within a genre represent different text types; linguistically similar
texts from different genres represent a single text type."
Paltridge (1996), in an article on "Genre, Text Type, and the Language Learning Classroom," makes
reference to Biber (1988; but, crucially, not to Biber 1989)3 and proposes a usage of the terms genre and
text type which he claims is in line with Biber's external/internal distinction, as delineated above. It is
clear from the article, however, that what Paltridge means by "internal criteria" differs considerably from
what Biber meant. Paltridge proposes the following distinction:
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 40
Table 1. Paltridge's Examples of Genres and "Text Types" (based on Hammond, Burns, Joyce, Brosnan,
& Gerot, 1992)
Genre Text Type
Recipe Procedure
Personal letter Anecdote
Advertisement Description
Police report Description
Student essay Exposition
Formal letter Exposition
Format letter Problem–Solution
News item Recount
Health brochure Procedure
Student assignment Recount
Biology textbook Report
Film review Review
As can be seen, what Paltridge calls "text types" are probably better termed "discourse/rhetorical structure
types," since the determinants of his "text types" are not surface-level lexicogrammatical or syntactic
features (Biber's "internal linguistic features"), but rhetorical patterns (which is what Hoey, 1986, p. 130,
for example, calls them). Paltridge's sources, Meyer (1975), Hoey (1983), Crombie (1985) and Hammond
et al. (1992) are all similarly concerned with text-level/discoursal/rhetorical structures or patterns in texts,
which most linguists would probably not consider as constituting 'text types' in the more usual sense.
Returning to Biber's distinction between genre and text type, then, what we can say is that his "internal
versus external" distinction is attractive. However, as noted earlier, the main problem is that linguists
have still not firmly decided on or enumerated or described in concrete terms the kinds of text types (in
Biber's sense) we would profit from looking at. Biber's (1989) work on text typology (see also Biber &
Finegan,1986) using his factor-analysis-based multi-dimensional (MD) approach is the most suggestive
work so far in this area, but his categories do not seem to have been taken up by other linguists. His eight
text types (e.g., "informational interaction," "learned exposition," "involved persuasion") are claimed to
be maximally distinct in terms of their linguistic characteristics. The classification here is at the level of
individual texts, not groups such as "genres," so texts which nominally "belong together" in a "genre" (in
terms of external criteria) may land up in different text types because of differing linguistic
characteristics. An important caveat to mention, however, is that there are many questions surrounding
the statistical validity, empirical stability, and linguistic usefulness of the linguistic "dimensions" from
which Biber derives these "text types," or clusters of texts sharing internal linguistic characteristics (see
Lee, 2000, for a critique) and hence these text typological categories should be taken as indicative rather
than final. Kennedy (1998) has said, for example, that
Some of the text types established by the factor analysis do not seem to be clearly
different from each other. For example, the types "learned" and "scientific" exposition …
may differ only in some cases because of a higher incidence of active verbs in the
"learned" text type. (p. 188)
One could also question the aptness or helpfulness of some of the text type labels (e.g., how useful is it to
know that 29% of "official documents" belong to the text type "scientific exposition"?).
It therefore still remains to be seen if stable and valid dimensions of (internal) variation, which can serve
as useful criteria for text typology, can be found. At the risk of rocking the boat, I would also like to say
that, personally, I am not convinced that there is a pressing need to determine "all the text types in the
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 41
English language" or to balance corpora on the basis of these types. Biber (1993) notes that it is more
important as a first step in compiling a corpus to focus on covering all the situational parameters of
language variation, because they can be determined prior to the collection of texts, whereas
there is no a priori way to identify linguistically defined types ... [however,] the results of
previous research studies, as well as on-going research during the construction of a
corpus, can be used to assure that the selection of texts is linguistically as well as
situationally representative [italics added]. (p. 245)
My question, however, is: what does it mean to say that a corpus is "linguistically representative" or
linguistically balanced? Also, why should this be something we should strive towards? The EAGLES'
(1996) authors say that we should see progress in corpus compilation and text typology as a cyclical
process:
The internal linguistic criteria of the text [are] analysed subsequent to the initial selection
based on external criteria. The linguistic criteria are subsequently upheld as particular to
the genre … [Thus] classification begins with external classification and subsequently
focuses on linguistic criteria. If the linguistic criteria are then related back to the external
classification and the categories adjusted accordingly, a sort of cyclical process ensues
until a level of stability is established. (p. 7)
Or, as the authors say later, this process is one of "frequent cross-checking between internal and external
criteria so that each establishes a framework of relevance for the other" (p. 25). Beyond these rather
abstract musings, however, there is not enough substantive discussion of what text types or other kinds of
internally-based criteria could possibly look like or how exactly they would be useful in balancing
corpora.
In summary, with text type still being an elusive concept which cannot yet be established explicitly in
terms of linguistic features, perhaps the looser use of the term by people such as Faigley and Meyer
(1983) may be just as useful: they use text type in the sense of the traditional four-part rhetorical
categories of narrative, description, exposition and argumentation. Steen (1999, p. 113) similarly calls
these four classes "types of discourse."4 Stubbs (1996, p. 11), on the other hand, uses text type and genre
interchangeably, in common, perhaps, with most other linguists. At present, such usages of text type
(which do not observe the distinctions Biber and EAGLES try to make) are perhaps as consistent and
sensible as any, as long as people make it clear how they are using the terms. It does seem redundant,
however, to have two terms, each carrying its own historical baggage, both covering the same ground.
"Genre," "Register," and "Style"
Other terms often used in the literature on language variation are register and style. I will now walk into a
well-known quagmire and try to distinguish between the terms genre, register, and style. In his
Dictionary of Linguistics and Phonetics, Crystal (1991, p. 295) defines register as "a variety of language
defined according to its use in social situations, e.g. a register of scientific, religious, formal English."
(Presumably these are three different registers.) Interestingly, Crystal does not include genre in his
dictionary, and therefore does not try to define it or distinguish it from other similar/competing terms. In
Crystal & Davy (1969), however, the word style is used in the way most other people use register: to
refer to particular ways of using language in particular contexts. The authors felt that the term register had
become too loosely applied to almost any situational variety of language of any level of generality or
abstraction, and distinguished by too many different situational parameters of variation. (Using style in
the same loose fashion, however, hardly solves anything, and, as I argue below, goes against the usage of
style by most people in relation to individual texts or individual authors/speakers.)
The two terms genre5 and register are the most confusing, and are often used interchangeably, mainly
because they overlap to some degree. One difference between the two is that genre tends to be associated
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 42
more with the organisation of culture and social purposes around language (Bhatia, 1993; Swales, 1990),
and is tied more closely to considerations of ideology and power, whereas register is associated with the
organisation of situation or immediate context. Some of the most elaborated ideas about genre and
register can be found within the tradition of systemic functional grammar. The following diagram (Martin
& Matthiessen, 1991, reproduced in Martin, 1993, p. 132), shows the relation between language and
context, as viewed by most practitioners of systemic-functional grammar:
Figure 1. Language and context in the systemic functional perspective
In this tradition, register is defined as a particular configuration of field, tenor, and mode choices (in
Hallidayan grammatical terms), in other words, a language variety functionally associated with particular
contextual or situational parameters of variation and defined by its linguistic characteristics. The
following diagram illustrates this more clearly:
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 43
Figure 2. Metafunctions in relation to register and genre6
Genre, on the other hand, is more abstractly defined:
A genre is known by the meanings associated with it. In fact the term "genre" is a short
form for the more elaborate phrase "genre-specific semantic potential" … Genres can
vary in delicacy in the same way as contexts can. But for some given texts to belong to
one specific genre, their structure should be some possible realisation of a given GSP
Generic Structure Potential … It follows that texts belonging to the same genre can vary
in their structure; the one respect in which they cannot vary without consequence to their
genre-allocation is the obligatory elements and dispositions of the GSP. (Halliday &
Hasan, 1985, p. 108)
[T]wo layers of context are needed -- with a new level of genre [italics added] posited
above and beyond the field, mode and tenor register variables … Analysis at this level
has concentrated on making explicit just which combinations of field, tenor and mode
variables a culture enables, and how these are mapped out as staged, goal-oriented social
processes [italics added]. (Eggins & Martin, 1997, p. 243)
These are rather theory-specific conceptualisations of genre, and are therefore a little opaque to those not
familiar with systemic-functional grammar. The definition of genre in terms of "staged, goal-oriented
social processes" (in the quote above, and in Martin, Christie, & Rothery, 1987), is, in particular, slightly
confusing to those who are more concerned (or familiar) with genres as products (i.e., groupings of texts).
Ferguson (1994), on the other hand, offers a less theory-specific discussion. However, he is rather vague,
and talks about (and around) the differences between the two terms while never actually defining them
precisely: He seems to regard register as a "communicative situation that recurs regularly in a society" (p.
20) and genre as a "message type that recurs regularly in a community" (p. 21). Faced with such
comparable definitions, readers will be forgiven for becoming a little confused. Also, is register only a
"communicative situation," or is it a variety of language as well? In any case, Ferguson also seems to
equate sublanguage with register (p. 20) and offers many examples of registers (e.g., cookbook recipes,
stock market reports, regional weather forecasts) and genres (e.g., chat, debate, conversation, recipe,
obituary, scientific textbook writing) without actually saying why any of the registers cannot also be
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 44
thought of as genres or vice versa. Indeed, sharp-eyed readers will have noted that recipes are included
under both register and genre.
Coming back to the systemic-functional approach, it will be noted that even among subscribers to the
"genre-based" approach in language pedagogy (Cope & Kalantzis, 1993), opinions differ on the definition
and meaning of genre. For J. R. Martin, as we have seen, genre is above and beyond register, whereas for
Gunther Kress, genre is only one part of what constitutes his notion of register (a superordinate term).
The following diagram illustrates his use of the terms:
Figure 3. Elements of the composition of text (Kress, 1993, p. 35)
Kress (1993) appears to dislike the fact that genre is made to carry too much baggage or different strands
of information:
There is a problem in using such a term [genre] with a meaning that is relatively
uncontrollable. In literary theory, the term has been used with relative stability to
describe formal features of a text -- epitaph, novel, sonnet, epic -- although at times
content has been used to provide a name, [e.g.] epithalamion, nocturnal, alba. In screen
studies, as in cultural studies, labels have described both form and content, and at times
other factors, such as aspects of production. Usually the more prominent aspect of the
text has provided the name. Hence "film noir"; "western" or "spaghetti western" or
"psychological" or "Vietnam western"; "sci-fi"; "romance"; or "Hollywood musical"; and
similarly with more popular print media. (pp. 31-2)
In other words, Kress is complaining about the fact that
a great complex of factors is condensed and compacted into the term -- factors to do with
the relations of producer and audience, modes of production and consumption, aesthetics,
histories of form and so on. (p. 32)
He claims that many linguists, educators, and literacy researchers, especially those working within the
Australian-based "genre theory/school" approach, use the term in the same all-encompassing way. Also,
he is concerned that the work of influential people like Martin and Rothery has been focussed too much
on presenting ideal generic texts and on the successive "unfolding" of "sequential stages" in texts (which
are said to reflect the social tasks which the text producers perform; Paltridge, 1995, 1996, 1997):
The process of classification … seems at times to be heading in the direction of a new
formalism, where the 'correct' way to write [any particular text] is presented to students in
the form of generic models and exegeses of schematic structure. (Kress, 1993, p. 12)
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 45
Those familiar with Kress' work in critical discourse analysis (e.g., Kress & Hodge, 1979) should not be
surprised to learn, however, that in his approach to genre the focus is instead:
… on the structural features of the specific social occasion in which the text has been
produced [, seeing] these as giving rise to particular configurations of linguistic factors in
the text which are realisations of, or reflect, these social relations and structures [,…e.g.]
who has the power to initiate turns and to complete them, and how relations of power are
realised linguistically. In this approach "genre" is a term for only a part of textual
structuring, namely the part which has to do with the structuring effect on text of sets of
complex social relations between consumers and producers of texts. [all italics added] (p.
33)
As can be seen, therefore, there is a superficial terminological difference in the way genre is used by
some theorists, but no real, substantive disagreement because they both situate it within the broader
context of situational and social structure. While genre encompasses register and goes "above and
beyond" it in Martin's (1993, Eggins & Martin, 1997) terms, it is only one component of the larger
overarching term register in Kress' approach. My own preferred usage of the terms comes closest to
Martin's, and will be described below. Before that, however, I will briefly consider two other attempts at
clearing up the terminological confusion.
Sampson (1997) calls for re-definitions of genre, register, and style and the relationships among them, but
his argument is not quite lucid or convincing enough. In particular, his proposal for register to be
recognised as fundamentally to do with an individual's idiolectal variation seems to go against the grain of
established usage, and is unlikely to catch on. Biber (Finegan & Biber, 1994, pp. 51-53; 1995, pp. 7-10)
does a similar survey, looking at the use of the terms register, genre, style, sublanguage, and text type in
the sociolinguistic literature, and despairingly comes to the conclusion that register and genre, in
particular, cannot be teased apart. He settles on register as "the general cover term associated with all
aspects of variation in use" (1995, p. 9), but in so doing reverses his choice of the term genre in his earlier
studies, as in Biber (1988) and Biber & Finegan (1989). (Further, as delineated in Finegan & Biber, 1994,
Biber also rather controversially sees register variation as a very fundamental basis or cause of social
dialect variation.)
While hoping not to muddy the waters any further, I shall now attempt to state my position on this
terminological issue. My own view is that style is essentially to do with an individual's use of language.
So when we say of a text, "It has a very informal style," we are characterising not the genre to which it
belongs, but rather the text producer's use of language in that particular instance (e.g., "It has a very
quirky style"). The EAGLES (1996) authors are not explicit about their stand on this point, but say they
use style to mean:
the way texts are internally differentiated other than by topic; mainly by the choice of the
presence or absence of some of a large range of structural and lexical features. Some
features are mutually exclusive (e.g. verbs in the active or passive mood), and some are
preferential, e.g. politeness markers and mitigators. (p. 22)
As noted earlier, the main distinction they recommend for the stylistic description of corpus texts is
formal/informal in combination with parameters such as the level of preparation (considered/impromptu),
"communicative grouping" (conversational group; speaker/writer and audience; remote audiences) and
"direction" (one-way/interactive). This chimes with my suggestion that we should use the term style to
characterise the internal properties of individual texts or the language use by individual authors, with
"formality" being perhaps the most important and fundamental one. Joos's (1961) five famous epithets
"frozen," "formal," "informal," "colloquial," and "intimate" come in handy here, but these are only
suggestive terms, and may be multiplied or sub-divided endlessly, since they are but five arbitrary points
on a sliding scale. On a more informal level, we may talk about speakers or writers having a "humorous,"
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 46
"ponderous," or "disjointed" style, or having a "repertoire of styles." Thus, describing one text as
"informal" in style is not to say the speaker/writer cannot also write in a "serious' style," even within the
same genre.
The two most problematic terms, register and genre, I view as essentially two different points of view
covering the same ground. In the same way that any stretch of language can simultaneously be looked at
from the point of view of form (or category), function, or meaning (by analogy with the three sides of a
cube), register and genre are in essence two different ways of looking at the same object.7 Register is
used when we view a text as language: as the instantiation of a conventionalised, functional configuration
of language tied to certain broad societal situations, that is, variety according to use. Here, the point of
view is somewhat static and uncritical: different situations "require" different configurations of language,
each being "appropriate" to its task, being maximally "functionally adapted" to the immediate situational
parameters of contextual use. Genre is used when we view the text as a member of a category: a culturally
recognised artifact, a grouping of texts according to some conventionally recognised criteria, a grouping
according to purposive goals, culturally defined. Here, the point of view is more dynamic and, as used by
certain authors, incorporates a critical linguistic (ideological) perspective: Genres are categories
established by consensus within a culture and hence subject to change as generic conventions are
contested/challenged and revised, perceptibly or imperceptibly, over time.
Thus, we talk about the existence of a legal register (focus: language), but of the instantiation of this in
the genres of "courtroom debates," "wills" and "testaments," "affidavits," and so forth (focus: category
membership). We talk about a formal register, where "official documents" and "academic prose" are
possible exemplar genres. In contrast, there is no literary register, but, rather, there are literary styles and
literary genres, because the very essence of imaginative writing is idiosyncrasy or creativity and
originality (focus on the individual style). My approach here thus closely mirrors that of Fairclough
(2000, p. 14) and Eggins & Martin (1997). The latter say that "the linguistic features selected in a text will
encode contextual dimensions, both of its immediate context of production (i.e., register) and of its
generic identity (i.e., genre), what task the text is achieving in the culture" (p. 237), although they do not
clearly set out the difference in terms of a difference in point of view, as I have done above. Instead, as
we have seen, they attempt in rather vague terms to define register as a variety "organised by
metafunction" (Field, Tenor, Mode) and genre as something "above and beyond metafunctions." In
Biber's (1994) survey of this area of terminological confusion, he mentions the use of terminology by
Couture (1986), but fails to note a crucial distinction apparently made by the author:
Couture's examples of genres and registers seem to be more clearly distinguished than in
other studies of this type. For example, registers include the language used by preachers
in sermons, the language used by sports reporters in giving a play-by-play description of
a football game, and the language used by scientists reporting experimental research
results. Genres include both literary and non-literary text varieties, for example, short
stories, novels, sonnets, informational reports, proposals, and technical manual. [all italics
added] (Finegan & Biber, 1994, p. 52)
Biber does not point out that a key division of labour between the two terms is being made here which has
nothing to do with the particular examples of activity types, domains, topics, and so forth: whenever
register is used, Couture is talking about "the language used by…", whereas when genre is used, we are
dealing with "text varieties" (i.e., groupings of texts).
I contend that it is useful to see the two terms genre and register as really two different angles or points of
view, with register being used when we are talking about lexico-grammatical and discoursal-semantic
patterns associated with situations (i.e., linguistic patterns), and genre being used when we are talking
about memberships of culturally-recognisable categories. Genres are, of course, instantiations of registers
(each genre may invoke more than one register) and so will have the lexico-grammatical and discoursal-
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 47
semantic configurations of their constitutive registers, in addition to specific generic socio-cultural
expectations built in.
Genres can come and go, or change, being cultural constructs which vary with the times, with fashion,
and with ideological movements within society. Thus, some sub-genres of "official documents" in
English have been observed to have changed in recent times, becoming more conversational, personal,
and familiar, sometimes in a deliberate way, with manipulative purposes in mind (Fairclough 1992). The
genres have thus changed in terms of the registers invoked (an aspect of intertextuality), among other
changes, but the genre labels stay the same, since they are descriptors of socially constituted, functional
categories of text.
Much of the confusion comes from the fact that language itself sometimes fails us, and we end up using
the same words to describe both language (register or style) and category (genre). For example,
"conversation" can be a register label ("he was talking in the conversational register"), a style label ("this
brochure employs a very conversational style"), or a genre label ("the [super-]genre of casual/face-to-face
conversations," a category of spoken texts). Similarly, weather reports are cited by Ferguson (1994) as
forming a register (from the point of view of the language being functionally adapted to the situational
purpose), but they are surely also a genre (a culturally recognised category of texts). Ferguson gives
"obituaries" as an example of a genre, but fails to recognise that there is not really a recognisable
"register of obituaries" only because the actual language of obituaries is not fixed or conventionalised,
allowing considerable variation ranging from humorous and light to serious and ponderous.
Couture (1986) also offers an additional angle on the distinction between register and genre:
While registers impose explicitness constraints at the level of vocabulary and syntax,
genres impose additional explicitness constraints at the discourse level … Both literary
critics and rhetoricians traditionally associate genre with a complete, unified textual
structure. Unlike register, genre can only be realized in completed texts or texts that can
be projected as complete, for a genre does more than specify kinds of codes extant in a
group of related texts; it specifies conditions for beginning, continuing, and ending a text.
(p.82)
The important point being made here is that genres are about whole texts, whereas registers are about
more abstract, internal/linguistic patterns, and, as such, exist independently of any text-level structures.
In summary, I prefer to use the term genre to describe groups of texts collected and compiled for corpora
or corpus-based studies. Such groups are all more or less conventionally recognisable as text categories,
and are associated with typical configurations of power, ideology, and social purposes, which are
dynamic/negotiated aspects of situated language use. Using the term genre will focus attention on these
facts, rather than on the rather static parameters with which register tends to be associated. Register has
typically been used in a very uncritical fashion, to invoke ideas of "appropriateness" and "expected
norms," as if situational parameters of language use have an unquestionable, natural association with
certain linguistic features and that social evaluations of contextual usage are given rather than
conventionalised and contested. Nevertheless, the term has its uses, especially when referring to that body
of work in sociolinguistics which is about "registral variation," where the term tells us we are dealing with
language varying according to socio-situational parameters. In contrast, the possible parallel term
"genre/generic variation" does not seem to be used, because while you can talk about "language variation
according to social situations of use," it makes no sense to talk about "categories of texts varying
according to the categories they belong to." Of course, I am not saying that genres do not have internal
variation (or sub-genres). I am saying that "genre variation" makes no sense as a parallel to "register
variation" because while you can talk about language (registers) varying across genres, it is tautologous to
talk about genres (text categories) varying across genres or situations. In other words, when we study
differences among genres, we are actually studying the way the language varies because of social and
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 48
situational characteristics and other genre constraints (registral variation), not the way texts vary because
of their categorisation.
Genres as Basic-Level Categories in a Prototype Approach
One problem with genre labels is that they can have so many different levels of generality. For example,
some genres such as "academic discourse" are actually very broad, and texts within such a high-level
genre category will show considerable internal variation: that is, individual texts within such a genre can
differ significantly in their use of language (as, for example, Biber, 1988, has shown). A second problem,
as Kress noted, is that different "genres" can be based on so many different criteria (domain, topic,
participants, setting, etc.).
There is a possible solution to this. Steen (1999) is an interesting attempt at applying prototype theory
(Rosch, 1973a, 1973b, 1978; Taylor, 1989) to the conceptualisation of genre (and hence to the
formalisation of a taxonomy of discourse; cf. also Paltridge, 1995, who made a similar argument but from
a different perspective). Basically, the prototype approach can be summarised by Table 2 (which
represents my understanding of Steen's ideas; my own suggestions are marked by "?"):
Table 2. A Prototype Approach to Genre
SUPERORDINATE Mammal
Literature ["SUPER-
GENRE"?]
Advertising ["SUPER-
GENRE'"]
BASIC-LEVEL Dog/Cat
Novel, Poem, Drama
[GENRE]
Advertisement [GENRE]
SUBORDINATE
[PROTOTYPE]
Cocker
spaniel /
Siamese
Western, Romance,
Adventure [SUB-GENRE]
Print ad, Radio ad, TV ad, T-
shirt ad [SUB-GENRE]
Basic-level categories are those which are in the middle of a hierarchy of terms. They are characterised as
having the maximal clustering of humanly-relevant properties (attributes), and are thus distinguishable
from superordinate and subordinate terms: "It is at the basic level of categorization that people
conceptualize things as perceptual and functional gestalts" (Taylor, 1989, p. 48). A basic-level category,
therefore, is one for which human beings can easily find prototypes or exemplars, as well as less
prototypical members. Subordinate-level categories, therefore, operate in terms of prototypes or fuzzy
boundaries: some are better members than others, but all are valid to some degree because they are
cognitively salient along a sliding scale. We can also extend this fuzzy-boundary approach to the other
levels (basic-level and superordinate) to account for all kinds of mixed genres and super-genres (e.g., to
what degree can Shakespeare's dramas be said to be different from poetry? When does good advertising
become a form of literature or vice versa?).
Steen (1999) applies the idea of basic-level categories and their prototypes to the conceptualisation of
genre as follows:
It is presumably the level of genre that embodies the basic level concepts, whereas
subgenres are the conceptual subordinates, and more abstract classes of discourse are the
superordinates. Thus the genre of an advertisement is to be contrasted with that of a
sermon, a recipe, a poem, and so on. These genres differ from each other on a whole
range of attributes … The subordinates of the genre of the advertisement are less distinct
from each other. The press advertisement, the radio commercial, the television
commercial, the Internet advertisement, and so on, are mainly distinguished by one
feature: their medium. The superordinate of the genre of the ad, advertising, is also
systematically distinct from the other superordinates by means of only one principal
attribute, the one of domain: It is "business" for advertising, but it exhibits the respective
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 49
values of "religious", "domestic" and "artistic" for the other examples. [all italics added]
(p. 112)
Basically, Steen is proposing that we can recognise genres by their cognitive basic-level status: True
genres, being basic-level, are maximally distinct from one another (in terms of certain "attributes" to be
discussed below), whereas members at the level of sub-genre (which operate on a prototype basis) or
"super-genre"8 have fewer distinctions among themselves.
The proposal is for genres to be treated as basic-level categories which are characterised by
(provisionally) a set of seven attributes: domain (e.g., art, science, religion, government), medium (e.g.,
spoken, written, electronic), content (topics, themes), form (e.g., generic superstructures, à la van Dijk
(1985), or other text-structural patterns), function (e.g., informative, persuasive, instructive), type (the
rhetorical categories of "narrative," "argumentation," "description," and "exposition") and language
(linguistic characteristics: register/style[?]). Steen offers only a preliminary sketch of this approach to
genre (and hence to a taxonomy of discourse), and, as it stands, it appears to be too biased towards written
genres. Other attributes can (and should) be added: for example, setting or activity type, to distinguish a
broadcast interview from a private interview; or audience level, to distinguish public lectures from
university lectures (and both attributes to distinguish the latter from school classroom lessons). Another
point is that dependencies among the attributes exist (many values for domain, medium, and content are
typically co-selected, for instance). Nevertheless, the approach looks like a promising one, and when fully
developed will help us sort out genres from sub-genres.
"GENRES" IN CORPORA
Applying this "fuzzy categories" way of looking at genre to corpus studies, we can see that the categories
to which texts have been assigned in existing corpora are sometimes genres, sometimes sub-genres,
sometimes "super-genres" and sometimes something else altogether. (This is undoubtedly why the catch-
all term "text category" is used in the official documentation for the LOB and ICE-GB corpora. Most of
these "text categories" are equivalent to what I am calling "genres" in the BNC Index.) For example,
consider ICE-GB corpus categories in Table 3.
Table 3. Text Categories in ICE-GB (figures in parentheses indicate the number of 2,000-word texts in
each category)
 Medium I
Medium II (?) or
Interaction Type (?)
Super-genre or
Function
Genres or Sub-genres
face-to-face conversations
(90)Private (100)
phone calls (10)
classroom lessons (20)
broadcast discussions (20)
broadcast interviews (10)
parliamentary debates (10)
legal cross-examinations (10)
Dialogue
(180)
Public (80)
business transactions (10)
spontaneous commentaries
(20)
unscripted speeches (30)
demonstrations (10)
Unscripted (70)
legal presentations (10)
broadcast talks (20)
Monologue
(100)
Scripted (30)
non-broadcast speeches (10)
broadcast news (20)
SPOKEN
(300)
Mixed
(20)
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 50
student essays (10)Non-professional
writing (20) student examination scripts
(10)
social letters (15)
Non-Printed
(50)
Correspondence (30)
business letters (15)
humanities (10)
social sciences (10)
natural sciences (10)
Academic writing (40)
technology (10)
humanities (10)
social sciences (10)
natural sciences (10)
Non-academic writing
(40)
technology (10)
Reportage (20) press news reports (20)
administrative/regulatory (10)Instructional writing
(20) skills/hobbies (10)
Persuasive writing
(10)
press editorials (10)
WRITTEN
(200)
Printed
(150)
Creative writing (20) novels/stories (20)
The top row of the table is my attempt at describing what attribute(s) or levels the terms within each
column represent. The terms within the last column are what end-users of the corpus normally work with,
and can be seen to be either genres or sub-genres, viewed from a prototype perspective (e.g., "broadcast
interview" is probably best seen as a sub-genre of "interview," differing mainly in terms of the setting,
and business letters differ from social letters mainly in terms of domain). Most of the terms in the third
column can be said to describe "super-genre" or "super-super-genres," with the exception of "instructional
writing" and "persuasive writing" (shaded), which seem more like functional labels.9
The British National Corpus (BNC), in contrast, has no text categorisation for written texts beyond that of
domain, and no categorisation for spoken texts except by "context" and demographic/socio-economic
classes. The following diagram shows the breakdown of the BNC:
Figure 4. Domains in the British National Corpus (BNC)
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 51
It can be seen that for the written texts, domains are broad "subject fields" (see Burnard, 1995). These are
closely paralleled for the spoken texts by even broader "context" categories covering the major spheres of
social life (leisure, business, education, and institutional/public contexts). Apart from considering all the
demographically sampled conversations as constituting one super-genre of "casual conversation" and all
the written imaginative texts as forming a super-genre "literature," genres cannot easily be found at all
under the current domain scheme. More about these BNC categories and their (non-) usefulness will be
said in later sections.
Moving on to the LOB corpus (Table 4), we see that it is mostly composed of a mixture of genre and sub-
genre labels:
Table 4. Genres in the LOB Corpus
LOB Corpus (Written)
Press: reportage
Press: editorial
Press: reviews
Religion
Skills, trades & hobbies
Popular Lore
Belles lettres, biography, essays
Misc (gov docs, foundation reports,
industry reports, college reports, in-
house organ)
Learned/scientific writings
General fiction
Mystery & detective fiction
Science fiction
Adventure & western fiction
Romance & love story
Humour
Examined in terms of Steen's genre attributes, the shaded cells in Table 4 above are clearly sub-genres of
some general super-genre of "fiction" (both "novels" and "short stories" -- the basic-level genres in
Steen's taxonomy -- are included). "Religion," on the other hand, appears to be a domain label since it
brings together disparate books, periodicals and tracts whose principal common feature is that they are
concerned with religion (in this case Christianity).10
Why do we have all these different levels or types of categorisation? It is tempting to believe that this is
the case because the corpus compilers felt that these were the most useful, salient, or interesting
categories -- perhaps these are basic-level genres, or prototypical sub-genres (especially those which keep
appearing in different corpora). But is it a problem that the categories differ in terms of their defining
attributes and in terms of generality? My personal opinion is that it is not. Cranny-Francis (1993, p. 109)
touches on this point and asks:
If "genre" has this range of different meanings and classificatory procedures -- by formal
characteristics, by field -- we might ask what is its value? Why is it so useful to
educators, linguists and critics, as well as to publishers, filmmakers, booksellers, readers
and viewers?
She suggests that the reason is simply because genre "is never simply formal or semantic [based on field
or subject area] and it is not even simply textual." Using the terms as defined in this paper, we could
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 52
paraphrase this to read, "genre is never just about situated linguistic patterns (register), functional co-
occurrences of linguistic features (text types), or subject fields (domain), and it is not even simply about
text-structural/discoursal features (e.g., Martin's [1993] generic stages, Halliday & Hasan's [1985] GSPs,
van Dijk's [1985] macrostructures, etc.)." It is, in fact, all of these things. This makes it a messy and
complex concept, but it is also what gives it its usefulness and meaningfulness to the average person.
They are all genres (whether sub- or super-genres or just plain basic-level genres).
The point of all this is that we need not be unduly worried about whether we are working with genres,
sub-genres, domains, and so forth, as long as we roughly know what categories we are working with and
find them useful. We have seen that the categories used in various corpora are not necessarily all "proper"
genres in a traditional/rhetorical sense or even in terms of Steen's framework, but they can all be seen as
"genres" at some level in a fuzzy-category, hierarchical approach. A genre is a basic-level category,
which has specified values for most of the seven attributes suggested above and which is maximally
distinct from other categories at the same level. "Sub-genres" and "super-genres" are simply other (fuzzy)
ways of categorising texts, and have their uses too. The advantages of the prototype approach are that (a)
gradience or fuzziness between and within genres is accorded proper theoretical status, and (b)
overlapping of categories is not a problem (thus texts can belong to more than one genre).
From one point of view, until we have a clear taxonomy of genres, it may be advisable to put most of our
corpus genres in quotation marks, because genre is also often used in a folk linguistic way to refer to any
more-or-less coherent category of text which a mature, native speaker of a language can easily recognise
(e.g., newspaper articles, radio broadcasts), and there are no strict rules as to what level of generality is
allowable when recognising genres in this sense. In a prototype approach, however, it does not seriously
matter. Some text categories may be based more on the domain of discourse (e.g., "business" is a domain
label in the BNC for any spoken text produced within a business context, whether it is a committee
meeting or a monologic presentation). Spoken texts, which tend to be even more loosely classified in
corpus compilations, may simply be categorised on whether they are spontaneous or planned, broadcast or
spoken face-to-face, as in the London-Lund Corpus, for instance, which means the categories are "genres"
only in a very loose sense. This goes to show that there are still serious issues to grapple with in the
conceptualisation of spoken genres (written ones are, in contrast, typically easier to deal with) but that a
prototype approach, with its many levels of generality and a set of defining attributes, may help to tighten
up our understanding.
These brief visits to the various corpora suggest that there should not be any serious objections
(theoretical or otherwise) to the use of the term genre to describe most of the corpus categories we have
seen. Such usage reflects a looser approach, but there is no requirement for genres to actually be
established literary or non-literary genres, only for them to be culturally recognisable as groupings of
texts at some level of abstraction. The various corpora also show us that the recognition of genres can be
at different levels of generality (e.g., "sermons" vs. "religious discourse"). In the LOB corpus, the
category labels appear to be a mix: some are sub-genre labels (e.g., "mystery fiction" and "detective
fiction"), while others are more properly seen as domain labels ("Skills, trades, & hobbies," "Religion").
My own preferred approach with regard to developing a categorisation scheme is to use genre categories
where possible, and domain categories where they are more practical (e.g., "Religion"11).
THE BNC JUNGLE: THE NEED FOR A PROPER NAVIGATIONAL MAP
Having clarified some of the terminology and concepts and looked at the categories used in a few existing
corpora, I want to move on to consider some of the problems with the British National Corpus as it now
stands, and then introduce a new resource called the BNC Index which (it is hoped) will make it easier for
researchers and language learners/teachers to navigate through the numerous texts to find what they need.
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 53
Some Existing Problems
Overly Broad Categories. The first problem that prompts the need for a navigational map has to do with
the broadness and inexplicitness of the BNC classification scheme. For example, academic and non-
academic texts under the domains "Applied Science," "Arts," "Pure/Natural Science," "Social Science,"
and so forth, are not explicitly differentiated. (It is interesting to note, in this connection, that under the
attribute of "genre" in the "text typology" of Atkins et al., 1992, p. 7, no mention is made of the useful
distinction between academic and non-academic prose, even though this is employed in one of the earliest
corpora, the LOB corpus, where the "learned" category has proved to be among the most popular with
linguists.)
Another example that points to the inadequacy of the BNC's categorisation of texts is the way
"imaginative" texts are handled. A wide variety of imaginative texts (novels, short stories, poems, and
drama scripts) is included in the BNC, which is a good thing because the LOB, for example, does not
contain poetry or drama. However, such inclusions are practically wasted if researchers are not actually
able to easily retrieve the sub-genres on which they want to work (e.g., poetry) because this information is
not recorded in the file headers or in any documentation associated with the BNC. There is at present no
way to know whether an "imaginative" text actually comes from a novel, a short story, a drama script or a
collection of poems (unless the title actually reflexively includes the words "a novel" or "poems by
XYZ"). For example, given text files with titles like "For Now" or "The kiosk on the brink," there is no
way of knowing that both of these are actually collections of poems. All the BNC bibliography and file
headers tell us is that these are "imaginative" texts, taken from "books."
Classification Errors and Misleading Titles. In the process of some previous research, I found that there
were many classificatory mistakes in the BNC (and also in the BNC Sampler): some texts were classified
under the wrong category, usually because of a misleading title. For the same reason, even though a
limited, computer-searchable bibliographical database of the BNC texts exists12 (compiled by Adam
Kilgarriff), not enough information is included there, and researchers cannot always rely on the titles of
the files as indications of their real contents: For example, many texts with "lecture" in their title are
actually classroom discussions or tutorial seminars involving a very small group of people, or were
popular lectures (addressed to a general audience rather than to students at an institution of higher
learning). A good reason for a navigational map, then, is so that we can go beyond the existing
information we have about the BNC files (and beyond the mistakes) and to provide genre classifications,
so that researchers do not have just the titles of files to go on.
Sub-Genres Within a Single File. Another problem, which will only be touched on briefly because there
is no real solution, is that some BNC files are too big and ill-defined in that they contain different genres
or sub-genres. For example, newspaper files described in the title as containing "editorial material"
include letters-to-the-editor, institutional editorials (those written by the editor), and personal editorials
(commentaries/personal columns written by journalists or guest writers), and some courtroom files
contain both legal cross-examinations (which are dialogic) as well as legal presentations (summing-up
monologues by barristers or judges). This is a problem for lines of linguistic enquiry that rely on
relatively homogeneous genres. It is a problem, however, which cannot be solved easily because the
splitting of files is beyond the scope of most end-users of the BNC. The problem is just mentioned here as
a caution to researchers.
Domains Versus Genres: The BNC Sampler & Why We Need Genre Information
The BNC Users' Reference Guide states that only three criteria were used to "balance" the corpus:
domain, time, and medium. In choosing texts for inclusion into the BNC Sampler (the 2-million word
sub-set of the BNC), domain was probably the most important criterion used to ensure a wide-enough
coverage of a variety of texts. On the BNC Web page for the Sampler, the following comment on its
representativeness is made:
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 54
In selecting from the BNC, we tried to preserve the variety of text-types represented, so
the Sampler includes in its 184 texts many different genres [italics added] of writing and
modes of speech.
It should be noted that no real claim to representativeness is made, and that what they really meant was
that many different texts were chosen on the basis of domain and other criteria.13 The fact that the
Sampler contains many different genres is not in doubt, but the texts were not chosen on this basis, since
they had no genre classification, and hence the Sampler cannot (and, indeed, it does not) claim to be
representative in terms of "genre."
It is my belief that it is because "domain" is such a broad classification in the BNC that the Sampler
turned out to be rather unrepresentative of the BNC and of the English language. Anyone wishing to use
the Sampler should be under no illusion that it is a balanced corpus or that it represents the full range of
texts as in the full BNC. The Sampler may be broadly balanced in terms of the domains, but when broken
down by genre, a truer picture emerges of exactly how (un)representative it really is. Appendix A lists
missing or unrepresentative genres in the Sampler BNC which demonstrate this.
"Genre" is perhaps a more insightful classification criterion than "domain," as least as far as getting a
representatively balanced corpus is concerned. If the compilers of the BNC Sampler had known the genre
membership of each BNC text, they would probably have created a more balanced and representative sub-
corpus. As things stand, however, any conclusions about "spoken English" or "written English" made on
the basis of the BNC Sampler will have to be evaluated very cautiously indeed, bearing in mind the
genres missing from the data.
There is another example of how large, undifferentiated categories similar to domain can unhelpfully
lump disparate kinds of text together. Wikberg (1992) criticises the LOB text category E ("Skills, trades,
and hobbies") as being too baggy or eclectic. He demonstrates how, on the evidence of both external and
internal criteria, the texts in Category E can actually be better sub-classified into "procedural" versus
"non-procedural" discourse. He also notes that it is not just text categories that can be heterogeneous.
Sometimes texts themselves are "multitype" or mixed in terms of having different stages with different
rhetorical or discourse goals. He thus concludes with the following comment:
An important point that I have been trying to make is that in the future we need to pay
more attention to text theory when compiling corpora. For users of the Brown and the
LOB corpora, and possibly other machine-readable texts as well, it is also worth noting
the multitype character of certain text categories. (p. 260)
This is a piece of advice worth noting.
THE BNC (BIBLIOGRAPHICAL) INDEX
The BNC Index spreadsheet I am about to describe was created as one solution to the previously
mentioned problems and difficulties. It is similar to the plain text ones prepared by Adam Kilgarriff that I
have benefited from and found rather useful.14 However, those files do not contain all the details which
are needed for compiling your own sub-corpus (author type, author age, author sex, audience type,
audience sex, section of text sampled, [topic] keywords, etc.). Sebastian Hoffmann's files were useful too,
in a complementary way, but these do not include (a) keywords and (b) the full bibliographical details of
files. A third existing resource, the "bncfinder.dat" file that comes with the standard distribution of the
BNC (version 1) has most of the header information, but in the form of highly abbreviated numeric codes,
and also does not include any bibliographical information about the files or keywords. The BNC Index
consolidates the kinds of information available in the above three resources, but, in addition, includes (a)
BNC-supplied keywords (as entered in the file headers by the compilers); (b) COPAC keywords15 for
published non-fiction texts16 (topic keywords entered by librarians); (c) full bibliographical details
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 55
(including title, date and publisher for written texts, and number of participants for spoken files); (d) an
extra level of text categorisation, "genre," where each text is assigned to one of the 70 genres or sub-
genres (24 spoken and 46 written) developed for the purposes of this Index; (e) a column supplying
"Notes & Alternative Genres," where texts which are interdisciplinary in subject matter or which can be
classified under more than one genre are given alternative classifications. Also entered here are extra
notes about the contents of files (e.g., where a single BNC file contains several sub-genres within it, such
as postcards, letters, faxes, etc., these are noted). These extra notes are the result of random, manual
checks: not all files have been subjected to such detailed analysis. For some written texts taken from
books, the title of the book series is also given under this column (e.g., file BNW, "Problems of
unemployment and inflation," is part of the Longman book series "Key issues in economics and
business").
It is hoped that this will be a comprehensive, user-friendly, "one-stop" database of information on the
BNC. All the information is presented using a minimum of abbreviations or numeric codes, for ease of
use. For example, m_pub (for "miscellaneous published") is used instead of a cryptic numeric code for the
medium of the text, and domains are likewise indicated by abbreviated strings (e.g., W_soc_science,
S_Demog_AB) rather than numbers. It should be noted that I carried out the genre categorisation of all the
texts by myself: This ensures consistency, but it also means that some decisions may be debatable. The
pragmatic point of view I am taking is that something is better than nothing, and that it is beneficial to
start with a reasonable genre categorisation scheme and then let end-users report problem/errors and
dictate future updates and improvements.
When compiling a sub-corpus for the purpose of research, classroom concordancing, genre-based
learning, and so forth, you need all the available information you can get. With the BNC Index, it is now
possible, for example, to separate children's prose fiction from adult prose fiction by combining
information from the "audience age" field and the newly introduced "genre" field (using domain alone
would have included poems as well).
All the information in the spreadsheet is up-to-date and as accurate as possible, and supersedes the
information given in the actual file headers and the "bncfinder.dat" file distributed with the BNC (version
1), both of which are known to contain many errors. Changes and corrections to erroneous classifications
were made both after extensive manual checks and on the basis of error reports made by others. The
following section lists and explains all the columns/fields of information given in the BNC Index. Some
of the genre categories are still being worked on, however, and may change in the final release of the
Index.
Notes on the BNC Index
For spoken files, there are only eight relevant fields of information, giving the following self-explanatory
details (abbreviations are explained in Table 6):17
File
ID
Domain Genre Keywords
Word
Total
Interaction
Type
Mode Bibliographical Details
FLX
S_cg_ed
ucation
S_classroom
natural &
pure
science;
chemistry
5,142 Dialogue S
11th year science lesson: lecture in
chemistry of metal processing
(Edu/inf). Rec. on 23 Mar 1993 with 2
partics, 381 utts
Note that Mode only distinguishes broadly between spoken (S) and written (W). To further restrict
searches to only "demographic" files or only "context-governed" files, the Domain field should be used.
For written files, there can be up to 19 fields of information (depending on the file: fields which do not
apply to a particular file are left blank). As an example, the entry for AE7 is as follows:
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 56
File
ID
Medium Domain Genre
Notes &
Alternative
Genres
COPAC
Keywords
Keywords
Audience
Age
Audience
Sex
Audience
Level
AE
7
book W_nat_
science
W_non_
ac_nat_
science
Also
W_non_ac_hu
manities_arts
Biology -
Philosophy
molecular
genetics
adult mixed high
Bibliographical details
Total
Words
Sampling
Circulation
Status
Period
Composed
Mode
Author
Age
Author
Sex
Author
Type
The problems of biology.
Maynard Smith, John.
Oxford: OUP, 1989, pp.
9-109. 1686 s-units.
36,115 mid M 1985-1994 W 60+ yrs Male Sole
The information fields are explained more fully in the BNC User's Reference Guide, but here is a brief
explanation of some of them:
The table above tells us that file AE7 is a sample extracted from the middle (Sample Type) of a book
(Medium), whose Circulation Status is Medium (this refers to the number of receivers of the text),18
whose author (Author Age/Sex/Type) is 60+ yrs old (age band 6 in terms of BNC codes), is Male and is
the Sole author of the text. The text has been manually classified as "non_academic prose, natural
sciences" (Genre), although it also deals with philosophical issues (COPAC Keywords) and thus may also
be considered under "W_non_ac_humanities_arts." The target audience for the text are adults, of both
sexes (mixed), and high-level (original BNC numerical code="level 3"). The BNC compilers have
classified it under "natural sciences" (Domain),19 and the text was composed in the period 1985-1994
(Period Composed).20 The Bibliographical Details field gives us the title of the text (The Problems of
Biology), its author, publisher, and so forth, and an indication of the number of sentences ("s-units"),
while the (BNC compilers') Keywords field supplies the detail that the book is about molecular genetics
(COPAC and BNC keywords tend to be about topic, and are sometimes useful for sub-genre
identification). The page numbers under Bibliographical Details were, in this case and many others, not
actually given in the original BNC bibliography, but were manually added to the Index after I had
searched in the file for the page break SGML elements. This is to allow proper, complete referencing (the
original bibliographical reference would have been "pp. ??"). However, some files did not have page
breaks encoded at all, and thus their bibliographical references remain incomplete.
A list of all possible values for the closed-set fields (the keyword fields are open-ended) is given in
Appendix B.
With all these fields of information put together in a one database/spreadsheet, where they can be
combined with one another, it becomes easy to scan the BNC for whatever particular kinds of text you are
interested in.
Further Notes on the Genre Classifications
The genre categories used in the BNC Index were chosen after a survey of the genre categorisation
schemes of other existing corpora (e.g., LLC, LOB, ICE-GB) and will thus be familiar to users and
compatible with these other corpora, allowing comparative studies based on genres taken from different
corpora. These genre labels have been carefully selected to capture as wide a range as possible of the
numerous types of spoken and written texts in the English language, and the divisions are more fine-
grained than the domain categories used in the BNC itself. Note that some genre labels are hierarchically
nested so that, for example, if you simply want to study "prototypical academic English" and are not
concerned with the sub-divisions into social sciences, humanities, and so forth, you can find all such files
by searching for "W_ac*" and specifying "high" for "audience level."21 Or if you are interested in the
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 57
language of the social sciences, whether spoken or written, you can similarly use wildcards to search for
"*_soc_science." In general, where further sub-genres can be generated on-the-fly through the use of
other classificatory fields, they are not given their own separate genre labels, to avoid clutter. For
instance, "academic texts" can be further sub-divided into" (introductory) textbooks" and "journal
articles," but since this can very easily be done by using the medium field (i.e., by choosing either "book"
or "periodical"), the sub-genres have not been given their own separate labels. Instead, end-users are
encouraged to use available fields to create their own sub-classificatory permutations. The "genre" labels
here are therefore meant to provide starting points, not a definitive taxonomy.
Table 5 shows the breakdown of the genre categories used in the BNC Index spreadsheet more clearly
than in the earlier table, and also shows the super-genres that some researchers may want to study (made
possible by the use of hierarchical genre labels).
Table 5. Breakdown of BNC Genres in proposed classificatory scheme22
 BNC SPOKEN  Super Genre  BNC WRITTEN  Super Genre
 S_brdcast_discussn   W_ac_humanities_arts  
 S_brdcast_documentar
y
 Broadcast  W_ac_medicine  
 S_brdcast_news   W_ac_nat_science  Academic
 S_classroom   W_ac_polit_law_edu  prose
 S_consult   W_ac_soc_science  
 S_conv   W_ac_tech_engin  
 S_courtroom   W_admin  
 S_demonstratn   W_advert  
 S_interview  Interviews  W_biography  
 S_interview_oral_histor
y
  W_commerce  
 S_lect_commerce   W_email  
 S_lect_humanities_arts   W_essay_sch  
 S_lect_nat_science  Lectures  W_essay_univ  Non-printed essays
 S_lect_polit_law_edu   W_fict_drama  
 S_lect_soc_science   W_fict_poetry  Fiction23
 S_meeting   W_fict_prose  
 S_parliament   W_hansard  
 S_pub_debate   W_institut_doc  
 S_sermon   W_instructional  
 S_speech_scripted  Speeches  W_letters_personal  Letters
 S_speech_unscripted   W_letters_prof  
 S_sportslive   W_misc  
 S_tutorial   W_news_script  
 S_unclassified   W_newsp_brdsht_nat_arts  
   W_ newsp_brdsht_nat
_commerce
 Broadsheet
   W_ newsp_brdsht_nat _editorial  
   W_ newsp_brdsht_nat _misc  national
   W_ newsp_brdsht_nat
_reportage
 
   W_ newsp_brdsht_nat _science  newspapers
   W_ newsp_brdsht_nat _social  
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 58
   W_ newsp_brdsht_nat _sports  
   W_newsp_other_arts  
   W_newsp_other_commerce  Regional
   W_newsp_other_report  & local
   W_newsp_other_science  newspapers
   W_newsp_other_social  
   W_newsp_other_sports  
   W_newsp_tabloid  Tabloid newspapers
   W_non_ac_ humanities_arts  
   W_non_ac_medicine  Non-academic
   W_non_ac_nat_science  prose
   W_non_ac_polit_law_edu  (non-fiction)
   W_non_ac_soc_science  
   W_non_ac_tech_engin  
   W_pop_lore  
   W_religion  
It will be noted that aspects of this genre classification scheme mirror the ICE-GB corpus (see Table 5 for
the ICE-GB categories), although I have made finer distinctions in some cases (e.g., the lecture and
broadsheet sub-genres) and grouped texts differently (e.g., I have "nested" all broadsheet newspaper
material together rather than into separate functional groups as in the ICE-GB (cf. "Reportage" and
"Persuasive writing" in Table 5).
In some respects, the scheme also follows the Lancaster-Oslo/Bergen (LOB) corpus quite closely. This
was done deliberately, to facilitate diachronic/comparative research.24 For example, here is how the
various subject disciplines are categorised in the LOB corpus and in the BNC Index:
Table 6. LOB Corpus Categories Broken Down into Component Disciplines
LOB (& BNC Index) Category Subjects/Disciplines
Humanities Philosophy, History, Literature, Art, Music
Social sciences Psychology, Sociology, Linguistics, Social
Work
Natural sciences Physics, Chemistry, Biology
Medicine --
Politics, Law, Education --
Technology & Engineering Computing, Engineering
One difference from the LOB corpus is that economics texts in the BNC Index are not put under "politics,
law and education," but are instead put under the "W_commerce" genre. Also, archaeology and
architecture have been classified as humanities or arts subjects under the present scheme, while
geography is classed either as a social or natural science depending on the branch of geography. Geology
has been classed as a natural science. One mathematics textbook file for primary/elementary schools was
simply put under "miscellaneous," while university-level mathematical texts were put under either
"natural_sciences" or "technology & engineering" depending on whether they were pure or applied.25
It should also be noted that some texts are a mixture of disciplines (e.g., history and politics often go hand
in hand, but the two are separate categories under this scheme). In such cases, a more or less arbitrary
assignment was made, based on what was judged to be the dominant point of view in the text, and, in the
case of printed publications, after consultation of the keywords for the text in library catalogues (see
discussion which follows).
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 59
Some genres are deliberately broad because they can be easily sub-divided using other fields. For
example, "institutional documents" includes government publications (including "low-brow'"
informational booklets and leaflets/brochures), company annual reports, and university calendars and
prospectuses. However, these texts can be fairly easily separated out using "Medium," "Audience level,"
or "Keywords."
The "non-academic" genres relate to written texts (mainly books) sometimes called "non-fiction" which
have subject matters belonging to one of the disciplines listed above. They are usually texts written for a
general audience, or "popularisations" of academic material, and are thus distinguished from texts in the
parallel academic genres (which are targeted at university-level audiences, insofar as this can be
determined). In deciding whether a text was academic or not, a variety of cues was used: (a) the "audience
level (of difficulty)" estimated by the BNC compilers (coded in the file headers) (b) whether COPAC lists
the book as being in the "short loan" collections of British universities (this works in one direction only:
absence is not indicative of a work not being academic) (c) the publisher and publication series (academic
publishers form a small and recognisable set, and some books have academic series titles, which help to
place them in context).
The spoken "lecture" genres in the Index refer only to university lectures. Thus, many "A"-level or non-
university lectures are classified as "S_speech_unscripted." Similarly, "S_tutorial" refers only to
university-level tutorials or classroom "seminars." Other non-tertiary-level or home tutorial sessions are
classified under "S_classroom."
Genres labels are deliberately non-overlapping for spoken and written texts. For example, parliamentary
speeches audio-transcribed by the BNC transcribers are labelled "S_parliament" for the spoken corpus,
whereas the parallel, official/published version is labelled "W_hansard" for the written corpus. Also, for
spoken texts, the "leftover" files (which do not really belong to any of the other spoken genres used in this
scheme, e.g., baptism ceremony, auctions, air-traffic control discourse, etc.) are labelled as
"S_unclassified," whereas leftover written files are labelled "W_misc."
As mentioned in the first part of this paper, deciding what a coherent genre or sub-genre is can be far
from easy in practice, as (sub-)genres can be endlessly multiplied or sub-divided quite easily. Moreover,
the classificatory decisions of corpus compilers may not necessarily be congruent with that of researchers.
For example, what is considered "applied science"? In the present scheme, "applied science" excludes
medicine (which is instead placed in a category of its own), engineering (which is put under
"technology"), and computer science (also under "technology"). For the purposes of the BNC Index, a
particular "level of delicacy" has been decided on for the genre scheme, based on categories already in
use in existing corpora and in the research literature. Users may further sub-divide or collapse/combine
genres as they see fit. The present scheme is only an aid; it helps to narrow down the scope of any sub-
corpus building task. In this connection, it should be noted that due to the way the material was recorded
and collated, many of the spoken files (especially "conversation") are less well-defined than the written
ones because they are made up of different task and goal types, as well as varying topics and participants
(e.g., a single "conversation" file can contain casual talk between both equals and unequals, and "lecture"
files often contain casual preambles and concluding remarks in addition to the actual lectures themselves).
Researchers wanting discoursally well-defined and homogeneous texts will have to sub-divide texts
themselves.
If the distribution of linguistic features among "genres" is important to a particular piece of research, then
obviously the research can be affected or compromised by the definition/constitution of the "genres" in
the first place. For this reason, users of the BNC Index are advised to read the notes/documentation given
here, and to be clear what the various domain and genre labels mean.26 To illustrate: the BNC compilers
have classified some texts into the "natural/pure sciences" domain (e.g., text CNA, which is taken from
the British Medical Journal), which I would consider as belonging to "applied science" or else simply
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 60
"medicine" as a separate category. On the other hand, the BNC compilers appear to have a rather loose
definition "applied science." Anything which is not directly classifiable or recognisable as being purely
about theoretical physics, chemistry, biology or medicine is apparently considered "applied." For
example, consider
Text ID Medium Domain Bibliographical Details
FYX book W_app_science Black holes and baby universes. Hawking, Stephen W. London:
Bantam (Corgi), 1993, pp. 1-139. 1927 s-units.
AMS book W_app_science Global ecology. Tudge, Colin. London: Natural History Museum
Pub, 1991, pp. 1-98. 1816 s-units.
AC9 book W_app_science Science and the past. London: British Museum Press, 1991, pp. ??.
1696 s-units.
The first book is a popularisation by Stephen Hawking and is an application of physics to the study of the
universe or outer space. In the BNC Index genre scheme, I would consider this to be part of the "non-
academic natural sciences" genre (rather than "applied science"). It is a similar situation with the second
and third books (which concern ecology and archaeological/historical work, respectively). It is true that
these are also about applying scientific ideas in some way, but they do not quite fit in with the more
common understanding of "applied science." In the present scheme, text AMS would be under "academic:
natural science," and AC9 under "non-academic: humanities."
As another example of the classificatory system used here, consider the case of linguistics. Some
linguists, including myself, would consider our discipline to be a social science (although others would
place us in the humanities). In any case, consider the way the following BNC texts were (inconsistently)
classified by the compilers:
Text ID Medium Domain Details
B2X periodical W_app_science Journal of semantics. Oxford: OUP, 1990, pp. 321-452. 847 s-
units.
CGF book W_arts Feminism and linguistic theory. Cameron, Deborah. Basingstoke:
Macmillan Pubs Ltd, 1992, pp. 36-128. 1581 s-units.
EES m_unpub W_app_science Large vocabulary semantic analysis for text recognition. Rose,
Tony Gerard. u.p., n.d., pp. ??. 2109 s-units.
FAC book W_soc_science Lexical semantics. Cruse, D A. Cambridge: CUP, 1991, pp. 1-
124. 2261 s-units.
FAD book W_soc_science Linguistic variation and change. Milroy, J. Oxford: Blackwell,
1992, pp. 48-160. 1339 s-units.
It may be the case that the actual content/topic of these linguistics-related texts makes them seem less like
social science texts than arts or applied science texts (e.g., text ESS is a dissertation on computer
handwriting recognition by a student from a department of computing,). But if so, what does it make of
the general public's understanding of domain labels like "linguistics" and "social sciences," then? These
are important questions when one is seeking to draw conclusions about the distribution of linguistic
features found in particular genres. For the present purposes, therefore, one particular stand has been
taken on how to classify texts, and readers should bear this in mind. (In the case of the above example, all
were classified as "academic: social science" except EES, which was put under "academic: technology
and engineering.")
What About Library Classificatory Codes?
At this point, some people may be wondering if the classification systems used by libraries might be of
use in helping us determine the proper genre labels. Atkins et al. (1992, p. 8) note in their discussion of
the corpus attribute topic that "It is necessary to draw up a list of major topics and subtopics in the
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 61
literature. Library science provides a number of approaches to topic classification." This is an area that is
beyond my expertise and the scope of this article, but I will make a few brief comments here.27
Several library classification/cataloguing systems are in use all over the world. They are all principally
about subject areas (or topic) rather than about genre, although the two are, of course, related in many
cases. A familiar scheme, the Dewey Decimal Classification system, is shown in Table 7.
Table 7. Dewey Decimal Classification System
Classmark [Broad Area] & Subject Areas
Class 0 [GENERALITIES] Generalities; Catalogues; Newspapers; Computing
Class 1 [PHILOSOPHY & PSYCHOLOGY] Philosophy; Psychology; The Mind;
Class 2 [RELIGION] Religion
Class 3 [SOCIAL SCIENCES] Social Sciences; Law; Government; Society; Commerce; Education;
Class 4 [LANGUAGE] Linguistics; Scientific Study of Language
Class 5 [NATURAL SCIENCES & MATHEMATICS] Pure Sciences; Mathematics; Physics;
Chemistry; Biology;
Class 6 [TECHNOLOGY (APPLIED SCIENCES)] Applied Sciences; Engineering; Medicine;
Manufacturing;
Class 7 [THE ARTS] The Arts; (Music, Drama etc.) Recreations; Hobbies;
Class 8 [LITERATURE & RHETORIC] Literature
Class 9 [GEOGRAPHY & HISTORY] Geography; History; Information about localities
In addition to the Classmark, however, library materials are also given keywords which generally consist
of Library of Congress subject headings (usually related to topic[s]). These are very useful when it comes
to finding out what a text is about (or, in the case of fiction texts, what a text is).28 In the case of literary
texts, actual genre labels are sometimes given as keywords, and a frighteningly large number of sub-
genres have been identified by the British Library cataloguers. These may prove useful to those who
desire detailed sub-genre information on literary texts. A few examples will suffice here: Adventure
stories, Detective and mystery stories, Picaresque literature, Robinsonades, Romantic suspense novels,
Sea stories, Spy stories, Thrillers, Allegories, Didactic fiction, Fables, Parables, Alternative histories,
Dystopias, Bildungsromane, Arthurian romances, Autobiographical fiction, Historical fiction, Satire,
Christmas stories, Medical novels, Folklore, Domestic fiction, Ghost stories, Horror tales, Magic realism,
Occult fiction, Feminist fiction, and Tall tales.
In addition to these fascinatingly categorised sub-genres,29 the library also includes "form headings,"
which are meant to "define a type of fiction in terms of specific presentation, provenance, intended
audience, form of publication."30 Examples include Young adult fiction, Children's stories, Readers
(Elementary), Plot-your-own stories, Diary fiction, Epistolary fiction, Movie novels, Scented books,
Glow-in-the-dark books, Toy and movable books, Graphic novels, Radio and television novels, Sound
effects books, Musical books, and Upside-down books.
As can be seen, therefore, library catalogues are a potentially valuable source of information as far as the
genre classification of fiction texts and the identification of subject topics in non-fiction texts are
concerned. Such information was, in fact, used in the process of creating the BNC Index, during the
manual stage of checking and correcting the initial genre classifications I had made.
Using the BNC Index
The BNC Index will be distributed in the Microsoft Excel® spreadsheet format as well as in a tab-
delimited format (it will also be incorporated into two custom-built, user-friendly programs: see below).31
On a practical note, the advantage of using the Excel format is that there is a quick way of displaying only
the texts which match your chosen criteria through the use of the relatively user-friendly "Autofilter"
function (under the "Data" menu in the program, choose "Filter" and then "Autofilter"). With the
Autofilter switched on, the top row of every field (column) will have a drop-list which can be used to
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 62
instantly filter down to the texts you want displayed (clicking on the drop-list button reveals all the
possible values for that field (e.g., genre), and you just select the one you want). Fields are combinable, so
you can, for example, first restrict the display to only "social science" texts under domain, then further
restrict this to only "periodicals" under medium, and end up with social science periodicals. It is also
possible to make more advanced searches, by activating the "Custom" filter dialogue box from the
relevant drop-list. This will allow you to filter the fields using wildcards. One caveat needs to be issued to
users, however: They should not rely entirely on the genre labels, but should also check the "Alternative
Notes" column and scan/browse the files, too. For example, texts labelled "S_brdcast_discussion" also
contain news reportage (in between the broadcast talk shows/programmes). This is unavoidable, since
some BNC files combine genres and sub-genres and can only be labelled in terms of the majority type.
Some of the BNC-supplied fields are also not entirely accurate. Many of the files which are coded as
"monologue" (under the Interaction Type column), for example, actually include some dialogue as well
(i.e., they are mostly monologue, but not exclusively).
A stand-alone Windows® program, called BNC Indexer®, has been developed by Antonio Moreno Ortiz
using the information contained in my spreadsheet.32 A web-based facility, BNC Web Indexer, is also
being developed at Lancaster, which does essentially the same thing.33 Both programs are similar in
layout and function. They are much easier to use than the Excel spreadsheet since they do not require any
knowledge of spreadsheet/database programs and have very simple, intuitive interfaces (perfect for
classroom situations). All the information fields (domain, genre, audience age, author sex, etc.) and their
values are displayed on screen and users simply select the values they want to use and then press a button
to execute the query. A results panel shows all the texts which match the filtering criteria, along with
bibliographical and other information. (With BNC Indexer, individual texts can also be deselected from
the output list if so desired, and can be browsed first by double-clicking on the relevant line.) Output file
lists containing the file IDs of the BNC files which matched the criteria can be generated and fed into
concordancers such as WordSmith or MonoConc,34 which can use a list of filenames to specify a sub-
corpus to which future queries are to be restricted. Note that with both BNC Indexer and BNC Web
Indexer, individual files can always be deleted from the output list if so desired, so users do not have to
accept the classification decisions wholesale but can vet individual texts before allowing them into a sub-
corpus.
It is beyond the scope of the present article to give more practical instructions or examples on how to use
the BNC Index spreadsheet or the Indexer programs. Users will, in any case, surely find their own
favourite ways of doing things, or may visit the relevant web sites for further information.
THE USES OF GENRE
In this paper, I have examined the different usages of the terms genre, text type, register, domain, style,
and so forth. Which of these concepts is most useful for researchers, or for teachers to use in the context
of classroom concordancing? I suggest that it is fruitful to start by looking at genres (categories of texts),
and end up by generalising (through induction) about the existence of registers (linguistic characteristics)
or even "text types" in Biber's sense (categories of texts empirically based on linguistic characteristics).
The work by Carne (1996), Cope & Kalantzis (1993), Flowerdew (1993), Hopkins & Dudley-Evans
(1988), Hyland (1996), Lee (in press), McCarthy (1998a, 1998b), Thompson (in press), and Tribble
(1998, 2000), to name but a few, show how a genre-based approach to analysing texts can yield
interesting linguistic insights and may be pedagogically rewarding as well. Thompson's paper, for
example, shows how genre-based cross-linguistic analyses of travel brochures and job advertisements can
reveal subtle, linguistically-coded differences in culture and point of view. Such genre analyses of
relatively small, focussed and manageable sets of texts are now possible with the help of the BNC Index,
opening up a rich resource for all kinds of learning and research activities. By searching for keywords in
the various database fields, teachers and researchers can now quickly find even such rare sub-genres as
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 63
postcards, lecture notes, shopping lists and school essays ("rare" in the sense that they were not included
in previous-generation general corpora and are hard to get hold of in machine-readable format even
nowadays).
The personal BNC Index project described here is an attempt at classifying the corpus texts into genres or
super-genres, and putting this and other types of information about the texts into a single, information-
rich, user-friendly resource. This Index may be used to navigate through the mass of texts available. Users
can then see at once how many texts there are that match certain criteria, and the total number of words
they constitute. In this way, sub-corpora can then be easily created for specialised research or
teaching/learning activities (e.g., it is now easy to retrieve BNC texts for ESP lessons to do with law,
medicine, physics, engineering, computing, etc.).
Ultimately, one would wish that a deeper understanding of genres (their forms, structures, patterns) would
be a "transformative" exercise for all investigators. As Cranny-Francis (1993) says,
Genre is a category which enables the individual to construct critical texts; by
manipulating genre conventions to produce texts which engender [critical analysis.] It
also enables, therefore, the construction of a new, different consciousness …
A concept of genre allows the critic or analyst to explore [the] complex relationships in
which a text is involved, relationships which ultimately relate back to what a text means.
This is because what a text says and how it says it cannot be separated; this is
fundamental to our notion of genre. Because of this, genre provides the link between text
and context; between the formal and semantic properties of texts; between the text and
the intertextual, disciplinary and technological practices in which it is embedded. (pp.
111-113)
I hope that the disparate users and potential users of the BNC, whether researchers, teachers or students,
will find the genre-enhanced BNC Index useful for all kinds of linguistic enquiry, and that some of the
above transformative goals will be realised for them.
APPENDIX A
SPOKEN BNC Sampler: Missing or Unrepresentative Genres
·  Consultations: medical (none)
·  Consultations: legal (none)
·  Classroom discourse (only 3 texts)
·  Public debates (only 3 texts)
·  Job interviews (none)
·  Parliamentary debates (none)
·  News broadcasts (none)
·  Legal presentations (there are 2 legal cross-examinations, but no presentations, i.e., monologues)
·  University lectures (none)
·  Telephone conversations (no pure telephone conversations in the BNC as a whole)
·  Sermons (only 1 text)
·  Live sports discussions (none)
·  TV/radio discussions (only 4 texts)
·  TV documentaries (only 2 texts)
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 64
WRITTEN BNC Sampler: Missing or Unrepresentative Genres
·  Academic prose: humanities (none)
·  Academic prose: medicine (none)
·  Academic prose: politics, law and education (only 2 texts on law, none on politics or education)
·  Academic prose: natural sciences (nothing on chemistry, only 1 on biology & 3 on physics)
·  Academic prose: social sciences (nothing on the core subject areas of sociology or social work, nor on
linguistics, which is arguably a social science, even though it is often treated as a humanities subject)
·  Academic prose: technology & engineering (nothing on engineering)
·  Administrative prose (only 1 text)
·  Advertisements (none)
·  Broadsheets: the only broadsheet material included consisted entirely of foreign news, and only from
the Guardian.
·  Broadsheets: sports news (none)
·  Broadsheets: editorials and letters (none)
·  Broadsheets: society/cultural news (none)
·  Broadsheets: business & money news (none)
·  Broadsheets: reviews (none)
·  Biographies (none)
·  E-mail discussions (none)
·  Essays: university (only 1 text)
·  Essays: school (none)
·  Fiction: Drama (only 1 text)
·  Fiction: Poetry (only 2 texts)
·  Fiction: Prose (insufficient texts, and only 1 short story)
·  Parliamentary proceedings/Hansard (none)
·  Instructional texts (none)
·  Personal letters (none)
·  Professional letters (none)
·  News scripts (only 1 radio sports news script)
·  Non-academic: humanities (only 2 texts)
·  Non-academic: medicine (none)
·  Non-academic: pure sciences (none)
·  Non-academic: social sciences (2 rather odd texts, and 1 which possibly could be non-academic)
·  Non-academic pure science material (i.e. popularisations of science texts: there were none of these in
the Sampler)
·  News scripts (classified as 'written-to-be-spoken' in the main BNC. None included in the Sampler)
·  Official documents (only 1 text)
·  Tabloid newspapers (only Today and East Anglian Daily Times, the latter of which is not really a
tabloid, but a regional newspaper)
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 65
APPENDIX B
Information Fields and Possible Values in the BNC Index (the abbreviations/codes are in bold)
Field Possible Values
Medium [Written texts only]
book, m_pub (miscellaneous, published), m_unpub (miscellaneous unpublished),
periodical (magazines, journals, etc.), to_be_spoken (written-to-be-spoken)
Domain S_cg_business (context-governed, business), S_cg_education (c-g, educational),
S_cg_leisure (c-g, leisure), S_cg_public (c-g, public/institutional),
S_Dem_AB/C1/C2/DE/Unc (spoken demographic classes for the casual
conversation files; 'Unc' = 'unclassified'), W_app_science (applied science),
W_arts, W_belief_thought (belief & thought), W_commerce (commerce &
finance), W_imaginative (imaginative/creative), W_leisure (leisure),
W_nat_science (natural sciences), W_soc_science (social sciences),
W_world_affairs (world affairs).
Genre
(70 in total)
[Spoken texts, 24 genres]:
S_brdcast_discussn (TV or radio discussions), S_ brdcast_documentary (TV
documentaries), S_brdcast_news (TV or radio news broadcasts), S_classroom
(non-tertiary classroom discourse), S_consult (mainly medical & legal
consultations), S_conv (face-to-face spontaneous conversations), S_courtroom
(legal presentations or debates), S_demonstratn ('live' demonstrations), S_interview
(job interviews & other types), S_interview_oral_history (oral history
interviews/narratives, some broadcast), S_lect_commerce (lectures on economics,
commerce & finance), S_lect_humanities_arts (lectures on humanities and arts
subjects), S_lect_ nat_science (lectures on the natural sciences),
S_lect_polit_law_edu (lectures on politics, law or education), S_lect_soc_ science
(lectures on the social & behavioural sciences), S_meeting (business or committee
meetings), S_parliament (BNC-transcribed parliamentary speeches), S_pub_debate
(public debates, discussions, meetings), S_sermon (religious sermons),
S_speech_scripted (planned speeches), S_speech_unscripted (more or less
unprepared speeches), S_sportslive ('live' sports commentaries and discussions),
S_tutorial (university-level tutorials), S_unclassified (miscellaneous spoken
genres).
[Written texts, 46 genres]
W_ac_humanities_arts (academic prose: humanities), W_ac_medicine (academic
prose: medicine), W_ac_nat_ science (academic prose: natural sciences),
W_ac_polit_law_edu (academic prose: politics, laws, education), W_ac_soc_
science (academic prose: social & behavioural sciences), W_ac_tech_engin
(academic prose: technology, computing, engineering), W_admin (adminstrative
and regulatory texts, in-house use), W_advert (print advertisements), W_biography
(biographies/autobiographies), W_commerce (commerce & finance, economics),
W_email (e-mail sports discussion list), W_essay_school (school essays),
W_essay_univ (university essays), W_fict_drama, W_fict_poetry, W_fict_prose
(drama, poetry and novels), W_hansard (Hansard/parliamentary proceedings),
W_institut_doc (official/govermental documents/leaflets, company annual reports,
etc.; excludes Hansard), W_instructional (instructional texts/DIY),
W_letters_personal, W_letters_prof (personal and professional/business letters),
W_misc (miscellaneous texts), W_news_script (TV autocue data),
W_newsp_brdsht_nat_arts (broadsheet national newspapers: arts/cultural
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 66
material), W_newsp_brdsht_nat_commerce (broadsheet national newspapers:
commerce & finance), W_newsp_brdsht_nat_editorial (broadsheet national
newspapers: personal & institutional editorials, & letters-to-the-editor),
W_newsp_brdsht_nat_misc (broadsheet national newspapers: miscellaneous
material), W_newsp_brdsht_nat_report (broadsheet national newspapers: home &
foreign news reportage), W_newsp_brdsht_nat_science (broadsheet national
newspapers: science material), W_newsp_brdsht_nat_social (broadsheet national
newspapers: material on lifestyle, leisure, belief & thought),
W_newsp_brdsht_nat_sports (broadsheet national newspapers: sports material),
W_newsp_other_arts (regional and local newspapers),
W_newsp_other_commerce, W_newsp_other_report, W_newsp_other_science,
W_newsp_other_social, W_newsp_other_sports, W_newsp_tabloid (tabloid
newspapers), W_non_ac_humanities_arts (non-academic/non-fiction: humanities),
W_non_ac_medicine (non-academic: medical/health matters),
W_non_ac_nat_science (non-academic: natural sciences),
W_non_ac_polit_law_edu (non-academic: politics, law, education),
W_non_ac_soc_ science (non-academic: social & behavioural sciences),
W_non_ac_tech_engin (non-academic: technology, computing, engineering),
W_pop_lore (popular magazines), W_religion (religious texts, excluding
philosophy).
Mode W (written), S (spoken)
Author age 0-14 yrs (band 1), 15-24 yrs (band 2), 25-34 yrs (band 3), 35-44 yrs (band 4), 45-59
yrs (band 5), 60+ yrs (band 6), --- (unclassified)
Author sex Male, Female, Mixed, Unknown, --- (not applicable/available)
Author type Corporate, Multiple, Sole, Unknown/unclassified
Audience age child, teen, adult, --- (unclassified)
Audience sex male, female, mixed, --- (unclassified)
Audience level low (level 1), medium (level 2), high (level 3), --- (unclassified)
Sampling whole text (whl), beginning sample (beg), middle sample (mid), end sample (end),
composite (cmp), unknown/not applicable (--).
Circulation Status (formerly "reception status"): Low, Medium, High (blank for unclassified texts)
NOTES
1. In contrast, Nuyts (1988) uses "text type" in a rather idiosyncratic way to mean "a variety of written
text" (as opposed to "conversation type" for spoken texts). Many other people similarly use "text
type" in a rather loose way to mean "register" or "genre."
2. EAGLES is the Expert Advisory Group on Language Engineering Standards, an initiative set up by
the European Union to create common standards for research and development in speech and natural
language processing. At present, most EAGLES documents take the form of preliminary guidelines
from which it is hoped that standards will later emerge.
3. In Biber's (1989) article on text typology, the nature of his "internal criteria" are more clearly shown.
His "text types" are groupings of texts based on statistical clustering procedures which make use of
co-occurrence patterns of surface-level linguistic features.
4. Wikberg (1992, p. 248) calls these rhetorical types "discourse categories" (German Texttyp), as
opposed to "text types" (German Textsorte) which is equivalent to what I am here calling genres.
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 67
5. The GeM project at Stirling University illustrates an interesting new usage of genre. As it says on
their Web site, "The GeM project analyses expert knowledge of page design and layout to see how
visual resources are used in the creation of documents, both printed and electronic. The genre of a
page -- whether it's an encyclopaedia entry, a set of instructions, or a Web page -- plays a central role
in determining what graphical devices are chosen and how they are employed …. The overall aim of
the project is to deliver a model of genre [italics added], layout, and their relationship to
communicative purpose for the purposes of automatic generation of possible layouts across a range of
document types, paper and electronic."
6. This diagram is from Martin (in press), but a similar one may be found in Eggins & Martin (1997, p.
243).
7. On a more speculative note, we could perhaps borrow from the tagmemic/particle physics perspective
and talk in terms of particles (registers), waves (styles) and fields (genres). (Mike Hoey, personal
communication.)
8. Martin (1993, 121) uses the term "macro-genre" to mean roughly the same thing.
9. Also, face-to-face conversations do not, arguably, form a proper genre as such (cf. Swales, 1990).
However, for many research purposes, they form a coherent, useful super-genre.
10. Perhaps "religion" could also be considered a very broad content or topic label (?). In any case, this
exceptional category apparently came about due to the unique nature of the texts: the corpus
compilers note that the texts could "embrace any of the stylistic characteristics of [several other LOB
categories]," yet they all belonged together in some sense. All "committed religious writing" was
therefore put together under "Religion" (cf. Johansson, Leech, & Goodluck, 1978, 16).
11. As the EAGLES (1996) authors say, where there is a division into "factual" (informative) vs.
"fictional" (imaginative), then "to avoid controversy, religious works are given a separate category of
their own" (p.8).
12. Available on the Web at ftp://ftp.itri.bton.ac.uk/pub/bnc/bib-dbase. Titles of files in this resource are
truncated to the first 80 characters, which limits its usefulness for some purposes.
13. The quote also contains an example of the term text types being used in a non-technical/loose fashion
to mean "types/varieties of text."
14. Kilgarriff's list only includes the first 80 characters or so of the title of each file, which means some
titles are truncated (thus no good for searching by), and author names (for the written texts) are not
included.
15. COPAC is an on-line system for unified access to the (combined) catalogues of some of the largest
university research libraries in the UK and Ireland. Keywords were manually copied from the Web
catalogue entries and put into a separate column in the BNC Index to allow researchers to search by
proper library keywords in addition to the keywords provided by the BNC compilers. These keywords
will greatly facilitate the identification of sub-genres, (sub-)topics, etc., by people who wish to have
finer sub-classifications for specific research purposes.
16. For an explanation of why only non-fiction works are given keywords, see note 28.
17. Note that for the demographic files (conversations) the Keywords field is empty for almost all the
files.
18. The somewhat confusing term reception status is used in the BNC Users' Reference Guide instead of
circulation status. Since it refers to the size of the readership or the circulation level (not the social
status of the text), I have changed the label to reflect this. Circulation status should be used with
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 68
caution, because it is relative to genre: A newspaper with "low" reception status may still have a lot
more readers than a "medium-reception" book of poetry or office memo. The field (Target) Audience
level, on the other hand, is an estimate (by the compilers) of the level of difficulty of the text, or the
amount of background knowledge of its subject matter which is assumed.
19. Note that Genre classifications (assigned by me) do not always agree with the Domain classifications
of the BNC compilers (i.e., the official domain classifications as given in the standard distribution of
the corpus).
20. This follows the new 4-way classification scheme employed in the BNC World Edition: alltim0 (---
[unclassified]); alltim1 (1960-1974); alltim2 (1975-1984); alltim3 (1985-1994).
21. Using "audience level=high" will roughly filter out introductory textbooks and texts written for both
an academic and a more general audience.
22. Some of the genre names in the actual spreadsheet are further abbreviated for practical reasons.
23. Note that, in addition, there are four BNC files (EUY, HD6, KA2, KAV) which contain a roughly
even mix of poetry and prose. These have been placed under the "W_misc" genre.
24. The LOB corpus already has, of course, a modern-day correlative: the FLOB (Freiburg LOB) corpus.
My categorisations will allow the BNC to also be used in comparative studies using these corpora.
25. People who disagree with these classifications may use the "Keywords" and "Title" fields to find the
relevant files and re-classify them as desired.
26. The domain labels in the BNC Index are largely unchanged (i.e., they reflect the decisions of the
BNC compilers). Some egregious errors were corrected, however, and reported to the BNC project
for fixing in the new release, BNC World Edition.
27. The British Library Web site (http://www.bl.uk) offers some detailed information & links.
28. A British Library "Fiction Indexing Policy" document states, "When indexing non-fiction it is right to
attempt to express what the work as a whole is about, since it is usual for non-fiction to focus on one
or more specific topics. By contrast, a work of fiction is rarely 'about' a topic at all. Instead, most
works of fiction contain within them subjects as themes or settings. What they are 'about' is conveyed
in the story as a whole. It is only themes, settings and characters which can be picked out easily by
means of subject headings" (see http://www.bl.uk/services/bsds/nbs/marc/655polc.html).
29. As the EAGLES (1996) authors further point out, there are "alarming possibilities of double
classification [i.e., mixed genres] -- spy thriller, historical romance, etc."
30. From the document at http://www.bl.uk/services/bsds/nbs/marc/655list2.html, which also gives a full
listing of the literary sub-genres identified by the British Library.
31. The BNC Index spreadsheet, when ready, will be distributed initially at
http://members.xoom.com/davidlee00/corpus_resources.htm. Suggestions for hosting on other sites
are welcome.
32. Available at http://personal5.iddeo.es/tone/BNCIndexer. It is priced at 50 Euros for either an
individual or institutional licence (up to 15 users).
33. BNC Web Indexer is the result of a collaboration between Paul Rayson (UCREL, Lancaster
University) and myself. The URL will be announced on the CORPORA and CLLT (Corpus
Linguistics and Language Teaching) mailing lists when available.
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 69
34. Or using the Web-based concordancer for the BNC developed at Zürich, BNCweb, at
http://escorp.unizh.ch (restricted usage). The new version of SARA developed for the BNC World
Edition is also expected to have more sophisticated sub-corpus querying facilities.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
David YW Lee recently completed his doctoral studies at Lancaster University and is currently a visiting
researcher and part-time tutor there. His PhD research involved applying Douglas Biber's
multidimensional (MD) methodology to fresh spoken and written data from the British National Corpus
(BNC) and a consequent critique of that factor-analysis-based methodology. At present, he is working on
publishing his findings as a book, and is writing various articles for journals.
E-mail: david_lee00@hotmail.com
REFERENCES
Atkins, S., Clear, J., & Ostler, N. (1992). Corpus Design Criteria. Journal of Literary and Linguistic
Computing, 7(1), 1-16.
Bhatia, V. (1993). Analysing genre: Language use in professional settings. London: Longman.
Biber, D. (1988). Variation across speech and writing. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Biber, D. (1989). A typology of English texts. Linguistics, 27(1), 3-43.
Biber, D. (1993). Representativeness in corpus design. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 8(4), 243-257
Biber, D. (1994). An analytical framework for register studies. In D. Biber & E. Finegan (Eds.),
Sociolinguistic perspectives on register (pp. 31-56). New York: Oxford University Press.
Biber, D. (1995). Dimensions of register variation: A cross-linguistic comparison. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Biber, D. & Finegan, E. (1986). An initial typology of text-types. In J. Aarts & W. Meijs (Eds.), Corpus
linguistics II (pp. 19-46). Amsterdam: Rodopi.
Biber, D., & Finegan, E. (1989). Drift and the evolution of English style: A history of three genres.
Language, 65, 487-517.
Burnard, L. (Ed.). (1995, April 25). The British national corpus users reference guide (SGML version,
First release with version 1.0 of BNC). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Computing Services.
Carne, C. (1996). Corpora, genre analysis and dissertation writing: An evaluation of the potential of
corpus-based techniques in the study of academic writing. In S. Botley, J. Glass, T. McEnery, & A.
Wilson (Eds.), Proceedings of teaching and language corpora 1996, UCREL Technical Papers Vol. 9
(pp. 127-137). Lancaster, UK: Lancaster University.
Cope, B., & Kalantzis, M. (1993). Introduction: How a genre approach to literacy can transform the way
writing is taught. In B. Cope & M. Kalantzis (Eds.), The powers of literacy: A genre approach to teaching
writing (pp. 1-21). London: Falmer Press.
Cope, B., & Kalantzis, M. (Eds.). (1993). The powers of literacy: A genre approach to teaching writing.
London: Falmer Press.
Couture, B. (1986). Effective ideation in written text: A functional approach to clarity and exigence. In B.
Couture (Ed.), Functional approaches to writing: Research perspectives (pp. 69-91). Norwood, NJ:
Ablex.
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 70
Cranny-Francis, A. (1993). Genre and gender: Feminist subversion of genre fiction and its implications
for cultural literacy. In B. Cope & M. Kalantzis (Eds.), The powers of literacy: A genre approach to
teaching writing (pp. 116-136). London: Falmer Press.
Crombie, W. (1985). Discourse and language learning: A relational approach to syllabus design.
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Crystal, D., & Davy, D. (1969). Investigating English style. London: Longman.
Crystal, D. (1991). A dictionary of linguistics and phonetics. Oxford, UK: Basil Blackwell.
Expert Advisory Group on Language Engineering Standards. (1996, June). Preliminary recommendations
on text typology. EAGLES Document EAG-TCWG-TTYP/P. [Available at
http://www.ilc.pi.cnr.it/EAGLES96/texttyp/texttyp.html]
Eggins, S., & Martin, J. R.. (1997). Genres and registers of discourse. In T. van Dijk, (Ed.), Discourse as
structure and process (pp. 230-56). London: Sage.
Faigley, L., & Meyer, P. (1983). Rhetorical theory and readers' classifications of text types. Text, 3, 305-
325.
Fairclough, N. (1992). Discourse and social change. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Fairclough, N. (2000). New labour, new language? London: Routledge.
Ferguson, C. (1994). Dialect, register and genre: Working assumptions about conventionalization. In D.
Biber & E. Finegan (Eds.), Sociolinguistic perspectives on register (pp. 15-30). New York: Oxford
University Press.
Finegan, E., & Biber, D. (1994). Register and social dialect variation: An integrated approach. In D. Biber
& E. Finegan (Eds.), Sociolinguistic perspectives on register (pp. 315-347). New York: Oxford
University Press.
Flowerdew, J. (1993). An educational or process approach to the teaching of professional genres. ELTJ,
47, 4305-4316.
Grishman, R., & Kittredge, R. (Eds.). (1986). Analyzing language in restricted domains: Sublanguage
description and procesing. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1985). Language context and text: Aspects of language in a social-
semiotic perspective. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Hammond, J., Burns, A., Joyce, H., Brosnan, D., & Gerot, L. (1992). English for social purposes: A
handbook for teachers of adult literacy. Sydney: National Centre for English Language Teaching and
Research, Macquarie University.
Hoey, M. (1983). On the surface of discourse. London: Allen and Unwin.
Hoey, M. (1986). Clause relations and the writer's communicative task. In B. Couture (Ed.), Functional
approaches to writing: Research perspectives (pp. 120-141). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Hopkins, A., & Dudley-Evans, T. (1988). A genre-based investigation of the discussion sections in
articles and dissertations. English for Specific Purposes, 7, 113-121.
Hyland, K. (1996). Talking to the academy: Forms of hedging in scientific research articles. Written
Communication, 13(2), 251-282.
Johansson, S., Leech, G., & Goodluck, H. (1978). Manual of information to accompany the Lancaster-
Oslo/Bergen corpus of British English, for use with digital computers. Oslo: Department of English,
University of Oslo.
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 71
Joos, M. (1961). The five clocks. New York: Harcourt Brace & World.
Kennedy, G. (1998). An introduction to corpus linguistics. London: Longman.
Kittredge, R., & Lehrberger, J. (Eds.). (1982). Sublanguage: Studies of language in restricted semantic
domains. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
Kress, G. (1993). Genre as social process. In Cope, B., & Kalantzis, M. (Eds.), The powers of literacy: A
genre approach to teaching writing (pp. 22-37). London: Falmer Press.
Kress, G., & Hodge, R. (1979). Language as ideology. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Lee, David Y. W. (2000). Modelling variation in spoken and written language: The multi-dimensional
approach revisited. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Lancaster University.
Lee, David Y. W. (in press). Defining core vocabulary and tracking its distribution across spoken and
written genres: Evidence of a gradience of variation from the British National Corpus. Journal of English
Linguistics.
Martin, J. R. (in press). Cohesion and texture. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Martin, J.R. (1993). A contextual theory of language. In Cope, Bill & Mary Kalantzis (Eds.), The Powers
of Literacy: a genre approach to teaching writing (pp. 116-136). London: Falmer Press.
McCarthy, M. (1998a). Taming the spoken language: Genre theory and pedagogy. The Language
Teacher, 22(9). Retrieved June 20, 2000 from the World Wide Web:
http://langue.hyper.chubu.ac.jp/jalt/pub/tlt/98/sep/mccarthy.html.
McCarthy, M. (1998b). Spoken language and applied linguistics. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Meyer, B. (1975). The organisation of prose and its effects on recall. New York. North Holland.
Nakamura, J. (1986). Classification of English texts by means of Hayashi's Quantification Method Type
III. Journal of Cultural and Social Science, 21, 71-86.
Nakamura, J. (1987). Notes on the use of Hayashi's Quantification Method Type III for classifying
English texts. Journal of Cultural and Social Science, 22, 127-145.
Nakamura, J. (1992). Hayashi's Quantification Method Type III: A tool for determining text typology in
large corpora. An annex to a general report on annotation tools of the NERC Report. Unpublished
manuscript.
Nakamura, J. (1993). Statistical methods and large corpora: A new tool for describing text types. In M.
Baker, G. Francis, & E. Tognini-Bonelli (Eds.), Text and technology: In honour of John Sinclair (pp. 293-
312). London: John Benjamins.
Nuyts, J. (1988). IPrA survey of research in progress. Wilrijk, Belgium: International Pragmatics
Association.
Paltridge, B. (1995). Working with genre: A pragmatic perspective. Journal of Pragmatics, 23, 393-406.
Paltridge, B. (1996). Genre, text type, and, and the language classroom. ELT Journal, 50(3), 237-243.
Paltridge, B. (1997). Genre, frames and writing in research settings. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Phillips, M. A. (1983). Lexical macrostructure in science text. Unpublished doctoral dissertation,
University of Birmingham, UK.
Rosch, E. (1973a). On the internal structure of perceptual and semantic categories. In T. E. Moore, (Ed.),
Cognitive development and the acquisition of language (pp. 111-144). New York: Academic Press.
David Lee Genres, Registers, Text Types, Domains, and Styles
Language Learning & Technology 72
Rosch, E. (1973b). Natural categories. Cognitive Psychology, 4, 328-350.
Rosch, E. (1978). Principles of categorisation. In E. Rosch, & B. Lloyd (Eds.), Cognition and
categorisation. Hillside, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Sampson, J. (1997). "Genre," "style" and "register". Sources of confusion? Revue Belge de Philologie et
d'Histoire, 75(3), 699-708.
Steen, G. (1999). Genres of discourse and the definition of literature. Discourse Processes, 28, 109-120.
Stubbs, M. (1996). Text and corpus analysis: Computer assisted studies of language and culture. Oxford,
UK: Blackwell.
Swales, J. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Taylor, J. R. (1989). Linguistic categorisation: Prototypes in linguistic theory. Oxford, UK: Clarendon.
Thompson, G. (in press). Corpus, comparison, culture: Doing the same things differently in different
cultures. In M. Ghadessy, R. Roseberry, & A. Henry (Eds.), The use of small corpora in language
teaching. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Tribble, C. (1998). Writing difficult texts. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Lancaster University.
Tribble, C. (2000). Genres, keywords, teaching: towards a pedagogic account of the language of Project
Proposals. In L. Burnard, & T. McEnery (Eds.), Rethinking language pedagogy from a corpus
perspective: Papers from the third international conference on teaching and language corpora (Lodz
Studies in Language; pp. 75-90). Hamburg: Peter Lang. Retrieved June 20, 2000 from the World Wide
Web: http://ourworld.compuserve.com/homepages/Christopher_Tribble/Genre.htm.
van Dijk, T. (Ed.). (1985). Handbook of discourse analysis. London: Academic Press.
Wikberg, K. (1992). Discourse category and text type classification: procedural discourse in the Brown
and the LOB corpora. In Leitner, Gerhard (Ed.), New directions in English language corpora:
Methodology, results, software developments (pp. 247-261). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
