Language Learning & Technology May 2001, Vol. 5, Num. 2
http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num2/review3/default.html pp. 28-33
Copyright ª  2001,  ISSN 1094-3501 28
REVIEW OF HOT POTATOES
Title Hot Potatoes, Version 5
Authors Stewart Arneil, Martin Holmes, and Hilary Street
Platforms Windows and Macintosh
Minimum Software
Requirements
Netscape Navigator or MS Internet Explorer versions 4 or above, with JavaScript
enabled. Some modules, JMix and JMatch, use DHTML and require version 5+
browsers.
Publishers Half-Baked Software, Inc.
http://web.uvic.ca/hrd/hotpot
Support Offered
E-mail support direct from author, Martin Holmes, at mholmes@uvic.ca. The
Hot Potatoes Web site posts frequently asked questions and has a bulletin board
where questions can be posted to be answered by users.
Target Language Any Roman character set language (program supports the use of accented
characters)
Target Audience Language teachers
Price
Free for non-profit individuals or educational institutions, with the condition that
materials produced are freely available to anyone via the Web. Otherwise,
license starts with 1 user for $100 US. Large publication license: US $350.
Reviewed by Paula Winke, Georgetown University, and David MacGregor, the Center for Applied
Linguistics
Overview
The program Hot Potatoes, currently produced by Half-Baked Software, Inc., was designed to allow
teachers to make interactive, Web-based exercises that can be accessed by students at any Internet-
capable computer terminal with a standard Web browser. Hot Potatoes uses both HTML and JavaScript;
however, one does not need to know these languages to make the Web-based exercises. Instead, teachers
use the program's exercise templates to create exercises on Web pages which then can be uploaded to a
server where students access them. Hot Potatoes can create six different types of Web-based exercises
which can stand alone or be linked to other exercises to form a sequence of tasks. Students can correct
their own work based on the clues and feedback set up in advance by the teacher. Hot Potatoes also
allows the teacher to specify an email address to which scores are sent. Although no knowledge of Web
design is necessary to create the Web page exercises, teachers with such knowledge can customize the
materials to a greater degree by manipulating the program code.
Description
Hot Potatoes is actually a software suite comprised of six different programs, referred to as modules in
this review. Each module can be used to create a different type of interactive, Web-based exercise. The
six different modules are referred to as "potatoes," and consist of JBC, JQuiz, JMix, JCross, JCloze, and
JMatch, with each name referring to the type of exercise the module creates. A summary of the types of
exercises that can be created with each module, as well as links to online interactive examples created by
the authors of this review,1 are presented in Table 1.
Paula Winke & David MacGregor Review of Hot Potatoes
Language Learning & Technology 29
Table 1. The Six Modules to Make Exercises in Hot Potatoes
Module Exercise type What students do Interactive example
1. JBC
multiple-choice
quiz
choose the correct answer
for each question
http://epsilon3.georgetown.edu/~pmw2/
hotpot/JBCSample.htm
2. JQuiz text-entry quiz
type in words, phrases or
even sentences (open-
ended)
http://epsilon3.georgetown.edu/~pmw2/
hotpot/JQuizSample.htm
3. JMix
jumbled-word
exercise
arrange jumbled words into
phrases or sentences
http://epsilon3.georgetown.edu/~pmw2/
hotpot/JMixSample.htm
4. JCross crossword
fill in the blanks to
complete the crossword
puzzle
http://epsilon3.georgetown.edu/~pmw2/
hotpot/JCrossSample.htm
5. JCloze
fill-in-the-blank
exercise
enter the words that are
missing
http://epsilon3.georgetown.edu/~pmw2/
hotpot/JClozeSample.htm
6. JMatch
matching
exercise
match items in the 1st
column with those in the
2nd
http://epsilon3.georgetown.edu/~pmw2/
hotpot/JMatchSample.htm
JBC allows teachers to create multiple-choice questions with as many answer choices as they like (see
Figure 1). JQuiz is used to create open-ended questions, which differ from multiple-choice questions in
that the student types the answer in a text-field, rather than choosing from a list of options. JBC and JQuiz
both allow exercises to be programmed with an unlimited number of correct answers. For example, for
the question "What is the capital of the United States?" the teacher can specify "DC," "D.C.,"
"Washington," and other versions of the name as correct answers. Hot Potatoes also gives teachers the
option of making answers case-sensitive, and of allowing students to see all correct answers by having a
"Show Answer" button displayed.
Figure 1. Creating a multiple choice question
Paula Winke & David MacGregor Review of Hot Potatoes
Language Learning & Technology 30
JMix is for the creation of exercises of scrambled sentences, paragraphs, or stories (see Figure 2).
Students drag and drop the sentence fragments to put them in order, or they can click on the fragments
sequentially to put the text together. The teacher may add an unlimited amount of additional acceptable
sentences, and can set up a warning to be shown if the alternate sentence put together by the student does
not contain all of the words or punctuation of the original, preferred sentence.
Figure 2. JMix exercise
JCross can be used to design crossword puzzles with customized puzzle layout and optional clues for each
word. The module begins with a blank grid template, and the teacher designs the puzzle by entering the
words directly into the grid, or by simply providing a list of words. Words can run in the order of left to
right or top to bottom. When finished, the module automatically crops the grid into a crossword puzzle
and automatically assigns a number to each word. To see the clue for a word, the student clicks on the
number in the crossword puzzle where the word begins.
Figure 3. JCross example exercise
Paula Winke & David MacGregor Review of Hot Potatoes
Language Learning & Technology 31
JCloze is a traditional cloze or fill-in-the-blank exercise template which allows the teacher to type in a
text of any kind (paragraph, ordered-sentences, etc.), and then choose the words be left blank for students
to fill in. Furthermore, a separate reading text can be entered (manually or from an HTML file) upon
which the cloze-type questions can be based.
JMatch allows the teacher to create matching and sequencing exercises based on two columns of items.
JMatch allows for easy insertion of pictures, graphics, and images, so that the matching exercise could
consist of pairing vocabulary words with the corresponding pictures.
All six modules of the Hot Potatoes program suite have several useful options that allow the teacher to
customize exercises within the bounds of the basic templates. For example, when creating exercises, the
teacher can customize feedback such that students receive a different message according to which
incorrect answer they choose (see Figure 1). Similarly, the teacher can choose to provide students with
access to a "Clue," such as the first letter of a word in a crossword puzzle. Some of the modules also
allow the teacher to enter a reading text upon which the questions can be based. Furthermore, these texts
can be set to disappear after a pre-specified amount of time in order to add a timed component to the
exercise, although students may click a button to see the text again. All modules except JCross allow the
teacher to easily incorporate graphics, sounds, and video into exercises. The modules also allow teachers
to customize the general appearance of the Web page output: They can specify the colors of the text,
titles, and backgrounds. It should also be noted that Hot Potatoes does not support non-Roman fonts.
There is also a Common Gateway Interface (CGI) function tab in all six modules which allows the results
to be sent to a designated email address, as long as the host server is equipped with the proper
FormMail.pl Perl script. Hot Potatoes sends only the student's ID, the name of the exercise, and the
overall score; the script does not record the actual questions that were incorrectly answered, nor does it
record the number of attempts made by the student.
Hot Potatoes offers extended support for those who have paid for a commercial license. For those who do
not have a commercial license, there is free email support at mholmes@uvic.ca or hotpot@uvic.ca, and
the Bulletin Board Internet help function of Hot Potatoes, accessible from all modules, also offers free
help on a list of topics.
Evaluation
Hot Potatoes will be evaluated according to the following three questions: Does the program permit the
creation of language learning exercises that are consistent with second language acquisition theory? Is the
program user friendly? And finally, is the program appropriate for language testing?
The use of technology by teachers of second or foreign languages has many benefits, one of which
includes the increase in the amount of exposure to and potential interaction with the target language
outside of the classroom setting. Hot Potatoes exercises may fall into this category of beneficial
technological use when accessed by students remotely as supplementary classroom work. Moreover, the
exercises can be shared with teachers worldwide, as long as they have access to the Web.
The effectiveness of the tasks, however, depends on the use the teacher makes of the program. Research
suggests that learners benefit from task-based instruction, in which they are engaged in tasks with a
primary focus on content rather than language (Long, 1996). Some of the characteristics of good task-
based activities are that they focus on meaning, provide a communication problem to solve, have a
relationship to real-world activities, and are not concerned with language display (Skehan, 1998). Hot
Potatoes exercises could form the basis of task-based activities. For example, two or more students new
to a school could share a computer terminal and cooperate to complete a JMatch activity in which they
must identify various buildings on campus (see JMatch example). A drawback of Hot Potatoes, however,
is that it can more easily be used to create form-focused activities in which the "interaction" is limited to
interaction between the user and the pre-scripted feedback provided by the creator of the activity. Such
Paula Winke & David MacGregor Review of Hot Potatoes
Language Learning & Technology 32
activities can only be considered interactive in the narrowest of senses, and amount to little more than
online versions of traditional grammar activities. Therefore, it seems exercises made with Hot Potatoes
can promote SLA, but the extent to which they do so depends on the content of the exercises created by
the teacher. In short, Hot Potatoes is a tool, and, like even the best of tools, its value depends on the
knowledge and creativity of the user.
We found the six modules of Hot Potatoes logical and easy to use. They do not require programming
knowledge, yet they still offer flexibility for teachers who have more advanced knowledge. To familiarize
ourselves with the modules, we first read the Hot Potatoes tutorial offered with the program, which took
about 30 minutes, and then created a basic, sample exercise with one of the modules in about an hour.
Because all modules are similar in design and share basic features, learning one of the Hot Potatoes
modules makes it easy to learn the other five.
It must be emphasized that the creators of Hot Potatoes did not intend the program as a test-design
package, nor should it be used as such. There are no provisions to prevent the student from cheating, and
no security measures are provided. Moreover, the limited nature of the CGI Perl script feature, which
does not include detailed information regarding students' responses to individual items, makes it
impossible for teachers to identify students' strengths and weaknesses. Instead, the intended use of the
program is to permit the creation of exercises that allow students to work their way towards correct
answers based on the feedback provided. Still, some teachers may be tempted to use Hot Potatoes
exercises as tests. For one, Hot Potatoes itself refers to two of the exercise modules as "Quizzes."
Furthermore, there is a dearth of affordable language testing software. Because Hot Potatoes is such a
valuable, free (for non-profit educational users who make their pages available on the Web) and easy-to-
use tool for creating exercises, it is understandable that teachers may overestimate the capabilities of the
program and thus try to use it for testing purposes. Nonetheless, language teachers who need a secure
testing solution are advised to look at server-side, commercial products, such as Question Mark or Test
Pilot (reviewed this issue) with secure browser options and statistical test reporting functions. However, it
must be noted that these commercial software testing products were not designed specifically for
language testing, although they can be adapted for such use. On the other hand, Hot Potatoes was
designed specifically for the creation of language exercises, but should not be used for testing.
Summary
The Hot Potatoes program, which consists of modules for creating six different types of exercises, is an
excellent resource for creating on-line, interactive language learning exercises that can be used in or out
of the classroom. These types of exercises can be especially useful in language learning laboratories with
Internet access, or for remote learning. When matched with both appropriate content and motivated
students, Hot Potatoes exercises seem likely to promote second language acquisition. Hot Potatoes' user-
friendly modules also allow more adept teachers to create complex, interactive exercises. Hot Potatoes is
not intended as testing software, and should not be used as such. Nevertheless, the Hot Potatoes program
suite provides teachers with flexible, easy-to-use modules for creating Web-based language exercises that
students can work on while also receiving feedback that will direct them towards correct answers.
NOTE
1. In the creation of these sample exercises, the authors did not alter the original HTML source code nor
change any of the basic functions of the modules in any way. Links to more Hot Potatoes exercises
are listed on the University of Victoria Research and Development team's Web site.
Paula Winke & David MacGregor Review of Hot Potatoes
Language Learning & Technology 33
ABOUT THE REVIEWERS
Paula Winke has an M.A. in Linguistics from the University of Minnesota and was a Peace Corps
Volunteer in China. She currently is a doctoral candidate in Applied Linguistics at Georgetown
University and a Research Assistant for the Arabic and Russian Web Test Project in the Language Testing
Division at the Center for Applied Linguistics in Washington, DC.
Email: pmw2@georgetown.edu
David MacGregor has an M.A. in TESOL from the School for International Training. He taught ESOL in
Turkey, Spain, and the United States. He currently is a doctoral candidate in Applied Linguistics at
Georgetown University and a Research Assistant in the Language Testing Division at the Center for
Applied Linguistics in Washington, DC.
Email: macgregd@georgetown.edu
REFERENCES
Long, M. (1996). The role of the linguistic environment in second language acquisition. In W. C. Ritchie
& T. K. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of language acquisition: Vol. 2. Second language acquisition (pp. 413-
478). New York: Academic Press.
Skehan, P. (1998). A cognitive approach to language learning. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
