Language Learning & Technology May 2001, Vol. 5, Num. 2
http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num2/emerging.html pp. 8-13
Copyright ª  2001, ISSN 1094-3501 8
EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
Language Testing Tools and Technologies
Bob Godwin-Jones
Virginia Commonwealth University
Introductory Quiz
1. Testing has long been an integral part of language instruction:
True False
2. Testing is used to... (check all that apply)
 place students in appropriate instructional levels
 assess learners' progress (for themselves or their teachers)
 ascertain and certify language proficiency levels
3. The preferred networking environment for delivering language testing is rapidly becoming the...
Extra credit.
The Educause-sponsored project to ensure interoperability among Internet-based assessment
programs is the .
Computerized Testing
Computers have been used in language assessment since at least the 1960s. The PLATO project at the
University of Illinois pioneered the use of networked computers for language practice and testing.
However, the use of computers in language testing did not become widespread and generally available
until the advent of the personal computer in the late seventies and early eighties. Among the better-known
software packages from the early (DOS) days is Calis from Duke University (still available as an
unsupported product). It was designed for active drill and practice of grammar and vocabulary, rather than
formal assessment. This was the case as well for Dasher, a widely-used Mac-based program from the
University of Iowa. Both programs provided for varied feedback options and recognition/display of
partially correct answers. In addition to dedicated language software, generic authoring tools were often
used to develop language drill and assessment programs. The best-known of these are HyperCard (from
Apple) and Toolbook (from Asymetrix, now click2learn) With both, multimedia could be integrated into
the tests or exercises, allowing for more options, including assessing listening comprehension. The arrival
of CD-ROM facilitated greatly the use of multimedia in language programs, by providing the necessary
storage capacity.
There are today successors to these stand-alone authoring programs, such as WinCalis, the Windows
version of Calis. One of the attractive features of WinCalis is its support for Unicode (ISO 10646), which
allows representation of a great variety of languages and alphabets simultaneously in an application.
MaxAuthor, from the University of Arizona, is another Windows-based authoring program for language
testing and practice. It also supports a variety of languages, and lessons can be made Web-accessible.
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies
Language Learning & Technology 9
Internet Applications
Although some testing applications have taken advantage of the availability of local area networks
(particularly for storing scores centrally), the arrival of the World Wide Web in 1993 with its rich and
powerful network environment provided a more attractive -- and ever more pervasive -- networking
option. The Web offers the advantages of centralized delivery (and authentication) as well as server-based
score storage and retrieval. Initially, the user experience with Web-based tests was not much different
from pen and paper versions, with relatively little interactivity or user feedback. Some Web tests continue
to use similar approaches with test scoring provided by e-mail or separate Web pages showing the
answers (for the test taker to compare with his/her answers). The advantage of using the Web, however, is
in the interactivity it enables. This is generally done through the use of Web form pages which are
processed by CGI ("Common Gateway Interface") scripts, usually written in Perl. Tests delivered through
CGI typically are in machine-correctable formats such as multiple choice or true-false, using checkboxes,
radio buttons, or pull-down menus. Usually users must complete the entire test before submitting it and
receiving feedback. In CGI-based formats, feedback options are limited and there is rarely recognition of
partially correct answers.
In 1995, Netscape introduced JavaScript as an interpreted scripting language built into its browser, using
object-oriented syntax borrowed from Java. Subsequently, Microsoft delivered a JavaScript compatible
language with its browser ("JScript"), and two years ago ECMAScript, based on JavaScript and JScript,
was adopted as an Internet standard. JavaScript adds considerably more flexibility to the processing of
Web forms, allowing, for example, for question by question feedback to questions. With the arrival of
JavaScript, language tests have begun to expand format options, adding short answer, matching, or
sentence ordering, for example. JavaScript is not as well suited as CGI for secure testing since the source
code is accessible to users. It is possible to provide some security through the use of temporary "cookies"
(to hold answers), encrypted answer strings, or external scripts which dynamically write the Web pages,
but these are not as secure as server-based CGI solutions. There has been an explosion of interest in
recent years in using JavaScript in language testing (see resource list).
A more secure option than JavaScript is Java. Like JavaScript tests, Java applets can easily be distributed
over the Internet, but since they are compiled, the source code is not viewable. Java has been used in
language testing but mostly on an experimental basis. Java has suffered from slow performance,
compatibility problems, and mediocre multimedia support. Some use is being made also of programs with
Web browser plug-ins such as Director (see example) and Flash (see example), as well as multimedia
players combined with quizzes, such as Quicktime VR (see example) or RealPlayer (see example). These
can provide attractive interfaces and good multimedia support, but require users to have the necessary
version of the plug-in installed. For both Java and multimedia authoring programs such as Director or
Authorware, there is a steeper learning curve than is the case with basic Web authoring using HTML and
JavaScript.
One area in which there has recently been considerable activity is the development of Web-based
language placement exams. Among them are those from Macalaster, BYU, and Northwestern. All use a
server-based CGI delivery for security reasons. Of interest is the use of a computer adaptive testing
approach in some on-line placement exams, such as the WebCAPE Tests from BYU. The placement
exams under development at Ohio State University use an adaptive testing mechanism combined with
authentic language materials shown in their original context.
Authoring Tools
There has been a great deal of interest in recent years in the creation of Web-based tests and exercises
through easy-to-use authoring tools. A number of such tools have been created specifically for language
learning. WebPractest from Gary Smith, for example, allows creation of JavaScript-based interactive
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies
Language Learning & Technology 10
exercises. One of the advantages of WebPractest is the ability to choose question-by-question or summary
feedback. Tests are created in WebPractest through the use of a text editor. Hot Potatoes, out of the
University of Victoria, is another tool developed for creating language tests. It is being widely used for a
variety of languages. Its formats include multiple-choice, fill-in-the-gap, short-answer, jumbled-sentence,
and crossword-type quizzes. Hot potatoes involves use of the Windows or MacOS version of its stand-
alone authoring tool. No knowledge of HTML or JavaScript is required (although users with that
knowledge can edit source files as desired). In addition to instant feedback, the program can also provide
hints and clues.
A wide variety of test and quiz formats is available through the "Interactive Quiz Makers" from Dan
Beeby (cloze, matching, multiple choice, memory). This tool uses a combination of CGI and JavaScript to
deliver the quizzes. Several of the formats feature the use of DHTML ("dynamic HTML") to enable drag
and drop functionality. This allows for considerably more interactivity. In the "Matchmaker2" format, for
example, students drag and drop images to match a text cue; in "PlaceMaker3," students are given
vocabulary words that fit into a specific location in an image and must use drag and drop to match.
In addition to these authoring tools, quiz/exercise templates are also available for language teachers, such
as those from Marmo Soemarmo. His site provides examples of exercises in a great variety of formats:
true-false, multiple choice, matching, feature or category identification, short answer, cloze, sentence
generation, hypertext, memory, spelling. By downloading the source code for the examples provided, new
content can be added by following the comments included in the code. Test and exercise templates for
language learning are also available from Douglas Mills and George Mitrevski.
Many instructors in higher education today are using the testing mechanisms built into Web course
management systems such as WebCT or Blackboard. These tools offer instructors an extensive set of
features to include in Web-based course materials. The test formats vary, but at a minimum include short
answer, multiple choice, true-false, and essay. The delivery is CGI-based. An exception are the quizzes in
Web Course in a Box, which provide the option of more flexible feedback through JavaScript and also
include built-in standard feedback in multiple languages.
Outlook
Computerized testing will inevitably increase in volume and scope. This is happening in all areas,
including in major national and international standardized tests. This growth is not without controversy,
as evinced in the reaction to the ETS announcement of the use of computerized testing in Africa. As
schools demand more frequent standardized testing of students, more of that testing will migrate to
computer formats. Many states provide practice tests for students on the Web, such as those from Edutest
for the Virginia "Standards of Learning" exams.
In language testing, accelerating development of speech recognition technologies promises to provide
new options in computerized testing which may involve both listening and speaking. It is likely as well
that testing will become more customizable, with options for tailoring tests to individual students and
their specific needs and backgrounds. XML ("extensible markup language") through its interactive
"Document Object Model" (DOM) is likely to replace both HTML and JavaScript as the standard for
creating interactive Web pages for language testing and practice. The IMS Project ("Instructional
Management System") uses XML as a standard for describing questions and tests. The idea is to enable
and encourage the interoperability of content within assessment systems, a very useful development for
individual instructors, as well as for publishers, certification agencies, and software vendors. Several
software companies, such as Blackboard and WebCT, are already using the IMS specifications and XML
to enable import/export functionality. The University of Baltimore recently took advantage of this feature
to move courses from one course management system to another.
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies
Language Learning & Technology 11
On the server end, JSP ("Java Server Pages") is becoming an attractive alternative to CGI. JavaServer
Pages technology uses XML-like tags and scriptlets written in the Java programming language, but
incorporated into the HTML code, to provide an equivalent to CGI. Java "servlets" residing on the Web
server are able to interpret this code and execute the processing of the Web forms. The idea is to separate
the page display and formatting from the programming logic, so that interactive pages can be created and
maintained by conventional HTML/XML tools. While the approach is similar to that used by Microsoft's
ASP ("Active Server Pages"), the JSP approach provides more programming and scripting flexibility as
well as multi-platform support. In any case, there is likely to be a database back-end that keeps test
information, including questions and answers, as well as scores. There are well-established methods for
connecting databases with Web servers, such as ODBC ("Open Database Connectivity"). A popular
method to interact with databases is the use of middleware or application development software such as
ColdFusion (from Allaire, recently merged with Macromedia), Tango, or Lasso.
Resource List
Web-Based Testing Resources
·  The Language Tester's Guide to Cyberspace excellent guide from Glenn Fulcher
·  Resources in Language Testing Page by Glenn Fulcher
·  "Language Testing" on WWW from Doshisha University, Kyoto, Japan (K. and S. Kitao)
·  Language Testing Resources from the Center for the Advancement of Language Learning
·  Foreign Language Test Database from CALL, listing 140 tests in 63 languages
·  Assessment & Evaluation on the Internet links to web pages of organizations, etc., with
annotations
·  Ericae.net resource collection on assessment and evaluation
·  Education Standards and Testing links to web sites related to testing
Organizations and Institutions
·  International Language Testing Association
·  ALTE The Association of Language Testers in Europe
·  Cambridge EFL Examinations
·  English Language Institute (ELI) Testing-Certification from the University of Michigan
·  ETS Educational Testing Service, its tests, and links to other test-related resources
·  ILTA International Language Testing Association includes links to LTRC Program Booklets
·  Local Examinations Syndicate (UCLES) from the University of Cambridge
Language Tests
·  Oral Proficiency Testing ACTFL
·  IELTS - English language test from the British Council
·  TOEFL practice questions for the widely used TOEFL exam
·  Basic English Skills Test (BEST) from the Center for Applied Linguistics
·  Examination for the Certificate of Proficiency in English (ECPE) from the University of
Michigan
·  The Michigan English Language Assessment Battery (MELAB) University of Miichigan
·  Examination for the Certificate of Competency in English (ECCE)
·  The STEP test (in Japanese)
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies
Language Learning & Technology 12
·  Advanced Placement Program from the College Board
Sample On-line Practice Tests
·  Language Tests for English Language Learners from Ohio University
·  ESL Quiz Center links to quizzes, from Dave Sperling
·  TransWord Foreign Language Tests / Exercises
·  V-LASSO Vocational Language Assessment On-line
·  Self-Study Quizzes for ESL Students from The Internet TESL Journal's Activities for ESL
Students
·  Cutting Edge CALL Demos from Jim Duber
·  Spanish Language Exercises from Juan Roman de Arana
·  French Grammar Exercises from the University of Texas
Language Placement Tests On-line
·  WebCAPE Language Placement Tests from the Humanities Research Center, Brigham Young
University
·  Foreign Language Placement Tests from the Multimedia Learning Center, Northwestern
University
·  Placement test (German) from Macalester College
Test Makers, Tools, and Templates
·  Dasher
·  WinCalis from Duke University
·  MaxAuthor from the University of Arizona
·  WebPractest by Gary Smith (William and Mary)
·  Hot Potatoes from the University of Victoria Humanities Computing and Media Centre
·  Review of Hot Potatoes
·  Sites using Hot Potatoes
·  Web Author from the Language Resource and Research Center at the University of Pennsylvania
·  Interactive Language Makers from Dan Beeby
·  Webgen 2000 (Java-based) from the University of Lethbridge
·  Marmo's JavaScript Templates by Marmo Soemarmo
·  JavaScript for Language Learning from the LinguaCenter, University of Illinois
·  Knowledge Design from George Mitrevski (Auburn)
