Language Learning & Technology September 2001, Vol. 5, Num. 3
http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num3/announcements/ pp. 13-18
Copyright ª  2001, ISSN 1094-3501 13
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS
This page includes announcements from the organizations sponsoring LLT.
University of Hawai’i National Foreign Language Resource
Center (NFLRC)
Less commonly taught languages, particularly those of Asia and the Pacific, are the focus of the
University of Hawai`i National Foreign Language Resource Center, which engages in research and
materials development projects and conducts Summer Institutes for language professionals among its
many activities.
PACIFIC SECOND LANGUAGE RESEARCH FORUM ( PacSLRF)
2001 The NFLRC is pleased to co-sponsor the upcoming PacSLRF 2001
Conference, which will be held at the Imin Conference Center on the
University of Hawai'i at Manoa campus October 4-7, 2001. This
international conference will focus on the acquisition of second languages
in instructed and naturalistic settings, particularly in East Asian, Southeast
Asian, and Pacific languages. Questions? Contact us at pacslrf@hawaii.edu.
NEW PUBLICATIONS FROM THE UH NFLRC
•  A Focus on Language Test Development: Expanding the Language Proficiency Construct Across a
Variety of Tests by T. Hudson & J. D.Brown (Eds.). This volume presents eight research studies
which introduce a variety of novel, non-traditional forms of second and foreign language assessment.
To the extent possible, the studies also show the entire test development process, warts and all. These
language testing projects not only demonstrate many of the types of problems that test developers run
into in the real world but also afford the reader unique insights into the language test development
process.
•  Motivation and Second Language Learning by Z. Dörnyei & R. Schmidt (Eds.). This volume, the
second in this series concerned with motivation and foreign language learning, includes papers
presented in a state-of-the-art colloquium on L2 motivation at the American Association for Applied
Linguistics Conference (Vancouver, 2000) and a number of specially commissioned studies. The 20
chapters, written by some of the best known researchers in the field, cover a wide range of theoretical
and research methodological issues, and also offer empirical results (both qualitative and quantitative)
concerning the learning of many different languages (Arabic, Chinese, English, Filipino, French,
German, Hindi, Italian, Japanese, Russian, and Spanish) in a broad range of learning contexts
(Bahrain, Brazil, Canada, Egypt, Finland, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Japan, Spain, and the US).
Additions have also been made to the NFLRC NetWorks collection of online publications. Check out our
other publications at http://www.LLL.hawaii.edu/nflrc/publication.html.
.
News from Sponsoring Organizations
Language Learning & Technology 14
Michigan State University Center for Language Education
and Research (CLEAR)
CLEAR’s mission is to promote foreign language education in the United States. To meet its goals,
CLEAR’s projects focus on foreign language research, materials development, and teacher training.
FOREIGN LANGUAGE RESEARCH
·  Acquisition of Prosody by English-Speaking Learners of French
·  Feedback and Interaction
·  Longitudinal Analysis of Foreign Language Writing Development
MATERIALS DEVELOPMENT
Products
·  Business Chinese (CD-ROM)
·  Modules for Assessing Socio-Cultural Competence for German (CD-ROM)
·  Pronunciación y fonética (CD-ROM)
·  African Language Tutorial Guide (guide and video)
·  Foreign Languages: Doors to Opportunity (video and discussion guide)
·  Task-based Communicative Grammar Activities for Japanese and Thai (workbook)
·  Test Development (workbook and video)
·  The Internet Sourcebook for Business German
·  Business Language Packets for High School Classrooms (French, German, and Spanish)
Coming Soon!
·  Portuguese Pronunciation and Phonetics CD-ROM
·  Modules for Assessing Socio-Cultural Competence for Russian (CD-ROM)
·  Thai Tutorial Guide
·  The Internet Sourcebook for Business Spanish
Game-O-Matic
The Game-O-Matic is a suite of wizards that create Web-based activities for language learning and
practice. Teachers can make original Game-O-Matic games by visiting http://clear.msu.edu/dennie/matic/.
Have a new idea for a Game-O-Matic activity? Contact Dennie Hoopingarner at hooping4@msu.edu.
Newsletter
CLEAR News is a biyearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. Contact
the CLEAR office to join the mailing list or see it on the Web at http://clear.msu.edu/clearnews/.
TEACHER TRAINING
Summer Workshops
Every summer, CLEAR offers teacher development workshops for foreign language educators to help
strengthen and expand their teaching skills. CLEAR offers stipends to help defray the workshop fees and
travel/accommodation expenses. For more information, see CLEAR’s Web site at http://clear.msu.edu.
For more information, contact
Center for Language Education And Research (CLEAR)
A712 Wells Hall
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824-1027
Phone: 517/432-2286
Fax: 517/432-0473
Email: clear@msu.edu
News from Sponsoring Organizations
Language Learning & Technology 15
Apprentissage des Langues et Systèmes d'Information et
de Communication (ALSIC)
ALSIC (Language Learning and Information and Communication Systems) is an electronic journal in
French for researchers and practitioners in fields related to applied linguistics, didactics,
psycholinguistics, educational sciences, computational linguistics, and computer science. The journal
gives priority to papers from the French-speaking community and/or in French, but it also regularly
invites papers in other languages so as to strengthen scientific and technical exchanges between linguistic
communities that too often remain separate. The editorial board of ALSIC invites you to contact them for
any prospective contributions at the following electronic address: alsic@lifc.univ-fcomte.fr.
The Australian Technology Enhanced Language Learning
Consortium (ATELL)
Contacts: Dr. Mike Levy, The University of Queensland (mlevy@lingua.arts.uq.edu.au)
Prof. Roly Sussex, The University of Queensland (sussex@lingua.arts.uq.edu.au)
ATELL is an informal collaboration of Australian language teachers involved in technology-enhanced
language learning and teaching. It has recently been moved to The University of Queensland, where Dr.
Mike Levy and Professor Roly Sussex are developing the concept in collaboration with Mr. Greg
Dabelstein, coordinator of the CALL special interest group of the Association of Modern Language
Teachers' Associations of Australia (AFMTLA). We intend to establish a network of complementary and
collaborating resources for teachers and learners in the TELL domain in schools and tertiary institutions.
There will be a Web site, which will include information, collaboration, and resources such as
·  a register of Australian TELL experts
·  links to other sites with TELL-related information and materials
·  links to reviews of hardware, software, courseware
·  a section for FAQs (Frequently Asked Questions)
·  what's new -- ideas, research, materials
·  a register of projects, current and past, in TELL research, development, implementation
·  software modules, libraries, and related resources for developers
·  audio and video files for language learning support
·  policies and discussion
·  special interest groups
In addition, we are reviving the ATELL mailing list, whose e-mail location is atell@lingua.arts.uq.edu.au.
ATELL is supported by the Language Laboratory at the University of Queensland.
News from Sponsoring Organizations
Language Learning & Technology 16
Center for Advanced Research on Language Acquisition,
University of Minnesota (CARLA)
CARLA is one of nine National Language Resource Centers whose role is to improve the nation's
capacity to teach and learn foreign languages effectively. Launched in 1993 with funding from the
national Title VI Language Resource Center program of the U.S. Department of Education, CARLA's
mission is to study multilingualism and multiculturalism, to develop knowledge of second language
acquisition, and to advanced the quality of second language teaching, learning, and assessment by
conducting research and action projects sharing research-based and other forms of knowledge across
disciplines and education systems extending, exchanging, and applying this knowledge in the wider
society.
CARLA's research and action initiatives include a focus on the articulation of language instruction,
content-based language teaching through technology, culture and language studies, less commonly taught
languages, language immersion education, second language assessment, second language learning
strategies, and technology and second language learning.
To share its latest research and program opportunities with language teachers around the country,
CARLA offers the following resources: a summer institute program for teachers; a database which lists
where less commonly taught languages are taught throughout the country; listservs for teachers of less
commonly taught languages and immersion educators; a working paper series; conferences and
workshops; and a battery of instruments in French, German, and Spanish for assessing learners'
proficiency in reading, writing, speaking, and listening at the intermediate-low level on the ACTFL scale.
Check out these and other CARLA resources on the CARLA Web site at http://carla.acad.umn.edu.
The Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL)
The Center for Applied Linguistics is a private, nonprofit organization that promotes and improves the
teaching and learning of languages, identifies and solves problems related to language and culture, and
serves as a resource for information about language and culture. CAL carries out a wide range of
activities in the fields of English as a second language, foreign languages, cultural education, and
linguistics. These activities include research, teacher education, information dissemination, instructional
design, conference planning, technical assistance, program evaluation, and policy analysis. Publications
include books on language education, online databases of language programs and assessments, curricula,
research reports, teacher training materials, and print and online newsletters.
Major CAL projects include the following:
·  ERIC Clearinghouse on Languages and Linguistics
·  National Clearinghouse for ESL Literacy Education
·  Refugee Service Center
·  Pre-K-12 School Services
CAL collaborates with other language education organizations on the following projects:
·  Center for Research on Education, Diversity & Excellence
·  Improving Foreign Languages in the Schools Project of the Northeast and Island Regional Laboratory
at Brown University
·  National Capitol Language Resource Center
·  National K-12 Foreign Language Resource Center   
News from Sponsoring Organizations
Language Learning & Technology 17
·  National Network for Early Language Learning
News from the ERIC Clearinghouse on Languages and Linguistics
·  ERIC/CLL’s quarterly online newsletter, ERIC/CLL Language Link, covers current topics in
language education.  Recent articles in Language Link include a review of the 2000 US Census and
its implications for language educators, CoBaLTT (computer-assisted language learning), profiles of
effective Early Foreign Language Programs, and a Language Policy update.
·  Recent ERIC/CLL Digests cover a range of topics in ESL, foreign language, and bilingual education
including our newest Digest, Lexical Approach to Second Language Teaching.
News from the National Center for ESL Literacy Education
Facts and Statistics Related to Adult ESL provides links to resources that NCLE most often consult for
statistics on adult ESL and the populations served by adult ESL programs.
The latest NCLE Digest, Reflective Teaching Practice in Adult ESL Settings offers the adult ESL
practitioner background information and step-by-step suggestions for using reflective processes as a tool
for professional development.
Computer Assisted Language Instruction Consortium
(CALICO)
Since its inception in 1983, CALICO has served as an international forum for language teachers who
want to develop and utilize the potential of advanced technology to support their teaching and research
needs. Through its Annual Symposia, Special Interest Groups (SIGs), CALICO Journal, CALICO
Monograph Series, CALICO Resource Guide, and numerous other publications, CALICO provides both
leadership and perspective in the ever-changing field of computer-assisted instruction. The strength of
CALICO derives from the enthusiasm, creativity, and diversity of its members. It comprises language
teachers and researchers from universities, military academies, community colleges, K-12 schools,
government agencies, and commercial enterprises. To learn more about CALICO activities and how to
participate in them, visit the CALICO homepage at http://www.calico.org.
News from Sponsoring Organizations
Language Learning & Technology 18
European Association for Computer Assisted Language
Learning (EUROCALL)
EUROCALL is an association of language teaching professionals from Europe and worldwide aiming to
·  Promote the use of foreign languages within Europe
·  Provide a European focus for all aspects of the use of technology for language learning
·  Enhance the quality, dissemination, and efficiency of CALL materials
EUROCALL's journal, ReCALL, published by Cambridge University Press, is one of the leading
academic journals covering research into computer-assisted and technology-enhanced language learning.
The association organises special interest meetings and annual conferences, and works towards the
exploitation of electronic communications systems for language learning. For those involved in education
and training, EUROCALL provides information and advice on all aspects of the use of technology for
language learning.
Forthcoming EUROCALL conferences
·  EUROCALL 2001 will be at the University of Nijmegen, The Netherlands, 30 August to 1 September
2001.
·  EUROCALL 2002 will be at the University of Jyväskylä, Finland, 14 - 17 August 2002.
For full details, contact us at http://www.eurocall.org.
International Association for Language Learning Technology
(IALLT)
Established in 1965, IALLT (formerly IALL) is a professional organization whose members provide
leadership in the development, integration, evaluation, and management of instructional technology for
the teaching and learning of language, literature, and culture. Its strong sense of community promotes the
sharing of expertise in a variety of educational contexts. Members include directors and staff of language
labs, resource or media centers, language teachers at all levels, developers and vendors of hardware and
software, grant project developers and others. IALLT offers biennial conferences, regional groups and
meetings, the LLTI listserv (Language Learning Technology International), and key publications such as
the IALL Journal, the IALL Language Center Design Kit, and the IALL Lab Management Manual. The
2003 IALLT conference will be held at the University of Michigan, June 17 - 21. For information, visit
the IALLT Web site at www.iallt.org/.
