Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num3/stjohn/
September 2001, Vol. 5, Num. 3
pp. 185-203
Copyright © 2001, ISSN 1094-3501 185
A CASE FOR USING A PARALLEL CORPUS AND CONCORDANCER
FOR BEGINNERS OF A FOREIGN LANGUAGE
Elke St.John
University of Sheffield, UK
ABSTRACT
This pilot study set out to determine whether a parallel corpus and a concordancer would
be appropriate tools to supplement a teaching programme of German at the beginners'
level in an unsupervised environment. In this instance, a beginner student of German was
asked to find satisfactory answers to unknown vocabulary and formulate appropriate
grammar rules for himself using the parallel corpus and concordancer as the only tools. It
is shown that these tools can be of great benefit for beginners.
AIMS AND OBJECTIVES
I describe a pilot study involving a beginner student of German who undertook a supplementary
unsupervised programme of learning German using a concordancer and a parallel corpus. I investigate
how a beginner student of German fares using a concordancer, Multiconcord (see King & Wools, 1996;
St.John & Chattle, 1998), and a parallel German/English corpus, INTERSECT (Salkie, 1995) consisting
of the original German source texts and their English translations. The aim of this study was to determine
how this student copes using the parallel corpus and what conclusions he comes to when comparing the
two languages, and in particular, when investigating lexical items. As students at the beginner and
intermediate levels are still very dependent on a dictionary, their lack of vocabulary in the new language
can often cause problems for them in class. As a consequence, most of the questions set were related to
investigating the meaning of words (see Student Tasks).
Additionally, using corpora and a concordancer can be motivating and rewarding not only for the learner
but also for the teacher. For the teacher, these tools can provide contextualised examples to confounding
lexical questions. Moreover, the learner can develop an ability to "learn how to learn" (Johns, 1991a, p. 1)
by being allowed to assume the role of an explorer. This study supports Barlow's (1995a, 1996a, p. 2)
claim that one of the roles the language learner plays when using corpora is that of a language researcher
and explains why "a suitable research environment" must be provided (Barlow, 1996b, p. 45; see also
Johns, 1986, p. 151, 1991a, p. 2). This therefore assists the student in exploring the language in great
detail and thereby gaining further insights into its grammar and vocabulary.
The use of concordancing in language teaching is not new. However, this pilot study demonstrates for the
first time the potential of concordancing in learning German at the beginner's level.
CONCORDANCER AND CORPORA IN LANGUAGE ENVIRONMENTS
Concordancing is a tool that has been used extensively by linguistic and literary researchers. A
concordance is a list of the occurrences of either a particular word, or a part of a word or a combination of
words in context and it is drawn from a text corpus, which is presented in context. A corpus is a large
body of text often in electronic format. (see Baker 1995, p. 226; Francis, 1993, p. 138; Johansson, 1995,
p. 19; Leech, 1991, p. 8 for more detailed definitions)
Linguistic and applied linguistic researchers are not the only group who can benefit from the use of
concordancing as a tool for language learning (i.e., as a means of exploring the meanings and uses of
Elke St.John A Case for Using a Parallel Corpus…
Language Learning & Technology 186
words in their authentic contexts; see Aston, 1997a; Tribble, 1997). A concordance program enables
research into the lexical, syntactic, semantic, and stylistic patterns of a language.
Concordancer and monolingual text corpora (comprising only one language) have already been employed
by both the language teacher and learner in classroom exercises. Typical exercises using a monolingual
English corpus have included vocabulary building and the exploration of the grammatical and discourse
features of texts. For specific descriptions of classroom activities (mainly for EFL teaching, however)
using a monolingual English corpus, see, for example, Aston (1997a, p. 51-64), Mindt (1997, p. 40-50),
Minugh (1997, p. 67-82), Murphy (1996), Flowerdew (1993, 1996), Stevens (1991a, 1991b), Tribble
(1990), and Johns (1986, 1991a, 1991b). In a well-known quote, Johns advocates the DDL (Data Driven
Language) approach. The advantage of this approach is that, in a classroom situation, it enables the
teacher to play a less active role whilst at the same time exposes the student to authentic texts like those
found in a monolingual corpus:
What distinguishes the DDL approach is the attempt to cut out the middleman as much as
possible and give direct access to the data so that the learner can take part in building his
or her own profiles of meanings and uses. The assumption that underlies this approach is
that effective language learning is itself a form of linguistic research, and that the
concordance printout offers a unique resource for the stimulation of inductive learning
strategies -- in particular, the strategies of perceiving similarities and differences and of
hypothesis formation and testing. (Johns, 1991b, p. 30)
Experiments in data driven learning and corpus-based methods (e.g., Baker, Francis, & Tognini-Bonelli,
1993; Barlow, 1995b, 1996a; Dickens & Salkie, 1996; Lewandowska-Tomaszcyk & Melia, 1997; Salkie,
1995, 1996; Tognini-Bonelli, 1996; Wichmann, Fligelstone, McEnery, & Knowles, 1997) are beginning
to bear fruit in a wide range of language environments although there is as yet only a limited amount of
experience on which to draw regarding learning German using a parallel corpus.
With regard to monolingual corpora, they have already been used to teach German.
Dodd (1997) exploits a corpus of written German for advanced language learning. After browsing
through a raw corpus, his students compare corpus evidence with reference works. Dodd concludes that a
computer-supported investigation of language corpora provides a powerful and simple tool for language
learning. Fernández-Villanueva (1996) used a German monolingual corpus of oral language to research
the function of German particles. She describes it as a very positive experience because it allows students
to investigate the function of the particles, which do not have a direct equivalent in their mothertongue.
Wichmann (1995) used a monolingual English corpus for teaching German and sorting out problems of
lexical choice. She proposes the use of both corpora and concordancer because dictionaries do not provide
enough information of meaning in context (see Barlow, 1996b, p. 54). However, Wichmann's study does
not explain what kind of exercises she set her students.
Parallel corpora (sometimes also called translation corpora) have already been successfully used by
linguistic researchers for their research into the nature of translation. Zanettin (1994) focuses on the use of
concordancing software on bilingual English/Italian parallel subcorpora to design language activities
aimed at developing translation skills. Like this pilot study, he emphasises that concordancing programs
"can be run by students at any time in a self-access environment, provided that instructional sheets
explaining the background for the activity are supplied" (p. 108). Salkie (1996) also employs a parallel
corpus to investigate grammar problems but concentrates on epistemic modality in English and French.
Dickens and Salkie (1996) compare French/English bilingual dictionaries with a parallel corpus and show
in analogy to this study how many equivalents one single word can actually have. Barlow (1996a)
discusses research based on the analysis of parallel texts (English/Spanish) with particular regard to the
translation of reflexive pronouns. He also advocates some uses for parallel texts in the language
Elke St.John A Case for Using a Parallel Corpus…
Language Learning & Technology 187
classroom as it is carried out in this study. The unifying theme in his article is the notion that the use of
corpora and a concordancer allows everyone, from the theoretical linguist to the student learning a second
language, to become a researcher (p. 2). This notion is actually combined in the present study because the
student observed is both a linguist (his major) and a language learner. In the analysis in Meaning of
Particles (tasks 2-6), the student discovers that there are many English equivalents for a certain German
particle. This reflects Barlow's (1996b, p. 53) observation that a basic search for concordances can make
students aware that the French translation of head is not always tête. Barlow (1996b, p. 54) concludes that
a parallel text provides an online contextualised dictionary, which language learners can exploit in a
similar way to that demonstrated in the student's tasks 2-6 under Meaning of Particles.
Danielsson and Ridings (1996) report on their tool for work in parallel corpora (Skandinavian
languages/English) and their efforts to integrate it into an academic programme for training translators.
However, parallel corpora have not only been used for research into translation and translator training
(see Baker, 1993, 1995; Buyse, 1997; Piotrowska, 1997; Schmied, 1994; Ulrych, 1997), they can also
prove very useful to non-advanced language learners, as this pilot study will endeavour to demonstrate.
Finally, McEnery, Wilson, and Baker examine how corpora can meet the needs of grammar teaching at
the pre-tertiary level in the UK. In general, they come to the conclusion that a corpus should be at least
integrated into teaching. They further conclude that "corpus data present a means by which grammar
teaching may be more effective -- and more importantly may be rated more positively by learners" (1997,
p. 15).
It can be seen from the literature that parallel corpora have already been successfully employed in a
number of studies. However German/English parallel corpora have not yet formed part of a study. In this
present study, the student had to research a set of questions on his own and what is novel in this study
about classroom concordancing is that the student is at beginner's level working on his own and that a
German/English parallel corpus as opposed to a monolingual corpus was used. A parallel corpus was
used, not only for investigating patterns in the language he was learning, but also to compare it with his
mother tongue and to draw conclusions from it.
BACKGROUND
Corpus Used in This Study
The German-English INTERSECT corpus (Salkie, 1995) which was used for this study has about
800,000 words and comprises the following files:
Table 1. Composition of the INTERSECT Corpus (parts not used in the present study in italics)
 file name  content  comment
 Dbank  Annual bank reports  Hoechst, BASF, Siemens
 newsapr  news reports  From the "German News" Web site
 newsjan  news reports  From the "German News" Web site
 Euro  EU texts  
 UN  United Nations documents  
 hertzgog  Transcripts of speeches by the
President of Germany
 Spoken (President Herzog)
 Basiclaw  Constitution Texts  Germany, Switzerland, & Austria
The student worked with six files only. The constitution texts which are also part of the INTERSECT
Corpus were not used because of the complexity of German legal language structures.
Elke St.John A Case for Using a Parallel Corpus…
Language Learning & Technology 188
The corpus includes a variety of text types including spoken language, and it is thus both appropriate and
sufficient for this pilot study because tendencies rather than rules are discovered. Corpus size is obviously
a matter of considerable discussion and is not the point of this particular paper but the subject of further
research. However, the problem with large corpora for language learners, especially beginners and
intermediate students, is that concordances of frequent words can easily become too long and
meaningless. This can be very demotivating for the beginner student. Aston comments in this respect that
"work with small specialised corpora can not only be a valuable activity in its own right, as a means of
discovering the characteristics of a particular area of language use, but also an instrument to help and train
learners to use larger ones appropriately" (1997b, p. 61). The use of a small corpus has both advantages
and disadvantages: Since the amount of data searched is relatively small, any observations on frequency
of occurrence may be ungeneralisable, while on the other hand it avoids a proliferation of examples,
particularly of common words which would prove too daunting to learners. When using a small corpus,
the obvious strategy to employ is to focus on common words. In comparing the corpus with dictionaries,
this is a logical approach in any case: if the corpus gives some clues about which words occur fairly often,
this is in itself useful information as will be shown in the analysis.
Student
As already mentioned, I decided to only use one student for this particular study for several reasons. The
literature review already shows that beginner language students had not previously been involved in
corpus-based studies. In my view, it would present too great a risk if several students were included in the
very first experiment of this kind. As with other new technologies before it, such as the language
laboratory, a step-by-step introduction is probably most effective. As Flowerdew puts it:
There is a danger of the enthusiasm for concordancing being inflated to such an extent
that concordancing is seen as a sort of language teaching panacea. (1996, p. 112)
Therefore, carefully conducted evaluative studies will ensure that such an inflated view will not prevail. A
study carried out on a small scale such as this, will be able to offer proper guidance to large-scale studies
using concordance tools.
Furthermore, in a beginners' class, where the students are generally less confident than in an immediate or
advanced class, it is usually more difficult to encourage and motivate them to take part in a project. A
project involving new technologies would present in my judgement an even heavier threat to the students.
Just as Stevens (1995, p. 2) divides language teachers into three groups, namely those who have never
heard of concordances, those who have not yet taken them seriously, and those who actively use them,
students could be divided into the same groups with beginner students most likely falling into the first
group. Therefore, caution needs to be exercised when starting a project involving relatively new
technology. I therefore decided to introduce only one new variable at a time, starting in this study with a
beginner with a background in linguistics. I then propose to introduce a second variable (a beginner with
no linguistic background, e.g., a student majoring in science) in a future experiment.
Out of all non-specialist language learners I teach, I considered a student with his main subject in
linguistics to be most appropriate in this instance, rather than a student majoring, for example, in science.
It is generally agreed that in a beginner class, one of the teacher's tasks is to maintain the students' interest
in the language concerned. A project of this kind could prove counter-productive and possibly discourage
non-linguists. The student observed in this study had just finished his first year at university studying
linguistics with German as a subsidiary subject. At the beginning of the project, he had already completed
one year of German at university (3 hours a week) and his level of German was approximately equivalent
to basic GCSE level. However, it has to be stressed that this level is achieved within 1 year of intensive
study at university in comparison to an average of 4 years at school. It is also important to mention that
the student, unlike many other so-called "false beginners," had no knowledge of German before studying
the language at university. The student was one of the best students in his year and fond of grammar.
Elke St.John A Case for Using a Parallel Corpus…
Language Learning & Technology 189
However, there were still doubts about whether his level of German would be good enough to cope with
some of the questions set. In particular, the language was thought to be too difficult as it was at a level to
which only more advanced learners are exposed. Consultation with the student revealed that he actually
regarded the project as a challenge.
The parallel corpus and the parallel concordancer were the learner's only resource. In the process of
answering his set of questions, he was able to teach himself how to use the concordancer without using a
manual and went on to describe the program as very user-friendly.
Student Tasks
Since the reference works most often used by undergraduate students of foreign languages seem to be
dictionaries, one of the student's first tasks consisted of word or phrase searching. In this instance, he had
to enter the word/phrase he wanted to examine. The software would then browse through the corpus of
texts and look for the wanted expression in the search language while the correspondence would be
shown in the target language parallel to the search language. Unlike KWIC (Key Word In Context)
concordancers, which show the search word centralised in a single line of text, the format for the parallel
display is the sentence and paragraph, with the results of each search being given as parallel sentences or
paragraphs. This is mainly because, although the context word is known in the search language, there is
no way of knowing where in the target language paragraph the relevant correspondence word will appear
or, indeed, if it appears at all. There is even the possibility that the required word or words may appear in
a preceding or following sentence, rather than the equivalent single sentence of the search language. In
this pilot study, the emphasis is on the behaviour of words in context in both German and English.
The student had 17 tasks to choose from. If one question/search produced too many hits he went on to the
next task, which again proves that too large a corpus would not be appropriate for a non-advanced learner
(see Aston, 1997b, p. 61). From the hits of the other tasks, he also only selected sentences he could easily
understand. Considering the learner's degree of proficiency, the level of the corpus as a whole was
probably too demanding for him, but he correctly employed a strategy of finding his own level in the
corpora by searching for shorter sentences. The examples in this paper show this.
ANALYSIS
Introduction
The set of tasks consisted of common lexical and grammar problems usually encountered by beginner
students and was therefore considered as appropriate for this study. The following results show how the
student coped with the given resources and whether he managed to find appropriate answers without the
input and guidance of the teacher.
Task 1
The very first question the student was recommended to choose was based on two phrases that are often
introduced in the first lesson of a beginner class when students have to learn phrases of introduction such
as Wie ist Ihr Name? (What's your name?) and Wie ist Ihre Telefonnummer? (What's your telephone
number?). Both interrogatives in the two questions are translated into English as what and the student was
asked whether it is a pattern that wie always translates as what and not how as described in dictionaries.
After using just wie and was as the search words in the input field of the interface which produced too
many hits, the student decided to enter ist in the context. He subsequently came up with the following
data and comments:
dbank.de 1a Wie ist diese Differenz zu bewerten?
dbank.en 1b How is such a spread to be assessed?
dbank.de 2a Wie ist die Option „runde Wechselkurse" zu bewerten?
Elke St.John A Case for Using a Parallel Corpus…
Language Learning & Technology 190
dbank.en 2b How is the option "round exchange rates" to be assessed?
dbank.de3a Was ist die EWU?
dbank.en3b What is EMU?
dbank.de4a Was ist die Alternative zur EWU?
dbank.en4b What is the alternative to EMU?
In general was translates into English as "what." However, anyone with a basic
knowledge of German knows that there are cases where wie equates to "what" in English.
The examples in the question show this. The system did provide examples where wie
translates as "how" and from this evidence a student of German would conclude that, in
general, wie equals "how" in English except in certain cases.
The above phrases were recommended to the student as the basis of his very first question because it
required a simple search for a particular phrase with which the student was very familiar; and it also
involved a simple examination of the meaning. It is also worth pointing out that the student felt
sufficiently independent enough to go a step further when there were too many hits for was and wie and
he then inserted an ist into the context field of the interface in order to reduce the number of hits. Even
though it was the very first question, the student did not ask for the tutor's assistance but just tried to find
a solution for himself, which is also very rewarding from a teacher's perspective.
Meaning of Particles
In the next set of tasks, the learner was asked to find out how certain German modal particles and
conjunctions translate into English. In this case, all he had to search for was a particular particle and then
examine the correspondence. Doherty (1982, p. 95) stated that the English language has no equivalents
for these modal particles, so it was interesting to see what solutions the learner would actually provide.
Task 2
The first search term was wohl which produced 57 hits altogether (see Table 1 in Appendix A). The
particle wohl gives the sentence a sense of uncertainty that is required in these kinds of texts (Helbig,
1994, p. 238). What was striking was that 41 of the 57 hits occurred in the dbank file alone. One would
probably expect to find most hits in the dbank file considering that in financial reports many forecasts are
made for future years that are based on hypotheses. The student produced many concordances and also
categorised them (see Appendix B). He commented as follows:
"Wohl" produced an interesting batch of searches. The general trend was that "wohl"
introduced doubt into the sentence/paragraph. These were broken down into: "Wohl erst";
" wohl aber/aber wohl"; "wohl auch/wohl auch nicht"; "werden wohl"; "wohl nicht."
When the English translations were read in conjunction with the German, it was noticed
that most of the sentences tended to say: "probably"; "will probably"; "may well"; "is
likely" etc.
The general feeling when reading these sentences/paragraphs is one of doubt or caution
and the word "wohl" appears with one of the aforementioned words.
From a teacher's point of view, the student's investigations are more than satisfactory because he managed
to deduce the right meaning and quite rightly discovered the uncertainty of wohl. His attention was not,
however, drawn to the fact that the majority of the hits were in the dbank file. The comments show
nevertheless in what detail the student observed the concordance output. It becomes apparent that he no
longer writes about a translation as in the first search. He probably started to realise that there is not
always a one-to-one equivalent available. This can be very rewarding for the teacher who might find it
very frustrating that s/he is not always able to provide the student with one definite answer. The student's
comments also show how reading in the foreign language is practised whilst searching through the target
Elke St.John A Case for Using a Parallel Corpus…
Language Learning & Technology 191
language to find patterns. It is moreover interesting to note how the student grouped the different
meanings of wohl according to its collocation and meaning.
Task 3
The next search term was also which can be used either as a particle or an adverb depending on syntax
and context. It gives a sentence a sense of conclusion and is also used as a connective particle between
two successive sentences (Helbig, 1994, p. 86-87). Furthermore, also belongs to the category of false
friends (Pascoe & Pascoe, 1985, p. 12). Beginner students very often translate it as also into English
whilst auch is in fact the correct German word for also.
The student's search produced 74 hits altogether, probably too many for a low-level student to work
through (see Table 2 in Appendix A). The student decided to only work on the following output with the
following explanations afterwards:
dbank.de 5a Es kann also kaum einen Zweifel daran geben, daß die EWU kommt - wenn
der politische Wille stark genug ist und genügend Länder die
Aufnahmeprüfung bestehen.
dbank.en 5b There can, therefore, be little doubt that EMU will come - if the political will
is strong enough and a sufficient number of countries pass the convergence
examination.
dbank.de 6a Da sich also der Umstellungskurs an Devisenmarktkursen orientieren wird, ist
durch die Festlegung der Umrechnungskurse weder ein Gewinn noch ein
Verlust zu erwarten.
dbank.en 6b Since, therefore, the conversion rate will be geared to forex market rates,
fixing the conversion rates should produce neither a profit nor a loss.
The examples, "also" revealed a pattern and the English translation was "therefore." The position in the
sentence in German corresponded with the position in English in almost all cases. It would appear from
the searches that, when "also" translates as "therefore," the relative position of the word in both languages
is the same or very near.
Another pattern appeared where "also" translated as "thus." This was deduced because there appeared to
be no other function for the word in the sentence. Unlike the translation "therefore," the relative position
in each language varied. However, the translation could be worked out by reading the German and then
the English. When the two were then compared, a deduction was made. The examples below demonstrate
this.
herzgog.de 7a Auch in Zukunft muß das Motto also heißen: Freiheit ist das höchste Gut.
herzgog.en 7b Thus, in the future as well, our motto must be: Freedom is our most precious
asset.
herzgog.de 8a Wir stehen also nicht ohne Orientierung da.
herzgog.en 8b Thus we do not stand here devoid of orientation.
The learner discovered its correct function as a modifier in at least four examples. Although the question
did not ask for a pattern in terms of word order, the learner mainly concentrated on this aspect.  This
might be due to the fact that the student had a linguistic background and natural interest in exploring more
but this also shows very interesting aspects of using concordances with students, namely the experience
they gain of how the languages operate. It also demonstrates that he was examining and comparing the
languages and developing some insight into both languages simultaneously. This example also shows that
the English translations can prove to be very useful to the learner.
Elke St.John A Case for Using a Parallel Corpus…
Language Learning & Technology 192
Task 4
The next search word was eben, which only produced 15 hits with 11 hits alone in the herzgog file (see
Table 3 in Appendix A).
Eben is used as an adjective, adverb, or particle; in the latter case its meaning being very difficult to
determine (Helbig, 1994, p. 124). This fact was also discovered by the student and the particle use is not
found much in written language. That is why most hits occurred in the herzgog file, that is, the
transcription of President Herzog's speech. König remarks in this respect that some scalar particles like
eben "have a wider use in English than their German 'counterparts,' in other words, some particles in
English will have several translational equivalents in German" (1982, p. 79). Thus the exact opposite can
apply when working from English to German. It is interesting to examine the student's findings:
herzgog.de 9a Und nach allem, was ich eben über das europäische Erbe gesagt habe, wäre
eine undemokratische Lösung auch eine uneuropäische Lösung.
herzgog.en 9b And after all that I have just said about the European inheritance, an
undemocratic solution would also be an "un–European" solution.
herzgog.de 10a man wechselte eben zu anderen.
herzgog.en 10b one simply changed to others.
"Eben" appeared only 15 times in the corpora. In the searches below, "eben" seems to
equate to "just" in English. When not translated exactly as "just," "just" seems to be
implied as in example 10 where "eben" equates to "simply": "simply" could easily be
replaced with "just" and carry the same meaning.
Looking through the other examples from the corpora, there were many interpretations,
which could have been made for the translation of "eben."
These data and his comments suggest that the student is becoming aware that a word may not even be
lexicalised at all in one language. This is a very important learning process and linguistic insight into
languages for a student to grasp when starting to study a foreign language. The fact that he was not taught
this but that he could find it out for himself is one of the most valuable aspects of concordancing and from
the teacher's point of view very satisfactory. It is not easy for the teacher to tell students that there is just
no translation available. It is more rewarding for both sides if the students can find out this fact himself.
Task 5
The next search term was the particle doch, which produced 170 hits altogether (see Table 4 in Appendix
A): The particle doch has seven different uses as a modal particle (Helbig, 1994, p. 111-119). Its main use
is adversative in contradictions (Helbig, p. 119). The student carefully chose to work on the following
output:
newsjan.de 11a Schmuggelplutonium stammt angeblich doch aus Moskau.
newsjan.en 11b Smuggled plutonium indeed from Moscow
newsjan.de 12a Nichts fuer sensible Gemueter - aber leider doch passiert
newsjan.en 12b Not for the faint-hearted - but it did happen
dbank.de 13a Zwar ist es seiner Meinung nach zu früh, um einen Erfolg oder ein
mögliches Scheitern der EWU vorauszusagen, doch sieht er die Strukturen,
auf denen die EWU aufbaut, als durchaus vernünftig an.
dbank.en 13b Although it is too early to tell, in his opinion, whether or not EMU will
succeed, its design does make sense.
dbank.de 14a Dies hätte zweifellos negative Auswirkungen auf Spaniens
Haushaltsposition, doch wären diese sehr viel geringer als im Falle Italiens.
Elke St.John A Case for Using a Parallel Corpus…
Language Learning & Technology 193
dbank.en 14b While a collapse of EMU would undoubtedly have a negative impact on
Spain's budget position, the effect would be considerably smaller than in the
case of Italy.
He described the output as follows:
What seemed to be evident was that the word "doch" had a modifying effect on the
sentence.  In the sentences, "doch" seems to refer to words like "indeed' and "did."
In other examples, "doch" has many uses: One of which is to add a positive nature to a
sentence. In trying to find a trend for its use in German, there was also evidence that it
had a positive modifying effect on a sentence. However, this was not the only use for the
word. It soon became clear that "doch" is used in a variety of subtle ways to shape a
phrase or sentence. Some good examples of the versatility of "doch" can be seen when it
is used at the beginning of a sentence. In some of these examples, "doch" translates into
"but" in English.
The above example again shows that not only detailed reading in the target language is practised when
using corpora but also that text analysis is employed merely by going through the data and trying to find
patterns when analysing the sentences carefully.
Task 6
Strictly speaking, this was not a task set but a search, which was initiated by the learner himself. It shows
that the learner adopted a very interesting behaviour pattern, which might be ascribed to the fact that he
has a linguistic background. After searching several German particles, the student spotted however
several times and started becoming curious about the German correspondence. As a result, he carried out
a search of however to investigate what translation the system would come up with:
The purpose of this exercise was to test the corpora when the search words found by the
system varied.  Here, the English word "however" was entered and the search found
different German translations.
When this happened, it was decided to try and cross-reference the German word in each
case. The corpora produced many other examples for each word but the idea here was to
test whether the same reference could be found in the corresponding German search.
In this way the student can find what he/she wants to know by using a search in either
language. This is useful if the student is weak in either language and needs to find a
particular answer.
dbank.en 15a Formal participation in the exchange rate mechanism is, however, a binding
condition of the Treaty.
dbank.de 15b Die formale Teilnahme am Wechselkursverbund ist jedoch im Vertrag
zwingend vorgeschrieben.
dbank.en 16a However, a lasting improvement will probably only occur when Switzerland's
economic outlook brightens.
dbank.de 16b Allerdings sollte eine nachhaltige Stärkung wohl erst einsetzen, wenn auch
die konjunkturellen Perspektiven der Schweiz sich verbessern.
dbank.de 17a Die formale Teilnahme am Wechselkursverbund ist jedoch im Vertrag
zwingend vorgeschrieben.
dbank.en 17b Formal participation in the exchange rate mechanism is, however, a binding
condition of the Treaty.
Elke St.John A Case for Using a Parallel Corpus…
Language Learning & Technology 194
The student came to a constructive conclusion and the fact that he carried out a cross-reference shows his
interest in research and exploring. Here it would be most interesting to see whether a more typical
language learner, that is, one without a linguistic background would behave in the same way. It also
demonstrates the fact that concordances allow students to generate and collate the language data needed
to invent their own rules of grammar and to develop the most appropriate ways of learning for
themselves. This example clearly shows that the learner assumed control of his learning process. Once the
student had seen how to use the program, he could, to a certain extent, set his own agenda for its use, as
illustrated above with however and the cross-reference research.
Grammatical and Lexical Tasks
Task 7
Another trouble spot for English learners of German is the distinction of aber and sondern both
translating as "but" into English. For this reason, the student was asked to find a possible semantic and/or
syntactical distinction between the two. The concordance below helped him to grasp the difference almost
by himself.
There were 576 hits of aber whereas sondern only showed 178 entries the latter having a specific use (it
only occurs after a preceding negative clause), which can also explain the fewer entries (see Tables 5 and
6 in Appendix A). Aber is also used as a co-ordinating conjunction and has two different uses as a modal
particle (Helbig, 1994, p. 80-81). This can be another reason why on the whole there are more hits for
aber. However, the frequency of a particle obviously also depends on the nature of the text. The subject
came up with the following data and conclusion:
dbank.de 18a Schuldenstand: Rückläufig, aber immer noch hoch
dbank.en 18b Public sector debt: falling, but still high
dbank.de 19a Aber kann man da sicher sein?
dbank.en 19b But can we be sure here?
"Aber" translates into English as "but" when the sentence uses "but" as a straight-forward
conjunction linking two main clauses of the sentence. The examples show the use of
"aber" and the search produced many more examples. English also uses the word "but"
when the German uses the word "sondern." "Sondern" is used in a different way to "aber"
although it still translates as "but." "Sondern" is used when the sentence has a negative
preceding the word.
euro.de 20a Deshalb strebten die Gründerväter der Europäischen Gemeinschaften nach einer
gemeinsamen Energiepolitik: nicht etwa als Selbstzweck, sondern als Motor
für die politische Integration.
euro.en 20b Appreciating its importance, the founding fathers of the European Community
desired an energy policy not only for itself but also as a motor for political
integration.
euro.de 21a Der Europäische Rat gibt seiner ernsten Besorgnis Ausdruck über die
anhaltende Gewalt im Gebiet der Großen Seen, von der nicht nur Ost-Zaire,
sondern auch Burundi betroffen ist.
euro.en 21b The European Council expresses grave concern about the continuing violence in
the Great Lakes Region, not only in Eastern Zaire but also in Burundi.
As with "aber," there were many examples in the files which could also have been shown here. The
system did throw up what looks like an exception. However, this could be correct in the context of this
Elke St.John A Case for Using a Parallel Corpus…
Language Learning & Technology 195
particular sentence and without the time to explore more of the files, it will have to remain an exception in
this project:
dbank.de 22a Um die — nicht kurzfristig, möglicherweise aber auf längere Sicht —
bestehenden Risiken von Sanktionen im Rahmen des Stabilitätspakts zu
minimieren…
dbank.en 22b In order to minimize the risks of sanctions in the framework of the stability
pact — not so much on a short-term horizon but possibly over the longer
term…
The student observed quite rightly that aber and not sondern occurred after nicht. In a classroom
situation, students typically react negatively to the introduction of an exception to a rule but, by taking
over control of his own learning, the student even analyses the exception he found. Also from the
teacher's point of view, it is a better outcome to let students search for exceptions rather than merely
presenting it to them. The reaction of the students will be more positive and learners should in turn be
motivated if they can find such things for themselves, though it could be argued that, for this particular
question, a monolingual context would be sufficient. The student, however, bearing in mind his level,
always found it helpful to have the translation available. He also mentioned in his feedback that he
learned new words by reading both the German and the English translation.
With regard to distinctions made in a target language and non-existent in the learner's language, Barlow
comments concerning a distinction in Spanish, which is non-existent in English:
By studying the context of instances of English for that correspond to Spanish por,
compared with those that correspond to para, it is possible to form hypotheses about
which of the meanings of for match up with por and which with para. (1996b, p. 54)
As can be seen above, the strategy Barlow describes is exactly practised by the learner who managed to
work out the distinction for himself.
Task 8
The student had to find out a meaning for denn, a word many beginner students tend to equate with then,
especially when it occurs at the beginning of a sentence. Denn occurred 75 times in all files together (see
Table 7 in Appendix A).
It has seven different uses as a modal particle and is also used as causal conjunction and adverb (Helbig
1994, p. 105-110). The learner's comments regarding his data were that denn at the beginning of the
sentence translates as for. However, he also discovered that it also occurs within commas with the words
es sei. He concluded quite rightly that it then always translates as unless (see Appendix C).
In the searches here "denn" at the beginning of the sentence translates as "for," however
"denn" occurs within commas with the words: "es sei." This translates on all occasions as
"unless."
It is very interesting that the student discovered that denn collocates with es sei, that is,. es sei denn. This
demonstrates that concordancing makes hidden structures visible, and enhances the imagination.
Task 9
The last question the student chose was more challenging and complex in my judgement. He was asked to
find possible meanings for man. With the word man, German has a very useful all-purpose impersonal
pronoun that the 242 hits in all files reflect. The student produced the following data (see Table 8 in
Appendix A):
Elke St.John A Case for Using a Parallel Corpus…
Language Learning & Technology 196
herzgog.de 23a Aus der eigenen Geschichte lernt man immer noch am besten.
herzgog.en 23b One's own history teaches one the best lesson.
herzgog.de 24a Man sah weg, als jüdischen Ärzten und Rechtsanwälten die Zulassung
entzogen wurde;
herzgog.en 24b One looked away when Jewish doctors and lawyers lost their licences;
newsjan.de 25a Ausserdem koenne man den Menschen nicht anlasten, dass sie keine Arbeit
faenden.
newsjan.en 25b She added that no one could be held liable for not being able to find a job.
The subject wrote afterwards:
"Man" generally translated into English as the pronoun "one." It appeared in different
places in the sentence including the beginning. The examples demonstrate this very
clearly. The examples also show that "man" does not always have an apparent translation
but when the sentence is read as a whole, it would appear that "man" is being used to
refer to the general idea, i.e. "it" or the situation in general. Furthermore "man" tends to
refer to "people," "nobody," "we" (the people). There were many examples in the corpora
like these when "man" was used to refer to someone or something.
His comments show once more how concerned he was about word order. They further indicate that he
again looked for a translation but in the end accepted that there is not always a translation for one
particular word.
This analysis provides an illustration of how the common content of parallel corpora can be exploited to
gain linguistic insights into the structure and function of languages. However, it must also be stressed
again that only one student used the corpora and concordancer on a self-access basis. Multiconcord was
installed on a computer in the Self-Access-Centre where the student could use it as and when he wanted
during open hours. Given that there was no tutor observation during the project period, even of the data
that the learner ultimately produced, it is remarkable to see that a beginner student of German can actually
discover and learn on his own. In answering my initial question, all his answers can be regarded as fully
satisfactory and appropriate with regard to the language learning process. In most questions, the student's
conclusions were the only correct answer. However, considering that the student might have shown a
natural interest in exploring the data in more detail, taking into account that his main subject of study was
linguistics, any generalisations drawn from this study need confirmation. The next step would be to
include students from other subjects like engineering or science and to see whether they come up with the
same and or similar conclusions before expanding the experiment to a whole beginners' class.
Student Observation and Feedback
The student was interviewed after the pilot study; there was no student/teacher interaction during the
project time. The learner found the concordancer very user-friendly and he did not use any tools other
than the corpora and the concordancer. He later said that he ignored sentences that were too difficult due
to a long and complicated word order, that is, he selected the sentences he wanted to use for the data,
which in itself is a very important "help yourself" learning strategy. Indeed, the data used consisted of
sentences only without any complex structures.
This obviously means that the student's analysis is incomplete because, in order to reach reliable
conclusions, all data should be considered and analysed. However, it was certainly a step forward in the
learning process of a beginner student as it enabled him to draw certain conclusions about the language
based on short and simple sentences. It was interesting, to see that the student used the corpus in two
Elke St.John A Case for Using a Parallel Corpus…
Language Learning & Technology 197
ways: to answer the set questions and to look up things that were not directly related to the questions, for
example his search for however.
He spent on average 2 hours on each question but he noticed that he became more efficient after each
question. His explanation for this was that he became more confident in the course of time, that he knew
what to do, and also that he became more used to the system. He also knew what to look for because he
became more selective by choosing shorter sentences. The learner followed the following procedure:
After selecting a question, he first tested how many hits it produced. If there were enough hits but not too
many to cope with, the concordanced evidence of this point was assembled in both languages. He then
tried to find prominent features and classified them into up to four categories. The student then saved the
sentences and/or printed them out. He tried to discover a pattern in the language and, by generalising
found the rules, which governed those patterns (see Johns, 1991a, p. 4). The student's work became more
exploratory and thus motivating and highly experimental. In addressing the theme of this study, that is,
whether corpora and concordancer are appropriate tools at beginners' level, it can be said that the student
not only found the meaning of the search words (i.e., learned new vocabulary), but he also had the
satisfactory feeling of having achieved something.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, I have shown the use of parallel corpora and concordance software, in particular its
usefulness in the very early stages of language acquisition for both teacher and learner alike. Learners
often pose questions and answers that teachers cannot predict. A corpus and concordance can supplement
the teaching. As Johns put it, "we simply provide the evidence needed to answer the learner's questions,
and rely on the learner's intelligence to find answers" (1991a, p. 2).
In view of the degree of proficiency in German this student had, it was the correct decision to concentrate
mainly on lexical questions. These were indeed neither easy nor straightforward. This pilot study proves
that, when the translation is available, even beginner students can make use of concordancing. German
was in most cases (except in the search for however) the search language and English was used to help
understand the German.
In this pilot study, the selected student might be regarded as a rather untypical learner and therefore
further research must involve more typical language learners to find out whether low level language
students can generally cope with corpus work. Nevertheless, when carrying out a study on a bigger scale,
the two groups of typical and untypical learners have to be clearly distinguished. It was important
however to first carry out a pilot study of this kind with one student to avoid any possible failures, which
could have lead to a demotivation of the students. This experiment must be seen as a pilot study to design
more carefully prepared, objective, large scale experiments. For that reason, I would like to address the
following issues:
Firstly, the data and subsequently the answers obtained here are relevant and appropriate for this
particular pilot study. The data represents language that has been used in authentic and naturally occurring
communicative situations.
Secondly, the conclusions cannot be generalised because of the nature of the student and also because of
the fact that the student did not consider all data. The choice of student has also effected the outcome and
a study on a bigger scale will provide an answer.
Finally, this study supports Zanettin's (1994, p. 108) claim that the interactive concordancer is a potential
learning resource, which can be used freely and on their own initiative by all students from beginner to
advanced in a self-access centre. The role of the teacher/language adviser is to suggest points at which the
interactive concordancer may help to solve learning difficulties or, with instructional sheets, to explain the
background for the activity and to give operational directions.
Elke St.John A Case for Using a Parallel Corpus…
Language Learning & Technology 198
The use of parallel corpus and concordancing in the early stages of a German learning programme can
add to grammar teaching and certainly make the work with new vocabulary more interesting and
rewarding. As already stated, preferably, the study should be repeated on a larger number of students and
on other types of students before conclusions are drawn as to whether a non-advanced learner of German
can actually benefit from using the concordancer and a parallel corpus. I, however, strongly believe that
corpora and concordancing are of great potential value in the very early stages of a language learning
programme and I am positive that further studies will reinforce my claim.
APPENDIX A
Table 1
WORD FILE HITS
WOHL all 57
dbank 41
Table 2
WORD FILE HITS
ALSO All 74
Table 3
WORD FILE HITS
EBEN All 15
Herzgog 11
Table 4
WORD FILE HITS
DOCH All 170
Table 5
WORD FILE HITS
ABER All 576
Table 6
WORD FILE HITS
SONDERN all 178
Table 7
WORD FILE HITS
DENN all 75
Table 8
WORD FILE HITS
MAN all 242
Elke St.John A Case for Using a Parallel Corpus…
Language Learning & Technology 199
APPENDIX B
Wohl erst
dbank.de 1a Der Großteil des privaten Bankgeschäfts wird aber wohl erst umgestellt, wenn auch die
Euro-Banknoten und Münzen eingeführt werden.
dbank.en 1b The bulk of retail banking business will, however, probably not make the switch until
euro notes and coins are introduced.
Wohl aber/ aber wohl
dbank.de 2a Daran wird die EWU aber wohl nicht scheitern.
dbank.en 2b But EMU is unlikely to fail because of this.
dbank.de 3a 1996 nicht signifikant, wohl aber in Relation zum IEP.
dbank.en 3b this does not apply to the IEP.
Wohl auch
dbank.de 4a Beide Staaten werden wohl auch hohe D-Mark-Anteile in der Reservehaltung aufweisen.
Dies wird vor allem für Österreich vermutet.
dbank.en 4b Both countries, particularly Austria, probably hold a large proportion of their reserves in
DEM.
Wohl auch nicht
dbank.de 5a Die Stärke eines Finanzplatzes hängt allerdings nicht nur von der Marktgröße ab, also von
der Höhe der Staatsverschuldung eines Landes, sie sollte es wohl auch nicht.
dbank.en 5b However, a financial centre's strength and attractiveness does not (and should not!) solely
depend on the amount of government paper available, i.e. on the size of the public debt.
Werden wohl
dbank.de 6a Der Anteil an den offiziellen Devisenreserven der Welt wird wohl über das Niveau der
jetzigen Währungen des Wechselkursmechanismus, das bei etwa achtzehn Prozent liegt,
hinaus anwachsen.
dbank.en 6b Its share in world foreign exchange reserves may well rise to a level above the combined
18 per cent of the major ERM currencies today.
Wohl nicht
dbank.de 7a Zweifel an der Erfüllung des Maastrichter Zinskriteriums bestehen wohl nicht mehr; die
weit weniger als in den EWS-Kernländern vorangeschrittene Zinskonvergenz könnte
vielmehr in absehbarer Zukunft eine treibende Kraft der irischen
Kapitalmarktbewegungen bleiben.
dbank.en 7b Doubts about Ireland meeting the Maastricht interest rate criterion appear to have
vanished: interest rate convergence, which has not progressed in Ireland nearly as far as
in the EMS core countries, could well remain a driving force in the Irish capital market
in the foreseeable future.
Elke St.John A Case for Using a Parallel Corpus…
Language Learning & Technology 200
APPENDIX C
herzgog.de 8a Denn die Zukunft gestaltete sich anders, als es die meisten am 8. Mai 1945 erwarteten,
auch anders, als es dem soeben zitierten Dichterwort eigentlich entsprochen hätte.
herzgog.en 8b For the future turned out differently from most people's expectations on 8 May 1945
and from the image conveyed by the prayer I have just quoted.
un.de 9a Denn es mag für unseren Planeten, der nunmehr aus anderen Gründen nach wie vor in
Gefahr schwebt, nicht noch eine dritte Chance geben.
un.en 9b For there may not be a third opportunity for our planet which, now for different reasons,
remains endangered.
dbank.de 10a ob das Verhältnis des geplanten oder tatsächlichen öffentlichen Defizits zum
Bruttoinlandsprodukt einen bestimmten Referenzwert überschreitet, es sei denn, daß
entweder das Verhältnis erheblich zurückgegangen ist.
dbank.en 10b whether the ratio of the planned or actual government deficit to gross domestic product
exceeds a specified reference value, unless either the ratio has declined substantially.
dbank.de 11a Die schwedische Regierung dürfte 1997 mit einem „sanften Nein" gegen die EWU
stimmen, es sei denn, es gelingt ihr, die schwedischen Wähler umzustimmen.
dbank.en 11b The Swedish government is likely to opt for a "soft no" to EMU in 1997, unless it is
able to reverse public opposition to the single currency.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Elke St.John is German Co-ordinator at Modern Languages Teaching Centre at the University of
Sheffield in the United Kingdom. Her research interests include corpus-based translation studies and
corpus-based learning and legal translation.
E-mail: E.StJohn@sheffield.ac.uk
REFERENCES
Aston, G. (1997a). Enriching the learning environment: Corpora in ELT. In A. Wichmann, S. Fligelstone,
T. McEnery, & G. Knowles (Eds.), Teaching and language corpora (pp. 51-64). New York: Longman.
Aston, G. (1997b). Small and large corpora in language learning. In B. Lewandowska-Tomaszcyk & P. J.
Melia (Eds.), Practical applications in language corpora (pp. 51-62). Lodz, Poland: University Press.
Baker, M. (1993). Corpus linguistics and translation studies -- Implications and applications. In M. Baker,
G. Francis, & E. Tognini-Bonelli (Eds.), Text and technology (pp. 233-250). Philadelphia: John
Benjamins.
Baker, M. (1995.) Corpora in translation studies: An overview and some suggestions for future research.
Target 7(2), 223-243.
Baker, M., Francis, G., & Tognini-Bonelli, E. (Eds.). (1993). Text and technology. Philadelphia: John
Benjamins.
Barlow, M. (1995a). A guide to ParaConc. Houston, TX: Athelstan.
Barlow, M. (1995b). A concordancer for parallel texts. Computers and Texts, 10, 14-16.
Barlow, M. (1996a). Corpora for theory and practice. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 1(1),
1-37.
Elke St.John A Case for Using a Parallel Corpus…
Language Learning & Technology 201
Barlow, M. (1996b). Parallel texts in language teaching. In S. Botley, J. Glass, T. McEnery, & A. Wilson
(Eds.), Proceedings of teaching and language corpora 1996 (pp. 45-56). Lancaster, UK: UCREL
Technical Papers Volume 9.
Buyse, K. (1997). The study of multi- and unilingual corpora as a tool for the development of translation
studies: A case study. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Belgium.
Danielsson, P., & Ridings, D. (1996). Corpus and terminology: Software for the translation program at
Göteborgs Universitet or getting students to do the work. In S. Botley, J. Glass, T. McEnery, & A. Wilson
(Eds.), Proceedings of teaching and language corpora 1996 (Technical Papers Volume 9; pp. 57-67).
Lancaster, UK: UCREL.
Dickens, A., & Salkie, R. (1996). Comparing bilingual dictionaries with a parallel corpus. In M.
Gellerstam, J. Järborg, S. G. Malgren, K. Norén, L. Rogström, & C. Röjder Papmehl (Eds.), EUROLEX
'96 proceedings I –II (pp. 551-559). Göteborg, Sweden: Göteborg University Department of Swedish.
Doherty, M. (1982). Epistemische Ausdrucksmittel im Deutschen und Englischen [Epistemic means of
expressions in German and English]. Fremdsprachen, 26, 92-97.
Dodd, B. (1997). Exploiting a corpus of written German for advanced language learning. In A.
Wichmann, S. Fligelstone, T. McEnery, & G. Knowles (Eds.), Teaching and language corpora (pp. 131-
145). New York: Longman.
Fernández-Villanueva, M. (1996). Research into the functions of German modal particles in a corpus. In
S. Botley, J. Glass, T. McEnery, & A. Wilson (Eds.) Proceedings of teaching and language corpora 1996
(Technical Papers Volume 9; pp. 83-93). Lancaster, UK: UCREL
Flowerdew, J. (1993). Concordancing as a tool in course design. System, 21(2), 231-244.
Flowerdew, J. (1996). Concordancing in language learning. In M. Pennington (Ed.), The power of call
(pp. 97-113). Houston, TX: Athelstan.
Francis, G. (1993). A corpus driven approach to grammar -- principles, methods and examples In M.
Baker, G. Francis, & E. Tognini-Bonelli (Eds.), Text and Technology (pp. 137-156).
Amsterdam/Philadelphia: Benjamins
Helbig, G. (1994). Lexikon deutscher Partikeln [Encyclopedia of German particles]. München, Germany:
Langenscheidt.
Johansson, S. (1995). Mens Sana in corpore sano: On the role of corpora in linguistic research. The
European English Messenger, 4(2), 19-25.
Johns, T. (1986). Micro-concord: A language learner's research tool. System, 4(2), 151-162.
Johns, T. (1991a). Should you be persuaded: Two examples of data driven. ELR Journal 4, 1-16,
University of Birmingham.
Johns, T. (1991b). From printout to handout: Grammar and vocabulary learning in the context of data-
driven learning. ELR Journal 4, 27-45.
King, P., & Woolls, D. (1996). Creating and using a multilingual parallel concordancer. Translation and
Meaning, 4, 459-466.
König, E. (1982). Scalar particles in German and their English equivalents. In W. F. W. Lohnes & E. A.
Hopkins (Eds.), The contrastive grammar of English and German (pp. 76-101). Ann Arbor, MI: Karoma
Publishers.
Elke St.John A Case for Using a Parallel Corpus…
Language Learning & Technology 202
Leech, G. (1991). The state of the art in corpus linguistics. In K. Aijmer & B. Altenberg (Eds.), English
corpus linguistics: Studies in hon Lewandowska-Tomaszcyk, B., & Melia, P. J. (Eds.). (1997). Practical
applications in language corpora. Lodz, Poland: University Press.
McEnery, T., Wilson, A., & Baker, P. (1997). Teaching grammar again after twenty years: Corpus-based
help for teaching grammar. ReCALL, 9(2), 8-16.
Mindt, D. (1997). Corpora and the teaching of English in Germany. In A. Wichmann, S. Fligelstone, T.
McEnery, & G. Knowles (Eds.), Teaching and language corpora (pp. 40-50). New York: Longman.
Minugh, D. (1997). All the language that's fit to print: Using British and American newspaper CD-ROMs
as corpora. In A. Wichmann, S. Fligelstone, T. McEnery, & G. Knowles (Eds.), Teaching and language
corpora (pp. 67-82). New York: Longman.
Murphy, B. (1996). Computer, corpora and vocabulary study. Language Learning Journal, 14, 53-57.
Pascoe, G., & Pascoe, H. (1985). Sprachfallen im Englischen. Wörterbuch der falschen Freunde
[Difficulties in English. Dictionary of false friends.]. München, Germany: Hueber.
Piotrowska, M. (1997). Criteria for selecting parallel texts in teaching a translation course. In B.
Lewandowska-Tomaszczyk & P. J. Melia (Eds.), Practical applications in language corpora (pp. 411-
420). Lodz, Poland: Lodz University Press.
Salkie, R. (1995, May). INTERSECT: A parallel corpus project at Brighton University. Computers &
Texts 9, 4-5.
Salkie, R. (1996) Modality in English and French: A corpus-based approach. Language Sciences, 18(1-2),
381-392.
Schmied, J. (1994). Translation and cognitive structures. Hermes, Journal of Linguistics, 13, 169-181.
Stevens, V. (1991a). Classroom concordancing: Vocabulary materials derived from relevant, authentic
text. English for Specific Purposes Journal 10, 35-46.
Stevens, V. (1991b). Concordance-based vocabulary exercises: A viable alternative to gap-filling. ELR
Journal, 4, 47-61.
Stevens, V. (1995). Concordancing with language learners: Why?When?What? CAELL Journal 6(2), 2-
10.
St.John, E,. & Chattle, M. (1998.) Multiconcord: The Lingua Multilingual Parallel Concordancer for
Windows. ReCALL Newsletter, 13, 7-9.
Tognini-Bonelli, E. (1996). Towards translation equivalence from a corpus linguistics Perspective.
International Journal of Lexicography, 9(3), 197-217
Tribble, C. (1990). Concordancing in an EAP writing program. CAELL Journal, 1(2), 10-15.
Tribble, C. (1997.) Improvising corpora for ELT: Quick-and-dirty ways of developing corpora for
language teaching. In B. Lewandowska-Tomaszczyk & P. J. Melia (Eds.), Practical applications in
language corpora (pp. 106-117). Lodz, Poland: Lodz University Press.
Ulrych, M. (1997). The impact of multilingual parallel concordancing on translation. In B. Lewandowska-
Tomaszczyk & P. J. Melia (Eds.), Practical applications in language corpora (pp. 421-435). Lodz,
Poland: Lodz University Press.
Elke St.John A Case for Using a Parallel Corpus…
Language Learning & Technology 203
Wichmann, A. (1995). Using concordances for the teaching of modern languages in higher education.
Language Learning Journal, 11, 61-63.
A. Wichmann, S. Fligelstone, T. McEnery, & G. Knowles (Eds.). (1997). Teaching and language
corpora. New York: Longman.
Zanettin, F. (1994). Parallel words: Designing a bilingual database for translation activities. In A. Wilson
& T. McEnery, (Eds.), Corpora in language education and research: A selection of papers from Talc94
(Technical Papers, Volume 4; pp. 99-111). Lancaster, UK: UCREL.
