Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num3/review4/
September 2001, Vol. 5, Num. 3
pp. 32-36
Copyright ª  2001, ISSN 1094-3501 32
REVIEW OF MONOCONC PRO AND WORDSMITH TOOLS
Title MonoConc Pro Version 2.0 WordSmith Tools Version 3.0
Developer Mike Scot
Platform PC PC
Hardware/
System
Requirements
Windows 95 or higher
Minimum 80386 processor, VGA display
or better, Windows 3.1x or Windows 95,
minimum 4 MB RAM (8 MB if used with
Windows 95).
Program
Information
http://www.oup.com:8080/elt/global/catal
ogue/multimedia/wordsmithtools3/
Publisher Athelstan
info@athel.com
Oxford University Press
Support On-line help and a small manual On-line help and an extensive manual
Languages Can be used with different languages Can be used with different languages
Audience Beginning to advanced users Beginning to advanced users
ISBN not applicable 0-19-45-92863
Price US $85 single user;
US $550 15 user site
51.95 British pounds
Reviewed by Randi Reppen, Northern Arizona University
The recent interest in corpus linguistics and the use of authentic materials has created a need for software
packages that allow teachers and researchers to carry out corpus-based investigations. These corpus-based
investigations can be used to augment classroom instruction so that ESL/EFL students are exposed to real
language rather than artificial texts and made-up examples. Teachers and researchers can also begin to
explore some of the more subtle areas of language use where our intuitions often lead us in the wrong
direction.
In this review, I will take a close look at WordSmith Tools (Version 3) and MonoConc Pro (Version 2),
two of the more readily available and reasonably priced packages for working with corpora, in order to
contrast the different options that they offer teachers and researchers. As with any software purchase, the
needs of the user should play a key role in deciding which program is most appropriate. Both programs
include many of the same features, such as the ability to create word lists (in both alphabetical order and
frequency order), generate concordance output, and give collocation information. Both programs easily
handle large corpora and work with either tagged or untagged texts. As with any software package, the
user needs to check the default settings (e.g., minimum or maximum number of hits displayed) to make
certain that they are set according to the users' desires. In the following paragraphs, I describe the major
features shared by the two programs as well as some of the more specialized features offered by only one
or the other.
One of the major innovations of these packages is that they allow users to analyze any collection of
ASCII texts. This is in marked contrast to earlier concordancing packages which required the user to build
a database of texts before using the program for analyses. This was usually an elaborate process, and
sometimes required sending texts to the software author or publisher before the concordancing tools could
be used. Further, the database normally could not be modified once it was constructed. Thus, the database
needed to be rebuilt any time additional texts were added. WordSmith and MonoConc Pro differ from
these earlier packages in that they allow the user to select any group of texts for analysis every time the
system is started. Better yet, additional texts can be added "on the fly," so that the corpus being analyzed
can be tailored to directly fit the immediate research questions.
Randi Reppen Review of MonoConc Pro and WordSmith Tools
Language Learning & Technology 33
The primary research use of both software packages is to generate concordances, or listings of all the
occurrences of any given word in a given text, with words shown in context. Concordance listings can be
useful for exploring the use and meanings of specific words. Often when looking at concordance lines,
users may want to expand the context so that they can get a better sense of the meaning or use. Here is
one area where the two programs differ quite a bit. Both programs allow the user to adjust the settings of
the concordance program to display more or less text on the concordance screen. However, MonoConc
Pro has an additional feature that is especially attractive for researchers: the split screen display allows
users to expand the context of an entry line simply by highlighting the line, which displays the fuller
context in the upper window (see Figure 1). In WordSmith, the entire display must be expanded or
reduced, so the context is expanded for all of the entries being viewed rather than for a single highlighted
entry.
Figure 1. MonoConc Pro screen display of concordance lines
Another nice feature of MonoConc Pro is that the total number of words in the corpus is always displayed
in the lower right hand corner (as shown in Figure 1). This information is vital for comparisons of texts of
unequal lengths, as the normalization of counts of linguistic features, a process that allows such
comparisons to be carried out accurately, relies on text length (for more information, see Methodology
Box 6 in Biber, Conrad, & Reppen, 1998, pp. 263-264).
Both programs have sort functions that allow users to sort concordance lines in several ways (e.g., by
search word, then first word right; or by first word). Sorting words and seeing the collocation
Randi Reppen Review of MonoConc Pro and WordSmith Tools
Language Learning & Technology 34
immediately to the left or right of the target word can provide insights on word senses and uses. Another
feature found in both programs is the ability to "blank out" target words in the concordance output, which
can be useful to teachers for the development of vocabulary activities and cloze tests. By using corpora,
rather than teacher-made examples, teaching and testing materials reflect the language found in authentic
texts and thus provide learners with more exposure to real language. Concordance displays are quite
similar in both programs.
In addition to the functions that these programs have in common, WordSmith is able to perform a number
of useful tasks that MonoConc Pro is not. For example, WordSmith can provide information about the
distribution of a feature in a single text or across texts. Distributions are shown with a graph that plots the
occurrences of the target item in the text or corpus (see Figure 2). The distribution of a particular lexical
or grammatical feature across a text or series of texts can provide interesting information about the text
structure and also about how the feature functions across various texts. A similar tool is available in
MonoConc Pro; however, I was unable to interpret the bar graph display used in MonoConc Pro.
Figure 2. WordSmith plot distribution by text for the occurrence of thank
WordSmith also allows the user to compare word lists. The Key Word function allows the user to compare
a given text to a target text or target register, which can be particularly useful for cross-register
comparisons. For example, a teacher or researcher could compare biology textbooks to geology textbooks
in order to see what lexical similarities or differences occur. The Key Word function provides a quick
glimpse of what the text is about, since the list is not based on absolute frequency but rather the unique
words that are frequent in the particular text.
The Cluster function is the WordSmith feature that is perhaps most innovative since it is quite powerful
and can be very useful. With this function, the user can specify from two to eight word clusters from a
concordance list and then see which words tend to co-occur (see Figure 3). Co-occurring words are often
idioms or set phrases.
Randi Reppen Review of MonoConc Pro and WordSmith Tools
Language Learning & Technology 35
Figure 3. WordSmith screen with clusters
WordSmith also has a feature that allows the user to align two texts and create a new file that contains one
displayed over the other. This is extremely useful for comparing translations or two versions of the same
text. The texts are displayed in different colors for ease of reading. See Figure 4 for an example of this
feature used to check a translation against the original text.
Figure 4. Aligning two texts to check a translation (excerpt from WordSmith on-line manual)
Randi Reppen Review of MonoConc Pro and WordSmith Tools
Language Learning & Technology 36
The main advantage of MonoConc Pro over WordSmith is that it is much easier to use. For example,
when MonoConc Pro is launched, a clear easy-to-use screen appears with a bar across the top, providing
the options available. On the other hand, when WordSmith is launched there are many screens that appear,
and until the user becomes familiar with the program, just getting the program going can be a bit of a
challenge. For someone starting out with corpus analysis, and wanting to focus mostly on concordancing,
MonoConc Pro is more user-friendly. The screens are clearer, and since they resemble the screens of
many word processing programs, users may feel more comfortable.
In summary, both programs offer users powerful tools for searching texts and exploring how language is
used in natural settings, thus providing valuable resources for teachers and researchers. However, the two
programs have different strengths: for users who are less comfortable with computers, MonoConc Pro's
interface is much more user-friendly than that of WordSmith. However, for those who are comfortable
with computers and plan to carry out more powerful text analysis, WordSmith would be a better choice.
So, while both MonoConc Pro and WordSmith offer attractive options for exploring texts, the best choice
will depend on the specific goals and experience of the user.
ABOUT THE REVIEWER
Randi Reppen is an Assistant Professor in Northern Arizona University's MA-TESL/PhD-Applied
Linguistics Program, and the Director of the Program in Intensive English. She is co-author of Corpus
Linguistics: Investigating Language Structure and Use with Douglas Biber and Susan Conrad (1998). Her
research interests include corpus linguistics and the use of corpora in materials development.
E-mail: Randi.Reppen@NAU.EDU
REFERENCE
Biber, D., Conrad, S., & Reppen, R. (1998). Corpus Linguistics: Investigating language structure and
use. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
