Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num3/wang/
September 2001, Vol. 5, Num. 3
pp. 174-184
Copyright ª  2001, ISSN 1094-3501 174
EXPLORING PARALLEL CONCORDANCING
IN ENGLISH AND CHINESE
Wang Lixun
The Open University of Hong Kong
ABSTRACT
This paper investigates the value of computer technology as a medium for the delivery of
parallel texts in English and Chinese for language learning. An English-Chinese parallel
corpus was created for use in parallel concordancing -- a technique which has been
developed to respond to the desire to study language in its natural contexts of use.
Specific problems of dealing with Chinese characters in concordancing are discussed. A
computer program called English-Chinese Parallel Concordancer was developed for this
research. The operation of the program is demonstrated through screen shots. The
pedagogical application of parallel concordancing in English and Chinese is illustrated
through examples from some teaching and learning experiments, and the Data-Driven
Learning approach is applied and explored. It is hoped that parallel concordancing in
English and Chinese will become a useful and popular tool for both English and Chinese
learners in their second language learning.
INTRODUCTION
Parallel concordancing is a tool which has been developed to respond to the desire (fuelled by linguists
such as Sinclair) to study language in its natural contexts of use. It allows us to place side by side for
comparison two contexts produced for a given item -- phrase, word, or morpheme -- one being a
translation of the other. It has many uses in translation studies and in translation pedagogy, such as in the
compilation of bilingual dictionaries. However, in the present paper it is the pedagogical value of parallel
concordancing which will receive attention.
The main research interest in this paper is in the use of parallel concordancing in the teaching of
languages, specifically in its use as a form of consciousness-raising, of making learners aware of the
differences between the target language and their own language (Rutherford, 1987). By comparing the
contexts obtained for an item in one language, with the translations of the contexts in the other language,
learners can see how the item is rendered according to varying contextual elements (Roussel, 1991). This
can be useful pedagogically as, for example, it can help to prevent the L2 of more advanced learners from
becoming fossilised and settling into the use of cognate but contextually inappropriate structures in the
target language. It can help one to look at the way a given structure is used in different styles or registers,
or by different age groups, or by native and foreign speakers (King, 1989).
Barlow, who developed the ParaConc (Barlow, 2001) program for parallel concordancing, claims that
parallel texts (texts that are translations of each other) are a promising resource for a range of research
projects related to language learning. Using parallel texts, as he puts it, "allows language learners to
directly investigate (perhaps in response to queries posed by the teacher) the main correspondences
between particular words and structures in two languages" (Barlow, 1996a). It helps beginning learners to
create an awareness for the feel of a second language and also to obtain some concrete knowledge of
correspondences. It also helps advanced learners to deepen their knowledge of words and phrases: to
understand not just the main meaning or most common meanings of a word, but to understand a range of
meanings and to perceive how context in terms of discourse and genre provides clues to the appropriate
Wang Lixun Parallel Concordancing in English and Chinese…
Language Learning & Technology 175
meaning (Barlow, 1996a, 1996b). In this paper, some pedagogic applications of parallel concordancing
are explored, making use of Barlow's insights and also the Data-driven Learning (DDL) approach (Johns,
1991, 1993, 1994), which will be discussed in the section "Parallel Concordancing for Lexical Learning."
To carry out parallel concordancing in English and Chinese, I constructed an English-Chinese parallel
corpus and developed a software package, English-Chinese Parallel Concordancer (Wang, 2000). A
concordance example of the word xian4zai4 (now) is discussed in the paper, revealing an insight into
different uses of the word, and how the findings can be applied in language learning. (Xian4zai4 is
Chinese Pinyin, the Roman transliteration of Chinese characters, which is used throughout this paper for
the convenience of English readers. The numbers are tone markers.)
PROBLEMS OF DEALING WITH CHINESE CHARACTERS IN CONCORDANCING
Although parallel concordancing has been carried out between several European languages, it seems not
to have been previously extended to non-alphabetic languages such as Chinese. This is due to
fundamental differences in the language systems which create complex conceptual and computational
problems of alignment. The most immediate differences between Chinese and the European languages are
that Chinese is written in ideograms rather than alphabetic characters, and that it lacks the properties of
most European grammatical systems. For example, it has no articles, no tenses, no participles or gerunds,
no moods, and virtually no inflections. It even had no punctuation, until it was introduced from the West
at the end of the 19th century.
Even in a language as English, the definition of "word" can be problematic. For example, is "crabmeat"
one word, or two? However, it is even more problematic for a language as Chinese to define word.
Written Chinese gives no indication of which characters are to be considered as words and which
combine with others to form compound words. For example, according to standard Chinese grammar
rules, ban4 (half), tu2 (way), er2 (but), and fei4 (give up) are four words, which should be separated by
spaces. But most Chinese people consider this four-character combination a single word (give-up-half-
way). This type of combination is very common in Chinese, having a similar function to that of an idiom
in English, although the characters in it normally keep their original meanings rather than combine with
others to form compound words. Also, unlike English idioms, the compound can function as an adjective,
adverb, or verb, which might explain why people usually regard it as a single word.
If we want to take account of the non-correspondence between character and word, we must first develop
some way of establishing when a string of characters can be considered a word. Then, in entering the
Chinese text on computer, spaces can be inserted between these conceptual words to correspond to the
standard graphical indication of a word in English. Thus wo3 (I), qi2 (ride) zi4 xing2 che1 (bicycle) would
be entered as wo3 qi2 zi4xing2che1.
However, there are a number of technical problems associated with this form of alignment. It seems
impractical to design a computer program to insert spaces automatically, since two successive characters
may be either one or two words according to the context. This means that the spaces have to be added
manually, which is costly in terms of time and money. Furthermore, the end-user searching for a word
with the retrieval software may conceive of words differently from the original corpus compiler and may
have to make several attempts to match the compiler's input.
Given the technical and conceptual problems associated with non-correspondence alignment, it appeared
that the only practical solution was to make an assumption of character-word correspondence and thus
treat each Chinese character as a word. Having made this assumption, the inputting task was made easier
by the Chinese word processor NJStar, which not only inserts spaces between Chinese characters
automatically, but can also convert Chinese characters into Pinyin, which is very important for English-
speaking people wanting to learn or pronounce Chinese.
Wang Lixun Parallel Concordancing in English and Chinese…
Language Learning & Technology 176
CREATING AN ENGLISH-CHINESE PARALLEL CORPUS
Unlike other concordancing programs such as Microconcord (Johns, 1986) or Wordsmith (Scott, 2000),
which can be used on any collection of texts, a parallel concordancer must be used on a corpus consisting
of parallel texts in two or more languages. Before developing the concordancing program, then, it was
necessary to select texts in order to set up an English-Chinese parallel corpus.
The corpus aims at helping intermediate English or Chinese language learners, such as university
students, further improve their second language. Thus, the texts chosen were English or Chinese texts
which are fairly easy to understand from the point of view of vocabulary, syntax, and discourse.
University students are usually interested in genres such as novels, fables, essays, autobiographies,
magazines, and general scientific articles, so these genres were taken into first consideration. To keep a
balance, about half the source texts were in English and half in Chinese. Only written materials were
collected, as it was too difficult for the present research to cover transcribed spoken materials. To ensure
that the quality of translation was good, only published translations were selected. The corpus now
contains about 1 million words in English and 2 million characters in Chinese. Table 1 shows the
percentage of genres distribution in the corpus.
Table 1. Percentage of Genres Distribution in the Corpus
Genre novel essay fable autobiography scientific article political address magazine other
% 50 15 10 5 5 5 5 5
Initially, the method of inputting the texts was to scan in English texts and type in Chinese texts.
Subsequently, Chinese texts were scanned with SunmiPage ScanInsert OCR software (Liang, 1997) and
then edited. The texts used are either copyright-free or permission has been obtained from the authors.
After editing, the texts needed to be marked up. The purpose of marking up texts is to define sentence and
paragraph boundaries so that a sentence in one text can be matched with its translation in the other by the
parallel concordancing program. In order to keep the size of the text files as small as possible, minimal
marking up was used: The only necessary element is <S> to identify sentence boundaries, as the program
was developed in such a way as to recognise paragraph boundaries without special markers.
Electronically, each Chinese punctuation mark occupies two bytes, while each English mark occupies
only one byte. A program was developed to automatically mark up Chinese text according to Chinese
punctuation and English text according to English punctuation.
THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE ENGLISH-CHINESE PARLLEL CONCORDANCER
Since 1997, I have been developing the English-Chinese Parallel Concordancer (E-C Concord), and the
first version was successfully completed in 2000. It works in a Windows95/98 environment, and can carry
out sentence-by-sentence parallel concordancing in English, Chinese, and Pinyin. The main technical
problem in developing a program for parallel concordancing related to the alignment method used for
identifying equivalent sentences between texts. A major problem in aligning texts arises when the number
of sentences in the source language differs from that in the target language. The situation could also arise
where the number of sentences in a paragraph is the same, but the divisions between them do not
coincide. A program called Multiconcord (Woolls, 1997) had previously been developed at the University
of Birmingham, using an algorithm which automatically looks for disturbance between the two texts and
re-establishes the matches by joining several short sentences together in one language to match a long one
in the other. The algorithm gives satisfactory accuracy in aligning parallel texts in European languages
(Woolls, 1998). However, an adaptation of this program to align texts in English and Chinese only
achieved an accuracy of about 60%, based on an accuracy test carried out by Woolls and the author. The
decision was then taken that for the present research the texts would be pre-aligned -- which of course
Wang Lixun Parallel Concordancing in English and Chinese…
Language Learning & Technology 177
gives an accuracy of 100%. That accuracy is achieved at the cost of time-consuming manual pre-editing
of the texts.
Figure 1. Screen shot of the search window of E-C Concord
The program allows the user to type in a search item in the "search box," and choose a Search Language
and a Target Language. When entering an English or Pinyin search item, wild cards (*) are acceptable, so
that "book*" can be "book," "books," "booking," "booked," and so forth, and "wang*" can be "wang1,"
"wang2," "wang3," or "wang4." Wild cards cannot be used with Chinese characters. The user needs to
select one or more text files from the file list: These files contain the corpus data. The program provides
three ways of concordancing: (a) Monolingual Concordance, Key-Word-In-Context; (b) Monolingual
Concordance, Sentence-by-Sentence; and (c) Parallel Concordance, Sentence-by-Sentence. The user can
also control the maximum search hits. After making all the necessary choices and pressing the "Search"
button, the user will get a result such as shown in Figures 2 and 3.
Wang Lixun Parallel Concordancing in English and Chinese…
Language Learning & Technology 178
Figure 2. Parallel concordance of "now": Chinese character output
Figure 3. Parallel concordance of "now": Chinese Pinyin output
Wang Lixun Parallel Concordancing in English and Chinese…
Language Learning & Technology 179
The concordance output is in sentence-by-sentence format, which consists of pairs of English and Chinese
sentences, one been the translation of the other in the pair. The text can be edited on screen and saved as
text files for further studies.
PARALLEL CONCORDANCING FOR LEXICAL LEARNING
More than one and a half centuries ago, von Humboldt (1836/1988) pointed out that "we cannot, properly
speaking, teach a foreign language: all we can do is create the conditions under which it can be awakened
in the soul" (p. 236). Using Humboldt's insights, and based on the data generated by the concordancer,
Johns (1991) proposed a new language-learning approach, which he called Data-Driven Learning (DDL).
The DDL approach puts emphasis on the inductive acquisition on the part of students of grammatical
rules or regularities through the process of analysing the patterns of language use of specially selected
items as revealed through corpora (Johns, 1991; Tribble & Jones, 1990). Johns's remark "Every student a
Sherlock Holmes" implies that the role of the learner has changed in DDL: A learner is a researcher,
testing hypotheses and revising them in the light of data; a learner is a detective, finding and interpreting
linguistic clues. DDL can focus on different aspects of language. This paper focuses on lexical learning
using DDL. The following is an example of what a learner can detect by analysing parallel concordance
data.
The lexical item studied here is the adverb xian4zai4 (now), as it is a very common and important word,
but one not satisfactorily covered by bilingual dictionaries. Some differences in the use of xian4zai4 and
"now" in the two languages are discussed below.
One hundred and twenty-eight examples were found in four different texts (novels). Forty examples were
randomly selected from them, and were classified into several groups. The idea was to ask Chinese
students at an intermediate English level to identify the linguistic bases of the grouping. In order to
compare Chinese characters with English words more clearly, the Pinyin transcription identifies its
separate "words."
The following abbreviations, as used by Li & Thompson (1981), were used in the examples:
Abbreviation T O CRS PFV ASSOC GEN CL 3sg
Term translation original currently
relevant
state (le)
perfective
aspect (le)
associative
(de)
genitive
(de)
classifier third
person
singular
Some of the above abbreviations were used because certain Chinese characters, such as those for de and
le, cannot be translated directly into English words. Furthermore, each of these two has two distinct
meanings which depend on the context. Many Chinese classifiers cannot be translated into English, as
they simply do not exist in English, where, for example, one speaks of "a herd of cows," but there is no
classifier for a single cow. The third person singular pronoun ta1 in Pinyin does not show the gender, so it
cannot be automatically translated into "he" or "she."
Eight Chinese students in the University of Birmingham were asked to accomplish the following tasks
concerning the adverb xian4zai4 (now).
Wang Lixun Parallel Concordancing in English and Chinese…
Language Learning & Technology 180
Task 1
Look at the following data:
1. T: di2que4 shi4 zhe4 yang4: ta1  xian4zai4 zhi1   you3  shi2  ying1cun4 gao1 le5, ......
    truly       be    like this       3sg    now      only    have    ten   inch          high  CRS
O: And so it was indeed: she was now only ten inches high, …
2. T: shi4shi2shang4, ta1 xian4zai4   yi3      yuan3  bu4zhi3          jiu3  ying1chi3 gao1, ...
     in fact                3sg  now        already much   not less than   nine   feet          high
O: in fact she was now rather more than nine feet high, …
3. T: ta1 wan2quan2  wang4ji4 le5 ta1  xian4zai4    bi3   tu4zi3 da4 shang4 yi1qian1   bei4,
    3sg  completely  forget    PFV 3sg  now       compare rabbit big   up   a thousand  times
O: …quite forgetting that she was now about a thousand times as large as the Rabbit, …
4. O: wo3 xian4zai4 yi3jing1 cheng2  le5   ming2 fu4   qi2 shi2  de5    gong1ren2 ...
     I      now         already   become PFV name agree that fact GEN  worker
T: I was now a bona fide worker …
Question: What underlying pattern can be detected in the above parallel texts?
What the students found was that, in the Chinese examples, xian4zai4 immediately follows the subject,
while in the English ones, now follows "subject + be." They were then asked whether this was always the
case. They carried out more concordancing and found that there was no such structure as "subject + verb
(be) + xian4zai4" in Chinese in the corpus. The conclusion they drew was that Chinese speakers should
pay special attention to the structure "subject + verb (be) + now" in English, as this structure does not
exist in Chinese. They also suggested that English speakers learning Chinese should avoid adding an
unwanted verb (be) to a Chinese sentence.
Task 2
5. T: "xian4zai4  gai1       dao4 hua1yuan2  li3qu4 la5!"
       now         should  go to       garden     into !
O: "And now for the garden!"
6. T: "kuai4dian3, xian4zai4      jiu4         qu4!"
       quick           now       immediately     go
O: "Quick, now!"
7. T: ba3 ta1de5  tou2   tai2  gao1 -- xian4zai4  na2    bai2lan2di4 lai2 --
   make his      head    raise high         now    fetch    brandy         come
O: Hold up his head -- Brandy now --
Question: Why are the English versions of the above sentences so much shorter than the Chinese ones?
The students found that in the English sentences various subjects and verbs around now were not present.
For example, "And now (I should head) for the garden," "Quick, now (you go there immediately)," and
"(You go and fetch some) Brandy now." In the Chinese translation, however, the words struck through
were presented, such as "should go to ... into" in Example 5, "immediately go" in Example 6 and "fetch ...
come" in Example 7. The students concluded that in Chinese the adverb xian4zai4 could not be used
independently, and some words not present in the English sentences were required in the Chinese
translation. They realised that certain structures which are acceptable in English are not acceptable in
Chinese, and vice versa. It seems that in the above Chinese sentences, 'the law of least effort' was not
followed.
Wang Lixun Parallel Concordancing in English and Chinese…
Language Learning & Technology 181
Task 3
8. O: wo3 xian4zai4 bu4  chi1 zhi1shi4  wo3 bu4 xiang3 chi1 ta1 ba4 le5.
      I     now          not   eat    only        I      not  want    eat   3sg       CRS
T: But I didn't choose to just yet.
9. O: wo3 xian4 zai4 shi4 "zu3 zhang3"  le5,   geng4 zhu3yao4 de     shi4 ......
     I      now            be    group leader  PFV  even   mainly     GEN  be
T: Because I was "group leader" and, even more, …
10. O: wo3 xiang3 ta1 bu4  shi4 sui2 kou3  zhe4yang4   shuo1   de,    ke3neng2 shi4 you3yi4shi4di4
      I      think 3sg   not   be   casually     in this way  speak  ASSOC may       be      intentionally
    yao4  rang4 wo3 zhi1dao4 wo3 xian4zai4 bu4 tong2 yu2 guo4qu4  de      shen1fen1.
    want  let        I      know        I    now          not  same          past   ASSOC  status
T: I suspected that he said this to let me know my changed status.
11. O: na3me5, wo3 xian4 zai4 sheng1huo2 yu2 qi2jian1   de      zhe4ge4 xin1   de       sheng1cun2
     then        I      now            live            in between   ASSOC  this      new  ASSOC  living
    huan2jing4     shi4  zen3yang4  de5 ne5?
    surroundings   be    what            GEN?
   T: So what about my life in these new surroundings?
Question: What is missing from the English versions of the above sentences? Why?
The students easily found that xian4zai4 occurs in the Chinese text but now did not appear in the English
translation.
The students observed that the English translation in Example 8 simplified the original Chinese sentence.
There were two sentence structures parallel to each other in the Chinese sentence, the first stating the fact
that "I now (do) not eat," the second telling the reason "I (do) not want (to) eat." Having further studied
the extended context of the sentence in the original text, the students realised that the narrator of the
sentence was in a state of starvation most of the time, so to be able to choose whether to eat or not was
very satisfying, and the feeling was expressed through the parallel sentence structure. The English
translation used prospective contrast, and it simplified the sentence. The students felt that it was not as
expressive as the original Chinese sentence.
In Example 9, the students argued that now was not used in the English translation because the past tense
"was" was clear enough and now was not necessary. In the Chinese version, the combination "now ... le
(PFV)" served the same purpose as "was."
In Example 10, the students found that the Chinese version used contrastive structures twice: "casually in
this way speak" versus "intentionally want let I know" and "now" versus "past," but neither appeared in
the English translation. They argued that contrastive structures were frequently used in Chinese to make
the meaning of sentences absolutely clear, but in English quite often such structures were not used so as
to make sentences simpler.
In Example 11, the students found it logically reasonable that the word now did not appear in the English
translation: One could not live in the past in "new surroundings." Although it sounded redundant, the
word xian4zai4 should not be omitted from the Chinese sentence.
Having studied examples where xian4zai4 occurred in the Chinese original but now did not appear in the
English translation, the students carried out more parallel concordancing looking for examples where now
occurred in an English original but xian4zai4 did not appear in the Chinese translation. The following are
some examples they found:
Wang Lixun Parallel Concordancing in English and Chinese…
Language Learning & Technology 182
12. O: "Now, Dinah, tell me the truth: did you ever eat bat?"
T: "wei4,                dai4na4, gen1  wo3  shuo1 shi2 hua4,  ni3  chi1  guo4  bian1fu2 mei2you3?"
wei (draw attention) Dinah   to       me    say    real words  you  eat    PFV     bat            not
13. O: ...her face brightened up to think that she was now the right size for going through the little door
      into that lovely garden.
T: xiang3 dao4 ta1  mu4qian2          de     shen1cai2 zheng4hao3 neng2 tong1 guo4 na3 shan4 xiao3
   think    3sg       in front of eyes ASSOC size            right            can     go    through that CL  little
    men2, ke3yi3 jin4ru4 na3 ke3ai4   de hua1yuan2, ta1  xi3  xing2      yu2                se4.
    door   can      enter    that  love -ly      garden         3sg  joy  reflect   through (face) colour
14.  O: She found that she was now about two feet high, ...
T: ta1  fa1xian4  ci3ke4         zi4ji3 shen1 gao1    da4yue1 liang3 ying1chi3...
    3sg  find       this moment  self    body  height   about     two         feet
15.  O: "Now tell me, Pat, what's that in the window?"
T: "hao3le,  gao4 su4 wo3, pa4 te4 , chuang1zi3 li3 na3 dong1xi1 shi4 shen2me?"
     all right  tell           me   Pat          window       in that    thing      be    what
Having studied the examples, the students realised that xian4zai4 is not the only translation of now, it can
be translated as mu4qian2 ("in front of eyes"), ci3ke4 ("this moment"), and possibly other words, and
sometimes now is used as a word for drawing attention rather than for referring to time: wei4 ("well" or
"listen") and hao3le ("all right"). Discoveries like this certainly help learners to be more aware of
different uses of words in different contexts. Their L2 is less likely to become fossilised, and they will be
able to see more of the subtle differences between meanings, and will try to avoid using cognate but
contextually inappropriate structures in the target language.
The above discussion shows the possibility of using parallel concordance data as teaching materials for
Data-driven Learning purposes. The teacher can either put data into groups for students to study, or ask
them to carry out concordancing on a particular lexical item, analyse the data, and ask them to submit
what they have found through the analysis.
CONCLUSION
Technically, parallel concordancing between English and Chinese has been established successfully, and
further tasks can be developed and experimented with students at different level to increase their, and
their teachers', familiarity with the methodology. It is highly possible that the English-Chinese
Concordancer (Wang, 2000) can be extended to Japanese and Korean, as like Chinese, they use
ideograms rather than alphabetic letters. Experience suggests that the parallel concordancer is one of the
most powerful tools that computer science can offer to language researchers. The distinctive feature of the
Data-driven Learning approach to inductive language teaching is that the language data are primary, and
the teacher does not know in advance exactly what rules or patterns the learner will discover. DDL with
the support of parallel concordancing will help the learner to develop in-depth knowledge of lexical
meaning and use based on evidence from authentic language.
Wang Lixun Parallel Concordancing in English and Chinese…
Language Learning & Technology 183
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Wang Lixun was born in China. He was awarded a PhD in Computational Linguistics at the University of
Birmingham, UK, in 2000. His research interests include computer-assisted language learning; corpus
linguistics; Web-based language learning. He has developed the software English-Chinese Parallel
Concordancer, Bilingual Sentence Shuffler, and MatchUp. He has also developed his homepage and the
ECLEPT Web site. He currently works in the School of Arts and Social Sciences at The Open University
of Hong Kong.
E-mail: lxwang@ouhk.edu.hk
REFERENCES
Barlow, M. (1996a). Parallel texts in language teaching. In S. Botley, J. Glass, A. M. McEnery, & A.
Wilson (Eds.), Proceedings of teaching and language corpora 1996 (UCREL Technical Papers Volume
9; pp. 45-56). Lancaster, UK: University Centre for Computer Corpus Research on Language.
Barlow, M. (1996b). Corpora for theory and practice. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 1(1),
1-37.
Barlow, M. (2001). ParaConc [Computer software]. Houston, TX: Athelstan.
Humboldt, W. von. (1836/1988). On language: The diversity of human language-structure and its
influence on the mental development of mankind (P. Heath, Trans.). Originally published as the
introduction to Uber die Kavi-Sprache auf der Insel Java (1836-1840). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Johns, T. F. (1986). Microconcord: A language-learner's research tool. System, 14(2), 151-162.
Johns, T. F. (1991). Should you be persuaded -- two samples of data-driven learning materials. In T. F.
Johns & P. King (Eds.), Classroom concordancing (English Language Research Journal 4; pp. 1-13).
Birmingham, UK: Birmingham University.
Johns, T. F. (1993) Data-driven learning: An update. TELL & CALL, 1993(2), 4-10.
Johns, T. F. (1994) From printout to handout: Grammar and vocabulary teaching in the context of data-
driven learning. In T. Odlin (Ed.), Approaches to pedagogic grammar (pp. 293-313).Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
King, P. (1989) The uncommon core: some discourse features of student writing. System, 17(1), 13-20.
Li, C., & Thompson, S. (1981). Mandarin Chinese. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Liang, X. M. (1997). SunmiPage ScanInsert OCR [Computer software]. Singapore: Computek
Enterprises Pte Ltd.
Roussel, F. (1991). Parallel concordances and tonic auxiliaries. In T.F. Johns & P. King (Eds.),
Classroom concordancing (English Language Research Journal 4; pp. 71-103). Birmingham, UK:
Birmingham University.
Rutherford, W. E. (1987). Second language grammar: Learning and teaching. London: Longman.
Scott, M. (2000). WordSmith Tools Version 3.0 [Computer software]. Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press.
Tribble, C., & Jones, G. (1990). Concordances in the classroom: A resource book for teachers. London:
Longman.
Wang Lixun Parallel Concordancing in English and Chinese…
Language Learning & Technology 184
Wang, L. X. (2000). English-Chinese Parallel Concordancer [Computer software]. Birmingham, UK:
University of Birmingham.
Woolls, D. (1998, July 24-27). Multilingual Parallel Concordancing for Pedagogical Use. Teaching and
Language Corpora 98 (pp 222-227). Oxford, UK: Keble College.
Woolls, D. (1997). Multiconcord [Computer software]. Birmingham, UK: CFL Software Development.
