Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/review3/ 
January 2002, Vol. 6, Num. 1  
pp. 27-32 
 
Copyright © 2002, ISSN 1094-3501 27 
REVIEW OF ADVANCED FRENCH: INTERACTIVE VIDEO LANGUAGE 
LEARNING WITH "AU COEUR DE LA LOI" 
Title  Advanced French: Interactive Video Language Learning with "Au coeur de 
la loi" 
Platform  Mac OS 8.6+; Windows 98/2000  
System requirements  PC: Pentium, 200 Mh; 64MB RAM; DVD ROM drive; 800x600, 16 bit 
color display; 50MB free disk space; Soundcard 
Mac: G3 or G4 processor (e.g. DVD iMac); 128MB RAM; DVD ROM drive 
Microphone is needed to record one's voice 
Publisher / contact 
information 
EuroTalk Ltd. 
315-317 New Kings Road 
London SW6 4RF 
Tel: 44 (0) 207 371 7711 
Fax: 44 (0) 207 371 7781 
http://www.eurotalk.co.uk 
Support offered http://www.eurotalk.co.uk/ETWebPages/Products/DVDF.html 
"Help" screens are provided within the program 
Printed instructions are inside cover of product 
Target language French (English, German, Italian, and Spanish programs also available) 
Target audience Intermediate or Advanced French (suitable for university and high school 
levels) 
Price 34.99 GBP, according to ordering information on Web site 
(http://www.eurotalk.co.uk/ETWebPages/Orders/orderF.html)  
ISBN 1-862-21403-4 
Reviewed by Susan Carpenter Binkley, The Five Colleges of Ohio Consortium 
OVERVIEW 
Advanced French is a new DVD-ROM in a series of advanced language lessons produced by EuroTalk Interactive. 
Each DVD in the series, which includes Advanced English, Spanish, German, and Italian as well as French, is based 
on an episode from a television program in the target language. Advanced French is based on an episode of Au coeur 
de la loi (At the Heart of the Law), a French television series which features a female detective and her male 
colleagues in Paris.  
DESCRIPTION 
The main menu of Advanced French presents users with six choices: Video and text, dictionary, word 
search, activities, record your own voice, and quiz. There are no directions explaining where or how to 
begin the program, although the "video and text" button does receive prominence at the top and center of 
the screen (see Figure 1). This button takes the user to the heart of the DVD: the 50-minute video episode 
of Au coeur de la loi. While it is possible to begin with the activities, these are all based on the video, and 
thus users who are unfamiliar with the episode will likely become confused. 
Susan Carpenter Binkley Review of Advanced French… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 28 
 
Figure 1. Main menu 
After viewing the video, users can consult the reference tools and complete the activities largely in the 
order they see fit. However, the quiz should probably be done last, as it includes information from the 
other activities.  
Video and Text (Vidéo et texte) 
Clicking on Vidéo et texte takes the user to the video and transcript. Au coeur de la loi plays within a 
television-like frame, with the French transcript appearing as subtitles below the television frame (see 
Figure 2) . 
 
Figure 2. Video and text screen  
Susan Carpenter Binkley Review of Advanced French… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 29 
It is also possible to view the video at full screen size (without subtitles, icons, or menu items) or to scroll 
through the episode's transcript in its entirety. In this mode, clicking on any line of dialogue will cause the 
video to jump to the corresponding section of the episode.  
There is also a scene menu from which the learner can easily jump to any part of the video without 
scrolling through the dialogue or using the somewhat difficult to control fast-forward and reverse buttons.  
Dictionary (Dictionnaire) 
The dictionary consists of an alphabetical list of objects and characters seen in the video. Rather than 
providing a definition, clicking on a given word displays a frame from the video with the corresponding 
object circled while a voice-over provides a pronunciation model. The dictionary is accessible only from 
the main menu and is not hotlinked from any other activity in the program. 
Word Search (Recherche de mots) 
Recherche de mots is similar to the dictionary, but instead of listing objects seen in the video, it lists the 
words spoken in the dialogue. Clicking on a word plays the scene in which that word was uttered. No 
translations or definitions are provided. Instead, the student must rely exclusively on context to determine 
the meaning.  
Activities (Activités) 
The activities section consists of four different types of exercises which focus on vocabulary, listening 
comprehension, and spelling. For all four activities, Advanced French includes both untimed "practice 
sessions" (entrainement) and timed "tests." In the practice sessions, users can eliminate one incorrect 
answer by clicking the question mark icon at the bottom of the screen. Some of the timed tests allow only 
several seconds to respond, and those several seconds seem to go by rather quickly. The spelling activity 
in particular requires a fair amount of clicking and dragging in a short time (see Figure 3).  
 
Figure 3. Spelling test 
Susan Carpenter Binkley Review of Advanced French… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 30 
Feedback for both correct and incorrect answers is provided, with the exact form of the feedback varying 
by activity. In both practice and test modes, the user's score, based on the total number of questions in the 
activity, is reported.  
The vocabulary activity (vocabulaire) is a multiple-choice exercise based on the objects in the dictionary. 
For each item, learners see and hear a single word and then click on the corresponding image, out of six 
that are displayed (see Figure 4). Many of the targeted items are often covered in beginning level texts 
(e.g., "le pied" (a foot), "une ceinture" (a belt), and "une voiture" (a car). 
 
Figure 4. Vocabulary activity  
Mot perdu is a fill-in-the-blank exercise based on brief scenes from Au coeur de la loi. As learners view 
the scene, the transcript is provided with one word missing. Learners click on the missing word from a list 
of 10 choices. 
The spelling activity (épeler) is also based on a short clip from the video. This activity is similar to the 
fill-in-the-blank exercise, in that the transcript appears with one word missing. However, here learners 
click and drag letters to spell the missing word, rather than choosing from a list of choices. 
Finally, "What is the next line?" (Quel [sic] est la prochaine réplique?) is perhaps the most difficult of 
the four activities. Learners first view a very brief clip -- consisting of just one line of dialogue -- and then 
must choose the next line of dialogue from a list of three possibilities. In this activity, unlike most of the 
others, a transcript of the scene is not provided, so users must rely solely on their listening ability. 
Record Your Own Voice (Enregistrez-vous) 
The speaking component is located in the Enregistrez-vous section. Here, after users choose a character, a 
scene with that character is shown. Learners repeat each line of dialogue, recording their own voices. 
They do not need to memorize the line, since a written transcription is provided. However, users must 
keep pace with the original video, which can be quite challenging, since the actors speak quickly. After 
individually recording about five lines of dialogue, learners can play the entire scene with their own voice 
inserted into the proper places. 
Susan Carpenter Binkley Review of Advanced French… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 31 
Quiz (Quizz Vidéo)  
The Quizz Vidéo provides a game show format with a virtual competitor named Mathieu. A short clip 
from the video is shown, and a multiple choice question based on that clip appears and is read by the 
voice of a game show host. These questions cover a range of information, from vocabulary and grammar 
("Quel est l'impéritif présent du verbe réfléchir?" / What is the imperative of the verb to reflect?) to 
comprehension of the storyline ("Pourquoi est-ce que l'agent de police arrête la voiture?" / Why does the 
police office stop the car?). Unfortunately, if the learner doesn't respond correctly, there is apparently no 
way to learn the correct answer: "Mathieu" hits a button and receives the points, but it is not clear which 
answer he chose.  
Help Features 
Upon launching the DVD, users are given the opportunity to choose the language for the instructions on 
the help screens. English is the default language for the instructions, but one can also choose French, as 
well as a variety of other languages. Subsequently, whenever users click on the small red and white life 
preserver at the bottom right of each screen, they can read instructions in that language.  
Users sign in when they begin, and the program keeps track of their progress for each use by indicating 
the date of the previous use, the number of sessions practiced, and the running score for any tests taken. It 
does not, however, bookmark partially completed exercises, nor does it return the users to point where 
they left off on the previous use.  
EVALUATION 
Advanced French is appropriate for individual, self-guided work in an intermediate to advanced language 
class. If the instructor has a regular "lab day" incorporated into the class schedule, this DVD would work 
nicely. It would require, however, several days work to get through most of the activities because the 
video alone, played without interruption, is about 50 minutes. However, it could be challenging to 
incorporate this DVD into a class lesson and/or evaluate students' progress because of the absence of units 
or clearly divided segments. Questions in the various exercises are posed in apparently random order and 
do not move chronologically through the storyline. Thus, if learners watch the first 30 minutes of the 
video, and then attempt to complete some of the exercises, they could become frustrated, since the 
exercise questions will not necessarily reflect that portion of the video. This lack of segmentation is 
perhaps the biggest drawback for the teacher wishing to integrate Advanced French into a course syllabus.  
Of the four basic skills, Advanced French is strongest on listening and reading, rather than speaking or 
writing. However, the comprehension questions do not require learners to use any higher-order skills such 
as reasoning. Instead, the questions tend to be straightforward and fact-oriented. Moreover, none of the 
activities are based on communication; the speaking exercises consist only of repeating lines of dialogue, 
and the real challenge is to repeat the lines very quickly, before the recording function shuts off. It is 
therefore questionable whether the program lives up to the producers' billing as "interactive" since 
learners do not interact with other speakers. Holliday (1999) has noted this shortcoming of supposedly 
interactive software. In most cases, he writes, "the learner is in reality not interacting with another speaker 
... and all of the computer's supposed interactive responses are in fact drawn from a limited data bank of 
preprogrammed, pre-audio-recorded or pre-video-recorded items" (p. 186). Advanced French provides 
even less than a "databank of preprogrammed responses"; the only response to the learner's recorded 
voice is the next line of dialogue.  
An instructor could, however, create oral and written activities to serve as a follow-up to the video in 
order to encourage oral and written communication. In fact, the video addresses many current social 
issues that could form the basis for further discussion in class. For example, the storyline involving Aziz, 
a rehabilitated delinquent, alludes to problems of racism in the workplace, particularly towards those of 
Susan Carpenter Binkley Review of Advanced French… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 32 
North African descent. The main character, Béatrice, juggles several different -- and often competing -- 
relationships with her mother, son, and boyfriend. The activities created by EuroTalk do not elaborate on 
these pertinent topics or coax the learner to explore them in more depth.  
SUMMARY 
Many students will likely find it interesting to watch a recent television episode created for native 
speakers of French, rather than a film produced specifically for pedagogical purposes. Thus, the use of Au 
coeur de la loi is one of the most attractive aspects of Advanced French in that it offers exposure to 
authentic French. Although learners may at first feel overwhelmed by not being able to understand all of 
the spoken dialogue in the film, the exercises are likely to alleviate this frustration by requiring much 
simpler language skills. However, the lack of opportunities for meaningful communication in these 
exercises provided means that instructors will likely want to supplement the DVD with various additional 
activities. 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Susan Carpenter Binkley has a PhD in French from the Ohio State University. She currently serves as 
Language Technology Specialist for the Ohio Five Foreign Language Project (The College of Wooster, 
Denison University, Kenyon College, Oberlin College, Ohio Wesleyan University), supported by a grant 
from the Mellon Foundation. Her current research focuses on instructional design for foreign language 
Web activities, and the use of digital video for second language acquisition. 
E-mail: binkleys@kenyon.edu 
REFERENCES 
Dickinson, L. (1987). Self-instruction in language learning. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press. *** 
Omaggio Hadley, A. (1993). Teaching language in context. Boston: Heinle and Heinle. *** 
Holliday, L. (1999). Theory and research: Input, interaction, and CALL. In J. Egbert & E. Hanson-Smith 
(Eds.), CALL environments: Research, practice, and critical issues. Alexandria, VA: TESOL. 
Nunan, D. (1989). Designing tasks for the communicative classroom. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge UP. 
*** 
