Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/review4/ 
January 2002, Vol. 6, Num. 1 
pp. 33-39 
 
Copyright © 2002, ISSN 1094-3501 33 
REVIEW OF  
TESOROS: A MULTIMEDIA-BASED SPANISH COURSE ON CD-ROM 
Title  Tesoros: A Multimedia-Based Spanish Course on CD-ROM. 
Platforms Windows 95/98 
Macintosh: System 7.5 or later. 
System requirements  Windows: Pentium 100 MHz processor; 16 MB of RAM; 640 x 480 256-color 
display; 8x CD-ROM drive; SoundBlaster compatible sound card with 
microphone and speakers 
Macintosh: PowerPC 100 MHz processor; 16 MB of RAM; 640 x 480 256-
color display; 8x CD-ROM drive; microphone and speakers 
Publisher McGraw-Hill Companies 
PO Box 182605 
Columbus, OH 43218-2605 
Phone: 1-800-262-4729 (students) 
Phone: 1-800-338-3987 (instructors) 
Fax: 1-614-759-3644 
E-mail: customer.service@mcgraw-hill.com 
Support offered  Customer service: http://www.mhhe.com/catalogs/cust_serv/ 
Target language  Spanish. 
Target audience Introductory level. 
Price Stand-alone set of 5 CD-ROMs: $45 
Institutional lab pack (10 sets of 5 CD-ROMs): $320 
Site license: Contact your local McGraw-Hill representative 
http://www.mhhe.com/catalogs/rep/ 
ISBN 0-07-234220-X 
Reviewed by Joseph Collentine, Northern Arizona University 
Tesoros is an introductory multimedia Spanish course on five CD-ROMs. It forms the core of a larger 
package that includes a textbook and a workbook/laboratory manual which is appropriate for self-study or 
classroom-based learners. According to the accompanying information booklet (p. 1), Tesoros "offers 
students the opportunity to explore Spanish through an intriguing story line" and it "contains many 
interactive task-based activities." The narrative-based curriculum centers around a detective who searches 
for a hidden treasure located somewhere in the Spanish-speaking world, a plot element which takes users 
to a myriad of countries. The student plays the detective's assistant, completing a number of tasks that are 
meant to help the sleuth find the hidden treasure.  
Each of the 16 lessons is organized around a multimedia episode of the story. First, students view and 
listen to a comic-strip-like episode. To understand the content of an episode, students can roll their mouse 
over a caption to hear an audio-recording of the dialogue. 
Reviewed by Joseph Collentine  Review of Tesoros... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 34 
 
Figure 1. Story episode 
Double-clicking on any frame in the episode opens a window with the dialogue transcribed and 
hyperlinked to information about lexical and grammatical features (see Figure 2). 
 
Figure 2. Dialogue with hyperlinks to lexical and grammatical information. 
Reviewed by Joseph Collentine  Review of Tesoros... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 35 
Learners then complete a series of tasks assigned by the detective, who requires them to compose e-mails 
and record biographical information about certain characters. Learners must also recreate portions of the 
episode's dialogue by means of a drag-and-drop activity. Subsequently, the student reads and listens to a 
list of vocabulary items related to the episode. Various activities are designed to help the learner retain 
these lexical items. Finally, each lesson ends with a grammar explanation and accompanying exercises. 
 
Figure 3. Vocabulary and grammar activities. 
Lafford (2001) recently reviewed the Tesoros package for CALICO, concentrating on the extent to which 
Tesoros is compatible with what are presumed to be effective computer-assisted language learning 
(CALL) design features. Lafford's thorough and insightful assessment concludes that Tesoros is 
compatible with about half of the multimedia design features that Chapelle (1998) argues will create 
fruitful conditions for second language acquisition (SLA). 
Chapelle's features are motivated by interactionist SLA research, which posits that the acquisition of 
linguistic phenomena is facilitated by negotiating for meaning. The perspective on learning taken by 
Tesoros' designers is somewhat broader, since it appears to be more informed by cultural and social 
psychological theories of learning. Using a mystery story as the foundation for the course is consistent 
with one thesis of cultural psychology: that the narrative is an effective tool with which to foster 
knowledge acquisition (Bruner, 1996). Tesoros' designers also attempt to engage Spanish learners in task-
based activities, which reflects the increasing acceptance of the social psychological thesis that instruction 
should encourage knowledge acquisition through "situated cognition" (Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989). 
Finally, although Tesoros does not include any of the currently available technologies that allow learners 
to negotiate messages with either fellow students or their instructors (e.g., chat rooms), the designers 
demonstrate an awareness of recent CALL discussions on the need for materials to provide so-called 
"interactive software features" that give learners frequent feedback and that affect a non-linear experience 
(see Labour, 2001).  
Reviewed by Joseph Collentine  Review of Tesoros... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 36 
TESOROS' USE OF THE NARRATIVE AS A CURRICULAR FOUNDATION  
Narratives whose content constitutes a central and unifying theme within a given curriculum represent a 
key factor in facilitating knowledge acquisition since they provide a cognitively efficient mechanism 
around which learners can build new knowledge about culture and language (Bruner, 1996). Activities 
that involve learners' episodic memory and cognitive "scripts" (e.g., advanced organizers) facilitate the 
acquisition process because they add new memories to related, rather than isolated, bits of information 
(McLaughlin, 1987). To be sure, the Open University's MENO project (Multimedia, Education, and 
Narrative Organization) has specifically researched the facilitative effects of narratives on learning in 
multimedia environments. Because computer-based materials can overload the novice with data (e.g., 
links, stimuli), the use of narrative as a curricular cornerstone can be particularly beneficial in this 
medium, as narratives provide an anchor with which to integrate new information. Technology-based 
Spanish FL materials have embraced the potential benefits of the narrative since the introduction of 
Destinos, a video-based introductory course, and more recently with the McGraw-Hill/Annenberg/CPB 
Nuevos Destinos project. Other groundbreaking FL projects include French in Action and A la rencontre 
de Philippe.  
Tesoros effectively uses its story line as a unifying theme when providing opportunities for learners to 
develop their lexical and grammatical abilities. Most linguistic structures (e.g., vocabulary, grammatical 
phenomena) are introduced through the comic-strip episodes, and hyperlinks encourage students to seek 
the definitions of unknown words and grammar explanations. However, even though one of the learner's 
duties is to study cultural information about the country in which each episode takes place, Tesoros does 
not adequately integrate this cultural information in the narrative. While the CD-ROM and Web links 
provide a plethora of social, historical, literary, and musical information about any given place, the 
materials do not clearly specify task demands that might require the learner to seek specific information. 
Tesoros would have done well to provide activities requiring learners to conjecture about some of the 
places that the detective might visit in a given country, what the detective might see and eat, and 
important people that could provide information or even clues to the treasure's whereabouts. Thus, 
teachers using Tesoros in courses will likely want to design such activities. In future versions of this 
software, portions of the narrative's development could be contingent on the user's interaction with 
cultural materials. For instance, a student might choose from a selection of songs to buy, and that music 
might form the background music for some subsequent situation; or, a work of art that the learner enjoyed 
might "mysteriously" reappear in a subsequent episode. 
TESOROS AS A SOURCE FOR ENCOURAGING LEARNING THROUGH SITUATED 
COGNITION 
Situated cognition is a theory of social psychology asserting that knowledge acquisition results not only 
from abstract explanations of concepts but also from experiencing how that knowledge is useful in real-
world problem solving (Brown et al., 1989; see also Salaberry, 1996). Within the fields of second- and 
foreign-language acquisition, pedagogues have spoken of the need to involve learners in task-based 
activities, or assignments where learners employ the target language while working towards some non-
linguistic goal (Crookes & Gass, 1993; Long, 1997, Nunan, 1989). Students role play, derive a solution 
for some dilemma, and make choices about how to achieve a goal.  
Some of Tesoros' task-based activities reflect these stipulations, since learners must use Spanish 
communicatively in the role of a detective's assistant who needs to gather and organize clues. Each 
chapter requires learners to complete various tasks based on the accompanying episode. For example, 
writing tasks require students to use Spanish to uncover and maintain biographical information about the 
story's participants and correspond with the detective via (simulated) e-mail. It is questionable whether 
some activities labeled "tasks" will truly involve learners in situated cognition. For example, one duty that 
Reviewed by Joseph Collentine  Review of Tesoros... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 37 
the detective assigns his assistant involves the recreation of a portion of each episode's dialogue. Students 
complete a drag-and-drop activity, matching written segments with their place in the episode's dialogue. 
Yet, while recreating the content of a conversation is reasonably authentic detective work (to the extent 
that detectives often take notes on what they have heard or observed), Tesoros does not make clear the 
non-linguistic (i.e., the situational) purpose of such a task. Future versions of the software could ask 
students to act somehow on the information in the dialogue. For instance, if the detective needed to know 
the whereabouts of a person possessing an important clue, the application could prompt the learner to get 
that information from the dialogue. The student might then need to write a note reporting the person's 
whereabouts. Alternatively, an input-oriented activity might require the learner to choose between one of 
several possible notes to send to the detective. Finally, one of the learners' designated "tasks" is not, by 
definition, task-based at all; it simply requires learners to record and listen to sentences that they repeat 
from the episode.  
TESOROS' INTERACTIVE SOFTWARE FEATURES 
An important CALL design issue as of late is the extent to which an application is "interactive." Tesoros' 
principal author, Robert Blake, has raised concerns about the accuracy of software marketing that claims 
to give students an interactive experience (Blake, 1999). Given that this program does not allow users to 
exchange information either between two people (e.g., in a chat room environment) or between a user and 
the software (e.g., via some sort of Natural LanguageProcessing technology), in all likelihood, Tesoros' 
authors do not mean to equate "interactive task-based activities" with interpersonal interaction. From a 
software engineering perspective, Labour (2001) asserts that there are two important factors by which to 
assess an instructional application's degree of interactivity: a) the frequency and the variety of 
comprehension checks (e.g., Cloze exercises, multiple choice questions, open-ended questions); b) the 
degree to which students can explore content in a non-linear fashion. Tesoros does provide a non-linear 
experience; yet, the comprehension checks could be more engaging.  
Concerning comprehension checks, Tesoros relies heavily on discrete-point types of exercises that require 
mostly one-word answers and that entail matching tasks (i.e., drag-and-drop exercises). For instance, 
several grammar activities prompt students to write sentences employing a targeted structure (e.g., the 
copula). Erroneous or problematic portions of the learner's text automatically change to green. For the 
most part, however, the comprehension checks do not provide the level of linguistic interactivity that the 
Macromedia Director authoring environment in which Tesoros was created could support. As one who 
authors pedagogical materials in Director (see Collentine, 2000), this reviewer believes that the software 
designers have not taken advantage of the algorithms that the Director API and its Lingo scripting 
language offer language instruction.  
Director contains numerous built-in string operations that parse simple and complex phrases. For 
instance, an activity might require a learner to pose questions to a character in the story, targeting the use 
of interrogatives. With a high degree of reliability, code such as that shown in Figure 4 could check the 
learner's response to see if it contains the appropriate interrogative. 
 
Figure 4. String operations checking for presence of interrogative. 
Similarly, a linguist and a software engineer could collaborate to capitalize on various string operations to 
examine whether a particular verb appears in a user response (i.e., whether the response contains the 
targeted semantic information) and then whether that verb appears in the correct form. For example, the 
Reviewed by Joseph Collentine  Review of Tesoros... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 38 
code shown in Figure 5 employs Lingo to examine a user's entire response to a question prompting the 
use of dormir (to sleep). Specifically, it employs built in methods such as "the number of words in 
STRING," "STRING contains STRING," and "offset STRING1, STRING2" (where the result is the 
character position of STRING1 within STRING2) to determine whether the learner's utterance has a form 
of dormir and whether it is inflectionally appropriate. It would not be difficult for an engineer to make 
this code re-usable (i.e., convert it so that it takes parameters representing certain segments of any verb, 
such as is stem and its inflection). 
 
Figure 5. String operations checking for presence and accuracy of dormir 
Regarding linearity, Tesoros allows students to move freely within the various chapters of the story and 
within the various scenes of an episode. Here students can explore in detail a wide variety of forms found 
within the narrative's dialogue. With any number of mouse events, learners can retrieve "graphic" glosses 
of unknown numerous vocabulary items in the dialogue (i.e., in the form of drawings). Users can also 
click on a grammatical form, whereupon they see a "reference card" that reveals the grammatical 
paradigm to which the form belongs and any other related forms. For example, if a student clicks te (the 
second-person, singular, direct-object pronoun), a list of direct-object pronouns appears. These forms are 
not translated into English. Superficially, this design feature might seem like a shortcoming. Yet, this 
approach is likely to lead learners to consider the semantic value or grammatical features of terms that 
they might already know within a paradigm (e.g., a learner may already know what me -- the first-person 
form -- represents). Perhaps by deductive efforts the learner will discern the meaning and/or function of 
te. What will likely be frustrating for some learners, however, is that these reference cards do not contain 
links to parts of the software application where learners can access full lessons on the referenced 
grammatical item (e.g., a grammar lesson treating direct-object pronouns).  
SUMMARY 
The Tesoros CD-ROM package resides on a solid foundation of learning theory and materials design. The 
multimedia materials, in concert with Tesoros' print materials and any teacher-specific tasks, will provide 
learners with opportunities to develop their knowledge of the Hispanic world and the Spanish language in 
an engaging fashion. Furthermore, the interface and the application's software features allow for an 
interactive experience. At the same time, Tesoros is testimony to the need for commercial educational 
software to exploit more fully the tools that authoring environments offer. The designers would do well to 
include specific tasks based on the cultural information provided. Additionally, in future versions of this 
courseware, the inclusion of more task-based activities that parallel real-world demands and linguistic 
interactions that take full advantage of Director's built-in string-parsing operations would likely provide 
learners with a more beneficial experience. 
Reviewed by Joseph Collentine  Review of Tesoros... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 39 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Joseph Collentine is an Associate Professor of Spanish at Northern Arizona University. He has published 
on CALL theory, materials design, and tracking technologies. He also researches the acquisition of 
morphosyntactically complex structures by foreign language learners of Spanish. 
E-mail: Joseph.Collentine@nau.edu 
REFERENCES 
Blake, R. (1999). Nuevos destinos: A CD-ROM for advanced beginning Spanish. CALICO Journal, 
17(1), 9-24. 
Brown, J. S., Collins, A., & Duguid, S. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning. Educational 
Researcher, 18(1), 32-42. 
Bruner, J. S. (1996). The culture of education. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Chapelle, C. (1998). Multimedia CALL: Lessons to be learned from research on instructed SLA. 
Language Learning & Technology, 2(1), 22-34. Retrieved November 15, 2001, from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol2num1/article1/index.html. 
Collentine, J. (2000). Insights into the construction of grammatical knowledge provided by user-behavior 
tracking technologies. Language Learning & Technology, 3(2), 44-57. Retrieved November 15, 2001, 
from http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num2/collentine/index.html. 
Crookes, G., & Gass, S. (Eds.). (1993). Tasks and language learning: Integrating theory & practice. 
Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Labour, M. (2001) Social constructivism and CALL: Evaluating some interactive features of network-
based authoring tools. ReCall, 13(1), 32-46. 
Lafford, P. (2001). Tesoros review. The CALICO Review. Retrieved November 15, 2001, from 
http://astro.temple.edu/~jburston/CALICO/review/tesoros00.htm. 
Long, M. H. (1997). Focus on form in task-based language teaching. Retrieved November 15, 2001, from 
http://www.mhhe.com/socscience/foreignlang/conf/first.htm. 
McLaughlin, B. (1987). Theories of second language learning. London: Edward Arnold.  
Nunan, D. (1989). Designing tasks for the communicative classroom. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Salaberry, R. (1996). A theoretical foundation for the development of pedagogical tasks in computer 
mediated communication. CALICO Journal, 14(1), 5-36.  
