Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num3/doering/
September 2002, Volume 6, Number 3
pp. 127-146
Copyright © 2002, ISSN 1094-3501 127
PRESERVICE ENGLISH TEACHERS ACQUIRING LITERACY
PRACTICES THROUGH TECHNOLOGY TOOLS
Aaron Doering and Richard Beach
University of Minnesota
ABSTRACT
This study analyzes the uses of various technologies to enhance literacy practices within a multi-
genre writing project involving pre-service teachers and middle school students. Twenty-seven
English pre-service teachers, simultaneously enrolled in a methods and a technology course,
collaborated with middle school students using asynchronous Web discussion to develop
hypermedia projects that fostered and promoted the use of technology as a tool. These tools
mediated the uses of various literacy practices within the larger activity system of teacher
education, whose object is to assist teachers to acquire those practices involved in working
effectively with students. Qualitative data were collected through analyzing preservice teachers'
development of Storyspace TM hypermedia projects, the use of asynchronous discussion with their
middle school students, and participation on a WebCT TM bulletin-board discussion. The
hypermedia productions with middle school students helped the preservice teachers learn how to
model the literacy practices of making intertextual or hypertextual links. The Web-based
communication with students helped preservice teachers develop relationships with students in
the absence of face-to-face interaction. And, through participation in the WebCT TM bulletin
board, preservice teachers employed different literacy practices ranging from the display of
spontaneous thinking to engaging in word/role play.
LITERACY PRACTICES AND TECHNOLOGY TOOLS
A preservice teacher and a middle-school student are exchanging messages on a Web-based bulletin
board about a biography project they are working on together on the topic of Princess Diana. The student
posts the following message:
Last night I went on the Internet and found alot of stuff like her will, and her divorce papers and
some poems some people wrote about her. I also found some pictures of when she was younger.
The preservice teacher responds:
Last night I bought a couple of books about Princess Diana that were on sale at the bookstore.
One contains a bunch of short little memories of her written by all sorts of people that knew her
in her lifetime. I will also print at least 2 articles from the Internet that will be helpful (not too
long) for us to think about what we want to write about. See you Wednesday.
This on-line exchange was part of a project involving preservice English teachers working in a semester-
long practicum experience with a group of middle-school students, a project that involved extensive uses
of technology. Their on-line exchange entails uses of literacy practices such as sharing information and
planning activities, practices central to a co-inquiry writing project. This project represents the increasing
use of technology as a tool for linking adults with students in schools, an approach that is highly relevant
to teacher education.
 In many teacher education programs, in addition to their student teaching, preservice teachers are
required to complete practicum experiences that involve minimal face-to-face interaction with students.
Aaron Doering and Richard Beach Preservice English Teachers Acquiring Literacy Practices…
Language Learning & Technology 128
Technology can enhance preservice teachers' ongoing interaction with students, as well as providing
students with positive learning experiences through technology. For example, in the "Fifth Dimension"
after-school computer-mediated program operated by the University of California, San Diego,
participation in an elaborate set of computer games and activities resulted in increased student
engagement, participation, and learning within a community (Cole, 1999). In this program, University
undergraduates serve as "wizards" who guide students through a "maze" of activities based on the
students' zone of proximal development. Estes, Bronack, and Schoeny (1999) found when students and
faculty use both synchronous and asynchronous discussions to communicate about topics within a given
course, a "community of emergent professionals" developed along with positive "student-instructor
relationships" that fostered growth within the class. In a graduate teacher education program at Ball State
University, instructors wanted to move students from a passive into an active role in social
communication within their classes and did so by utilizing asynchronous discussion. Eighty-eight percent
of the students reported that online discussion helped them understand and master course concepts, and
93% indicated that the peer interaction was "very helpful" (Thompson & Nay, 1999). The asynchronous
discussion page they employed increased the chances of student interactions as well as helping the
students "dynamically establish a zone of proximal development anytime of the day by simply connecting
to the page and asynchronously collaborating with others" (Thompson & Nay, 1999, p. 20). Through
participating in these teacher/student exchanges, preservice teachers acquire strategies for interacting with
students.
In addition to teacher/student interactions, preservice teachers need opportunities to share reflections with
each other in a supportive context. Teacher educators are employing Web-based tools to foster online
discussions between preservice teachers regarding issues faced in their programs or in the classroom. The
Inquiry Page housed at the University of Illinois is designed to help teachers share teaching successes and
collective expertise (Bruce & Davidson, 1996; Bruce & Easley, 2000). Teachers engage in mutual inquiry
through their access to resources on teaching and learning, articles, project links, curriculum units, and
content resources. Users of the site are themselves the developers who reconstruct the tool as they use it.
Participants may share video, photos, graphics, and texts showing people engaged in inquiry in different
settings, and access resources involving a dynamic incorporation (using Digital Windmill) of the Open
Directory category on Inquiry Based Learning.
This site represents a new generation of Web design that serves the social needs of preservice teachers to
mutually engage them in co-inquiry about problems, issues, or dilemmas. Research on uses of these sites
indicates the importance of the quality of social interaction in this online co-inquiry. For example, Barab
and Schatz (2001) analyzed the development of a Web-based learning site designed to foster sharing of
inquiry-instruction ideas by Indiana math and science teachers in terms of the components of evolving
activity systems. This Web site was initially designed as a tool by University educators to achieve the
objective of more discussion/sharing about inquiry instruction, with the intended outcome being improved
understanding of inquiry-based instruction. However, given the lack of participation, the University
educators, along with teacher participants, shifted the focus of the Web site to emphasize participants'
mutual collaboration at the site around inquiry-based math/science instruction.
Online interaction also has certain limitations compared with face-to-face interactions (Beach & Lundell,
1998). Analysis of interactions between teacher education candidates and supervisors indicated that
online interaction was a "cool" medium in that it avoided the more direct exchanges of feelings inherent
in face-to-face interactions (Clift, Mullen, Levin, & Larson, 2001). On the other hand, the anonymity
inherent in such interaction allowed for more candid feedback than is often the case in face-to-face
interactions.
While such research demonstrates the efficacy of technology tools in fostering or mediating problem-
solving communication about specific tasks, for example, completion of student teaching, it is also
important to recognize that through technology-mediated experiences, preservice teachers are learning
Aaron Doering and Richard Beach Preservice English Teachers Acquiring Literacy Practices…
Language Learning & Technology 129
various literacy practices associated with literacy development in English instruction. It is primarily
through active participation with technology as opposed to receiving instruction about technology that
preservice teachers learn to recognize the value of technology tools.
In this report, we examine the various literacy practices that were fostered within a multi-genre writing
project involving pre-service teachers and middle school students through the use of  Web-based bulletin-
board exchanges and hypermedia productions. We hope to demonstrate that technology tools can serve to
mediate and foster the development of a range of different literacy practices within a teacher education
program.
TECHNOLOGY TOOLS AS MEDIATING LITERACY PRACTICES
Social-cultural activity theory of learning (Cole, 1996; Engestrom,1987; Wertsch, 1998) posits that
learning occurs through social uses of various tools: language, signs, images, and texts, as well as
technology tools. Activity theorists believe that people learn the uses of these tools by learning how they
are linked to the objects or outcomes driving a specific activity within an "activity system." Russell
(1997) defined an activity system as, "any ongoing, object-directed, historically conditioned, dialectically
structured, tool-mediated human interaction. Some examples are a family, a religious organization, a
school, a discipline, a research laboratory, and a profession" (p. 510).
Central to activity theory of learning is the idea that these tools function to mediate the learning of literacy
practices (Bruce & Levin, 1997). Students learn to use a range of tools to engage in these literacy
practices. Work in the field of "distributed cognition" (Hutchins, 1995) posits that certain practices
associated with an activity become embodied or "distributed" in tools. For example, navigational
instruments are used to capture what is known about navigating the seas. They then serve as tools that
guide a ship based on human knowledge about navigation. Similarly, expert computer systems are built
on experts' knowledge about a certain phenomena such as diagnosing a particular disease. Tools are
therefore used within an activity to function as extensions of certain practices involved in an activity
(Vygotsky, 1978).
Defining Intertextual Connections Leading to Intermediality
One basic literacy practice involves defining intertextual links between texts. Intertextual links are used to
define connections between language, images, characters, topics, or themes based on similarities in
languages, genres, or discourses (Fairclough, 1992; Van Dijk, 1998). These links reflect connections
associated with establishing and reifying institutional power. For example, characters in Dickens' novels
employ discourses of mechandizing, law, religion, science, and government which evoke connections to
the institutions represented by these discourses, what Fairclough describes as "interdiscursivity."
Intertextuality may also involve connections built on social meanings in which participants make
intertextual links in order to build social relationships or connections (Bloome & Egan-Robertson, 1993).
For example, participants in conversation may allude to shared experiences to foster a social bond or an
insider reference to exclude others. Participation in on-line chat exchanges engages early-adolescents in
using intertextual links to foster social interaction (Beach & Lundell, 1997; Lewis & Fabos, 2000).
Making intertextual links between disparate text types or genres helps students engage in what Semali and
Watts-Pailliotet (1999) define as "intermediality": the ability to construct connections between different
sign systems, concepts, and technology tools. Students are engaged in making intertextual links through
multi-genre writing about a topic, an approach currently popular in secondary writing instruction
(Romano, 2000). Multi-genre writing involves using a range of different types of genres -- reports,
poems, letters, diaries, stories, advertisements, field notes, photos, drawings, and so forth -- to explore
different aspects of and perspectives on a topic. Connecting these disparate genre types requires the
Aaron Doering and Richard Beach Preservice English Teachers Acquiring Literacy Practices…
Language Learning & Technology 130
ability to determine how different types of texts yield different perspectives on the same topic or
phenomenon.
One technology tool that mediates the practice of making these multi-genre intertextual links is
hypermedia. Hypermedia functions as a tool by combining hypertext (texts linked together by multilinear
nodes) and multimedia (photos, video, art, audio, text, etc.) to produce an interactive media experience for
participants (Jonassen, 2000; Landow, 1997). Because hypertext allows participants to choose optional
paths through multimedia, participants can both construct and respond to hypermedia interactively.
Students often respond positively to hypermedia texts because it is consistent with their everyday
experiences with multi-modal environments that combine images, animation, video, music, and texts
(Beach & Myers, 2001; Myers & Beach, 2001).
Learning to produce and read hypermedia requires new, alternative ways of processing texts (Fastrez,
2001; Rouet & Levonen, 1996). In an essay about the pedagogical implications of this shift towards
hypermedia, Bolter (1998) argues that hypermedia challenges the traditional emphasis in literacy
instruction on understanding or producing unified, coherent texts based on a definitive, single perspective.
He calls for teaching a "rhetoric of expectations and arrivals" (p. 10) that help students understand where
certain links may take them and how they should respond to where they arrive. And, given the important
role of graphic representations in hypermedia, he posits the need for often-marginalized art and video-
production instruction to help students respond critically to images. These uses of hypermedia also
require students to engage in what Kress and van Leeuwen (1996, 2001) have defined as new modes of
verbal and visual communication, requiring an ability to know how verbal and visual texts function to
enhance each other's meaning.
Producing hypermedia texts using tools such as Storyspace TM, HyperStudioTM, HyperCardTM, and various
Web authoring programs, involves defining intertextual and hypertext links between a range of different
types or genres of texts (McKillop & Myers, 1999; Myers, Hammett, & McKillop, 1998, 2000).1 These
tools serve to mediate the construction of intertextual and hypertextual links (Jonassen, 2000). For
example, StoryspaceTM (Bolter, Smith, & Joyce, 2001) provides users with visual maps of written and
visual texts linked together with lines; produced hypertexts contain hot-links to other texts. Middle-school
(McKillop & Myers, 1999), high school students (Beach & Myers, 2001), and college students (Myers,
Hammett, & McKillop, 1998, 2000) employed StoryspaceTM to represent their responses to literature
through links between photos, music, video clips, and texts. Analysis of the nature and types of links
constructed in these hypermedia productions indicated that the level and sophistication of links varied
according to grade level and ability to engage in critical thinking, as well as the social motivation to
construct these links within the classroom as an activity system. In one of the studies, 16 seventh graders
and 18 preservice teachers used StorySpaceTM to combine original poems, images, and QuickTime TM
movies to explain the various literacy devices used in poetry (McKillop & Myers, 1999). The types of
links employed were analyzed in terms of their functions: An "iconic function" was used to illustrate
another text, an "indexical function" was used to extend a text to show shared meaning, and a "symbolic
function" was used to question the meaning of a text. Most of the seventh graders' links served as iconic
illustrations of ideas in poems. There were far fewer instances of links reflecting critical analysis, for
example, when students juxtaposed texts to generate contested meanings. The undergraduates were more
likely to employ links serving a "symbolic function" that involved critical analysis of texts. This study
suggests that users employ links for different purposes representing different levels of critical thinking.
Other research indicates that, with sufficient training, early adolescents are able to use StoryspaceTM to
construct relatively sophisticated links (Patterson, 2000) based on research on American history and
culture (http://angelfire.com/mi/patter/america.html). Students created hypertext narratives with links to
information about slavery. The results (http://www.npatterson.net/mid.html) suggest that working with
Aaron Doering and Richard Beach Preservice English Teachers Acquiring Literacy Practices…
Language Learning & Technology 131
StoryspaceTM shifted students away from simply rehashing information about persons to understanding
people and events as shaped by historical and cultural forces.
 Hypermedia can also assist in organizing links around central themes or topics in writing instruction.
Analysis of first-year college writing class students' construction of hypertexts indicated that students
structured information around central ideas and illustrated those ideas through links to other texts or
graphics (Duguay, 1999). Using the hypertext as a tool helped students define links between diverse parts
of their hypertext because the links made it visually easier to connect the ideas. Ryan (1999) examined
college students' construction of hypermedia links using HyperCardTM to write a "Literary Journal"
biography of an American author based on a range of different sources and information about that
author's life, as well as comments on other students' work and supplementary material. In contrast to the
essay format that often constrains exploration of alternative, conflicting perspectives, the hypertext format
fostered exploration of alternative, conflicted perspectives about an author's life that resisted closure.
Analysis of the effectiveness of hypertext or hypermedia production requires going beyond comparisons
of linear versus nonlinear productions to consider the particular contexts, user characteristics, design
options, and types of tasks involved in the production (Rouet & Levonen, 1996). The quality and nature
of hypertext links may be a function of participants' sense of the larger object or outcome driving their
participation in an activity (Barab & Schatz, 2001). This suggests the need to examine hypertext or
hypermedia production in terms of the larger context or activity constituting that production.
Posing Questions and Collaborative Exploration of Issues
Another literacy practice involves posing questions related to the collaborative, inquiry-based exploration
of issues (Beach & Myers, 2001; Short & Harste, 1996; Smithson & Dias, 1996). In teacher/student
journal dialogue exchange, teachers pose questions designed to encourage students to elaborate on their
answers or explore other perspectives, modeling heuristics for exploring topics (Peyton & Staton, 1993).
Over time, students internalize these questions and employ them in their own writing, resulting in
increased elaboration in their writing. Synchronous computer-mediated written communication between
middle-school students involved in responding to issues portrayed in stories fostered elaboration of
responses in responses to peers' questions (Beach & Lundell, 1998). Students were also making
intertextual connections to other texts and experiences that served to build social bonds between the
students.
The success of these exchanges requires the ability to adopt a collaborative, exploratory stance that serves
to invite mutual exploration from participants. This requires participants' willingness to be open to
entertaining others' beliefs as valid and rational, something that Davidson (1984) refers to as the
"principle of charity" (p. 126). As Porter (2001) notes, "because communicators cannot assume shared
meanings, they must assume a shared world; if they assume that they share neither a language nor a
world, there would be no possibility for communication" (p. 586). It also requires the ability to frame
statements of beliefs or opinions as tentative hunches or hypotheses, what Davidson refers to as "passing
theories" (p. 45). The concept of "passing theories" refers to the idea that participants are willing to
modify their established "prior theories" to be open to entertaining and integrating others' beliefs into
one's own beliefs (Dasenbrook, 2001). In classroom discussions of literature, when students framed a new
topic in a tentative, exploratory manner, other students were more likely to follow up on that topic than
when the topic was framed in a definitive manner (Beach & Phinney, 1998). In the middle-school
students' synchronous computer-mediated classroom interaction (Beach & Lundell, 1998), as well as on
AOL Buddy Chat exchanges (Lewis & Fabos, 2000), early adolescents learn to adopt a tentative,
brainstorming stance; adopting a rigid, hard-line stance is often socially unacceptable in these exchanges.
In preservice teachers' on-line discussions, how discussions are initially framed has a strong influence on
the level of substantive exchange of ideas (Harrington & Quinn-Leering, 1996).
Aaron Doering and Richard Beach Preservice English Teachers Acquiring Literacy Practices…
Language Learning & Technology 132
Adopting a collaborative, exploratory stance also involves recognizing differences in social status.
Engaging in on-line tutoring requires preservice teachers to balance their status as authority figure with
the need to establish a collaborative, working relationship with students (Brecke & Gebhardt, 2001). As
Tannen (1984) notes, in this negotiation, participants may use conversation as "symmetrical," to maintain
equal status, or, as "asymmetrical," to establish a dominant/subordinate relationship. On-line discussions
serve to minimize some of the nonverbal aspects, therefore reducing "asymmetrical" status differences in
face-to-face interactions (Walther, 1996). Differences in uses of "asymmetrical" practices may also be
related to gender stances (Bergvall & Remlinger, 1996; Gonzales, 2001), with, in some cases, males
assuming a more dominant stance (Kramarae & Taylor, 1993).
Analysis of differences in college students' engagement with synchronous versus asynchronous exchanges
is that, without the time pressure to post messages immediately, participations had more time to reflect on
their messages, resulting in longer, more thoughtful comments than in a synchronous mode (Reed et al.,
2001).
One limitation of on-line exchanges in an asynchronous mode is that participants may simply post
messages without explicitly seeking a response or reply, even when an instructor attempts to facilitate
discussion (Topper, 2001). Or, participations may never receive a response or reply, leading them to opt
out of the discussion. Without models of effective on-line discussion or a sense of obligation to
participate in a discussion, participants may not engage in substantive exchange of ideas.
All of this suggests that the successful participation in on-line exchanges requires preservice teachers to
employ the literacy practice of adopting tentative, exploratory stances and attending to status differences
between preservice teachers and students.
Adopting Multiple Voices and Perspectives
Another basic literacy practice involves adopting multiple voices and perspectives through making
"double-voice" intertextual references or evoking or mimicking the languages or styles from other texts or
worlds (Bakhtin, 1981; Knoeller, 1998). Speakers and writers employ these intertextual references to
establish social relationships and identities (Bloome & Egan-Robertson, 1993). Through interaction with
others, participants construct identities by performing in ways that position them in relation to others'
positions -- "it is in the connection to another's response that a performance takes shape" (McNamee,
1996, p. 150). As Bakhtin argued in his concept of "answerability," people's utterances reflect their
relationships with others' potential, anticipated reactions to their utterances. In participating with a range
of diverse perspectives and voices in a computer-mediated context, students learn to consider alternative
perspectives different from their own (Taylor, 1992). The more open students are to experimenting with
alternative ways of being and knowing, the more open they are to entertaining alternative values, as
opposed to a rigid, monologic perspective on the world (Lewis & Fabos, 2000). Middle-school students
engaged in synchronous exchanges employed parodies of peers, teachers, and school discourses, for
example, mimicking the pedantic language of textbook "discussion questions" (Beach & Lundell, 1998).
This research indicates that a range of different literacy practices can be fostered through uses of
technology tools. This raises the question as to whether technology tools associated with on-line
exchanges and hypermedia production can be used to foster various literacy practices involved in a
project in which preservice teachers were working with middle-school students.
PRESERVICE ENGLISH TEACHERS' PARTICIPATION IN A CO-INQUIRY MULTI-GENRE
WRITING PROJECT
This research project examined the following questions related to preservice teachers' uses of technology
tools to acquire various literacy practices involved in working with middle-school students in a multi-
genre writing project.
Aaron Doering and Richard Beach Preservice English Teachers Acquiring Literacy Practices…
Language Learning & Technology 133
The participants in this project were 27 preservice English teachers enrolled in a composition-methods
course taught by Beach and an instructional technology course taught by Doering in the Fall Semester,
2000 at the University of Minnesota. Preservice teachers (hereafter "teachers") in the composition
methods course learned various strategies for engaging in inquiry-projects and for teaching multi-genre
writing. The purpose of the instructional technology course was to help teachers acquire a set of
technology tools they could employ in teaching English.
In conjunction with these courses, participants were engaged in a semester-long practicum experience in a
magnate middle school that draws a highly diverse student population from a wide range of both urban
and suburban districts in the St. Paul, Minnesota area. The school curriculum is organized around
interdisciplinary inquiry projects in which students are engaged in constructivist exploration of topics
across different subjects. The students represented a wide range of socio-economic backgrounds and
ability levels, with many students testing at a relatively low reading level. The teachers each worked
during weekly visits with one or two students in each of two different class periods.
A Multi-Genre Writing Project
The teachers and middle school students worked together on a multi-genre project involving writing a
biographical sketch, a newspaper report, and a narrative about famous people ranging from Martin Luther
King Jr. to Princess Diana. They employed Inspiration TM as a tool for creating visual maps of different
aspects of their writing and links between these aspects. They conducted research about their person using
the Web and other sources based on questions posed about the person, generating information they used
to write a biographical sketch. Students then wrote a newspaper article about some aspect of the person's
life employing ClarisWorksTM to create a news article format. The project concluded with students
writing a fictional narrative about their person in which they adopted that person's or another person's
first-person point of view to describe some event in the person's life. This required students to imagine the
person's subjective experience in an event, along with descriptions of dialogue; setting; and the person's
feelings, attitudes, and beliefs about the event.
For the final presentations of their multi-genre projects, the students shared the results of their work in
short 10-minute presentations in small groups. Students employed a range of multi-modal presentations
acting out a scene from their lives, a skit, interviewing the person, a piece of art in the person's form, an
overhead, slide presentation, news report/sportscast, and dramatic reading.
Hypermedia Production
As part of their instructional technology class, the teachers created their own hypermedia production
based on their students' multi-genre writing. They used StoryspaceTM (Bolter, Smith, & Joyce, 2001) as a
tool to develop and link multimedia material within windows that can include or be embedded in other
hierarchical windows. (Given the lack of access to computers in the middle school and the expense of the
StoryspaceTM software, the teachers, in discussion with their middle-school students, developed the
hypermedia versions of the multi-genre writing at their University site. In an ideal situation, the teachers
and the students would have developed the hypermedia at the middle school site.)
Constructing the hypermedia production to share with their students involved teachers in a constructivist
approach to teaching in that they had to draw on the information about the individual to construct their
own interpretation of the person's life through making intertextual links between texts, images, and
sounds. This change in learning when using hypermedia sometimes causes problems as learners struggle
to integrate information, themes, and stances into a hypertext document (Jonassen, 2000). To explore their
knowledge as related to their audience, they initially developed concept maps using InspirationTM to
represent their knowledge prior to creating the hypermedia production. These concept maps were used as
guides to help the teachers choose what links they believed were important as well as what types of media
they may have wanted to employ (graphics, video, sounds) to represent their knowledge in StorySpaceTM.
Aaron Doering and Richard Beach Preservice English Teachers Acquiring Literacy Practices…
Language Learning & Technology 134
The hypermedia productions were analyzed by the investigators in terms of the types of texts -- images,
written texts, sounds, and so forth -- teachers included in their productions, as well as the types of links
they employed in connecting these texts.
Web-Based Teacher/Student Communication
As part of a federally-funded technology-development program, an asynchronous Web-based
teacher/student communication site was created to foster communication between the teachers and
students during the time when they were not working with each other in school. To address potential
security and privacy issues, the middle school students would click on the name of their assigned
preservice teacher and then engage in conversation about their projects or personal matters. Only the
pupils assigned to the teachers could access those particular teachers. Because the communications were
asynchronous, teachers and the middle school students could post and respond to questions relating to
their cooperation on the project at any time.
These exchanges served to create a sense of "situatedness," commonality, interdependency, and
infrastructure essential for creating a computer-mediated community of practice (Hung & Chen, 2001).
The middle school students and the preservice teachers were able to participate in the "sociocultural
practices of a community" (Lave & Wenger, 1991, p. 29), as they were situated in a rich context of
practice that involved sharing information about each other while working on completing the biography
project. They were therefore sharing in a common activity that required their joint efforts in completing
the project. They were dependent on each other: the students providing the materials for the projects and
the teachers providing the technical support involved in the hypermedia production. And, they were
operating within an infrastructure that involved a sense of accountability to completing the project.
Transcripts of the Web-based communications were analyzed in terms of the amount of participation as
determined by the number of comments employed, defined in terms of a complete "thought unit," a
procedure employed in research on on-line communication (Schallert, Reed, Dodson, Benton, &
Boardman, 2001; Reed et al., 2001). Each "thought-unit" was defined as constituting reference to one
particular idea or thought. A constant comparative method (Glaser & Strauss, 1967) was employed to
guide the development of the significant categories and patterns in the data in terms of the types of topics
discussed and the literacy practices employed. The types of topics and practices were then cross-checked
with an experienced English teacher for further verification (Merriam, 1998). The interjudge-agreement
rate was 92 % confirming the selection of the topics and practices.
WebCT TM Bulletin-Board Discussion
The teachers also participated in an asynchronous discussion on the course WebCT TM site. For this site,
teachers were asked by the course instructor to make at least one posting a week; they were told that they
could respond to topics or issues in the course discussions, readings, or practicum experiences, as well as
other topics outside the course. Other than these minimal requirements, the instructor did not attempt to
direct the discussion through specific assignments. The instructor hoped that through participation in this
bulletin board exchange, students would gain some experience with uses of a bulletin board as a learning
tool for use in their own future teaching. The instructor also hoped that the students would acquire an
understanding of how writing is driven by social purposes or needs related to participating in a
community constituted through a bulletin board exchange. Transcripts of the WebCT TM discussion were
analyzed in terms of the types of literacy practices employed in the exchanges using the same analysis
methods employed with analysis of the teacher/student interactions.
RESULTS
Hypermedia Productions
Aaron Doering and Richard Beach Preservice English Teachers Acquiring Literacy Practices…
Language Learning & Technology 135
Development of the Initial and Following Nodes  Analysis of the hypermedia productions based on the
students multi-genre writing projects indicated that 80 % of the teachers began their multimedia
development with a picture of the person with links to the "major nodes" or events of the person's life. It
was these major events that lent themselves to links where the students explained the person in more
detail using various media. For example, one student studying Martin Luther King, Jr. began his
multimedia development with a picture of Martin Luther King, Jr. with four links underneath the picture
leading to nodes about "Enemies and Resistance," "Awards and Supporters," "Biographical Information,"
and "Civil Rights Efforts." Each one of these four major nodes had a short written description that
explained Martin Luther King, Jr.'s relationship to each node. In the "Civil Rights Efforts" node, the
teacher developed five sub-nodes that described Martin Luther King Jr.'s efforts. These nodes were "Sit-in
Demonstrations," "Passive Resistance," "Montgomery Bus Boycott," "Writings," and "Marches and
Speeches." Within each of these nodes, the teacher used images, texts, or clips to represent the civil rights
theme. Within the "Writings" node, the teacher listed and included writings from Martin Luther King, Jr.'s
books. These writings were obtained through searching the Internet and incorporated within a separate
"exploding" StoryspaceTM node. To represent the "Montgomery Bus Boycott," the teacher decided to use
a video clip she also obtained from the Internet. And to represent the "Passive Resistance" theme, she
scanned in pictures that were obtained through a family trip. She further expanded the node as she made
links to Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.'s quote in Parting the Waters: America in the King Years, 1954-63
(Branch, 1988) where he stated, "We're going to work with grim and bold determination -- to gain justice
on buses in this city." The quote was followed by a timeline to illustrate the relationship between Dr.
King's request for justice and the events that followed. Through the development of these links, the
teachers were placing a wide range of media texts into a historical/cultural context within their
productions that allowed them to adopt a critical stance.
The teacher showed a clear pattern of critical thinking as nodes illustrated the teacher's thinking
surrounding the topics John F. Kennedy, Fidel Castro, Cuba, Bay of Pigs, and the Cuban Missile Crisis.
Links to text and images were developed to show how relations between the United States and Cuba
worsened when Castro's government took control of oil refineries owned by American and British firms.
This node development was further refined as images and sounds were employed to show when
Eisenhower granted the CIA permission to secretly train Cuban exiles for an invasion of Cuba and how
Kennedy learned of this operation 9 days after his election. The analysis of the Cuban Missile Crisis was
shown as students linked from the Cuban Missile Crisis node to a map showing where Cuba's missiles
were located and the extent in miles they could have reached within the interior United States. This is just
one example how teachers integrated a wide range of media texts into their productions, frequently
selecting texts most readily available from the Internet using multiple sources from both United States
and world perspectives.
 Other teachers chose to limit their biography to detailed portrayals of a specific period in a person's life
because information about that period was more available and they preferred to develop a specific aspect
of a person's life. As one teacher indicated in her learning log, she would rather research the person's life
"using depth, rather than breadth, and develop an understanding that was more meaningful."
All teachers used digital pictures copied from the Internet or scanned from books. Thirty percent of the
teachers also used QuickTimeTM movies obtained from the Internet that showed the event in detail. As
they indicated in their learning logs, teachers believed that these video clips effectively conveyed ideas
they wanted to portray about their person. In addition to pictures and movies, 20% of the teachers used
sound clips that they prerecorded using SoundEdit Pro TM or that they captured from the Internet to add
narration to their project.
Through these hypermedia productions based on the students' writing, the teachers were using multi-
media links to model uses of technology for their students as a tool for portraying a range of different
biographical elements of their subjects' lives. Because the clips were extracted from related historical or
Aaron Doering and Richard Beach Preservice English Teachers Acquiring Literacy Practices…
Language Learning & Technology 136
cultural contexts and events, teachers were going beyond simply presenting biographical information to
examining individuals' lives as constituted by participation in larger historical and cultural contexts.
Drawing on material portraying these contexts, for example, the world of the segregated South in
portraying Martin Luther King, teachers represented individuals in terms of the forces shaping their lives.
This led them to interrogate individuals' practices as challenging or failing to acknowledge these
prevailing historical or cultural forces. For example, students who looked at the Montgomery Bus Boycott
did not look only at why Rosa Parks did not give up her seat, but they made links to the larger activity
system reflecting the many events surrounding the Civil Rights Movement such as the Civil Rights Act,
Martin Luther King's "I Have a Dream" speech, and Lyndon B. Johnson being elected president.
Analysis of the Links Employed  The 27 projects indicated that the most common link use was directly
from a picture or words placed under a picture that described themes for analysis. For example, when
placing a picture of the "Montgomery Bus Boycott" in a node, a reader would click on the picture to move
to an explanation of the boycott and then link back to another node with another theme when finished.
Sixty-five percent of the teachers used this approach of simply linking images and texts without use of
hypertext links from individual words.
The other 35% of the teachers used hypertext links in which certain words were linked to other words or
texts. One teacher described the life of John F. Kennedy and made links to words that he found most
difficult for a reader to outside nodes that either described the word through text, a graphic, or both. These
were words teachers believed would improve the students' reading experience. Of the 35% that used
hypertext links for development, over 80% of them had five or more links within each biographical
description. The words that were most commonly linked were those that the teacher believed would
provide background knowledge for readers assumed to have no previous knowledge of the person. For
example, the links in the nodes on John F. Kennedy included the Cuban Missile Crisis, Bay of Pigs,
Marilyn Monroe, Fidel Castro, and Camelot. These words were linked to additional nodes that explained
John F. Kennedy's relationship to each of these nodes. This reflects a rhetorical awareness of their
middle-school student audience's level of prior knowledge.
While some of the links represented what McKillop & Myers (1999) describe as "iconic" or "indexical"
functions in that they were used simply to illustrate a text, the teachers more commonly employed links
for a "symbolic function" to interrogate or challenge idealized or mythic biographical versions of
individuals' lives. This demonstrates that creating hypertext links as a literacy practice can contribute to
developing a critical stance. In making connections, teachers created dissonant comparisons between
positive versus negative aspects of an individual's life, connections that implied contradictions or
problematic aspects of their lives. For example, links to the "Bay of Pigs" or "Marilyn Monroe" served to
challenge the idealized image of John F. Kennedy. Creating these links juxtaposed disparate texts in ways
that reflected a critical analysis of individuals.
Web-Based Communications Between Teachers and Students
Analysis of the Web-based communication between teachers and students indicated high levels of
participation. The students expressed a high level of engagement with this site, expressing disappointment
when they did not receive responses from their teachers. Given the infrequency of face-to-face meetings
during the practicum, this Web-based communication served to enhance the quality of teacher/student
relationships and provide for frequent collaboration on the project. Through their exchanges, teachers and
students were acquiring a number of literacy practices.
Building Personal Relationships  Analysis of the Web-based communication between teachers and
students indicated that the teachers initiated all the comments on the asynchronous discussion board. The
initial conversations during the first two weeks of the semester typically began with three-to-five sentence
personal anecdotes that served to help establish a personal relationship between the teacher and students.
The interaction and writing style during these initial exchanges was relatively formal.
Aaron Doering and Richard Beach Preservice English Teachers Acquiring Literacy Practices…
Language Learning & Technology 137
Many of the middle school students described how they enjoyed the ability to communicate on-line to
build a better relationship with the teacher before they started the co-inquiry multimedia project. One
student said, "because we're able to communicate online, it was easier to get to know the practicum
teacher because it gave me more time to think about what I would want to know from them and how I
might want to answer their questions." Another student said, "I was always excited to check the
discussion area when I got home so I could see if my practicum teacher had sent me a message back." The
middle-school students expressed some disappointment to their teachers when the teacher did not respond
immediately to their posting, an indication of their interest in hearing from their teacher.
In the following example, a teacher and student used the discussion board to establish a personal
relationship.
Getting to know you
From: Middle School Student A
Date: 9/13/00
Time: 2:12:02 PM
Comments
1. How old are you? 2. What subject of teaching do you want to teach? 3. Why do you want to
teach that subject? 4. When did you decide to be a teacher? 5. Whats your favorite animal? Why?
6. Whats your favorite color? Why?
Re: Getting to know you
From: Teacher A
Date: 9/13/00
Time: 6:00:47 PM
Comments
This year I hit the big 3-0. I am sure to you 30 sounds really old, but in some ways I feel like high
school ended just moments ago. I am planning to teach high school English. My 1st college
degree was pre-med, but I realized by the time I was ready to graduate that I didn't really want to
become a doctor. I wanted to become a teacher. Both of my parents teach, so perhaps it rubbed
off on me somehow. Surprisingly, both of them told me not to go into teaching. Why English? I
think it is because I love reading and write fairly well and want to help others get enjoyment from
these two things. Also, I want to stay in touch with young adults and look forward to having
summers off to relax and spend time with family.
My favorite animal...dogs. My very favorite animal... my old silver schnauzer named Gretzky.
My family had to put him to sleep a couple of years ago because his kidneys were failing, but
now we have his son Max. Gretzky is probably one of the coolest things about my life so far.
Favorite color...lately it has been orange. I used to hate orange but now I really like the brightness
and energy it emits. I have a concert t-shirt from the Oasis show that is orange and I really want
to order a pair of orange leather pants from a catalog, but perhaps that would be a bit much.
Now tell me some things about you. What is your name? If you could go to another country
where would you go and why? Who is your favorite musician? What do you do for fun?
Nice chatting with you.
Aaron Doering and Richard Beach Preservice English Teachers Acquiring Literacy Practices…
Language Learning & Technology 138
These exchanges served the important function of building a social relationship between the teacher and
student, a relationship essential for both their face-to-face and on-line collaboration. When responses
were elicited on research progress, 85% of sharing included Internet addresses where students had found
information they believed could contribute to the final project. Teachers and students were learning the
literacy practice of using intertextual links to establish social relationships (Bloome & Egan-Robertson,
1993). In the example above, the teacher makes references to experiences with pets, t-shirts, and a rock
band, references that serve to build a social relationship based on what the teacher assumes are familiar,
shared experiences. And, in sharing Internet addresses, teachers and students were defining ways to
establish a social working relationship. Moreover, in formulating their messages rhetorically within an
early-adolescent's zone of proximal development (Vygotsky, 1978), teachers were learning the literacy
practice of framing communication in ways that are consistent with their audience's developmental level.
Planning and Development As illustrated by the initial example of work on the Princess Diana project, as
the semester progressed, the conversations focused more on planning and developing the multi-genre
writing project. While the students normally posed a topic that was directly related to the media and the
popular culture, many of the teachers encouraged students to select topics that they found, as one teacher
noted, "would be more meaningful and easier to obtain quality information" on. During these exchanges,
the sentences became much shorter than during the initial exchanges, with incomplete one to two sentence
responses. The interaction and writing style also became more informal as participants were mutually
engaged in a shared activity designed to produce a final report.
The discussion board served to support the teachers and students in sharing ideas about the content of
their multi-genre writing project, and this sharing involved literacy practices such as posing questions. In
the exchanges, teachers frequently posed questions to students regarding further elaboration about their
projects, questions that they may then have internalized to think about different aspects of their projects.
In this case, the teachers were learning to stretch the borders of the students' zone of proximal
development by challenging them to develop novel ways of thinking about their writing topic.
The assignment of working with two to four students, each of whom was creating a different project was
a bit overwhelming for the teachers. The teachers often did not have time during their face-to-face
meetings to respond to all of their students' questions. They and their stuents therefore used the discussion
board to address questions related to the projects. The discussion board also helped the teachers monitor
the students' progress on the project to insure that they completed it on time. Some of the teachers
commented on the convenience of being able to send multiple messages to the middle school students and
determine their progress through their responses. As one teacher noted, "I am able to keep in constant
communication with them up to the days I meet with them. We are then able to get much more
accomplished as we have been communicating and know what the plan is when we will see each other."
In sharing message, teachers and students were also creating a paper trail that allowed them to refer back
to decisions about work on their projects.
In the exchanges about the multi-genre project, the teachers were more likely to dominate the discussion.
Seventy percent of the conversation focused on direction and control comments where the teachers were
guiding the students in their research, asking them about the progress they were making on research, or
reminding them what was due the next time they were able to meet. One possible explanation of this
disparity was that the students had minimal access to computers in their school and simply did not have
the time to write extensive answers. While students could also access the site from their homes, many
students did not have computer access in their homes. Another factor may have been that some students
had minimal writing skills, limiting the amount they were able to write. The fact that the students wrote
longer entries when they were discussing their own lives and shorter entries when they were discussing
their projects suggests that teachers considering employing this tool need to include a focus on
autobiographical topics, as well as topics related to tasks.
Aaron Doering and Richard Beach Preservice English Teachers Acquiring Literacy Practices…
Language Learning & Technology 139
Analysis of the exchange based on gender differences indicated that male and female students who
collaborated with female teachers had a 35% greater quantity of discussions overall than with male
teachers. Students were also 52% more likely to employ what was categorized as "personal" topics with
female teachers than with male teachers. There was also a difference within the student group; female
students communicated more frequently and also contributed more project-related information than their
male counterparts.
Analyzing all of the asynchronous discussions, teachers employed 73% of "thought units," while students
contributed only 27%. Overall, the focus of the discussions moved from initial personal conversations to
project-related conversation during the middle of the semester to personal conversation at the end of the
semester. In the middle of the semester, the fact that the participants were mutually engaged in working
on the biography project provided some reason for sharing messages regarding their joint efforts on
completing the project. From an activity theory perspective (Cole, 1996; Engestrom, 1987), participating
in a shared activity designed to achieve the outcome of completing the project provided a reason for using
the exchanges: The teachers and students recognized the value of a technology tool for accomplishing
their purposes. They learned to perceive the value of Web-based communication as a tool for engaging in
collaborative co-inquiry. Rather than having to wait for their weekly visits, they could contact each other
at any time regarding issues associated with completing the project. This suggests the importance of
organizing Web-based communication around a shared activity.
Teachers' WebCTTM Bulletin Board Communication
Analysis of the topics addressed in the WebCTTM class bulletin board exchanges between teachers
indicated that teachers used the exchanges to discuss a range of different issues, particularly those
associated with education: teachers as role models, vouchers, censorship, testing, and so forth. And,
teachers shared their experiences with working in the middle-school practicum, as well as personal
experiences. In doing so, they employed a number of literacy practices that served to foster productive
exchanges such as spontaneous thinking, inviting others' participation, engaging in word/role play, and
self reflection.
Display of Spontaneous Thinking Teachers used the postings to openly think through a topic or issue,
creating a written record of their unfolding thought. Rather than formulate their ideas prior to writing and
then write an organized statement, teachers were spontaneously writing out their thoughts in a free-
writing mode. They would then entertain alternative, even contradictory perspectives as they formulated
their thoughts in a posting. For example, in discussing the issue of teaching expository versus narrative
forms to middle-school students, one teacher, responding to another teacher's belief in the value of
narrative writing, noted,
As we discussed in class earlier, there is clearly something going on with my middle-school
student that makes the narrative form a richer expressive medium for him. I will, of course, take a
look at your link. Also, I would like to see more of the research on this. The stuff we've gotten in
the program points specifically to class-differentiated processing. But your post suggests that
there is also research pointing to a broader conclusion. But before I do I wanted to affirm your
idea about narrative processes superseding linear logical processes in decision-making. I know
for myself that the work that I do when I am reflecting on a difficult problem often resembles a
conversation more than a reasoned, bulleted list. I wonder where conversational dialogue fits in
this paradigm?
The spontaneous nature of his thinking is evident in the fact that he poses questions to himself ("I wonder
where conversational dialogue fits in this paradigm?") which then stimulate him to further thinking about
the issue. He also openly reports that "I shouldn't say more 'til I've read some," implying that he will
continue to think further about the topic.
Aaron Doering and Richard Beach Preservice English Teachers Acquiring Literacy Practices…
Language Learning & Technology 140
The fact that these teachers explicitly shared how they are grappling with an issue provided other
participants with a window on the reasoning employed, allowing others to react to that reasoning. The
informality that characterized much of exchanges provided a window into how teachers were thinking
about issues, revealing the conflicting perspectives shaping their decisions. While such informality is
certainly found in face-to-face conversations, the Web-based exchanges allow participants to reflect on
written records of each other's thinking, reflecting that leads to substantive reactions often lacking in face-
to-face conversation (Walther, 1996).
Inviting Others' Participation The teachers commended each other for their comments and invited others
to participate or to respond to their postings. The positive comments and invitations implied that they
valued the need for others' perspectives as useful, rational beliefs about a topic, an enactment of
Davidson's (1984) principle of charity. For example, in discussing the topic of future employment in the
job market, one student reacted to another student's description of an interview with a school
administrator about her hiring practices:
I liked what you said here…. First of all, way to ask a relevant questions [sic]. Along with finding
hope in her answer, I'd like to pose an equally practical question. When and how should we be
going about searching out opportunities for our own future employment. I am lucky to have a few
friends in high places when it comes to the job-search issue, but I think it would be wonderful to
be getting some direction on this subject in class. Anyone else have any insights or information
for me???
By framing their postings in a tentative, exploratory manner -- as "passing theories" (Davidson, 1984) --
teachers were more likely to evoke responses than if they posted messages in a definitive mode. Adopting
a tentative stance invited or evoked the need for further verification -- agreements or disagreements --
from their peers. For example, in discussing the topic of grading writing, one teacher formulated his
position on the need to provide feedback during the entire composing process:
So, my two cents: I kind of see grading as a process that begins when the paper is assigned and
ends when we hand back that last draft. Plus, it bears great weight (some insist that grading
should be done away with in comp classes) in terms of the whole process, their process, of
addressing and completing a writing assignment. Does this make sense to anyone?
In his positing, he hedges his comments with words such as "my two cents" and "kind of see." He also
notes that others hold different perspectives on grading. And, his final invitation, "Does this make sense
to anyone?" implies that he himself is trying to "make sense" out of his own ideas about evaluating
writing. His invitation evoked a number of reactions in which teachers mutually explored the issue of
evaluating writing.
Again, the informality of a Web-based exchange served to encourage participants to adopt more tentative,
exploratory stances that invite or evoke reactions from others (Beach & Phinney, 1998).
Engaging in Word/Role Play The teachers also frequently engaged in "double-voiced" word play
(Bakhtin, 1981), mimicking or parodying persons or discourses. Within the course, the teachers had also
participated in a large-group role-play based on the 2000 Presidential election in which they adopted
various roles and exchanged written memos with each other. They compared their WebCTTM exchange
with this role-play session in terms of using written texts to engage in verbal play through writing. As one
teacher noted,
The experiences with WebCT has [sic] really opened up my ideas on communication and
possibilities therein…I think both WebCT and the role play offer something priceless to learning,
i.e., play. It's learning of and appreciation for multiplicity. There were so many contexts
overlapping in that classroom that multiple uses and abuses are inevitable, and, I think,
productive. The same is true for the WebCT.
Aaron Doering and Richard Beach Preservice English Teachers Acquiring Literacy Practices…
Language Learning & Technology 141
This dialogic word-play included intertextual references to stances and discourses operating in the group
and the teacher education program. By mimicking or parodying the language of these stances or
discourses, student were formulating oppositional stances reflecting their own beliefs and ideas about
teaching and learning. All of this served to enhance their appreciation for the complexity of teaching.
Self-Reflection on the Process Teachers also explicitly reflected on or described their stances or attitudes
adopted in their postings. In some cases, they apologized for repeating themselves, making overly-
assertive statements, or sharing complaints. For example, one student noted: "Whoops, I just browsed
back up the thread and realized I'm repeating myself!" After posting a long message, one student
commented, "Sorry to drop such a wide load here on the CT, but it was cathartic."
They also valued the fact that they could openly express their opinions within their group without
necessarily being concerned about offending others. One student noted, "could you just imagine if we
were afraid of speaking our souls for fear of offending someone. Our class would be pretty damn quiet if
that were the case."
An international student from Korea noted that the site served to foster development of open expression,
something she finds lacking in her Korean student peers: "we are too concerned about hurting others
people's feelings to think out loud…I think Korean students have to learn to be more assertive in order to
exchange their thoughts." She noted that she was more intimidated by-face-to-face large-group discussion
and less intimidated by sharing her emotional concerns on the bulletin board.
Teachers also noted some of the difficulties specific to participating on a bulletin board discussion. One
teacher commented on the difficulty of conveying her attitudes: "I don't know exactly how or why, but
threaded discussions transform words. Unless the writer is incredibly skilled, the tone is hard (if not
impossible) to communicate. Perhaps it is the instantaneous nature of it that is its main draw and
downfall…? Her comment reflects one of the limitations of on-line communication: the lack of the non-
verbal components inherent in face-to-face conversation (Walther, 1996).
Construction of a Student-Driven Site The teachers therefore used their exchanges on the WebCTTM
bulletin board discussion as a tool for sharing and coping with various issues associated with teaching.
Teachers could garner perspectives and advice on issues from a range of different perspectives. They then
began to value the site as a support system for coping with problems. All of this occurred with little or no
deliberate intervention by the instructor, who assumed that by having the teachers pose their own
questions and problems, they were more likely to perceive the bulletin board as driven by their own
framing of issues and problems. While there is considerable debate about the need for instructor control
and intervention in on-line discussions (Topper, 2001), this suggests that for some groups, such
intervention may not be necessary. It may be the case that when participants perceive a site as constructed
primarily by themselves, they experience a sense of commonality and interdependency (Hung & Chen,
2001) not found in a teacher-led site.
SUMMARY
The results of this study indicate that the teachers and middle-school students were employing the
technology tools of hypermedia production and Web-based communication to engage in literacy practices
involved in their multi-genre writing project and in communicating with each other (see Table 1). These
tools served to mediate the uses of various literacy practices within the larger activity system of teacher
education, whose object is to assist teachers to acquire those practices involved in working effectively
with students.
Aaron Doering and Richard Beach Preservice English Teachers Acquiring Literacy Practices…
Language Learning & Technology 142
Table 1. Literacy Practices Through Technology Tools
Literacy Practice Technology Tool(s)
defining intertextual connections
hypermedia based tool = storyspace, hyperstudio, Web
development, inspiration
posing questions & collaborative
exploration of issues
computer-mediated written communication between students
and teachers - synchronous or asynchronous
adopting multiple voices and
perspectives
asynchronous computer-mediated written communication
between students
Adopting a collaborative, inquiry stance asynchronous computer-mediated classroom interaction
The teachers used the InspirationTM and StoryspaceTM tools to define intertextual and hypertextual
connections between the texts included in their multi-genre writing project. These hypermedia tools
allowed teachers to combine written texts, images, sounds, and video to portray the characteristics of a
person in a Web-based production for sharing with others, including their students. Teachers and students
learned to employ links to historical and cultural contexts leading them to critical interrogation of
biographical information (McKillop & Myers, 1999). They were also learning the literacy practice of
using intertextual links to establish social connections with others.
Knowing how to communicate in a multi-modal format using computer tools is becoming an essential
literacy practice (Kress & van Leeuwen, 1996, 2001). Students also need to know why they are using
these tools to achieve certain objects or outcomes in an activity (Cole, 1996; Wertsch, 1998). They are
more likely to acquire an understanding of the uses of these tools as participants in a community of
practice organized around a shared activity such as the biography co-inquiry project described in this
study.
The teachers and students used the Web-based communication site as a tool for establishing social
relationships and for planning their multi-genre writing projects. This site provided teachers with
continuous, on-going interaction with their students, something often lacking in practicum experiences
with infrequent school visits. The written exchange allowed teachers to model a range of literacy practices
-- building personal relationships through intertextual links, mutual planning and development based on
shared information and question-asking -- practices students then demonstrated in their own responses.
One problematic aspect of the exchange was the fact that the teachers dominated the interactions by a
ratio of four to one. While this may have been a function of student access to computers or their level of
writing ability, it may also have been simply a function of novice teachers' working with students for the
first time in their careers in a relatively unfamiliar computer-mediated site. There were also marked
gender differences, with female teachers eliciting more participation from students than male teachers
through uses of "personal" connections, suggesting the need for teachers of both genders to employ such
connections. This suggests the need for training teachers to conduct on-line exchanges as equally
important to training in leading and facilitating oral discussions. Such training should examine issues of
teacher domination, especially as related to gender. And, the training should help teachers define the
range of literacy practices students are acquiring through participation in the interaction.
Through their participation on the WebCTTM bulletin board, teachers employed the literacy practices of
displaying spontaneous thinking, inviting others' participation, adopting an exploratory stance, engaging
in word/role play, and reflecting on the process. They were also recognizing how participating in an
active, on-line community helped them explore issues and concerns related to education. And, they also
perceived the site as constructed through their own participation without the need for instructor direction,
Aaron Doering and Richard Beach Preservice English Teachers Acquiring Literacy Practices…
Language Learning & Technology 143
enhancing their sense of communality and interdependency (Hung & Chen, 2001) as a community of
practice. Given this experience, they may then be more likely to participate in similar Web sites or
employ such sites in their own teaching. And, through that participation, they were employing a number
of literacy practices that they could model as participants in teacher/student Web-communication. All of
this points to ways in which technology serves to mediate both preservice teachers' acquisition of teaching
strategies and the development of literacy practices.
NOTE
1. One of the issues, however, in the uses of these commercial hypermedia tools is that of access.
StoryspaceTM and HyperStudioTM, for example, are relatively expensive commercial products.
Furthermore, sophisticated hypermedia production often requires access to high-end computers, scanners,
or digital recording equipment. These financial considerations remain a major challenge for implementing
wide-spread use of these tools in schools.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Aaron Doering is a Lecturer of Instructional Systems and Technology at the University of Minnesota. His
research focuses on preservice teacher education with emphasis on teaching and learning with
hypermedia and geographic information systems. His most recent publications include Impact of
Asynchronous Discussion on Preservice Teacher Education.
E-mail: adoering@umn.edu
Richard Beach is Professor of English Education at the University of Minnesota. He is the co-author of
Inquiry-Based English Instruction and Writing to Learn, Using Journals in the Classroom; and author of
A Teacher's Introduction to Reader Response Theories. His reasearch focuses on response to literature
and the media.
E-mail: rbeach@umn.edu
REFERENCES
Bakhtin, M. (1981). The dialogic imagination. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Barab, S., & Schatz, S. (2001). Using activity theory to conceptualize online community and using online
community to conceptualize theory. Paper presented at the American Educational Research Association,
Seattle, WA.
Beach, R., & Lundell, D. (1998). Early adolescents' use of computer-mediated communication in writing
and reading. In D. Reinking, M. McKenna, L. Labbo, & R. Kieffer (Eds.), Handbook of literacy and
technology: Transformations in a post-typographic world (pp. 93-112). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Beach, R., & Myers, J. (2001). Inquiry-based English instruction: Engaging students in life and
literature. New York: Teachers College Press.
Beach, R., & Phinney, M. (1998). Framing literary text worlds through real-world social negotiations.
Linguistics and Education, 9(2), 159-198.
Bergvall, V., & Remlinger, K. (1996). Reproduction, resistance and gender in educational discourse: The
role of critical discourse analysis. Discourse & Society, 7(4), 453-479.
Bloome, D., & Egan-Robertson, A. (1993). The social construction of intertextuality in a classroom
reading and writing lessons. Reading Research Quarterly, 28, 304-333.
Aaron Doering and Richard Beach Preservice English Teachers Acquiring Literacy Practices…
Language Learning & Technology 144
Bolter, J. D. (1998). Hypertext and the question of visual literacy. In D. Reinking, M. McKenna, L.
Labbo, & R. Kieffer (Eds.), Handbook of literacy and technology: Transformations in a post-typographic
world (pp. 3-14). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bolter, J. D., Smith, J., & Joyce, M. (2001). Storyspace. Cambridge, MA: Eastgate Systems Inc.
Branch, T. (1988). Parting the waters: American in the King years, 1954-63. New York: Simon and
Schuster.
Brecke, C., & Gebhardt, N. (2001). Fear and teaching on the hybrid network. Paper presented at the
meeting of the National Council of Teachers of English, Baltimore, MD.
Bruce, B. C., & Davidson, J. (1996). An inquiry model for literacy across the curriculum. Journal of
Curriculum Studies, 28(3), 281-300.
Bruce, B. C., & Easley, J. A., Jr. (2000). Emerging communities of practice: Collaboration and
communication in action research. Educational Action Research, 8(2), 243-259.
Bruce, B. C., & Levin, J. (1997). Educational technology: Media for inquiry, communication,
construction, and expression. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 17(1), 79-101.
Clift, R., Mullen, L., Levin, J., & Larson, A. ( 2001). Technologies in contexts: Implications for teacher
education. Teaching and Teacher Education, 17, 33-50.
Cole, M. (1996). Cultural psychology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Cole, M. (1999). Cultural psychology: Some general principles and a concrete example. In Y. Engestrom,
R. Miettinen, & R. Punamaki (Eds.), Perspectives on activity theory (pp. 87-106). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Dasenbrook, R. W. (2001). Truth and consequences: Intentions, conventions, and the new thematics.
University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press.
Davidson, D. (1984). Inquiries into truth and interpretation. Oxford, England: Clarendon Press.
Duguay, K. (1999). The pedagogical and electronic contexts of composing in hypermedia. In C. DeWitt,
& K. Strasma (Eds.), Contexts, Intertexts, and Hypertexts (pp. 15-38). Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press.
Engestrom, Y. (1987). Learning by expanding: An activity theoretical approach to developmental
research. Helsinki: Orienta-Konsultit. [Online]. Available at http://communication.ucsd.edu/MCA/Paper/
Engestrom/expanding/toc.htm
Estes, T., Bronack, S., & Schoeny, Z. (1999). Creating optimized learning environments: A course using
interactive Web elements. Paper presented at the Society for Information Technology & Teacher
Education International Conference, San Antonio, TX.
Fairclough, N. (1992). Discourse and social change. Cambridge, England: Polity Press.
Fastrez, P. (2001). Characteristic(s) of hypermedia and how they relate to knowledge. Education Media
International, 38(2/3), 101-110.
Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory. Chicago: Aldine Publishing.
Gonzales, M. (2001). Networking gender, voice, and technology. Paper presented at the meeting of the
National Council of Teachers of English, Baltimore, MD.
Harrington, H., & Quinn-Leering, K. (1996). Considering teaching's consequences. Teaching and
Teacher Education, 12, 591-607.
Aaron Doering and Richard Beach Preservice English Teachers Acquiring Literacy Practices…
Language Learning & Technology 145
Hung, D., & Chen, D. (2001). Situated cognition, Vygotskian thought and learning from the communities
of practice perspective: Implications for the design of Web-based e-learning. Education Media
International, 38(1), 3-12.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jonassen, D. (2000). Computers as mindtools for schools: Engaging critical thinking. Columbus, OH:
Prentice Hall.
Knoeller, C. (1998). Voicing ourselves: Whose words we use when we talk about books. Albany, NY:
SUNY Press.
Kramarae, C., & Taylor, H. (1993). Women and men on electronic networks: A conversation or a
monlogue? In H. Taylor, C. Kramarae, & D. Ebben (Eds.), Women, information technology and
scholarship (pp. 52-61). Urbana, IL: Center for Advanced Study.
Kress, G., & van Leeuwen, T. (1996). Reading images: The grammar of visual design. New York:
Routledge.
Kress, G., & van Leeuwen, T. (2001). Multimodel discourse: The modes and media of contemporary
communication. London: Arnold.
Landow, G. P. (1997). Hypertext 2.0: The convergence of contemporary critical theory and technology.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Lewis, C., & Fabos, B. (2000). But will it work in the heartland? A response and illustration. Journal of
Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 43(5), 462-470.
McKillop, A. M., & Myers, J. (1999). The pedagogical and electronic contexts of composing in
hypermedia. In S. DeWitt & K. Strasma (Eds.), Contexts, intertexts, and hypertexts (pp. 65-116).
Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press.
McNamee, S. (1996). Therapy and identity construction in a postmodern worlds. In D. Grodin & T.
Lindlof (Eds.), Constructing the self in a mediated world (pp. 141-155). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Merriam, S. (1998). Qualitative research and case study applications in education. San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass Inc.
Myers, J., & Beach, R. (2001). Hypermedia authoring as critical literacy. Journal of Adolescent & Adult
Literacy, 44(6), 538-546.
Myers, J., Hammett, R., & McKillop, A. M. (1998). Opportunities for critical literacy and pedagogy in
student-authored hypermedia. In D. Reinking, M. McKenna, L. Labbo, & R. Kieffer (Eds.), Handbook of
literacy and technology: Transformations in a post-typographic world (pp. 63-78). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Myers, J., Hammett, R., & McKillop, A. M. (2000). Connecting, exploring, and exposing the self in
hypermedia projects. In M. Gallego & S. Hollingsworth (Eds.), What counts as literacy: Challenging the
school standard (pp. 85-105). New York: Teachers College Press.
Patterson, N. (2000). Weaving a narrative: From teens to string to hypertext. Voices from the Middle,
7(3), 41-47.
Peyton, J., & Staton, J. (1993). Dialogue journals in the multilingual classroom: Building language
fluency and writing skills through writing interaction. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Aaron Doering and Richard Beach Preservice English Teachers Acquiring Literacy Practices…
Language Learning & Technology 146
Porter, K. (2001). A pedagogy of charity: Donald Davidson and the student-negotiated composition
classroom. College Composition and Communication, 52(4), 574-611.
Reed, J., Boardman, A., Coward, F., Beth, A., Benton, R., Dodson, M., Kim, M., & Schallert, D. (2001).
Perceptions of psychological engagment when technology enters the classroom. Paper presented at the
meeting of the National Reading Conference, San Antonio, TX.
Romano, T. (2000). Blending genre, altering style. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Rouet, J., & Levonen, J. (1996). Studying and learning with hypertext: Empirical studies and their
implications. In J. Rouet, J. Levonen, A. Dillon, & R. Spiro (Eds.), Hypertext and cognition (pp. 9-24).
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Russell, D. (1997). Rethinking genre in school and society: An activity theory analysis. Written
Communication, 14(4), 504-554.
Ryan, G. (1999). "Epistemic Conversations: Creating Socratic Dialogue in Hypertext," In S. DeWitt & K.
Strasma (Eds.), Contexts, intertexts, and hypertexts (pp. 65-116). Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press.
Schallert, D., Reed, J., Dodson, M., Benton, R., & Boardman, A. (2001). What does it mean to be
psychologically engaged in an electronically- mediated classroom discussion. Paper presented at the
meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Seattle, WA.
Semali, L., & Watts-Pailliotet, A. (1999). Introduction: What is intermediality and why study it in U.S.
Classrooms. In L. Semali & A. Watts-Pailliotet (Eds.), Intermediality (pp. 1-30). Boulder, CO: Westview
Press.
Short, K., & Harste, J. (1996). Creating classrooms for authors and inquirers, 2nd ed. Portsmouth, NH:
Heinemann.
Smithson, J., & Dias, F. (1996). Arguing for a collective voice: Collaborative strategies in problem-
oriented conversation. Text, 16(2), 251-268.
Tannen, D. (1984). Conversational style: Analyzing talk among friends. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Taylor, P. (1992). Social epistemic rhetoric and chaotic discourse. In G. Hawisher & P. LeBlanc (Eds.),
Re-imagining computers and composition (pp. 131-148). Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook.
Thompson, J., & Nay, F. (1999). Distance interaction through the World Wide Web in graduate teacher
education: A follow-up analysis of student perceptions. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the
Mid-Western Educational Research Assoication, Chicago, IL.
Topper, A. (2001). Merging technology, teaching and learning: Developing and using learning
environments supported by technology. Paper presented at the meeting of the National Reading
Conference, San Antonio, TX.
Van Dijk, T. A. (1998). Ideology: A multidisciplinary approach. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society: The development of high psychological processes. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Walther, J. (1996). Computer-mediated communication: Impersonal, interpersonal, and hyperpersonal
interaction. Communication Research, 23, 3-43.
Wertsch, J. (1998). Mind as action. New York: Oxford University Press.
