Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/review2/ 
January 2002, Vol. 6, Num. 1 
pp. 21-26 
 
Copyright © 2002, ISSN 1094-3501 21 
REVIEW OF ESSENTIAL ACADEMIC SKILLS IN ENGLISH: LISTENING 
TO LECTURES 
Title  Essential Academic Skills in English: Listening to Lectures CD-ROM 
(Volume I) 
Publisher CELTE 
University of Warwick 
Conventry 
CV4 7AL, United Kingdom 
Phone: (0044) (0)-24 7652 8440 
Fax: (0044) (0)-24 7652-4318 
Email: easeteam@warwick.ac.uk 
ISBN 0902683-46-4 
Platform PC only; Windows 95, 98, 2000, or NT.  
System requirements 486 processor or better with 8 MB of RAM (16 MB preferred); SVGA 
display (800 x 600, 16 bit color or better); sound card; computer speakers; 
mouse 
Support http://www.ease.ac.uk 
Target language English (British) 
Target audience Not stated, but it appears to be designed for advanced intermediate or 
advanced adult students. 
Price Single user copy (£30.00), 5 user license (£120.00), 6-20 user license 
(£220.00), Full-site license (£400.00) 
Reviewed by Meena Singhal, Long Beach City College 
OVERVIEW 
Essential Academic Skills in English: Listening to Lectures is a stand-alone PC software package 
designed for non-native speakers of English who intend to undertake university study in English. 
Listening to Lectures, the first in the EASE CD-ROM series, contains digital video of academic lectures 
as well as activities based on these lectures, and thus introduces learners to the kinds of lecture situations 
and listening activities they will likely encounter in academic settings. 
DESCRIPTION 
Listening to Lectures contains 85 short video clips (approximately 1-2 minutes) from 40 authentic 
lectures given in 25 different departments, including the sciences, social sciences, and humanities. These 
clips are divided among six units: Openings, Structure and Organization, Functions 1, Functions 2, 
Attitudes and Significance, and Argumentation.  
Getting started with Listening to Lectures is easy. Users simply click on the unit they wish to study. Users 
also have the option of going through an introductory tour before beginning. Upon beginning a unit, the 
instructions inform the user of how to proceed. The tasks are organized around watching video clips from 
lectures. Learners first complete pre-viewing activities and then watch the video clip. The video clip can 
be controlled by clicking on the play and pause buttons and by dragging the slider with the cursor. 
Information about the lecture such as the title and the speaker of the lecture can be obtained by clicking 
on the "i" button. In addition, the user can access the entire transcript of what the lecturer is saying by 
clicking on the speech bubble. At any time during the program, the user can also access the dictionary 
Reviewed by Meena Singhal Review of EASE: Listening to Lectures  
 
Language Learning & Technology 22 
which contains definitions of words in the lectures and allows learners immediate access to the video-clip 
in which the word is used, thus providing them with the context for the word.  
 
Figure 1. Video clip and transcript 
After users watch the video clip, they complete exercises about the lecture. For the most part, these 
exercises emphasize lecture content and rhetorical features, including discourse-level as well as sentence-
level activities. The exercises are varied in terms of type and format, and they include matching questions, 
multiple choice questions, drag and drop exercises, and cloze-tests. Users also have the option of taking 
on-screen notes while watching the video (see Figure 2). 
 
Figure 2. On-screen note-taking 
Reviewed by Meena Singhal Review of EASE: Listening to Lectures  
 
Language Learning & Technology 23 
Learners can get feedback on their answers or choose to see the correct answers by using the Done and 
Reveal buttons, respectively. While the form of feedback varies depending on the type of exercise, in all 
cases a brief explanation of why the user's answer was incorrect is provided 
 
Figure 3. Feedback 
The first unit, Openings, focuses on some of the things lecturers commonly do at the outset of their 
lectures, and thus the six video clips in this unit are all of the beginnings of lectures. In one activity, users 
views three video clips and are asked to identify (from a list) the ways in which the speakers opened their 
lectures. Choices include "the speaker tells a joke," "the speaker states what they're going to talk about," 
and so forth. In this unit, questions on discourse and rhetorical features include, "Did the speaker 
introduce himself?" "How many parts is the speech divided into?" and "How many broad questions is the 
lecture organized around?" Other activities require the user to type in the phrases that the lecturer uses to 
talk about the structure of the lecture.  
In the second unit, Structure and Organization, the focus is on the ways in which speakers structure their 
lectures and the language they use to talk about structure. Topics covered include opening and closing 
summaries, markers, and transitions. In one activity, users watch video clips and then identify whether 
they were opening or closing summaries, while in another they identify opening and closing phrases used 
in a video clip. More form-focused activities in this unit require the user to identify the tense of the verbs 
being used by the speaker in the clip, or to type the missing words from the speaker's lecture. 
Reviewed by Meena Singhal Review of EASE: Listening to Lectures  
 
Language Learning & Technology 24 
 
Figure 4. Drag and drop activity. 
In the third and fourth units, Functions 1 and Functions 2, the focus is on features of academic discourse. 
In other words, users are introduced to some of the things speakers usually do in lectures such as defining, 
classifying, comparing and contrasting, and exemplifying.  
In Unit 5, Attitudes and Significance, the user practices distinguishing between significant and less 
significant points made by lecturers and examines the degree to which the lecturer is committed to what 
he or she is saying. This is done through activities that ask users to identify importance markers, style and 
manner, speakers' attitude about a topic, and identification of non-literal meaning. For example, in one 
activity on style and manner, users view video clips of two different speakers. A drag-and-drop activity 
asks them to match words such as "informal," "formal," "humorous," and "serious" with the appropriate 
clip.  
In the final unit, Argumentation, users identify arguments and study the language and structure of 
arguments. In addition to thinking about how arguments are constructed, users are asked to consider the 
purpose of academic discourse and their role within it.  
Users begin by learning about the differences between documentary, which is based on truth and is 
factual, and fiction, which is based on imagination and is invented. They also engage in activities in 
which they are asked to listen for specific phrases that might indicate a lecturer does not agree with a 
particular notion. They are asked to identify which ones appear in a speech and which phrases are used to 
evaluate an argument. In another activity, users are first presented with information explaining a common 
organizational pattern for arguments. Next, they view a video clip and try to match the points the lecturer 
makes with the pattern. In addition to exercises centered around video clips, this unit also contains 
activities based on longer, written passages. 
EVALUATION 
This program offers a well-designed user interface and the operation of the program is self-explanatory 
and clear. Further, navigation is straightforward , and page numbers inform users of their progress 
through units. At any time during the program, learners can click on the Home icon to return to the main 
Reviewed by Meena Singhal Review of EASE: Listening to Lectures  
 
Language Learning & Technology 25 
page of the first unit. However, after having moved beyond the first unit, the user cannot return to the 
main menu without exiting the program and starting again.  
Generally speaking, the sound quality is quite good. One important point to note, however, is that all 
speakers have British accents. While all learners will likely benefit from exposure to a wide range of 
English pronunciation patterns, learners in other settings, such as those who aim to enter a U.S. college, 
for example, may find this somewhat distracting initially. On the other hand, learners of British English 
will likely appreciate this aspect of Listening to Lectures.  
A strong feature of the program is the sound pedagogy on which it is based. According to current 
research, effective listening activities should be based on authentic, rather than simplified, input (Dunkel, 
1991; Mendelsohn, 1994; Rubin, 1995). In Listening to Lectures, learners are presented with naturalistic 
spoken language, rather than scripted input designed specifically for nonnative speakers. Another 
important point to note is that the videos provide visual support, as users cannot only listen to speakers 
but can also see their gestures, facial expressions, and body language which can increase comprehension. 
In addition, Listening to Lectures provides users with opportunities to employ both top-down and bottom-
up processing skills (see Dunkel, 1991; Morley, 1991). Many of the pre-listening activities are designed 
to provide background information and activate schemata by encouraging the users to think about what 
they already know about the lecture topic and the skill to be practiced. Students can also practice a range 
of skills such as inferencing, evaluation and synthesis of material, and extracting implied meaning from 
what they hear. Such activities are in line with constructivist approaches to language learning which view 
knowledge acquisition as a dynamic process where learners are the architects, rather than the recipients, 
of knowledge (McGroarty, 1998). 
Another positive aspect of the program is that many activities are designed to help users develop listening 
strategies, including using non-verbal cues to assist in comprehension, synthesizing and summarizing 
information, recognizing rhetorical organization, and predicting information, to name a few. Such an 
approach is consistent with current theory, which views listening as a highly active process of selecting 
and interpreting information from auditory and visual cues (Richards, 1983; Rubin, 1995).  
The availability of feedback makes Listening to Lectures suitable for self-instructional purposes, as well 
as use in courses. Although the form of feedback varies, correct answers and a brief explanation are 
always provided. Some feedback responses, however, such as "Are you serious? Try again" offer little in 
the way of encouragement. Nonetheless, the feedback is generally useful and in many sections, when 
learners get the wrong answer, they have an opportunity to replay the clip and attempt the question again.  
SUMMARY 
Essential Academic Skills in English: Listening to Lectures is easy to use and could undoubtedly improve 
listening comprehension and academic listening skills. The overall format and content is most suited to 
students in, or planning to enter, college or university settings. Because its main focus is on improving 
listening skills in this type of setting, it is best as a curricular supplement for high intermediate and 
advanced levels. The reviewer highly recommends this program and believes it will be useful to both non-
native and native students who wish to improve their academic listening skills.  
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Meena Singhal (PhD, The University of Arizona) teaches Academic Reading and ESL at Long Beach 
City College, CA. Some of her publications have appeared in Language Teaching and Research, CALL-
EJ, and On-CALL: The Australian Journal of Computers and Language Education. She is the editor of an 
online publication, The Reading Matrix: An International Online Journal, which deals primarily with 
Reviewed by Meena Singhal Review of EASE: Listening to Lectures  
 
Language Learning & Technology 26 
issues related to second language reading and literacy. Her research interests include reading instruction 
and technology and the design of CALL materials for academic reading and reading comprehension.  
E-mail: msinghal@lbcc.cc.ca.us 
REFERENCES 
Dunkel, P. (1991). Listening in the native and second/foreign language. Toward an integration of research 
and practice. TESOL Quarterly, 25(3), 431-457.  
McGroarty, M. (1998). Constructive and constructivist challenges for applied linguistics. Language 
Learning, 48, 591-622. 
Mendelsohn, D. J. (1994). Learning to listen: A strategy-based approach for the second-language 
learner. San Diego, CA: Dominie Press.  
Morley, J. (1991). Listening comprehension in second/foreign language instruction. In M. Celce-Murcia 
(Ed.), Teaching English as a second or foreign language (2nd ed.; pp. 81-106). Boston: Heinle and Heinle.  
Richards, J. (1983). Listening comprehension: Approach, design, procedure. TESOL Quarterly, 17(2), 
219-240.  
Rubin, J. (1995). The contribution of video to the development on competence in listening. In D. 
Mendelsohn and J. Rubin (Eds.), A guide for the teaching of second language listening (pp. 151-165). San 
Diego, CA: Dominie Press.  
