Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/announcements/ 
January 2002, Vol. 6, Num. 1 
pp. 11-16 
 
 
Copyright ã 2001, ISSN 1094-3501 
 
1
11 
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS 
This page includes announcements from the organizations sponsoring LLT. 
University of Hawai'i National Foreign Language Resource 
Center (NFLRC) 
Less commonly taught languages, particularly those of Asia and the Pacific, are the focus of the 
University of Hawai`i National Foreign Language Resource Center, which engages in research and 
materials development projects and conducts Summer Institutes for language professionals among its 
many activities. 
2002 NFLRC SUMMER INSTITUTES 
Heritage Learners and National Language Needs (June 20 - 21, 2002) This two-day symposium 
provides practical information, theoretical considerations, and program/curriculum models for language 
education that utilizes existing heritage language resources. Recently, there has been expanding interest 
among language scholars in capitalizing on the linguistic resources of language minority students through 
developing their heritage language skills. Such a "language as resource" approach has numerous benefits. 
This symposium will offer a range of language, culture, literacy, and technology workshops by experts 
who have extensive knowledge and experience in developing innovative K-16 heritage language 
programs. 
Ia Faalautele Lau Gagana - Samoan Pedagogy Workshop (June 24 - 28, 2002) Immediately following 
our Summer Institute symposium on heritage language, this 5-day workshop brings together experts in 
Samoan Language teaching, teacher training, materials development and Samoan Language content areas 
(e.g., oratory, grammar, literature) to share information and to discuss a range of Samoan Language 
curriculum development issues (e.g., community awareness, literacy education, resources, language 
structure and use) 
Web-based Workshops for Advanced Reading & Writing Development & Maintenance 
(tentatively, July 22 - August 2, 2002) This workshop serves as an online professional development 
opportunity for non-native-speaking teachers of Chinese and Korean language at the K-16 level.  As part 
of our mission to serve the development and enhancement of Asian language and area studies in the 
United States, we will offer 2 two-week intensive language courses in Chinese and Korean.  The intensive 
courses, delivered entirely over the World Wide Web using a tested and proven pedagogic model, focus 
on the development and/or maintenance of communicative language skills at the advanced level, with 
strong emphasis on written communication meeting high standards of literacy. 
For more information about the 2002 NFLRC Summer Institutes, visit 
http://nflrc.hawaii.edu/prodev_home.cfm. 
NEW PUBLICATIONS FROM THE UH NFLRC 
Developing Korean Language Performance Assessments , by J. D. Brown, T. Hudson & Y. Kim. This 
Research Note reports on a task-based performance assessment development project for Korean as a 
foreign language through the National Foreign Language Resource Center at the University of Hawai`i. It 
contains an overview of college-level Korean language teaching and testing in the United States as well as 
an introduction to task-based performance assessment in general and the design of performance 
assessment tasks using test and item specifications in particular. Questionnaire forms used and prototype 
tasks developed in English and Korean are presented in the appendices. 
 News from Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 
 
12 
Community Language Resources: A Handbook for Teachers , by T. Menacker. The aim of the project 
described in this Research Note is to capitalize on community language resources in developing programs 
and products to improve foreign language education.  Approaches were developed in Hawai‘i schools to 
serve as a model for similar projects and programs that can be carried out elsewhere in the US. 
Mind, Language, and Epistemology Toward a Language Socialization Paradigm for SLA, by K. 
Watson-Gegeo. Karen Watson-Gegeo’s plenary talk, presented at the 4th Pacific Second Language 
Research Forum (PacSLRF) conference, lays out the issues involved and argues for a language 
socialization paradigm for second language acquisition that is consistent with and embraces new 
developments in second generation cognitive science, first language acquisition studies, cognitive 
anthropology, and human development research. 
For more information or to order NFLRC publications online, visit the publications section of our Web 
site. 
 
 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education 
and Research (CLEAR) 
CLEAR’s mission is to promote foreign language education in the United States. To meet its goals, 
projects focus on foreign language research, materials development, and teacher training. 
FOREIGN LANGUAGE RESEARCH 
· Feedback and Interaction 
· Longitudinal Analysis of Foreign Language Writing Development 
MATERIALS DEVELOPMENT 
Products 
· Business Chinese (CD-ROM) 
· Modules for Assessing Socio-Cultural Competence for German (CD-ROM) 
· Pronunciación y fonética (CD-ROM) 
· African Language Tutorial Guide (guide and video) 
· Foreign Languages: Doors to Opportunity (video and discussion guide) 
· Task-based Communicative Grammar Activities for Japanese and Thai (workbook) 
· Test Development (workbook and video) 
· The Internet Sourcebook for Business German 
· The Internet Sourcebook for Business Spanish (online links from CLEAR’s Web site) 
· Business Language Packets for High School Classrooms (French, German, and Spanish; PDF files 
from CLEAR’s Web site) 
Coming Soon! 
· Portuguese Pronunciation and Phonetics CD-ROM 
· Modules for Assessing Socio-Cultural Competence for Russian (CD-ROM) 
· Thai Tutorial Guide 
· The Internet Sourcebook for Business French 
 News from Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 
 
13 
Game-O-Matic 
The Game-O-Matic is a suite of wizards that create Web-based activities for language learning and 
practice. Teachers can make original Game-O-Matic games by visiting http://clear.msu.edu/dennie/matic/. 
Have a new idea for a Game-O-Matic activity? Contact Dennie Hoopingarner at hooping4@msu.edu. 
Newsletter 
CLEAR News is a biyearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. Contact 
the CLEAR office to join the mailing list or see it on the Web at http://clear.msu.edu/clearnews/. 
TEACHER TRAINING 
2002 Summer Workshops  
CLEAR is offering eight summer workshops in 2002 for foreign language educators to help strengthen 
and expand their teaching skills. CLEAR offers stipends to help defray the workshop fees and 
travel/accommodation expenses.  
The 2002 Summer Workshop offerings are  
· Teaching Writing in the Foreign Language Classroom – June 17-19, 2002 
· Using Communicative Activities in a Grammar-Based Curriculum – June 20-22, 2002 
· Promoting Motivation and Interest in Foreign Languages Inside and Outside of the Classroom – June 
25-28, 2002 
· Basic Web Pages for Late Bloomers – July 9-12, 2002 
· Beyond Web Pages – July 15-19, 2002 
· Putting Flash into Your Course – July 22-26, 2002 
· Materials Development Marathon: Creating Online Communicative Activities from Start to Finish – 
July 29-August 2, 2002 
· Developing and Managing a Tutorial-Based Language Program for LCTLs – August 5-6, 2002 
For more information on the Summer Workshops, go to http://clear.msu.edu/institutes/02institutes/. 
For more information about CLEAR, contact 
Center for Language Education And Research (CLEAR) 
A712 Wells Hall 
Michigan State University 
East Lansing, MI 48824-1027 
  
Phone: 517/432-2286 
Fax: 517/432-0473 
Email: clear@msu.edu 
 
 
Apprentissage des Langues et Systèmes d'Information et 
de Communication (ALSIC) 
ALSIC (Language Learning and Information and Communication Systems, http://alsic.org/) is an 
electronic journal in French for researchers and practitioners in fields related to applied linguistics, 
didactics, psycholinguistics, educational sciences, computational linguistics, and computer science. The 
journal gives priority to papers from the French-speaking community and/or in French, but it also 
regularly invites papers in other languages so as to strengthen scientific and technical exchanges between 
linguistic communities that too often remain separate. The editorial board of ALSIC invites you to contact 
them for any prospective contributions at the following electronic address: infos@alsic.org. 
 
 News from Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 
 
14 
The Australian Technology Enhanced Language Learning 
Consortium (ATELL) 
 
Contacts:  Dr. Mike Levy, The University of Queensland (mlevy@lingua.arts.uq.edu.au) 
Prof. Roly Sussex, The University of Queensland (sussex@lingua.arts.uq.edu.au) 
ATELL is an informal collaboration of Australian language teachers involved in technology-enhanced 
language learning and teaching. It has recently been moved to The University of Queensland, where Dr. 
Mike Levy and Professor Roly Sussex are developing the concept in collaboration with Mr. Greg 
Dabelstein, coordinator of the CALL special interest group of the Association of Modern Language 
Teachers' Associations of Australia (AFMTLA). We intend to establish a network of complementary and 
collaborating resources for teachers and learners in the TELL domain in schools and tertiary institutions. 
There will be a Web site, which will include information, collaboration, and resources such as  
· a register of Australian TELL experts  
· links to other sites with TELL-related information and materials  
· links to reviews of hardware, software, courseware  
· a section for FAQs (Frequently Asked Questions)  
· what's new -- ideas, research, materials  
· a register of projects, current and past, in TELL research, development, implementation  
· software modules, libraries, and related resources for developers  
· audio and video files for language learning support  
· policies and discussion  
· special interest groups  
In addition, we are reviving the ATELL mailing list, whose e-mail location is atell@lingua.arts.uq.edu.au. 
ATELL is supported by the Language Laboratory at the University of Queensland. 
 
 
Center for Advanced Research on Language Acquisition, 
University of Minnesota (CARLA) 
CARLA is one of nine National Language Resource Centers whose role is to improve the nation's 
capacity to teach and learn foreign languages effectively. Launched in 1993 with funding from the 
national Title  VI Language Resource Center program of the U.S. Department of Education, CARLA's 
mission is to study multilingualism and multiculturalism, develop knowledge of second language 
acquisition, and advance the quality of second language teaching, learning, and assessment by conducting 
research and action projects sharing research-based and other forms of knowledge across disciplines and 
education systems extending, exchanging, and applying this knowledge in the wider society.  
CARLA's research and action initia tives include a focus on the articulation of language instruction, 
content-based language teaching through technology, culture and language studies, less commonly taught 
languages, language immersion education, second language assessment, second language learning 
strategies, and technology and second language learning.  
To share its latest research and program opportunities with language teachers around the country, 
CARLA offers the following resources: a summer institute program for teachers; a database which lists 
where less commonly taught languages are taught throughout the country; listservs for teachers of less 
commonly taught languages and immersion educators; a working paper series; conferences and 
workshops; and a battery of instruments in French, German, and Spanish for assessing learners' 
proficiency in reading, writing, speaking, and listening at the intermediate-low level on the ACTFL scale. 
Check out these and other CARLA resources on the CARLA Web site at http://carla.acad.umn.edu. 
 News from Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 
 
15 
The Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL) 
The Center for Applied Linguistics is a private, nonprofit organization that promotes and improves the 
teaching and learning of languages, identifies and solves problems related to language and culture, and 
serves as a resource for information about language and culture. CAL carries out a wide range of 
activities in the fields of English as a second language, foreign languages, cultural education, and 
linguistics. These activities include research, teacher education, information dissemination, instructional 
design, conference planning, technical assistance, program evaluation, and policy analysis. Publications 
include books on language education, online databases of language programs and assessments, curricula, 
research reports, teacher training materials, and print and online newsletters.  
Major CAL projects include the following: 
· ERIC Clearinghouse on Languages and Linguistics 
· National Clearinghouse for ESL Literacy Education 
· Refugee Service Center  
· Pre-K-12 School Services 
CAL collaborates with other language education organizations on the following projects: 
§ Center for Research on Education, Diversity & Excellence 
§ Improving Foreign Languages in the Schools Project of the Northeast and Island Regional Laboratory 
at Brown University 
§ National Capitol Language Resource Center  
§ National K-12 Foreign Language Resource Center   
§ National Network for Early Language Learning 
News from the  ERIC Clearinghouse on Languages and Linguistics  
· ERIC/CLL’s quarterly online newsletter, ERIC/CLL Language Link, covers current topics in 
language education.  Recent articles in Language Link include a review of the 2000 US Census and 
its implications for language educators, CoBaLTT (computer-assisted language learning), profiles of 
effective Early Foreign Language Programs, and a Language Policy update.  
· Recent ERIC/CLL Digests cover a range of topics in ESL, foreign language, and bilingual education 
including our newest Digest, Lexical Approach to Second Language Teaching. 
News from the  National Center for ESL Literacy Education 
Facts and Statistics Related to Adult ESL provides links to resources that NCLE most often consult for 
statistics on adult ESL and the populations served by adult ESL programs. 
The latest NCLE Digest, Reflective Teaching Practice in Adult ESL Settings offers the adult ESL 
practitioner background information and step-by-step suggestions for using reflective processes as a tool 
for professional development. 
 News from Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 
 
16 
 
Computer Assisted Language Instruction Consortium 
(CALICO) 
Since its inception in 1983, CALICO has served as an international forum for language teachers who 
want to develop and utilize the potential of advanced technology to support their teaching and research 
needs. Through its Annual Symposia, Special Interest Groups (SIGs), CALICO Journal, CALICO 
Monograph Series, CALICO Resource Guide, and numerous other publications, CALICO provides both 
leadership and perspective in the ever-changing field of computer-assisted instruction. The strength of 
CALICO derives from the enthusiasm, creativity, and diversity of its members. It comprises language 
teachers and researchers from universities, military academies, community colleges, K-12 schools, 
government agencies, and commercial enterprises. To learn more about CALICO activities and how to 
participate in them, visit the CALICO homepage at http://www.calico.org. 
 
 
European Association for Computer Assisted Language 
Learning (EUROCALL) 
EUROCALL is an association of language teaching professionals from Europe and worldwide aiming to  
· Promote the use of foreign languages within Europe  
· Provide a European focus for all aspects of the use of technology for language learning  
· Enhance the quality, dissemination, and efficiency of CALL materials  
EUROCALL's journal, ReCALL, published by Cambridge University Press, is one of the leading 
academic journals covering research into computer-assisted and technology-enhanced language learning. 
The association organises special interest meetings and annual conferences, and works towards the 
exploitation of electronic communications systems for language learning. For those involved in education 
and training, EUROCALL provides information and advice on all aspects of the use of technology for 
language learning. 
Forthcoming EUROCALL conference 
· EUROCALL 2002 will be at the University of Jyväskylä, Finland, 14 - 17 August 2002. 
For full details, contact us at http://www.eurocall.org. 
 
 
International Association for Language Learning Technology 
(IALLT) 
Established in 1965, IALLT (formerly IALL) is a professional organization whose members provide 
leadership in the development, integration, evaluation, and management of instructional technology for 
the teaching and learning of language, literature, and culture. Its strong sense of community promotes the 
sharing of expertise in a variety of educational contexts. Members include directors and staff of language 
labs, resource or media centers, language teachers at all levels, developers and vendors of hardware and 
software, grant project developers and others. IALLT offers biennial conferences, regional groups and 
meetings, the LLTI listserv (Language Learning Technology International), and key publications such as 
the IALL Journal, the IALL Language Center Design Kit, and the IALL Lab Management Manual. The 
2003 IALLT conference will be held at the University of Michigan, June 17 - 21. For information, visit 
the IALLT Web site at www.iallt.org/. 
