Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num3/reveiw3/
September 2002, Volume 6, Number 3
pp. 32-36
Copyright © 2002, ISSN 1094-3501 32
REVIEW OF TEACHERS UNDERSTANDING TEACHING: A
MULTIMEDIA HYPERTEXT TOOL
Title Teachers Understanding Teaching: A Multimedia Hypertext Tool
Author Karen Johnson and Glenn Johnson
Series TeacherSource
Platform Macintosh or PC
Hardware
requirements
Macintosh: 68030 Macintosh with 4 MB RAM available (8 MB
recommended); System 7.0 or later; 13" color monitor (640 x 480) with Color
8 bit, 256 colors; Macintosh CD-ROM 180 KB/second transfer rate, or faster.
Windows: 386/33 megahertz or better; 4 MB RAM available (8 MB
recommended); 13" color monitor (640 x 480) with Color 8 bit, 256 colors;
double-speed or faster CD-ROM. Windows NT does not support the progress
tracking system.
Publisher Heinle and Heinle
20 Park Plaza
Boston, MA 02116
Support 70-page manual; online help
Year of Publication 1998
Version 1.01
Target audience Language teachers in pre-service or in-service professional development
programs
Price $68.95
ISBN 083846356-8
Reviewed by Suzanne Scott, California State University, Humboldt
OVERVIEW
Readers involved in language teacher education are likely to be interested in Teachers Understanding
Teaching, which explores teachers' ideas about teaching and includes footage and discussion of video
clips of three actual ESL classrooms in the US. The classes cover a range of levels: a 4th-5th grade content-
based ESL science course, a 7th-8th grade language and literature class, and a pre-university IEP class.
Like other materials in the TeacherSource Series, Teachers Understanding Teaching contains three main
strands: Voices, Frameworks, and Investigations. Voices provides an insider's view of teaching, with
excerpts from interviews with the teachers on their knowledge and beliefs about L2 teaching and learning.
Frameworks presents an outsider's perspective, with information about theoretical issues gleaned from
research on teaching and teachers. Investigations bridges theory and practice, showing excerpts from
actual classroom instruction, organized around instructional considerations, and accompanied by the
teachers' commentary on the excerpts. A Tasks section provides 35 activities to further users'
understanding of concepts presented in the three strands. The goal of the program, to be used within a
professional development language teaching program, is to help present and future teachers make sense of
what they do in classrooms and why.
DESCRIPTION
Teachers Understanding Teaching opens with a choice of the three strands: Voices, Frameworks, and
Investigations, each of which also has a number of subsections to explore. The Voices strand includes five
sections called "Understandings": Second Language Learning, Students, TESOL, Memories of Teachers,
and Beliefs (see Figure 1). Users access excerpts from the interviews by first selecting a topic to explore,
Reviewed by Suzanne Scott Review of Teachers Understanding Teaching…
Language Learning & Technology 33
and then choosing one of the three teachers.  Further information is available in Key Concepts, which can
also be accessed from a pull-down menu available in all strands.
Figure 1. Voices main menu
Frameworks contains four "Research Issues": Learning to Teach, Teachers' Knowledge, Teacher Decision
Making, and Teachers' Beliefs. In this strand, users click on a topic, and are shown a filing cabinet with
tabbed files indicating references (e.g., Johnson, 1998); these references discuss ideas which theoreticians
and researchers feel are important in teaching. Teachers' Beliefs, for example, has 12 tabbed files, each
file containing a short quote from one citation relevant to the topic of teachers' beliefs. Each quote has the
full reference available, as well as an annotation of the article or book. A few of the quotes also have
comments on the topic from one or more of the three teachers. Key concepts are bolded, and when the
cursor rolls over them, a definition of the concept is provided. Frameworks also has an Author Map,
which gives a one-screen overview of this section.
The third strand, Investigations, is perhaps the most interesting. It offers the user eight cognitive, social,
and affective "Instructional Considerations" to explore: Curriculum Investigations, Subject Matter
Content, Language Skills, Motivation and Involvement, Strategy, Management, Student Understanding,
and Affective Needs. As with the Voices section, users select a topic, and then choose one of the three
teachers. In Investigations, however, instead of an interview on the chosen topic, we step inside the
teacher's classroom by watching video footage of the teacher in action. A short summary explains the
context, for example, "Elizabeth provides an introduction to a reading skills activity." The teacher's after-
the-fact commentary on the classroom excerpt is provided as well. Transcripts of the teachers' comments
are available, but there are no transcripts of classroom talk.
Reviewed by Suzanne Scott Review of Teachers Understanding Teaching…
Language Learning & Technology 34
Figure 2. Investigations: Ken on student understanding
A pull-down menu available in all strands provides information on the three teachers, such as their
background in language learning and their professional development. In all three strands, an Information
icon gives a quick overview of the strand, and a Reflections icon provides a basic text environment with
prompts to guide reflective writing, which can be saved to floppy or hard disk. A Bulletin Board is
designed to encourage discussions among class members. The Bulletin Board is not a networked
communication system; users must use the same terminal to communicate with each other. A Tasks
section provides 35 activities to further understanding, organized by strand or by purpose (e.g., tasks
conducted outside or inside the classroom, tasks that foster collaboration). The tasks indicate their
purpose, provide directions for users to do the task, and have users return to Investigations to examine
how the three teachers accomplish the same task. A Progress tracking tool lets signed-in users know what
parts of the CD they have viewed.
Reviewed by Suzanne Scott Review of Teachers Understanding Teaching…
Language Learning & Technology 35
Figure 3. Task 2: Exploring commonly held conceptions of teachers and teaching
DISCUSSION
One of the most attractive aspects of Teachers Understanding Teaching is related to one of its primary
shortcomings. The CD includes a wealth of information and approaches to the complex world of language
teacher education, and the result can be … well, messy. For example, the 70-page manual tells us that we
can move through the CD in a number of different ways -- for example, by choosing one teacher and
accessing all of that teacher's views and excerpts, or by selecting one of the three strands and viewing
everything in that strand. Yet both of these approaches feel disjointed. Despite the careful layout of
strands and considerations under each strand, I felt at times as if I were dropping in on conversations or
written discussions of which I'd missed the beginning. While the words and concepts made sense in and
of themselves, I wasn't always sure why I was listening to, or reading, any given bit at any given time.
After viewing multiple screens, users may feel they've entered a whirling kaleidoscope of information,
and they may not know what section to focus on next, or how one aspect ties in with another. As a result,
instructors introducing this program to students ought to carefully plan their way through the CD,
explicitly stressing linkages and providing coherence.
Another major strength of the CD is the video clips of actual ESL classrooms, accompanied by
commentary from the teachers. Unfortunately, the screen showing the videos is only approximately one-
eighth the size of the computer screen, so the images can be quite small. Nonetheless, this footage is
valuable, as are the teachers' accompanying explanations of various aspects of their teaching. Together,
this information provides an ideal arena for discussion with teachers-in-training, including the match -- or
lack of match -- between what the teachers say they are doing in a given clip, and how it might appear to
the viewer. For example, in one clip, a teacher's behavior seemed to this viewer to be somewhat gruff and
condescending towards her students. Yet the teacher's commentary on that excerpt indicated that she felt
her behavior was supportive and encouraging. The contrast between our disparate interpretations of this
video clip provides fertile grounds for discussion and highlights the risk involved in making assumptions
Reviewed by Suzanne Scott Review of Teachers Understanding Teaching…
Language Learning & Technology 36
about a teacher after seeing only an isolated segment of teaching. Teaching is, as Johnson notes in the
accompanying manual (p. 3), a highly contextualized activity, and this CD provides the opportunity to
hear the teacher's perspective and to view multiple clips of the same class.
SUMMARY
Teachers Understanding Teaching: A Multimedia Hypertext Tool provides a useful means for exploring
what teachers actually do in classrooms, and how their beliefs are reflected in their actions. While users
may be frustrated by the lack of coherence as they move within and among the strands, the CD is likely to
be beneficial nonetheless. It shows connections between teachers' belief systems and their teaching; it lets
teachers speak for themselves about their own teaching; it gathers together, from research on teaching and
teachers, quotations for consideration; and it gives us footage of classrooms and commentary explaining
the rationale behind teaching choices. I would recommend that language teacher educators take the time
to examine Teachers Understanding Teaching: A Multimedia Hypertext Tool and that they consider
including it in their professional development programs for language teachers.
ABOUT THE REVIEWER:
Suzanne Scott is an Assistant Professor at California State University, Humboldt. Her research interests
include language teaching and language learning, as well as issues in interpersonal communication.
E-mail: sps15@humboldt.edu
