Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/toyoda/
January 2002, Vol. 6, Num. 1
pp. 82-99
Copyright © 2002, ISSN 1094-3501 82
CATEGORIZATION OF TEXT CHAT COMMUNICATION BETWEEN
LEARNERS AND NATIVE SPEAKERS OF JAPANESE1
Etsuko Toyoda
The University of Melbourne, Australia
Richard Harrison
The University of Nagoya, Japan
ABSTRACT
A number of CALL studies suggest the potential benefits of network-based
communication for L2 acquisition, focusing on its nature for inducing negotiation of
meaning. This study examined negotiation of meaning that took place between students
and native speakers of Japanese over a series of chat conversations and attempted to
categorize the difficulties encountered. The data showed that the difficulties in
understanding each other did indeed trigger negotiation of meaning between students
even when no specific communication tasks were given. Using discourse analysis
methods, the negotiations were sorted into nine categories according to the causes of the
difficulties: recognition of new word, misuse of word, pronunciation error, grammatical
error, inappropriate segmentation, abbreviated sentence, sudden topic change, slow
response, and inter-cultural communication gap. Through the examination of these
categories of negotiation, it was found that there were some language aspects that are
crucial for communication but that had been neglected in teaching, and that students
would not have noticed if they had not had the opportunity to chat with native speakers.
In light of these findings, the authors make pedagogical recommendations on some
classroom tasks for improving chat conversations.
INTRODUCTION
As a result of technological innovations, new types of communication, namely network-based
communication, have emerged. These new technologies, e-mail and chat in particular, are being used
increasingly in second/foreign language (L2) learning environments. Many researchers regard this type of
communication as a promising tool for language learning, as it allows learners to interact with native
speakers from the country where their target language is spoken. Previous research suggests that it
increases learners' opportunities to use the target language (Barson, Frommer, & Schwartz, 1993), induces
a series of negotiations of meaning (Blake, 2000), and improves the quality of written and spoken
language (Sotillo, 2000).
SLA Theories
Second language acquisition (SLA) theories advocate that oral interaction that requires negotiation of
meaning is necessary for enhancing learners' interlanguage (Ellis, 1985; Long, 1991; Pica, 1994; Swain,
1993, 1995). Negotiation of meaning is defined as "modification and restructuring of interaction that
occurs when learners and their interlocutors anticipate, perceive, or experience difficulties in message
comprehensibility" (Pica, 1994, p. 495). Modification and restructuring include repetitions, confirmations,
reformulations, comprehension checks, recasts, confirmation checks, and clarification requests (Long,
1996).
Etsuko Toyoda and Richard Harrison Categorization of Text Chat Communication...
Language Learning & Technology 83
The Interaction Hypothesis (Gass, 1997; Long, 1996, 1991) claims that resolving miscommunication
(negotiation of meaning) enhances L2 learning, as it provides more opportunities for comprehensible
input and modified output. The Output Hypothesis (Swain, 1993, 1995) explains that producing output is
one way of testing a hypothesis about comprehensibility or linguistic well-formedness (Swain, 1995, p.
126), and that learners' hypothesis testing often invokes interaction between the learners and their
interlocutor(s). Native speaker difficulties in following learners' interlanguage may trigger feedback,
which in return may induce changes in the learners' output. Negotiation of meaning also occurs on
occasions where the native speakers' input is above the learners' threshold level of understanding.
Learners may notice a gap between their interlanguage and the language that native speakers produce, and
may request clarification. The output hypothesis thus claims that the output induces negotiation of
meaning and the negotiation leads to the enhancement of the learners' interlanguage.
CALL Studies on Negotiation of Meaning
Many CALL researchers postulate that network-based communication can facilitate second language
acquisition in a similar fashion to face-to-face negotiations in classroom settings, and have found
abundant evidence of comprehensible input and modified output resulting from negotiation of meaning
(Blake, 2000; Kitade, 2000; Pellettieri, 2000; Warschauer, 1998). They claim that this type of
communication may be beneficial for enhancing learners' interlanguage even more than oral
conversations, as the learners can view their language as they produce it and they are more likely to
'monitor' and edit their messages (Kitade, 2000; Ortega, 1997; Pellettieri, 2000; Warshauer, 1998). One of
the distinctive features of network-based communication, a lack of non-verbal cues, may facilitate
negotiation of meaning as communication has to rely merely on verbal correspondence(Kitade, 2000).
Another advantage is that logs of the communications can be saved, which can then be reviewed later on
by the learners and their teachers. These logs can be valuable resources for the enhancement of the
learners' interlanguage (Blake, 2000).
In the networked environment, learners can engage in asynchronous communication or synchronous
communication. E-mail is one type of asynchronous communication where people can take time to read
and write messages. The delayed nature of this type of communication gives learners more opportunities
to produce syntactically complex language (Sotillo, 2000). On the other hand, synchronous
communication, such as chat, requires instantaneous responses as in face-to-face communication. By
comparing synchronous and asynchronous modes, Sotillo claims that the quality and types of discourse
functions present in synchronous discussions were similar to the types of interactional modifications
found in face-to-face conversations. As there is no physical environment or non-verbal signals to share
(Kitade, 2000), chat may be referred as a 'text-mediated telephone conversation.''
Research Questions
Although a number of CALL studies suggest the potential benefits of network-based communication for
L2 acquisition focusing on its nature for inducing negotiation of meaning, few have investigated the
triggers for negotiation in a free conversation setting. Even fewer have mentioned how the logs can be
utilized for the enhancement of learners' interlanguage. In order to beneficially use network-based
communication for L2 learning, more research based on discourse analysis is called for. The purpose of
this study is to examine the Japanese chat data in order to uncover specific types of communication
difficulties that trigger negotiation of meaning, and based on findings from these analyses, to make
recommendations on how the quality of communication can be improved.
Etsuko Toyoda and Richard Harrison Categorization of Text Chat Communication...
Language Learning & Technology 84
STUDY
Participants
The participants were 5 undergraduate students enrolled in an advanced level Japanese course, Japanese
Multimedia, offered in Semester 2, 2000 at the University of Melbourne. One of the main aims of this
course was to enhance students' autonomous learning skills in Japanese through research and presentation
using multimedia tools. The participant students undertook a semester-long project, created a Web site,
and electronically interacted with their partners using the chat function of a 3-dimensional language
learning environment called JEWELS.2 The students were all advanced learners of Japanese who had
studied the language for at least 4 years and had in-country experiences prior to participation in the
project. In face-to-face communication with the teacher, they had no trouble getting their meaning across
despite making some subtle errors. Their partners were all native speakers of Japanese (students and
teachers) who resided in Japan or the USA at the time of chatting.
JEWELS
We created an online virtual university campus, named JEWELS (Japanese-language Education
Worldwide Electronic Learning Space) using software from an American company called Activeworlds
(www.activeworlds.com). This software allows one to create 3-D models of buildings, and has a library
of ready-made objects such as chairs, tables, and computers for creating rooms, and so forth. The users
log in with a username and password, and are rendered as 3-D avatars which appear in the scene. They
can even fly if they want to. When they log in, the users see the 3-D environment in the left hand window
of the browser (see Figure 1) and on the right side see a window for displaying WWW pages based on
Internet Explorer. Communication between the users in the environment is through a chat window below
the 3-D window. Users can communicate to all the other users in the environment, or to individuals using
a whisper chat window. All the chat dialogues appear in the chat log window immediately below the 3-D
window.
Figure 1.
Etsuko Toyoda and Richard Harrison Categorization of Text Chat Communication...
Language Learning & Technology 85
In our case we used Japanese fonts for the chatting. We configured the program to handle Japanese fonts
using a utility program called Emigrant32, which allowed Japanese fonts to be displayed in the chat
windows and in the WWW browser window. However, this was dependent on the user having a Japanese
Windows operating system running on their computer. We installed Japanese versions of Windows 98 on
the Melbourne machines so that the software would run correctly. Input in Japanese is carried out through
standard QWERTY keyboards with the users typing in Romanized Japanese, which the software
automatically converts into Hiragana or Katakana (phonetic-based scripts) as appropriate. Pressing the
space bar brings up a window from which the users can choose the correct Kanji (non-phonetic-based
script). This is the standard form of Japanese input used on every Japanese capable computer.
Use of Avatars
The built-in avatars in Activeworlds could be used in two ways. Firstly, the appearance of the avatar
could be chosen so that it could be female or male or even a bird. Kim (2000) notes that avatars are one
way in which participants are able to create their own persona, and that an important part of building an
online community is to use personal profiles to distinguish individuals within the online community
(p.101). Secondly, the avatars could move around in the environment using the arrow keys, taking
different viewpoints of the environment. Each avatar had associated programmable actions such as
waving, dancing, fighting, and so forth.
Our students and their Japanese partners used the first features of changing the appearance of the avatars
to those that they liked; however, they made little use of the other movement features, probably because
we did not give them tasks that required such movements. Also the students seemed not to have any spare
time to attempt to use these features while they were chatting, as they were experienced at neither the
electronic chatting, nor the manipulation of avatars. The ideal situation would have been to have an avatar
construction kit, whereby the avatars could be programmed to look more appropriate to the context, with
programmable actions associated with Japanese cultural gestures such as bowing, and so forth. This
would also involve creating tasks in which the avatars would be required to move and act. Another
interesting project would be to investigate how avatars can be used to express cultural non-linguistic
features such as bowing and other culturally laden gestures. However, this was beyond the scope of our
project. In the current project, we were interested in getting the students to use the chat facilities rather
than to use the avatars.
Chat Data
In chat, due to the fact that multiple participants can type messages simultaneously, some utterances
addressing unrelated topics may often be interwoven into any discussion thread. Such complexity may
lead to breakdowns in communication for novice users (Werry, 1996). To minimize the confusions and
misinterpretations resulting from the multiple threads, we allocated our students to different
communication zones in the JEWELS environment, and we limited the number of participants to a
maximum of three in each zone. The students had chat exchanges with their partners for 1 hour per
session over 10 sessions in the semester. Data used for this study were the students' chat logs over the
course of seven sessions, excluding the sessions when a) the participants moved around the learning
environment to familiarize themselves with it, b) we had a mock job interview, and c) the participants
thanked each other (the last session). In all seven sessions, the participants were instructed to discuss with
their partners ideas and thoughts regarding the Web page creation project.
Data Analysis
The chat data were analyzed using discourse analysis methods. Following Kitade's study (2000), the data
were first segmented into sequential units of conversation. A sequence of conversations was separated
from others based not only on topic changes but also direction shifts within the same topic. After
excluding the units where no communication breakdowns were observed, the remaining 45 units were
Etsuko Toyoda and Richard Harrison Categorization of Text Chat Communication...
Language Learning & Technology 86
placed into categories according to their features. Two experienced Japanese language teachers carried
out the data analysis, and where the two could not agree, a third person's opinion was sought for the
judgment. Communication breakdowns sometimes occurred due to the nature of conversations between
native and non-native speakers, and at other times due to problems caused by the CMC (computer
mediated communication) tools. However, this study does not distinguish between the two, and sees these
difficulties as a natural form of chat communication between native and non-native speakers.
Categories
The conversations observed in the chat tended to follow the typical schema noted by Varonis and Gass
(1985): trigger, indicator, response, and reaction. Briefly stated, a trigger is the stimulus for the
negotiation that ensues, and an indicator alerts that there is a communication problem. Following an
indicator, there are generally a response from the speaker who caused the problem and a reaction to the
response. To categorize a series of negotiation of meaning, we focused on the trigger of the negotiation.
We have observed in the collected data that the triggers could be grouped into three levels: word, sentence
and discourse. Each level also could be sorted broadly into three different categories, resulting in nine
categories all together.
Word level Sentence level Discourse level
W-1 Recognition of new word
W-2 Misuse / misunderstanding
of word
W-3 Pronunciation / typing error
S-1 Grammatical error
S-2 Inappropriate segmentation
S-3 Abbreviated sentence
D-1 Sudden topic change
D-2 Slow response
D-3 Intercultural communication
gap
The distribution of the negotiation of meaning in each category was as follows. The numbers in the
parentheses show the negotiations caused by native speaker triggers.
Table 1 Distribution of Negotiation of Meaning
W1 W2 W3 S1 S2 S3 D1 D2 D3
12(8) 5 7 3 2 6(5) 4(1) 4 2(2)
The next section will look into each of the nine categories.
EXAMPLES AND INTERPRETATIONS
W-1 Recognition of a New Word
Introduction of new words took place on both the students' and native speakers' sides although it
happened far more frequently on the latter. Upon introduction of a new word from the native speakers, in
many cases (8 times out of 12), the student in the dialogue noticed the new word and presented a
clarification question to ask for the meaning of the word, as shown in this example (NS is a native speaker
and NNS is a non-native speaker, i.e., a student).
Table 2.
1 NS Senmon wa? What are you majoring in?
2 NNS Igaku desu! Medicine!
3 NS Dono bun-ya desu ka? Which area?
4 NNS Bun-ya tte doo iu koto? What does area mean?
5 NS Nai-ka toka shooni-ka toka. Things like internal medicine and pediatrics.
6 NNS Mada bun-ya ga nai desu. I don't have an area yet.
Etsuko Toyoda and Richard Harrison Categorization of Text Chat Communication...
Language Learning & Technology 87
By giving some examples or explaining the definition of the word in simpler language, the native
speakers tried to restore the communication. Other frequently used clarification questions were: X.tte dou
iu koto? (What does X .mean?), X.tte? (abbreviated form of What does X mean?), X wa nan desuka?
(What is X?), Nan desu ka sore? (What is that?), or just repeating the unknown word with a question
mark.
New words were sometimes introduced with confirmation questions by the native speakers. The
frequently used confirmation questions were: Wakaru? or Wakari masu ka? (Do you understand?) and
X.tte kotoba shitte imasu ka? (Do you know the word, X?). In the following example, the learner
encountered two new words that she could neither read nor get the meanings. In English, pronouncing the
word is usually possible even if the meaning of the word cannot be drawn from the spelling. In contrast,
Japanese kanji-written words convey far less information. To show that the words were introduced to the
student without any clue to meaning and pronunciation, in the following excerpt, the words were left in
Kanji. Kanji is one type of Japanese script, which is derived from Chinese characters, and, unlike the
other types of Japanese scripts, is not phonetic-based (Tamaoka, 1991). Although Kanji is often described
as ideographic or logographic, inferring the meaning of a word from a chain of unfamiliar Kanji
characters is not easy. Because these words are specifically used in a topic related to religions, the native
speaker may have sensed that they were difficult for the student. He asked the student Wakaru? (Do you
understand?), and then gave the definitions of the words. When the student later clarified the
pronunciation of one of the words by asking how to read the characters, the native speaker gave the
pronunciations of both words.
Table 3.
1 NS Kono shuumatsu wa gifu no 命日 no
omairi to, otto no jikka no 地鎮祭
deshita. Wakaru?
This weekend I visited the grave of my
father-in-law for 命日, and attended 地鎮祭.
Do you understand?
2 NNS Wakaranai.... . I don't understand it....
3 NS 命日 wa nakunatta hi no koto. Oboo san
ga kite okyoo o agete kuremasu.
命日 means the anniversary of the day
someone passed away. A priest comes and
recites a sutra for us.
4 NNS Sore wa, meejitsu to iu n desu ka. Is it called meejitsu?
5 NS 地鎮祭 tte iu no wa ie o atarashiku tateru
toki ni, tate hajimeru mae ni oharai
(nihon-shiki no oinori?) o shite morau
koto desu.
地鎮祭 is to receive Shinto purification
(Japanese style praying?) before they begin
to build a new house.
6 NS 命日 wa meenichi to yomimasu. 命日 is pronounced as meenichi
7 NS 地鎮祭 wa jichin-sai desu. 地鎮祭 is pronounced as jichin-sai.
8 NNS Naruhodo… I see…
Although less often (4 out of 12 cases), new words were sometimes introduced by the students, as in the
following example.
Etsuko Toyoda and Richard Harrison Categorization of Text Chat Communication...
Language Learning & Technology 88
Table 4.
1 NNS Sate, meruborun ni ryuugaku shite iru
nihon-jin to nihon-go o benkyoo shite iru
aasutoraria no gakusei to ni nihon ni
kankee mono ka ebento o minna ni
tsutaeru saabisu nandesu.
By the way it is a service to let all Japanese
overseas students studying in Melbourne and
all Australian students learning Japanese
know about things related to Japan or special
events.
2 NS Hoomusutee toka? About home stay or something?
3 NNS Matsuri toka bbq nado. Things like festivals and BBQs and so on.
4 NS bbq wa nani desu ka. What is a BBQ?
5 NNS Hai, hoomusutee nado Yes, about things like home stay and so
on.
6 NS Nee, bbq tte nani? Hey, what is a BBQ?
7 NNS Babekyuu. Barbecue.
8 NS Aa, sokka. Oh, I see.
The correct Japanese for barbecue is baabekyuu. Even though the student wrote the word incorrectly, the
native speaker understood the word and posted the acknowledgement as a reaction to the student's
response.
An interesting dialogue was recorded when the native speaker misinterpreted the word that the student
introduced.
Table 5.
1 NNS Katakana no "hotkey" arimasu ka? Is there a "hotkey" for Katakana?
2 NS Hokkee desu. It's hokkee (hockey) (in Katakana).
3 NNS Hokke- tte nan nan desu ka? What in the world is hokke-?
4 NS Machigaemashita. I misunderstood.
5 NNS Yappari nai ka.... Ma, ee wa. Just as I thought, there isn't one, is there? ....
Oh well, that's all right.
Katakana is another type of script used for Japanese writing, and is usually used for loan words, that is,
words originated in Western languages. When the student asked about a hotkey for Katakana, the native
speaker thought that this student wanted to know how to write hockey in Katakana. This became a trigger
for the next question, What is hokkee? By then the native speaker had realized that he had misunderstood
the student's utterance, and apologized for it, though whether the native speaker understood the student's
utterance is not clear from the chat log.
W-2 Misuse / Misunderstanding of Word
The first example is for the misuse of a word. In the following conversation, the student and her partner
were talking about popular TV programs in Japan. Trying to say also common to old people, the student
used the word icchi suru (agree, match with), which was not totally wrong, but was not appropriate in this
context. The native speaker rephrased the word in two different ways, once as "Dare ni demo atehamaru"
(That can apply to anyone), and another time as "Kyoutu shiteiru" (That is in common). At the end, the
student himself rephrased it as "Things that even older people know."
Etsuko Toyoda and Richard Harrison Categorization of Text Chat Communication...
Language Learning & Technology 89
Table 6.
1 NNS Demo, motto toshiyori hito demo itchi no
koto imasen ka.
But aren't there things that even more elderly
people agree on?
2 NS Dare ni demo atehamaru yoo na joohoo
to iu koto desu ka?
Do you mean the kind of information that
would apply to anyone?
3 NNS Soo desu ne. Minna doraemon o shitte
imasu ka.
That's right. Do you all know
"Doraemon"?
4 NS Umareta nendai wa motto nenree no takai
hito demo shitte iru koto wa kyootsuu
shite imasu yo ne.
Even people who are of higher age groups by
birth would know the same things we know,
don't you think?
5 NNS Uun, hoka ni nani ka ree ga arimasu ka. No, are there any other examples?
6 NS Ree? Nan no ree desu ka? Examples? Examples of what?
7 NNS Nenree no takai hito demo shitte iru
koto.
Things that even people of higher age
would know.
The next example is when a polysemy caused a communication difficulty. The native speaker used the
word katamaru for the meaning of gather, while the student interpreted this word as harden, which is the
primary meaning of this word.
Table 7.
1 NS Saikin no watashi no kansatsu dakedo,
hoka no kuni no hito no yoo ni,
omotedatte katamaru no wa sukunai
kamo shirenai kedo, ura de to iu ka,
mienai tokoro de katamatte iru ki ga
suru kedo doo kana?
This is my recent observation, but, I have a
feeling that they do not conspicuously
gather in groups but, behind, or in places
where they can not be seen, they seem to
gather in groups. What do you think?
2 NNS Watashi wa ajia-jin to shite soo iu hito o
yoku kansatsu shita koto arimasu yo.
As an Asian, I have often observed people
like that.
3 NS Soo iu hito to wa What do you mean, people like that?
4 NNS Damatte kurushimu hito ga ooi desu ne. There are many people who keep silent and
suffer, aren't there?
5 NS Damatte kurushimu? To keep silent and suffer?
6 NNS To iu ka, heesa-teki de jibun no mondai o
iwanai.
In other words, they shut others out and
don't say anything about their own
problems.
7 NS Aa, wakari mashita. Oh, now I see.
After a number of exchanges, it seems that the student and native speaker came to realize that they were
discussing two different topics. Expansion and elaboration on the word may have helped them to realize
the definitions of the word. The student confirmed her understanding with the teacher after this chat
exchange, although it is not clear from the chat log if she realized her misinterpretation.
While misuse or misunderstanding of a word is not unusual, this example shows that the
misunderstanding is not always easily noticed, and it sometimes takes a while before it is realized.
Etsuko Toyoda and Richard Harrison Categorization of Text Chat Communication...
Language Learning & Technology 90
W-3 Pronunciation/Typing Error
One frequent cause of miscommunication was pronunciation/typing error, and many of the words that
were mispronounced or misspelled were Katakana words. Although making a distinction between a
pronunciation error and a typing error is not an easy task in the case of chat conversations, the fact that
errors occur much more frequently on Katakana words made us think that there were likely to be some
contributions from pronunciation errors. As mentioned above, Katakana words are loan words originated
in Western languages. The students tended to make mistakes all the more because the Katakana words are
similar to their original English words. In other words, they are inclined to pronounce the words in a
similar way to English. For example, many Japanese learners write intaneto for Internet when it should be
written as intaanetto.
In the following conversation, one of the Katakana words that this student misspelled triggered
miscommunication.
Table 8.
1 NNS Yoroo 2000 o mimashita ka. Did you see Euroo 2000?
2 NS Nan desu ka? Sore. What is that?
3 NNS Yorooppa no sakkaa chaipionshipu. The Euroopean soccer championship.
4 NNS E, yorooppa ni sakan deshita. Oh, it existed widespread in Euroope.
5 NS Yuuro 2000 kana? Nihon-go de wa?
(Demo jitsu wa shirimasen)
It's perhaps called Euro 2000. In Japanese.
But I actually don't know.
The native speaker was not able to guess what "Yoroo 2000" was, but when the student gave a context of
European soccer championship, she was able to give a possible word.
Other misspelled Katakana words that caused communication difficulties were bajjin for baajin (Virgin --
the name of an airline company), fashion for fasshon (fashion), ronvekeshon for rongubakeeshon (Long
Vacation -- the name of a TV program), and fuutoboor for futtobooru (football).
The next example is from a Kanji word. When typing words in Kanji using a Japanese word processor,
the word is typed in using Roman letter keys as it is pronounced, which appears in Hiragana (phonetic-
based script) on the screen, and then turns into appropriate Kanji when the space bar is pressed. Often the
same pronunciation has several forms in Kanji. If the Kanji given by the installed dictionary is not an
appropriate one, other options are available on a list to replace the one that had appeared in the first place.
In the following example, as the student typed in shuushin instead of shusshin and converted it to Kanji,
the two-Kanji word that means sleep appeared. The native speaker did not understand why the student
abruptly began to talk about sleeping which had no connection with the previous conversation. The
student then chose another Kanji and added Taiwan, from which the native speaker was able to give
feedback.
Table 9.
1 NNS Shuushin (in Kanji) Going to sleep (Shuushin)
2 NS Shuushin? (in Kanji) Going to sleep (Shuushin)?
3 NNS Shuushin (in another Kanji) wa taiwan. Life-time (shuushin) is Taiwan.
4 NS Shusshin de wa? Don't you mean Shusshin (where you come
from)?
5 NNS Soo. That's right.
6 NS (NNS) san no shusshin wa taiwan desu
ka.
Is Taiwan where you come from?
Etsuko Toyoda and Richard Harrison Categorization of Text Chat Communication...
Language Learning & Technology 91
In a face-to face conversation, mixing up a long vowel with a short vowel does not necessarily cause any
miscommunication, as in most cases the meaning gets across with the help of the context. However, since
chat communication relies more on Kanji as it appears on the screen and it provokes native speakers to
activate their lexical properties of the kanji, it may therefore cause communication difficulties.
S-1 Grammatical Errors
We observed very few communication difficulties due to grammatical errors. While grammatical errors
per se were recorded numerous times, there were only three cases where the native speakers could not
follow the students' intentions. One of the examples is shown in Table 10.
Table 10.
1 NS Nihon no dorama no kanjoo ni, kyookan
ga motemasu ka?
Can you sympathize with the emotions in
Japanese dramas?
2 NNS Kakko ii desu ne. Kyookan wa, taiwan-jin
no hoo ni chikai kedo.
They are cool. Even though sympathy is
more like a Taiwanese.
3 NS To iu no wa, amari kyookan wa dekinai,
tte iu koto?
Are you saying that you can't sympathize with
them much?
4 NNS Oosutoraria no tomodachi de mo,
minagara waraimasu.
Even my friends in Australia laugh while
they watch.
5 NS Soo kaa. "Owarai" to shite, miteru no
kaa....
Oh, is that right? Are they watching them as
"comedies"….?
By synthesizing line 2 and 4, it appears that the student meant to say that even his Australian friends
(understand and) laugh while watching the Japanese drama although Taiwanese appreciate Japanese
drama in a more similar way to Japanese. The error was only one particle; because the student said
Taiwanjin no hou NI chikai instead of Taiwan jin no hou GA chikai, the meaning changed completely.
Particles are post-positional markers to show case functions such as nominative, possessive, and
objective. The particles look as if they are only supplementary in a sentence. However, they can shift the
meaning of a sentence 180 degrees. Whether or not the native speaker realized this is not clear from the
chat log. Nevertheless, miscommunication caused by grammatical errors was not one of the main causes
for communication difficulties in conversation between these advanced level students and native speakers
in this study.
S-2 Inappropriate Segmentation
Inappropriate segmentation was even less common a cause of miscommunication than grammatical
errors.
Table 11.
1 NNS Sore wa, nani ka to ii masu to melbourne
ni iru nihon-go no gakusei
Well, to tell you what it is, students studying
Japanese in Melbourne.
2 NNS to melbourne ni iru nihon-jin no gakusei and Japanese students staying in Melbourne
3 NS Nihon-go no gakusei no donna koto ni
tsuite kaku no desu ka.
What kind of things about the Japanese
language students are you going to write
about?
4 NNS no tame no site. A Web site for (them).
5 NS Naruhodo. Tame ni naru joohoo o
noseru to iu koto desu ne.
I see. You mean you are going to put
information that would be useful, do you?
Etsuko Toyoda and Richard Harrison Categorization of Text Chat Communication...
Language Learning & Technology 92
The student meant to say that "(it will be) a site for students learning Japanese and Japanese students in
Melbourne, but she segmented or broke the sentence into three utterances: a) students studying Japanese
in Melbourne, b) Japanese students staying in Melbourne, and 3) a Web site for (them). Because the
student stopped the previous utterance with the noun (gakusei) without the particle (no), and there came
in another utterance made by a native speaker, no tame no site (a site for) looked as if it were stand-alone.
The native speaker interpreted this word as useful, which is another meaning of the word. Despite the
misinterpretation, the direction of the conversation did not skew so much in this case, as they were still in
the same topic framework.
In Japanese, particles are bound-morphemes and they are placed after nouns (except two types of
particles; one that shows quotations and the other that shows moods). When native speakers write in
Japanese on the computer, in most cases they type in a particle together with the word that comes before
the particle. In the chat logs kept during the seven sessions, there were no cases where native speakers
made an utterance starting with a particle (with exceptions of the particle for quotations). On the other
hand, some inappropriate segmentation (ending a line without a particle and starting the next line with the
particle) was observed among the students during the first few sessions although they rarely resulted in
miscommunication. They may have misanalyzed a particle as a preposition for the following verb rather
than a postposition for the preceding noun. However, there is not enough evidence to determine whether
or not this is something that reflects interlanguage representations.
S-3 Abbreviated Sentence
In spoken conversations among native speakers, the use of abbreviated sentences is frequent. In Japanese,
stopping a sentence mid-way is acceptable as long as the context supports the meaning of the sentence.
Some abbreviated sentences produced by native speakers in the chat seemed to have troubled the students
as shown in the following conversations.
Table 12.
1 NS Nani ni tsuite, tsukutte iru no desu ka.
Teema toka.
What are you making a homepage on? Topic
or something?
2 NNS Teema ka.... gakusei no joohoo saabisu e Topic.... To the information service of the
students.
3 NS Arubaito toka? Part time jobs or something?
4 NNS Ima nai kedo, mae ni ten-in datta. I don't have one but I was a shop assistant
before.
5 NS A, soo na n desu ka. Oh, were you?
6 NS Ano, hoomupeeji no hanashi ni modori
mashoo ka.
Um... shall we go back to the topic of the
homepage?
The second sentence in line 1 and line 3 are abbreviated sentences. In face-to face communication with
native speakers, one may encounter a number of this type of utterance. The most frequently used form as
can be seen in the above example, is a noun with toka, which means such as X but can mean What about
X?, What do you think of X?, or Do you mean X? all depending on the context. In the given example,
when the native speaker said Teema (theme) toka, the students understood it, and tried to answer to it in
line 2. However, when the native speaker said Arubaito (part-time job) toka?, meaning Are you thinking
of including part-time job in your theme?, the student (NNS) interpreted this utterance superficially and
started talking about his own part-time job experiences. The native speaker's response A soonandesuka
(Oh, were you?) made the student think that his interpretation was correct.
Confusions were amplified when another topic intertwined in an existing topic of conversation as can be
seen in the following example.
Etsuko Toyoda and Richard Harrison Categorization of Text Chat Communication...
Language Learning & Technology 93
Table 13.
1 NS1 (NNS) san ga tsukutte iru, "HP" ni
tsuite, hanashi masu ka?
Shall we talk about the home page you are
making, (NNS)?
2 NNS Hai, soo shimashoo.. Yes, let's do that.
3 NS2 Nihon de wa, furiitaa to iu shigoto o
shite iru wakai hito ga ooku imasu.
Oosutoraria de wa?
In Japan there are many young people who
are doing a work called free worker. How about
in Australia?
4 NS1 Shigoto ni tsuite deshita kke? Was it about jobs?
5 NNS So That's right
6 NS1 Gutai-teki ni wa? (What is it) exactly about?
7 NNS Shosho, machi kudasai. Please wait a moment.
8 NS2 Dooka shimashita ka? Is there anything wrong?
9 NNS Donna topikku ni shiyo ka. What kind of topic shall we talk about?
In lines 1 and 2, both sides have agreed on talking about the Web page that the NNS was creating. And
then in line 3, the NS 2 abruptly brought in a new topic about freeter (a person who is not bound to one
company and who freely takes up different jobs), followed by an abbreviated sentence asking about the
situation in Australia. As the sentence merely means In Australia? and there is one unrelated sentence in
between the utterances, the student seemed to have been confused. Other abbreviated sentences in lines 4
and 6 made the situation worse, which resulted in the student asking once more about the topic of the
conversation. The distinctive features of chatting, such as no turn-taking competition and no non-verbal
signs, negatively affected this sequence of communication.
D-1 Sudden Topic Change
In the above situations, the students failed to incorporate contextual information in order to understand the
utterances. In the example below, the native speaker's use of the context had adversely led to a
misunderstanding. While the student abruptly changed the topic using an abbreviated sentence, the native
speaker was still trying to interpret the utterance in relation to the context.
Table 14.
1 NS Uun, sugu ni wa wakaranai kedo,
"YAHOO" toka de shiraberareru n ja nai
kana.
Hmm, I can't thnk of any straight away but I
suppose you can find out through places like
"Yahoo".
2 NS Kiiwaado de, nihon toka fasshon toka
iretara, ippai dete kuru to omoo yo.
If you enter keywords like Japan or
fashion, I think a lot will come out.
3 NNS Ja kyoomi wa. Then what about interests?
4 NS Soo, kyoomi aru mono ni tsuite, kiiwaado
ni iretara, ii desu yo.
That's right. All you have to do is to enter
what you are interested in into the
"keyword".
5 NS Kyoomi wa doo iu koto ni tsuite aru no? What kind of things are you interested in?
6 NNS Chigaou, anata no kyoomi yo. It's not right. I mean, your interests.
7 NS A, watashi no? Oh, mine?
One of the clear differences between the students and the native speakers was, with the exception of this
case, that the students often tried to shift the topic without a conjunction whereas the native speakers often
used the conjunction tokorode (by the way) for a topic change.
Etsuko Toyoda and Richard Harrison Categorization of Text Chat Communication...
Language Learning & Technology 94
D-2 Slow Response
In the following conversation, when NS1 started to talk about his experience in the USA, NS2 added
another episode from her experience in Canada. The student (NNS), in response to these, asked NS1 for
the reason. However, the response (in this case, the question) was so slow that it induced the confusion.
Table 15.
1 NS1 Saikin ichiban omoshirokatta no wa,
paatii ni itta n dakedo, dare ga sensee de
dare ga gakusee ka o "guess" suru no ga
muzukashikatta desu.
What was most interesting recently was
that, I went to a party and it was difficult
to "guess" who were teachers and who
were students.
2 NS2 Kanada de wa, eego kenshuu o uketari,
nihon-go kyooiku no genba o kengaku
shitari shita no desu ga,
In Canada, I did things like learning
English and observing places where
Japanese was actually taught, but,
3 NNS Dooshite desu ka. Why was (it)?
4 NS1 Kono shitsumon wa (NS2) san ni?
Soretomo watashi ni?
Is this question for me? Or for (NS2)?
5 NNS Sensee wa dare ka, gakusee wa dare ka,
guess dekinai no wa.
Not being able to guess who the teachers
were and who the students were.
In face-to-face conversation, this sort of communication disorder can be avoided by, for example, giving
eye contact to the addressee. In text-based communication, it seems to be inevitable to have
communication difficulties of this kind. Managing multiparty conversations might have been much more
demanding compared to dyads involving only two interlocutors. However, the communication breakdown
could have been avoided if the student's response was quicker and was made in relation to the previous
utterance. In conversations among native speakers, a number of demonstratives (e.g., this, that, these, and
those) are used referring to the previous utterances in order to avoid confusion, and when they ask
questions about something that has been said several lines up where links were not so clear, they may
make the subject of the sentence clear by repeating some words used before. This particular
communication breakdown caused by the student's slow response may have been avoided if the student
used some linkage words.
D-3 Intercultural Communication Gap
The last category is for communication difficulties due to cultural differences. The following is a
conversation over jikoshuchou (self-assertive) between the student and native speaker. Jikoshuchou, or
expressing one's opinion, has been an important aspect of character-building in Western culture. On the
contrary, conforming oneself to the situation has been a virtue in Japan. In a reply to the student's
question if Japanese are lacking self-assertion, the native speaker said that Japanese tend to assert
themselves after acknowledging the other party's opinion. The student is using the word jikoshuchou as
"asserting oneself with no relation to others" whereas the native speaker is using the same word as
"expressing one's opinion suitable to the situation."
Etsuko Toyoda and Richard Harrison Categorization of Text Chat Communication...
Language Learning & Technology 95
Table 16.
1 NNS Eeto, nihon-jin tte jiko shuchoo busoku
da to omoimasu ka.
Well, do you think Japanese people lack self-
assertion?
2 NS Aite no iken o kiite kara kangae yoo to
suru tokoro wa arimasu yo ne.
We do tend to try and think after listening to
the opinion of the other, don't we?
3 NS Aite no iken to jibun no iken o tatakawase
yoo to suru no dewa naku, onaji bubun o
mitsukete ukeirete ikoo to suru no dewa
nai desu ka.
Perhaps it is that, rather than trying to
argue against the other's opinion with our
own, we try to find common grounds and
accept the other's views?
4 NNS To iu ka, boku no iken dewa nihon-jin wa
narubeku meewaku o kakenai yoo ni soo
suru shuukan ga aru to wakatte imasu ga.
Or, in my opinion, I already understand
that the Japanese customarily do that so
they don't cause trouble or inconvenience
to others.
5 NS Aite no iken mo mitomete, jibun no
iken mo wakatte morau doryoku o
suru.
Accepting the other's opinion and also
making an effort to make the other
understand our opinions.
6 NNS Desu kara, sore wa gyougi ni chikai
desu ne.
So, that is more like a manner/behaviour, isn't it?
7 NS  Kyougi, desu ne. You mean conferring, don't you?.
After exchanging each other's view, the student concluded that expressing one's opinion after taking in the
other's opinion is a kind of gyougi (manner). Conceivably, the student tried to understand that not
imposing oneself would be mannerly in Japan. Hearing this word, the native speaker corrected the word
to kyougi (negotiation), in thinking that the student misspelled the word, as the whole notion of
jikoshuchou for him is kyougi(negotiation) and not gyougi (a manner). It appeared to the student that
expressing one's opinions after listening to the other's opinions is a mannerly behavior, while from the
native speaker's point of view it is negotiation.
RECOMMENDATIONS
Chatting in a L2 may not always be an easy task for learners, as it requires them to read messages and
respond to them quickly. There are no clues such as facial expressions and body language to help them
understand the incoming messages, which may make their interactions with their interlocutors difficult as
they have to rely solely on written texts. Moreover, complexly intertwined threads of dialogues may place
more burdens on the learners to comprehend the messages and subsequently impede their appropriate
output. Nevertheless, our data showed that the difficulties in understanding each other have indeed
triggered negotiation of meaning.
Another point to make is that the data revealed that there were several levels of communication
difficulties; word, sentence, and discourse levels. We observed that as we moved away from word level
and into discourse level, negotiation of meaning became more complex and less transparent. The findings
from the study suggest that the higher the level of the negotiation, the less clear it becomes whether the
negotiation is successful. Successfully negotiating the communication problems is essential in order to
take advantage of comprehensible input and modified output. The review of the chat logs may facilitate
the improvement of students' interlanguage.
In this section, we would like to look into how the quality of chat communication can be improved. Chat
logs, especially those that learners themselves have produced, can be valuable linguistic material for
helping students to reflect on their interlanguage. Learners will definitely pay attention to the language in
Etsuko Toyoda and Richard Harrison Categorization of Text Chat Communication...
Language Learning & Technology 96
their logs because they are their own products (Swain, personal communication). The findings from the
analysis of the chat data shed some light on what we can do in class using chat logs as learning materials.
Given the limited data, these should be considered as example tasks for negotiation about form in our
study context.
W-1 Recognition of New Word
Although a number of new words were introduced by the native speakers, the students sometimes failed
to get the meaning of the words because they did not indicate to the native speakers clearly enough that
they did not understand the word. Only when we went over the chat log with the students, did it become
clear that there were times where the students experienced difficulty in understanding words and were not
able to negotiate the meaning of the words. Having a good stock of expressions for clarification checks
and confirmation checks seems to be critical in order to carry on a conversation. These communication
strategies for asking the native speakers for clarification could be one kind of task using the chat logs, for
example, looking for instances where the request for clarification was not clear, and discussing how they
can be made clearer. Japanese language teaching has now shifted in approach to more communication-
focused teaching. The findings from this study suggest that explicit teaching of communication strategies
is also necessary. Going through the logs could be a valuable opportunity for learning some examples of
the types of stock phrases the students might need.
W-2 Misuse / Misunderstanding of Word
There were some cases where the students misused or misunderstood words that had more than one
meaning and words that shared a similar meaning with other words. These polysemies and homonyms
can be perfect materials for discussions. Learners usually learn new target words in relation to their
equivalents in their native language. However, dependence on the translation could cause
miscommunication as meaning range in two languages often does not completely overlap. Japanese
language teaching may have focused extensively on the expansion of new vocabulary, and may have
neglected to teach the word usage in contexts. Learners can talk about the reasons for the misuses and
misunderstandings and learn the core meaning of the words by collecting many example sentences that
contain the words.
W-3 Pronunciation / Typing Error
Our data has shown that writing English words in Katakana is not easy, as knowledge of the correct
English spelling may interfere with proper Japanese pronunciation. However, with some exceptions, there
are general rules for conversion, and learners may be able to find out the rules or exceptions by reviewing
Katakana words in their chat logs. The findings from our study suggest that reviewing Katakana is
necessary in the later stages of learning. When converting the typed words into Kanji, learners need to be
aware that the Kanji being chosen is relevant to the context of a conversation. In our study, the chat
conversation did make the students realize that instant kanji processing skills should be improved. One
task would be a dictation of a passage that contains many homophones, and discussion on the difference
among the possible types of Kanji characters.
S-1 Grammatical Error
A particle can sometimes be crucial to convey the right meaning of a sentence. However, it is also true
that particles are most commonly misused among learners of Japanese. In most cases, learners learn
particles along with other grammatical features, and have rarely been taught their functions in comparison
with others. Highlighting the particles that appeared in chat logs and analyzing the function of each
particle in class may help students organize the acquired knowledge.
Etsuko Toyoda and Richard Harrison Categorization of Text Chat Communication...
Language Learning & Technology 97
S-2 Inappropriate Segmentation
It was interesting to see some sentences starting with particles in the chat logs, as such a feature is rarely,
if ever, observed in regular classes either in face-to-face communication or in written composition where
utterances or sentences just flow. It tells us that learners may be treating a particle as a preposition for the
following verb rather than a postposition for the preceding noun. Segmentation of a sentence into smaller
units may be one task appropriate here.
S-3 Abbreviated Sentence
We have observed frequent use of abbreviated sentences by the native speakers. For students who have
limited experience conversing with native speakers, comprehending abbreviated sentences using
contextual information was not easy. Teaching abbreviated sentences has been neglected, although these
sorts of sentences form an important part of natural conversations. Also, learners would not have noticed
such sentences if they had not engaged in electronic chats with native speakers. Most of our students have
had experiences of living in Japan and are familiar with Japanese native speech. Nevertheless, it is not
easy to notice when and how abbreviated sentences are used while conversing in face-to-face situations.
Learners may be able to find abbreviated sentences, if any, in their chat logs and discuss the expanded
form of those sentences.
D-1 Sudden Topic Change
A sudden topic change without a conjunctive word was one of the typical causes for communication
difficulty. Our suggestion is that learners go over their logs and discuss how their partners have changed a
topic. It might be a good opportunity to review conjunctive words and their functions in a passage, and
examine when conjunctive words are not used. As in the case of particles, conjunctive words are usually
presented together with other language functions. The proper usage of such words needs to be taught at
some stage. It could be possible to practice this through pair work, eliciting sentences from a picture and
collaboratively combining the sentences using a conjunction.
D-2 Slow Response
Multiple topics of conversation intertwined together is a unique feature of chatting. When a response is
slow, it can cause confusion. There is no doubt that coping with multiparty conversation with native
speakers using an unfamiliar chat tool is extremely hard for non-native speakers. Learners should be
aware that responding quickly in chat by using shorter sentences is essential. Learners may discuss
strategies for avoiding this sort of confusion, and look for particular strategies for chat conversation.
Some practice sessions for making shorter abbreviated sentences might be necessary. However, making
an utterance shorter does sometimes cause communication difficulties. Based on our impressionistic
observation of conversations between native speakers, we believe there exist many repetitions of phrases
to link one's utterance to the previous ones, particularly in cases where "why" and "how" are sought.
Learners may need to learn some strategies to respond quickly in the shortest possible abbreviated
sentences that still have links to the previous utterances.
D-3 Intercultural Communication Gap
The concept of a word is not the same in a different cultural context. Miscommunication caused by a gap
in concepts between two cultures is typical in an international communication setting, and is not specific
to chat conversation. However, chat conversations certainly make the situation worse, as interlocutors
cannot see each other's facial expression of confusion. It may be valuable to have discussions on the
meaning range of a word in the target language and in the native tongue, and talk about the sense of value
in each culture. In language classes, even when cultural differences are touched upon, they are usually
discussed on a superficial level. Focusing on some key words that can be a cause of communication
breakdowns would be a very good way of leading learners to notice cultural differences.
Etsuko Toyoda and Richard Harrison Categorization of Text Chat Communication...
Language Learning & Technology 98
CONCLUSION
Abundant research suggests that negotiation of meaning, which has been claimed to facilitate L2 learning,
frequently occurs in electronic communication. In this paper, we categorized negotiation of meaning that
took place between learners and native speakers of Japanese over a series of chat conversations, and made
suggestions for making use of chat logs.
A series of communication difficulties was observed in the chat logs. We found that the chat exchanges
induced negotiation of meaning between interlocutors at various levels. Another thing that the chat logs
taught us was that there were some language aspects that are crucial for communication, but that had been
neglected in teaching, and that students would not have noticed if they had not had the opportunity to chat
with native speakers.
NOTES
1. This study has been funded by the Faculty of Arts ITMM grant. An early draft of the paper was
written by the first author and was submitted as a class assignment for the subject "Second Language
Acquisition" offered in the Linguistics and Applied Linguistics Department at the University of
Melbourne.
2. JEWELS has been developed by a team of researchers in Japan led by Mr. Richard Harrison.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to express our gratitude to Assoc. Prof. Tim McNamara and Dr. Robert Debski for
their valuable comments on the earlier version of the paper. We would also like to thank the LLT
reviewers for their constructive feedback.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Etsuko Toyoda is a senior tutor of Japanese at the Melbourne Institute of Asian Languages & Societies at
the University of Melbourne. Her research interests include word recognition, learner autonomy, language
learning and technology, and metalinguistic awareness.
Richard Harrison, born in the UK, has been teaching Japanese as a foreign language and developing/using
computer-based software for Japanese for the past 10 years in the UK, Australia, and Japan. His current
research interests are in virtual learning environments and constructivist approaches to learning language,
particularly socially-based interaction using chat.
E-mail: e.toyoda@asian.unimelb.edu.au
harrison@ecis.nagoya-u.ac.jp
REFERENCES
Barson, J., Frommer, J., & Schwartz, M. (1993). Foreign language learning using email in a task-oriented
perspective: Interuniversity experiments in communication and collaboration. Journal of Science and
Technology, 2(4), 565-584.
Blake, R. (2000). Computer mediated communication: A window on L2 Spanish interlanguage. Language
Learning & Technology, 4(1), 120-136. Retrieved May 6, 2001, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/blake/.
Ellis, R. (1985). Understanding second language acquisition. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Etsuko Toyoda and Richard Harrison Categorization of Text Chat Communication...
Language Learning & Technology 99
Gass, S. (1997). Input, interaction, and the second language learner. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Kim, A. J. (2000). Community building on the Web. Berkeley, CA: Peachpit Press.
Kitade, K. (2000). L2 Learners' discourse and SLA theories in CMC: Collaborative interaction in Internet
chat. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 13(2), 143-166.
Long, M. H. (1991). Focus on form: A design feature in language teaching methodology. In K. de Bot, R.
Ginsberg, & C. Kramsch (Eds.), Foreign language research in cross-cultural perspective (pp. 39-52).
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Long, M. H. (1996). The role of linguistic environment in second language acquisition. In W. C. Richie &
T. K. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of research on language acquisition, Vol. 2: Second language acquisition
(pp. 413-468). New York: Academic Press.
Ortega, L. (1997). Processes and outcomes in networked classroom interaction: Defining the research
agenda for L2 computer-assisted classroom discussion. Language Learning & Technology, 1(1), 82-93.
Retrieved May 6, 2001, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/ortega/.
Pellettieri, J. (2000). Negotiation in cyberspace: The role of chatting in the development of grammatical
competence. In M. Warschauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Network-based language teaching: Concepts and
practice (pp. 59-86). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Pica, T. (1994). Research on negotiation: What does it reveal about second-language learning conditions,
processes, and outcomes? Language Learning, 44, 493-527.
Sotillo, S. M. (2000). Discourse functions and syntactic complexity in synchronous and asynchronous
communication. Language Learning & Technology, 4(1), 82-119. Retrieved May 6, 2002, from
http://llt.msu.edu.vol4num1/sotillo/default.html.
Swain, M. (1993). The output hypothesis: Just speaking and writing aren't enough. The Canadian Modern
Language Review, 50, 158-164.
Swain, M. (1995). Three functions of output in second language learning. In G. Cook & G. Seidhofer
(Eds.), Principles and practice in applied linguistics: Studies in honor of H. G. Widdowson (pp. 125-144).
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Tamaoka, K. (1991). Psycholinguistic nature of the Japanese orthography. Studies in Language and
Literature, 11(1), 49-82.
Varonis, E. M. & Gass, S. (1985). Non-native / non-native conversations: A model for negotiation of
meaning. Applied Linguistics, 6, 71-90.
Warschauer, M. (1998). Interaction, negotiation, and computer-mediated learning. In M. Clay (Ed.),
Practical applications of educational technology in language learning. Lyon, France: National Institute
of Applied Sciences. Retrieved May 6, 2001, from http://www.insa-
lyon.fr/Departments/CDRL/interaction.html.
Werry, C. C. (1996). Linguistic and interactional features of Internet relay chat. In S. Herring (Ed.),
Computer-Mediated Communication: Linguistic, social, and cross-cultural perspectives (pp. 47-63).
Amsterdam: J. Benjamins.
