Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num3/net/
September 2002, Volume 6, Number 3
pp. 4-7
Copyright © 2002, ISSN 1094-3501 4
ON THE NET
Foreign Language Teacher Education Resources
Jean W. LeLoup
SUNY Cortland
Robert Ponterio
SUNY Cortland
When one talks about teacher education one must also, of necessity, include professional
development. Teacher education does not end with the conferring of the degree; it must
continue throughout the teacher's professional career or we will have instructors who are
out of touch with their discipline. In essence, teacher education subsumes both
preservice and inservice teachers, and this is particularly germane to foreign language
(FL) teacher education. Second language acquisition is clearly an ongoing process, one
that rarely -- if ever -- ends, if only because the languages and cultures we study are
constantly evolving. The acquisition of professional knowledge and abilities is also a
continuing process; successful teachers perpetually hone their skills and acquire new
talents for use in the classroom.
To accomplish this continuing renewal, FL teachers need to remain current with research
in the field and trends in methodology and instruction, and to be reflective practitioners
who think about their work. How to do this when one is either busy preparing to enter
the teaching profession or, equally as busy, teaching on a daily basis with many students
and language lessons to juggle? Having useful FL resources easily available can
facilitate professional development of both the preservice and the inservice FL teacher.
This column will examine a few sites that are designed for FL educators and serve as
vehicles for both teacher education and professional development.
The ERIC Clearinghouse for Languages and Linguistics or ERIC/CLL is one such useful
and easily available resource for FL educators. As stated on their Web site, ERIC/CLL is
operated by the Center for Applied Linguistics, a private non profit organization. The
Clearinghouse collects and disseminates information on current developments in
education research, instructional methods and materials, program design and evaluation,
teacher training, and assessment in the following areas:
• Foreign languages
• English as a second or foreign language
• Bilingualism and bilingual education
• Psycholinguistics and sociolinguistics
• Theoretical and applied linguistics
• Intercultural communication and cultural education
• Study abroad and international exchange
Jean W. Le Loup and Robert Ponterio On the Net
Language Learning & Technology 5
While the ERIC/CLL site is extensive, in this column we will concentrate on those
resources that are most directly involved with teacher education and professional
development. First is the ERIC/CLL Resource Guides Online series that includes
Internet Resources for Foreign Language Teachers. This comprehensive site offers links
to the following FL teaching resources, some of which are created by ERIC though
others are available from other sources:
• ERIC Digests: brief summaries of the latest hot topics dealing with FL learning
and instruction written by recognized specialists in the field, including a specific
section devoted to Professional Development
• ERIC/CLL Resource Guides Online: other ERIC series on related topics
including Immersion, Bilingualism, and Early language learning
• Annotated Bibliographies: these minibibs are short bibliographies of recent
research and articles dealing with a wide range of current issues in FL learning
• Other ERIC/CLL Publications: email newsletters (such as Language Link),
bulletins, and even a publication for parents dealing with early language
learning questions;
• Online Journals and Newsletters: additional resources not directly affiliated
with ERIC/CLL including Language Learning and Technology
• Listservs: online discussion forums of interest to FL teachers, such as
FLTEACH (Foreign Language Teaching Forum) and LLTI (Language Learning
Technology International), with directions on how to subscribe
• Web Sites: certainly not exhaustive but a very good place to start
• National, Regional, and Language-Specific Organizations of Language
Teachers, and Foreign Language Resource Centers: contact information and,
in many cases, specific missions and areas of focus
• Conferences: some limited information on annual FL conferences
• ERIC Documents: a helpful illustration of what can be available from a search
of the ERIC database of educational documents, including information about
how to then obtain copies of documents identified through the search process
Language Link, mentioned above, frequently publishes articles that deal directly with
teacher education and professional development. Issues are available back through June
of 1999 and are definitely worth a perusal. For example, in March of 2002, the feature
article, Foreign Language Teaching Methods Online: ACTFL's New Course, detailed
this valuable resource for both preservice and inservice teachers who may not have had a
methods course specifically for FL educators. The June issue of Language Link offers a
feature article on Bilingual Career Ladder Programs: An Answer to the ESL Teacher
Shortage? It is a thought-provoking piece for anyone considering entering this area of
the FL education field as a new or veteran FL teacher.
The last offering of ERIC/CLL that we will mention here is an extensive article by Lily
Wong Fillmore and Catherine E. Snow entitled What Teachers Need to Know about
Language. It is the result of a special project funded by a U.S. Department of Education
initiative. Any preservice or inservice FL teacher should read this article and ponder the
ideas therein. Additional commentary on the paper's implications for early childhood
educators, as well as three ERIC Digests on the topic, are also provided.
The ERIC/CLL site is a great benefit for preservice and inservice FL teachers as well as
anyone else interested in the issues involved in foreign and second language learning
Jean W. Le Loup and Robert Ponterio On the Net
Language Learning & Technology 6
and instruction. We encourage you to take an in-depth look at this marvelous resource
and to take advantage of the valuable professional support it offers.
We briefly mention two additional sites below because they were specifically developed
for use in preservice FL teacher education and represent an interactive use of the Web to
actively involve the future teacher through the manipulation of the lesson content.
However, these lesson can also be of use to the inservice teacher population in FL and,
indeed, in general. At any rate, they were created by one of the authors of this column (J.
LeLoup) and are freely available for those who wish to use them.
A Communications Technology Module for the Foreign Language Methods Course
presents a basic introduction to essential communications technologies that FL teachers
should be familiar with and know how to use. This module provides definitions,
explanations, and practical application scenarios and activities to demystify this
technology and make it accessible to educators. Because it was created with preservice
teachers in mind, a pedagogy section proffers thought-provoking questions one should
explore when contemplating the use of technology in a particular activity. The module
also offers sample lesson plans using these technologies with a view toward helping FL
teachers integrate this knowledge into their curriculum. The lessons are Standards-based
and are centered around specific technologies.
The second site is foreign language-related but simultaneously targets preservice
teachers across disciplines. The ESL/LEP Module was created as a drop-in component
to be used in all teacher education programs at the State University of NewYork
Cortland in partial fulfillment of a New York State Department of Education mandate
for all teacher candidates to heighten their awareness of the needs of English as a Second
Language/Limited English Proficiency students. This module includes several activities
and assignments, some general and some discipline-specific, that aim to give preservice
teachers a better understanding of the issues involved in teaching ESL/LEP students in
any content area. Video clips are used to (a) simulate immersion in a class where course
content is taught in another language and (b) reveal the ESL/LEP students perspective
on several critical questions that arise concerning teaching methodologies and practices
in classes with an ESL/LEP population.
Jean W. Le Loup and Robert Ponterio On the Net
Language Learning & Technology 7
These pedagogical resources for teachers illustrate two of the principal advantages of
Web materials as components of any course of training, whether university-based or
individual and independent. The first advantage is fast, easy access to current, pertinent
information in order to answer questions and offer solutions to problems. The Web thus
becomes a virtual library allowing the preservice or inservice teacher to quickly locate
and access documents that would otherwise not be available or that may only be found
via a trip to a library that may be miles away, a significant hardship for the teacher
facing considerable time constraints. Generally speaking, these documents can be
deemed traditional in that they resemble the typical printed page. The advantage of the
Web, therefore, is access.
The second advantage of the Web is the possibility of using the power of the computer
to implement an interactive, multimedia presentation that can support realistic
simulations providing material that the teacher can manipulate. This can make for a
much richer learning experience than a more traditional "page-turner" type presentation
in which the information is displayed essentially as it would be in a book. The
manipulation, designed to imitate the experience of active involvement in the learning
process that one normally associates with work in a classroom environment, is a
powerful feature that would be impossible to reproduce without the aid of the computer.
The ERIC Clearinghouse for Languages and Linguistics site and the Communications
Technology Module for the Foreign Language Methods Course and ESL/LEP Module
are useful tools for the Foreign Language professional and interesting samples of the
potential of the Web as an instructional medium.
