Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/onthenet/ 
January 2002, Vol. 6, Num. 1 
pp. 3-5 
 
Copyright © 2002, ISSN 1094-3501 3 
ON THE NET 
MERLOT: Multimedia Educational Resource for Learning and Online 
Teaching 
Jean W. LeLoup  
SUNY Cortland  
Robert Ponterio  
SUNY Cortland  
Locating and evaluating online authentic materials of use in the language classroom is a time consuming 
but essential prelude to integrating Internet technology in the foreign language curriculum. Quality 
teaching materials that help us integrate this authentic online content are an invaluable resource, but such 
online lessons are not themselves easy to find. The MERLOT project not only points us to such teaching 
materials, it also provides peer reviews that help us evaluate them.  
 
What is MERLOT? 
MERLOT stands for Multimedia Educational Resource for Learning and Online Teaching.  
MERLOT is a free and open resource designed primarily for faculty and students in 
higher education. With a continually growing collection of online learning materials, peer 
reviews and assignments, MERLOT helps faculty enhance instruction. MERLOT is also 
a community of people who strive to enrich teaching and learning experiences.  
This home page statement from the MERLOT project explains the essence of this Internet endeavor. 
MERLOT was created by the California State University-Center for Distributed Learning in 1997. Since 
that time, the MERLOT project has developed into an international cooperative effort that serves over 
1,400 campuses, including more than 350,000 faculty and 8 million students. MERLOT has 23 
institutional partners working together to support and maintain MERLOT's Discipline Communities.  
Discipline Communities  
These Discipline Communities include, but are not limited to, languages. They are focused primarily 
around academic disciplines (Biology, Business, Chemistry, Engineering, Health Science, History, 
Information Technology, Mathematics, Music, Physics, Psychology, Teacher Education, and of course 
World Languages). In addition, there is a community for faculty development (Teaching Well Online) 
and one for academic technology staff (CATS).  
The main goal of MERLOT is to develop and present organized collections of online teaching-learning 
resources for the various disciplines represented in the communities. These resources are generally online 
materials that have been submitted as exemplary in their particular field. They are subject to a peer review 
process that applies evaluation standards to the resources in the collection, though not all submissions are, 
indeed, reviewed. 
Jean W. LeLoup and Robert Ponterio On the Net 
 
Language Learning & Technology 4 
Peer Review  
The Peer Review Process is a procedure whereby materials are evaluated for  
· Quality of Content 
· Potential Effectiveness as a Teaching Learning Tool 
· Ease of Use 
Faculty evaluators are trained in the review process and have their work validated through inter-rater 
reliability checks. Two or three reviewers are assigned per site selected for examination. The final 
reviews may all be posted or may be compiled into one summary review. The author of the materials is 
provided feedback and given an opportunity to respond to the reviewers comments, if desired. Permission 
to post the review is also requested of the author. The review rating system is one of one to five stars:  
1 star - Materials not worth using at all  
2 stars - Materials do not meet minimal standards but there might be some limited value  
3 stars - Materials meet or exceed standards but there are some significant concerns  
4 stars - Materials are very good overall but there are a few minor concerns  
5 stars - Materials are excellent all around 
MERLOT's policy is not to post peer review ratings of 1 or 2 stars. However, User Comments can include 
ratings from 1-5 stars. Any MERLOT member and any individual reviewer of the peer review teams can 
post User Comments if they wish. The site provides an extensive explanation of the rating system and the 
rationale for it.  
Clearly, individual users should examine all the materials carefully with regard to their own particular 
curriculum and potential educational use.  
World Languages  
The Discipline Community most likely of interest to foreign language educators is entitled World 
Languages. At this writing, there were 587 submissions to the World Languages community. The 
collection can be sorted by title, author, rating, date entered, or item type, with the default sort order being 
by 5 star rated materials first. Languages represented by materials submissions and/or online resources 
currently include Arabic, Chinese, ESL, French, German, Greek, Hebrew, Italian, Japanese, Latin, 
LCTLs, Portuguese, Russian, and Spanish.  
Materials listed in the MERLOT database can be located by keyword search or by browsing through 
subcategories. For example, "Humanities/World Languages/French/Culture" is just one subcategory 
found in the World Languages category. A complete subject index of all subcategories can assist the 
visitor to MERLOT looking for specific areas of interest.  
MERLOT's search engine allows searches of the entire database and also makes it easy to perform a sub-
search to narrow the search results farther, zooming in on the desired resources. An advanced sub-search 
form is a valuable option that makes it very easy to design complex search criteria, even for the database 
novice. The results for any search done in the site include a link to the advanced sub-search form, 
facilitating access to the form when needed.  
The MERLOT project is always in search of qualified external reviewers for the World Languages 
Community in order to have sufficient number of content experts to do peer reviews in all of the 
languages in MERLOT. Faculty who are interested in being considered have to become MERLOT 
members, submit user comments on some of the sites in their languages, and send in their credentials 
(CV), which should indicate experience with online learning materials as well as content expertise.  
Language teachers who develop high quality online lessons should seriously consider submitting their 
work to MERLOT for inclusion in the database and for peer review. The usefulness of this wonderful 
Jean W. LeLoup and Robert Ponterio On the Net 
 
Language Learning & Technology 5 
resource for teachers will continue to grow as we contribute the materials we develop for our students. In 
addition, peer reviews not only help potential users evaluate a site, they can be an excellent source of 
feedback as those who develop lessons work on revisions.  
Joining MERLOT  
Individuals can contribute materials to the MERLOT site but must become members in order to so. The 
membership form requests a name, email, and primary/secondary areas of interest. The idea here is to 
establish a vehicle for educators to find other colleagues with similar interests in the profession.  
The community aspect of MERLOT is its greatest asset. The directors of the MERLOT project feel that 
they are successful in their mission if community members want to contribute  resources as well as use 
them. If faculty and other site users submit the learning assignments that they write dealing with objects 
they find in MERLOT, or if they even just share comments about how they use the sites, they, in turn, 
feel more invested and more part of the community. They are, consequently, more likely to come back to 
MERLOT for future use. The end result is that MERLOT is not building just a repository but "a space 
where there can be real interaction among language professionals, authors and learners," says Laura 
Franklin ( Northern Virginia Community College) who, along with Carla Meskill (SUNY Albany), co-
leads the World Language Discipline Team.  
