Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/from_the_editors.html 
January 2002, Vol. 6, Num. 1 
pp. 1-2 
 
Copyright © 2002, ISSN 1094-3501 1 
 
 
FROM THE EDITORS 
Welcome to the first issue of volume six of Language Learning & Technology. We 
expect 2002 to be another exciting year for LLT with special issues coming up on 
indigenous languages and teacher education. In this issue, the first general issue since 
last January, we are pleased to bring you a wonderful variety of articles. 
Three of the articles examine social aspects of language learning. Margaret A. DuFon 
begins a discussion of ethnographic, artistic, technological, and other concerns of 
obtaining authentic language learning material through video in "Video Recording in 
Ethnographic SLA Research: Some Issues of Validity in Data Collection." She 
illustrates some of the theoretical and methodological questions she raises with her own 
experiences with her students in Indonesia. In her article "Social Dimensions of 
Telecollaborative Foreign Language Study," Julie Belz analyzes socio-institutional 
dimensions of a German-American telecollaboration partnership, revealing 
tremendously practical points of consideration for any inter-language telecollaboration 
project. And, Etsuko Toyoda and Richard Harrison, in "Categorization of Text Chat 
Communication Between Learners and Native Speakers of Japanese," look at how 
difficulties in communication trigger negotiation of meaning between students and 
native speakers of Japanese in chat conversations. Through their examination, they 
discovered crucial communication aspects which were not taught in class and which 
students would not have learned had they not participated in chat with native speakers. 
The next three articles are related to vocabulary learning. Ofelia Nikolova's "Effects of 
Students' Participation in Authoring of Multimedia Materials on Student Acquisition of 
Vocabulary" reports on a study which considers the effect of student involvement in the 
learning process on vocabulary learning. She also discusses the effectiveness of text, 
sound, and image versus text and sound only. Isabelle De Ridder addresses the question, 
"Visible or Invisible Links: Does the Highlighting of Hyperlinks Affect Incidental 
Vocabulary Learning, Text Comprehension, and the Reading Process?" In "Providing 
Controlled Exposure to Target Vocabulary Through the Screening and Arranging of 
Texts," Sina Ghadirian proposes exposing students to reading texts in an order which 
introduces them to words of incremental frequency in the target domain. This is now 
possible through the use of a computer program which sorts collections of texts and 
finds the target words while creating an order for the texts.  
Finally, "Student Perceptions on Language Learning in a Technological Environment: 
Implications for the New Millennium" by Johanne Steppe-Greany reports on a survey of 
beginning Spanish students' responses to technology-enhanced learning environments. 
This kind of feedback is certainly valuable to any institution considering developing 
technology-enhanced language classes. 
We have two regular technology columns. In On the Net, Jean W. Leloup and Robert 
Ponterio introduce us to MERLOT (Multimedia Educational Resource for Learning and 
Online Teaching), a free online collection of reviewed authentic language learning 
materials. And in Emerging Technologies, Bob Godwin-Jones describes different types 
of wireless networks, both those available now, and those becoming available. Though 
Europe is somewhat ahead of the game in this area, it is a growing option in other parts 
of the world. 
Mark Warschauer, Dorothy Chun, & Pamela DaGrossa  From the Editors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 2 
 
 
We also offer you one book and three software reviews. Stephen A. Bird reviews Carol 
Chapelle's Computer Applications in Second Language Acquisition (2001). Meena 
Singhal reviews Essential Academic Skills in English: Listening to Lectures CD-ROM 
(Volume I). Susan Carpenter Binkley reviews Advanced French: Interactive Video 
Language Learning with "Au coeur de la loi." And Joseph Collentine reviews Tesoros: 
A Multimedia-Based Spanish Course on CD-ROM. 
Thank you all for your continued support of LLT. Please continue to send us 
manuscripts, commentaries, and reviews. We also welcome feedback from our readers 
and encourage each of you to subscribe. It's free, and it helps us to better know you and 
your interests.  
Have a wonderful 2002! 
Sincerely, 
Mark Warschauer & Dorothy Chun 
Editors 
Pamela DaGrossa 
Managing Editor 
 
