Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num3/review4/
September 2002, Volume 6, Number 3
pp. 37-45
Copyright © 2002, ISSN 1094-3501 37
REVIEW OF THE MOUTON INTERACTIVE INTRODUCTION TO
PHONETICS AND PHONOLOGY
AND PHONETICS: AN INTERACTIVE INTRODUCTION
Title The Mouton Interactive Introduction to
Phonetics and Phonology (2000)
Phonetics: An Interactive Introduction
(2000; Contains bonus program
Introduction to Voice Onset Time, 1996)
Author Jürgen Handke Nicholas Reid, with contributions from
Helen Fraser
Platform Windows (9x/ME/NT 4.0/2000) and
Macintosh (MacOS 8.1 or higher)
Windows (95/98/NT4) and Macintosh
(MacOS 7.5.1 or later)
Minimum
hardware
requirements
PC: Pentium, 32 MB RAM, 30 MB
hard disk space, SVGA graphics
board, CD-ROM drive and sound card.
Mac: PowerPC 120 MHz or higher, 32
MB RAM, 30 MB hard disk space,
screen resolution 800x600, color
monitor with thousands of colors or
higher, CD-ROM drive, sound card.
PC: Pentium processor or equivalent, 2x
speed CD-ROM, 12 MB RAM (free),
800x600 8-bit color display.
Mac: 68040 or faster processor, 2x speed
CD-ROM, 12 MB RAM (free), 800x600
8-bit color display.
Publisher Mouton de Gruyter.
http://www.degruyter.de/mouton/
phonetics/
The University of New England,
Australia
http://www.une.edu.au/tlc/phon.htm
Support offered Extensive context-sensitive "Help"
menus throughout the program, as well
as a "Help" index. Brief overview of
program options given in inside cover
of booklet inside the jewel case.
None. (Tips given from the Navigate
pull-down menu.)
Target language English and general English and general
Target audience Linguistics students and instructors Linguistics students and instructors
Price $39.95 (for orders placed in North
America). Class adoption price (20 or
more copies) $29.95. Campus license
$750.
UNE Student $21.93; Other Student
$54.77; Institution $98.63. Incl. postage,
handling and GST. (Price given in
Australian dollars.)
ISBN 3-11-016812-X 1-86389-609-0
Reviewed by D. Eric Holt, University of South Carolina
OVERVIEW
The Mouton Interactive Introduction to Phonetics and Phonology and Phonetics: An Interactive
Introduction, which includes the bonus program Introduction to Voice Onset Time, are CD-based
multimedia resources for the beginning student of linguistics, as well as for more advanced students (or
instructors) who desire further review of the fundamentals of phonetics and phonology in a visually
stimulating, interactive setting. Both CD-ROMs contain detailed illustrations, animated graphics, and
video clips of the physical, acoustic, and auditory aspects of speech production and perception, and in the
case of the Mouton title, of more abstract phonological concepts, representations, and theories. Both
programs are easily navigated via menu-driven commands and clickable hotlinks, and they include
practical exercises for the student to develop mastery of the concepts presented.
Reviewed by D. Eric Holt Review of Mouton Interactive… and Phonetics…
Language Learning & Technology 38
These programs are part of the growing trend to offer Web-based or CD-ROM resources for students of
linguistics, such as those that supplement the texts of Hammond (2001, http://www.cascadilla.com/ssaa/
index.html); Labov, Ash, & Boberg (2001, http://babel.ling.upenn.edu/phono_atlas/home.html and
http://www.uni-marburg.de/linguistik/dgweb/atlas/cdinfo.htm); Ladefoged (2001a, 2001b, http://hctv.
humnet.ucla.edu/departments/linguistics/VowelsandConsonants/index.htm); as well as the Contemporary
Linguistics companion Web site (http://www.bedfordstmartins.com/linguistics/), which provides
excellent links on phonetics and phonology. The difference in the current context is, of course, that the
CD-ROMs under review are stand-alone materials. (See the Appendix for a list of other multimedia and
on-line phonetics and phonology materials.)
DISCUSSION
The Mouton Interactive Introduction to Phonetics and Phonology
From the opening screen, there is access to separate branches dedicated to phonetics and phonology, with
over 100 screens of content. Various buttons appear on each screen when the functions are available:
Navigation (which leads to the closest thing to what one might call the table of contents); Bibliography
(with a list of 12 entries on phonetics and phonology, with reference information that can be copied to the
clipboard; a blurb about the book, and a summary of its contents); Glossary (an A-Z listing of technical
words and terms employed, with definitions and textual examples where appropriate); Notepad (for note-
taking); Information (about the project and the author, narrated by the author); and Help. In addition,
content screens have a button for the Interactive Tutor when relevant exercises are available.
The Phonetics section shows all aspects of articulatory, auditory and acoustic phonetics, and in addition
to text, includes numerous animations and sound files to help the student more fully grasp the concepts
presented (see Figures 1 and 2).
Figure 1. Mouton Phonetics overview
Reviewed by D. Eric Holt Review of Mouton Interactive… and Phonetics…
Language Learning & Technology 39
Figure 2. Mouton State of the Glottis
The interactive presentation of Phonetics is noteworthy. For example, one highly useful screen from the
subsection The Segments of Speech is The International Phonetic Alphabet: Pulmonic Consonants, which
contains a full IPA chart. When a symbol is clicked, a traditional three-part articulatory description is
shown, and the sound is heard, accompanied by animated side-view facial diagrams. Likewise, Primary
Cardinal Vowels allows the user to see how vowel sounds are produced by moving the cursor over a
vowel triangle superimposed on an animated human vocal tract (side view). As the cursor moves over a
certain vowel, the mouth and tongue in the image shift to reflect the articulation of the vowel; an
additional front view of a human face also shifts according to the vowel produced, which may be heard by
clicking on it. Finally, The Human Hearing System (from the Auditory Phonetics subsection) provides an
animated graphic of the workings of the outer, middle and inner ear, along with a voice-over description
by the author.
The Phonology section covers standard topics such as the phoneme and distinctive features, as well as
suprasegmentals and a variety of phonological theories from the ancient tradition to Optimality Theory,
and it includes discussion of British and American English. There are copious illustrations of minimal
pairs, stress and intonational phrases, and other topics, all fully exemplified visually, graphically and
auditorily where appropriate (see Figure 3).
Reviewed by D. Eric Holt Review of Mouton Interactive… and Phonetics…
Language Learning & Technology 40
Figure 3. Mouton Phonology overview
Finally, the Interactive Tutor tests students and monitors their individual progress, with results stored in
an individual student-protocol. For all topics there is a variety of exercises ranging from multiple-choice
tasks to labeling or construction tasks, and even exercises involving transcription, where the student has
the chance to put into practice those elements just introduced. Most exercises have several levels of
difficulty that are activated as the student progresses; that is, the questions get more difficult as the
student answers lower-level ones.
For a more detailed overview of the Mouton product, the reader is referred to the excellent demo program
available at http://www.uni-marburg.de/linguistik/dgweb/phonology/demos.htm, where one can overview
the contents and structure of the program, view representative screenshots, and see the workings of the
three Phonetics screens described above.
Phonetics: An Interactive Introduction
Phonetics: An Interactive Introduction, which may be used as an autonomous resource or as a supplement
to any general introductory phonetics textbook, was originally developed for distance students of
linguistics at the University of New England, Australia. The target audience now includes graduate
students in linguistics and speech pathology at numerous universities around Australia, and Phonetics
would serve equally well in universities in other parts of the world. The CD-ROM includes modules
called The Vocal Tract, Speech Sounds, Phonation Modes, Airstream Mechanisms, and Acoustic Analysis,
and also includes a module of Exercises (see Figure 4).
Reviewed by D. Eric Holt Review of Mouton Interactive… and Phonetics…
Language Learning & Technology 41
Figure 4. Phonetics opening page
The program is rich in multimedia, and includes numerous sound files, video resources, and animations
that vividly demonstrate all aspects of speech articulation. The student can listen to speech sounds, match
them with their International Phonetic Alphabet symbols, watch video of the vocal folds in action and of
patients whose larynx has been removed and who speak using esophageal airflow, and even listen to a
speaker of a "click" language. These last two items are especially interesting and are unique to this title.
Also particularly noteworthy is the Australian context of this program, and audio files allow the student to
compare Australian English with other varieties (see Figure 5). Further, there are animations of complex
articulatory gestures, and of the basics of the acoustic properties of speech (see Figure 6). As noted by the
authors, this type of information is difficult to learn from print-based sources, and the extremely visual
and interactive nature of this CD-ROM is likely to maintain high student interest and facilitate
assimilation of the concepts presented.
Reviewed by D. Eric Holt Review of Mouton Interactive… and Phonetics…
Language Learning & Technology 42
Figure 5. Phonetics Speech Sounds (Australian English vowels)
Figure 6. Phonetics Acoustic Analysis (introduction)
Reviewed by D. Eric Holt Review of Mouton Interactive… and Phonetics…
Language Learning & Technology 43
The Exercises section is quite good, and provides immediate feedback to the student on activities such as
labeling parts of the vocal tract, identifying and labeling symbols for consonants and vowels, transcribing
three- and eight-phoneme words, choosing the phonation mode, and identifying parts of a spectrogram.
There are no record-keeping, printing, or e-mail options that I could identify.
The CD-ROM contains a bonus program, Introduction to Voice Onset Time (VOT; Figure 7), an excellent
resource that further enriches the learning experience of the student and of the teaching possibilities for
the instructor. All aspects of VOT are discussed and exemplified, and there are clickable examples from
English, French, Hindi, Tamil, Korean, and Thai.
Figure 7. VOT
EVALUATION
Uses for these programs are many: showing animation and video clips in class; assigning out-of-class
tasks; reviewing material for general study or exam preparation; delving deeper into issues presented in
class or not covered in class; and self-paced independent study. These titles are further valuable to
phonologists without in-depth training or teaching experience in phonetics, or with exposure to the
discipline primarily via the printed word. Likewise, the Mouton title is valuable to phoneticians who wish
to learn more about a variety of phonological theories. Phonetics won a prestigious award from the
Australasian Society for Computers in Learning in Tertiary Education (ASCILITE) for its exemplary use
of electronic technologies in teaching and learning; this is a well-deserved honor, in my view.
Limitations
The Mouton Interactive Introduction to Phonetics and Phonology. An overall index, table of contents, and
site map are lacking and would be most welcome, as would a list of audio, video, and other animated
files, for facilitated reference and access to all materials. Likewise, a list accessible from the main page
with names or authors would also be useful, especially one with links to citations within the program. As
Reviewed by D. Eric Holt Review of Mouton Interactive… and Phonetics…
Language Learning & Technology 44
far as I can tell, the very interesting Important Phoneticians and Phonologists, a list of 29 researchers
with a picture and short biography of each, is accessible only from within the Phonological Theories
page. Additionally, while the Interactive Tutor is an exceptional resource, I would have liked to see a
central list of the activities to be completed, with the flexibility to undertake the exercises from the
opening page. Finally, while the program is indeed as user-friendly as its promo touts, I had some
difficulty with some of the sound files, and at times only the beginning of the selection was played,
including in the Interactive Tutor, so that I was unable to make fully-informed choices of answers. This
technical difficulty may not be an issue for other users, however.
Phonetics: An Interactive Introduction. This title is more limited in scope than the Mouton CD-ROM, as
it does not treat phonology. Like the Mouton title, this one lacks a comprehensive index or table of
contents, which, while not essential, certainly would have been welcome here, too. However, the
inclusion of Introduction to Voice Onset Time gives this product unique added value.
SUMMARY
Both CD-ROMs are highly valuable tools for the student of linguistics and phonetics and would be most
welcome in language technology, linguistics, and phonetics labs, as well as for individual at-home use.
The two programs are strongly recommended for students and instructors of phonetics and phonology as
they are a significant addition to the currently available media and materials which present concepts that
can be difficult to internalize without visualizing and practicing. While the instructor will still be an
invaluable part of the learning process, these titles provide wonderful ancillary support that can lighten
the burden of covering everything in detail in the classroom.
Because both programs are excellent, the choice between them will depend on the specific interests and
needs of the user: Mouton offers phonology while Phonetics offers VOT and the opportunity to compare
different varieties of English. That is, neither CD-ROM supercedes the other in terms of content and
value, and both will prove useful and enlightening to audiences with an interest in language and speech
science.
APPENDIX
Other Multimedia and Internet Resources
The following does not pretend to be an exhaustive listing, but includes sources, in addition to those given
in the References section, that the reviewer has found to be useful aids to the students in his courses.
Videos
Well, Joan, & Caldwell, Robert. (1991-1995). The Singer's Voice. Redmond, WA: Caldwell Publishing.
(18-27 minute video segments/tapes on Vocal folds, A fiberoptic view of vocal folds, The vocal tract,
Breath, and Resonance; ISBN 1-877761-63-X. VHS/DVD. $400.) Available at
http://www.caldwellpublishing.com/
Stone, Maureen. (1993). Measuring Speech Production. VHS/PAL. (three-cassette collection containing
demonstrations for use in teaching courses on speech acoustics, physiology and instrumentation; part two
has several segments on MRI and ultrasound techniques I've found good for phonetics units) Available
from the Acoustical Society of America at http://asa.aip.org/videos.html
Other sites used by phoneticians and linguists
• 3-D Vocal Tract MRI Gallery: http://web1.dcpa.org/brad_html/mrgallery.html
• Center for Spoken Language Understanding (CSLU): http://cslu.cse.ogi.edu/tutordemos/
(materials and information regarding speech recognition and synthesis)
Reviewed by D. Eric Holt Review of Mouton Interactive… and Phonetics…
Language Learning & Technology 45
• Prosody on the Web (with tutorials): http://www.eptotd.btinternet.co.uk/pow/powin.htm
UCLA Phonetics Lab
• Vocal Fold Animation:
http://www.humnet.ucla.edu/humnet/linguistics/faciliti/demos/vocalfolds/vocalfolds.htm
University College London
• Speech Internet Dictionary: http://www.phon.ucl.ac.uk/home/johnm/sid/sidhome.htm
• Tutorial on VOT & Aspiration:
http://www.phon.ucl.ac.uk/home/johnm/siphtra/plostut2/plostut2.htm
University of Lausanne
• Online Phonetics: http://www.unil.ch/ling/phonetique/api1-eng.html - Intro
University of Lund
• Coarticulation: http://www.ling.lu.se/persons/Sidney/coartdem/
• Speech Analysis Tutorial: http://www.ling.lu.se/research/speechtutorial/tutorial.html
University of Stuttgart
• Voice Quality: http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/phonetik/EGG/
• Methods of Examining Larynx: http://www.ims.uni-stuttgart.de/phonetik/EGG/page13a.htm
University of Washington
• Distinctive Vowels Sounds of British and American English:
http://faculty.washington.edu/dillon/PhonResources/vowels.html
University of Queens
• Speech Perception and Production Laboratory: http://psyc.queensu.ca/~munhallk/
• X-ray Film Database for Speech Research: http://pavlov.psyc.queensu.ca/faculty/munhall/x-ray/
ABOUT THE REVIEWER
D. Eric Holt is Assistant Professor of Spanish and Linguistics at the University of South Carolina, where
he teaches courses in general and Hispanic linguistics, including general phonology, Spanish/English
phonetics and pronunciation, historical linguistics, and the history and dialects of Spanish.
E-mail: holt@sc.edu
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
I thank David Cross and Julio Colón for their student-oriented comments and insights regarding the
Mouton de Gruyter CD-ROM.
REFERENCES
Hammond, R. M. (2001). The sounds of Spanish: Analysis and application (with special reference to
American English). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Labov, W., Ash, S., & Boberg, C. (2002). Atlas of North American English [ANAE] (formerly the
Phonological Atlas of North America). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Ladefoged, P. (2001a). A course in phonetics (4th ed.). Orlando, FL: Harcourt Brace.
Ladefoged, P. (2001b). Vowels and consonants: An Introduction to the sounds of languages. Oxford,
England: Blackwell.
