Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num3/speceditors/
May 2002, Volume 6, Number 3
pp. 1-4
Copyright © 2002, ISSN 1094-3501 1
FROM THE SPECIAL ISSUE EDITORS
The effects of information and communication technologies in language education are
often mediated by the learner, the content, the teacher, and the learning environment. Up
until recently, research has primarily focused on the relationship between technology
and the learner, and between technology and content. A large part of the existing CALL
research is about how language learners interact with technology as well as how certain
technologies can be used to support the teaching of certain types of content (e.g.,
vocabulary, grammar, listening, or writing). Relatively little is known about how
teachers interact with technology. However it has become increasingly clear that
teachers are key to the realization of its claimed educational potentials (Cuban, 1986;
Zhao, 2001, 2002). They are the "gate-keepers" of technology, who not only determine
whether it enters the classroom, but also affect how it is used in the classroom. If it is
not allowed in the classroom or not used properly, it cannot have the opportunity to
exercise its educational power. The realization of teachers' critical role in effective uses
of technology has led to a surge of interest in the relationship between the two (Zhao, in
press; US Congress Office of Technology Assessment, 1995). In some countries, this
interest has also led to radical changes in teacher education programs, which now
include considerably more courses in educational use of ICTs than a few years ago. This
special issue of LLT joins the conversation about teachers and technology by exploring a
number of critical issues in this field.
There are two broad categories of issues related to teachers and technology. The first
includes concerns with preparing teachers to effectively use technology as a pedagogical
and professional tool to achieve greater educational outcomes, and the second includes
issues about how to use technology in teacher education to prepare more versatile and
better skilled teachers by making changes in their educational environment. In this
special issue, we invited contributions exploring issues in both categories.
How to Prepare Teachers to Use Technology?
The ability to teach with technology is quite different from the ability to use it, because
technology must be integrated with a sound pedagogical framework. Thus, the first issue
we must consider in preparing teachers to use technology as a pedagogical tool and as a
new teaching and learning environment is how it interacts with current pedagogical
approaches. Research suggests that teachers are more likely to use it when it is found to
be compatible with their pedagogical styles (Zhao, 2002). To find that compatibility, we
must understand the salient features of various technologies and the attributes of
promising pedagogical approaches.
Weasenforth, Biesenbach-Lucas, and Meloni's article "Realizing Constructivist
Objectives Through Collaborative Technologies: Threaded Discussions" is an excellent
example of research attempting to connect pedagogy to technology. Through an
extensive situated study of the implementation of one of the most widely used
computer-mediated communication technologies, threaded discussion, this paper
examines how technology can be used to meet curricular goals within a constructivist
framework. In particular, the authors investigated the extent to which teacher-mediated
technology promoted selected cognitive and social skills as well as addressed affective
factors and individual differences in students. The examination of the interactions
Yong Zhao and Seppo Tella From the Special Issue Editors
Language Learning & Technology 2
between technology and a constructivist pedagogical framework offers many important
insights into the issue of compatibility between technology and pedagogy.
Another critical issue in answering the question of how to prepare teachers to use
technology is what factors affect its use by teachers. Klaus Brandl's article "Enhancing
Authentic Language Use: The Integration of Internet-Based Reading Materials Into the
Foreign Language Curriculum" identifies three factors which influence teachers' uses of
technology in language teaching: teachers' technology proficiency, teachers' pedagogical
approach, and students' language proficiency. Considering these three factors, the author
suggests three approaches to integrating Internet-based reading materials into a foreign
language curriculum: teacher-determined lessons, teacher-facilitated lessons, and
student-determined lessons. Additionally, Brandl provides specific, detailed guidelines
for curriculum development and instruction. Although this article deals with only one
specific technology (the Internet) and one specific aspect of language teaching (reading),
its analytical framework can serve as an excellent example for language educators and
researchers in their thinking about using technology to support language teaching.
Furthermore, Weasenforth et al. and Brandl's contributions point out directions to
address another significant issue in preparing teachers to teach with technology, that is,
the content of their preparation programs. Many organizations and agencies have started
to define technology of knowledge through teacher technology standards (e.g.,
International Society for Technology in Education, 2000; National Council for
Accreditation of Teacher Education, 1997). Suggestions from these two articles are
consistent with these standards in that they emphasize not the technical capability of
technology but its pedagogical connections. It is the pedagogical capacity of the
technology and the context that may best take advantage of the technology itself, and
which should form the core content of programs preparing teachers to use it.  In other
words, they suggest that we should teach teachers should not be limited to how to use
the technology, but how to use it to teach.
Immediately following the issue of what to teach teachers is the issue of how. Teachers
learn how to use technology in a number of different ways. Some learn from their
colleagues; others learn from the friends and family members; still others learn on their
own. Of course, many teachers learn through organized professional development
programs or courses, especially for pre-service teachers. A growing number also profit
from upgraded teacher education programs that take information and communication
technologies into account. While each approach may have its own merits, the question of
efficiency and effectiveness remains. For example, one commonly asked question about
teacher education is to what degree formalized teacher education makes a difference.
In "The Impact of CALL Instruction on Classroom Computer Use," Joy Egbert, Trena
Paulus, and Yoko Nakamichi examine the effects of formal teacher education programs
on teachers' actual use of technology. Through a survey study, they compared what
teachers learned in CALL courses and what they report using in their teaching. They
found that those who use CALL implement activities that they learned and practiced
outside of the course. They also found that lack of time, support, and resources inhibits
use of CALL activities in some classrooms and that colleagues are the most common
resources for CALL activities outside of formal coursework.
Yong Zhao and Seppo Tella From the Special Issue Editors
Language Learning & Technology 3
How to Use Technology to Support Teacher Education?
Technology can be an effective tool for teacher education as it is often conducive to
creating more versatile teaching, studying, and learning environments. Online
technologies can be used to support professional communities for teachers. Multimedia
and mobile technologies can be used to help teachers observe in more focused ways
exemplary practices. Videos can be used by the teachers themselves to more carefully
examine and reflect on their teaching practices. Videoconference systems with remote
control make it possible for language trainees to observe lessons at a distance or receive
guidance from a distant teacher, thus enhancing real-time and on-line communication
between teachers, teacher educators, and students. Technology tools can also be used to
help pre-service teachers connect with real classrooms.
In this special issue, Aaron Doering and Richard Beach report their experiences using a
variety of technologies to support teachers' acquisition of literacy practices. Connecting
pre-service teachers to middle school students in a collaborative writing project,
technology was used to help future teachers develop an understanding of various
technology practices and of their future students. The authors found that hypermedia
productions with middle school students helped pre-service teachers learn how to model
the literacy practices of making intertextual or hypertextual links. This study
demonstrated the potential of technology in support of teacher education.
Summary
Technology and teacher education is a complex and fairly recent phenomenon. Although
technology, in a broad sense, has always been part of education, and teachers have
always used it (e.g., books, blackboard, tape-recorders, language labs) in their
professional lives, the technologies they must use today are much more complex and
powerful. As a result, the process of preparing teachers to use technology becomes more
complex as well. While the papers in this special issue offer insights into some of the
significant issues that arise when teachers meet technology, there are many more
questions in this process that remain unexplored. The following are a few examples.
First, the cognitive and psychological process of technology integration by teachers
awaits exploring. Some of the issues include the following: What kind of cognitive and
psychological factors affect teacher adoption of technology? How do teachers become
proficient in the use of technology? What mental models do teachers proficient in its use
posses? How are these models different from those of novice users?
Second, the kind of social and organizational arrangements that promote technology use
by teachers is another area that needs further exploration. Some of the persistent issues
include the following: Why do only few teachers in a particular school use technology?
How can we help bring an exemplary teacher's practices into the next-door classroom?
What kind of professional development is more effective in promoting technology
integration? Which institutional policies result in more rapid adoption of technology?
Third, the relationship between teachers and technology has been a long-standing issue
that is yet to be resolved. Some argue that technology will replace teachers while others
contend that we actually do not need technology. Apparently, the truth lies somewhere
in between. Further research is needed not to settle the debate but to define the different
roles technology and teachers can and should play in the language classroom.
Yong Zhao and Seppo Tella From the Special Issue Editors
Language Learning & Technology 4
Last, as Internet-based education becomes increasingly popular, we also need to explore
the differences and similarities in online versus face-to-face teaching. Due to the vast
differences in delivery and communication media between these two, teachers may have
to take different approaches requiring different teaching abilities. Research is needed to
help us understand what abilities teachers must have in order to teach online on the one
hand, and to incorporate network-based education into more traditional classroom-based
approaches on the other.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to all our authors, including those who were not able to have their work
published in this issue. We also want to thank all our reviewers for their timely and
thoughtful comments and feedback about the manuscripts. We owe a special thank-you
to Pamela DaGrossa, whose expertise and excellent management skills kept us moving.
Finally thanks to LLT editors for allowing us to work on this special issue and guiding us
through this process. All their work has resulted in an outstanding collection of papers.
We hope you will enjoy reading them and learn as much from them as we have.
Sincerely,
Yong Zhao
Michigan State University
Seppo Tella
University of Helsinki
REFERENCES
Cuban, L. (1986). Teachers and machines: The classroom uses of technology since
1920. New York: Teachers College Press.
International Society for Technology in Education. (2000). National educational
technology standards for teachers. Eugene, OR: International Society for Technology in
Education.
National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education. (1997). Technology and the
new professional teacher: Preparing for the 21st century classroom. Washington DC:
National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education.
U.S. Congress Office of Technology Assessment. (1995). Teachers and technology:
Making the connection (OTA-EHR-616). Washington DC: Office of Technology
Assessment.
Zhao, Y. (in press). What should teachers know about technology: Perspectives and
practices. Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.
Zhao, Y., & Cziko, G. A. (2001). Teacher adoption of technology: A perceptual control
theory perspective. Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, 9(1), 5-30.
Zhao, Y., Pugh, K., Sheldon, S., & Byers, J. (2002). Conditions for classroom
technology innovations. Teachers College Record, 104(3), 482-515.
