Reviewed by Stephen A. Bird Review of Computer Applications in SLA  
 
Language Learning & Technology 17 
REVIEW OF COMPUTER APPLICATIONS 
IN SECOND LANGUAGE ACQUISITION 
Computer Applications in Second Language Acquisition 
Cambridge Applied Linguistics Series 
Carol A. Chapelle  
 
2001 
ISBN 0-521-62646-3 
£ 13.95 
228 pp. 
Cambridge University Press 
Cambridge, UK  
Reviewed by Stephen A. Bird 
Computer Applications in Second Language Acquisition  is one of the latest offerings in the 
Cambridge University Press Applied Linguistics Series.  It presents a detailed review of computer 
technology's contribution to the teaching and learning of second languages, as well as theory-
based rubrics for assessing second language teaching, testing, and research materials and 
methods.  
The volume reflects the rapid expansion of computer applications in second language acquisition 
(abbreviated by Chapelle as CASLA) and related fields of inquiry such as computer-assisted 
language learning (CALL), computer-assisted second language acquisition research (CASLR), 
and computer-assisted language testing (CALT), which have become immensely important 
domains. Chapelle's book assumes from the outset that "anyone concerned with second language 
teaching and learning in the 21s t  century needs to grasp the nature of the unique technology-
mediated tasks learners can engage in for language acquisition and how such tasks can be used 
for assessment" (p. 2). Her book aims to provide some of that understanding, and does so quite 
well.  
Chapters 1 and 2 present a detailed history of the use of computers in second language 
acquisition (SLA) research and practice since the 1950's, the impact of which has been pervasive 
and profound. The advent of local area networks and then the World Wide Web has generated an 
amazing increase in the amount of target language available to students, as well as greater 
opportunites to communicate with native speakers. The detailed electronic records of student 
communication that are now possible allow scholars and teachers to access accurate, reliable data 
from which to evaluate learning performance under various conditions. And of course, teacher-
researchers now have ready access to statistical software packages allowing efficient data 
analysis. Chapelle makes it clear that there is really no area of applied linguistics that has not 
been dramatically affected by the advances in computer technology of the last 20 years. 
Reviewed by Stephen A. Bird Review of Computer Applications in SLA  
 
Language Learning & Technology 18 
However, Chapelle questions the extent to which computer technology has benefited SLA, a field 
where the aim, she argues, is centered on improving learners' L2 communicative ability (p. 41). 
Related fields such as corpus linguistics, artificial intelligence, computational linguistics, and 
educational technology have exploited technology effectively and can make huge contributions 
to SLA (see, e.g., the LLT special issue on corpus linguistics). However, unlike these research 
domains, CASLA's research questions and methodology are focused on identifying "theoretically 
and empirically based criteria for choosing among the potential design options and methods for 
evaluating their effectiveness for promoting learners' communicative ability" (p. 42), meaning 
that CASLA has a unique research agenda. 
Chapter 3 raises the possibility of developing "a theory concerning ideal cognitive and socio-
affective conditions for instructed SLA" (p. 45). The ideal conditions for learning discussed in 
this chapter are fairly vague and not particularly new. For example, Chapelle proposes that the 
teacher (or computer programmer/materials developer) select "a range of structures" because 
some SLA research suggests "learners will acquire particular structures when they are ready to" 
(p.46). However, she cautions that teachers should also be aware that "learners need to be 
exposed to language which is within their grasp" on the grounds that "language far beyond or 
beneath learners' abilities or needs is not useful for acquisition." Admittedly, it is impossible to 
provide specific, concrete recommendations to cover all learning contexts, but the advice offered 
here reads rather like formalized common sense and provides little in the way of practical 
guidance. As the chapter stresses, the ideal conditions for SLA are so complex and context-
dependent that it is impossible to offer anything more precise than statements such as "motivated 
students will learn more quickly." But if this limitation is real, one wonders what the purpose of 
these rubrics and theories is. How near are we to Chapelle's stated aim of constructing a theory 
of ideal conditions for second language learning that can help in the design and evaluation of 
computer-based learning?  
In fact, Chapelle's book may reflect the limit of theory construction in applied linguistics as a 
field. Little of the theoretical content here looks like much of an advance over work produced in 
the late 1980's. For the most part, the recommendations offered here can be reasonably 
characterized as fairly general, useful statements that inexperienced teachers can consult as a 
starting point for evaluating and developing materials and methods. But to call them theories in a 
scientific, experimental sense -- that is, as statements that allow testable predictions about 
optimum conditions for learning -- seems to be a bit misleading given their lack of specificity.  
Nonetheless, Chapelle is optimistic about the future of SLA theory. Chapters 4 and 5 suggest 
some directions forward if computer technology is harnessed appropriately. Chapter 4 addresses 
computer technology's impact on language testing, arguably the domain where computers have 
had their most powerful impact (see the recent LLT special issue on computer-assisted language 
testing) Chapelle provides a comprehensive discussion of the relevant issues, focusing on what 
she refers to as a "usefulness analysis" (p. 148) of test materials. The criteria included are 
extensive, and address questions of validity, reliability, practicality, and authenticity. As in the 
case of materials evaluation in Chapter 2, these criteria are more subjective and context-
dependent than they might appear at first. For example, the chapter stresses that many of the 
criteria, such as validity, are not easy to determine and that teachers thus need to evaluate 
usefulness on a case-by-case basis. Considering the number of usefulness criteria presented, one 
cannot help but feel that this chapter is more of a problem statement than a useable solution to 
the task of constructing or evaluating a valid and reliable test of language learning. This is not a 
criticism of Chapelle's book; it is actually to her credit that the chapter lays out the many tricky 
dimensions of language testing. But it would be misleading to say that this makes the job of 
constructing and evaluating a valid and reliable computerized test much easier.  
Reviewed by Stephen A. Bird Review of Computer Applications in SLA  
 
Language Learning & Technology 19 
The fact that test tasks can now be constructed on computer platforms means that detailed 
information about student performance can in principle be recorded and analyzed, thus 
potentially yielding far more valid and reliable data on which to develop robust, testable 
theories. One of the chronic problems in SLA research is that studies are often too short-lived for 
learning outcomes to be assessed properly or predictions to be tested in a convincing way. If 
testing regimes allow an automated system to track student results on tests over time, a far more 
robust set of data is available to teachers and researchers. With this sort of power, one can run 
many more repeated-measures tests over long periods of time, recording numerous factors -- 
error rates, reaction times, and so on -- collecting in an automated fashion far more data than has 
been possible thus far in most SLA research. Unfortunately, Chapter 4 is somewhat scant on 
examples of this sort of investigation. Chapelle describes a few studies but concludes that "in 
short, examination of CALT in 2000 demonstrates that many … questions … about how to 
improve both theory and practice in language testing through the use of computers still remain" 
(p.130). And the limited number of examples of CALT tests presented in the chapter leave the 
reader with no clear idea of the form these advances will take. 
Chapter 5 examines the contribution of computers to CASLR, and again provides a list of criteria 
for evaluating research methods. This chapter is perhaps the least convincing of the book, 
particularly in terms of the amount of research reviewed. There is an over reliance on just a few 
studies when providing examples of computer-assisted SLA. For example, DeKeyser's (1995) 
study of implicit and explicit learning using an artificial grammar is cited repeatedly, although 
artificial grammar learning is an extensively researched terrain in experimental psychology (see 
Reber, 1967, for an early example; see Tunney & Altmann, 2001, for a recent study and literature 
review). The fact that the chapter does not cite any work -- not even a review -- from outside of 
SLA journals is lamentable and leaves the chapter looking fairly thin in its coverage of important 
research.  
The final chapter sketches some future directions for CALL, CALT and CASLR. Chapelle 
stresses the importance of developing software that cuts across all of these fields - for example, 
materials that allow authentic learning to take place while automatically recording a wide range 
of data relevant to testing CALT and CASLR. Computer technology offers potential in this 
regard but is yet to be fully exploited. And, consistent with the rest of the book, the final chapter 
offers a rough guide to what those materials should do but few specific recommendations. 
Nevertheless, Chapelle concludes that innovations in CASLA have the potential to allow CALL, 
CALT, and CASLR to gain deeper understanding of SLA, and hence, to improve second 
language instruction.  
In general, Computer Applications in Second Language Acquisition provides a very readable 
overview of  the issues to consider in developing and employing CALL, CALT and CASLR. 
Chapelle makes it clear that there is yet much to be done but, as an early contribution to what is 
a promising area of SLA work, this volume is a good beginning.  
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Steve Bird holds a PhD from the University of Cambridge Research Centre for English and 
Applied Linguistics. He is founder and CEO of Applied PsychoLinguistics Ltd UK, a language 
learning software development company.  
E-mail: stevebird@appliedpsycholinguistics.com 
Reviewed by Stephen A. Bird Review of Computer Applications in SLA  
 
Language Learning & Technology 20 
REFERENCES 
Reber, A. S. (1967). Implicit learning of artificial languages. Journal of Verbal Learning and 
Verbal Behavior, 6,  855-863.  
Tunney, R. J., & Altmann, G.T.M. (2001). Two modes of transfer in artificial grammar learning. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 27(3), 614-639. 
