Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol6numX3/emerging/
September 2002, Volume 6, Number 3
pp. 10-14
Copyright © 2002, ISSN 1094-3501 10
EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
Technology for Prospective Language Teachers
Bob Godwin-Jones
Virginia Commonwealth University
Language teachers in training today are likely to have become familiar with computers as
part of their university experience, with the expectation of using, at a minimum, word
processing, spreadsheets, and Web browsers to do research, writing, and projects. They
are likely to be exposed to computer-assisted language learning (CALL), and some may
elect to pursue CALL as a major focus. But even those teachers not delving deeply into
CALL will be expected by their supervisors, their peers, and, most importantly, by their
students to enhance their teaching through technology. We will be focusing in this
column on what tools and technologies are likely to be important to teachers entering the
classroom for the first time.
Technology Training
It is beneficial for teachers to have an appreciation of the range of options available in
CALL and what the learning curve and effectiveness of each option is likely to be. The
former is much easier to determine then the latter. There are too few CALL and SLA
(second language acquisition) studies that provide concrete evaluations of specific tools
and technologies and how they are used. Before being able to evaluate effectively CALL
programs, teachers need to add to their pedagogical knowledge a fundamental
understanding of the workings of computers and networks. To be able to use a word
processing program, for example, one needs to understand the concept of a file and
storage media. To use a Web browser effectively, one needs to understand about media
types and Web page delivery. At a minimum teachers needs to become informed users of
technology (see the special LLT issue on literacies and technologies). This should include
not just software use but as well some hardware basics and an understanding of networks
(local area and Internet). A familiarity with multimedia formats (DVD, MP3, etc.) as well
as of players is clearly essential for language teachers. Naive technology users are not
well suited to make intelligent choices on the selection of CALL materials. Anyone who
has used any kind of technology in the classroom also knows how crucial it is to be able
to do basic trouble-shooting of technology glitches.
Most U.S. colleges now have computer literacy requirements in place. The requirements
vary considerably, but usually are limited to a knowledge of the mechanics of computing.
Today, such skills are normally a pre-requisite for success in higher education. For
students needing training in the use of general purpose software, electronic tutorials have
become widely available. Some are available on CD (such as SkillSoft products), others
are accessed through the Web (such as Smartforce). In addition to commercial products,
some schools have developed their own training materials, like the nice Microsoft Office
tutorials from the Florida Gulf Coast University. One of the useful methods for
developing training materials for learning specific software is the use of screen capture
software. Such programs have been available for some time but have become more
sophisticated. Programs from companies like TechSmith and Ambrosia allow not just
screen captures but movies of the screen (in AVI or QuickTime formats) and even sound
to be recorded. An instructor can move through successive steps in using an application
and have all those steps recorded. Voiceovers can then be added.
Bob Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies
Language Learning & Technology 11
Digitization
An area of obvious interest to prospective language teachers is the use of media in the
classroom. The trend towards use of digital media has accelerated in recent years, due to
faster processors, increased network speed, cheaper and more flexible storage options,
and easier to use software. The slide projector has given way to projected graphics files,
Web pages, and presentations. All-in-one projectors are displacing LCS panels mounted
on overhead projectors. Although still quite expensive, such projectors can now project
at high resolutions and are able to show video, sometimes at HDTV quality. They have
also become significantly smaller, lighter, and brighter, useable in lit rooms and
designed to be highly portable (comparative review).
Getting pictures into a digital format is becoming easier and more affordable. Flat-bed
scanners have dropped precipitously in price in recent years, while small portable
scanners have become available, useful for traveling and collecting media. Of course,
digital cameras can be used for this purpose as well. The close-up mode available in
many models allows quite clear pictures to be made of objects such as menus or
newspaper clippings. Many models available today offer very high resolution which can
show clearly significant detail.
Digital cameras have risen significantly in popularity as prices have dropped and models
have proliferated. Options for transfer of images from the camera have increased, with
USB connections now standard, and Firewire connectivity available on high end models.
Fast transfer is possible with floppy disk or PC card adapters, into which a camera's
media card can be inserted. The card then appears on the desktop and images can be
easily dragged to the computer's storage device(s). Such adapters now support high
capacity media such as the 128 MB SmartMedia card, which can hold hundreds of
images.
Software for the transfer, viewing, sorting, printing, and sharing of digital images has
improved considerably. Programs such as Apple's iPhoto are so powerful yet easy to use
that they make the manipulation of digital images much faster and more efficient than
was possible with earlier software (or with the software that still comes with most digital
cameras). iPhoto takes advantage of the Internet to enable easy sharing of pictures as
well as commercial printing in a variety of formats (including photo albums). Although
iPhoto runs only on MacOS X, its attractiveness is spurring developers to offer similar
functionality for Windows users (such as Jasc's Media Center Plus or Ulead's Photo
Explorer Pro). Microsoft's Windows XP includes user-friendly digital photo tools as
well.
Apple has played a similar path-breaking role in other digital media. iMovie simplifies
tremendously the process of making digital movies. One need only compare the complex
interface of the industry standard Adobe Premiere to that of iMovie to appreciate the
extent to which Apple has made digital movie making available to the mainstream. Of
particular interest to language teachers is iDVD from Apple, which simplifies greatly the
task of creating a DVD. Mention should be made as well of the iPod, Apple's small but
powerful portable MP3 player, which features fast Firewire transfer and an innovative
navigational wheel. The MP3 file format has moved from the darling of teenage Napster
users to being a widely used format in education. Media sites often supply audio files in
a variety of formats including MP3. Using MP3 files, rather than cassettes to play audio
in the classroom offers the advantage of instant replay and fast searching.
Bob Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies
Language Learning & Technology 12
 Presentation and Authoring Software
Teachers using presentation software such as Microsoft PowerPoint generally need little
training in its use. Templates make it very easy to develop a good looking slide show.
Media incorporation is straightforward as well; graphics, audio, and video can be added
from pull-down menus. Some interactivity is possible with presentation software,
depending on the product. It is possible in most, for example, to use transitions and
sequential display to deliver material in question and answer format or to create
simulations. Many teachers are electing to put presentations on the Web so that students
can review the materials presented outside of class. This can generally be done by using
the "save to HTML" option, although the resulting Web-based slide show typically lacks
some of the features of the original presentation. Software is available (such as Impatica)
which does a better job of converting the presentation to a Web format.
An alternative to presentation software is the creation of lessons or presentations directly
in HTML. This results in a format which looks the same in class and on the Web. It used
to be that HTML-created presentations were poor cousins to PowerPoint slide shows.
That needn't be the case with the current capability of Web authoring. The "dynamic
HTML" (DHTML) possible today enables transitions to be added and on-the-fly changes
to Web pages without reloading. Of course, the learning curve for creating such pages is
considerably higher than it is for learning PowerPoint or other presentation software. In
addition to knowledge of HTML, creating interactivity in Web pages also requires use of
JavaScript. Neither poses an insurmountable learning barrier, however, taking that
plunge may be more than many teachers are ready to contemplate.
An alternative is to use an HTML editor to create the Web pages. Products like
FrontPage (from Microsoft) or Dreamweaver (from Macromedia) make the task to
creating attractive and functional Web pages quite simple. Mastery of HTML or any
scripting language is not necessary to use such a product, although some basic
knowledge can be helpful in understanding how Web pages are put together (i.e., the
nature of how hypertext links work, how graphics are embedded and formatted, or
accessibility issues in the code that's used). Current versions of HTML editors also offer
the ability to use some JavaScript or DHTML functionality from pull-down menus.
Here, too, some understanding of the underlying scripting systems is helpful in
understanding cross-browser and cross-platform issues and what additional functionality
might be possible beyond the options offered by the software product.
Content Management and Course Web Sites
A basic understanding of what's going on under the hood on Web pages is also helpful to
teachers who may be using what is generally called a "learning management system"
(LMS) such as Blackboard or WebCT. These are products which greatly simplify the
task of creating a Web site for a class and adding functionality such as discussion
forums, chat rooms, and on-line quizzes. They have become popular options for teachers
in higher education and are being increasingly used in secondary schools as well. To use
a LMS it is not necessary to have any knowledge of HTML or of Web authoring in
general. As a consequence, instructors with little or no experiences using the Web are
able to create a course Web site which can incorporate a variety of interactive tools and
hold a great deal of course content in electronic format. Also, publishers are making
available some textbook content in formats which can be imported into Blackboard or
WebCT, including some multi-item question pools.
Bob Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies
Language Learning & Technology 13
It is important for teachers to recognize that a LMS can be a powerful teaching tool but
also that its use tends to limit choices and options in the design of a course Web site. A
template-based system necessarily restricts the degree of individualization.
Customization is possible only up to a point; the basic structure and "look and feel" of
the Web sites remain the same. Novice teachers also may assume that the tools and
functions built into the system are the definitive statement of the functionality that is
available for creating course Web sites. Given the expense of purchasing and
maintaining such a system, institutions are unlikely to provide training beyond the basics
of how to use the LMS. This has the unfortunate by-product of discouraging teachers
from trying new and creative ways to use the Internet, which are not part of the LMS.
While a LMS provides significant functions, it is designed for general educational use,
not specifically for language learning.
A hopeful sign for the future of LMS is the creation of the Open Knowledge Initiative
(OKI), a collaborative project to design and deliver an open and extensible architecture
for learning management systems. It is being led by MIT and Stanford University but
supported by many more U.S. universities. The goal is to develop open standards for the
creation and exchange of tools and learning materials among institutions and faculty.
The hope is that the OKI standards will be adopted in future versions of commercial
LMS, which should enable the interchange and flexibility lacking today. OKI is working
with the long-running IMS (Instructional Management System) project to develop the
standards. IMS defines an extensive set of meta-data for identifying and cataloging
learning modules, while OKI is developing an application programming interface (API)
specification for a variety of common services. Meanwhile, commercial LMS are
beginning to move in the direction of modularity. Blackboard's "Building Blocks"
initiative, for example, allows for plug-in modules to be added to Blackboard
installations. Third-party developers are beginning to offer such plug-ins. Wimba's voice
board, a tool of potential interest to language teachers, is available as a plug-in. When
used within Blackboard, Wimba employs the same interface used in creating and
managing Blackboard discussion boards.
One of the other issues in using a LMS is content management. Electronic resources
teachers make available are grouped together by the LMS, but the content collection is
course-specific. The LMS does not provide for sharing of resources (among courses,
instructors, or schools) or for cataloging and searching. As teachers accumulate more
material electronically, management becomes a critical issue. Even for basic handouts
and exams, issues such as version control, sharing with colleagues, and reliable long-
term storage are important. These are functions usually associated with digital libraries
or content management systems (CMS). Several CMS companies (such as Concord) are
now integrating their services into LMS. WebCT Vista is an enterprise version of the
product which aims to integrate a number of these services. Whatever system they use,
beginning language teachers should early on try to find an efficient means for collecting
and tracking their electronic teaching resources, which are bound to grow well beyond
what they may envision today.
Bob Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies
Language Learning & Technology 14
Resource List
Training Materials and Tools
Well Training Resources Includes a booklet on Web Skills for Language Learners
Software Tools for the Web Nice lists for different platforms
Skillsoft Commercial training materials
SmartForce Commercial training materials
Microsoft Office Tutorial From Florida Gulf Coast University
Netskills UK resources for learning about the Internet
On-line Teaching: Tools and Projects Reports on on-line projects
Creating Web-based Language Learning Activities From the ERIC Clearinghouse on
Languages and Linguistics
TechSmith Screen capture software
Ambrosia Screen capture software
The WELL Project Web Enhanced Language Learning, a collaborative project in the
UK
Through the Web WYSIWYG Editor Widgets List of editors, some free, some
commercial
Learning Management and Content Management Systems
Blackboard Commercial learning management system
WebCT Commercial learning management system
Concord Maker of MasterFile content management system
Blackboard Users Group for Languages, Literatures & Culture Organized by Samantha
Earp (Duke Unversity)
Blackboard ML Press release on multilingual version of Blackboard
WebCT ESL page WebCT resources for ESL teachers, includes link to discussion forum
Integrating Technology into Language Learning Course Web site emphasizing WebCT
(by Esperanza Rom&aacute;n Mendoza)
Instructional Management Systems Part of the On-line Teaching Tools and Projects site
Suppliers of Virtual Learning Environments From the Ferl Web site
Open Knowledge Initiative Open source course management project
IMS project Meta-data project
