Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num2/cazden/
May 2002, Volume 6, Number 2
pp. 116-117
Copyright © 2002, ISSN 1094-3501 116
COMMENTARY
Courtney B. Cazden
Harvard University
Electronic media are coming into more widespread use in education, and movements for indigenous
language revitalization are simultaneously gaining momentum. So it is not surprising that integrating
technology into revitalization efforts is growing in many places, and descriptions of such integrations are
gaining visibility as well. The annual conferences on indigenous language co-sponsored by Northern
Arizona University (and subsequently published in widely used volumes) highlighted the contributions of
technology in 2001 (http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~jar/TIL.html). The splendid new book, The Green Book of
Language Revitalization in Practice, edited by Leanne Hinton and the since deceased and deeply
mourned Kenneth Hale (2001), includes an 80-page section on technology in its 400+ pages. And now we
have this theme issue of a specialized journal in the field. It is an expression of, and tribute to, the sharing
of experiences among indigenous communities across tribal and national boundaries that all three of these
sources are international in scope.
One can categorize the potential uses of technology for language learning in many ways. One simple cut
focuses on what the technology creates: language materials, or contexts for language use, or both. In the
materials category, Villa reports how a native speaker of Navajo gained sufficient computer skills to
create CD-ROMs of "authentic" intergenerational interaction, and Edwards and colleagues describe
shareware that can be used for creating bilingual books in many languages. In the contexts category, Auld
describes an unusual communal setting in a remote Aboriginal community in Australia where up to four
generations gather around a touch screen displaying a "talking book." As in projects described in other
articles, Aboriginal speakers participate in the creation (with digital cameras) of these books-on-screen as
well as their use.
Auld suggests a more fine-grained differentiation between computer as tutor and as tool and then among
three kinds of tools. Historically, tutoring was the first role, with the computer substituting for a teacher in
the now-classic three-part instructional sequence: presenting a task, accepting the student's response, and
evaluating it. As computer capabilities have increased, and instructional philosophies have shifted from
just transmitting a pre-set curriculum to also supporting learners' purposes, the role of computer as tool
has become more prominent. Auld further distinguishes three kinds of tool use: a conjectural role
stimulating critical evaluation, an emancipatory role empowering the user, and a collaborative role
among users in a computer-mediated environment.
All these articles assume, explicitly or implicitly, that decisions about computer use -- like educational
decisions more generally -- are made, or should be made, within the indigenous community. But that said,
wide variations and tough issues remain. Jancewicz and MacKenzie compare the use of resources in
Naskapi and East Cree communities, similar in many ways including the special problem of syllabic
orthographies, that led one to emphasize use in the workplace, the other in schools. Haag and Coston
relate shifts in computer use over time in a Choctaw community to shifts in its governance and leadership.
Several of the articles argue for incorporating computers into indigenous language programs for the
symbolic value of demonstrating, especially to young people, that learning their heritage language is for
more than preserving the past, but there may well be opinions within a community against, as well as for,
that value.
For material developers, this is a fundamental issue. I have put Villa's use of the adjective "authentic" in
quotation marks not at all to question the authenticity of his materials but to call attention to issues
embodied in that loaded word. Villa defines "authentic materials" as "original texts, films, and recordings
Courtney B. Cazden Commentary
Language Learning & Technology  117
of language usage … that accurately reflect how a language community employs its heritage tongue," and
a CD-ROM of naturally-flowing intergenerational conversation fits that definition. But the language
games accompanying the Yupik bilingual CD-ROM, "How the Crane got Blue Eyes," produced by the
school district in southwest Alaska discussed by McHenry, do not fit that definition. And neither would
materials created for, say, math lessons in some other partial or full immersion program. Materials
embodying and supporting both authentic and non-authentic language use can have significant
educational value. It all depends on the program's governing purpose and values.
The special defining conditions of language revitalization programs may make the exclusive use of
authentic materials impossible. In one oft-cited metaphor, the collective language resources of any
community will be a leaky bucket in need of endless refilling unless or until the community's youngest
members are learning that language in the home. Realistically, many young parents are themselves not
fluent speakers, and so some non-authentic ("non-natural") forms of support, electronic or not, are
needed. Maori researcher Margie Hohepa (1998) documents the benefits when young children carry little
indigenous language books from school to home. Non-authentic in the sense that Maori elders speak of
theirs as an "oral" culture (despite widespread Maori literacy in the 19th Century), the books contain
mature language models for parents to read aloud and converse about with their child.
Two non-indigenous scholars who have devoted their professional careers to the revitalization movement,
Michael Krauss and Joshua Fishman, stress the crucial importance of such inter-generational
transmission. Several of the authors echo that concern, and Villa explicitly states, "Computers cannot
become a surrogate for one generation of minority language speakers passing that tongue to subsequent
generations." There is much to be learned from these articles about how computers can contribute support
for oral face-to-face transmission, as long as there is at least equal attention to preventing them becoming
a substitute for it.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Courtney Cazden is the Charles William Eliot Professor of Education (Emerita) at Harvard University and
a faculty member at the Bread Loaf School of English, a summer graduate program of Middlebury
College. For four summers, she has taught "Sustaining Indigenous Languages" at Bread Loaf's campus in
Juneau Alaska or Santa Fe, and in 2001 at Dine (Navajo) College.
E-mail: cazdenco@gse.harvard.edu
REFERENCES
Hinton, L., & Hale, K. (2001). The green book of language revitalization in practice. San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Hohepa, M. K. (1998). 'Hei Tautoko i Te Reo': Maori language regeneration and whanau bookreading
practices. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Auckland, New Zealand.
