Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num1/editors.html
January 2003, Volume 7, Number 1
pp. 1
Copyright © 2003, ISSN 1094-3501 1
FROM THE EDITORS
Welcome to the 7th volume of Language Learning & Technology!
We are pleased to bring you four articles examining CALL tasks and programs, two in
secondary schools and two in universities. In "Crossing Boundaries: Multimedia
Technology and Pedagogical Innovation in a High School Class," Susan Parks, Diane
Huot, Josiane Hamers, and France H.-Lemmonier consider a Quebec secondary school
program which uses computer technology in project-based teaching. They examine the
relationship of teachers' pedagogical beliefs to their use of the technology and its
position in a larger socio-cultural context. Rosanne Greenfield ("Collaborative E-Mail
Exchange for Teaching Secondary ESL: A Case Study in Hong Kong") discusses a
qualitative study of the attitudinal responses of secondary school students who
participated in an e-mail exchange with native English speakers in the US. Barbara
Hanna and Juliana de Nooy look at French-learning students' participation in online
discussion groups with native speakers in "A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the
Forum: Electronic Discussion and Foreign Language Learning" and how students'
successful participation is related to cultural knowledge. And, in "Designing Task-
Based CALL to Promote Interaction: En busca de Esmeraldas," Marta González-Lloret
reports on the effectiveness of one CALL activity in facilitating comprehension through
communication and negotiation by Spanish language learners. The activity was created
based on Doughty and Long's (2002) principles of language teaching and Chapelle's
(1998) proposals for developing multimedia.
In their regular column On the Net, Jean LeLoup and Robert Ponterio introduce the site
"Foreign Language Study and the Brain," created and maintained by Dr. Teresa
Kennedy of the University of Idaho. This site describes how the brain works and how
that relates to foreign language learning.
Bob Godwin-Jones (Emerging Technologies) looks at the latest technology relating to
E-Books and the Tablet PC. These tools have great potential for the language learning
classroom given the increased proliferation of wireless technology.
We are now soliciting abstracts for a special issue of LLT on Technology and Young
Learners, to be guest edited by Michele Knobel and Colin Lankshear. Please remember
that abstracts are due April 30. We hope you will consider submitting your work.
Finally, we include on p. 106 a letter from two of the three co-authors of an article
published in our last issue. This letter reinforces the point that all authors should be
certain to receive permission from their Institutional Review Boards before carrying out
research studies, whether the results of the research are to be submitted to LLT or
elsewhere.
A very happy and peaceful new year to you.
Sincerely,
Mark Warschauer & Dorothy Chun
Editors
Pamela DaGrossa
Managing Editor
