Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/review2/
May 2003, Volume 7, Number 2
pp. 28-31
Copyright © 2003, ISSN 1094-3501 28
REVIEW OF
NETWORK-BASED LANGUAGE TEACHING: CONCEPTS AND PRACTICE
Network-Based Language Teaching: Concepts and Practice
Mark Warschauer & Richard Kern, Editors
Cambridge Applied Linguistics Series
Michael H. Long & Jack C. Richards, Series Editors
2000
ISBN 0-521-66742-9
$25.00US
240 pp.
Cambridge University Press
110 Midland Avenue
Port Chester, NY 10573-4930
http://uk.cambridge.org/
Reviewed by Marisol Fernández-García, Northeastern University
Network-Based Language Teaching: Theory and Practice is an edited volume that collects a group of
descriptive and empirical studies on network-based language teaching (NBLT) in a variety of second and
foreign language learning contexts. As the editors, Warschauer and Kern, point out in the preface, these
studies document and illustrate the type of processes and outcomes that take place when language learners
use computer networks in particular circumstances. Those interested in designing and implementing
NBLT will undoubtedly find helpful the implications that the results of these studies may have for their
own teaching context.
In chapter 1 ("Introduction: Theory and Practice of Network-Based Language Teaching"), Richard Kern
and Mark Warschauer define NBLT as "language teaching that involves the use of computers connected
to one another in either local or global networks" (p. 1). As such, NBLT represents a new and different
form of Computer Assisted Language Learning (CALL). On the one hand, communication is at the core
of NBLT; on the other, NBLT breaks with the time and space constraints imposed by face-to-face
communication and by traditional language learning tools, thus allowing for multiple forms of learning,
communicative practice, and collaboration. Despite the apparent new possibilities that this new medium
affords, Kern and Warshauer caution that the specific advantages of NBLT can only be unveiled by
research that examines "particular practices of use in particular contexts" (p. 2).
Kern and Warschauer devote part of this chapter to situating the emergence of NBLT in a historical
context by first considering the shift in theoretical perspectives in the recent history of language teaching,
and then, how those perspectives have influenced the use of computer technology in language teaching.
The last section of the chapter outlines the research implications for various CALL approaches and
identifies the areas of NBLT research that have been neglected to date and that are addressed by the
contributions of the volume.
Chapter 2 ("Sociocollaborative Language Learning in Bulgaria"), by Carla Meskill and Krassimira
Ranglova, offers a detailed account of the redesign of an English as a foreign language curriculum (EFL)
at the University of Sofia, Bulgaria. The authors argue that the redesign of the curriculum was based on
current sociocognitive theory and practice and involved a major shift away from a curriculum that
emphasized teacher-centered and language appreciation activities to one that is student- and meaning-
centered. The authors provide a discussion of the rationale for the adoption of a response-based approach
Reviewed by Steven L. Thorne Review of Language and the Internet
Language Learning & Technology 29
to the teaching of literature and explain and illustrate how technology was integrated into the social
context of learning and the literature-based curriculum. Finally, they discuss the formative and summative
assessment based on data collected during the yearlong period of implementation. Among the many
positive aspects the data revealed, Meskill and Ranglova highlight the role of technologies "in bringing
about new ways of using and thinking about language, especially in terms of student autonomy, student-
student collaboration, and teacher participation" (p. 35).
In chapter 3 ("On-Line Learning in Second Language Classrooms: An Ethnographic Study"), Mark
Warschauer reports on a two-year study of the implementation of on-line learning in four college
language and writing classes in Hawaii. Following an ethnographic approach, Warschauer shows how the
particular sociocultural context affects the implementation and contributes to the relative success of
NBLT. In particular, his findings indicate that the general institutional context and the beliefs of
individual teachers influenced the implementation of new technologies. Students, on the other hand,
experienced the use of technologies as a medium to develop new literacy skills of great importance in
their lives. Warschauer's careful analysis suggests that, in the context of his study, for electronic learning
activities to be most purposeful and effective, they should be learner-centered, authentic, and rhetorically
appropriate; have goals that are relevant for students' lives; and allow students to explore and express
their social and cultural identity.
In the fourth chapter ("Negotiation in Cyberspace: The Role of Chatting in the Development of
Grammatical Competence"), Jill Pellettieri reports on a study that investigated the potential of network-
based communication "to foster the negotiation of meaning and form-focused interaction" (p. 64). Using
Varonis and Gass' (1985) model for nonnative-nonnative speaker negotiation, Pelletieri presents a
descriptive analysis of the discourse generated by second language learners of Spanish while carrying
tasks through network-based synchronous written interaction. In line with studies that examined oral
interactions, Pelletieri found that lexical and content negotiations predominated over morphosyntactic
ones. Only those tasks that included a more form-focused subcomponent (e.g., the composition of an on-
line note or narrative) tended to generate higher percentages of morphosyntactic negotiations. Her study
also indicated that learners' output modifications in response to negotiations and corrective feedback
resulted in more target-like forms and in high rates of incorporation of feedback into subsequent turns.
The study points to a number of interesting venues for future research relating to how specific features of
task design may have an impact on the amount of negotiation or on learners' focus on grammatical form.
The fifth contribution to the volume ("Writing into Change: Style Shifting in Asynchronous Electronic
Discourse"), by Boyd Davis and Ralf Thiede, examines style-shifting patterns in the texts generated by
English as foreign language (EFL) students in two asynchronous conferences during a semester-long
course. An analysis of the discourse and of the syntactic and lexical profiles in two of the EFL students'
postings suggested "consciously motivated choices of style, of lexicosyntactic accommodation, and of
linguistic awareness" (p. 112), particularly in response to native-speaker texts. The authors also identified
signals of social practice that reflected status and distance and that seemed to support Wolfson's (1989)
"bulge hypothesis," that is, "that minimum or ... maximum, degrees of status and social distance ... foster
very similar patterns as opposed to the greater variation in the middle section" (p. 113). Davis and Thiede
base most of their claims on qualitative analyses of some EFL students' texts, as well as self-reports, and a
series of quantitative measures. The rationale for the use of the latter is not specifically addressed, and the
reader could benefit from a brief account of its appropriateness for their particular research design.
In chapter 6 ("Computers and Collaborative Writing in the Foreign Language Curriculum"), Jean Marie
Schultz reports on an experimental study that compared the effects of computer-based and face-to-face
oral peer editing feedback on intermediate-level French students' compositions. Schultz's analyses yielded
a positive effect for oral feedback on the revisions of compositions of third-semester students in terms of
number and length of content changes. Similar results were obtained in the case of fourth-semester
students; however, the compositions of students that had participated in an alternate mode of feedback
Reviewed by Steven L. Thorne Review of Language and the Internet
Language Learning & Technology 30
(computer and oral) were superior to either pure mode in terms of stylistic and interpretative-level content
changes made. The results of Schultz's study challenge previous claims about the efficiency of computer
use to foster improvement in certain areas of writing. On the other hand, her results suggest the need for
research that looks into the different cognitive processes involved in oral and computer-mediated
feedback and how they may interact to facilitate improvements in writing development.
In chapter 7 ("Networked Multimedia Environments for Second Language Acquisition"), Dorothy M.
Chun and Jan L. Plass discuss key issues involved in the design of networked multimedia environments
that are based on principles of second language acquisition. Consonant with current constructivist
approaches to learning, Chun and Plass conceive multimedia programs as environments that can enhance
the "learning-as-knowledge-construction process" (p. 161) and engage learners in higher-level cognitive
processes. The authors present a description of a prototype project under development for second-year
German students that illustrates how the tools incorporated were implemented in a constructivist
environment. Among the factors that the authors underscore as in need of investigation, is the potential
cognitive overload of navigating in a hypermedia environment. The chapter concludes with specific
suggestions for future research on the cognitive processes involved in learning with hypermedia materials.
The authors point out that this type of research is crucial to determine which and how features of
hypermedia environments can aid in the process of language acquisition.
In chapter 8 ("An Electronic Literacy Approach to Network-Based Language Teaching"), Heidi Shetzer
and Mark Warschauer present a theoretical framework for the development of electronic literacy. Shetzer
and Warschauer argue that, in an ever increasing technological society, an electronic literacy approach to
NBLT implies two pedagogical objectives: "how to use information technology in order to teach
language" and "how to teach language so that learners can make effective use of information technology"
(p. 172). Shetzer and Warschauer examine first the three main areas that the development of electronic
literacy skills encompasses (i.e., communication, construction, and research) and discuss how they differ
from earlier approaches to language and literacy instruction. They then suggest skills and activities that
allow for flexibility depending on the technologies available in a particular context. Finally, they propose
action research, which involves collaboration among teachers, students, and researchers, as well as the use
of the electronic medium, to investigate and reflect critically on specific electronic literacy practices.
In chapter 9 ("Task-Based Language Learning Via Audiovisual Networks: The LEVERAGE Project"),
Christoph Zähner, Agnès Fauverge, and Jan Wong describe a pilot study on the use of broadband audio
and audiovisual conferencing with college-level learners of French and of English. Drawing on the
theoretical work of authors such as Frawley (1997), Neisser (1992), and Vygotsky (1978), the authors
evaluate the system in an attempt to determine whether it was able to support intensive collaborative
learning and effective zones of proximal development. They present data samples that reveal learners' use
of metaconscious processing and intersubjectivity, as well as close collaboration in carrying out the tasks
of the study. The analysis of the data also indicated the importance of shared work space in collaborative
learning. Thus, in the case of network-based environments, the availability of a shared writing tool
seemed to be essential to facilitate the externalization of ideas and to make them the subject for reflection
and negotiation. Likewise, the authors found that the role of an adviser was crucial to help with language-
related, task-related, and technical issues, and therefore, to maximize the potential benefits of audiovisual
networking. In contrast with on-line written communication (Bump, 1990; Kern, 1995), this study
suggests that particular limitations of audiovisual conferencing (e.g., restricted visual channel) forced
learners to rely on oral feedback and seemed to have an inhibitory effect in learners' participation. This
study indicates the potential of audiovisual networking as a promising tool for long-distance task-based
learning. Nevertheless, clarification of how particular terms (e.g., "peer tutoring," "corrections,"
"negotiation of meaning," "misunderstandings") are used in the results section of the chapter is needed to
properly interpret the implications of this type of learner-learner collaboration for language acquisition.
Reviewed by Steven L. Thorne Review of Language and the Internet
Language Learning & Technology 31
In chapter 10 ("Is Network-Based Learning CALL?"), Carol A. Chapelle argues that support for a
distinction between CALL and NBLT must come from an empirically based definition of network and
non-network CALL activities, including a description of learners' use of language and of the activity
features that contribute to the significant aspects of learners' language use. Chapelle examines six
recurrent themes in the history of CALL, and whether and how NBLT ties to and offers new perspectives
on each theme: the need for CALL evaluation, the myth of "CALL method," significant features of
activities, the need to link to SLA research, the classroom context of CALL, and sociocultural issues of
CALL. She also addresses the critical role of NBLT in CALL's evolution and identifies some of the
complexities of network learning activities that raise new challenges but also "push forward the scope of
CALL use and evaluation" (p. 219). Chapelle concludes with a tentative answer to the title question:
"NBLT represents an expansion rather than a reconceptualization of CALL" (p. 222).
This volume offers a very readable group of studies that not only clarify the nature of NBLT but also
address, from a variety of perspectives, many of the complexities involved in its design and
implementation. Most contributions present particular instances of use of NBLT, which illustrate the wide
range of potential applications. In addition, significant venues for future research are identified
throughout the book. The editors note that the book was "written for researchers, graduate students, and
teachers who are interested in the theory and practice of network-based language teaching" (p. 2), and it
certainly is an essential source for that type of readers. Nevertheless, the book may appeal as well to
readers with a general interest in the use of computer-mediated communication in education.
ABOUT THE REVIEWER
Marisol Fernández-García is Assistant Professor of Spanish and Applied Linguistics in the Department of
Modern Languages at Northeastern University. Her research interests are in psycholinguistics and input
processing, interaction and negotiation in oral and computer-mediated communication, and foreign
language teaching and assessment methods.
E-mail: m.fernandez-garcia@neu.edu
REFERENCES
Bump, J. (1990). Radical changes in class discussion using networked computers. Computers and the
humanities, 24(1-2), 49-65.
Frawley, W. (1997). Vygotsky and cognitive science: Language and the unification of the cognitive and
social mind. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Kern, R. G. (1995). Restructuring classroom interaction with networked computers: Effects on quantity
and quality of language production. The Modern Language Journal, 79, 457-476.
Neisser, U. (1992). The development of consciousness and the acquisition of the self. In F. Kessel, P.
Cole, & D. Johnson (Eds.), Self and consciousness: Multiple perspectives (pp. 1-18). Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Varonis, E., & Gass, S. (1985). Non-native/non-native conversations: A model for negotiation of
meaning. Applied Linguistics, 6(1), 71-90.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wolfson, N. (1989). The social dynamics of native and nonnative variation in complimenting behavior. In
M. Eisenstein (Ed.), The dynamic interlanguage: Empirical studies in second language variation (pp.
219-236). New York: Plenum Press.
