Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num3/sampson/
September 2003, Volume 7, Number 3
pp. 103-118
Copyright © 2003, ISSN 1094-3501 103
MEETING THE NEEDS OF DISTANCE LEARNERS
Nicholas Sampson
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
ABSTRACT
This study draws on the experience of a cohort of 22 multinational and multilingual students
enrolled in a Master in Education (MEd) distance learning program administered by a British
university. It's purpose is to locate the aims and philosophies of distance learning within the
experiences of actual distance learners in order to see if learners' needs were being met by the
program and to obtain a fuller understanding of core aspects of distance education. The study
found that students were, on the whole, satisfied with the course materials, the choice of modules,
assignment feedback, and length of time given to complete the assignments, but significant
problems surfaced regarding issues of student support, and access to and provision of resource
materials. Arguably, these are issues intrinsic to the successful provision of distance learning
courses, and the results both concord with aspects of the research literature (Burge & Howard,
1990; Chen, 1997; Hyland, 2001; Morgan, 1995; Robinson, 1995; Simpson, 2000; Tait, 2000)
and raise some interesting questions regarding the provision of distance education and its ability
to meet the needs of learners.
INTRODUCTION
Most research into the area of distance learning has been carried out with native-English speakers or
monolingual speakers, and very few studies have examined the concerns of multilingual and multinational
distance learners. Accordingly, this paper seeks to address the lack of research into this learner group by
documenting the results of a research project undertaken with multilingual and multinational students
(including myself) enrolled on a British university's Master in Education (MEd) distance learning
programme administered in Hong Kong. The student cohort comprised Hong Kong Chinese students,
Macanese students, native-Japanese speakers, native-German speakers, and native-English speakers from
the United Kingdom and Australia.
The study was intended to assess the experiences of actual distance learners and to see if students' needs
were being met by the programme. The results of the study will be presented and discussed in relation to
the aims and philosophies that underpin distance education, the strengths and weaknesses of distance
education, and the needs of distance learners as they relate to the key issues of course materials and
learning support.
RESEARCH REVIEW
What is distance education?
Before a fuller discussion of distance education can be undertaken, it is necessary first to clarify the terms
open learning and distance learning. In the field of non-traditional, post-school education, open learning
and distance learning are terms which are often used interchangeably, and the literature abounds with
overlapping terminology and conflicting viewpoints. Some propose that there is no distinction between
the two (Rumble, 1989), and that "distance learning is a sub-category of open learning" (Lewis &
Spencer, 1986, p. 17); others that "Open learning is not synonymous with distance education" (Foks,
1987, p. 74), a view echoed by Garrison (1990), who states that, "Open learning systems are not
equivalent to … distance education" (p. 119).
Nicholas Sampson Meeting the Needs of Distance Learners
Language Learning & Technology 104
It appears that there are significant differences between the two terms, although much modern usage blurs
the distinction. Distance learning refers mainly to a mode of delivery (independent learning at a distance
through the means of self-study texts and non-contiguous communication), while open learning includes
the notions of both openness and flexibility (whereby students have personal autonomy over their studies
and where access restrictions and privileges have been removed) and distance (as in independence from
the teacher).
Keegan (1990, p. 44) identifies five main elements of distance education: the separation of teacher and
learner; the influence of an educational organization; the use of technical media (usually print) to unite the
teacher and learner and to carry educational content; the provision of two-way communication so that the
student may benefit from or even initiate dialogue; and the possibility of occasional meetings for both
didactic and socialization purposes. Keegan's formulation is a useful one (and one which appears to have
been generally accepted by researchers, although one criticised by Garrison, 1990, as being too narrow),
and is considered a suitable one for this paper since the distance learning programme under study
included these five elements.
The Strengths and Weaknesses of Distance Education
Distance learning, like any kind of learning, can serve different ends, but distance learning appears mainly
to serve those who cannot or do not want to make use of classroom teaching. Demanding professional
commitments and family responsibilities of many adults often make attending a conventional, full-time,
face-to-face course with fixed timetables a rather unrealistic proposition, and the reasons why adults
choose distance education are primarily "the convenience, flexibility and adaptability of this mode of
education to suit individual students' needs" (Holmberg, 1989, p. 24).
All learning requires a degree of motivation, self-discipline, and independence on behalf of the learner,
but these aspects are arguably more pertinent in the case of distance learning, where the student is largely
self-directed and unsupervised, and expected to be more autonomous. Threlkeld and Brzoska (1994) state
that "maturity, high motivation levels, and self-discipline have been shown to be necessary characteristics
of successful, satisfied students" (p. 53). One of the main foci of this study is what factors contribute to
this notion of "successful, satisfied students."
Distance study is self-study, but the student is not alone. As Holmberg (1989) describes it, "A kind of
conversation in the form of two-way traffic occurs through the written or otherwise mediated interaction
between the students and the tutors and others belonging to the supporting institution" (p. 27). Holmberg
goes on to state that, "conversation is brought about by the presentation of the study matter if this is
characterised by a personal approach…and causes the students to discuss the contents with themselves"
(p. 27). Such a development can be brought about by a readable style of presentation. The issue of course
materials is directly relevant to the current study, and the dialogic approach to materials will be examined
in more detail later in the paper.
Kirkup and Jones (1996) believe that the success of distance learning courses "cannot be assumed" (p.
277). Sharp cut-off dates for tutor-marked assignments, rigidity of learning content and materials, and
inflexible learning structures are all common in distance education systems (Keegan, 1990), and are
factors which clearly will not meet the needs of all learners. Kirkup and Jones (1996) summarise the most
significant weaknesses of distance education as (a) its inability to offer dialogue in the way that
conventional face-to-face education does; (b) the inflexibility of its content and study method; and (c) the
isolation and individualisation of the student.
Meeting the Needs of Distance Learners: Student Satisfaction
Garrison (1990) states that, "the majority of distance education is concerned with meeting the educational
needs of adults" (p. 103), and Holmberg (1986) that "distance teaching will support student motivation,
Nicholas Sampson Meeting the Needs of Distance Learners
Language Learning & Technology 105
promote learning pleasure and effectiveness if offered in a way to make the study relevant to the
individual learner and his/her needs" (p. 123).
Defining and categorising adult learners' needs is, though, a difficult task. Distance education offers
students an opportunity to "study and learn in a peer-free environment, when and if they prefer it"
(Verduin & Clark, 1991, p. 27), while also providing support during the learning experience in terms of
guidance, planning, and feedback that is necessary for continued student motivation and completion of the
course.
A review of the literature demonstrates that while there is no significant difference in achievement levels
between distant and traditional learners, there is "considerable variance in student attitudes and
satisfaction levels" (Johnstone, 1991, cited in Threlkeld & Brzoska, 1994, p. 49). Student satisfaction in
distance education has been examined by a number of researchers (Beare, 1989; Hilgenberg & Tolone,
2000; Jones, 1992; McCleary & Egan, 1989). One of the most common problems of many distance
learning courses is the limitation of dialogue between teachers and learners, and amongst learners
themselves. As Kirkup and Jones (1996) state, "Students need dialogue with their teachers and with other
students in order to consolidate and check on their own learning" (p. 278). Chen (1997) supports this
view, finding student-instructor dialogue an important factor in distance learning. Furthermore, dialogue
allows students to assess their learning and develop a sense of community with other students (a measure
that can counter the effects of isolation often experienced by distance learners), and also allows the
institution to assess its teaching objectives and see if they are being fulfilled.
Threlkeld and Brzoska (1994) maintain that there is little empirical evidence to show mediated instruction
suffers in comparison to face-to-face instruction, stating that "the instructional medium doesn't appear to
make any important difference in student achievement, attitudes and retention" (p. 42). They conclude
that the media itself is not as important to instruction as other variables, such as learner characteristics,
motivation, and instructional alternatives. It is these variables, they suggest, that are more pertinent to the
process of learning and teaching at a distance, and thus to the ability of distance education to meet the
needs of learners.
The need for face-to-face meetings is undoubtedly important to the distance learner, although it is perhaps
more a matter of the degree of interactivity than whether or not any interactivity takes place. As Stone
(1990, cited in Threlkeld & Brzoska, 1994, p. 47) argues in his assessment of interactivity in distance
learning, adult learners may actually perform better in situations where they control not only where but
when learning occurs, and concludes that as long as students have some form of interaction with tutors,
then high quality learning can still occur.
One way to counterbalance the absence of dialogue in distance learning is to institute sufficient student
support services. Tait (1995) categorises student support as advice/counselling, tutoring (individually or
in groups), the learning of study skills, peer group support, feedback concerning assessment and progress,
language support and administrative problem-solving, where the aim is to support students' individual
learning whether alone or in groups. Student support is a key issue in the provision of distance education,
and three services appear repeatedly in the literature: timely student feedback, on-site support, and access
to library materials. The response of tutors and "turn-around time" for comments and grading is cited
again and again as being a critical component of student support, with students who receive timely
feedback on assignments responding more positively to the course than those who have to wait for
feedback (Delbecq & Scates, 1989). The support provided by on-site facilitators has also been
consistently cited as crucial to the effectiveness of a distance education programme (McCleary & Egan,
1989; Murphy & Yum, 1998; Threlkeld, 1992; Threlkeld & Brzoska, 1994). Burge and Howard (1990),
too, in their questionnaire study of audio-conferencing in Canadian graduate education, found that the
effective utilisation of local tutors (or on-site facilitators) increases student satisfaction with courses.
Nicholas Sampson Meeting the Needs of Distance Learners
Language Learning & Technology 106
Finally, access to library materials is a key component of distance education. For many learners, access to
library resources may well be limited. This creates obvious problems for the distance learner. An
evaluation of learner support conducted by Dillon, Gunawardena, and Parker (1992; cited in Threlkeld &
Brzoska, 1994, p. 57) noted that "Library resources are very important to distance students as the majority
of them…indicated that success in the course required access to library materials." The issue of student
support has received renewed interest recently, with Tait (2000) and Simpson (2000) both exploring this
aspect of distance learning in some detail.
In considering student support services, any institution that offers courses through distance learning must
address the question of who their learners are and what their needs are. The institution must then
determine how those needs can be met with regard to constraints of costs, technologies, and geography. It
appears that media such as correspondence, face-to-face, telephone, and electronic communications
provide a variety of means which differ widely in their effectiveness (for individuals and groups) and in
ways that appear to be only partially understood (Tait, 1995), while Lewis (1995) states that the tutor is
"the main source of support for the student beyond the course materials" (p. 245). Clearly, then, the
course materials and the tutors are of significant import in distance education, and resources that
contribute greatly to meeting the needs of learners.
In reference to the programme conducted by a British university, it is possible to identify five areas of
support provision: local tutors who provided assignment feedback and arranged study groups and
individual meetings; week-long intensive study schools (ISS's) which took place biannually in Hong
Kong; the facility to communicate with the course tutors in the UK via e-mail; feedback from the tutors in
the UK; and access to a library of relevant texts located at the British Council (BC), the institution which
mediated between the British university and the Hong Kong-based students. This would appear to be a
comprehensive support structure, but any structure needs to implemented and monitored efficiently if it is
to achieve its aims.
METHOD
Introduction
The research study was undertaken in an attempt to identify some of the key issues in distance education
with specific reference to a group of distance learners enrolled on a two-year, part-time MEd (ELT)
distance learning programme delivered by an established British university, and to see how far their
individual needs were being met by the course.
Background to the Course
The Master of Education (ELT) by Distance Learning offered by the university was designed as an
opportunity for teachers to study at home for a post-graduate qualification. The four main features of the
course were that it could be completed in two years; it followed a modular structure which allowed course
members to progress at their own pace; assignments were related to the work of course members; and
access to the research expertise of the members of university staff was provided.
Detailed course materials were provided for each module, and each student was allocated a tutor in the
UK with whom regular contact (by post, telephone, fax, or e-mail) could be maintained. In addition,
students were required to attend four intensive study schools (ISS's) in Hong Kong over two academic
years for consultation with the course director and specialist tutors.
A range of six modules was offered which could be combined in various ways to provide specialisation in
Educational Management, English Language Teaching, Social Psychology of Special Education, Child
Development; Information Technology in Education, and Science Education. The course required
students to complete four taught modules and was continuously assessed. An assignment of 6,000 words
Nicholas Sampson Meeting the Needs of Distance Learners
Language Learning & Technology 107
was required for each of the four modules, followed by a dissertation of 20,000 words. Set books were
provided for each module, along with Module Files (which presented major issues and areas of
investigation on the module topic), Supplementary Notes (including relevant and up-to-date journal
papers), and a Guide for Course Materials (which included an academic plan and timetable together with
details of assignments).
Course members maintained contact with the university through the Course Director, with the British
Council in Hong Kong acting in an administrative role (distributing course materials, collecting and
sending assignments/dissertations to the UK, providing rooms for the ISS lectures and seminars, etc.). For
each module, the university appointed specialist Associate Local Tutors (who were based in Hong Kong)
to give support and guidance in the study of the modules and the preparation of the assignments. Contact
with university staff was facilitated through attendance at the ISS's held in Hong Kong (at the British
Council) every June and December. At the ISS's, students could meet university tutors and other students
and develop their own networks and contacts. For the dissertation, students were allocated a personal
supervisor from the university's Department of Educational Studies.
The Questionnaire
The self-completion questionnaire (see Appendix for a copy of the one used in this survey) was selected
as the most appropriate tool for two reasons: (a) because it is an effective small-scale research tool, and
(b) because "the knowledge needed is controlled by the questions, therefore it affords a good deal of
precision and clarity" (McDonough & McDonough, 1997, p. 171).
As Cohen and Manion (1998) state, "surveys gather data at a particular point in time with the intention of
describing the nature of existing conditions … or determining the relationships which exist between
specific events" (p. 83). In addition, given the size of the study and number of people involved, a
questionnaire was particularly appropriate for collecting data in a relatively quick and inexpensive
manner (Bell, 1999, p. 126). Furthermore, because they are anonymous, questionnaires encourage
respondents to be honest, and Seliger and Shohamy (2000) believe that they provide data which are more
"uniform" and "accurate" than that obtained by other methods (p. 172)).
In an effort to maximise the response rate, the questionnaire was designed to be deliberately short (eight
questions) and to have the majority of questions (questions 1-6) be of the scaled type (utilising a four-
point Likert-like scale). Only two of the questions were open-ended questions (questions 7 and  8),
because, while I didn't want respondents to feel pressured into writing too much, more individual points
of view and more detailed information than could be elicited in the closed questions were required.
The use of the fixed-alternative format gave the respondents specific and limited alternative responses
from which to select the one closest to their own viewpoint. These kind of questions are easier for
respondents to answer than open-ended types, and the standardisation of alternative responses allows for
comparability of answers, which in turn facilitates the coding, tabulating and interpreting of data.
It has been argued that there is a tendency for respondents to show "indecisiveness" when answering
questionnaires (Rust & Golombok, 1992, p. 154), and avoid either agreement or disagreement with scaled
questions by opting for the middle (neutral/no opinion) category. To combat such a propensity, it was
decided not to include a middle category as a means of ensuring relevant levels of agreement and
disagreement. This follows Walonick's (1997) finding that questions which exclude the middle option
produce a greater volume of accurate data. To this end, the questions were designed -- as far as possible --
to minimise any potential irritation that respondents might feel (through the omission of a middle
category) with items they deemed unanswerable.
A review of the literature indicated that student satisfaction with a distance learning course revolves
around issues of course materials and student support (in terms of feedback, on-site support and access to
library materials). The survey questions thus focused mainly on these two areas.
Nicholas Sampson Meeting the Needs of Distance Learners
Language Learning & Technology 108
A pilot study involving six people showed that the questionnaire contained no confusing or ambiguous
questions, and there was thus no need to alter or amend the questions or the format of the questionnaire.
The pilot group were drawn from the tutors and students on a distance learning course offered by a local
(i.e., Hong Kong) university, and were selected because of their familiarity with issues related to distance
learning programmes.
Fieldwork
The sample of students was drawn from the whole cohort of students enrolled on the British university's
MEd (ELT) distance learning programme, and included both native and non-native speakers of English.
Access to the cohort was granted by the British Council in Hong Kong, which was the organisation
responsible for liaising between the British university and the Hong Kong-based students. (I was enrolled
on the programme and, at the time of the study, had completed one year of the two-year course.) Because
of issues related to personal privacy, the British Council forwarded the questionnaire (see Appendix) and
covering letter to the student cohort on my behalf.
In order to counter any potential reservations and to provide a guarantee of confidentiality, respondents
were given the opportunity of returning the questionnaire either by fax to me directly or via an e-mail
forwarded by the British Council (with the respondent's e-mail address and other identifying features
removed). Otherwise, respondents could return the questionnaire to me directly by e-mail.
Processing the Data
In processing the questionnaire data, and following Cohen and Manion (1994, p. 101), the returned self-
completion questionnaires were checked for completeness, accuracy, and uniformity. It was discovered
that each respondent had answered every question and, furthermore, that all questions were answered
accurately (in the sense that appropriate answers had been given to the questions). Respondents also
interpreted the instructions and questions uniformly.
Response Rate
The response rate was calculated by comparing the number of questionnaires analysed with the number
distributed to students.
Table 1. Summary of Questionnaire Response Rate
Number of questionnaires distributed 54
Number of questionnaires returned 22
Response rate 41%
In order to maximise the response level, a reminder e-mail was sent to those students who did not respond
the first time, and included the same questionnaire and a follow-up covering letter emphasising the
importance of the survey and the value of the respondents' participation. The questionnaire and covering
letter was again forwarded to students by the British Council on my behalf. The reminder had the effect of
increasing the response rate by just three (to 14). Because of this rather disappointing response rate, a
third and final attempt to gather data from the cohort lead to a further 12 students being sent the
questionnaire by e-mail (as an attachment forwarded to them on my behalf by a colleague still enrolled on
the programme), which resulted in eight more students responding. (The third reminder also included a
number of moderator variables which were absent from the first two survey attempts. The additional
demographic information obtained from the last eight respondents focused on the student's gender,
nationality, first language, and stage of the course, and this group comprised five native-speakers and
three non-native speakers. Findings from these variables are discussed at relevant points in the results and
discussion section.)
Nicholas Sampson Meeting the Needs of Distance Learners
Language Learning & Technology 109
It remains, however, that the overall response rate of 41% was a little disappointing. There are, perhaps, a
number of reasons for the low response rate. The questionnaire was sent out in mid-July, which coincided
with the academic summer holiday. Since many of the students on the course were either practising
teachers or engaged in full-time work at educational institutions, it is likely that some would have been on
holiday or outside Hong Kong at the time. Furthermore, the subjects may have been influenced by the fact
that I was also enrolled on the programme, and may thus have been hesitant to give out personal
information to a fellow classmate. Finally, since the questionnaire asked students to rate their satisfaction
with the university's distance learning programme, some may have been reluctant, for whatever reason, to
explicitly voice their opinions and/or criticisms (despite their anonymity being assured). A counter view
to this, however, is that since the questionnaire focussed on issues directly related to students' learning (an
endeavour that they are investing time, effort, and money in), it might not have been unreasonable to
expect that more people would have been willing to respond.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Table 2 shows a breakdown of student responses regarding questions 1-6 (the scaled questions). Since
questions 7 and 8 were open-ended questions, the results cannot be similarly quantified, though common
themes were identified through a qualitative analysis.
Table 2. Student Responses to Questions 1-6 of the Survey Questionnaire
Very satisfied Satisfied Dissatisfied Very dissatisfied
Q1 2 18 1 1
Q2 7 13 1 1
Q3 1 12 6 1
Q4 4 14 3 1
Q5 0 8 11 3
Q6 0 4 17 1
Course Materials
Q1. How satisfied are you with the course materials provided on the programme?
Most respondents (91%) were either satisfied or very satisfied with the course materials, while just 9%
were dissatisfied or very dissatisfied. In a follow-up comment with regard to the course materials, one
respondent stated that "material mentioned in the modules is often difficult to obtain and not supplied as
reading material." Others stated that "I think more textbooks should have been given to us" and "resource
books in the British Council were not enough." It is worth noting that, in the absence of a tutor, the role of
learning materials is of great importance. Holmberg (1986) states that the provision of extra materials in
the form of a specially prepared reader is advisable "when students have inadequate library facilities or
when only a few selected texts are relevant" (p. 47). This is a point that relates to the frustration felt by
some respondents who do not have access to an adequate library, one of whom reported that "looking for
resources for supporting my ideas was very difficult as I had a problem accessing the local university
libraries," and a third that "we should have been given access to at least one university library in Hong
Kong for the duration of the course; I also think that the [British university's] on-line library should have
been easier to access -- I struggled for months to get some kind of access, and I eventually only had
limited access during my dissertation stage."
Other comments relating to the course materials included "the materials are written in an accessible and
personal style" and a few respondents welcomed the "time-outs" that have been built into the materials
allow for a degree of dialogic exchange, interaction, and engagement with the text. By attempting to
Nicholas Sampson Meeting the Needs of Distance Learners
Language Learning & Technology 110
involve the learner emotionally, the materials encouraged a degree of self-reflection on the part of the
learner and thus satisfied Morgan's (1995) concern that distance learning texts "encourage reflection in
learning" (p. 59).
An analysis of the final eight respondents' questionnaires revealed no significant differences between
native-speakers (NS) and non-native speakers (NNS) answers in this regard.
Choice of Modules
Q2. How satisfied are you with the choice of modules available on the programme?
Respondents were fairly unanimous in this respect, with most (91%) being either satisfied or very
satisfied with the choice, and only 9% dissatisfied or very dissatisfied. Comments on the choice of
modules ranged from "the topics are directly relevant to me" to "the modules I've encountered so far have
been thought-provoking and appealing."
Assignment Feedback
Q3. How satisfied are you with the feedback you have received for your assignments?
This question was not applicable to two respondents since they had yet to receive feedback for their first
assignment. Of the remaining respondents, almost two thirds (65%) were satisfied or very satisfied, with
35% being either dissatisfied or very dissatisfied. Comments relating to the latter included, "I was
unimpressed with the feedback, which I felt was misleading from a local tutor about a problematic
assignment, followed by some very negative and unhelpful comments on the same assignment from the
marker in the UK." Hyland (2001, p. 233) states that in the distance learning context, "feedback plays a
crucial role in opening and maintaining a dialogue between tutors and students … [and] also serves an
important function in motivating and encouraging students." Holmberg (1983) avers that empirical studies
have shown that "quick handling with proper tutor comments on students' papers has proved essential for
students' success" (p. 322), and others (Egan, Sebastian, & Welch, 1991; Threlkeld & Brzoska, 1994) that
timely feedback regarding assignments is a critical component of learner support.
Again, no significant differences between native-speakers (NS) and non-native speakers (NNS) answers
were discovered in this regard.
Assignment Completion Time
Q4. How satisfied are you with the length of time you are given to complete your assignments?
The majority of respondents (82%) were either satisfied or very satisfied with assignment completion
times, while 18% were dissatisfied or very dissatisfied. Two respondents stated that they would like more
flexibility in this respect, although since the programme was not an open learning course, it seems
reasonable to have cut-off dates for assignments. Deadlines can also be a motivating factor, and one
student stated that "sufficient flexibility has been built into the course by the provision of assignment
extensions and the option to defer if necessary."
As before, a bias analysis of the answers given by the NS and NNS on this point showed no major
differences between the two groups.
Student Support
Q5. How satisfied are you with the range of support provided on the programme (i.e., in terms of local
tutors, ISS's and the British Council)?
This was the aspect of distance learning that I most wished to focus on, so questions 5, 6, and 7 related to
the provision and management of student support services.
Nicholas Sampson Meeting the Needs of Distance Learners
Language Learning & Technology 111
In relation to question 5, nearly two thirds of respondents (64%) were either dissatisfied or very
dissatisfied with the range of support provided on the programme in terms of the local tutors, the ISS's
and the British Council, while 36% were satisfied or very satisfied. From the follow-up comments in
questions 7 and 8, it was possible to identify a number of specific concerns, namely, that while students
welcomed the provision of local tutors, many found the quality of the support they provided to be lacking.
Comments included "the quality of their input and advice varies, some are helpful while others are rather
passionless and directionless," "I am rather dissatisfied with the aspect [sic] of the local tutors provided,"
"local tutors could be more helpful," and "the local tutors provide little support; this term we haven't even
been informed yet about our tutors -- if there are any this term!" One respondent reported a bad
experience with the first local tutor and decided not to seek tutor assistance for subsequent modules.
In general, the usefulness of the local tutors was found to be highly variable, with one tutor in particular
being identified by several respondents as being extremely unfocussed and largely unhelpful. One student
comment in this regard was that "My first tutor provided meaningless feedback and several of my fellow
students felt the same way," while another stated that "I was very unhappy with my first tutor. She tried to
dissuade me from pursuing the assignment topic of my choice, stating that she wasn't familiar with the
subject area, and suggesting I choose an assignment on an entirely different topic simply because it was
one she was more comfortable with."
In terms of the intensive study schools, most seem happy with them ("the ISS's have so far been useful,"
"the intensive seminars have been [of] a very high quality," and "I felt that most of the ISS input was fine,
and during face-to-face meetings I received a lot of in-depth information"), but three respondents would
like them to be longer than they were and to include more lectures/seminars. This might then prevent, in
the words of one respondent, the feeling that "I could have got more out of the ISS if there had been more
time … the lecturers seemed to be too pressured and tired to give what I, personally, would have liked."
Chen (1997) discovered that a significant factor in student satisfaction with distance learning is student-
instructor dialogue. And Holmberg (1986), with regard to face-to-face sessions in distance education,
found that "they are useful as opportunities to consult subject specialists … and to exchange views with
tutors and fellow-students," and thus help to stimulate and motivate students' learning (p. 53).
A few respondents mentioned the support provided by the British Council, variously stating that "the BC
staff have always been prepared to do that little extra to help out," "the BC staff are well-organised and
helpful," and "the people at the British Council were very supportive and always responded to my
questions or request immediately." On the other hand, another respondent stated that "contact between
[the university in the UK] and the BC is minimal," and another that "local tutors are often contacted late
after the ISS ... which cuts down on the time available to discuss assignments," while another complained
about "the speed of communication between the students and the school (sic)." These last three comments
would, however, appear to reflect more on the course organisers at the British university rather than on
the staff at the BC (although there may well be mitigating circumstances for any breakdown in
communication between the university and the BC -- the sudden illness of a key member of the university
staff, for example).
Q6. How satisfied are you with the level of support provided on the programme (ie is it enough)?
In relation to question 6, respondents were almost unanimous in stating their dissatisfaction with the level
of support provided on the programme, with 82% being dissatisfied or very dissatisfied, and just 18%
satisfied. The level of support provided was deemed to be insufficient, and follow-up comments on this
issue (given in response to Q7) ranged from "more support will (sic) be much better" and "There is only
little support," to "I can't say we are well 'looked after' and cared for" and "No-one checks to see if you're
getting on OK." If the on-site support provided by the university programme is characterised as consisting
of the local tutors and the staff at the British Council's Distance Learning Centre, then these are revealing
comments since, in their overview of research into distance education, Threlkeld and Brzoska (1994) state
Nicholas Sampson Meeting the Needs of Distance Learners
Language Learning & Technology 112
that the support provided by the on-site facilitators is "critical to the effectiveness of a distance education
programme" (p. 55).
Q7. What aspects of the support provided on the programme do you like or dislike?
In relation to question 7, the ability to contact the university tutors directly and the willingness of
university tutors to communicate by e-mail was given by eight respondents as an aspect of the course they
liked (although one respondent disliked "the way support dwindles because of low intake numbers"). The
way the course is organised was liked by five respondents, as was "the broad base it gives students to
choose their own path through each module." In addition, the fact that students were given the
opportunity to negotiate alternative assignment titles if they felt the ones available did not accommodate
them was an aspect that was welcomed by one respondent. This (along with the opportunity to extend
assignment/dissertation deadlines and/or defer for a certain period if necessary) provided a level of
flexibility that a number of respondents appreciated.
Interestingly, when the responses of the NS and NNS of the last eight respondents were analysed in
regard to questions 5 and 6, it was the NNS who expressed higher levels of satisfaction than the NS with
both the range and level of support provided by the programme. All three of the NNS reported themselves
satisfied with the range of support, and two of the three satisfied with the level of support. This contrasts
greatly with the NNS, all five of whom reported themselves dissatisfied or very dissatisfied with both the
range and level of support. Non-native English proficiency would appear to be a factor that positively
influences satisfaction levels, although more research in this area is needed before such a claim could be
considered conclusive.
Suggestions for Improving the Course
Q8. What areas, if any, of the programme could be improved?
An analysis of responses to this question highlighted a number of common concerns, with 12 respondents
criticising the limited number and type of books provided by the British university and located in the BC
library (one respondent finding it "incomprehensible that all the classical literature and [key educational
works by noted authors] are not available"). This factor was clearly a concern for those students who did
not have access to a university library or similar resource for reference books, articles and journals.
As discussed before, comments relating to the issue of student support were also given in response to this
question. In tandem with the range of support provided on the programme, the issue of the level of student
support seems to be one that is failing to meet the needs of many students. As stated earlier, this is an area
that would appear to be worth looking into in more detail.
SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
It seems that students were, on the whole, satisfied with the course materials, the choice of modules,
assignment feedback, and length of time given to complete assignments. In these areas, it seems fair to
say that most students' needs were being largely met.
An area of significant concern, however, was that of student support. Although this is an issue that
inherently involves a high degree of subjectivity, this would appear to be an area worthy of further
investigation since it relates directly to students' needs, and it would appear that students' needs are not
being met in this aspect. Furthermore, as Robinson (1995) states in her review of research literature
regarding learner support, "multiple interacting factors (personal, environmental and course variables) are
at work in determining learner success," although some "institutional interventions can assist if
appropriately targeted" (p. 222).
Nicholas Sampson Meeting the Needs of Distance Learners
Language Learning & Technology 113
Many people clearly appreciated the provision of local tutors, but there were questions about the quality
of the assistance they provided in practice. As a way of more effectively utilising this valuable resource, it
would be worthwhile for the course organisers and administrators to implement closer screening and
monitoring of local tutors.
The issue of access to library materials is often cited by researchers as a key component in distance
education (Cavanagh, 1994; Dillon et al, 1992; Tait, 2000). This is germane to the current programme,
and since a number of students do not have access to reference material (and have expressed frustration at
not being able to access the material they need to complete their work), it would appear to be worth
looking into ways of providing students with the ability to access key resource material, either by
establishing a relationship for this purpose with a local university or by providing access to an on-line
data bank. Appleton (1994) goes so far as to state that "academic institutions … have a responsibility to
provide off-campus students with resources and facilities equivalent to their on-campus peers" (p. 79).
Since the Internet has rapidly become a source of daily communications, education via the Internet is now
more widely used. Many educational institutions actively use the Internet to deliver completely on-line
programmes. In America, for example, the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES, 1999, cited in
Lim, 2001) reports that "58% of two-year and four-year postsecondary education institutions offering
distance education in the 1997-98 academic year used asynchronous Internet instruction (e.g., e-mail,
listserves, and Web-based courses). Of these, 82% planned to start using or to increase their use of
asynchronous Internet instruction as a primary mode of delivery in the next three years" (p. 41). The
UKeU (2003) online list of UK universities offering full Web-based courses is constantly growing, too.
Given this international trend, the British university offering the current MEd programme might usefully
consider a similar course of action as a way of counteracting student frustration over lack of access to
resource materials. In the meantime, at the very least, equipping the library at the British Council with
more resource material would be a welcome stopgap.
As a number of respondents were unhappy with certain administrative aspects of the course (in terms of
arrangement of local tutors, feedback on assignments, and communication between the university and the
British Council), it seems that administrative procedures could be better co-ordinated to allow for quicker
and more efficient communication between the students and the university, and the university and the
British Council. Such a view concords with both Holmberg (1989, p. 106), who found that speeding up
communication and instituting quick response and turn-around times helps to reduce the frustration felt by
students, and Snowden and Daniel (1988), who state that "distance education systems, because of the
inherent complexity and interdependence of their parts require 'tighter' management than conventional
educational institutions" (p. 339). This belief is echoed by Rumble (1992, cited in Schlosser & Anderson,
1994), who states that the key to successful management of distance education lies in planning,
organization, leadership and control (p. 31).
The issue of the UK-based tutors' individual concern for students was mentioned by a number of
respondents as an area that could be improved, with one stating that the sending of "a bimonthly or
quarterly email" to individual students might be a good idea -- "a personal one, with reference to your
own time plan, modules, progress." Another respondent stated, "we seem to have been left on our own a
bit, whereas [the university] might have thought to enquire about how things were/are going for us, as, I
think, most of us are new to this level of study." This relates to Rogers' (1989) claim that isolation,
anxiety, and failure to control the pace of work are particular problems with learners "who have not
undertaken a substantial piece of learning for some time" (p. 148). The respondents' comments are,
therefore, important considerations, and more personal support and concern for individual students'
welfare would help offset the sense of isolation that distance learners often feel (Holmberg, 1989, p. 95)
and contribute to learners' motivation, interest, and satisfaction (Willen, 1981, p. 113).
Nicholas Sampson Meeting the Needs of Distance Learners
Language Learning & Technology 114
Although there is a school of thought in distance education that holds to treating the students as
"potentially independent people to whom it is left not only to decide, but expressly to state, if and to what
extent they want support or advice" (Holmberg, 1986, p. 70), it would seem that the views of those
students who were investigated on the current programme take the opposite view, which posits
interference on the part of the institution to prevent failure and promote success as a social responsibility
of the institution. The communication element is rightly considered a cornerstone in distance education
and, as Robinson (1995) concludes in her survey of learner support research, "learner-institution contact,
such as regular contact with support staff, appears to have a positive effect on learner performance and
persistence rates" (p. 222).
Limitations of the Study
There are a number of limitations to the study. Firstly, the sample consisted of a fairly small group (which
in turn had a fairly low response rate of 41%, although possible reasons for this are given in the response
rate section of the paper). Secondly, the students in the cohort were all at different stages of their studies,
with some at the beginning and others nearing the end. The varying levels of experience with the course
may, therefore, influence both the needs and levels of satisfaction of individual students. Finally, given
the nature of the questionnaire -- an attempt to gauge the level of satisfaction of distance learners -- it
should be noted that "satisfaction" is a rather elusive concept because it is a state of mind, and one,
therefore, for which no relative measures between individuals exist. Furthermore, since a person's needs
will also vary from individual to individual, it is hard to objectively quantify and qualify whether all
peoples' needs are being met. In terms of the level of support as it pertains to meeting learners' needs, for
example, a highly motivated and self-confident learner who is comfortable working on their own could
quite feasibly require less support than one who is less motivated and self-confident and not particularly
comfortable working by himself. For the purposes of this study, a useful definition of satisfaction was that
given by Lawler (1973, cited in Poppleton, 1988), who states that satisfaction "is determined by the
difference between all those things that a person feels he [sic] should receive and all the things that he
[sic] actually does receive" (p. 8).
CONCLUSION
It is clearly extremely challenging for any process of education, let alone one carried out at a distance, to
meet the needs of all learners. In her review of the literature in distance learning, Speth (1991) states that
there is no typical distance learning student -- a view echoed by Charp (1997) -- but rather that
tremendous variability and individual differences exist in the consumer population. In general terms, then,
such variability and individuality will make meeting all learners' needs an extraordinarily difficult task.
It seems fair to say that anyone embarking on a course of distant-learning study at the "career education"
level would have some awareness of the demands that such study would place upon them in terms of
motivation, self-discipline, and time management. In choosing a distance learning course, potential
students would analyse their needs and relate them to the types of courses available. It is only when
immersed in the actual course of study, however, that certain problems might become apparent. How far
responsibility for these problems lies with the student or with the distance learning institution will vary
from individual to individual and from institution to institution, and, as such, it is hard to identify in
general terms whether the fault is the result of any fundamental flaws in the notion of distance education,
or whether it lies with the student or with the organising institution. Accordingly, the complicated
interplay of a multitude of factors makes the successful provision of distance education a very formidable
one.
The results of the survey highlighted a number of areas in which students felt let down by the course,
especially in terms of learning support, and access to and provision of resource materials. The study
highlighted the need for competent student support services, access to reference materials, and efficient
Nicholas Sampson Meeting the Needs of Distance Learners
Language Learning & Technology 115
administrative procedures in order to better fulfil learners' needs. While in no way intended to be
conclusive, it is hoped that the results of the survey have indicated some areas in which further research
would be useful, and pinpointed areas which the university might like to evaluate in the light of the
findings.
As the research literature appears to support the view that there is no significant difference between face-
to-face and non-contiguous instruction, successful distance learning comes from factors related to
learners, support, course design, motivation, and need. Distance education, as it is provided by the British
university, is meeting the needs of some learners, but this is clearly not the case for all students. In light of
this, the student support services and problem-solving capabilities of the organising institution are seen to
be crucial to satisfying the needs of multilingual, multinational distance learners.
APPENDIX
Distance Learning Questionnaire
Learners' experiences on the MEd Distance Learning Programme
1. How satisfied are you with the course materials provided on the programme?
Very satisfied [  ]    Satisfied [  ]     Dissatisfied [  ]     Very dissatisfied [  ]
2. How satisfied are you with the choice of modules available on the programme?
Very satisfied [  ]   Satisfied [  ]     Dissatisfied [  ]     Very dissatisfied [  ]
3. How satisfied are you with the feedback you have received for your assignments?
Very satisfied [  ]   Satisfied [  ]     Dissatisfied [  ]     Very dissatisfied [  ]
4. How satisfied are you with the length of time you are given to complete your assignments?
Very satisfied [  ]   Satisfied [  ]     Dissatisfied [  ]     Very dissatisfied [  ]
5. How satisfied are you with the range of support provided on the programme (ie in terms of local
tutors, ISS's and the British Council)?
Very satisfied [  ]   Satisfied [  ]     Dissatisfied [  ]     Very dissatisfied [  ]
6. How satisfied are you with the level of support provided on the programme (ie is it enough)?
Very satisfied [  ]   Satisfied [  ]     Dissatisfied [  ]     Very dissatisfied [  ]
7. What aspects of the support provided on the programme do you like or dislike?
8. What areas (if any) of the programme could be improved?
Very many thanks for your participation.
All responses and personal information will be kept strictly confidential.
Nicholas Sampson Meeting the Needs of Distance Learners
Language Learning & Technology 116
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Nicholas Sampson is an instructor in the Language Centre of the Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology. He holds an MEd (ELT) and is currently working towards his PhD with Nottingham
University in the UK. Apart from distance education, his main areas of research are teaching materials
and teacher autonomy.
E-mail: lcnick@ust.hk
REFERENCES
Appleton, M. (1994). Investigating library services for post-graduate off-campus students. In T. Evans &
D. Murphy (Eds.), Research in distance education 3 (pp. 78-90). Geelong, Victoria, Australia: Deakin
University Press.
Beare, P. L. (1989). The comparative effectiveness of videotape, audiotape, and telelecture in delivering
continuing teacher education. The American Journal of Distance Education, 3(2), 57-66.
Bell, J. (1999). Doing your research project: A guide for first-time researchers in education and social
science. Buckingham, England: Open University Press.
Burge, E. J., & Howard, J. L. (1990). Audio-conferencing in graduate education: A case study. The
American Journal of Distance Education, 4(2), 3-13.
Cavanagh, A. (1994). The role of libraries in off-campus study. In T. Evans & D. Murphy (Eds.),
Research in distance education 3 (pp. 91-102). Geelong, Victoria, Australia: Deakin University Press.
Charp, S. (1997). Strategies for bridging distances. THE Journal (Technological Horizons in Education),
24(9), 6-8.
Chen, L. (1997). Distance delivery systems in terms of pedagogical considerations: A revolution.
Educational Technology, 37(4), 34-37.
Cohen, L., & Manion, L. (1994). Research methods in education (4th ed.). London: Routledge.
Delbeq, A., & Scates, D. (1989, August). Distance education through telecommunications: A review of
lessons learned. A special report of the American Assembly of Collegiate Schools of Business.
Dillon, C., Gunawardena, C., & Parker, R. (1992). An evaluation of learner support services in a distance
education system. Distance Education, 13(1), 29-45.
Egan, M. W., Sebastian, J., & Welch, M. (1991, March). Effective television teaching: Perceptions of
those who count most…distance learners. Proceedings of the Rural Education Symposium. Nashville,
TN. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED373708)
Foks, J. (1987). Towards open learning. In P. Smith & M. Kelly (Eds.), Distance education and the
mainstream (pp. 74-92). London: Croom Helm.
Garrison, G. R. (1990). Understanding distance education: A framework for the future. London:
Routledge.
Hilgenberg, C., & Tolone, W. (2000). Student perceptions of satisfaction and opportunities for critical
thinking in distance education by interactive video, The American Journal of Distance Education, 14(3),
59-73.
Holmberg, B. (1986). Growth and structure of distance education. Kent, England: Croom Helm.
Holmberg, B. (1989). Theory and practice of distance education. New York: Routledge.
Nicholas Sampson Meeting the Needs of Distance Learners
Language Learning & Technology 117
Hyland, F (2001) Providing effective support: Investigating feedback to distance language learners. Open
Learning, 16(3): 234-247
Johnstone, S. (1991). Research on telecommunicated learning: Past, present and future. The Annals of the
American Academy of Political Science, 514, 49-57.
Jones, T. (1992). IITS students' evaluation questionnaires for the fall semester of 1991. A summary and
report. (ERIC document Reproduction Service No. ED 345716)
Keegan, D. (1990). Foundations of distance education (2nd ed.). London: Routledge
Kirkup, G., & Jones, A. (1996). New technologies for open learning: The superhighway to the learning
society? In P. Raggatt, R. Edwards, & N. Small (Eds.), Adult learners, education and training 2: The
learning society -- challenges and trends (pp. 272-291). London: Routledge.
Lawler, E. E. (1973). Motivation in work organizations. Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Lewis, R. (1995). Support for the in-company learner. In F. Lockwood (Ed.), Open and distance learning
today (pp. 242-254). London: Routledge.
Lewis, R., & Spencer, D. (1986). What is open learning? London: Council for Educational Technology.
Lim, C. K. (2001). Computer self-efficacy, academic self-concept, and other predictors of satisfaction and
future participation of adult distance learners. The American Journal of Distance Education, 15(2), 41-51.
McCleary, I. D., & Egan, M. W. (1989). Program design and evaluation: Two-way interactive television.
The American Journal of Distance Education, 3(1), 50-60.
McDonough, J., & McDonough, S. (1997). Research methods for English language teachers. London:
Arnold.
Morgan, A. R. (1995). Student learning and students' experiences. In F. Lockwood (Ed.), Open and
distance learning today: (pp. 56-66). London Routledge.
Murphy, D., & Yum, J. C. K. (1998). Understanding Hong Kong distance learners. Distance Education,
19(1), 64-80.
National Center for Education Statistics (NCES). (1999). Distance education at postsecondary education
institutions: 1997-98 (NCES2000-013). Report prepared by L. Lewis, K. Snow, E. Farris, & D. Levin.
Washington, DC: Government Printing Office. Available at http:/nces.ed.gov/pubs2000/2000013.pdf
Poppleton, P. (1988) Teacher professional satisfaction: Its implications for secondary education and
teacher education. Cambridge Journal of Education, 18, 5-16.
Robinson, B. (1995). Research and pragmatism in learner support. In F. Lockwood (Ed.), Open and
distance learning today (pp. 221-231). London: Routledge.
Rogers, A. (1996). Teaching adults. Buckingham, England: Open University Press.
Rogers, J. (1989). Adults learning. Milton Keynes, England: Open University Press.
Rumble, G. (1989). "Open learning," "distance learning," and the misuse of language. Open Learning,
4(2), 28-36.
Rumble, G. (1992). The management of distance learning systems. Paris: UNESCO, International
Institute for Educational Planning.
Rust, J., & Golombok, S. (1992). Modern psychometrics: The science of psychological assessment.
London: Routledge.
Nicholas Sampson Meeting the Needs of Distance Learners
Language Learning & Technology 118
Schlosser, C. A., & Anderson, M. L. (1994). Distance education: Review of the literature. Ames, IA:
Research Institute for Studies in Education.
Seliger, H. W., & Shohamy, E. (2000). Second language research methods. Oxford, England: Oxford
University Press.
Sewart, D. (1988). Distance teaching: A contradiction in terms? In D. Sewart, D. Keegan, & B. Holmberg
(Eds.), Distance education: International perspectives (pp. 46-61). New York: Routledge.
Simpson, O. (2000). Supporting students in open and distance learning. London: Kogan Page.
Snowden, B. L., & Daniel, J. S. (1988). The economics and management of small post-secondary distance
education systems. In D. Sewart, D. Keegan, & B. Holmberg (Eds.), Distance education: International
perspectives (pp. 398-424). New York: Routledge.
Speth, C. (1991). Important themes and concepts in technology based distance education: A review of the
research literature (Monograph Reviewing Research Literature). Manhattan: University of Kansas.
Stone, H. (1990). Does interactivity matter in video-based off-campus graduate engineering education?
Unpublished manuscript.
Tait, A. (1995). Student Ssupport in open and distance learning. In F. Lockwood (Ed.), Open and distance
learning today (pp. 232-241). London: Routledge.
Tait, A. (2000). Planning student support in distance and open learning. Open Learning, 15(3), 287-299.
Threlkeld, R. (1992). Recent research and evaluation studies for high school distance learning. Panel
presentation, National University Continuing Education Annual Meeting, San Diego, CA.
Threlkeld, R., & Brzoska, K. (1994). Research in distance education. In B. Willis (Ed.), Distance
education: Strategies and tools (pp. 41-66). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational Technology Publications.
UKeU (2003). UK eUniversities Worldwide Web site. Available at http://www.ukeu.com/
ukuniversities_partners.php
Verduin, J. R., Jr., & Clark, T. A. (1991). Distance education: The foundations of effective practice. San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Walonick, D. S. (1997). Survival statistics. Minneapolis, MN: StatPac Inc.
Willen, B. (1981). Distance education at Swedish universities: An evaluation of the experimental
programme and a follow-up study. Stockholm: Uppsala Studies in Education.
