Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num1/news/
January 2003, Volume 7, Number 1
pp. 9-14
Copyright © 2003, ISSN 1094-3501 9
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS
Sponsors
University of Hawai`i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC)
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR)
Co-Sponsors
Apprentissage des Langues et Systèmes d'Information et de Communication (ALSIC)
Australian Technology Enhanced Language Learning Consortium (ATELL)
Center for Advanced Research on Language Acquisition, University of Minnesota (CARLA)
Center for Applied Linguistics, Washington, DC (CAL)
Computer Assisted Language Instruction Consortium (CALICO)
European Association for Computer Assisted Language Learning (EUROCALL)
International Association for Language Learning Technology (IALLT)
University of Hawai'i National Foreign Language Resource
Center (NFLRC)
The University of Hawai`i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials
development projects and conducts Summer Institutes for language professionals among its many
activities.
2003 PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT OPPORTUNITIES
CLAN for Conversation Analysis (March 31-April 4, 2003) - This workshop includes hands-on training
in CLAN for Conversation Analysis, transcription principles and problems, and connecting soundfiles,
videofiles, and transcripts. It is designed for 15 teaching hours plus exercises, running over a 5-day
period. The teaching hours will shift between lectures, demonstrations, and hands-on activities. The
exercises will allow the participants to get on friendly terms with the software and to be able to discuss
problems and questions. The workshop will be led by Dr. Johannes Wagner (University of Southern
Denmark).
Corpus Linguistics for Korean Language Learning & Teaching (June 30-July 11, 2003) - This NFLRC
Summer Institute will acquaint participants with the basic concepts of corpus linguistics, including corpus
construction and annotation, concordancing, frequency counts and ranks, grammatical tagging, and
related concepts. Participants will learn how to access Korean corpora and use the available computer
programs for Korean corpus analysis.  The workshop will outline techniques for the teacher to use in
materials preparation and curriculum design and for the individual learner to use in exploring meaning,
structure, and use in Korean.  Participants will also engage in individual projects chosen with their own
learning goals in mind.  The deadline for online applications is February 1, 2003.
Southeast Asian Pedagogy Workshops (Summer 2003) - A series of teacher training workshops will be
conducted for faculty teaching at advanced study abroad programs in Southeast Asia. Workshops are
being planned for Filipino, Indonesian, Khmer, Thai, and Vietnamese. Training may also be conducted at
the Southeast Asian Studies Summer Institute at the University of Wisconsin.
Richard Schmidt (Director) and Jim Yoshioka (Program Coordinator) will serve as Program Chair and
Associate Program Chair of the upcoming AAAL 2003 Conference in Arlington, Virginia. Highlights of
News from Sponsoring Organizations
Language Learning & Technology 10
the conference include six plenary addresses (Patricia Duff, Joshua Fishman, Georgette Ioup, Geoffrey
Nunberg, William O'Grady, Congressman Robert Underwood), five invited colloquia ("Instructed Second
Language Acquisition," "The Discourse of Health Care Dilemmas," "Classroom Talks: A Conversation
Analytic Perspective," "Cognitive Linguistics and Second Language Acquisition," & "The Development
of Academic Competence in Adolescent English Learners"), a joint AAAL/ILTA colloquium, numerous
selected papers, posters, and colloquia reflecting the diversity of applied linguistics, a publishers' exhibit,
and much more! For more information about AAAL 2003, visit the AAAL Web site (www.aaal.org).
NFLRC Publications
NFLRC Hawai‘i has recently added two new technical reports to their publications catalog. The first, An
Investigation of Second Language Task-Based Performance Assessments (Brown, Hudson, Norris, &
Bonk), describes the creation and validation of performance assessment instruments. The second, New
Technologies and Language Learning: Cases in the Less Commonly Taught Languages (Spreen, Ed.), is a
collection of case studies presenting technology-based options for language programming that will help
universities make more informed decisions about teaching less commonly taught languages. All technical
reports can be purchased online through University of Hawai`i Press. (http://www.uhpress.hawaii.edu/)
The third video in a series of language teaching demo tapes from Tim Murphey is now available. NPRM
(Near Peer Role Modeling) demonstrates ways in which teachers might use students in their own classes
to motivate and inspire other students, to offer them more alternative strategies and beliefs, and to allow
them to learn more quickly and deeply. Check out other NFLRC publications, including CD-ROMs,
videos, free online downloadable publications, and more at nflrc.hawaii.edu.
Michigan State University Center for Language Education
and Research (CLEAR)
CLEAR's mission is to promote foreign language education in the United States. To meet its goals,
projects focus on foreign language research, materials development, and teacher training.
FOREIGN LANGUAGE RESEARCH
• Feedback to Learners: The Case of Heritage Language Learners
MATERIALS DEVELOPMENT
Products
• Business Chinese (CD-ROM)
• Modules for Assessing Socio-Cultural Competence for German (CD-ROM)
• Modules for Assessing Socio-Cultural Competence: Russian (CD-ROM)
• Pronunciación y fonética (CD-ROM)
• African Language Tutorial Guide (guide and video)
• Directory of African Language Offerings (online database)
• Foreign Languages: Doors to Opportunity (video and discussion guide)
• Task-based Communicative Grammar Activities for Japanese and Thai (workbook)
• Test Development (workbook and video)
• The Internet Sourcebook for Business French (Web links)
• The Internet Sourcebook for Business German (Web links)
• The Internet Sourcebook for Business Spanish (Web links)
• Business Language Packets for High School Classrooms (French, German, & Spanish; PDF files)
News from Sponsoring Organizations
Language Learning & Technology 11
Coming in 2003!
• Portuguese Pronunciation and Phonetics (CD-ROM)
• French Pronunciation and Phonetics (CD-ROM)
• Elementary Business German (CD-ROM)
• Thai Tutorial Guide
Game-O-Matic
The Game-O-Matic is a suite of wizards that create Web-based activities for language learning and
practice. Teachers can make original Game-O-Matic games by visiting http://clear.msu.edu/dennie/matic/.
Have a new idea for a Game-O-Matic activity? Contact Dennie Hoopingarner at hooping4@msu.edu.
Newsletter
CLEAR News is a biyearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. Contact
the CLEAR office to join the mailing list or see it on the Web at http://clear.msu.edu/clearnews/.
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
Summer Workshops
Each summer, CLEAR offers professional development workshops for foreign language teachers on the
campus of Michigan State University. For more information on the Summer Workshops, go to
http://clear.msu.edu and click on "2003 Summer Workshops."
Onsite Workshops
CLEAR offers foreign language teachers at K-13+ institutions around the country the opportunity to host
a CLEAR workshop. These 1-3 day workshops are led by CLEAR's professional development staff
members. For more information, visit http://clear.msu.edu/onsite/about.html
For more information about CLEAR, contact
Center for Language Education And Research (CLEAR)
A712 Wells Hall
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824-1027
Phone: (517) 432-2286
Fax: (517) 432-0473
Web: http://clear.msu.edu/
Email: clear@msu.edu
Australian Technology Enhanced Language Learning Consortium (ATELL)
Contacts: Assoc. Prof. Mike Levy, Griffith University (michael.levy@mailbox.gu.edu.au)
Dr Robert Debski, The University of Melbourne (r.debski@hlc.unimelb.edu.au)
ATELL is an informal collaboration of Australian language teachers and researchers involved in the
development and use of technologies in language learning. Recently, intensive work has been undertaken
on the development of a new Web site, most especially by colleagues at Griffith University in Queensland
and The University of Melbourne in Victoria. The site will include a number of innovative resources for
both researchers and teachers in TELL and it is hoped that it will be operative by early February, 2003.
This work is continuing in collaboration with the Deans of the Faculties of Arts, Social Sciences, and
Humanities Language Network in Australasia (DASSH) and the Association of Modern Language
Teachers' Associations of Australia (AFMTLA). The ATELL Web site will include information,
collaboration, and resources such as
• a register of Australian TELL experts
• a register of projects in TELL research, development & implementation
News from Sponsoring Organizations
Language Learning & Technology 12
• a suite of resources for researchers
• links to other sites with TELL-related information and materials
As the various elements are put into place, an update on progress will be given.
Apprentissage des Langues et Systèmes d'Information et
de Communication (ALSIC)
ALSIC (Language Learning and Information and Communication Systems, http://alsic.org/) is an
electronic journal in French for researchers and practitioners in fields related to applied linguistics,
didactics, psycholinguistics, educational sciences, computational linguistics, and computer science. The
journal gives priority to papers from the French-speaking community and/or in French, but it also
regularly invites papers in other languages so as to strengthen scientific and technical exchanges between
linguistic communities that too often remain separate. The editorial board of ALSIC invites you to contact
them for any prospective contributions at the following electronic address: infos@alsic.org.
Center for Advanced Research on Language Acquisition,
University of Minnesota (CARLA)
CARLA is one of several National Language Resource Centers whose role is to improve the nation's
capacity to teach and learn foreign languages effectively. Launched in 1993 with funding from the
national Title VI Language Resource Center program of the U.S. Department of Education, CARLA's
mission is to study multilingualism and multiculturalism, develop knowledge of second language
acquisition, and advance the quality of second language teaching, learning, and assessment by conducting
research and action projects sharing research-based and other forms of knowledge across disciplines and
education systems extending, exchanging, and applying this knowledge in the wider society.
CARLA's research and action initiatives include a focus on the articulation of language instruction,
content-based language teaching through technology, culture and language studies, less commonly taught
languages, language immersion education, second language assessment, second language learning
strategies, research on pragmatics and speech acts, support for study abroad, and technology and second
language learning.
To share its latest research and program opportunities with language teachers around the country,
CARLA offers the following resources: an internationally acclaimed summer institute program for
teachers; a database which lists where less commonly taught languages are taught throughout the country;
listservs for teachers of less commonly taught languages and immersion educators; a working paper
series; conferences and workshops; and a battery of instruments in French, German, and Spanish for
assessing learners' proficiency in reading, writing, speaking, and listening at two levels on the ACTFL
scale. Check out these and other CARLA resources on the CARLA Web site at http://carla.acad.umn.edu.
The Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL)
The Center for Applied Linguistics is a private, nonprofit organization that promotes and improves the
teaching and learning of languages, identifies and solves problems related to language and culture, and
serves as a resource for information about language and culture. CAL carries out a wide range of
activities in the fields of English as a second language, foreign languages, cultural education, and
linguistics. These activities include research, teacher education, information dissemination, instructional
design, conference planning, technical assistance, program evaluation, and policy analysis. Publications
News from Sponsoring Organizations
Language Learning & Technology 13
include books on language education, online databases of language programs and assessments, curricula,
research reports, teacher training materials, and print and online newsletters.
Major CAL projects include the following:
• ERIC Clearinghouse on Languages and Linguistics
• National Clearinghouse for ESL Literacy Education
• The Cultural Orientation Resource Center
• Pre-K-12 School Services
CAL collaborates with other language education organizations on the following projects:
• Center for Research on Education, Diversity & Excellence
• Improving Foreign Languages in the Schools Project of the Northeast and Island Regional
Laboratory at Brown University
• National Capitol Language Resource Center
• National K-12 Foreign Language Resource Center   
• National Network for Early Language Learning
News from the ERIC Clearinghouse on Languages and Linguistics
• ERIC/CLL Resource Guides Online provide links to relevant resources on various topics in second
language teaching and learning. Two new Resource Guides Online have recently been added to the
ERIC/CLL Web site: Less Commonly Taught Languages and Teaching Language Through Content.
• ERIC/CLL Digests cover a range of topics in ESL, foreign language, and bilingual education. Our
most recent Digests include Tapping a National Resource: Heritage Languages in the United States,
Selecting Materials to Teach Spanish to Spanish Speakers, Impact of Two-Way Immersion on
Students' Attitudes Toward School and College, and The Role of Metacognition in Second Language
Teaching and Learning.
• The newest book in ERIC/CLL's Professional Practice series is English Language Learners With
Special Education Needs: Identification, Placement, and Instruction, edited by Alfredo J. Artiles and
Alba Ortiz. This book describes the challenges involved in identifying and placing English language
learners with special needs and describes model programs and instructional methods that have been
successful in helping English language learners with special needs meet their full potential.
• Heritage Languages in America: Preserving a National Resource, edited by Joy Kreeft Peyton,
Donald A. Ranard, and Scott McGinnis is the latest in ERIC/CLL's Language in Education series.
This book describes the population of heritage language speakers in the United States and outlines
what needs to be done to preserve this important language resource.
News from the National Center for ESL Literacy Education
• A new Annotated Bibilography is available from NCLE: Research on Reading Development of
Adult English Language Learners
• The newest edition of NCLE's newsletter, NCLENotes, focuses on health literacy for adult
English language learners.
• NCLE has also recently published several additional resources on Addressing Health Literacy in
Adult ESL, including an ERIC Q&A, an annotated bibliography, and instructional activities.
News from Sponsoring Organizations
Language Learning & Technology 14
Computer Assisted Language Instruction Consortium
(CALICO)
Since its inception in 1983, CALICO has served as an international forum for language teachers who
want to develop and utilize the potential of advanced technology to support their teaching and research
needs. Through its Annual Symposia, Special Interest Groups (SIGs), CALICO Journal, CALICO
Monograph Series, CALICO Resource Guide, and numerous other publications, CALICO provides both
leadership and perspective in the ever-changing field of computer-assisted instruction. The strength of
CALICO derives from the enthusiasm, creativity, and diversity of its members. It comprises language
teachers and researchers from universities, military academies, community colleges, K-12 schools,
government agencies, and commercial enterprises.
CALICO '03: Collaborative CALL will take place from May 20-24 at the University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada.
To learn more about CALICO activities and how to participate in them, visit the CALICO homepage at
http://www.calico.org.
European Association for Computer Assisted Language
Learning (EUROCALL)
EUROCALL is an association of language teaching professionals from Europe and worldwide aiming to
• Promote the use of foreign languages within Europe
• Provide a European focus for all aspects of the use of technology for language learning
• Enhance the quality, dissemination, and efficiency of CALL materials
EUROCALL's journal, ReCALL, published by Cambridge University Press, is one of the leading
academic journals covering research into computer-assisted and technology-enhanced language learning.
The association organises special interest meetings and annual conferences, and works towards the
exploitation of electronic communications systems for language learning. For those involved in education
and training, EUROCALL provides information and advice on all aspects of the use of technology for
language learning.
EUROCALL 2003 will be at the University of Limerick, Ireland, 3-6 September 2003.
For full details, contact us at http://www.eurocall.org
International Association for Language Learning Technology
(IALLT)
Established in 1965, IALLT (formerly IALL) is a professional organization whose members provide
leadership in the development, integration, evaluation, and management of instructional technology for
the teaching and learning of language, literature, and culture. Its strong sense of community promotes the
sharing of expertise in a variety of educational contexts. Members include directors and staff of language
labs, resource or media centers, language teachers at all levels, developers and vendors of hardware and
software, grant project developers, and others. IALLT offers biennial conferences, regional groups and
meetings, the LLTI listserv (Language Learning Technology International), and key publications such as
the IALLT Journal, the IALLT Language Center Design Kit, and the IALLT Lab Management Manual.
The 2003 IALLT conference will be held at the University of Michigan, June 17 - 21, 2003. For
information, visit the IALLT Web site at www.iallt.org/.
