Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/odowd/
May 2003, Volume 7, Number 2
pp. 118-144
Copyright © 2003, ISSN 1094-3501 118
UNDERSTANDING THE "OTHER SIDE": INTERCULTURAL
LEARNING IN A SPANISH-ENGLISH E-MAIL EXCHANGE
Robert O'Dowd
University of Essen, Germany
ABSTRACT
Intercultural learning is often assumed to be an automatic benefit of e-mail exchanges between
groups of learners in different countries, but little research exists on whether on-line intercultural
collaboration does actually develop learners' understanding of the other culture's perspective and
world view. This paper reviews what recent literature suggests intercultural learning to involve
and then reports on a year-long e-mail exchange between Spanish and English second year
university language learners. Using the results of qualitative research, the paper identifies key
characteristics of e-mail exchanges which helped to develop learners' intercultural communicative
competence (Byram, 1997). It also outlines elements of e-mail messages which may enable
students to develop successful intercultural relationships with their partners.
INTRODUCTION
Despite the plethora of descriptive reports on intercultural e-mail projects, little appears to be known
about what students actually learn from the interaction with their virtual peers in other cultures (Kern,
1998; Mueller-Hartmann, 2000a). Although many projects adopt ambitious aims which involve the
development of tolerance and better intercultural awareness, as well as the reduction of stereotypes and
prejudice (Gray & Stockwell, 1998; Meagher & Castaños, 1996; Roberts, 1994; Sakar, 2001), little has
been done to evaluate to what extent such objectives can be achieved in the limited life-span of an e-mail
exchange between groups of foreign language learners or how they should be achieved. Nevertheless,
recent work in this area would appear to demonstrate that this gap in the literature is being addressed
(Belz, 2002; Belz & Kinginger, 2002; Kramsch & Thorne, 2002).
The belief that contact between cultures automatically leads to intercultural learning and to the
development of positive attitudes towards the target culture has already been rejected by many (Allport,
1979; Coleman, 1998; Fischer, 1998) and Richter confirms that this is also the case for virtual
intercultural contact: "The Internet brings about the contact of cultures, but this does not automatically
imply cultural understanding" (1998, p. 15; this author's translation).
Others, including Belz (2002), Belz and Müller-Hartmann (2002) and O'Dowd (2000) have also found
many impediments for intercultural learning in technology-supported exchanges. In contrast, Furstenberg,
Levet, English, and Maillet (2001), Tella (1991), and von der Emde, Schneider, and Kötter (2001), have
reported more positive experiences.
This paper reports on an e-mail exchange which took place between five pairs of Spanish and English
second-year university students over the course of one academic year. Both sets of students were studying
the language of the partner group. This author was both the teacher of the students in Spain and the
researcher. By carrying out a content analysis of students' on-line interaction, combined with
questionnaires and interviews, my aim was to "look beyond the texts of interaction to the broader
contextual dynamics that shape and are shaped by those texts" (Warschauer & Kern, 2000, p. 15). In
particular, I wanted to gain insight into why some networked exchanges may fail to lead to intercultural
learning while others can bring learners to alter their perspectives and change their way of viewing both
Robert O'Dowd Understanding the "Other Side"...
Language Learning & Technology 119
the home and target cultures. The central research question can be stated as follows: What characteristics
of e-mail exchanges lead to intercultural learning?
Section two is a review of the recent literature on the aims of intercultural learning and intercultural
communicative competence. Section three offers an overview of how e-mail exchanges have been seen to
contribute to intercultural learning in the foreign language classroom. This is followed in section four by a
brief presentation of the background of this particular project, including its aims, the tasks which the
students carried out, and the qualitative research techniques which were employed by the author in order
to identify the effects of the exchange on the learners. In sections five, six, and seven, I look at the three
key elements which emerged during the exchange as being influential to the development of intercultural
learning. Finally, in the discussion in section eight, I consider the possible consequences of these findings
for the organisation and implementation of future intercultural e-mail exchanges.
INTERPRETATIONS OF INTERCULTURAL LEARNING
The process of "intercultural learning" and its implied goal "intercultural competence" (Grosch & Leenan,
1998) have recently become fashionable in the world of foreign language methodology; however, their
exact meanings continue to be the source of much debate and disagreement. Writers such as Hu (2000)
and Paige, Jorstad, Siaya, Klein, and Colby (2000) have made practical contributions to the discussion by
presenting overviews of cognitive, affective, and skill-based aims, while others have outlined the content
of interculturally-oriented curricula (Neuner, 1997) as well as activities for developing intercultural
competence in learners (Sercu, 1998). However, collections of papers in search of common definitions
have served merely to reveal the many different interpretations of intercultural learning which exist, as
well as the different levels of importance which writers and teachers feel should be attributed to this goal
(for examples of varying definitions see Bausch, Christ, & Krumm, 1997). Edmonsdson and House
(1998) believe that intercultural learning has avoided definition because it is seen by some as a learning
objective, by others as a learning process, and yet by others as a particular form of communication. These
authors also question the usefulness of the term when, in their opinion, all foreign language learning is
inherently "intercultural." Finally, they consider "intercultural learning" as overloading communicative
competence with sociocultural objectives. The consequences of this is that the linguistic aspect of
language learning has been played down in favour of an idealistic, affective perspective (Edmondson &
House, 1998; House, 1996).
The emphasis which models of intercultural learning attribute to changing students' attitudes and
perspectives has particularly been the cause of much criticism in the literature. Hamburger (1990)
suggests that intercultural learning over-emphasises foreignness and the differences between cultures and
therefore risks leading to a reinforcement of stereotypes and ethnocentricism among learners. Kramsch
(1993) has highlighted the difficulties in ascertaining if and when the affective aims of intercultural
learning have been achieved. Finally, Cryle questions the realism of focusing on the affective aspects of
intercultural learning when getting students to become more aware of foreign perspectives may be "an
unhelpfully distant goal" (2002, p. 30).
Despite this lack of clarity in terms of definitions and evaluation, there seems to be general agreement
among the supporters of intercultural learning as to its key underlying goals and their consequences for
language instruction. Risager (1998), in her review of approaches to culture learning, explains that, in
contrast to previous approaches to language and culture learning, students are no longer expected to
simply take on positive attitudes towards the target culture and its members. Byram (1997) outlines why
this is the case: "Attitudes which are the pre-condition for successful intercultural interaction need to be
not simply positive, since even positive prejudice can hinder mutual understanding" (p. 34).
Similarly, Bennet (1993), in his developmental model of intercultural sensitivity, warns against the
limited nature of an understanding of culture where difference is recognised, but nevertheless minimised
Robert O'Dowd Understanding the "Other Side"...
Language Learning & Technology 120
in order to highlight the "universality" of human behaviour. Bennett says the belief that "deep down we
all are the same" is not an adequate response to cultural difference. Although characteristics of cultures
may have much in common at times, he sees this as not being relevant to the real issues of intercultural
communication:
They [attitudes of universalism] fail to address the culturally unique social context of physical
behavior that enmeshes such behavior in a particular worldview. Failure to consider this context
leads people to assume that knowledge of the physical universals of behaviour is sufficient for
understanding all other people. (Bennett, 1993, p. 43)
Instead, Bennett sees true intercultural sensitivity coming about when behaviour is understood as
belonging to a particular cultural context and the behaviour is therefore subsequently judged from within
that context and not by the learners' own cultural standards. This ability to step back from one's own
cultural background and critically identify the original cultural reasoning behind beliefs, actions and
behaviour is described by Bennett as "constructive marginality" and reflects much of what other writers
have described as "critical cultural awareness" (Byram, 1997), dialogism (Tella & Mononen-Aaltonen,
1998), intersubjectivity (Kinginger, in press) and "cross-cultural capability" (Killick, 1999). In contrast to
earlier models of culture learning, learners are no longer expected to reject their own culture and "take
on" the target culture (something viewed as undesirable as it involves replacing one form of
monoculturalism for another), but rather to find what Kramsch (1993) describes as a "third place." This
refers to a location between the home and target cultures where all behaviour (both that of others and that
of oneself) is seen as being grounded in a particular cultural context. This concept owes much to the
description of the "third domain" offered by Bhabha (1994) and Bakhtin's notion of dialogism (1986).
Kramsch (1993) sees the term as an alternative to the tendency in foreign language teaching to treat the
home and foreign cultures as monolothic entities. She refers to the phrase "being on the fence," as being
representative of the common belief that language learners are somehow located merely between two
cultures. She criticises this term for ignoring the reality of differences in class, race, religion, and so forth,
which are inherent in each of the two national cultures. Instead, Kramsch suggests that learners need to
locate themselves in a place which "grows in the interstices between the cultures the learner grew up with
and new cultures he or she is being introduced to" (p. 236). This description highlights two important
aspects of intercultural learning. Firstly, it underlines the learners' newly achieved distance from both the
home and target cultures, and secondly, it refers to the multiplicity of cultural identities which belong to
all of us, thereby rejecting the fallacy of "one nation = one culture."
Taking into account these principles or key characteristics of intercultural learning, Byram's (1997) model
of intercultural communicative competence can be seen as a representative model of what elements the
process of intercultural learning should aim to develop in learners. There are various reasons for this
choice. Firstly, the model (summarised below) offers a comprehensive approach that deals with the skills,
attitudes, knowledge and critical awareness which have been seen to constitute intercultural competence.
Secondly, Byram's main work on the model offers not only objectives for each of the components, but
also suggests modes of assessment for each part. Such elaboration on the model facilitates the teacher and
action researcher's (Wallace, 1998) task of operationalising and putting the model into practice in the
classroom, although Burwitz-Melzer (2000) criticises the objectives proposed by Byram as being
"inevitably very general and abstract" (p. 45, this author's translation). Finally, the model has already been
put into use extensively in foreign language classrooms. As such, it has become a common point of
reference in the literature on intercultural learning, thereby confirming to a great extent its relevance and
practicality. Classroom practice and research which have been carried out using the model, at least to a
certain extent, as a source of aims and assessment include Byram (1999), Duffy and Mayes (2001),
Müller-Hartmann (1999), and Woodin (2001).
Robert O'Dowd Understanding the "Other Side"...
Language Learning & Technology 121
Byram's model (1997) contains the following elements:
• "Attitudes of curiosity and openness, readiness to suspend disbelief about other cultures and
belief about one's own" (p. 50).
• "Knowledge of social groups and their products and practices in one's own and in one's
interlocutor's country, and of the general process of societal and individual interaction" (p. 58).
• "Skills of interpreting and relating: ability to interpret a document or event from another culture,
to explain it and relate it to documents from one's own" (p. 61).
• "Skills of discovery and interaction: ability to acquire new knowledge of a culture and cultural
practices and the ability to operate knowledge, attitudes and skills under the constraints of real-
time communication and interaction" (p. 61).
• "Critical cultural awareness/political education: an ability to evaluate critically and on the basis of
explicit criteria perspectives, practices and products in one's own and other cultures and
countries" (p. 63).
The question which is of interest here is, What must occur in an intercultural e-mail exchange in order
for such learning to be achieved? The following section looks briefly at how networked technologies
have been used until now by teachers to develop intercultural learning.
INTERCULTURAL LEARNING AND NETWORKED EXCHANGES
Intercultural exchanges in education have their origins in the global learning networks pioneered by
Freinet (1994) in France in the 1920's and later by Lodi in Italy in the 1960's (Cummins & Sayers, 1995).
Freinet made use of available technologies and modes of communication to enable his classes to
exchange "cultural packages" of flowers, fossils, and photos of their local area with classes in other
regions of France. Similarly, Lodi motivated his class and helped to develop their literacy skills by
encouraging them to create student newspapers in collaboration with distant partner classes.
Cummins and Sayers (1995) also make reference to the importance of Allport's (1979) "contact theory" in
the design of successful global exchange projects. This theory proposed that inter-group prejudice could
be combated by providing the rival ethnic groups with opportunities to co-operate together to achieve
common academic goals.
E-mail based exchanges and projects between groups of language learners have received much attention
in the literature of computer mediated-communication (Cummins & Sayers, 1995; Donath & Volkmer,
1997; Meagher & Castaños, 1996; Warschauer, 1997) and much has been made of their potential for
developing intercultural competence and bringing about a change in students' perspectives (Kinginger,
Gourvés-Hayward, & Simpson, 1999). However, many e-mail exchanges often result in little more than
superficial pen-pal projects where information is exchanged without reflection and where students are
rarely challenged to reflect on their own culture or their stereotypical views of the target culture. For
example, Meagher and Castaños found in their exchange between classes in the USA and Mexico that
bringing the students to compare their different attitudes and values led to a form of culture shock and a
more negative attitude towards the target culture. Fischer (1998), in his work on German-American
electronic exchanges, warns that very often students simply react to the foreign way of thinking,
dismissing it as strange or "typical" of that particular culture, instead of reflecting and learning from the
messages of their distant partners.
For this reason, researchers have called for carefully designed approaches to e-mail exchanges which
integrate them fully into the classroom as opposed to treating them as mere pen-pal activities (Cummins
& Sayers, 1995; Kern, 1998; Roberts, 1994). Mueller-Hartmann (2000a) suggests that if learners are to
achieve a genuine change in perspective in an e-mail exchange, it is necessary to have an effective task-
based structure which is integrated into the classroom so students have an opportunity to analyse and
Robert O'Dowd Understanding the "Other Side"...
Language Learning & Technology 122
reflect on their computer-based investigations with the help and guidance of their teachers. Several recent
studies have also looked at how the outcomes of intercultural exchanges can be influenced by both macro-
as well as micro-level aspects of the environments in which they take place. Belz (2002) describes how
social and institutional factors in Germany and the USA, such as language valuation, technological
access, and course accreditation, influenced the outcome of intercultural exchanges between university
students in these two countries. Similarly, Müller-Hartmann (2000b) looked at the institutional pressures
and requirements which influenced the developing relationship of teachers who were organising an
intercultural e-mail exchange. He also investigated how the teachers' ability to adapt to the extra
challenges of such an exchange influenced the intercultural learning process of their students. Referring to
e-mail exchanges as well as other on-line learning activities, Warschauer's (1999) ethnographic study of
four different language classes emphasises the need for electronic learning activities to be authentic,
learner-centred, relevant to students' lives, and also for them to allow students to explore their own social
and cultural identities.
In the following section I explore a year-long e-mail exchange between two classes of language students
in Spain and Britain. This qualitative analysis attempts to identify what elements influenced the
developing attitudes of the students towards the target and home cultures and thereby affected their levels
of success in achieving "a third place" between both cultures.
BACKGROUND TO EXCHANGE: LEÓN, SPAIN AND KING'S COLLEGE, ENGLAND
Project Background
As the teacher of the Spanish students, I came into contact with my counterpart at King's College, London
through the IECC Network, one of the many on-line mailing lists which facilitate the creation of
intercultural partnerships between classes in different countries. Both of us were native speakers of the
language that we were teaching. At the time, I was an Irish teacher of English as a foreign language in
Spain and my partner was a Spanish native speaker teaching in London.1 We decided that five members
of each class would be paired together for the exchange. The five participants in León were a subset of
approximately 50 students enrolled in a second-year course of English as a foreign language at León
University, while the students from London were part of a smaller second year class of Spanish as a
foreign language. The students' levels in their respective foreign languages varied greatly, although my
partner teacher and I both believed, based on previous class tests, that all the students were able to express
themselves in the L2 at a relatively advanced level. With one exception, none of the Spanish group had
been in Britain before, while all the members of the British group had spent periods abroad either in Spain
or Latin America.
Project Tasks
Taking into account Byram's (1997) model of intercultural competence, we both agreed on a series of
tasks, which we hoped would serve as a springboard for discussion and interaction. Some of these were
based on material already placed on-line by the Tandem Network, while other activities were adapted
from the Cultura project (Furstenberg et al., 2001). Following Appel (1999) and Brammerts (1996),
students were asked to complete each task in their target language but also to write a section in their own
language where they would correct the mistakes made by their partner in previous correspondence.
Robert O'Dowd Understanding the "Other Side"...
Language Learning & Technology 123
Table 1. Overview of Tasks
Task Title Description Aim
1 In-class e-mailing
list
Students discuss the image of Spain
abroad (Spanish Group only).
Accustom students to using e-
mail in their learning.
2 Introductory letter Students introduce themselves and tell
partner what may be different if they
visited the other's home town.
Students get to know their
partners and reflect on
cultural differences.
3 Word association Students write the associations which they
have of key words such as "good food," and
"bull-fighting." They then compare their
reactions with their partners' (Furstenberg et.
al., 2001, p. 57).
Students become more aware
of the link between language
and culture.
4 In-class e-mailing
list
Students discuss the image of Britain in
Spain and recount their experiences with
members of that culture (Spanish group
only).
Brainstorming and discussion
for future exchange with
partners (Kern, 1995)
5 Tourist shop Students visit a local tourist shop and
report back to their partner, telling them
what they saw and how accurately this
image represents their home culture.
Students reflect on how the
two cultures are represented
to foreigners and how
accurate these representations
are.
6 Comparative
expressions
Students complete a list of comparative
phrases (e.g. "as good as ... as black as...")
in their native language. They then explain
the possible origins and cultural
significance of these phrases.
Students examine differing
connotations in the two
cultures by comparing what
nouns are used in
comparative phrases.
7 Text extracts (1) Students read text extracts taken from
various foreign writers about Spain and the
Spanish. The Spanish group reflect on how
accurate they feel the texts to be. The
British group pose questions about the
texts.
Using the texts as a
springboard, both groups
explain to their partners how
they view the Spanish culture
and people.
8 Explaining idioms Students explain in the target language the
meanings of various idioms from their
own language. They also look at the
idioms' origins and significance.
Students look at the link
between idioms and cultural
values in both cultures.
9 Text extracts (2) Students read and discuss various short
extracts about England and the English.
Using the texts as a
springboard, both groups
explain to their partners how
they view English culture and
its people.
10 "The Unfaithful
Woman" (source:
e-mail mailing
list)
Students compare reactions to a fictitious
story which brings up issues of morality
and sexuality.
Discussion of the story leads
to comparison of moral
values and sexuality in both
countries.
The tasks reflected the components of Byram's (1997) model in that they involved interacting with
members of the target culture in order to acquire knowledge and subsequently to become more aware of
the different interpretations of cultural products or practices which members of another culture may have.
In tasks 5 and 9, students also had the opportunity to became more aware of their own culture and how it
Robert O'Dowd Understanding the "Other Side"...
Language Learning & Technology 124
was viewed by members of the foreign culture. Due to time and technical restrictions, the English group
was not able to use the in-class e-mail exchange system which was carried out in León (tasks 1 and 4).
These tasks allowed the Spanish group to discuss the topics and develop their ideas with members of their
own culture before carrying out the tasks with their foreign partners. As this was the first time any of the
Spanish students had used new technologies in their classes, the activities also gave the students an
opportunity to get used to e-mail as a medium for debate and learning.
For each task students were required to write at least two messages to their partner. In the first message
they were to present their own opinion and in the second they were to discuss and react to the message
they had received from their partner. In many cases students wrote more than the minimum number of e-
mails in order to discuss topics other than the task.
Researching the Exchange
Having established the exchange and the theme of my research, I then identified the research approach
which would best suit my needs. The approach which I adopted was essentially ethnographic (Agar,
1980; Nunan, 1992; Spradley, 1979); however, the research also strongly reflects the principles of action
research. Wallace (1998) defines action research for teachers as "collecting data on your everyday
practice and analysing it in order to come to some decisions about what your future practice should be"
(p. 4).
Wallace also sees action research as part of a process of reflection on professional practice which leads to
professional development. This reflected my own aim of improving the standard of learning in my classes
by attempting to identify how one of the learning activities (i.e., e-mail exchanges) could be improved
and its effectiveness increased. Shetzer and Warschauer (2000) consider action research to be particularly
well suited for researching aspects of networked-based language learning as the electronic networks can
greatly facilitate collaboration and the co-construction of knowledge between the teacher/researcher and
the learners themselves. As will become clear later, interaction between myself and the students involved
in this study (on both face-to-face and virtual levels) played an important part in the conclusions of this
research.
A variety of ethnographic techniques were used in the research in order to capture "the immediate and
local meanings of actions, as defined from the actors point of view" (Erickson, 1986, p. 119). It was
hoped that, through the analysis of the interviews, e-mails, students' essays, and questionnaires, I would
be able to identify the issues emerging which were important for the students, as opposed to those which
I, teacher and researcher, might have considered influential in the exchange's level of success. The
research techniques employed in this study included participant observation, e-mail data, questionnaires,
interviews, the researcher's reflexive journal, and peer-group feedback.
Participant Observation
In this study I played the roles of teacher and classroom researcher. By taking on both roles I hoped to
play an integrated role in the community of learning and to experience the benefits and drawbacks of on-
line learning first hand. My role as course teacher also allowed me to build up a relationship of trust and
familiarity with the students, which an outside researcher may not have achieved. Other researchers of
second language learners have also carried out successful studies of the classes they are teaching (Belz &
Kinginger, in press; Canagarajah, 1993; and partly, Warschauer, 1999). I was, of course, aware of the
dangers of my role as both teacher and researcher in this project and exploited various techniques
indicated in the literature in order to minimize the influence of my own sociocultural frameworks (Davis,
1995) and the risk of engaging in biased interpretations of the data. These techniques included member
checks (Lincoln & Guba, 1985), that is, checking my interpretation of the data with that of the actual
students who produced the data. Another technique I used to avoid researcher bias was a reflexive journal.
Robert O'Dowd Understanding the "Other Side"...
Language Learning & Technology 125
E-Mail Data
The Spanish students were asked to send me copies of all messages they sent or received from their
partners in London. In total, I received approximately 150 e-mails containing copies of messages which
had been sent. I also received 30 e-mails containing feedback on the exchange and answers to questions
which I had sent to students.
Questionnaires
The Spanish students were regularly sent questionnaires by e-mail during the exchange in order to
establish their developing reactions to the virtual contact. The teacher in London was unable to engage in
similar research with her class due to time restrictions. Instead, the English students were asked, on a less
regular basis, to fill out questionnaires which were then mailed to León. They also carried out and
submitted an extensive personal evaluation of their exchange at the end of the course which proved to be
particularly helpful for our research purposes.
Interviews
During the course of the exchange, I asked students to come to my office and carry out interviews about
their experiences. These interviews were recorded on audio tape and later transcribed for content. During
the interviews, I usually had a print-out of the particular student's e-mails and many of the questions were
based on sections of their correspondence. While students were normally chosen for interview on a
random basis, others were specifically chosen when they appeared to be having a particular problem or a
phase of particularly rich interaction with their partner. By asking students to comment on their e-mail
correspondence I was able to take into consideration their interpretation of events instead of imposing my
own analysis on the material. The fact that students could also be interviewed by e-mail enabled me to
react quicker to issues as they emerged.
Researcher's Reflexive Journal
Following each class, and at regular stages during the study and evaluation of the other data, I made
entries into a reflexive diary regarding my thoughts on the exchange and the intercultural learning which,
I felt, was or was not taking place at that stage. If I received any feedback from students or the partner
class in any form this was also noted in the journal. Very often, I printed out e-mail messages and pasted
them into the journal near other information which I felt was related to the same category or theme. By
noting down my theories and ideas in the journal, I was able to return to these at a later date and reflect on
their validity and, in many cases, fine tune them in the light of new research material.
Peer-Group Feedback
Throughout the exchange I was in regular contact with the teacher of the class in London. Our messages
often involved reporting on how our students were reacting to the exchange and what they were learning
from it. Very often I contacted my partner to try out theories which I was developing based on the data.
While carrying out the research I attempted to let the themes and issues emerge from the material, as
opposed to testing what particular theories might be confirmed or rejected by the data. As the term
proceeded, I collected e-mails and other data and began developing ideas about what the key issues were.
I then checked with other sources (e.g., interviews, questionnaires) in order to confirm or refute these
ideas. This triangulation of data is seen as a vital part of any qualitative research as it helps to develop a
deeper understanding of the subject in question (Denzin, 1970; Müller-Hartmann, 2001).
In the course of the exchange, three key issues emerged which were influential in the extent to which
students became more aware of the differing perspectives and interpretative systems of the target culture.
Each of these three themes will now be looked at in detail in sections five, six, and seven.
Robert O'Dowd Understanding the "Other Side"...
Language Learning & Technology 126
STUDENTS PRESENTING THEIR HOME CULTURES
In his research on electronic literacies, Warschauer (2000) reports on a class of native Hawaiian students
who, in their class in Hawaiian language, used their Web-page projects to make a contribution to
information about their native language and culture. He goes on to talk about the potential of on-line
project work "for fostering the exploration and expression of cultural and social identity" among learners
and suggests that it allows them "to carve out on-line space for their own language and culture"(p. 56).
Similarly, during this exchange, the students in León seemed to be taking this opportunity to fight against
the stereotypes which they felt others had of Spain and of the Spanish people. It became apparent that
students were taking control of the virtual medium and the interaction with their foreign partners to
present their lives and their homes as they perceived them and thereby correcting the misrepresentations
which they believed others had of them and their culture.
Before beginning their exchange with the students in London, the Spanish students took part in an in-class
e-mail discussion between themselves and other class members (task 1). In it they gave their reactions to
questions about what they thought was Spain's image abroad and whether they would feel proud to say
they are Spanish when they are away from home. Even though participation was not compulsory, the
questions provoked many responses, the majority of which reflected an attitude of frustration and
annoyance as to how the students believed their country was viewed by others abroad. The following
message reflects the general content of the exchange and shows an awareness of the stereotypes which
would appear to exist about Spain:
E-mail extract 1
First of all, I want to say that I am very proud of being Spanish, although people around world
doesn't have a good idea about us. I think the most important problem is the noise we make.
People says that we talk very loud and, from my point of view, it is due because we don't mind
expressing our feelings; we shout when we are happy and we shout when we are angry as well.
There is another idea that I think it is not true. There is a lot of people who thinks that Spanish
people is very lazy and we are the whole day laying at bed and going to parties. People works
here so hard as in other countries and some cities of Spain are very hot which makes the work
harder.
It is time people changes their minds about us.
As a result of this frustration, it appears that many members of the Spanish group used their exchange
with the English students to differentiate themselves from this negative image and highlight other aspects
of Spain. The level of success they experienced in carrying out this goal was influential in their level of
participation in the exchange and whether or not they later reported a changing perspective to the British
culture. The following two partnerships in the exchange show first a negative and secondly, a positive
example of this.
Partnership One: An Unreceptive Audience, Juan and Alice
Juan,2 one of the Spanish exchange participants, considered himself a "Leónese nationalist"3 and in the
course of the year he caused many heated debates in class as he attempted to steer many discussions to the
questions of regional nationalism and the need for autonomy in León. When the exchange began, he took
the opportunity of his introductory e-mail to his partner (task 2) to immediately differentiate between
Spain and León on a political and historical level:
E-mail extract 2
I'm going to tell you something about Llión and about my nation (situated within an area of the
North-West of Spain):
Robert O'Dowd Understanding the "Other Side"...
Language Learning & Technology 127
Llión is an ancient town of about 150,000 inhabitants. Llión and the Leónese Country ("País
Llïonés" in the Astur-Leónese language) are the result of a mixture of Celtic, roman, Germanic,
Arabic, Jewish and other cultures. Because of this fact, we have monuments from different ages
and cultures and our traditions are also the result of that mixture. For example, in Llión there're
some Romanic churches and a gothic cathedral and in some areas of the "País Llïonés" (Leónese
Country) there're buildings of pre-roman art.
It is interesting to note in this e-mail how Juan begins his presentation of León in a way that almost
assumes that the region is independent from Spain (not the case) by using terms such as "nation" and
"Leónese country." The fact that he does not explain what he means by these terms seems to imply that he
expects his partner to be already aware of the local political situation. After receiving a copy of this
message, I immediately sent Juan an e-mail, asking him why he had chosen to tackle this issue with his
partner in his opening message.
E-mail extract 3
I used the names "Llión" and "País Llïonés" because I think that is important to support our
language (a language that is decreasing the number of speakers but that is still spoken by 10% of
the Leónese people -- I'm not actually very sure of the rate of speakers).
I consider the "País Llïonés" my nation instead of Spain because I think that the Spanish identity
is an invention: in Spain there're a lot of different languages, personalities and traditions (different
cultures, the case of the U.S.A. is a very similar case: different nations within a "country").
I think that internet is a very good way for expressing ideas because it isn't controlled by censors
(yet?). And I like to show foreigners the Leónese culture because I don't like the common place
of "Spain is bulls and flamenco."
Comments such as "I consider the 'País Llïonés' my nation instead of Spain" and "the Spanish identity is
an invention" as well as many other comments in the course of our time together in class show that this
belief in regional nationalism was a central part of his personal and cultural identities. His comments
about the Internet not being "controlled by censors" and that he liked "to show foreigners the Leónese
culture" also demonstrate that he saw the on-line activities as a safe and promising medium to express this
identity without it being rejected or laughed at. (Many times in class his classmates had sighed with
impatience when he raised the topic.) Unfortunately, Alice, his virtual partner in London, did not seem to
be very receptive to his particular view of his homeland either. In a later interview, Juan reported being
surprised and a little disappointed that his partner had not reacted to his presentation in any way and had
simply ignored the differentiation between Llion and Spain. Perhaps as a result of this, this particular
partnership never seemed to function very well and messages remained short and impersonal for the
remainder of the exchange. In her final evaluation of the exchange, Alice complained that Juan had failed
to complete certain tasks and that he had rarely attempted to enter into any detailed explanations of his
ideas and views. Her rejection of his ideas on his culture appear to be confirmed in a comment almost
tinged with sarcasm: "his description of his area didn't particularly make me want to visit his 'Lionese
country.'" Juan's attempt to express his own perspective of his culture therefore met with rejection and as
a result his interest and motivation to carry out the exchange seems to have died quickly. His own final
feedback reflected this. In it he described his partner as "not very friendly" and resigned himself to the
stereotypes of Spain which he believed his partner to have and which he was unable to change: "She
thinks that a lot of commonplaces like bull-fighting and flamenco are true. It didn't surprise me at all."
In this case, the breakdown of the partners' relationship highlights the need for further developing both
students' intercultural communicative competence. Alice, for example, appears unwilling or unable to try
and understand Juan's representation of his home culture. For this reason, she perhaps needs to further
develop an attitude which Byram (1997) describes as "interest in discovering other perspectives on
Robert O'Dowd Understanding the "Other Side"...
Language Learning & Technology 128
interpretation of familiar and unfamiliar phenomena … in other cultures" (p. 50). Juan, on the other hand,
needs to work on the skills of interpreting and of interaction. Firstly, he must be able to identify in
advance that his version of his home culture may contrast with the image that Alice has of that culture.
Byram refers to this as the skill of being able to identify possible areas of misunderstanding in interaction
(p. 52). Secondly, he must be able to use his skills of interaction to express his understanding of his home
culture in a way in which is interesting and understandable to his partner. Juan's position on regional
nationalism and identity is very common in Spain and it is therefore important that students of Spanish
should be made aware of this aspect of Spanish culture. However, Spanish students engaging in e-mail
exchanges need the intercultural communicative competence to talk about this concept in a way which
their virtual partners will understand it.
Partnership Two: Opening Up to "The Other Side," Anna and Mary
Other members of the Spanish group were more successful in using their exchange to express or defend
aspects of their cultural identity. I found Anna to be the student who was most affected personally by her
experiences with Mary, her English partner. The warmth and honesty which the two expressed in their e-
mails almost from the beginning of the exchange led her to comment on a feedback form at the half-way
stage that "my experience with my exchange partner is the best thing to happen to me this year" and in a
later interview she explained, "I always imagined them [the English] very serious and reserved. But after
doing this I've changed my mind. She is so nice." In contrast to Juan and Alice, Anna and Mary seemed to
invest a lot of time in their messages, making sure to always write "off-task" as well as carrying out the
activity they had been asked to do. Both students used their partner to find out extra information about
their target culture and both made sure to acknowledge comments and respond to questions which they
had been asked by their partner.
Early on in the exchange, Anna and her partner found differences in attitudes towards "los toros" (bull
fighting) when they were asked to compare what came to their minds when they thought about this well-
known Spanish tradition (task 3). This developed into an exchange which showed the great potential for
this type of comparative activity (Furstenberg et al., 2001). Mary associated "Spain, blood, cruelty, and
festivals" with the term, while Anna responded with the much more positive associations "tradition, olé,
and bull-fighters." This is a typical clash of opinions on one of the most representative cultural symbols of
Spain. For many, both in and outside of Spain, bullfighting is a cruel sport where animals are toyed with,
tortured and then slaughtered in the name of culture and tradition, while for others, los toros represents
tradition and bravery and is seen as a fair combat between man and beast. In an interview with Anna after
this initial exchange on the subject, she reported being frustrated by her partner's associations but was
unclear as to how to deal with the subject in further e-mails. In response, I explained to Anna that she
should use this clash of opinions as an opportunity to become more aware of how British people view her
culture, thereby discovering, in the words of Byram, "other perspectives ... on familiar phenomena"
(1997, p. 51). Secondly, I suggested that the challenge of the exchange was not for Anna to try and
change her partner's opinion, but rather to successfully explain why she personally felt the way she did,
thereby giving her partner an insight into the different beliefs and meanings which she attributed to the
topic. In this way, the exchange of messages gave Anna the opportunity to develop her intercultural
communicative competence in several aspects. She gained knowledge about a cause of misunderstanding
and disagreement between the Spanish and British cultures (Byram, p. 51) and she was also given an
opportunity to try and mediate between two different interpretations of a cultural practice. This is an
important aspect of the intercultural skills of interpreting and relating (Byram, p. 52).
Following our discussion together about her partner's message, Anna's next e-mail contained the
following explanation:
Robert O'Dowd Understanding the "Other Side"...
Language Learning & Technology 129
E-mail extract 4
I'd like to tell you about your last E-Mail I think it is very important to know each other a little
bit. I think your opinion about " toros" is wrong and I want to explain you something about this.
(I don't want to change your opinion, I only think that is better to know something else.)
"Toros" is a typical thing here in Spain but some people think that is cruel too. When I was a
child I hated bullfights but one day my father went to a "corrida" and I went with him. When you
are there, you change your mind. You realise that it's a world (some people are inside and others
outside). These bulls are grown to bullfight. When a man have a farm with chickens, he kills them
and sells them. People buy them because they need to eat. It's true that people don't need these
bullfights, but I will ask you that if you will come to Spain again you should go to a "corrida."
It's a bit expensive but you will understand it. Nevertheless I understand that some people hate it
and I understand that they try to eliminate it.
Anna's low level of English is evident here but, despite her limited linguistic resources, she approaches
her explanation in a sensitive, tolerant way such as in her comment in the opening paragraph, "I don't
want to change your opinion, I only think that is better to know something else..." She also lets her partner
know that she understands that other people are against bull fighting. In any case, it is unlikely that her
line of argumentation here would convert anyone to los toros, but nevertheless it does go beyond the basic
claim "bull fighting is good" and tries to explain her genuine belief that the corrida is as much a natural
part of life as people killing and selling farm animals. The task and her foreign audience forces Anna to
put into words and explain what she may have taken for granted until now, thereby achieving what Byram
(1997) describes as suspending belief about one's own culture (Byram, p. 50). In Mary's following e-mail
she does not react in detail to Anna's explanation; however she does seem to have taken on the reasoning
behind her explanation:
E-mail extract 5
Gracias por tu explicacion de tu perspectiva de los toros. Es interesante entender "el otro lado,"
no?
[Thank you for your explanation about your opinion on bull fighting. It's interesting to understand
"the other side," isn't it?]
Apart from learning how to effectively express her culture, Anna is also learning about the important link
between language and culture in the form of communicative style and sociolinguistic norms. Earlier in the
exchange, Anna had corrected her partner's Spanish mistakes in the following way:
E-mail extract 6
Well, I´m going to tell you something about your mistakes: You have problems with the gender
of nouns, adjectives and articles.
We don´t say "chevere" and " plata" We say: "que algo es guay, muy bueno, estupendo, genial..
and so on" and "dinero, pelas..."
Anna's lack of knowledge of suitable language for pointing out mistakes to an English-speaking person or
her inability to use such language probably risked insulting or hurting Mary who was being corrected in
such a dismissive way. I wrote an e-mail to Anna suggesting that the language she used for correcting was
perhaps a little too direct and harsh for an English speaker and that, instead of saying, "you have problems
with..." that she could say something like, "you made one or two mistakes with..." Furthermore, her rather
dismissive comment, "We don´t say 'chevere' and 'plata,'" was not strictly correct. The terms she was
correcting referred to vocabulary items which are used in some South American dialects of Spanish but
Robert O'Dowd Understanding the "Other Side"...
Language Learning & Technology 130
not in Castilian Spanish. Therefore, Anna's e-mail should have been explained that the "we" in her
correction referred only to speakers of her dialect of Spanish. Anna acknowledged these corrections and I
think the message explaining her opinion about bull-fighting reflects a growing sensitivity to issues of
directness and politeness (i.e., appropriate social interaction) in language, something which is considered
an important aspect of intercultural communicative competence (Byram, 1997, p. 58).
The success of Anna's exchange and the relative failure of Juan's (a fact reflected in the relative number
and quality of e-mails sent as well as in the contrasting feedback from all four partners during and at the
end of the exchange) may be attributed to various factors. Motivation, proficiency level, access to
technologies and interest in learning about the target culture all may have been influential factors.
However, none of these emerged as significant in interviews with the two Spanish students, and they were
also not noticeable in the final evaluations submitted by the English. If anything, Anna should have had
more difficulties getting involved in the exchange due to her level of English and her lack of experience
in interacting with foreign nationals. Their contrasting levels of success would therefore appear to be due
to the reactions which they received when they expressed aspects of their culture to their partner. If they
perceived their partner as being interested in their descriptions of their own culture, then they felt
encouraged to write more and, possibly, to learn more themselves and change their attitudes towards the
target culture. If, on the other hand, they felt their positive face was threatened (Brown & Levinson, 1987)
by their partner showing a distinct lack of interest in their cultural background, then motivation to write
and to change their attitudes rapidly diminished.
When Anna was asked at the end of the exchange if her attitude towards the English had changed, she
wrote, "My original idea about the English was totally wrong. They are not serious and closed. They are
people like us and I like knowing it now. The tasks taught me that they are not like others describe them;
you have to get to know them to know how they truly are." This reflects a development in attitude,
moving away from negative stereotyping, but perhaps only reaching as far as what Bennett might describe
as "minimisation" and "physical universality" (Bennett, 1993) where cultural difference is ignored in the
belief that we are "deep down all the same." While this may not be the "third place" aimed for in
intercultural learning, her comments do demonstrate a process of development and a growing awareness
of the inaccuracies of national stereotyping: "they are not like others describe them."
Students Engaging in Distancing and Cultural Self-Reflection
According to Cummins & Sayers (1995), one of the many valuable aspects of the early global networks of
Freinet and Lodi was their adherence to the principle of "distancing." This referred to the process of
learners reflecting on and becoming more aware of their own environment and culture by interacting with
foreign partners and answering their questions about the home culture. Gervilliers et al. (cited in
Cummins & Sayers, 1995, p. 137) explain the principle in the following way:
The student, because she needs to describe them, develops an awareness of the conditions of her
life, of the life of her town or her neighbourhood, even of her promise…She had been living too
close to these conditions and through inter-school exchanges she distanced herself from them in
order to better comprehend the condition of her life. (1977, p. 29)
The power of intercultural comparison and dialogue is also recognised by the writer Bakhtin:
In the realm of culture, outsideness is a most powerful factor in understanding. It is only in the
eyes of another culture that foreign culture reveals itself fully and profoundly .... A meaning only
reveals its depths once it has encountered and come into contact with another, foreign meaning...
(1986, p. 7)
The following example from the project serves to illustrate this point.
Robert O'Dowd Understanding the "Other Side"...
Language Learning & Technology 131
Partnership Three: Questions From Abroad, Lourdes and Sonya
In the León -- London exchange, students were constantly called on to distance themselves from their
home culture as they tried to explain the meaning and significance of aspects of their language and
everyday lives. Several interesting examples of this come from the partnership of Lourdes and her English
partner, Sonya. These students wrote the longest messages of all the partnerships. This was due, perhaps,
to the high levels of competence both students had in their target languages and also because both seemed
to recognise the usefulness of having a partner in the target culture who could help with cultural and
linguistic doubts and questions. Both would often include comments and questions in their mails which
were not related to the tasks but which referred to topics which had come up in other classes and in other
contexts.
The partners were led to distance themselves from their home cultures several times in the course of their
correspondence as they tried to differentiate between the everyday products and practices of their
countries and their deeper cultural significance. In many cases, the students were able to take an "off-
task" comment about something one of them had done and then explore its significance in both cultures.
When Sonya mentioned in the introduction of one of her mails that she had been at a fireworks display in
London for Halloween, Lourdes took up the comment and contrasted the British significance of the
festival with the Spanish:
E-mail extract 7
Here I have met some English people, from Liverpool and the other day when they asked me
where they could buy fireworks I thought they were crazy, but now you have told me about that
day I can understand. Here we don't celebrate that night. We are more religious - at least the older
generation - and that night we don't do any special things .... The day after Halloween we usually
go to the cemetery to put flowers on the graves. That is supposed to be something devout but for
most of the people it is just an occasion to show the neighbour your new dress, car or husband. I
hate that and it happens a lot in the villages. I think I am beating about the bush but I want you to
know the truth.
The genuine expression of feeling in this mail becomes clear in the personalised example using the
second-person pronoun, "it is just an occasion to show the neighbour your new dress," and the direct
statement of intent at the end of the message, "but I want you to know the truth." This therefore becomes
much more than a superficial comparison of "facts and fiestas." Lourdes not only describes what happens
on that date in Spain but also tells her partner how she actually feels about the tradition, thereby giving
her a personal, critical perspective into the target culture -- something which textbooks are generally
unable to do. In terms of intercultural communicative competence, the students are primarily learning
about how institutions and traditions in the target culture (in this case, Spain) are perceived through the
perspective of members of that culture. This is an important aspect of the knowledge which students need
in order to interact successfully with members of the target culture (Byram, 1997, p. 51).
Both students were given another opportunity to engage in distancing and reflect on their own culture
when they carried out the task of visiting the tourist shops of their respective cities (task 5). Both students
found that their country was represented by symbols which were, at times, inaccurate and misleading.
Lourdes claimed she was disappointed that León's shops were full of dolls of bull-fighters and flamenco
dancers while Sonya wrote,
E-mail extract 8
Las tiendas se venden tambien las banderas de Inglaterra, que representan el nacionalismo del
pais. Sin embargo, el idea de nacionalismo no existe realmente. Inglaterra tiene una sociedad
muy multi-cultural . No conozco a nadie quien es totalmente Ingles.
Robert O'Dowd Understanding the "Other Side"...
Language Learning & Technology 132
En las tiendas vi muchas teteras y cajas de te. El te es como una institucion nacional aqui. Si
tenemos un problema, la primera cosa que hacemos es tomar una taza de te. Pensamos que el te
puede resolver nuestros problemas y despues nos sentimos mucho mejor.
[The shops also sell English flags which represent the nationalism of the country. However, the
idea of nationalism doesn't really exist. England has a multi-cultural society. I don't know anyone
who is totally English.
In the shops I saw a lot of teapots and boxes of tea. Tea is like a national institution over here. If
we have a problem, the first thing we usually do if have a cup of tea. We believe that tea can
solve all our problems and that afterwards we will feel much better.]
The message demonstrates how both students seem to be becoming more aware that intercultural learning
is much more than simply reporting and exchanging cultural products and practices. In the message, not
only are facts reported: "The shops also sell English flags..." but the connotations behind these cultural
products and what they symbolise are identified and then discussed: "However, the idea of nationalism
doesn't really exist. England has a multi-cultural society..." In this way the students are trying to express
the deeper cultural and contextual meaning of various aspects of their cultures -- all souls' day, flags, and
tea. While doing this, they are forced to consider what these cultural symbols, so long taken for granted,
actually mean to them and their compatriots. This is giving them invaluable practice in developing skills
of interpreting and relating cultural symbols as well as attaining what Byram (1997) describes as "critical
cultural awareness" (p. 63).
A further example, this time from another activity about comparative phrases in both cultures, shows how
Lourdes is also becoming aware of the link between language and culture. Her message reveals that it is
the process of carrying out the task with someone from another culture which makes her stop and reflect
about an aspect of her language which she had never considered before:
E-mail extract 9
When we talk about working a lot, we usually say "trabajar como un negro" [to work like a
Black]. It is really racist but I had never thought of the meaning before, sometimes you are so
used to saying some things that you don't stop to think how despective they can be.
Later, in a mid-project interview, Lourdes' comments confirm that the exchange has led her to reflect on
her own culture and language: "I have been able to compare our two cultures and in many situations I
have reflected about why we say some expression and not the other ... I learned not only about the other
culture but also I find very interesting themes about my own culture."
Sonya also confirms this in her post-project evaluation and she seems to suggest becoming aware, not
only of her own culture, but also of how her culture is viewed by members of the target culture: "I think
the task [on tourist shops] helped us to discover and think about our own culture and how people see us. I
agree with Lourdes when she says that you never know the image people have of your country until you
do something like this."
As was seen earlier, Byram (1997) sees this willingness to understand how one's own culture is viewed by
others as one of the key attitudes of intercultural communicative competence in learners (p. 50).
Robert O'Dowd Understanding the "Other Side"...
Language Learning & Technology 133
STUDENTS DEVELOPING PERSPECTIVE TO THE TARGET CULTURE THROUGH
DIALOGUE
As the project progressed it became clear that students were not only using the exchange as a platform to
express their own identity, but they were also using the interaction with their partners (both in their own
virtual in-class debates and in their interactions with the target group) to "test-out" and develop their ideas
on the target culture. Byram (1997) suggests that learners need to be able to "elicit from an interlocutor
the concepts and values of documents and events and to develop an explanatory system susceptible of
application to other phenomena" (p. 53) and it would appear that the students used this exchange in order
to achieve this objective. Students told anecdotes, expressed theories, and made assumptions about the
foreign culture, and then looked for their partners to respond to these ideas by either confirming or
denying them. In this way students constructed a new perspective towards the other culture or, at times,
simply confirmed their old one.
This process reflects the "technology-mediated" model of learning with technology which, according to
Meskill and Ranglova (2000), places the learner's construction of knowledge at its centre. In this model,
technology is used to facilitate interaction with variable sources of knowledge and thereby exposes
learners to a variety of perspectives. This model is based on the dialogic principles of writers such as
Bakhtin (1986) and Kramsch (1993) who see knowledge and meaning as being constructed when
interaction and dialogue with others leads to a taking-on of new perspectives. Tella and Mononen-
Aaltonen see dialogue as "interaction between self and other and the incorporation of the latter's
conceptual horizon to one's own perspective" (1998, p. 13).
Warschauer (1999) and Kinginger et al. (1999) see networked learning as being particularly suited to
dialogic interaction as it allows knowledge to be socially constructed through interaction with others in
various on-line environments. On-line discussions allow learners to express their ideas and then to clarify
and redefine them through feedback and through the other perspectives to which they are exposed.
Partnership Four: The Cost of Failing to Engage, Manuel and Heather
Manuel was one of the most academically successful students in the class and seemed to be respected a
great deal by students both because of his intellectual capabilities and his position as class representative.
I was surprised to find out during one of my early interviews with him that he was unhappy and frustrated
by the exchange due, initially, to his lack of knowledge of how to work e-mail and then later, to his
inability to connect on a personal level with Heather, his partner in London. He complained that she was
unwilling to "get stuck into" the topics and discuss issues in a more-detailed, revealing level. He
explained,
She blows hot and cold. One day she appears to have changed her batteries and to do her part, the
next she doesn't care ... "Well, I'm really busy" ... I don't know. I tried to encourage her to start a
debate about the monarchy but she completely ignored the theme ... she is always just referring to
the task...
The introduction of one of his e-mails reflects this frustration and shows that Manuel is well aware that a
superficial completion of the tasks is unlikely to lead to stimulating debate or productive learning:
E-mail extract 10
Hi Heather! We were supposed to have done a task before this one but, anyway, I think it's better
if we catch up because if we don't, we will go one step behind our class-mates and, after all, these
tasks intend to get us started so it is up to us.
Robert O'Dowd Understanding the "Other Side"...
Language Learning & Technology 134
Here, Manuel is indirectly reprimanding his partner for not having written sooner and thereby having
missed out on a task ("We were supposed to have done a task before this one"). He felt that they should
have been engaging in more interaction together than simply completing the tasks ("these tasks intend to
get us started so it is up to us"). In later e-mails with his partner (relating to task 9), Manuel could be seen
trying to express stereotypes he had about the British and then looking to her to confront and tackle these
ideas. He seemed eager to construct new ideas and to consider an alternative perspective. In an e-mail
relating to texts which both students had read about the British and the Spanish he wrote,
E-mail extract 11
...it is very relevant the part [of the book extract] that alludes to the way English people behave
with foreigners, that is, how a foreign person feels that English distrust him or "make him feel
small." It seems to be they are very good at doing so. It's well-known that many people go to
England in summer because nowadays everyone wants to improve their command of English and
all that stuff. So, people are given accommodation by families that are paid for it. Of course, it
can be considered a business, and if you don't want to involve in personal affections is up to you,
but, at least, the family should make the person feel comfortable and in an atmosphere that
accepts him and not as if he were an object with which they have to put up for a month or two so
they can afford the rent or buy a better car. With no doubts, there must be very different types of
people who must provide the visitors with a better or worse treatment, but what I've heard about it
would be more or less like that.
Anyway, you can give your opinion on this in a more accurate way as you live there and you can
see the reality all around you day after day, so correct me if I am wrong 'cause maybe my friends
have not been too lucky and because of them now I think this way
In this mail, Manuel tries to relate the text extract about the bad treatment of foreigners by the British to
the experiences of his friends and other Spanish students being badly treated in English homestays: "what
I've heard about it would be more or less like that." However, his final sentence seems to be the sign of a
learner in search of dialogue in the hope that this will allow him to develop or even change his opinions
towards the target culture: "you can give your opinion on this in a more accurate way ... so correct me if I
am wrong." The task gave Manuel the opportunity to develop his intercultural communicative
competence by eliciting the British perspective on this behaviour. Unfortunately, Heather failed to
respond to his ideas and questions. Her next e-mails dealt with other tasks and Manuel's opinions were
left unchallenged. In a final feedback on the exchange he concluded that, "My opinion about them [the
British] was not good at the beginning and I'm afraid it continues the same." In reference to the British
image of Spain he says, "They've got some stereotypes of Spain and they comply with them. They are not
interested in learning."
Manuel is an example of a learner's attitudes towards the target culture being developed through
interaction. However, instead of developing a better understanding of the foreign culture through dialogue
with others, he used his previous experiences and his own lack of a successful working relationship with
his partner to confirm the negative stereotypes which he had before. His perspectives are indeed being
constructed through interaction but not in a way one would wish.
In contrast to Manuel, a further example illustrates how another Spanish student was able to construct a
more empathetic view of the target culture by gaining insight into how members of the foreign culture
view themselves (i.e., the English) and their own culture (i.e., England).
Partnership Five: Seeing Through the Eyes of Another, Susana and Janet
Despite initial technical problems, Susana (from Spain) and her partner Janet (from England) had
developed a relatively good working relationship during the initial exchanges of e-mails. Both students
Robert O'Dowd Understanding the "Other Side"...
Language Learning & Technology 135
wrote to each other in a friendly manner and were taking care to correct each other's language errors at the
end of each message. When the students were asked to carry out the word association exercise (task 3),
they found that they had very different attitudes to the term "police." Janet associated the word with
"uniforms, crime, corruption and racism," while Susana simply wrote, "a normal person." In an interview
with Susana following this exercise, I asked her how she felt about this:
This really shocked me. We had spoken about a black teenager being killed by the police in
London. But this message really brought it home to me ... Her comments about the police left me
... I don't know ... I thought these things only happened in the films. This really shocked me.
Soon after she carefully breached the subject again with her partner, explaining why she had been
shocked by her comments:
E-mail extract 12
And finally, the police is something difficult for me to explain. They are people like you and me
but we think that they can help us, but sometimes they can't because they can't do anything. I
think it was a bit unjust what you said, they do which they can to help us.
Her English partner responded to this in the following way:
E-mail extract 13
Gracias por tus contestas a mis preguntas. Estoy de acuerdo con lo que dijiste de la policia - hay
un limite a lo que pueden hacer, pero no piensas tambien que hay bastante corrupcion en la
policia? La "LAPD" en los Estados Unidos es notoria, no? Y, aqui en Inglaterra, la policia
metropolitana de Londres tiene una reputacion racista, especialmente desde la muerte de un
joven negro, Stephen Lawrence. Sus asesinos (blancos) no fueron acusados, a pesar de muchos
testimonios y pruebas.
[Thanks for your answers to my questions. I agree with what you said about the police. There is a
limit to what they can do, but do you not think there is a lot of corruption in the police? The
LAPD in the USA is notorious, isn't it? And here in London the metropolitan police has a racist
reputation, especially since the death of a young black boy, Stephen Lawrence. His (white)
murderers were not brought to trial, despite a lot of witnesses and proof.]
Here Susana is being given insight into the reasoning behind Janet's negative attitudes to the police and
develops her knowledge of "institutions, and perceptions of them, which impinge on daily life within
one's own and one's interlocutor's country" (Byram, 1997, p. 51). This can be seen, for example, in the
extract "here in London the metropolitan police has a racist reputation, especially since the death of a
young black boy..." Susana therefore has the opportunity to move on from an initial shock about the
differing attitude to a better understanding of the cultural context which has caused this belief to come
about. Commenting on exercises similar to this one, Byram, Morgan, and Colleagues state that
When learners acquire an understanding of the connotations of lexical items in the foreign
language and contrast them with connotations of an apparently equivalent item in their own, they
begin to gain insight into the schemata and perspectives of the foreign culture. (1994, p. 44)
Later in the exchange, Janet sent Susana the following mail giving her reactions to short texts she had
read about England and the English (task 9). Once again she gives her partner a well thought-out
explanation of English behaviour based on the English cultural context. Here, Susana is again being given
the opportunity to see foreign cultural behaviour through the eyes of someone from that culture:
Robert O'Dowd Understanding the "Other Side"...
Language Learning & Technology 136
E-mail extract 14
Comparando los habitos ingleses con los espanoles, los espanoles no tienen miedo de expresar
susentimientos como los Ingleses. Y esto puede parecer casi arogancia a los demas estranjeros.
Pero, como dice Paxman, es solo porque es parte de su cultura proteger la "privacy" en una
forma que los hace parecer muy poco abiertos. El autor hace tambien una relacion entre el
hecho que la mayoria de los ingleses poseen la casa en la que viven. Hay un sentido muy fuerte
del privado, y tener una casa propria significa mas intimidad y "privacy", pero eso no me parece
muy diferente que en qualquier otro pais. Paxman relaciona todo esto tambien con el hecho que
Inglaterra es una isla, pero yo no creo que eso tenga mucho que ver con los caracteres frios. Yo
lo relaciono mas con el clima, que no deja que la gente se quede fuera en la calle o en otros sitios
publicos para mucho tiempo.
[Comparing the English and the Spanish, the Spanish are not afraid to express their feelings,
unlike the English are. And that could seem like arrogance to many foreigners. But, as Paxman
[the author of the texts on England, 1998] says, this is only because it is part of their culture to
protect their privacy in a way which may seem quite closed to others. The author also makes a
link to the fact that the majority of the English own the house in which they live. There is a very
strong sense of privacy, and owning one's house means more intimacy and privacy. But this
doesn't seem to me to be very different from other countries. Paxman relates all this to the fact
that England is an island, but I don't believe that this has much to do with the cold characteristics.
I relate it more to the climate which doesn't allow people to stay out on the street or in other
public places for a long time...]
In this mail, a supposed aspect of British cultural behaviour (Britons' unwillingness "to express their
feelings") and a native's understanding of it are explained by a member of that culture, thereby exposing
Susana not only to British behaviour, but also to an understanding of that behaviour "from an insider's
perspective" (Roberts, Byram, Barro, Jordan, & Street, 2001, p. 43). Susana's growing empathy and
understanding that cultural products and practices have different meanings in different cultures (an
integral part of intercultural communicative competence) shows itself clearly in an e-mail she sends
towards the end of the exchange. Talking about texts she had read about Spain (Hooper, 1995), she
writes,
E-mail Extract 15
The author said that the Spaniards have a big lack of shame, that we have little conscience of
embarrassment, maybe he is right but only if you see it as an English person. They see it this way
because they judge it with their rules.
Having received so much insight from her partner on the way the English see and experience their world,
Susana seems to be moving on from the assumption that everyone judges behaviour and sees the world in
the same way that she does. She shows an understanding that Spanish cultural behaviour will be
understood in other ways by other cultures ("maybe he is right but only if you see it as an English
person"), a first step on the road to empathy with the target culture. Byram et al.(1994) describe this form
of empathetic understanding as "informed supposition" which occurs when students try to imagine how
the world might be seen through someone else's eyes.
At the outset of this paper it was asked what characteristics would be conducive in the development of
successful intercultural learning in an e-mail exchange. The reported research identified three such
characteristics: (a) acceptance of one's own culture by one's partner, (b) the development of distancing,
and (c) dialogic interaction. The following section looks at the implications of these findings for future
exchanges.
Robert O'Dowd Understanding the "Other Side"...
Language Learning & Technology 137
IMPLICATIONS OF RESEARCH FINDINGS
This exchange would appear to confirm the value of network-based interactions for the development of
intercultural learning as it was outlined in section two of this paper. The different relationships which
developed during the e-mail exchange helped students to either develop the different components of
intercultural communicative competence or at least served to highlight the components which required
further attention (see, e.g., partnership one). Throughout the exchange students were given an opportunity
to learn about the important link between language and culture, both through activities which led them to
recognise the differing semantic connotations of words in different cultures and also through the need for
them to deal with the various communicative styles and socio-pragmatic rules in intercultural
communication. Furthermore, in their interactions with their partners, they were also challenged to
identify and explain the values and significance of products and practices in both the home and target
cultures.
Evaluating to what extent the knowledge, skills, and attitudes of intercultural communicative competence
were developed and how the students would later put them to use was difficult to evaluate in the time
period during and immediately after the project -- and for this reason it was not attempted in this study.
Indeed, increased intercultural competence is only likely to be revealed through further long-term study of
the students involved (Kramsch, 1993). Nevertheless, research did reveal evidence of intercultural
learning taking place and, most importantly for our research questions, what was causing this to occur.
The feedbacks and interviews carried out with the Spanish students at the end of the study suggested that
some students simply confirmed their negative attitudes towards the target culture (Manuel and Juan)
while others such as Anna, Lourdes, and Susana had moved on from the stereotypes and prejudices they
had expressed in interviews and questionnaires at the outset of the exchange. The reasons why these
students were more successful than the others in changing their attitudes and developing their intercultural
communicative competence appear to be as follows. Juan's failure to find a receptive audience to his
representation of Spain and León (in partnership one) meant that his own personal goal for the project
was rejected by his partner and he subsequently lost his intrinsic motivation to engage in the exchange
and, instead, developed a rather pessimistic outlook towards the target culture. Manuel also found his
attempts to elicit alternative perspectives from his partner ignored (in partnership four), and consequently
he worked with the little information he had about his partner to come to negative conclusions about her
and her culture.
In contrast, the exchanges which enabled learners to successfully develop aspects of intercultural
communicative competence exhibited the following characteristics:
• Students had opportunities to express their feelings and views about their own culture to a
receptive audience (as in the case of Anna in partnership two).
• Students were encouraged to reflect critically on their own culture through questions posed by
their partners (as in the case of Lourdes in partnership three).
• Students engaged in dialogic interaction with their partners about the home and target cultures
and consequently this led to a growing awareness of differing perspectives on the two cultures'
products and practices (as in the case of Susana in partnership five).
Consequently, it is clear that not only is task design important for the development of intercultural
communicative competence (as already pointed out by Müller-Hartmann, 2000a), but also the learners'
ability to take part effectively in e-mail exchanges. Much has already been written about the skills
learners need to have when engaging in on-line activities. Shetzer & Warschauers' (2000) electronic
literary approach, for example, puts forward a useful framework of skills and knowledge which students
need to have in order to develop electronic literacy, while Belz (2001, 2002), Belz and Müller-Hartmann
(2002) and Kern (1998) have highlighted various types of communication breakdown which students
need to be aware of in on-line intercultural exchanges. However, based on an analysis of the e-mails
Robert O'Dowd Understanding the "Other Side"...
Language Learning & Technology 138
exchanged by students in this exchange, the students who were able to develop a successful and
interculturally rich relationship with their partner had written e-mails which had the following elements:
• They took into account the socio-pragmatic rules of the partner's language when writing in that
language (see e-mail extract 6).
• Apart from the basic information on the topic in question, they also provided their partner with
analysis and personal opinions about the topic (see e-mail extracts 4, 7, and 14).
• They asked questions which encouraged feedback and reflection from their partner (see e-mail
extract 11 and 13).
• They tried to develop a personal ("friendly") relationship with their partner, as opposed to simply
focussing on the tasks they had been given (see e-mail extract 7).
• They recognised and reacted to the needs and interests of their partners, answering their questions
and encouraging them to write more about the topics which interested them (see e-mail extract 5
and, for an example of when this was not the case, see partnership four).
As Tella and Mononen-Aaltonen (1998) point out, current netiquettes encourage users to write short e-
mails, often no longer than one screen. Students may also find it difficult to get access to e-mail for long
enough in order to compose in-depth messages. Nevertheless, if intercultural communicative competence
is to be developed successfully and if students are to learn anything more than superficial knowledge
about the target culture, then students need to write messages which take into account the points laid out
above. Writing messages off-line or combining e-mails with essays and other hard copy materials (as
suggested by Kern, 1998) are two possible solutions to this problem. During the early stages of this
project, guidelines for interpreting e-mails from the other culture as well as examples of what I perceived
to be good messages (based on the insights of my on-going research) were drawn up and given to the
students. These examples and suggestions were often adapted from the students' own e-mails (when they
gave me permission to use them) and also from the examples provided by Kern.
It became clear during the exchange that learners are no more likely to know how to compose effective e-
mails for their foreign partners any more than they are likely to be aware of the skills and knowledge
necessary for intercultural learning. For this reason the role of the teacher in on-line learning needs
careful attention. For many years the term "guide on the side" has been used to describe the role of
teachers in the technology enhanced classroom, where their function is seen to be that of "a facilitator of
knowledge rather than the font of wisdom" (Warschauer & Healey, 1998). However, many researchers
(Feldman, Conold, & Coulter, 2001; Fischer, 1998; Müller-Hartmann, 2000b) have been critical of this
view. They have suggested that while the Internet may allow opportunities for on-line collaboration, this
does not mean that learners will have the skills to exploit these opportunities for successful learning.
Similarly, following an analysis of this exchange, I definitely see the need for myself as a teacher of
intercultural communicative competence to take a greater role in helping students in analysing and
creating e-mails in any future on-line exchanges.
CONCLUSION
This project set out to identify the factors which successfully lead to intercultural learning in virtual
exchanges. It was found that the students who were able to successfully develop their intercultural
communicative competence in this exchange had found a receptive audience for the expressions of their
own cultural identity. They had been forced to look at their home culture from a new perspective through
the questions and comments of their partners, and through dialogue with their partner they had begun to
understand the different ways a culture's products and practices can be experienced. However, this project
also revealed that intercultural exchanges which fail to function properly can lead to a reinforcement of
stereotypes and a confirmation of negative attitudes. This confirms the findings of Belz (2002, p. 70-72).
Robert O'Dowd Understanding the "Other Side"...
Language Learning & Technology 139
The research also attempted to identify elements of e-mail messages which would enable students to
establish successful intercultural relationships with their partners. The ability of the students to build up a
personal relationship with their partners via e-mail, their sensitivity to their partners' needs and
communicative style, and their capacity to produce engaging, in-depth correspondence were found to be
key aspects of the e-mails which lead to the successful development of intercultural communicative
competence in the exchanges.
In conclusion, it is important to point out that the area of intercultural e-mail exchanges continues to offer
fertile ground for further research and analysis. It would be perhaps useful, for example, to identify
whether the characteristics of successful e-mail exchanges and the content of effective e-mails which have
been presented here need to be modified or expanded in other cultural and institutional contexts.
Furthermore, greater investigation is needed into the question of how teachers can maximise the
intercultural learning experience of e-mail exchanges. Finally, more in-depth research is also required into
how notions of language, nation, and cultural identity are addressed by learners in intercultural e-mail
exchanges.4
NOTES
1. I would like to thank my partner in London, Manuela Gil Torres, for her contribution to the
development of the exchange and the collection of data for this research project.
2. The names of the participants used in this paper have been changed.
3. For a significant minority of people in the Spanish region of León, a strong sense of local identity is
accompanied by a desire for greater autonomy from the Spanish state. As is the case in other Spanish
provinces, the movement for independence is often associated with the use of a regional language instead
of Castilian Spanish (Hooper, 1995; Mar-Molinero, 2000).
4. I would like to thank the reviewers who read this paper for their insightful suggestions and comments.
Furthermore, I would like to gratefully acknowledge the support of my colleagues at the English
department at the University of Essen, Germany.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Robert O'Dowd holds an MA in TEFL and has taught EFL in Hungary, Ireland, Spain, and Germany. He
currently works at the University of Essen in Germany, developing on-line courses on the "Linguistics
Online" platform. He is also completing his PhD dissertation on intercultural learning in on-line
environments.
E-mail: robert.odowd@uni-essen.de
REFERENCES
Agar, M. (1980). The professional stranger. New York: Academic Press.
Allport, G. (1979) The nature of prejudice. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Appel, M. C. (1999). Tandem language learning by e-mail: Some basic principles and a case study.
Centre for Language and Communication Studies, Occasional Paper 54. Dublin: Trinity College.
Bakhtin, M. (1986). Speech genres and other late essays. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Bausch, M., Christ, H., & Krumm, H. (Eds.). (1997). Interkulturelles Lernen im Fremdsprachenunterricht
[Intercultural learning in foreign language teaching]. Tübingen, Germany: Gunter Narr.
Robert O'Dowd Understanding the "Other Side"...
Language Learning & Technology 140
Belz, J. A. (2001). Institutional and individual dimensions of translatlantic group work in network-based
language teaching. ReCALL, 13(2), 129-147.
Belz, J. A. (2002). Social dimensions of telecollaborative foreign language study. Language Learning &
Technology 6(1), p. 60-81. Retrieved November 21, 2002, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/BELZ/
Belz, J. A., & Kinginger, C. (2002). The cross-linguistic development of address form use in
telecollaborative language learning: Two case studies. Canadian Modern Language Review / Revue
canadienne des langues vivantes, 59(2), 189-214.
Belz, J. A., & Müller-Hartmann, A. (2002). Deutsch-amerikanisch Telekollaboration im
Fremdsprachenunterricht -- Lernende im Kreuzfeuer der institutionellen Zwänge [German-American
telecollaboration in foreign language teaching -- learners in the crossfire of institutional constraints]. Die
Unterrichtspraxis / Teaching German, 35(1), 68-78.
Bennett, M. (1993). Towards ethnorelativism: A development model of intercultural sensitivity. In M.
Paige (Ed.), Education for the intercultural experience (pp. 21-71). Yarmouth, ME: Intercultural Press.
Bhabha, H. (1994). The location of culture. New York: Routledge.
Brammerts, H. (1996). Language learning in tandem using the Internet. In M. Warschauer (Ed.),
Telecollaboration in foreign language learning (pp. 121-130). Honolulu: University of Hawai'i Second
Language Teaching and Curriculum Centre.
Brown, P., & Levinson, S. C. (1987). Politeness: Some universals in language usage. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Burwitz-Melzer, E. (2000). Interkulturelle Lernziele bei der Arbeit mit fiktionalen Texten [Intercultural
learning aims through working with fictional texts]. In L. Bredella, H. Christ, & M. K. Legutke (Eds.),
Fremdverstehen zwischen Theorie und Praxis [Understanding otherness -- between theory and practice]
(pp. 275-301). Tübingen, Germany: Gunter Narr Verlag.
Byram, M. (1997). Teaching and assessing intercultural communicative competence. Clevedon, England:
Multilingual Matters.
Byram, M. (1999). Acquiring intercultural communicative competence: Fieldwork and experiential
learning. In L. Bredella & W. Delanoy (Eds.), Interkultureller Fremdsprachenunterricht [Intercultural
foreign language teaching] (pp. 358-380). Tübingen, Germany: Gunter Narr Verlag.
Byram, M., & Morgan, C. (Eds.). (1994). Teaching-and-learning-language-and-culture. Clevedon,
England: Multilingual Matters.
Canagarajah, A. (1993). Critical ethnography of a Sri Lankan classroom: Ambiguities in student
opposition to reproduction through ESOL. TESOL Quarterly, 27(4), 600-629.
Coleman, J. (1998). Evolving intercultural perceptions among university language learners in Europe. In
M. Byram & M. Fleming (Eds.), Language learning in intercultural perspective (pp. 45-76). Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Cryle, P. (2002). Should we stop worrying about cultural awareness? In S. Cormeraie, D. Killick, & M.
Parry (Eds.), Revolutions in consciousness: Local identities, global concerns in "languages and
intercultural communication" (pp. 23-35). Leeds, England: International Association for Language and
Intercultural Communication.
Cummins, J., & Sayers, D. (1995). Brave new schools. Challenging cultural literacy through global
learning networks. New York: St. Martin's Press.
Robert O'Dowd Understanding the "Other Side"...
Language Learning & Technology 141
Davis, K. (1995). Qualitative theory and methods in Applied Linguistics research. TESOL Quarterly,
29(3), 427-453.
Denzin, N. (Ed.). (1970). Sociological methods: A source book. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Donath, R., & Volkmer, I. (Eds.). (1997). Das Transatlantische Klassenzimmer [The transatlantic
classroom]. Hamburg: Koerber-Stiftung.
Duffy, S., & Mayes, J. (2001). "Family life" and "regional identity" -- Comparative studies while learning
French. In M. Byram, A. Nichols, & D. Stevens (Eds.), Developing intercultural competence in practice
(pp. 93-111). Clevedon, England: Multilingual Matters.
Edmondson, W., & House, J. (1998). Interkulturelles Lernen: ein überflussiger Begriff [Intercultural
learning: A superfluous construct]. Zeitschrift für Fremdsprachenforschung, 9(2), 161-188.
Erickson, F. (1986). Qualitative methods in research on teaching. In M. Wittrock (Ed.), Handbook of
research on teaching (pp. 119-161). New York: Macmillan.
Feldman, A., Conold, C., & Coulter, B. (2001). Network science, a decade later: The Internet and
classroom learning. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Fischer, G. (1998). E-mail in foreign language teaching. Towards the creation of virtual classrooms.
Tübingen, Germany: Stauffenburg Medien.
Freinet, C. (1994). Oeuvres pédagogiques [Pedagogical works]. Paris: Seuil.
Furstenberg, G., Levet, S., English, K., & Maillet, K. (2001). Giving a virtual voice to the silent language
of culture: The Cultura Project. Language Learning & Technology, 5(1), 55-102. Retrieved February 25,
2003, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num1/furstenberg/
Gray, R., & Stockwell, G. (1998). Using computer mediated communication for language and culture
acquisition. On-CALL, 12(3). Retrieved February 25, 2003, from
http://www.cltr.uq.edu.au/oncall/gray123.html
Grosch, H., & Leenan, W. (1998). Bausteine zur Grundlegung interkulturellen Lernens [Components for
beginning the process of intercutlural learning]. In Interkulturelles Lernen (pp. 29-47). Bonn, Germany:
Bundeszentrale für politische Bildung.
Hamburger, F. (1990). Der Kulturkonflikt und seine paedagogische Kompensation [Cultural conflict and
its pedagogical compensation]. In E. Dittrich & F. Radttke (Eds.), Ethnizitaet (pp. 311-328). Opladen,
Germany: Westdeutsche Verlag.
Hooper, J. (1995). The new Spaniards. London: Penguin Books.
House, J. (1996). Zum Erwerb interkulturelles Kompetenz im Unterricht des Deutschen als Fremdsprache
[Acquiring intercultural competence in the German as a foreign language classroom]. Zeitschrift für
interkulturellen Fremdsprachenunterricht, 1(3), 21. Retrieved November 21, 2002, from
http://www.spz.tu-darmstadt.de/projekt_ejournal/jg_01_3/beitrag/house.htm
Hu, A. (2000). Intercultural learning and its difficult aspects -- An analysis of the criticism in relation to a
controversial subject. In T. Harden & A. Witte (Eds.), The notion of intercultural understanding in the
context of German as a foreign language (pp. 75-102). Bern, Germany: Peter Lang.
Kern, R. (1995). Restructuring classroom interaction with networked computers: Effects on quantity and
quality of language production.. The Modern Language Journal, 79, 457-476.
Kern, R. (1998). Technology, social interaction and FL literacy. In J. Muyskens (Ed.), New ways of
learning and teaching: focus on technology and foreign language education (pp. 57-92). Boston, MA:
Heinle & Heinle Publishers.
Robert O'Dowd Understanding the "Other Side"...
Language Learning & Technology 142
Killick, D. (1999, April). Culture and capability: Crossing the divide. IATEFL: Issues, 148, 4-7.
Kinginger, C. (in press). Communicative foreign language teaching through telecollaboration. In O. St.
John, J. Kees, & E. Schalkwijk (Eds.), New insights into foreign language learning and teaching.
Frankfurt: Peter Lang Verlag.
Kinginger, C., Gourvés-Hayward, A., & Simpson, V. (1999). A tele-collaborative course on French /
American intercultural communication. French Review, 72(5), 853-866.
Kramsch, C. (1993). Context and culture in language teaching. Oxford, England: Oxford University
Press.
Kramsch, C., & Thorne, S. (2002). Foreign language learning as global communicative practice. In D.
Block & D. Cameron (Eds.), Language learning and teaching in the age of globalization (pp. 83-100).
London: Routledge.
Lincoln, Y. S., & Guba, E. G. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Meagher, M., & Castaños, F. (1996). Perceptions of American culture: The impact of an electronically-
mediated cultural exchange program on Mexican high school students. In S. Herring (Ed.), Computer-
mediated communication. Linguistic, social and cross-cultural perspectives (pp. 187-201). Amsterdam:
John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Meskill, C., & Ranglova, K. (2000). Sociocollaborative language learning in Bulgaria. In M. Warschauer
& R. Kern (Eds.), Network-based language teaching: Concepts and practice (pp. 20-40). Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Müller-Hartmann, A. (1999). Auf der Suche nach dem "dritten Ort": Das Eigene und das Fremde im
virtuellen Austausch über literarische Texte [Looking for "the third place": The self and the foreign in
virtual exchanges about literary texts]. In W. Delanoy & L. Bredella (Eds.), Interkultureller
Fremdsprachenunterricht (pp. 160-182). Tübingen, Germany: Gunter Narr Verlag.
Müller-Hartmann, A. (2000a). The role of tasks in promoting intercultural learning in electronic learning
networks. Language Learning & Technology, 4(2), 129-147. Retrieved February 25, 2003,
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num2/muller/
Müller-Hartmann, A. (2000b). Wenn sich die Lehrenden nicht verstehen, wie sollen sich dann die
Lernenden verstehen? Fragen nach der Rolle der Lehrenden in global vernetzten Klassenräumen [If the
teachers don't understand each other, how will the learners be able to manage? Questions about the role of
the teachers in globally networked classrooms]. In L. Bredella, H. Christ, & M. K. Legutke (Eds.),
Fremdverstehen zwischen Theorie und Praxis (pp. 275-301). Tübingen, Germany: Gunter Narr Verlag.
Müller-Hartmann, A. (2001). Fichtenschonung oder Urwald? Der forschende Blick ins vernetzte
fremdsprachliche Klassenzimmer -- Wie Triangulation und Interaktionsanalyse der Komplexität gerecht
werden können [Translate]. In A. Müller-Hartmann & M. Schocker-v.Ditfurth (Eds.), Qualitative
Forschung im Bereich Fremdpsrachen lehren und lernen (pp. 206-233). Tübingen, Germany: Gunter
Narr Verlag.
Neuner, G. (1997). The role of sociocultural competence in foreign language teaching and learning. In
Sociocultural competence in language learning and teaching (pp. 47-96). Strasbourg: Council of Europe
Publishing.
Nunan, D. (1992). Research methods in language learning. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.
O'Dowd, R. (2000). Intercultural learning via videoconferencing: A pilot exchange project. ReCALL,
12(1), 49-63.
Robert O'Dowd Understanding the "Other Side"...
Language Learning & Technology 143
Paige, R. M., Jorstad, H., Siaya, S., Klein, F., & Colby, J. (2000). Culture learning in language
education: A review of the literature. Unpublished manuscript, Center for Advanced Research on
Language Acquisition, University of Minnesota. Retrieved February 25, 2003, from
http://carla.acad.umn.edu/IS-litreview/litreview.doc
Paxman, J. (1998). The English -- Portrait of a people. London: Penguin Books.
Richter, R. (1998). Interkulturelles Lernen via Internet? [Intercultural learning via the Internet?].
Zeitschrift für interkulturellen Fremdsprachenunterricht, 3(2). Retrieved February 25, 2003, from
http://www.spz.tu-darmstadt.de/projekt_ejournal/jg_03_2/beitrag/richter1.htm
Risager, K. (1998). Language teaching and the process of European integration. In M. Byram & M.
Fleming (Eds.), Language learning in intercultural perspective (pp. 47-96). Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Roberts, B. (1994) Posting in IECC -- discussion list March 22, 1994. In M. Warschauer (1995), E-mail
for English teaching (p. 95). Alexandria, VA: TESOL Publications.
Roberts, C., Byram, M., Barro, A., Jordan, S., & Street, B. (2001). Language learners as ethnographers.
Clevedon, England: Multilingual Matters.
Sakar, A. (2001). The cross-cultural effects of electronic mail exchange on the Turkish university students
of English as a foreign language (EFL). CALL-EJ Online, 3(1). Retrieved February 25, 2003, from
http://www.clec.ritsumei.ac.jp/english/callejonline/6-1/sakar.html
Shetzer, H., & Warschauer, M. (2000). An electronic literacy approach to network-based language
learning. In M. Warschauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Network-based language teaching: Concepts and practice
(pp. 171-185). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Spradley, J. (1979). The ethnographic interview. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Sercu, L. (1998). In-service training and the acquisition of intercultural competence. In M. Byram & M.
Fleming (Eds.), Language learning in intercultural perspective (pp. 255-289). Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Tella, S. (1991). Introducing international communications networks and electronic mail into foreign
language classrooms. A case studies in Finnish senior secondary schools. Helsinki: University of
Helsinki. Retrieved February 25, 2003, from http://www.helsinki.fi/%7Etella/95.pdf
Tella, S., & Mononen-Aaltonen, M. (1998). Developing dialogic communication culture in media
education: Integrating dialogism and technology. Helsinki: Media Education Publications 7. Available at
http://www.helsinki.fi/~tella/mep7.html
von der Emde, S., Schneider, J. & Kötter, M. (2001). Technically speaking: Transforming language
learning through virtual learning environments (MOOs). The Modern Language Journal, 85(2), 210-225.
Wallace, M. J. (1998). Action research for language teachers. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.
Warschauer, M. (1997). Computer-mediated collaborative learning: Theory and practice. The Modern
Language Journal, 81(3), 470-481.
Warschauer, M. (1999). Electronic literacies: Language, culture and power in online. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Warschauer, M. (2000). On-line learning in second language classrooms: An ethnographic study. In M.
Warschauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Network-based language teaching: Concepts and practice (pp. 41-58).
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Robert O'Dowd Understanding the "Other Side"...
Language Learning & Technology 144
Warschauer, M., & Healey, D. (1998). Computers and language learning: An overview. Language
Teaching, 31, 57-51.
Warschauer, M., & Kern, R. (Eds.). (2000). Network-based language teaching: Concepts and practice.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Woodin, J. (2001). Tandem Learning as an intercultural activity. In M. Byram, A. Nichols, & D. Stevens
(Eds.), Developing intercultural competence in practice (pp. 189-202). Clevedon, England: Multilingual
Matters.
