Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num1/greenfield/
January 2003, Volume 7, Number 1
pp. 46-70
Copyright © 2003, ISSN 1094-3501 46
COLLABORATIVE E-MAIL EXCHANGE FOR TEACHING
SECONDARY ESL: A CASE STUDY IN HONG KONG
Roseanne Greenfield
Hong Kong University, School of Professional and Continuing Education
ABSTRACT
This article presents data from a qualitative case study examining secondary ESL students'
attitudes toward and perceptions of a collaborative e-mail exchange between a Form 4 (10th
grade) ESL class in Hong Kong and an 11th grade English class in Iowa. The exchange was based
on a researcher-designed instructional model, utilizing widely accepted theories and methods for
modern second language instruction: cooperative learning, communicative language learning,
process writing, project-based learning, and an integrated approach.
After exposure to the exchange, Hong Kong students were questioned about (a) changes in
attitude towards computers and language learning; (b) effect of computer background on attitude,
interest, and motivation; (c) perception of their acquired reading, writing, speaking, and listening
skills; and (d) attitude towards cooperative learning. Data was collected primarily from pre- and
post-model surveys and personal interviews.
The majority of Hong Kong participants said they enjoyed the exchange, gained general
confidence in English and computer skills, and felt that they made significant progress in writing,
thinking, and speaking. They were, however, ambivalent as to whether it improved standardized
exam-related skills such as grammar usage and discrete language functions. As the project
progressed, students with strong computer skills indicated less satisfaction than those with weak
computer skills.
INTRODUCTION
Over the past two decades, computers have become common instructional tools in the ESL classroom.
Today, collaborative, multinational e-mail exchanges are just one of many computer-based activities that
ESL teachers utilize in hopes of increasing student language proficiency.
Previous research suggests that computer-mediated communication (CMC) can facilitate communication
(Cooper & Selfe, 1990), reduce anxiety (Kern, 1995; Sullivan, 1993), increase oral discussion (Pratt &
Sullivan, 1994), develop the writing/thinking connection (Warschauer, Turbee, & Roberts, 1996),
facilitate social learning (Barker & Kemp, 1990), promote egalitarian class structures (Cooper & Selfe,
1990; Sproull & Kiesler, 1991), enhance student motivation (Warschauer, 1996a), and improve writing
skills (Cohen & Riel, 1989; Cononelos & Oliva, 1993; Warschauer, 1996b). In light of these positive
effects, an increasing number of ESL teachers have embraced CMC exchanges. Yet, many have done so
without access to well-designed instructional models or guidelines that incorporate sound pedagogy,
theory, and an integrated curriculum. Several researchers have stressed the importance of theoretical
research for CMC exchanges (Brandl, 2002; Chapelle, 1997; Gonzalez-Bueno,1998), while others have
called for pedagogically sound methods (Cooper & Selfe, 1990; Cummins & Sayers, 1990, 1995) and
sensible curricular integration (Garrett, 1991; Warschaurer, 1996b).
With these points in mind, the instructional model used in this study incorporated several recommended
elements into its design: (a) new, student-centered paradigms; (b) an integrated approach for combining
computers and language learning; and (c) academically sound pedagogy, methods, and theory for
teaching secondary ESL students.
Roseanne Greenfield Collaborative E-mail Exchange for Teaching Secondary ESL…
Language Learning & Technology 47
New paradigms in language learning have been found to be well-suited for CMC exchanges, including
those which are open, inclusive, non-hierarchical, consensus-based, and/or product-oriented (Barker &
Kemp, 1990; Brandl, 2002; Cummins & Sayers, 1995; Kern 1995, 1996). Using these, educators can
focus on student-centered instruction, where the teacher is a coach and coordinator, rather than teacher-
centered, "information transfusion"-type instruction. Students can also create non-traditional forums
where they learn through engaging in discourse and reexamining authoritarian values (Cooper & Selfe,
1990).
New, maturing pedagogical models for collaborative, computer-based language teaching are also in the
works. Based on pedagogically sound theories, methods, and approaches for teaching a second language,
these models include but are not limited to, social learning theory, cooperative learning, project-based
learning, the writing process, an integrated approach to curriculum development, and a metacognitive
focus on writing (Barker & Kemp, 1990; Cummins & Sayers, 1995; Langston & Baston, 1990;
Warschauer 1995, 1996b).
Researchers caution, however, that CMC exchanges should be part of an integrated process, handled the
way one would incorporate a new textbook into the curriculum, rather than an add-on feature like a guest
speaker (Barson, Frommer, & Schwartz, 1993; Klemm & Snell, 1995; Warschauer, 1995). This refers not
only to the integration of computer technology with ESL methodology, but a more thorough integration
of classroom organization, syllabus, and curriculum (Warschauer, 1996b).
THE STUDY
Participants
This case study, conducted in the spring of 1999, involved two secondary schools: the Buddhist Sin Tak
College (BSTC) in Hong Kong and Green River High School (GRHS) in Iowa. The BSTC students were
15- and 16-year old native Cantonese speakers in a Form 4 (10th grade) intermediate-level ESL class.
Their American counterparts were 16- and 17-year-old native English speakers in an 11th grade elective
World Literature class. Research took place at BSTC during a 12-week period from late January through
mid-May 1999. The class met 3 days a week for 1.5 hours each day.
Project Design
The Hong Kong-Green River model was developed out of two competing demands: the Hong Kong
Certificate Education Exam (HKCEE) syllabus required for Form 4 students, and skills demanded of a
global telecommunications exchange and a communicative ESL classroom. Our model addressed both
needs to a certain extent, by focusing on selective elements of the HKCEE, while teaching "real-life"
English skills like planning, organizing, revising, debating, negotiating, using social interaction behavior,
and cooperative learning. Class content is described in Table 1.
Table 1. Class Content
I. Skills required by the Hong Kong Certificate Education Exam for Form 4 students:
Writing Informal writing, introductions, imaginative essays, descriptive paragraphs
Grammar Negative statements, the conditional tense, connectives
Reading Cloze passages, comprehension, word usage exercises
Oral Group discussion, summarization, social interaction behavior, group
negotiation
II. Skills required for a collaborative, communicative, student-centered e-mail exchange
Cooperative Learning Team building, desk arrangement, fulfilling individual roles and group goals,
completing timed tasks
Social Behavioral
Interaction
Initiating discussion, agreeing and disagreeing, asking for opinions,
clarifying, conceding points, giving counter arguments, reaching consensus
Roseanne Greenfield Collaborative E-mail Exchange for Teaching Secondary ESL…
Language Learning & Technology 48
and encouraging others during small group discussions
Process Writing Pre-writing, planning, drafting, revising, evaluating
Evaluation Metacognitive focus on writing, use of rubrics, peer and teacher feedback,
individual, small and large group evaluation methods
Computer
Background
Word processing, saving and storing data, sending e-mail, Internet etiquette
Project Activities
At the project's core, an anthology of student writing was cooperatively planned, negotiated, and carried
out by Hong Kong and Green River students. Anthology production was accompanied by a variety of
related activities such as "ice breakers," formal and informal e-mail communication, cloze exercises, a
"culture box" exchange, shared text, peer critiquing, and various forms of evaluation.
The Hong Kong-Green River Model
Opening Communication
a. Teachers exchange brief introductions and background information.
b. Teachers send a "welcome" letter to partner classes.
Ice Breakers
c. Keypals exchange first "hello" letter (informal e-mail on general themes like personal
characteristics, family, hobbies, or school life).
d. Keypals exchange second e-mail (focusing on negative statements and conditional tense). Hong
Kong students highlight these two grammatical items as found in their partner's letters, and make
deliberate use of them while discussing likes and dislikes, hopes and expectations.
e. Students create Cloze exercises (fill-in-the-blanks) with descriptive passages about their
respective Green River or Hong Kong communities.
f. Students guess at missed out words on their partners' Cloze exercises, then receive answer key via
e-mail.
Negotiating the Project
g. Both classes negotiate a topic for an imaginative essay (several rounds of "in class" and "online"
communication transpire).
h. Students share text-based examples of imaginative essays.
i. Students write first draft of imaginative essays in class and receive peer critique in cooperative
groups. Shared rubric used for evaluation.
j. Students revise drafts and send revisions to foreign keypals for peer-critique. Shared rubric is
used for evaluation.
Culture Exchange
k. Students exchange culture box (posted to partners and filled with photos, stamps, postcards and
other realia from their respective countries).
Continued Correspondence
l. Students send third e-mail to partners (focusing on the use of connectives).
m. Students write final draft of imaginative essays after receiving peer feedback from partners.
Roseanne Greenfield Collaborative E-mail Exchange for Teaching Secondary ESL…
Language Learning & Technology 49
Anthology Production
n. Essays are edited and production of jointly-published magazine begins.
o. Decisions are made (via e-mail) regarding anthology format, division of labor, inclusions, and
other related tasks.
Closure and Evaluation
p. Anthology is completed, "goodbye/thank you letters" are written, large and small group
evaluations are conducted, and student surveys and interviews are completed.
Pre-Project Preparation
Before the project commenced, Hong Kong students were given training in cooperative learning, process
writing, and oral discussion and negotiation. The following skills were practiced in each category:
Cooperative Learning Skills
1. Desk arrangement: Students were asked to cluster desks into cooperative groups at the beginning of
class. It was helpful to formally time this activity the first few weeks, saying, for example, "Let's see
if we can do this in 2 minutes today!" With a bit of practice and encouragement, arranging desks
became second nature when students walked through the classroom door.
2. Teambuilding activities: Groups were given the chance to form identities, select names, and design
group logos.
3. Fulfilling individual roles to meet group goals: The importance of students fulfilling individual
roles while adding to the mutual effort, was stressed. Individual roles included (but were not limited
to) a timekeeper, an encourager, a secretary or recorder, a group speaker, a quizzer, and a fact
checker.
4. Timed tasks: Cooperative groups learned to accomplish tasks within a set time period, including
exercises like "jigsaw" activities (groups reassemble a text that has been broken up in pieces like a
puzzle), "think-pair-share" activities (students pair up to discuss a particular topic provided by the
teacher, later sharing their findings with the whole class), "team interviews" (students interview each
other in turn), and "roundrobins" (students respond orally or in writing to questions, in turn and in a
circular fashion).
Process Writing Skills
1. Pre-writing skills: "Semantic webbing" or "brainstorming," listing, considering genre, goals, and
audience
2. Planning skills: Organizing ideas into an outline form, developing main topic, key points, and
subordinate ideas
3. Writing skills: Viewing writing as a teachable and recursive process, considering process as well as
product
4. Revising: Writing multiple drafts and proofreading for content, organization, sentence structure,
punctuation, grammar, mechanics and vocabulary
5. Evaluation: Using writing rubric, peer comments, and teacher comments to evaluate self and others,
and selectively assessing written pieces in regards to criterion on a rubric
Discussion and Negotiation Skills
1. Social interaction behavior: Initiating discussion, staying on task, presenting opinions and counter-
arguments, agreeing and disagreeing politely, compromising, negotiation, wrapping up
Roseanne Greenfield Collaborative E-mail Exchange for Teaching Secondary ESL…
Language Learning & Technology 50
2. Discussion: Using various formats such as dyads, small cooperative groups, large groups, presenting
discussion points to whole class, listening to classmates, encouraging input from others, giving
feedback in a group setting
CALL Procedures
The BSTC computer lab had of 24 Compaq Pentium II computers connected as a LAN (Local Area
Network), one 56K modem, and two Hewlett Packard Laser Jet printers. Student computers were located
in four rows of partitioned work carrels, while a single teacher station with the lab's only Internet
connection was located at the front of the room. Students wanting to send e-mail had to do so individually
from the teacher's station.
Prior to the exchange, students in Hong Kong and Green River were given a "computer use survey" which
identified individuals requiring special assistance with hardware or software, as well as those with
particular expertise who could serve as peer tutors. Based on survey results, students were paired up: one
student with strong computer skills and one with weaker skills.
Computer training was given in basic skills needed for the exchange: opening and closing files, saving
documents, copying onto floppy discs, and using specific e-mail programs and Web browsers. Students
were also briefed on Internet etiquette, especially common student behavior such as flaming and using all
capital letters.
During the first week of the exchange, all 45 Hong Kong students worked together in pairs in the
computer lab. Although "partnering" proved sound from a methodological standpoint, our lab was too
small for 45 students. During the second week, I divided the class in half during our 2-hour lessons,
allowing one group to work in the lab for the first "shift" while the other group studied in the classroom
with my team-teacher. At the end of the first hour, the two teachers switched places, so that everyone had
a chance to do the same work. Students were allowed to access the lab during "free" periods.
Operationalizing Project Goals
Exchange activities were planned with the project's three goals in mind: (a) implementation of student-
centered paradigms, (b) an integrated approach for combining computers and language learning, and (c)
academically sound pedagogy, methods, and theory. The following paragraphs describe two classroom
activities in detail -- topic selection and process writing -- both which exemplify how classroom activities
operationalized the larger project goals.
Topic Selection
Hong Kong students met in cooperative learning groups to explore topics for their "imaginative essay." In
a 5-minute, round robin exercise, each group member wrote down one suggestion on paper before passing
it on to the next member for his/her input. After a sizeable list had been formed, students practiced social
interaction skills (initiating discussion, agreeing, disagreeing, conceding points, proposing counter
arguments, summarizing, concluding), until groups had reached consensus on a topic.
Each group presented its topic of choice to the whole class, which then voted on the top three ideas. The
top three ideas were passed on to Green River partners, who in turn presented Hong Kong students with
their own favorite ideas. Online discussion and negotiation ensued until both classes arrived at a mutually
satisfactory theme: "entertainment." At the end of this activity, Hong Kong students reflected
(individually and in groups) about their collaborative learning experience.
This exercise exemplified student-centered pedagogy in which classmates discussed, negotiated, and
ultimately decided on their own theme. The teacher played the role of facilitator, helping cooperative
groups get started and stay on task, clarifying instructions, and suggesting learning methods as groups
worked independently. CMC was integrated naturally into this authentic, communicative task, as an
Roseanne Greenfield Collaborative E-mail Exchange for Teaching Secondary ESL…
Language Learning & Technology 51
extension of classroom discussion and debate. Finally, cooperative learning and theme-based education
were utilized to teach important skills of social interaction and group discussion.
Process Writing
The writing process served as a framework for students developing their imaginative essays. Pre-writing
activities included sharing exemplary essays with Iowa partners (scanned and sent via e-mail), and whole-
class discussions on pre-writing, planning, audience, the imaginative genre, and grammatical forms (in
particular, the conditional tense). Individual teacher-student conferences were held on an as-needed basis
to discuss writing goals.
While writing, all students used a shared rubric that was co-designed by Hong Kong and Iowa teachers.
While ultimately serving as an evaluation tool, this rubric helped students focus on specific writing goals
such as proper paragraphing, organization, transitions between paragraphs, and use of the hypothetical
conditional tense.
Peer critiques in Hong Kong were performed during a first draft "read around" activity in cooperative
groups. Students were given 8 minutes to read an essay, 15 minutes to give written comments on the
rubric form, and 5 minutes for oral feedback. Essays were exchanged until all group members had read
and commented on each essay. Teachers made additional written and verbal comments on first drafts,
before students sent revisions to their Iowa partners.
Using the same shared rubric, all students gave reciprocal written feedback (via e-mail) on their partners'
essays. Additional drafts were written and revised in respective classes, until a final copy was published
in the jointly-produced anthology.
This workshop environment made use of student-centered learning, through which classmates discussed
and evaluated peer work. Computers were integrated into the tasks of peer critiquing and examining
shared text. This activity placed a metacognitive focus on writing through the use of a shared rubric and
discussion of individual and class writing goals.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND DATA COLLECTION
This is a single case study examining student opinions, attitudes, and perceptions towards a specific
collaborative e-mail exchange at the Buddhist Sin Tak College, a local secondary school in Hong Kong.
The study, although non-experimental in nature, utilized qualitative and quantitative research instruments
for data collection. Qualitative instruments included formal and informal interviews, teacher
questionnaires, naturalistic observation, observation with a video camera and tape recorder, and research
journals. Quantitative instruments consisted of the pre- and post-model surveys using self-rated Likert-
like scales assessing English ability, interest, and confidence in certain English- and computer-related
domains.
Research Questions
Several research questions guided this study, examining (a) changes in student attitude about computers
and language learning; (b) the effect of computer background on student attitude, interest, and motivation;
(c) student perception of acquired reading, writing, speaking, and listening skills; and (d) student attitude
towards cooperative learning during the exchange. Investigating student attitude and perception was
important, since a large part of the CALL body of research deals with student outcomes and achievement,
rather than student-oriented questions about likes and dislikes of instructional models (Benremouga,
1995, p. 2). Additionally, assessment tools may not accurately detect progress in the four language
domains for students with poor test-taking skills. Therefore, student beliefs and perceptions about their
own improvement are important to document. The issue of computer background was important to
examine, since half of the Hong Kong students were experienced users, while the other half were novices.
Roseanne Greenfield Collaborative E-mail Exchange for Teaching Secondary ESL…
Language Learning & Technology 52
I wanted to know if experienced computer users would excel in CMC activities due to ability and interest,
or if they would become bored by using (and in some cases, reviewing) skills they had already acquired.
On the other hand, I questioned if students with weak computer backgrounds would be intimidated by
using CMC as part of their daily English lessons. Finally, I wanted to examine student perceptions
towards cooperative learning, since virtually every part of our CMC exchange was based on cooperative
discussion and negotiation, first in small classroom groups, and then as online discussion between the two
partner classes.
Semi-Structured Interviews
The majority of qualitative data came from formal, semi-structured interviews that were recorded and
transcribed during the last week of the project. Semi-structured interviews are well suited for case studies
because they include specific, well-defined questions determined in advance, while at the same time allow
for elaboration of responses and on subsidiary questions (Sudman, 1982). They are also useful tools for
eliciting opinions, feelings, and values (Merriam, 1988; Patton, 1990).
Salient themes that emerged from interview data were categorized and reported, while student quotations
were used to illustrate these themes. Attitudinal responses, particularly likes and dislikes about the
project's different features, were later quantified to get a better look at student reaction to the exchange.
The results, described below, refer only to Hong Kong students.
RESULTS
General Student Perceptions
The majority of Hong Kong students spoke favorably about the exchange during the personal interview
(see Appendix A), describing it with 45 positive adjectives, compared to 3 negative ones. Among positive
adjectives, the most common were "interesting/interested" and "good" as are illustrated here:
Beth: ...I think everyone who received letters (from partner class) will feel
excited so she or he will interested in this.
Arthur: It is a good project. We had a chance to improve our reading and also
listening and we have another chance to improve our grammar. During this
activity I always talk to others in English. Speaking in English can help me
to achieve more.
In the same interview question (Appendix A), students attributed 65 strengths to the project, while listing
only 16 weaknesses. The most commonly cited weakness (5 students) was that the project was not long
enough -- in actuality, a positive response. The most significant weakness reported was that students did
not receive enough letters/e-mail from their Iowa partners (4 students). This sentiment may be a result of
the fact that Iowa keypals missed several mutually established deadlines, resulting in a decreased number
of formal exchanges during the project.
Most and Least Fun Activities
Hong Kong students considered speaking in small groups and computer practice to be the "most fun"
parts of the exchange, as revealed during the personal interview (Appendix C). In general, six major
themes emerged as students described why certain activities were "fun":
• Freedom to write or imagine what one wants to
• Happiness/fun
• The model was "fresh" or "new"
• Sharing or learning with others
• More communication/more speaking opportunities
Roseanne Greenfield Collaborative E-mail Exchange for Teaching Secondary ESL…
Language Learning & Technology 53
• Making contact with friends via computers/e-mail
For example, Hong Kong students said,
Eliza: ...the topic is very wide. I can write anything I like.
Howard: I think cooperative learning is so good. It is very fresh. I can speak freely.
This data correspond with conclusions of other researchers, detailing student satisfaction from selecting
their own topics during CMC exchanges and being taught in a communicative, student-centered
environment (Cooper & Selfe, 1990; Tella, 1991, 1992a, 1992b).
Six themes emerged as reasons why students did not find particular activities "fun":
• Lacking skills for the activity
• Abundant experience in similar activities
• Too difficult
• Too easy
• Not teaching English to the extent that other activities did
• Foreign partners' comments were discouraging
The activity most frequently mentioned as "least fun" was "writing imaginative essays" -- the most
common objections being that they took "too much time" and that plots were "difficult to imagine"
(Appendix C). However, imaginative essay writing ranked forth in a list of 14 choices for being "most
helpful" for learning English (Appendix B), and third in a list of 14 choices for being "useful to repeat
again" (Appendix J). This ambivalence shows that Hong Kong students clearly appreciated the fact that
academically "helpful" activities are a lot of work.
Computer practice came in second place on both "least fun" and "most fun" lists, revealing a definite split
of opinion on the issue. This was possibly due to the fact that students were split in terms of computer
ability -- half were seasoned computer users, while half were beginners.
Language Learning with Computers
A majority of Hong Kong students (84%) indicated a preference for learning English with computers
during their personal interviews (Appendix G). The most common reasons given were that computers
made writing "easier," facilitated the correction of spelling and punctuation mistakes, were "modern,"
"useful," "interesting," and "faster" than writing by hand.
This data corroborates conclusions from other researchers, who report that CMC in the second language
classroom facilitates general communication and the revision process (Beauvois and Elledge, 1996;
Carter, 1989; Cononelos & Oliva, 1993; Kern, 1995; Phinney, 1989) and improves student attitude
towards writing (Egbert, Jessup, & Valacich, 1991).
Hong Kong students displayed less anxiety, fear, and discomfort over computer use at the end of the
exchange, than at the beginning (Appendix H). Reflecting on their feelings towards computers in January
(at the beginning of the exchange), Hong Kong students used a considerable number of negative words
and phrases such as "afraid" (6), "uncomfortable" (7), "not easy to use" (4), and "dislike" (3). However,
describing their feelings in May (at the end of the exchange), students used no words reflecting anxiety,
fear, discomfort, or lack of confidence while using computers. In addition, only six students reported
being "confident" about computer use in January, whereas this number grew to 14 by May (Appendix H).
One student recalls her feelings toward computers in January: (Maggie) "I am very afraid to use computer
at first, and I type very, very slow." However, in May, the same student reported, "I feel more confident
for using computer than before. And I spend my time on ICQ now. And I have improved my typing
speed."
Roseanne Greenfield Collaborative E-mail Exchange for Teaching Secondary ESL…
Language Learning & Technology 54
The majority of students indicated either contentment towards the computer use throughout the project or
an increasingly in positive reaction towards computer use by the end of the exchange (Appendix H). Of
the later group, eight students shifted from negative to the positive feelings.
These findings corroborate conclusions of other researchers that anxiety among L2 learners is reduced
when electronic discussion is used, especially when it precedes oral classroom discussion (Kern, 1995) or
allows time for students to form responses (Sullivan, 1993).
Collaborative Learning
Cooperative learning was the Hong Kong students' favorite exchange activity (Appendices B, C, D, and
J). During personal interviews, a total of 99 positive responses were reported for the cooperative learning
process, in contrast to 54 negative responses (Appendix D). Students favored cooperative learning for
"oral English practice," (31) "improving speaking" (16), and being the "most helpful" means of improving
English (Appendix D). Students also said cooperative learning exercises were the most "fun" (Appendix
C) and the most "useful to repeat" (Appendix J). Student feedback on cooperative learning included the
following:
Alisha: I really enjoy this. I can speak more frequently and to be more brave to
speak.
Wanda: I think the group discussion is quite helpful because when we do write a
composition, we can share our opinion to the other's and teachers. In the
traditional class ... we only give our composition to our teachers.
This data corroborates conclusions from other researchers that group learning is the most beneficial
operational mode for CMC Projects (Galvin, 1985; Ganszauge, Hult, Sajavaara, & Kontinnen, 1994), and
that for optimal learning to occur, students must go past the keypal stage and engage in significant
collaborative projects using a task-oriented approach with a final product (Klemm & Snell, 1995).
Cummins and Sayers (1995) additionally advocate the combination of collaborative learning and critical
inquiry for CMC projects.
Public Exams
Hong Kong students were ambivalent as to whether exposure to the CMC exchange would help them
perform on upcoming end-of-year public exams. Data from personal interviews (Appendix E) indicate
that 40% of Hong Kong students believed the exchange experience would help them on HKCEE exams.
Skills most often linked to expected improvement (Appendix E) were speaking (20 responses), listening
(15 responses), and writing (11 responses).
However, on the post-project survey (Appendix K), students indicated mild disagreement with the
proposition that exam-related skills improved as a result of the project. Nine students (20%) said the
project had "somewhat" improved skills for getting good test results, while only one student (2.2%)
thought these skills had improved "very much."
Finally, students did not believe that exposure to the exchange resulted in improved grammar or
vocabulary skills (Appendix E). Several students said that they preferred to learn discrete, language
function skills that would appear on their public examinations:
Harry: ... it (the exchange) only improved our talking and speaking English skills,
not very much teaching grammar, but in the exam, grammar is more
important than talking skills" (personal interview question 11B).
From the qualitative data above, student perception, attitude, and interest was largely favorable.
Roseanne Greenfield Collaborative E-mail Exchange for Teaching Secondary ESL…
Language Learning & Technology 55
Pre- and Post-Model Surveys
The majority of quantitative data used in this study came from pre- and post-model surveys which utilized
a self-rated, Likert scale which assessed English ability, interest, and confidence in various English- and
computer-related domains. Pre-model surveys were used to gain baseline information on demographics
and student attitudes, while the post-model survey measured student's perceived changes in their own
learning, attitude, and other evaluative matters. Pre- and post-model surveys have been found to be
valuable tools for case study research, as they generate a significant volume of data in an unobtrusive way
(Johnson, 1994) and highlight phenomena that are not easily observed such as attitudes, motivation, and
self-concepts (Seliger & Shohamy, 1989). Quantitative analysis provided a useful alternative perspective
of Hong Kong students, which although positive at times, did not always present a consistent or
unequivocal picture of improvement.
Description of Statistical Process
A t-test for correlated samples was performed on Likert scale ratings for pre- and post- model questions
with the same or very similar wording, in order to determine whether there were statistically significant
differences between the pre-model and post-model mean scores. The original coding used on pre- and
post-model surveys was 1=agree strongly, 2=agree, 3=neutral, 4=disagree, and 5=disagree strongly. This
coding was subsequently reversed after completion of both surveys. This was done for two reasons: (a)
people generally associate high numbers with positive ratings, and (b) changes in the mean ratings of
variables from a pre-model item to its post-model counterpart would be positive if the change was
towards the more positive end of the scale. For example, a change from a 4 to a 5 rating would indicate
change from "agree" to "strongly agree."
Correlation of Input and Output Measures
Correlations between input and output measures were then examined. Input measures included aspects of
the individual which were measured by the pre-model survey (e.g., computer familiarity) that might
reasonably have been expected to affect the outcome of the program (e.g., student reaction to the
program). Output measures included aspects of the individual which were measured by the post-model
survey (e.g., self-assessed improvement in writing) that could be said to have reflected the student's
reaction to the program (e.g., negative or positive impression).
Variables were grouped in related categories, to arrive at an aggregate score for grouped items. A
reliability analysis of these grouped items was performed, measuring the internal consistency of aggregate
scales to make sure they could be interpreted as measuring a single trait (Appendix M). This analysis
gives a reliability coefficient (Cronbach's alpha) with a value for each scale. The higher the value of this
coefficient, the more reliable and coherent the scale is considered to be. Conventionally, 0.075 is the
minimum required. Where reliability levels did not meet the conventional criterion, individual items were
omitted when this led to improvement in the scale reliability.
Roseanne Greenfield Collaborative E-mail Exchange for Teaching Secondary ESL…
Language Learning & Technology 56
Table 2. Comparative Pre- and Post-Model Survey Mean Scores
Questions (n = 45 students) Pre-mean Post-mean t p
1. I can write an English composition with ease 2.96 3.18 1.81 0.077
2. I can speak English with ease 3.02 3.16 1.03 0.309
3. I can read English with ease 3.18 3.29 0.93 0.359
4. I can understand spoken English with ease 3.11 3.32 1.39 0.173
5. I would rather spend time on my other courses rather than
English
2.87 2.96 0.53 0.599
6. I am nervous when I have to write an English
Composition
2.64 2.69 0.36 0.719
7. My classmates in Hong Kong can help me improve my
English writing by discussing my compositions in groups
3.02 3.16 0.61 0.546
8. I am confident about my English ability in general,
including reading, writing, speaking, and listening
2.71 3.00 2.23 0.031*
9. I am not interested in using computers in my English class 1.98 2.33 1.89 0.066
10. I am embarrassed to send letters to English-speaking
students
2.40 2.09 1.82 0.075
11. I think my English writing will improve/has improved 3.98 3.20 4.63 0.000**
12. I think my English speaking will improve/has improved 3.27 3.42 0.78 0.437
13. I think my English reading will improve/has improved 3.89 2.98 5.16 0.000***
14. I think my English listening will improve/has improved 3.18 3.36 0.88 0.383
*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001
Learning the Four Language Skills
A correlation of input and output measures was performed with variables relating to the four language
skills (items 8, 11, 12, 13, and 14 in Table 2). Since all of these items measured the underlying trait of
confidence in English, they were grouped into a single category to arrive at an aggregate score. It was
believed that the aggregate of scores for several items would be more reliable than an individual's score
for a single item.
Quantitative data from pre- and post- surveys showed a small but statistically significant (t = 2.23, df 44,
p = 0.031). increase in student's general confidence in the four English skills -- speaking, reading, writing,
and comprehension -- after exposure to this project. There was, however, a highly significant decrease in
"English writing" and "English reading" variables for which the post-model mean rating was significantly
less than the pre-model mean rating. In both cases, the difference was statistically significant at the level
of p<0.001, which seems to indicate that the experience of taking part in this exchange led to a decrease
in student confidence in reading and writing skills (Items 13 and 11 in Table 2).
It is my belief, nonetheless, that student confidence in writing and reading skills did not actually suffer.
There is a natural tendency for students to lose interest in any pedagogical program after time, and
students were given the pre-model survey a week before the project commenced, without an indication of
what the project would entail, other than a vague notion that it involved collaboration with a foreign class
via e-mail. Therefore, student hopes that their writing and reading skills might "improve" as a result of
this project were neither based on concrete experience or knowledge about the model.
Additional information garnered from qualitative data revealed that student had positive perceptions about
writing in particular. For example, project-related writing was ranked second of 14 responses for being a
"helpful" skill needed for the future (Appendix F) and ranked fourth of 14 responses for being "most
helpful for learning English" (Appendix B). Similarly, writing imaginative essays ranked third of 14
responses for being "useful to repeat again" (Appendix J).
Roseanne Greenfield Collaborative E-mail Exchange for Teaching Secondary ESL…
Language Learning & Technology 57
As for reading confidence, the exchange activities did not include the type of reading that Hong Kong
students are accustomed to: textbook examples of essay patterns and explanations of discrete grammar
functions. Instead, much of the reading time focused on peer essays and informal e-mail communication.
Some students may have felt that these reading models were less "legitimate" than those in their exam-
oriented textbook.
Rather than interpreting this data as a decrease in reading and writing confidence, I prefer to look
holistically at student attitudes. Methodological triangulation shows a somewhat inconsistent picture,
although the majority of evidence, particularly data garnered from student interviews, indicates a
favorable student response.
Computer Background and Attitude, Interest, and Motivation
As part of this study (Appendices L, M, and N), correlations were performed between input and output
measures on the pre-survey questionnaire. Input measures related to self-assessed computer ability
(labeled “CANDO”) were correlated with output measures related to self-assessed improvement in
various skills like writing, speaking, reading, and understanding (labeled "IMPROVED"). The correlation
between these measures was negative and statistically significant (r = -0.387, p<0.01), indicating that
higher levels of computer ability are associated with lower levels or general satisfaction with the project,
and vice versa (Appendix N).
The correlation between the number of hours students use computers at home each week ("HRSWEEK")
and the output measures ("IMPROVED") was also negative and statistically significant (Appendix N).
These data, although not as positive as hoped for, are understandable. A general decline in student interest
and motivation is a natural and familiar process in any pedagogical program as it proceeds. In addition,
students with highest computer abilities would naturally have found redundancy in the computer-related
parts of our project: initial training in word processing, saving files, and sending e-mail documents. Also,
inexperienced computer users may have felt excitement over using the new technology, as well as
personal satisfaction in learning skills they had not used before.
The data may be explained by overly optimistic expectations recorded during the pre-survey, and delayed
responses from Iowa keypals. Delayed responses may have affected students to a greater extent than other
reasons; it was virtually the only complaint that students verbalized during class. This problem was also
listed as the most significant "weakness" of the model (Appendix A).
DISCUSSION
This study indicates that developing a well-designed CMC exchange for the second language classroom is
not a simple endeavor. It is intricate, integrated, and multi-layered -- demanding the utilization of a host
of skills and instructional paradigms by the classroom instructor. The integration of sound theory,
methods, and pedagogy is essential in order to optimize language learning benefits. Simply sending e-
mail to students in other countries does not constitute an academically challenging or rigorous program
(Cummins & Sayers, 1990; Garrett, 1991).
Language learning principles can work well when used in tandem with new teaching paradigms such as
student-centered, consensus-based, and product-oriented approaches to learning (Cooper & Selfe, 1990).
In addition, CMC projects should be integrated into the larger curricular program, rather than function as
stand-alone activities (Warschauer, 1995). Therefore, grade-level, school-wide, or state-mandated
curriculums must be addressed when developing such exchanges.
Effective CMC exchanges can also be developed at schools with national curricula. As evidenced in the
instructional model above, an exchange can be flexible enough to keep the integrity of a national or
grade-wide curriculum, while simultaneously teaching English through holistic, real-life experiences. A
Roseanne Greenfield Collaborative E-mail Exchange for Teaching Secondary ESL…
Language Learning & Technology 58
blend of both general communicative skills and exam-driven skills might provide students at such schools
with a better formula for success.
There are, however, several caveats to consider with CMC exchanges. Project dependability, for one, is
impossible to ensure when working with a partner school, even with the best-designed project or the most
enthusiastic partners. In our case, Green River students failed to meet deadlines on several key
assignments (formal e-mail exchanges, peer critique, Cloze exercise, and culture box exchange) which
negatively impacted the Hong Kong students' interest. Some of these delays were beyond teacher control:
school closures on "snow" days, teacher illness, and in one case, the suspension of school-wide Internet
privileges after several students (not from our partner class) were caught "flaming." Other delays occurred
when the teacher failed to check that students had e-mailed their work. These delays greatly curtailed the
number of activities we had originally planned. However, it should be mentioned that in my prior
experience with six different collaborative e-mail projects, delays were not the norm.
A tremendous amount of teacher set-up and planning must precede a CMC exchange. This may involve
preparing students in unfamiliar skills, such as those needed for cooperative learning, process writing, or
small group discussions. Our Hong Kong students, for example, required 3 or 4 weeks of training before
they felt comfortable participating in the aforementioned activities.
Additionally, compatibility between partner classes is essential, but difficult to achieve. During pre-
project preparation in finding a suitable partner, we considered how many class hours per week the
teacher was willing to devote to the project, and if 17-year-olds would be willing to work with 15- and
16-year-olds. We additionally compared student background in computers and typing ability. A class of
"hunt and peck" typists, for example, would have difficulty responding to long questionnaires and essays
produced by expert typists. Finally, we evaluated respective class goals to make sure they were
complementary.
Finally, few theoretical or research-based models exist for developing CMC exchanges that expressly
show how language skills and technology can be integrated together under the umbrella of a well-
designed curriculum. Therefore, teachers may need support and preparation before embarking on such an
exchange. This support might come in the form of individual or school-sponsored research or professional
growth activities.
CONCLUSION
Data gained from this case study has highlighted the attitudes, feelings, and perceptions of secondary ESL
students towards a collaborative, cross-cultural CMC exchange for the purpose of learning English.
Qualitative data gained from personal interviews showed strong student support for this collaborative
exchange model. Hong Kong secondary students used largely positive adjectives to describe the project,
believing it was "a good learning experience," "helpful," "enjoyable," and something they would "like to
repeat in the future." Cooperative learning, in general, received the most positive student response.
Quantitative analysis, however, provided a useful alternative perspective, which although positive at
times, did not always present a consistent or unequivocal picture of improvement across the whole range
of attitudes surveyed by the questionnaires. Further findings indicate that CMC exchanges can be
successfully implemented at both "national curriculum" schools, as well as schools with a more flexible
curriculum, to enhance second language learning.
There were several limitations to this research, including the fact that student information was self-
reported and self-assessed. In addition, the duration of this study was relatively short, and it is a well-
known phenomenon in language learning research that short-term effects of a particular treatment can
change 6 or 8 months down the road. Finally, this study focused on a small, specific student population,
and therefore, data may not be generalized to other institutions or ESL classrooms.
Roseanne Greenfield Collaborative E-mail Exchange for Teaching Secondary ESL…
Language Learning & Technology 59
CMC exchanges offer a host of possibilities for increasing student language proficiency. Yet, models
based on theoretical or empirical research are sorely needed to guide teachers towards pedagogically
sound practices. These models, at minimum, should (a) involve an integrated approach for language
instruction, (2) make use of new student-centered paradigms in language learning, (3) have a basis in
current and widely-accepted theories and methods for modern second language instruction, (d) consider
learner's reactions, and (e) lead the instructor from the developmental stage of an exchange, through the
actual production and its logical extensions.
It is therefore my hope that this case study has offered other secondary ESL teachers one possible
framework for developing a CMC exchange. It is also my hope that it will lead to an increased
understanding of the structure, organization, and logistics of setting up a comprehensive CMC exchange,
as well as a "close up" glimpse at holistic phenomenon, including social dimensions, student attitudes,
and beliefs.
APPENDIX A
Question 2: What do you think of this project?
A. Adjectives Number B. Likes Number
Interesting/interested 15 E-mail 4
Good/nice 10 Using computers 3
Boring 3 Group discussion 3
Enjoyable, liked 4 Publishing magazine/project 2
Exciting 4 Cooperative learning 1
Fresh/new 4
Excellent/wonderful/great 3 C. Dislikes Number
Useful 2 Didn't like e-mail 3
Encouraging 1 Didn't like group discussions 3
Meaningful 1 Didn't like computer lab 1
D. Strengths Number E. Weaknesses Number
Improved English 16 Not long enough 5
Language modeled by native
speaker
8 Not enough e-mail from partner 4
Contact with foreigners 6 Not enough exam-related skills 3
Improved speaking 6 Not enough grammar practice 3
Improved writing 5 Too time consuming 2
Made friends 3 A lot of work 1
Improved grammar 3 Partner's vocabulary too high 1
Improved communication 2 Students lack computer skills 1
Improved listening 2 Chinese used in class 1
Improved reading 2
Learned a lot/good learning
experience
2
Improved confidence 1
Improved computer skills 1
Improved typing skills 1
Learned from others 1
Learning extended at home 1
Roseanne Greenfield Collaborative E-mail Exchange for Teaching Secondary ESL…
Language Learning & Technology 60
APPENDIX B
Question 3: Which activities during this project were the most helpful for learning English?
Activities n
Speaking practice in small groups 27
Getting comments from your Iowa partner about your essay 16
Cooperative learning in small groups 15
Writing Imaginative Essays 15
E-mail practice 12
Reading Imaginative Essays from Iowa 10
Writing comments to your Iowa partner about their essay 9
Computer practice 7
Personal letters to partner 7
Small group comments on essays 7
"Hello" Letters 5
Making Cloze Exercises 4
Answering your partners' Cloze Exercises 4
Other: 2
 (a) Improved thinking 1
 (b) Have native speaker as teacher 1
APPENDIX C
Questions 5, 6: What were the most fun/least fun activities during this project?
Most Fun Least Fun
Activity
n
rank
order
n
rank
order
Speaking practice in small groups 15 1 1 13
Computer practice 8 2 7 2
Cooperative learning in small groups 7 3= 1 14
Making Cloze exercises 7 3= 3 4=
"Hello" Letters 5 5 3 4=
Answering partners' Cloze exercises 4 6= 6 3
Writing imaginative essays 4 6= 8 1
Personal letters to partner 3 8 3 4=
E-mail practice 2 9= 2 11
Small group comments on essays 2 9= 2 12
Other: sharing culture box 2 11= -- --
Reading imaginative essays from Iowa 1 12 3 4=
Getting comments from Iowa partner about your essay 0 13= 3 4=
Writing comments to your partner about their essay 0 13= 2 10
Other: Everything is fun 2 9
Roseanne Greenfield Collaborative E-mail Exchange for Teaching Secondary ESL…
Language Learning & Technology 61
APPENDIX D
Question 8: What do you think of cooperative, small-group learning?
Answer n
General
Positive reaction 34
Mixed reaction 7
Negative reaction 4
Positive Points
Oral English practice 31
Improves our speaking 16
Fun/Enjoyable 12
Learn to cooperate with others 7
Learn together with others (as opposed to individually) 6
Share ideas/opinions 6
More efficient way to learn 4
More communication 3
Helps with HKCEE exam 2
Increases courage 5
Can talk about own interests 1
More authentic situation 1
Teacher will assist 1
Peer tutoring 1
Increase friendships 1
Learn more about classmates 1
Practice leadership 1
Negative Points
Some students are too shy/quiet 15
No negative points 5
Cannot correct oral mistakes 2
Some use Chinese 2
Lack of sufficient vocabulary 4
Room too noisy 4
Not efficient way to learn 3
Some talking off task 3
Takes time away from texts/ exams 3
Arranging desks takes too much time 2
Some students are too talkative 2
Nervous to speak up 2
Not enough time (want to do more) 2
Group members not friends 1
Can't improve our English 1
Introduction not clear 1
Some members do more work 1
Roseanne Greenfield Collaborative E-mail Exchange for Teaching Secondary ESL…
Language Learning & Technology 62
APPENDIX E
Question 11A: Do you think this project will help you pass your end-of-year English exams?
Answer n
Yes 18
Mixed response 5
Only a bit 9
No 8
Unsure 4
Student wasn't asked 1
Skills indicated as helpful to pass exams
Answer n
Oral 20
Listening 14
Writing 11
Grammar 5
Vocabulary 3
Reading 1
APPENDIX F
Question 12B: Skills gained from the project that you will need in the future?
Skill n Skill n
Speaking skills 26 Cooperation 2
Writing 10 Grammar 2
Listening 5 Presentations 2
Typing 4 Holding discussions 1
Communicate with foreigners 3 Listening to other's opinions 1
E-mail 3 Working on projects 1
Computer skills 2 Word usage 1
APPENDIX G
Question 14: Do you prefer learning English with or without computers?
Answer n
With 38
Without 5
Both 1
Student was not asked 1
Roseanne Greenfield Collaborative E-mail Exchange for Teaching Secondary ESL…
Language Learning & Technology 63
APPENDIX H
Questions 15, 16: How did you feel about using computers at the beginning of our project in
January/at the end of our project in May?
Feelings in January n Feelings in May n
Interested 23 Confident 14
Fun 18 Fun 14
Helpful 15 Helpful 13
Exciting 14 Interested 12
Comfortable using by myself 11 Exciting 11
Easy to use 8 Easy to use 8
Uncomfortable using by myself 7 Comfortable using by myself 6
Confident 6 Boring 3
Afraid 6 Not interested 2
Not easy to use 4 Not helpful 1
Dislike 3 Other: so-so 1
Not helpful 3 Dislike 0
Boring 2 Cold 0
Not interested 2 Nervous 0
Silly 1 Not easy to use 0
Cold 1 Silly 0
Other: A little bit confident 1 Uncomfortable using by myself 0
Nervous 0 Afraid 0
January 1999 May 1999 n
Positive to Remained Positive 20
Negative to Positive 8
Positive to Mixed 2
Positive to Negative 4
Mixed to Positive 2
Negative to Remained Negative 2
Negative to Mixed 2
APPENDIX I
Question 19: Would you like to do another project like this one in the future or not?
Answer n
Yes 37
No 3
A little bit 2
Maybe 2
Student was not asked 1
Roseanne Greenfield Collaborative E-mail Exchange for Teaching Secondary ESL…
Language Learning & Technology 64
APPENDIX J
Question 19A: What parts are useful/not useful to repeat again?
Useful to Repeat Not Useful to Repeat
n rank order n rank order
Speaking in small groups 24 1 3 9=
Cooperative learning in small groups 20 2 -- 13
Writing imaginative essays 17 3 3 9=
Reading imaginative essays from Iowa 16 4= 1 12=
Getting comments from Iowa partner 16 4= 2 10
E-mail practice 14 6 7 3
Making Cloze exercises 12 7 8 2
Hello letter 10 8 4 6=
Writing comments to Iowa 9 9= 5 5
Computer 9 9= 10 1
Personal letter 7 11= 2 8=
Small group comments on essays 7 11= 1 11=
Answering Cloze exercises 4 13 4 6=
All parts are useful -- -- 6 4
APPENDIX K
Post-Model Survey Question 24: My skills for getting good results on my year-end English exam
Likert Scale n Percentage
1 = has improved very much 1 2.2%
2 = has improved somewhat 9 20.0%
3 = neutral 19 42.2%
4 = has improved just a little 10 22.2%
5 = has not really improved 2 13.3%
m = 3.133
APPENDIX L
Labels for Input and Output Measures
NOTE: All items in this scale have been recoded so that the score is an index of positive motivation rather
than negative motivation
Input Measures
1. Familiarity with Computers
5(a) CANDO1 "I can use games"
5(b) CANDO2 "I can use word processing"
5(c) CANDO3 "I can use CD-ROMs"
5(d) CANDO4 "I can use e-mail"
5(e) CAND05 "I can use databases"
5(f) CANDO6 "I can install programs"
5(g) CANDO7 "I can do graphics"
5(h) CANDO8 "I can write computer programs"
5(i) CANDO9 "I can use the Internet"
Roseanne Greenfield Collaborative E-mail Exchange for Teaching Secondary ESL…
Language Learning & Technology 65
2. Self-Assessed Ability in English
10. LRNENG "I enjoy learning English in school"
11. WRITE1 "I can write and English composition with ease"
12. SPEAK1 "I can speak English with ease"
13. READ1 "I can read English with ease"
14. UNDSTD1 "I can understand spoken English with ease"
3. Prediction of Improvement
27. ENGWRIT1 "I think my English writing will improve"
28. ENGSPK1 "I think my English speaking will improve"
29. ENGREAD1 "I think my English reading will improve"
30. ENGLIST1 "I think my English listening will improve"
4. Extrinsic Motivation
15. REQUIRE "I am studying English only because it is a requirement"
16. OTHRCRS1 "I would rather spend time on my other courses rather than English"
17. PARENTS "The main reason I want to improve in English is to please my parents"
5. Confidence in Relation to the Project
19.* NERVOUS1 "I am nervous when I have to write and English composition"
20. CLSMTS1 "My classmates can help me improve in my English writing by discussing
my compositions with me"
21. GENCONF1 "I am confident about my English ability in general, including reading,
writing, speaking and listening"
22.* EMBRS1 "I am embarrassed to send letters to English-speaking students"
*Items 19 and 22 were recoded to provide a measure of positive rather than negative confidence.
6. Attitude to the Use of Computers in the English Class
22. TYPIST "I am a good typist, compared to the rest of the students in my class"
23.* NOTINT1 "I am not interested in using computers in my English
class"
25. BYHAND "I enjoy writing compositions by hand more than by computers"
26. FASTER "I can learn English faster when I use a computer"
*Item 23 was recoded so the score is an index of positive motivation rather than negative motivation.
OUTPUT MEASURES
7. General Satisfaction with the Project
17. ENGWRIT2 "My English writing has improved"
18. ENGSPK2 "My English speaking has improved"
19. ENGREAD2 "My English reading has improved"
20. ENGLIST2 "My English listening has improved"
21. COMPUSE "My ability to use the computer has improved"
22. HLPCOM "My ability to make helpful comments (in writing) about other students'
essays has improved"
23. REVISE "My ability to revise my writing based on other students' comments has
improved"
24. GOODRES "My skills for getting good results on my year-ended English exam have
improved
Roseanne Greenfield Collaborative E-mail Exchange for Teaching Secondary ESL…
Language Learning & Technology 66
8. Self-Assessed Ability in the Four Skills
1. WRITE2 "I can write and English composition with ease"
2. SPEAK2 "I can speak English with ease"
3. READ2 "I can read English with ease"
4. UNDSTD2 "I can understand spoken English with ease"
APPENDIX M
Alpha Values for Input Measures
Scale Alpha
INPUT MEASURES
1. Familiarity with Computers ("CANDO")
Variables: CANDO1, CANDO2, CANDO3, CANDO4, CANDO5,
CANDO6, CANDO7, CANDO8, CANDO9
0.8067
Variables: CANDO1, CANDO2, CANDO3, CANDO4, CANDO6,
CANDO7, CANDO8, CANDO9 (Remove CANDO5)
0.8177
2. Self-Assessed Ability in English ("SELFASS1")
Variables: LRNENG, WRITE1, SPEAK1, READ1, UNDSTD1 0.7381
Variables: WRITE1, SPEAK1, READ1, UNDSTD1 (Remove LRNENG) 0.7741
3. Prediction of Improvement ("IMPROV")
Variables: ENGWRIT1, ENGSPK1, ENGREAD1, ENGLIST1 0.6533
4. Extrinsic Motivation ("EXTMOTIV")
Variables: REQUIRE, OTHRCRS1, PARENTS 0.3028
5. Confidence in relation to the project ("CONFID")
Variables: NERVOUS1, CLSMTS1, GENCONF1, EMBRS1 0.4310
6. Attitude to the use of computers in the English Class ("ATTCOMP")
Variables: TYPIST, NOTINT1, BYHAND, FASTER 0.5125
Variables: TYPIST, NOTINT1, BYHAND, FASTER (Remove TYPIST) 0.6126
OUTPUT MEASURES
7. General Satisfaction with the Project ("IMPROVED")
Variables: ENGWRIT2, ENGSPK2, ENGREAD2, ENGLIST2, COMPUSE,
HLPCOM, REVISE, GOODRES
0.8489
8. Self-Assessed Ability in the Four Skills ("SELFASS2")
Variables: WRITE2, SPEAK2, READ2, UNDSTD2 0.6725
Roseanne Greenfield Collaborative E-mail Exchange for Teaching Secondary ESL…
Language Learning & Technology 67
APPENDIX N
Correlation Matrix for Input and Output Measures on Pre- and Post Model Surveys
HRSWEEK SELFASS1 IMPROVED SELFASS2
r 0.586 -0.230 -0.387 -0.575
p 0.000*** 0.129 0.009** 0.000***CANDO
N 44 45 45 45
r -0.016 -0.443 -0.310
p 0.918 0.003** 0.040*HRSWEEK
N 44 44 44
r 0.310 0.426
p 0.038* 0.004**SELFASS1
N 45 45
r 0.459
p 0.002**IMPROVED
N 45
*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001
APPENDIX O
Suggested Timeline for Projects
Two-Three Weeks
Prior to Project
Getting Ready
Send "hello" letter to partner teacher/s and test hardware and software. Develop a
basic user guide or worksheet for your students, and include new vocabulary and
terminology. Establish a dedicated bulleting board in class for the project.
Give students a computer interest survey to establish prior computer background,
ability level, areas of interest , and ideas for projects.
Introduce the concept of e-mail to students. Give them time to learn the software
and feel comfortable with it. Teach vocabulary, software instructions and review
learning methods (cooperative learning and process writing, for example).
Week One Beginning Student Interaction
Students send test messages and exchange lists of student names, e-mail addresses,
and street addresses (for sending photos and packages). Teachers send "welcome"
letters to students in partner class/es and explain project goals, timelines,
evaluation methods, and student roles.
Week Two Student Introductions and Surveys
Send student introductions or "ice breaker" activities (poems, short biographical
sketches, etc.). This is also a good time to send a simple survey. Ask partners about
their favorite foods, music, sports, the size of their school, school activities, special
characteristics of their community, etc.
Week Three Planning the Project
Have students discuss their ideas in class and on-line. You might even sponsor a
contest to see which group comes up with the best idea. Negotiate and develop
ideas in partnership with your partner school/s.
Project Weeks Exchanging Student Work
Agree upon a project and set a reasonable time schedule. Remember to send at
least one message each week—even if only to update partners on your progress.
Teachers should schedule periodic evaluations as student work progresses. If
something is not working, make appropriate changes as needed.
Towards End of
Project
Metacognitive Focus on Writing
Students write and talk about their own writing. What are the strengths and
Roseanne Greenfield Collaborative E-mail Exchange for Teaching Secondary ESL…
Language Learning & Technology 68
weaknesses of their submissions? Which are their favorite pieces and why are they
effective? What needs to be improved on?
Peer Evaluation
Using the writing process, students peer critique each other's written work and
revise and polish drafts for publication.
Peer critiques can be done with partners in respective classes, as well as by pairing
up with a partner from your partner school via e-mail. Using a rubric for evaluation
is helpful.
Organizing your Publication
Select and edit articles received for your project. Consider graphics, others
inclusions and cost. Teachers work with students to compile and print out the final
product.
Final Week Closure
Students evaluate their project (on-line and in class) and come to a closure. This
process can include "goodbye" letters, displays of realia from partner classes,
exchanging addresses (street and e-mail) for the future and enjoying the final
publication.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Roseanne Greenfield teaches English at Hong Kong University's School of Professional and Continuing
Education.
E-mail: roseanne@greenfield-thong.com
REFERENCES
Barker, T. T., & Kemp, F. O. (1990). Network theory: A postmodern pedagogy for the writing
Classroom. In C. Handa (Ed.), Computers and community: Teaching Composition in the twenty-first
century. Portsmouth, NH: Bonyton/Cook Publishers.
Barson, J., Frommer, J., & Schwartz, M. (1993). Foreign language learning using e- mail in a task-
oriented perspective: Interuniversity experiments in communication and collaboration. Journal of Science
Education and Technology, 2, 565-584.
Beauvois, M. H., & Elledge, J. (1996). Personality types and megabytes: Student attitudes toward
computer mediated communication (CMC) in the language classroom. CALICO Journal, 13(2/3), 27-45.
Benremouga, K. (1995). ESL students' perspectives on computer-assisted language learning.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Kansas, Lawrence.
Brandl, K. (2002). Integrating Internet-based reading materials into the foreign language curriculum:
From teacher-to-student-centered approaches. Language Learning & Technology, 6(3), 87-107.
Carter, L. (1989, March). Telecommunications and networked personal computers: Opening up the
classroom. Paper presented at the Conference on College Composition and Communication, Seattle, WA.
Chapelle, C. (1997). Call in the year 2000: Still in search of research paradigms? Language Learning &
Technology, 1(1), 19-43. Retrieved February 3, 1999, from http://polyglot.cal.msu.edu/llt/vol1num1/
chapelle/; now available at http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/chapelle/default.html
Cohen, M., & Riel, M. (1989). The effect of distant audiences on students. American Educational
Research Journal, 26(2), 143-59.
Roseanne Greenfield Collaborative E-mail Exchange for Teaching Secondary ESL…
Language Learning & Technology 69
Cononelos, T., & Oliva, M. (1993). Using computer networks to enhance foreign language/culture
education. Foreign Language Annals, 26, 252-34.
Cooper, M. M., & Selfe, C. L. (1990). Computer conferences and learning: Authority, resistance, and
internally persuasive discourse. College English, 52(8), 847-873.
Cummins, J., & Sayers, D. (1990). Education 2001: Learning networks and educational reform.
Computers in Schools, 7(1/2), 1-29.
Cummins, J., & Sayers, D. (1995). Brave new schools. New York: St. Martin's Press.
Egbert, J., Jessup, L., & Valacich, J. (1991). Interactive CALL for groups: New technologies for ESL.
CAELL Journal, 2, 18-24.
Galvin, J.M. (1985). Teleconferencing brings the world to the classroom. Social Studies, 76, 236-237.
Ganszauge, M., Hult, J., Sajavaara, K., & Kontinnen, R. (1994). The computer in the English language
cassroom. Scandinavian Journal of Educational Research, 38, 159-174.
Garrett, N. (1991). Technology in the service of language learning: Trends and issues. Modern Language
Journal, 75(1), 74-101.
Gonzalez-Bueno. M. (1998). The effects of electronic mail on Spanish L2 discourse. Language Learning
& Technology, 1(2), pp. 55-70. Retrieved December 14, 2001, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num2/article3/
default.html
Johnson, D. W. (1994). Research methods in educational management. Harlow, England: Longman.
Kern, R. (1995). Restructuring classroom interaction with networked computers: Effects on quantity and
characteristics of language production. Modern Language Journal, 79, 457-476.
Kern, R. (1996). Computer-mediated communication: Using e-mail exchanges to explore personal
histories in two cultures. In M. Warschauer (Ed.), Telecollaboration in foreign language learning:
proceedings of the Hawaii symposium (pp. 105-109). Honolulu: University of Hawaii, Second Language
Teaching & Curriculum Center
Klemm, R., & Snell, D. (1995). Enriching computer-mediated group learning by coupling constructivism
with collaborative learning. Journal of Instructional Science and Technology, 1(2), 1-11. Retrieved
January 21, 1999, from http://www.usq.edu.au/electpub/e-jist/klemm.htm
Langston, M. D., & Batson, T. W. (1990) The social shifts invited by working collaboratively on
computer networks: The INFI project. In C. Handa (Ed.), Computers and community: Teaching
composition in the twenty-first century (pp. 140-159). Portsmouth, NH: Bonyton/Cook Publishers.
Merriam, S. B. (1988). Case study research in education: A qualitative approach. San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass.
Patton, M. Q. (1990). Qualitative evaluation and research methods. Newbury Park, CA: Sage
Publications.
Phinney, M. (1989). Computers, composition, and second language teaching. In M. C. Penningto (Ed.),
Teaching languages with computers (pp. 81-96). La Jolla, CA: Athelstan Publications.
Pratt, E., & Sullivan, N. (1994, March). Comparison of ESL writers in networked and regular classrooms.
Paper presented at the 28th Annual TESOL Convention, Baltimore, MD.
Seliger, H. W., & Shohamy, E. (1989). Second language research methods. Oxford, England: Oxford
University Press.
Roseanne Greenfield Collaborative E-mail Exchange for Teaching Secondary ESL…
Language Learning & Technology 70
Sproull, L., & Kiesler, S. (1991). Connections: New ways of working in the networked organization.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Sudman, S. (1982). Asking questions: A practical guide to questionnaire design. San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass Publishers.
Sullivan, N. (1993). Teaching writing on a computer network. TESOL Journal, 3(1), 34-35.
Tella, S. (1991). Introducing international communications networks and electronic mail into foreign
language classrooms: A case study in Finnish senior secondary schools. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, Helsingin Yliopisto, Finland.
Tella, S. (1992a). Boys, girls and e-mail: A case study in Finnish senior secondary schools (Research
Report No. 110). Helsinki: University of Helsinki, Department of Teacher Education.
Tella, S. (1992b). Talking shop via e-mail: A thematic and linguistic analysis of electronic mail
communication (Research Report No. 99). Helsinki: University of Helsinki, Department of Teacher
Education.
Warschauer, M. (1995). E-mail for English teaching. Bloomington, IL: Teachers of English to Speakers
of Other Languages (TESOL).
Warschauer, M. (1996a). Motivational aspects of using computers for writing and communication.
Honolulu: University of Hawaii, Second Language Teaching & Curriculum Center.
Warschauer, M. (1996b). Computer-assisted language learning: An introduction. In S. Fotos (Ed.),
Multimedia language teaching (pp. 3-10). Tokyo: Logos International.
Warschauer, M., Turbee, L., & Roberts, B. (1996). Computer learning networks and student
empowerment. SYSTEM, 24(1), 1-14.
