Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num1/gonzalez/
January 2003, Volume 7, Number 1
pp. 86-104
Copyright © 2002, ISSN 1094-3501 86
 DESIGNING TASK-BASED CALL TO PROMOTE INTERACTION:
EN BUSCA DE ESMERALDAS
Marta González-Lloret
University of Hawai'i
ABSTRACT
Developing effective language teaching materials based on second language acquisition
principles is a priority which needs to be addressed in all language teaching areas. The field of
computer-assisted language learning (CALL) is no exception. "En Busca de Esmeraldas" is a
CALL activity delivered via the Internet and based on principles of language teaching (Doughty
& Long, 2002; Long, in press) and on Chapelle's (1998) proposals for developing multimedia,
grounded in SLA research.
The first part of this article presents the steps necessary for designing an effective language
learning tool to foster communication and negotiation, taking into consideration the importance
of supporting integral education, using tasks, providing elaborated input and feedback, and
promoting collaborative learning. The second part of the article reports on a study conducted
using such a tool to determine whether communication and negotiation occurred, and whether the
negotiation was similar to that reported in previous studies that claim such negotiation facilitates
the comprehension process.
INTRODUCTION
All areas of education are undergoing changes in the way teaching and learning are perceived. Teacher-
centered, class-lecture based, and structural-syllabus instruction are giving way to a more student-
centered, hands-on, practical, and flexible approach (Shank & Cleary, 1994). The field of second
language teaching is no exception in this paradigm shift. New theories and applications of language
teaching are exploring the benefits of new methods and pedagogical approaches, among them task-based
language teaching (Crookes & Gass, 1993; Long, in press) and focus on form (Doughty & Williams,
1998; Long, 1991a, 1998; Long & Robinson, 1998).
Parallel to these changes in education is a technological revolution realized in the increasing use of
computers for learning, the implementation of the Internet, and the rise of network-based teaching. Until
now, many CALL activities were created with the sole rationale that computers are useful and motivating
for students, although such activities lacked a solid research base. Recently, however, the field of CALL
has begun to undergo self-evaluation, and researchers are now claiming that in order for the field to
progress, it is necessary to look to SLA principles that make language teaching effective (Chapelle, 1998;
Doughty, 1987; Levy, 1999).
The Rationale for Network-Based Activities
Design, preparation, and programming of a computer-based activity are highly time-consuming, and
typically entail more difficulties in development than any paper-and-pencil classroom activity. Therefore,
in order to justify the investment in a CALL activity, there must be a rationale for why it is implemented
via the computer instead of another, less resource-demanding form. Simulations are one type of
computer-based activity that allows students to be immersed and actively involved in an environment that
is not otherwise accessible (Crookall & Oxford, 1990; Higgins & Morgenstern, 1990; Scarcella &
Crookall, 1990). The computer, thus, becomes a tool that cannot be easily substituted by any other
language teaching procedure and, therefore, the work invested in the creation of the materials is justified.
Marta González-Lloret Designing Task-Based CALL to Promote Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 87
Furthermore, CALL activities may be based in a network, such as the Internet, presenting several
advantages: rapid global access at any time from any computer with Internet access; integration of
graphics, audio, and text; and ease and low cost of publication (Kern & Warschauer, 2000). In sum,
network-based simulations offer access to an otherwise unattainable environment that translates into
language input and tasks for second language (L2) students.
L2 Interaction
Several theories postulate a relationship between language acquisition and output during the interaction
process (Pica, Holliday, Lewis, & Morgenthaler, 1989; Swain & Lapkin, 1995), between language
acquisition and input (Long, 1996), and between language acquisition and negotiation of meaning (Ellis,
1999; Ellis & He, 1999; Gass, 1997; Gass & Varonis, 1989, 1994; Loschky, 1994; Lyster, 1998a, 1998b;
Lyster & Ranta, 1997; Pica, 1994; Pica, Lincoln-Porter, Paninos, & Linnell, 1996). Some interaction
studies also indicate that negotiation with a teacher in the classroom is valuable for language acquisition
(Ellis, Tanaka, & Yamazaki, 1994; Pica, 1991). Hegelheimer and Chapelle (2000), following Long
(1996), posit that interaction may not be effective by itself, and that noticing input may be necessary for
language acquisition (Schmidt, 1990). They also state that learners are most likely to notice linguistic
form during interaction, and that the most useful interactions are "those which help learners comprehend
the semantics and syntax of input and which help learners to improve the comprehensibility of their own
linguistic output" (Hegelheimer & Chapelle, p. 42).
In addition, studies that focused on student dyads have suggested that interaction facilitates
comprehension better than conditions without the interaction component (Gass & Varonis, 1994;
Loschky, 1994; Pica, Doughty, & Young, 1986; Polio & Gass, 1998). Other studies have also pointed out
a positive effect of negotiation for meaning on the quality of the students' immediate production
(Holliday, 1995; Linnell, 1995, reviewed in Gass, Mackey, & Pica, 1998). Additional findings suggest
that the interaction process frequently results in improvement in the speech of lower level speakers.
Moreover, those speakers who have already acquired a form did not change it as a result of their peers'
errors, but they could help to model and correct this form (Gass & Varonis, 1989). In addition, it has been
suggested that during language interaction, both native (NS) and non-native (NNS) speakers provided
their interlocutors with input modified towards comprehensibility (Pica et al., 1996). According to
research, not only is language input important for SLA, but output may increase the control that learners
have over already acquired structures, permanently restructuring the learners' interlanguage (Donato,
1994; LaPierre, 1994; Noboyushi & Ellis, 1993).
Several CALL studies have also examined the interaction of students engaged in computer-mediated
communication (CMC). These studies present data collected while students are "chatting" (in a written
form) using a computer as the communication instrument (Beauvois & Eledge, 1996; Blake, 2000; Kern,
1995; Kitade 2000; Warschauer, 1996). The interaction analyzed in this article is not CMC. Rather, it is
more similar to traditional face-to-face interaction, with an added component, the computer, which serves
not as a communication vehicle but as a presenter of materials to engage students in conversation.
THE DESIGN PRINCIPLES
The general organization of "En Busca de Esmeraldas" (In Search of Emeralds)1 places students in a plot
in which they are hired to help find a document at the University of Hawai‘i. Students have the choice of
either reading a letter or listening to a message on their answering machine from a woman in Spain who
would like to hire them to search for a document at the University. Students have the option of accepting
or rejecting the job by writing and submitting an electronic letter. If they accept the job, they then have
three choices: listening, reading, or working with a partner to follow directions while engaged in a three-
dimensional environment. The first option allows the student to listen to directions while navigating the
three-dimensional simulation through a building. The second option allows the student to read the
Marta González-Lloret Designing Task-Based CALL to Promote Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 88
directions while navigating through the building. And the third option encourages students to work in
pairs, using the L2 to communicate. During the simulation (for all three options), one of the students has
the directions for finding the document, while the other student navigates the simulation. The directions
require that the students move through a building to find a key that opens the door to an office where they
can find a hidden map. The last task consists of writing back to the employer to inform her that the
document has been found and to ask her for further instructions. The complete activity can be found at
http://marta.lll.hawaii.edu/enbusca.2
In order to create this activity, two sets of principles, based on SLA research, were taken into account:
Long's principles of language teaching (Doughty & Long, 2002; Long, in press) and Chapelle's principles
for developing multimedia CALL (Chapelle, 1998).
Language Teaching Methodological Principles
In order to select design features that had a strong base in SLA research, the Language Teaching
Methodological Principles (TMP) proposed by Long (in press) and adapted by Doughty (2000a) were
used as guidelines. Doughty's adaptation divides these principles into four categories: activities, input,
learning processes, and learners.
Table 1. Language Teaching Methodological Principles (adapted from Doughty, 2000a)
ACTIVITIES
1. Support integral education
2. Use tasks, not texts, as the units of analysis
INPUT
3. Elaborate input
4. Provide rich input
LEARNING PROCESSES
5. Encourage inductive/"chunk" learning
6. Focus on form
7. Provide negative feedback
8. Respect learner "syllabuses"/developmental processes
LEARNERS
9. Promote cooperative/collaborative learning
10. Individualize instruction
TMP 1: Support Integral Education
This principle refers to the concept of "learning by doing." For "En Busca de Esmeraldas," students take
on the main role in a developing story. The overall activity is designed so that, upon its completion,
students have not only immersed themselves in the simulated target language environment, but have also
become practiced in some computer skills, such as writing and sending e-mail, and navigating through a
3-D environment, all done in L2.
TMP 2: Use Tasks as the Unit of Analysis
Task-Based Language Teaching (TBLT) is the pedagogy that best fits the principle of "learning by
doing." According to Long (1985, p. 91, 2000), there are four main steps necessary to develop TBLT:
Marta González-Lloret Designing Task-Based CALL to Promote Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 89
1. Conduct task-based needs analysis to identify target tasks.
2. Classify the target tasks into task types.
3. Develop pedagogic tasks from the task types.
4. Select and sequence the pedagogic tasks to form a task-based syllabus.
Although the activity presented here is not part of a task-based syllabus, the steps for a TBLT program
were considered in the design of the activity. A small needs analysis eliciting some instructional and
pedagogic needs was conducted among students and faculty in the Spanish department at the University
of Hawai‘i. The responses indicated that there was an evident need for a medium that would allow
instruction and practice in giving and receiving directions in an efficient and realistic manner. The 3-D
simulation was designed to meet this apparent need. From the needs analysis three target tasks were
identified: listen and understand directions, read and understand directions, and follow directions. They
were then classified into more general task types: receive directions and follow directions. Next, several
pedagogical tasks were created: listen to an answering machine message and identify what needs to be
accomplished (view it), follow the directions given orally on a tape (view it), follow directions given in a
letter (view it), and work with a partner in exchanging information (view it). Finally, the tasks were
sequenced in a chronological manner, following the steps for the document search.
In addition to Long's TBLT model, the complexity of the tasks was also considered for the task design.
Since the early 1980s there has been important research on measuring task complexity (Brindley, 1987;
Brown, Anderson, Shillcock, & Yule, 1984; Candlin, 1984; Nunan, 1989; for a review, see Robinson, in
press). Robinson distinguishes between task complexity (the cognitive demands of the task), task
difficulty (depending on learner factors), and task conditions (the interactive demands of tasks). He states
that task complexity should be the only consideration when selecting a task, since the other two cannot be
anticipated.3 Robinson proposes planning time, number of tasks, prior knowledge, and number of
elements as possible dimensions of complexity. All these concepts were taken into consideration when
developing the present materials. In addition, "En Busca de Esmeraldas" was evaluated by 42 participants
who were enrolled in their fourth language semester at the University of Hawai‘i, to assess the design
features as well as the difficulty of the task. The evaluation consisted of a questionnaire (see Appendix)
with 23 statements rated on a scale from 5=strongly agree to 1=strongly disagree. The mean was
calculated for every statement. The results of the students' evaluations were uniform, and the level of
difficulty of the activity seemed to be appropriate for the group (see Table 2).
Table 2. Students' Answers to Questionnaire
Mean SD
text is easy to understand 4.19 0.74
messages are easy to understand 3.90 0.83
movie is easy to follow 4.16 0.73
appropriate for level 4.38 0.58
interesting activity 4.71 0.59
helps me understand directions 4.21 0.79
Based on the results of the students' evaluations, some changes were made to the activity. Directions were
rewritten where they seemed unclear, and the sound files were compressed for faster uploading.
TMP 3: Elaborate Input
TMP 4: Provide Rich Input
Rich, elaborated output has been shown to be more effective for language acquisition than simplified
input, which provides unnatural use of language and deprives the students of items necessary for language
development. Elaborated input has also been shown to be more effective than natural, unmodified input,
Marta González-Lloret Designing Task-Based CALL to Promote Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 90
which may be linguistically too dense and may lack items that could aid comprehension (Long, 1997;
Parker & Chaudron, 1987).
In order to provide clear, understandable, but not simplified language, the input for the different tasks was
created as follows: Two native speakers of Spanish, other than the researcher, examined the texts to make
sure the language used was natural and appropriate to convey the message. Ten first-year students then
read the texts to identify potentially unfamiliar words. These words were kept in the text, but modified
input was provided to help students comprehend those words by glossing them through synonyms,
antonyms, paraphrases, definitions, or links to an on-line dictionary. When the student placed the cursor
over an underlined word, a small window opened in the top left corner of the screen. It disappeared when
the cursor was moved away.
TMP 5: Encourage Inductive/"Chunk" Learning
Several theories propose that superior language acquisition by children as compared to adults may be the
result of children learning items as formulaic sentences (Wray, 2000, cited in Doughty & Long, 2002).
Doughty and Long also suggest that the incorporation of whole "chunks" of the input may be beneficial
for adult language learners when performing a task. Following this idea, "En Busca de Esmeraldas"
incorporates those "chunks," or common phrases, necessary for giving and following directions such as
"dobla a la derecha/izquierda" (turn right/left), "sigue adelante" (go straight). These "chunks" were also
enhanced with color for saliency (view it).
TMP 6: Focus on Form
For "En Busca de Esmeraldas" to be effective, it was very important to pay attention to the learning
processes involved, so that the activity would not only promote interaction, but the language produced by
the students would also be as accurate as possible for their level. Research has shown that some type of
teacher intervention is desirable to achieve linguistic accuracy (Doughty & Williams, 1998; Pavesi, 1986;
Schmidt, 1983, 1993). Focus on Form (FonF) allows L2 teachers to implement this principle in an
effective manner. According to Long (2000), "FonF refers to how attentional resources are allocated and
involved briefly drawing students' attention to linguistic elements (words, collocations, grammatical
structures, pragmatic patterns, etc.) in context, as they arise incidentally in lessons whose overriding focus
is on meaning, or communication" (emphasis in original; p. 185; see also Doughty, 2001; Doughty &
Williams, 1998; Long, 1991a, 1998; Long & Robinson, 1998).
While students were working with "En Busca de Esmeraldas," teachers provided help with common and
individual linguistic problems. For details about the issues and limitations of implementing FonF in a
classroom setting, see Doughty (2001).
TMP 7: Provide Negative Feedback
Intervention in the form of feedback has also proved to be effective for language acquisition, both in L1
and L2 settings (for an overview see Long, Inagaki, & Ortega, 1998). "En Busca de Esmeraldas" included
two possibilities: a) feedback provided by another student during the negotiation of meaning; and b)
feedback provided by the teacher as a response to students' written output, submitted by e-mail. The first
type of feedback is difficult to control from the designers' point of view, since it depends on the
participants. Nevertheless, if the instructor is going to participate in the activity, recasting is
recommended since it is unobtrusive and more effective than modeling (Long, 1999). The pedagogic
technique chosen to implement the second type is at the discretion of the teacher supplying the e-mail
feedback.
TMP 8: Respect Learner "Syllabuses"/Developmental Processes
This principle advocates that content should be determined by students' needs and psycholinguistic
readiness for the content. Following this principle, "En Busca de Esmeraldas" originated from a needs
Marta González-Lloret Designing Task-Based CALL to Promote Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 91
analysis that identified practice giving and following directions in a realistic environment as important.
As for the students' psycholinguistic readiness, examination of students' writing showed that they had
been exposed to and started to use directions, but that they still did not do so in a native-like manner.
TMP 9: Promote Collaborative Learning
Cooperative learning occurs during the interaction among small groups of students. According to
educational researchers and psychologists, peer-interaction is the most successful form since it promotes
support, acceptance, and social development (Slavin, 1990; Wells, Ling, & Maher, 1990). One of the key
concepts of cooperative learning is the importance of a high success rate that results from working
collaboratively on tasks. There is considerable research from an educational perspective on the value of
task completion as a preferred method of instruction (Sharan, 1990) that supports the choice of a task-
based approach for a network-based activity. Furthermore, cooperative language learning embodies the
idea that language has a predominant social function and endorses the "social interactionist theory" in
which language finds its use in functions relevant to the learner's immediate communicative needs
(Doughty, 2000b).
TMP 10: Individualize Instruction
The individualization of instruction based on parameters such as language learning aptitude, motivation,
cognitive style, interests, and learning strategies has proved to be effective for language learners (Doughty
& Long, 2002). "En Busca de Esmeraldas" includes several tasks that can be accomplished through
different media (audio and visual) in an effort to accommodate different learning strategies, interests, and
cognitive styles. Although for Doughty and Long, the idea of "individualization" is not synonymous with
"autonomous learning," an added advantage of using computers for teaching is the possibility of
providing distance instruction. This is especially the case with network-based activities, since they can be
accessed from any location where the Internet is available. This feature allows for independent,
autonomous, and class learning. Students can access the task as many times as desired, whenever it is
most convenient for them.
Principles for Developing Multimedia CALL
In addition to following Long's (in press) general methodological principles for language teaching,
Chapelle's (1998) "seven hypotheses relevant for developing multimedia CALL" (p. 23) were taken into
account:
1. The linguistic characteristics of target language input need to be made salient for "input
enhancement."
2. Learners should receive help in comprehending semantic and syntactic aspects of linguistic input.
3. Learners need to have opportunities to produce target language output.
4. Learners need to notice errors in their own output, and they need to correct these errors.
5. Learners need to correct their linguistic output.
6. Learners need to engage in target language interaction whose structure can be modified for
negotiation of meaning.
7. Learners should engage in L2 tasks designed to maximize opportunities for good interaction.
The relevant aspects of SLA, according to Chapelle (1998), are the noticing of input, the intake or
comprehended language that may help develop the language system, and the negotiation of meaning that
facilitates second language development. Chapelle's proposals coincide with several aspects of Long's (in
press) general methodological principles for language teaching. Both emphasize the importance of
enabling the production of target language output by engaging the learners in L2 interaction (hypothesis
Marta González-Lloret Designing Task-Based CALL to Promote Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 92
3), in which they negotiate meaning to accomplish a task (hypotheses 6 and 7). "En Busca de Esmeraldas"
incorporates Chapelle's suggestion that students need help understanding syntactic and semantic aspects
of the language by providing modified input to aid comprehension (hypothesis 2). In addition, the input
was also enhanced with color and a larger font to make the directions more salient (hypothesis 1;
Sharwood-Smith, 1993; view it).
Summary
In order to be effective for language learning, the design of "En Busca de Esmeraldas" integrates
methodological principles of language teaching that are well grounded in SLA principles. Based on these
principles, the activity includes a series of tasks that engage students in the learning process by promoting
interaction. The input presented was modified to be salient and elaborated, not simplified. In addition, the
design also included features that promote learner autonomy.
A STUDY OF L2 INTERACTION DURING THE 3-D SIMULATION
Given that oral interaction and negotiation of meaning are potentially important for the acquisition of
language, and that well planned task-based activities incorporating SLA principles could foster
communication and negotiation, the 3-D simulation portion of the network-based activity was analyzed to
determine if such communication and negotiation occurred, and if it did, whether it was similar to that
reported in previous studies (Gass & Varonis, 1994; Loschky, 1994; Pica, Doughty, & Young, 1986;
Polio & Gass, 1998).
Negotiation Model
The negotiation model proposed by Doughty (2000b) was adopted for this study (Figure 1). According to
Doughty, the essential feature of the negotiation sequence "is the opportunity that is provided to the
learner to process utterances in the L2 which become more comprehensible" (p. 50). Her model
incorporates a trigger, a signal, a response, and a reaction. A trigger is "an utterance or part of an
utterance that is not understood" (p. 48). A signal is used by the interlocutor to express a lack of
comprehension. A response then comes from the first speaker trying to repair the problem. A reaction is
an extension or a response to the repair. This model is similar to the one employed by Gass and Varonis
(1985), although they use the term "indicator" instead of "signal." Gass and Varonis also included two
types of responses: direct (often wh- questions) and indirect (repetition, use of intonation). In this paper,
direct and indirect responses are considered without further differentiation since both are part of the
negotiation process.
Trigger → Signal → Response → Reaction
lexical item confirmation check repetition exclamation
phonetic error clarification request expansion non-verbal
language complexity comprehension check reformulation correction
task complexity Use of L1
Figure 1. Negotiation process (sequence adapted from Doughty, 2000b, p. 49)
To operationalize signals, Long's (1991a) confirmation checks, clarification requests, and comprehension
checks were used. These types of input modifications are used to negotiate meaning. Also following
Long, the responses in the data were identified as either repetition, expansion, or reformulation.
Subjects
Twelve English-speaking intermediate level students of Spanish as a foreign language at the University of
Hawai‘i participated in the study. All but one had taken three semesters of Spanish in the same program.
Marta González-Lloret Designing Task-Based CALL to Promote Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 93
Although all 12 students participated, the recordings of two dyads (4 students) were not included because
the quality of the tape made transcription impossible. All had been exposed to and had started to use
directions such as dobla a la derecha/izquierda (turn right/left), sigue adelante (go straight), and
entra/sale (enter/exit), as shown by previous examination of their writing, but they still did not do so in a
native-like way.
Materials and Procedures
The task consisted of a 3-D simulation, structured as an information gap activity. During this task, one of
the participants was given the necessary written directions to convey to his/her partner to navigate
through the simulation. Tape-recorders were placed behind each computer station, and, in order to be as
unobtrusive as possible, they were preset to record. The students formed pairs, without teacher
intervention, and assigned themselves the roles of instruction-giver or navigator. The teacher gave general
instructions on how to navigate, and encouraged students to ask and answer questions. Instruction-givers
were told not to show the written information to the navigators. In addition to the class instructor, four
other instructors assisted students with technical problems and observed several dyads.
Data Coding and Analysis
Four dialogues lasting between 35 and 55 minutes were transcribed and coded to examine the
interactional modifications that took place. The transcription system used was fairly standard, but was not
adopted from any particular source. Several periods were used to indicate a longer pause. Colors were
used for faster identification of breakdowns in communication and for revealing how the errors were
followed up and repaired. The language used during the negotiation was then analyzed following the
negotiation model discussed earlier (Figure 1). Triggers, signals, responses, and reactions were identified,
classified, and color-coded (red for triggers, green for signals, blue for responses, and pink for reactions).
English translation is provided between brackets.
The data showed a variety of triggers: lexical items that prompted the negotiation for meaning, phonetic
errors that mislead the listener, language complexity of the written instructions, and level of task
complexity. Although the complexity of the task was reduced by allowing students to learn to navigate
the 3-D environment and become familiar with the computer settings before the task was initiated, the
data included some instances where students seem to be have been having some technical problems due to
the task rather than the language needed to complete it.
As for types of responses, expansion, repetition, and reformulation were manifest although not abundant.
Reactions were not as evident in the data since in many instances they were non-verbal and occurred in
the 3-D environment. Nevertheless, there were several instances of reactions that varied from simple
exclamations of understanding to corrections of the trigger. These examples from the coded data help
illustrate the variety and complexity of the negotiation process.
Table 3. Example 1
Students' language Translation Type of Response
S7* al salir del ascensor when you leave the elevator Trigger -- lexical item
S8
oh, aquí pero no podemos ir a
otro! solamente dos cuartos
here but we can not go other! only
two rooms
Signal -- clarification
request
S7 donde está el ascensor? where is the elevator?
S8
que es el ascensor? no
comprendo! significa ascensor?
what is the "ascensor"? I don't
understand, meaning "ascensor"?
Signal -- clarification
request
S7 en ingles es elevator in English is the elevator Response -- English use
S8 oh, quieres ir a otro piso? oh! you want to go to another floor? Reaction -- exclamation
*S7 = student 7
Marta González-Lloret Designing Task-Based CALL to Promote Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 94
Table 4. Example 2
Students' language Translation Type of Response
S8
tenemos que decir como hacer con
/lleva/
we have to say how to do with
"key" (mispronounced)
Trigger -- phonetic error
S7 /lleva/? (puzzled) Signal -- clarification request
S8 so
Response --
repetition/reformulation
S7 llave key
S8 encotramos la llave si si pero we found the key yes, yes but Reaction -- correction
Table 5. Example 3
Students' language Translation Type of Response
S5 a la izquierda ... deja ... no arrow? to the left ... stop ... no arrow? Trigger -- lexical item
S6 la flecha the arrow
S5 doble otra ... entre ... no? turn another ... enter ... no?
S6 no puedo I can't Signal -- clarification request
S5 a la iz derecha to the left right Response -- reformulation
S6 (sound of moving like a plane/bee) Reaction -- non-verbal
S7 entre ... aaah enter ... aaah Reaction -- exclamation
. = pause;
… = longer pause
Although most of the time the process followed a more linear path, in some instances there were several
processes embedded in each other, and a reaction was not always apparent. Example 4 (Table 6)
illustrates this type of complex negotiation.
Table 6. Example 4
Students' language Translation Type of Response
S1
sube hasta el cuatro piso y al salir
del ascensor dobla a la izquierda ...
Inmediatamente despues ... dobla a
la derecha
go up to the fourth floor and
when you come out of the
elevator turn left ...
immediately after ... turn right
Trigger -- lexical item
S2 [giggles]
S1 y sigue todo . JESUS!! and follow . JESUS!! Signal -- clarification request
S2
uno a tiempo
one at a time
Response -- repetition +
trigger
S1 ok wait … Salir del ascensor
ok wait ... Go out of the
elevator
Signal -- clarification request
S2 ascensor ascensor (mumbles) elevator elevator
S1 a la izquierda ... y [xxx] ... a la to the left ... and ... to the
Response -- repetition +
trigger
S2 izquierda? (asks for confirmation) left?
Signal -- confirmation
request
S1 oh . a la izquierda oh . to the left Response -- repetition
S2 izquierda es left is
Signal-- confirmation
request
S1 oh! oh! Reaction -- exclamation
. = pause
… = longer pause
Marta González-Lloret Designing Task-Based CALL to Promote Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 95
The coding of the data also included the number of turns, number of utterances, t-units, and c-units
(communication units), and noted how many of these were read from the written directions. The
definitions for these units were adopted from Long (1991a). Turns are "one or more utterances bounded
by silence or the speech of another"; an utterance is " a stream of speech under a single intonation contour
bounded by silence or the speech of another"; a t-unit is defined as "one main clause plus a subordinate
clause attached to or embedded in it"; and a c-unit is "a t-unit or isolated phrase not accompanied by a
verb, but which has communicative value" (Long, 1991b, p. 1). This study used communication units (c-
units) as the primary units of analysis, since they most appropriately account for those utterances that
were not complete, lacked a verb, or were simply exclamations, but were used as elements for
communication. The count of the c-units included both Spanish and English elements, since both were
used to convey information; and when two words were used contiguously conveying the same meaning,
one in English and one in Spanish, they counted as one c-unit (e.g., wait, ya, si = 3 utterances, 2 c-units;
wait, ok, yes).
Results
Once the data were coded for negotiation and interaction features, a number of analyses were undertaken
to reveal the nature of the L2 simulation discourse. By comparing the proportion of turns taken by
participants in a dyad (Table 7) it can be verified that the task was constructed well enough to elicit
language from both participants. This result confirms that of Gass and Varonis (1985) who found that this
type of task elicited as much language interaction as that where both participants held half of the required
information.
Table 7. Account of Units for All Participants
Turns English Utterances t-units c-units reading*
S1 54 16 77 38 83 21
S2 48 18 63 13 67 0
S3 50 0 63 30 67 7
S4 49 5 64 13 71 2
S5 40 7 56 24 64 13
S6 39 2 65 29 75 4
S7 56 1 92 44 104 13
S8 55 10 115 49 125 10
*reading = not their own utterances; reading from written directions
S1, S3, S5, S7 = direction givers
S2, S4, S6, S8 = navigators
In addition, the interaction took place mainly in the target language despite the fact that one of the
participants in each dyad had written instructions, and that both participants spoke the same L1.
Table 8. Percentages of Target Language Use
S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 S6 S7 S8
55% 73% 90% 90% 69% 92% 87% 84%
S1 exhibited the lowest amount of L2 use (55%). Due to his limited command of the target language,
97% of his t-units were read or in English. Further analysis of this participant's language during an
informal oral interview revealed that his command of the language was considerably lower than that of
the other seven participants.
Since the percentage of turns by participant is not a primary indicator of negotiation, further analysis
examined the triggers that indicated a break in communication, and the signals and responses that
constituted the interaction. The analysis of signals and responses (Table 9) showed that signals were used
Marta González-Lloret Designing Task-Based CALL to Promote Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 96
mainly by participants in the navigator role, and the preferred signal was a clarification request, followed
by a confirmation request. On the other hand, responses were produced both by direction giver mainly in
the form of repetition, and by the navigator by using English. Although at first glance this result was
surprising, a more detailed analysis of when the use of English had taken place by participants in the
navigator role showed that most of the instances had occurred between S1 and S2, where S1, the direction
giver, had a much lower command of the language and often inquired about the translation of words
he/she only could read in the written directions.
Table 9. Signals and Responses
Direction giver Navigator Total
Confirmation requests
2
7.4%
25
92.6%
27
100%
Clarification requests
8
17.4%
38
82.6%
46
100%
Signals
Comprehension checks
2
50%
2
50%
4
100%
Repetitions
16
72.7%
6
27.3%
22
100%
Expansions
8
100%
0
0%
8
100%
Reformulations
4
100%
0
0%
4
100%
Responses
Use of English
9
37.5%
15
62.5%
24
100%
The data contained only eight instances of expansion and four instances of reformulation. This is probably
because (a) explanation and reformulation may require a higher than intermediate-level command of the
target language to appear frequently; (b) explanation and reformulation are usually produced by the NS, if
there is one, in a dyad; and (c) the language abilities of the two participants were similar although in each
dyad one participant took the leading role.
The data were also analyzed to determine the most common type of trigger (Table10) and reaction.
Lexical items that were unknown to one or both of the participants accounted for most of the triggers that
initiated negotiation (approximately 53%), followed by language complexity (30%). Phonological errors
triggered a few of the negotiations (approximately 7%), a result consistent with the intention of the task to
elicit negotiation of meaning for task completion. Lexical items carry meaning necessary for the
completion of the task, but phonological errors usually do not impede comprehension.
Table 10. Triggers
Types Total number Total as %
Lexical 16 53.33%
Phonological 2 06.66%
Language complexity 9 30.00%
Task complexity 3 10.00%
The discourse was also examined for sequences that might reveal L2 acquisition. In two out of the four
interactions there are examples of a student correcting an error during a later interaction (i.e., after his/her
partner had produced the correct form). In example 5 (Table 11), S8 produced an erroneous form (/lleva/)
repeatedly. This was not understood by his interlocutor, S7, who first questioned and then repaired the
error. Several turns later, S8 produced the correct form. Of course, a follow up is needed before claiming
Marta González-Lloret Designing Task-Based CALL to Promote Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 97
that S8 has corrected this item in his/her interlanguage, but noticing the form and the overt correction
constitute an initial step towards the acquisition of the form.
Table 11. Example 5
Students' language Translation
S8
Ok (reading) escribe una carta diciendo que lo
has encontrado y preguntado cuando lo
necesitas y que debes hacer con el trabajo (end
of reading) Tenemos que escribir carta y
tenemos que decir como hacer con lleva
Ok (reading) write a letter telling what you have
found and asking when she needs it and what do
you need to do about the job (end of reading)
We have to write letter and we have to say how
to do with lleva
S7 lleva?
S8 Preguntando cuando: asking when
S7 (reading) Lo necesita (reading) She needs it
S8
When you need .. found .. when it is needed and
what you should do with it and that was the
/lleva/ si?
S7 Si yes
S8 So
S7 si llave yes key
S8 Necesitamos escribir una carta ahora we need to write a letter now
S7 Si. Pero. yes but
(they turn around and start talking in Spanish
with one of the invited instructors for a long
time about his private life)
T terminaron de escribir la carta? did you finish writing the letter?
S8
encotramos la llave .si si pero que necesitamos
escribir una carta?
we found the key yes yes But what do we need
to write a letter?
(red = trigger, green = signal, blue = response, pink = incorporation of negotiation)
This example also confirms that one learner not only does not pick up the other learner's errors, but can be
a model that would induce a correction (Bruton & Samuda, 1980; Gass & Varonis, 1989; Pica et al.,
1996).
Finally, this study revealed a variety of indicators of comprehension involved in the negotiation process:
41% non-verbal reactions (navigator placing cursor on the right place in the simulation), 34%
exclamations followed by the navigator correcting the cursor position in the simulation, and 25%
corrections of the trigger made by its originator (see Table 12).
Table 12. Reactions.
Type Total number Total as %
Non-verbal 41% 18
Exclamation 34% 15
Self-correction 25% 11
Marta González-Lloret Designing Task-Based CALL to Promote Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 98
DISCUSSION
These results show that the language produced by the participants during the simulation was typical of
negotiation for meaning, where the main emphasis is on the completion of the task, and where language is
used with its main communicative purpose in an economical way, without paying attention to the
production of long, accurate constructions. The students produced utterances very similar in type to those
produced by non-native speakers in the study by Pica et al. (1996). Pica et al. concluded that L2 students
can be a source of modified input, although limited, and that interaction between L2 students, although
not as rich as the interaction between native speaker and non-native speaker, does offer "data of
considerable quality, particularly in the area of feedback" (p. 80). As an improvement to the present
study, it would be interesting to form dyads of students that do not share the same L1 since this would
eliminate the possibilities of responding with their L1, and would force students to negotiate more
through repetition, expansion and reformulation (more similar to native-nonnative dyads).
Measuring comprehension is difficult, and this study was not specifically designed to measure
comprehension or learning, but rather to present an example of a CALL task designed to elicit L2
interaction between dyads of students and to examine the type of interaction that actually occurred.
Certainly, more research is necessary to assess the relationship between interaction and comprehension, to
find out what type of interaction leads to comprehension, and to discover how language comprehension
can be identified and measured.
If research indicates that negotiation leads to comprehension and ultimately to language acquisition, the
claim would have some important pedagogic implications for language teaching. Most learners, especially
those studying less commonly taught languages, may not have many occasions to interact with NSs,
especially in classroom settings. Therefore, pair work and student-centered activities could be an efficient
and beneficial substitute for native speakers. However, as Pica et al. (1996) state, NNSs' negotiation may
not provide the necessary input modification that would result in restructuring of the learner's
interlanguage. For this reason, interaction should not be limited to this type of negotiation. Negotiation
for meaning, as presented here, may have a beneficial role when used in combination with other
pedagogic principles that promote language acquisition.
CONCLUSION
The design of the network-based activity described and evaluated in this program was motivated by the
need to develop language teaching materials, especially CALL materials, that are well grounded in SLA
principles. "En Busca de Esmeraldas" was developed based on sound language teaching principles. "En
Busca de Esmeraldas" incorporates a sequence of tasks building towards a meaningful goal, designed to
support learning by doing. The input provided during the tasks is elaborated, to provide students with rich
input, shown by SLA research to be beneficial for language acquisition. Giving feedback was also
considered, and recasting suggested as the preferred feedback form. Finally the ordering of tasks was
designed to promote cooperative learning, in order to involve students in L2 interaction and negotiation,
while working towards a meaningful goal.
A case study of the L2 interaction generated by the 3-D simulation was also undertaken to asses whether
this task was effective in generating L2 interaction, the type of interaction, and whether this CALL
interaction was similar to that of previous research. Keeping in mind the relatively small number of
subjects, the results of the analysis nevertheless suggest that students engaged in L2 interaction negotiated
in ways similar to previous reports suggesting that this type of negotiation facilitates comprehension and
could lead to language acquisition. More research is needed in the areas of L2 interaction between
nonnative speakers and in the creation of effective CALL materials. It is important to keep in mind that
Marta González-Lloret Designing Task-Based CALL to Promote Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 99
well-designed, effective materials need to be grounded in language acquisition research and solid
language teaching principles.
NOTES
1. "En Busca de Esmeraldas" is a two-part network-based activity: Part one is the search for a map, and
part two is the search for the emeralds. This paper describes part one.
2. The simulation component of "En Busca de Esmeraldas" consisted of 23 Web pages designed with
Claris Homepage 3.0, which incorporated 23 image files, two audio files (created with Microsoft Sound
Recorder for Windows 98 and compressed and modified with Awave software), and two QTVR movie
files created with Quick Time VR software. These two movies constituted the simulation, and each one
was built from 60 digital pictures converted into six panoramic scenes, where the students could navigate
inside a three-dimensional (3-D) environment. The environment places students at the basement of a
building and allows them to navigate up and down the building, entering different corridors and doors.
In the 3-D environment, the students followed spoken or written directions, alone or as part of a
communicative activity. Although one could claim that this activity could be more effectively
implemented by using the "real-world" environment, 80 students trying to follow the same path inside a
building would create serious difficulties. The simulation eases the constraints that time and space impose
in actual language instruction.
3.This is a complex subject, and other aspects of cognitive demands may need to be considered such as
those associated with abstract/general and concrete/specific learning skills.
Marta González-Lloret Designing Task-Based CALL to Promote Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 100
APPENDIX
Students' Questionnaire
Please circle the most adequate answer.
5 = Strongly agree  4 = agree  3 = I don't know  2 = disagree  1 = strongly disagree
About the Program
Navigation through the project was clear 5 4 3 2 1
You knew where you were going at all times 5 4 3 2 1
The design was uniform 5 4 3 2 1
The design was visually appealing 5 4 3 2 1
The font was easy to read 5 4 3 2 1
The links were easy to recognize 5 4 3 2 1
The text was not overwhelming 5 4 3 2 1
The pictures uploaded in a reasonable time 5 4 3 2 1
The movies uploaded in a reasonable time 5 4 3 2 1
The movie quality was good 5 4 3 2 1
The sound uploaded in a reasonable time 5 4 3 2 1
The sound quality was good 5 4 3 2 1
Allowed different navigation routs 5 4 3 2 1
It was interesting to follow 5 4 3 2 1
Other comments:
What did you find was the best part of the project:
About the Activity
The instructions were easy to understand 5 4 3 2 1
The texts were easy to understand 5 4 3 2 1
The listening messages were easy to understand 5 4 3 2 1
The movie was easy to follow 5 4 3 2 1
The movie was interesting to follow 5 4 3 2 1
The level of the project was appropriate 5 4 3 2 1
The project was interesting 5 4 3 2 1
It helped me understand directions 5 4 3 2 1
Would you try this simulation again in the future yes / no
Why:
Any other comments that would help evaluating the activity:
Gracias
ACKNOWLEGMENTS
I would like to thank Professor Catherine Doughty for her invaluable contributions to this paper and
Professor Dalila Ayoun for her comments on the manuscript. I would also like to thank the LLT reviewers
for their insightful comments.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Marta González-Lloret is a PhD candidate in the Second Language Acquisition program at the University
of Hawai‘i at Manoa. She is also a full-time instructor in the Spanish Division of the European Languages
and Literatures of Europe and the Americas.
E-mail: marta@hawaii.edu
Marta González-Lloret Designing Task-Based CALL to Promote Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 101
REFERENCES
Apple. (1998). Quicktime VR authoring studio (version 1.0) [computer software]. Cupertino, CA: Apple
Computer, Inc.
Beauvois, M. H., & Eledge, J. (1996). Personality types and megabytes: Student attitudes towards
computer mediated communication (CMC) in the language Classroom. CALICO Journal, 13(2,3), 27-45.
Blake, R. (2000). Computer mediated communication: A window on L2 Spanish interlanguage. Language
Learning & Technology, 4(1), 120-136. Retrieved March 4, 2002, from
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/blake/default.html
Brindley, G. (1987). Factors affecting task difficulty. In D. Nunan (Ed.), Guidelines for the development
of curriculum resources (pp. 45-56). Adelaide, Australia: Adelaide National Curriculum Resource Center.
Brown, G., Anderson, A., Shillcock, R., & Yule, G. (1984). Teaching talk: Strategies for production and
assessment. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Bruton, A., & Samuda, V. (1980). Learner and teacher roles in the treatment of oral error in group work.
RELC Journal, 11(2), 49-63.
Candlin, C. (1984). Syllabus design as a critical process. In C. Brumfit (Ed.), General English syllabus
design (pp. 29-46). Oxford, England: Pergamon.
Chapelle, C. A. (1998). Multimedia CALL: Lessons to be learned from research on instructed LA.
Language Learning & Technology, 2(1), 22-34. Retrieved March 4, 2002, from
http://llt.msu.edu/vol2num1/article1/index.html
Crookall, D., & Oxford, R. L. (Eds.). (1990). Simulation, gaming and language learning. New York:
Newbury House Publishers.
Crookes, G., & Gass, S. M. (Eds.). (1993). Tasks in a pedagogical context. Integrating theory and
practice. Clevedon, England: Multilingual Matters
Donato, R. (1994). Collective scaffolding in second language learning. In J. Lantolf & G. Appel (Eds.),
Vygotskian approaches to second language research (pp. 33-56). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Doughty, C. (1987). Relating second-language acquisition theory to CALL research and application. In
W. F. Smith (Ed.), Modern media in foreign language education: Theory and implementation (pp. 133-
167). Lincolnwood, IL: National Textbook Company.
Doughty, C. (2000a, September). What do computers assist in language learning? Perspectives from SLA
research and LT methodology. Handout for IATEFL Conference, Madrid.
Doughty, C. (2000b). Negotiating the L2 linguistic environment. University of Hawai‘i Working Papers
in ESL, 18, 47–83.
Doughty, C. (2001). Cognitive underpinnings of focus on form. In P. Robinson (Ed.), Cognition and
second language instruction. Cambridge Applied Linguistics Series (pp. 207-257). Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Doughty, C., & Long, M. H. (2002, February 3). Creating the optimal learning environment in a DL
language course. Plenary: Title VI conference on distance learning of the less commonly taught
languages. Washington, DC. Retrieved February 15, 2002, from
http://langinnovate.msu.edu/commpapers.html#doughty
Doughty, C., & Williams, J. (Eds.), (1998). Focus on form in classroom second language acquisition.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Marta González-Lloret Designing Task-Based CALL to Promote Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 102
Ellis, R. (1999). Theoretical perspectives on interaction and language learning. In Ellis, R. (Ed.), Learning
a second language through interaction (pp. 3-31). Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Ellis, R., & He, X. (1999). The roles of modified input and output in the incidental acquisition of word
meaning. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 21, 285-301.
Ellis, R., Tanaka. Y, & Yamazaki, A. (1994). Classroom interaction, comprehension and acquisition of
L2 word meanings. Language Learning, 44, 449-491.
FMJ-Software. (2000). Awave Studio (Version 7.0) [Computer software]. Hägersten, Sweden.
Gass, S. M. (1997). Input, interaction, and second language learner. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Gass, S. M., Mackey, A., & Pica, T. (1998). The role of input and interaction in second language
acquisition. The Modern Language Journal, 82, 299–305.
Gass, S. M., & Varonis, E. (1985). Task variation and nonnative/nonnative negotiation of meaning. In S.
Gass & C. Maden (Eds.), Input in second language acquisition (pp. 149-161). Rowley, MA: Newbury
House.
Gass, S. M., & Varonis, E. (1989). Incorporated repairs in nonnative discourse. In M. Eisenstein (Ed.),
The dynamic interlanguage (pp. 71-86). New York: Plenum Press.
Gass, S. M., & Varonis, E. (1994). Input, interaction, and second language production. Studies in Second
Language Acquisition, 16, 283–302.
Hegelheimer, V., & Chapelle, C. (2000). Methodological issues in research on learner-computer
interactions in CALL. Language Learning & Technology 4(1), 41-59. Retrieved March 4, 2002, from
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/hegchap/
Higgins, J., & Morgenstern, D. (1990). Simulations on computers. In D. Crookall & R. Oxford (Eds.),
Simulation, gaming and language learning (pp. 183-189). New York: Newbury House Publishers.
Holliday, L. (1995). NS syntactic modifications in NS-NNS negotiations as input data for second
language acquisition of syntax. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia.
Kern, R. (1995). Reconstructing classroom interaction with networked computers: Effects on quantity and
characteristics of language production. The Modern Language Journal, 79(4), 457-476.
Kern, R., & Warschauer, M. (2000). Theory and practice of network-based language teaching. In M.
Warschauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Network-based language teaching (pp. 1-19). Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Kitade, K. (2000). L2 learners' discourse and SLA theories in CMC: Collaborative interaction in Internet
chat. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 13(2), 143-166.
LaPierre, D. (1994). Language output in a cooperative learning setting: Determining its effects on second
language learning. Unpublished master's thesis, University of Toronto (OISE), Toronto, Canada.
Linnell, J. (1995). Negotiation as a context for learning syntax in a second language. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
Levy, M. (1999). Computer assisted language learning. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Long, M. H. (1985). A role for instruction in second language acquisition: Task-based language teaching.
In K. Hyltenstam & M. Pienemann (Eds.), Modeling and assessing second languages acquisition (pp.77-
99). Clevedon, England: Multilingual Matters.
Marta González-Lloret Designing Task-Based CALL to Promote Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 103
Long, M. H. (1991a). Focus on form: A design feature in language teaching methodology. In K. de Bot,
R. P. Ginsberg, & C. Kramsch (Eds.), Foreign language research in cross-cultural perspective (pp. 39-
52). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Long, M. H. (1991b, July). Measuring classroom language change.  Unpublished manuscript, University
of Hawai`i at Manoa.
Long, M. H. (1996). The role of linguistic environment in second language acquisition. In W. C. Ritchie
& T. K. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 413-468). San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Long, M. H. (1997). Authenticity and learning potential in L2 classroom discourse. In G. M. Jacobs (Ed.),
Language classroom of tomorrow: Issues and responses (pp. 148-69). Singapore: SEAMEO Regional
Language Center.
Long, M. H. (1998). Focus on form in task-based language teaching. University of Hawai‘i Working
Papers in ESL, 16(1), 357-371.
Long, M. H. (1999, August). Recasts: The story so far. Paper presented at the AILA conference, Tokyo.
Long, M. H. (2000). Focus on form in task-based language teaching. In R. Lambert & E. Shohamy (Eds.),
Language policy and pedagogy. Essays in honor of A. Ronald Walton (pp. 179-192). Philadelphia: John
Benjamins
Long, M. H. (in press). Task based language teaching. Oxford, England: Blackwell.
Long, M. H., Inagaki, S., & Ortega, L. (1998). The role of implicit negative feedback in SLA: Models and
recasts in Japanese and Spanish. Modern Language Journal, 82(3), 357-371.
Long, M. H., & Robinson, P. (1998). Focus on form: Theory, research, and practice. In C. Doughty & J.
Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in classroom second language acquisition (pp. 15-41). Cambridge,
England: CUP.
Loschky, L. (1994). Comprehensible input and second language acquisition. Studies in Second Language
Acquisition, 16(3), 303-323.
Lyster, R. (1998a). Recasts, repetition, and ambiguity in L2 classroom discourse. Studies in Second
Language Acquisition, 20, 51-81.
Lyster, R. (1998b). Negotiation of form, recasts, and explicit correction in relation to error types and
learner repair in immersion classrooms. Language Learning, 48, 183-281.
Lyster, R., & Ranta, L. (1997). Corrective feedback and learner uptake. Studies in Second Language
Acquisition, 19, 37-66.
Noboyushi, J., & Ellis, R. (1993). Focused communication tasks and second language acquisition.
English Language Teaching Journal, 47, 203-210.
Nunan, D. (1989). Designing tasks for the communicative classroom. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.
Parker, K., & Chaudron, C. (1987). The effects of linguistics simplifications and elaborative
modifications on L2 comprehension. University of Hawaii Working Papers in ESL 6(2), 107-133.
Pavesi, M. (1986). Markedness, discoursal modes, and relative clause formation in a formal and informal
context. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 8, 38-55.
Pica, T. (1991). Classroom interaction, negotiation, and comprehension: redefining relationships. System,
19(4), 437–452.
Marta González-Lloret Designing Task-Based CALL to Promote Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 104
Pica, T. (1994). Research on negotiation: What does it reveal about second-language learning conditions,
processes, and outcomes? Language Learning, 44(3), 493-527.
Pica, T., Doughty, C., & Young, R. (1986). The impact of interaction on comprehension: Do interactional
modifications help? International Review of Applied Linguistics, 72, 1-25.
Pica, T., Holliday, L., Lewis, N., & Morgenthaler, L. (1989). Comprehensible input as an outcome of
linguistic demands on the learner. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 11(1), 63-90.
Pica, T., Lincoln-Porter, F., Paninos, D., & Linnell, J. (1996). Language learners' interaction: How does it
address the input, output, and feedback needs of L2 learners?. TESOL Quarterly, 30(1), 59-84.
Polio, C., & Gass, S. (1998). The role of interaction in native speaker comprehension of nonnative
speaker speech. Modern Language Journal, 82, 308-319.
Robinson, P. (in press). Task complexity, cognitive resources, and second language syllabus design. In P.
Robinson (Ed.), Cognition and second language instruction. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.
Scarcella, R., & Crookall, D. (1990). Simulation/gaming and language acquisition. In D. Crookall & R.
Oxford (Eds.), Simulation, gaming and language learning (pp. 223-230). New York: Newbury House
Publishers.
Shank, R. C., & Cleary, C. (1994). Engines for education. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Sharan, S. (1990). Cooperative learning: A perspective on research and practice. In S. Sharan (Ed.),
Cooperative learning: Theory and research (pp. 285-300). NY: Praeger.
Sharwood-Smith, M. (1993). Input enhancement in instructed SLA: Theoretical bases. Studies in Second
Language Acquisition, 2, 165-179
Schmidt, R. W. (1983). Interaction, accumulation, and the acquisition of communicative competence. In
N. Wolfson & J. Manes (Eds.), Sociolinguistics and second language acquisition (pp. 137-174). Rowley,
MA: Newbury House.
Schmidt, R. (1990). The role of consciousness in second language acquisition. Applied Linguistics 11,
219-258.
Schmidt, R. (1993). Awareness and second language acquisition. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics
1992, 13, 206-226
Slavin, R. (1990). Cooperative learning: Theory, research & practice. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
Hall.
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (1995). Problems in output and the cognitive processes they generated. Applied
Linguistics, 6(4), 371-391
Warschauer, M. (1996). Comparing face-to-face and electronic discussion in the second language
classroom. CALICO Journal, 13(2 & 3), 7-26.
Wells, G., Ling, G., & Maher, A. (1990). Creating classroom communities and literate thinkers. In S.
Sharan (Ed.), Cooperative learning: Theory and research (pp. 95-121). NY: Praeger
