Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/thorne/
May 2003, Volume 7, Number 2
pp. 38-67
Copyright © 2003, ISSN 1094-3501 38
ARTIFACTS AND CULTURES-OF-USE IN INTERCULTURAL
COMMUNICATION
Steven L. Thorne
The Pennsylvania State University
ABSTRACT
This article develops a conceptual framework for understanding how intercultural
communication, mediated by cultural artifacts (i.e., Internet communication tools), creates
compelling, problematic, and surprising conditions for additional language learning. Three case
studies of computer-mediated intercultural engagement draw together correlations between
discursive orientation, communicative modality, communicative activity, and emergent
interpersonal dynamics. These factors contribute to varying qualities and quantities of
participation in the intercultural partnerships. Case one, "Clashing Frames of Expectation --
Differing Cultures-of-Use," suggests that the cultures-of-use of Internet communication tools,
their perceived existence and on-going construction as distinctive cultural artifacts, differs
interculturally just as communicative genre, pragmatics, and institutional context would be
expected to differ interculturally. Case two, "Intercultural Communication as Hyperpersonal
Engagement," illustrates pragmatic and linguistic development as an outcome of intercultural
relationship building. The final case study, "The Wrong Tool for the Right Job?," describes a
recent generational shift in communication tool preference wherein an ostensibly ubiquitous tool,
e-mail, is shown to be unsuitable for mediating age peer relationships. Taken together, these case
studies demonstrate that Internet communication tools are not neutral media. Rather, individual
and collective experience is shown to influence the ways students engage in Internet-mediated
communication with consequential outcomes for both the processes and products of language
development.
For some social classes and in highly privileged geographical regions, we have entered into a period of
rapid and efficient global communication practices mediating an array of interpersonal, discursive-
material, and cultural activities. Despite the robust connections between the increasing digitization of
everyday communicative practice and issues such as globalization and homogenization, Internet-mediated
intercultural educational activities remain demonstrably polymorphous. Reasons for this are many.
Educational cultures and objectives vary across nation state boundaries (Belz, 2002) as well as across
educational institutions within the US. Moreover, within the same university but across courses or time
periods, student populations shift, pedagogical goals are reassessed, and micro-interactional phenomena
illustrate their own "accentuality" (Volosinov, 1973), even when the task, as it were, is supposed to
remain consistent across participants and time (Coughlan & Duff, 1994). The focus of this article is yet
another dimension of human heterogeneity -- the cultural embeddedness of Internet communication tools
and the consequences of this embedding for communicative activity.
Three case studies will be presented which illustrate some of the possibilities and problems associated
with foreign language intercultural interaction mediated by Internet communication tools. I argue that
Internet communication tools, like all human artifacts, are cultural tools (for an extension of this argument
to the natural environment and the social construction of nature, see Braun & Castree, 1998; Harvey,
1996; Williams, 1980). Specifically, I show that e-mail, instant messenger, and forms of synchronous
chat, are deeply affected by the cultures-of-use, or to borrow a biological term -- phenotypic
characteristics, evolving from the manner in which these tools mediate everyday communicative practice.
To unpack this somewhat, most of the American students in the case studies have extensive Internet
experience that catalyzes specific forms (and expectations) of communication. In turn, the resulting
Steven L. Thorne Artifacts and Cultures-of-Use in Intercultural Communication
Language Learning & Technology 39
communicative dynamics are consequential for both the processes and products of language learning.
Importantly, these case studies span a 5-year period and in so doing demonstrate that the cultures-of-use
of Internet communication tools are rapidly evolving, if in geographically non-uniform directions, and
play a critical role in the manner in which intercultural communication plays out in formal educational
contexts.
Of particular relevance to foreign language uses of "telecollaboration" (implying interaction mediated by
Internet communication tools), I will include a critical discussion of recent Computer-Mediated
Communication (CMC) research (Walther, 1994, 1996, 1997) and will build on a theoretical framework
that can broadly be termed a cultural-historical perspective of human communication and cognition (e.g.,
Bruner, 1995; Cole, 1996; Hanks, 1996; Levinson, 1995; Rommetveit, 1974; van der Veer & Valsiner,
1991). This approach emphasizes the process whereby individuals modify, transform, and comprehend
artifacts and environments (e.g., Bødker, 1997; Cole & Engestrom, 1993; Kapetlinin, 1996), including
mediational artifacts such as Internet communication tools (Erickson, 2000; Herring, 1999; Kramsch &
Thorne, 2002; Thorne, 1999, 2000a). Application of a cultural-historical approach will focus on the
concept of mediation specifically as it pertains to Internet communication tools and their use to facilitate
intercultural foreign language communication.
Research in computer-mediated communication and technology-oriented second language acquisition
(SLA) has begun to illuminate many of the linguistic, interactional, and interpersonal dimensions to
language-based interaction as they pertain to learning and development (e.g., Blake, 2000; Chun, 1994;
Herring, 1996; Kern, 1995; Ortega, 1997; Pellettieri, 2000; Thorne, 2000a; Warshauer & Kern, 2000). To
this day, however, there remains considerable debate, and some mystery, about the mediational
affordances (e.g., the possibilities created by the relationships linking actor and object; see van Lier, 2000,
in press) of Internet communication tools and their correlation to linguistic and interpersonal dimensions
of foreign language learning. Below, I outline a cultural-historical framework for addressing development
and artifact mediation and review significant hypotheses from CMC research as necessary background for
interpreting the case studies to follow.
A CULTURAL-HISTORICAL APPROACH TO DEVELOPMENT AND ARTIFACT
CONSTRUCTION
Cultural-historical approaches to language education attempt to make explicit linkages between an
individual's development and the social-material conditions of his or her everyday practice (e.g., Chaiklin,
2001; Engeström, 1999; in second language research, Lantolf, 2000; Swain, 2000; Thorne, 2000b).
Higher order cognitive functions, including intentional memory, planning, voluntary attention,
interpretive strategies, and forms of logic and rationality, develop out of participation in social practices
such as schooling, interaction with care givers, the learning and use of semiotic systems such as spoken
languages, textual and digital literacies, mathematics, music, exposure to folk and "scientific" concepts,
context-contingent behavioral norms, and spatial fields such as the social and functional divisions of built
structures and visual artistic expression. All of these (and this is but a partial list) are uniquely human
social-semiotic systems (e.g., Halliday, 1978) that evolve over time and continue to transform from
generation to generation. To put this into modern parlance, Vygotsky (1978, 1986) argued that situated
social interaction connected to practical activity in the material world is the source of the development of
culture. In turn, cultural-societal structures provide affordances and constraints that shape the
development of specific forms of consciousness. This dialectical approach to the relation between agent
and structure forms the conceptual foundation of this research and continues today to be at the core of
related sociological and psychological inquiry (e.g., for theories of structuration, see Archer, 1995;
Bourdieu, 1977; Giddens, 1984; Sawyer, 2002; for an application of the social realist approach to
telecollaborative foreign language learning, see Belz, 2001).
Steven L. Thorne Artifacts and Cultures-of-Use in Intercultural Communication
Language Learning & Technology 40
Mediation and an Artifact's Culture-of-Use
The structure of texts, literacy, and communicative practices are tightly bound to the materiality of their
conveyance and representation (e.g., stone engravings, paper, computer generated documents, and here, a
focus on Internet communication tools). The relationship between mediational means, genres of
communicative activity (e.g., formal vs. informal registers or informational vs. phatic communication),
and forms of communicative practice at the level of utterance and exchange structure, suggest that digital
communication technologies have made possible substantive aesthetic shifts in human communicative
practices.
Mediation is a primary feature of cultural-historical psychology and is the assertion that humans do not
act directly on the world. Rather, actions are mediated by social-semiotic tools (language, numeracy,
concepts) as well as by material artifacts and technologies.1 The implication is that historical,
institutional, and discursive processes (e.g., the flow of culture at a given point in time and for specific
communities) largely mediate an individual's practical and symbolic activity. Artifact or tool (I do not
make a distinction between these two terms in this paper) utilization necessarily implies cultural
mediation and the routinized use of an artifact exhibits its temporally local as well as its historical
constitution. To take a tool like e-mail as an example, it may function primarily as a family information
medium for the generation that adopted it after retirement, or be used as a collaboration tool for
academics writing articles together. For an Internet advertising operation (e.g., spam manufacturer), e-
mail technology forms the means of production enabling its (highly annoying) business to thrive. I know
individuals for whom e-mail is an "impersonal" medium ill-suited for intimate or non-work related
communication; yet in a recent survey I distributed in a graduate seminar comprised of adult students
from a number of countries around the world, 65% (n=17) responded that the emotions they expressed are
as or more intimate through e-mail as in face-to-face (F2F) contexts. And as we shall see in case study
three of this article, for many American undergraduates, "it's like, 'Oh God, I have to write an e-mail
now'" (Grace, 19 year-old American undergraduate). Like many of her peers, Grace simply can't be
bothered to use such a banal and non-immediately responsive modality. My point with this example is
that even something prosaic like e-mail is a variably understood tool, a culturally specific tool, one that
may serve a diversity of functions for some, while for others, it conjures up specific associations or may
be used for highly restricted purposes. Internet mediated communication, then, can be seen to comprise a
set of phenomena involving individuals and collectives (e.g., foreign language classes) who, through their
everyday activities, construct CMC norms and forms of activity. In relation to the education projects
discussed here, these norms arise not only from local, extemporaneous activity, but from the wider
cultural contexts of computing integral to many students' non-academic lives (Thorne, 2000a).
Within educational contexts, CMC activity often appears to forge a hybridity that allows for an interplay
between students' non-academic identities and the discursively constructed institutional roles of the
classroom. Factors relevant for analyzing CMC use in language classrooms include the historically
sedimented characteristics that accrue to a CMC tool from its everyday use, what I am terming the
"cultures-of-use" of an artifact. Of course, artifacts do possess a concrete material form, but in the
"observer-relative" world of humans (see Searle, 1992), artifacts are meaningfully and differentially
defined by their immediate and historical use by communities (Cole, 1996). In short, artifacts embody
historical processes that shape, and are shaped by, human activity.
Employing this framework to interpret the mediated nature of human activity, a cultures-of-use analysis
attempts to render artifacts as they exist for users. Without endorsing technological determinism -- the
suggestion that technology determines human activity (an argument I counter in this article) -- the
structural properties of Internet communication tools  have an effect on turn-taking and exchange
structures (e.g., Herring, 1999; Werry, 1996). However, I wish to underscore and illustrate in the analysis
to come that an artifact's materiality is conventional and takes its functional form from its histories of use
in and across cultural practices. In this sense, all artifacts, including Internet communication tools, are
Steven L. Thorne Artifacts and Cultures-of-Use in Intercultural Communication
Language Learning & Technology 41
imbued with characteristics that illustrate the intersection of histories of use with the contingencies of
emergent practice.
In this section, I outlined a theoretical framework describing artifact-mediated practices as, in essence,
cultural practices (see also Cole, 1995). In the remainder of the paper, I focus on the cultures-of-use of
Internet communication tools and the decisive role they play in transatlantic foreign language
communication projects.
As a final lead-in to the case studies, the following section introduces CMC research and communication
theory that will be both affirmed and problematized in the case study analyses.
CMC Research and Communication Theory
Within SLA, understandings of "communication" are frequently bound to restrictively operationalized
concepts (e.g., communicative competence and proficiency, negotiation of meaning). It is ironic that in a
field like SLA, concerned with the development of communicative abilities, communication research (and
its research methodologies) is infrequently used to describe and interpret the linguistic activity of foreign
and second language learners. Communication theorists and experimental researchers have addressed
computer-mediated communication since the early 1980s and over the years have produced a diversity of
empirical claims and theoretical frameworks that attempt to explain how Internet communication tools
affect language-based human interaction. One early and quite robust line of CMC research describes the
medium as "not rich enough" for many task-related needs (Daft & Lengel, 1984, in Walther, 1996, p. 3),
nor is CMC effective for interpersonal exchanges as there is "scant social information" available
(Dubrovsky, Kiesler, & Sethna, 1991, p. 119). Prominent communication researcher (and CMC
specialist) Joseph Walther, making reference to both of the aforementioned studies, rhetorically asks, "if
it's not good for tasks and not good for socializing, then just what is CMC good for and why would
anyone use it at all?" (1996, p. 4).2
Examining data from a number of experimental conditions, Walther (1992) has developed a hypothesis,
based on principles of social cognition and interpersonal relationship development, that suggests CMC
relationships are as deeply relational as those that occur F2F. His central claim is that in comparison to
F2F communication, CMC interaction is not different in kind, but typically mediates a slower rate of
social information exchange (Walther, 1996, p. 10). Termed the information processing perspective, it
suggests that "as goes [F2F], so goes CMC, given the opportunity for message exchange and
accompanying relational development" (p. 11). If, as Walther argues, relationships mediated by textual
communication over the Internet are similar in kind to those built in F2F settings, what are the
implications for intercultural foreign language education projects? The case study data and analyses to
follow respond to this question and show that, though Walther's claims are highly relevant to intercultural
education, they benefit from critique and a corrective expansion.
THREE CASE STUDIES
That the Internet can now be used to facilitate direct interaction with expert speaker3 age-peers over much
of world holds great potential for foreign language students. But what forms of linguistic, cultural, and
interpersonal relationship building can be experienced via the use of Internet communication and
information tools? What is the nature of the production, consumption, and co-construction of meaning
and intention when intercultural communication is mediated by such tools? The following three case
studies illustrate that Internet communication tools are different cultural artifacts for different
communities, precipitating consequential effects on the processes of communication, relationship
building, and language development.
Steven L. Thorne Artifacts and Cultures-of-Use in Intercultural Communication
Language Learning & Technology 42
Case One: Clashing Frames of Expectation -- Differing Cultures-of-Use
In a recent study, Kramsch and Thorne (2002) examined the presumption that computer-mediated
communication naturally fosters the conditions of possibility whereby learners will construct a common
ground for cross-cultural understanding. This study was motivated by the authors' awareness that
intercultural communication is certainly made more rapid and convenient by global communication
networks, but also that traditional understandings of communicative competence (e.g., Breen & Candlin,
1980; Savignon, 1972, 1983) and negotiation (Pica, 1995) may become something quite different when
mediated by the Internet. For obvious historical reasons (the Internet was not widely available for
educational use until the mid-1990s in most locations), such artifact mediation is not taken into account in
the mainstream SLA literature focusing on communicative competence and negotiation of meaning
(recent exceptions include Pellettieri, 2000, and Blake, 2000, both of whom apply the interactionist SLA
perspective to Internet mediated foreign language activity; Kötter, 2003, this issue). This brings forth the
question of how and if Internet-mediated intercultural interaction alters the parameters of communication
and the nature of language use. To address this issue, Kramsch and Thorne (2002) examined the intra-
and interclass dialogues between lycée4 students in Ivry and Fresnes, France, and U.S. students studying
French at the University of California, Berkeley, in the Spring of 1997. Both student groups were between
18 and 20 years of age.
Real-Time Preparation and Asynchronous Conflict
The American students were excited about the upcoming exchange with French peers and participated in
numerous preparatory activities such as intra-class synchronous CMC ("chat") sessions. These chat
sessions were oriented toward developing questions and topics that they would then share with the lycée
students. Additionally, they prepared questions that focused on the French film La Haine,5 a film
depicting issues of racism, gang violence, and ethnic conflict in the housing projects outside of Paris. The
resulting inter-class e-mail exchanges were combative, perplexing, and for the American students,
resulted in a general sense of disappointment (see also Belz, 2001, 2003, this issue; Kramsch & Thorne,
2002).
As the Americans prepared for the intercultural exchange they exhibited hopes of gleaning an insider's
perspective on life in what they had come to imagine as the French equivalent of an American inner city
ghetto. Eric,6 a focal student in this study, participated in the following chat dialogue.7
1) Eric says, "comment ils vivent? Leur vie qouitedenment?" [how they live? Their everyday
lives?]
2) Ken says, "oui" [yes]
3) Eric says, "ca me semble d'etre un sujet" [that seems to me to be a topic]
4) Ken says, "comment on s'amuse?" [how they amuse themselves?]
5) Ken says, "est-ce qu'il y a des soirees? les raves?" [are there parties? Raves?]
6) Eric says, "bon bon, viens!!!!" [good good, yeah(?)!!!!]
7) Ken says, "qu'est ce que c'est les chose qui les inquetes?" [what are the things that worry
them?]
8) Ken says, "les parents, les drogues, la sexe? le SIDA, les politiques" [parents, drugs, sex?
AIDS, politics]
9) Eric says, "oui oui oui!!!!" [yes yes yes!!!!]
In this exchange, the marked enthusiasm and their explicit desire to engage around the perceived
commonalities of youth culture in certain segments of American and French societies (drugs, parents,
Steven L. Thorne Artifacts and Cultures-of-Use in Intercultural Communication
Language Learning & Technology 43
raves, sex, AIDS) illustrates that these students are working toward building solidarity while they also
exhibit a perhaps naïve idealism that youth culture would necessarily include their projection of a globally
viable constellation of anxieties and preoccupations. In their article, Kramsch and Thorne debate the
potential benefits of Eric and Ken's discursive move toward cross-cultural symmetry and sharedness, with
Thorne arguing that their attempt to build on what they imagine are universal youth culture themes has
the potential to invoke the trust necessary to later explore substantive issues of difference while Kramsch
is more critical and suggests that their idealism may obfuscate the "different social and cultural
conventions under which each party is operating" (2002, p. 90). A few days after this chat session, the
American students collectively wrote the first e-mail message and sent it to the Fresnes instructor's e-mail
account (the lycée students, to the best of our knowledge, did not have access to personal e-mail
accounts).8
E-mail 1: Berkeley > Fresnes9
A qui de droit:
…Recemment, nous avons regarde le film "Le Haine" en classe. Le contenue de ce film nous a
choque car il y avait des images de France que nous ne voyons pas d'habitude ici aux Etats-Unis.
Alors ce film etait un peu deroutant pour nous. J'espere que vous ou votre class peut nous aider
avec notre confusion. Voici une liste de questions sur "Le Haine" que nous avons prepare: …
[To whom it may concern:
 … Recently we saw the film "La Haine" in class. The content of the film shocked us since there
were images of France that we don't normally see here in the U.S. So this film was a bit unsettling
for us. I hope that you or your class can help us with our confusion. Here's a list of questions on
"La Haine" that we've prepared: …]
There followed a numbered list of seven questions which asked if the film La Haine accurately
represented the Parisian suburbs, if firearms and illegal drugs were available in these areas, if violence
was great, and so forth. The response arrived a few days later, written in English and sent from the French
instructor's e-mail account.
E-mail 2: Fresnes > Berkeley
Dear Nat,
You shouldn't generalize, because there are three sorts of suburbs at least. For example, Sandrine
lives in a very good suburb, in which all is quiet; Sophie lives in an area where violence is rising
and Delphine lives in a suburb where violence is widespread: a bookseller was killed without any
reason four months ago. However the situation in France is certainly better than the situation in
America. As a matter of fact, delinquents have more difficulty getting arms than in the USA.
Moreover, areas resembling the American ghettos don't exist in France. If you go to France, you
will never see an area like Harlem, where violence is great .... So we can confirm that the suburbs
you saw in "La Haine" are not like this in reality.
Signed: Sandrine, Delphine and Sophie.
The Americans were quite literally offended at the tone of this letter. Where they had expected responses
to questions that they presumed were polite and genuine, they felt as though they had received a
reprimand and immediately produced the following response.
Steven L. Thorne Artifacts and Cultures-of-Use in Intercultural Communication
Language Learning & Technology 44
E-mail 3: Berkeley > Fresnes
Chere Sandrine, Delphine, et Sophie,
La premiere chose que vous ecrivez dans votre lettre etait: "You shouldn't generalize", ou en
francais, "vous ne devriez pas generaliser" -- ca, c'est incroyable. Innocemment, ma class de
francais vous a pose des questions pour mieux comprendre la verite de la situation a la banlieue
francaise. Tout que nous recevions de vous etaient des reactions nationalistes! ...
Avez-vous visite Harlem? Pouvez-vous dire franchement que vous connaissez bien les problemes
sociaux des Etats-Unis? Avez-vous habite a Harlem ou Brooklyn, ou "the Bronx", ou Oakland, ou
Richmond, ou Compton, ou Long Beach, ou ici a …? Commest est-ce que c'est possible que vous
connaissez la situation des ghettos des Etats-Unis quand vous n'avez jamais habite ici? D'ou
avez-vous obtenu votre information -- Des films americains? Si je ne me trompe, vous etes
coupable de faire des generalizations, pas nous. Et ca, c'est un peu hypocrite....
Signed: Nat and Eric.
[Dear Sandrine, Delphine, and Sophie,
The first thing you wrote in your letter was : "You shouldn't generalize", or in French, "Vous ne
devriez pas généraliser" -- that is incredible. Innocently, my French class asked you some
questions in order to better understand the truth of the situation in the French suburbs. All that we
got back from you were nationalistic reactions! ....
Have you visited Harlem? Can you frankly say that you know the US's social problems well?
Have you lived in Harlem or Brooklyn, or "the Bronx," or Oakland, or Richmond, or Compton, or
Long Beach, or here in Berkeley? How is it possible that you know the situation of U.S. ghettos
when you've never lived here? Where have you gotten your information -- from American films?
If I'm not mistaken, you are guilty of making generalizations, not us. And that is a little
hypocritical ....
Signed: Nat and Eric]
A week later, Delphine replied. Her response showed surprise at Nat and Eric's tone, but she attempted to
return to a dispassionate exchange of ideas by redirecting the illocutionary force of Nat and Eric's
rhetorical questions and making them into genuine requests for information.
E-mail 4: Fresnes > Berkeley
Dear Nat and Eric,
I want to answer your letter which surprised me. To my mind, you didn't understand what we
wrote. Now, to answer your questions, I have never been to America and all what I know is taken
from books and films. The films we see, show us a bad image of the States. In American films,
we always see violent actions and in the books we see photos such as I explained to you in my
letter of … And to my mind, we are not "hypocritical" like you wrote: we only wrote what we
thought. I'm waiting for an answer from you to know what you think about my last letter.
Signed: Delphine
The American and French messages are characterized by different discourse styles that play themselves
out on national, institutional, and personal levels. As this study was based in the US, more data is
available, including pre-intercultural interaction chat sessions and post-class interviews, that illustrate the
Americans had hoped to build relationships based on trust rather than engage within a communicative
genre that privileged more dispassionate presentations of truth and fact that appears to have been the
operative approach taken by the French students. In a retrospective interview, Eric, who appears both in
Steven L. Thorne Artifacts and Cultures-of-Use in Intercultural Communication
Language Learning & Technology 45
our synchronous and asynchronous data, had this to say about the conflicting styles of the American and
French students:
Eric: e-mail is kind of like not a written thing .... when you read e-mail, you get conversation but
in a written form so you can go back and look at them. That's neat. I've had that experience where
conversational constructions appear in an e-mail form from a native speaker of French, which is
really neat. Because it doesn't fly by you and kind of "look at that"-- But in the [French]
communications, it felt like they were writing essays and sending them to us rather than having
an e-mail conversation with us.
Interviewer: It seemed like you all would ask questions, right? Didn't you get responses?
Eric: Sometimes we'd get long .... but it's true we didn't get, it seems true that they weren't doing
the same thing we were. It seemed like, you know, we had a task. And they, it seemed like, I
didn't know what they were doing. [laughs]
He went on to attribute the difficulties they encountered with the Fresnes students to differences in social
class, although it is not clear why he associates "socio-economic class" with the ability to interact and
conduct a conversation.
There was a clear socio-economic class difference between us and the French. We were doing
different things so it was sort of an interaction, but it wasn't a discussion or conversation. When
we [Americans] were talking to each other, it was debate and agreement and process. But with the
French, we'd ask a question and receive a statement...
These exchanges, and Eric's post-semester reflections, present a largely problematic scenario of the use of
digital technologies for the learning of French in an American university context. Messages were sent
back and forth, but is there evidence of relationship building and mutual knowledge construction that the
project sought to cultivate? Addressing intercultural pragmatics in foreign language learning contexts,
Boxer (2002) distinguishes between cross cultural and interlanguage pragmatics, saying that the latter
focuses on the language learner's appropriation and/or acquisition of pragmatic norms represented in the
host language community. Cross cultural pragmatics, on the other hand, "takes the view that individuals
from two societies or communities carry out their interactions (whether spoken or written) according to
their own rules or norms, often resulting in a clash in expectations and, ultimately, misperceptions about
the other group" (2002, p. 151). Indeed, the French-American interactions above provide a strong
example of the challenges inherent to cross cultural interaction while illustrating little in terms of
interlanguage pragmatic development by the participating American students, though conflict is certainly
not an inherently negative feature of intercultural communication, and other, perhaps difficult to ascertain
developments may have occurred, such as a breaking down of stereotypical images of a monolithic
French culture.
Phatic Versus Informational; Trust Versus Truth
Communication seems defined here by differing emphases on information exchange and personal
engagement across culturally different discourse genres.10 Jerome Bruner might theorize this
communicative situation as a case where language reflects and constructs cultural worlds in a way that
"preserves the distinction between facts on the one hand, and beliefs and opinions on the other." (1995, p.
20) Most of the French interlocutors used factual, impersonal, dispassionate genres of writing, including
the use of examples (e.g., data) and argument building logical connectors ("for example," "however,"
"moreover"). They made nuanced corrections to what they felt were American mis-judgments about the
situation in France. By contrast, the American students, who initiated this exchange in order to understand
"how they live? Their everyday lives?" (American student Eric's utterance in a preparatory chat session),
viewed this instance of Internet-mediated communication as a ritual of mutual trust building. The phatic
style of many of their postings, full of questions and exclamation marks (and other message elements
Steven L. Thorne Artifacts and Cultures-of-Use in Intercultural Communication
Language Learning & Technology 46
seeking to build relations rather than exchange information), suggests a high degree of affective
involvement and personal-emotional identification with the messages they wrote, especially early in the
project. It seems that the Americans, in their search for understanding the lives of the French, expected
trust and solidarity to develop through direct contact with French peers on the basis of shared personal
experience. The illusion of proximity afforded by their everyday uses of the Internet informed their
expectations of what these exchanges would be like.
In part due to the fact that some students have extensive histories as participants in highly structured on-
line speech communities (the Americans in this case), while others have very little or highly specific
Internet experience (the French lycée students), educational uses of Internet communication tools may
illustrate a heterogeneous set of communicative practices that bring into contact different rules,
community norms, and division of labor of these two speech communities. In the intercultural context that
Kramsch and Thorne explored (though they didn't address this issue in the paper), the American students
reported that Internet-based communication allowed them to interact as though they were not in the
institutional context of a foreign language classroom. That is, their acculturation into non-academic
digital speech communities predisposed them to engage in Internet-mediated communication in a style
and with expectations derived from their everyday uses of the medium. As pertains to their intercultural
communication, they were seeking phatic communication and the building of trust through the
development of relationships much as they would with peers in the US.
For the French students at the lycée, their Internet access was, from what we know, restricted to academic
activity in the classroom. Additionally, they wrote their messages in class and then passed them to their
instructor who then e-mailed them from the only Internet connected computer available. By contrast, the
American students reported spending on average 3+ hours a day on the Internet and were habituated to
the use of e-mail and chat for mediating social, familial, and intimate relationships in addition to its use
for school and professional communication. Hanks, speaking from a practice theory approach, suggests
that "it is the socially defined relation between agents and the field that 'produces' speech forms" (1996, p.
230). Hence for the American students in this study, the articulation through CMC of themselves as
agents and their perception of the 'field,' or discursive context in which they were engaged, supported
communication in French, but in the style that they might also use in non-academic Internet-mediated
speech-community cultures on a daily basis (for an extended discussion of this issue in other contexts, see
Thorne, 1999, 2000a). What I would like to suggest is that a difference in communicative genres
demonstrably thwarted satisfying interaction in this case of telecollaborative foreign language interaction.
Trust and relationship-building for the Americans and truth value and negotiation of factual accuracy for
the French involved differing goals, frames of reference, and perceptions of what is desirable, and even
possible, through Internet-based communicative activity. Hence the activity of e-mail communication was
different for the French than it was for the Americans, in part because the cultural artifact was used in a
different way in each case (e.g., the French students were communicating through a surrogate).
The social material conditions of these two student groups, spatially separated by 5,000 miles, and more
importantly occupying quite different material discursive contexts while producing their messages, were
dramatically at odds with one another. In addition to variance in communicative genre that Kramsch &
Thorne conclude to be the primary issue (2002), and perhaps even catalyzing these genre differences, are
radically different cultures-of-use of Internet communication tools. When cultures-of-use do not
minimally align, derived as they are from social-material conditions, the ideational worlds of
intersubjectivity and phatic communion become a challenge to envision and difficult to achieve.11 This
raises a profoundly important issue as to whether cross-cultural communication also needs to explicitly
take into account cross-class and cross-social material condition differences. If CMC use expands beyond
the privileged communities within privileged nation states that currently have full access to the Internet
(which in 1997 does not appear to include 18-20 year-olds in the Parisian suburb of Ivry and Fresnes12)
and if telecollaborative language teaching continues to expand as a method of foreign language teaching
Steven L. Thorne Artifacts and Cultures-of-Use in Intercultural Communication
Language Learning & Technology 47
and learning, we will "need to prepare students to deal with global communicative practices that require
far more than local communicative competence" (Kramsch & Thorne, p. 100). Kramsch and Thorne
conclude that "Between the global and the local lies genre, the social and historical base of our speech and
thought. An understanding of this neglected dimension of foreign language teaching may lead to a
reassessment of what we mean by 'communicative competence' in a global world and what the
communicative contract will be, upon which trust is based." (p. 100). The following two case studies
jump forward five years in time and describe events occurring in the French section of the Spring of 2002
Penn State Foreign Language Telecollaboration Project.13
Case Two: Intercultural Communication as Hyperpersonal Engagement
In contrast to Case One, what happens when intercultural communication, initially as part of a formal
educational exercise, expands beyond the pedagogical goals of the activity? In the Spring semester of
2002, students of French at The Pennsylvania State University (Penn State) interacted with engineering
students at the Ecole Nationale Supérieure de Télécommunications de Bretagne. Some, but not all, of the
students in France were slightly older than their American counterparts, but most participants were
between the ages of 18 and 24 years. Like the Berkeley case described above, the course was organized so
that students on both sides of the Atlantic would read parallel texts, see the same films, and share personal
biographies using e-mail and a form of synchronous chat (using the program NetMeeting; for other
parallel class intercultural collaborations, see Furstenberg, Levet, English, & Maillet, 2001; Kinginger,
Gouvès-Hayward, & Simpson, 1999).
Thresholds, Authentic Communication, and Mediational Means
As can occur in distance collaborations, there was a numerical imbalance in participants with more than
twice as many Penn State students as there were students participating at the partner institution in France.
In the one-to-one e-mail-based correspondence that was to form the critical medium for interaction, each
French student was paired with two or sometimes three Americans. As part of their participation grade,
the Americans were required to complete a minimum of three e-mail exchanges over the middle 5 weeks
of the semester. Kirsten, an American student, initially found her eventual key-pal in France to be
frustrating. In a one-hour post-semester interview, Kirsten expressed disappointment with the slow start to
this relationship and outlined the following series of events:
I think he had two other key pals and he didn't know I was his key pal .... I e-mailed him again in
English and I was like blah blah blah blah and was like "how are you, what are you up to,"
whatever, and I think he thought "well, I'm not her key pal and I really don't have time for this" so
[he] didn't respond. So after his vacation I e-mailed him again after I thought the rest of them
[Kirsten's classmates] would already be done with their e-mails and I tried to take up the
correspondence again. And, it worked!
I was really upset when I didn't hear from him [French key-pal] at first. Last week I was like,
when I made this appointment [for the interview], I was like "I'm going in there and be like "grrr
grrr grrr [vocalizations signifying anger and frustration], he didn't respond, I didn't talk to him,
I'm really disappointed, I went and cried", and now I'm like "wow!", within a week I went from
completely despondent and being like "I hate this, grrrrr," to "wow, love it! Love it!"
Kirsten was referring to a one-week period of extended and prolific dialogue with Oliver, her French key-
pal, which began with an e-mail exchange but then quickly moved to another Internet communication
tool, America Online Instant Messenger (IM).
Kirsten: Out of the blue he [Oliver] IM-ed me.
Interviewer: Did he know your screen name?
Steven L. Thorne Artifacts and Cultures-of-Use in Intercultural Communication
Language Learning & Technology 48
Kirsten: He found it on my Web page. He has been onto my Web page almost every single day!
It's gotten scary [laughing]. And he has clicked, I mean, every single link on my Web page and I
have a whole list of good sites.
Their first IM interaction was sustained: "We went on for probably close to six hours that day alone"
(Kirsten, in interview).
Interviewer: So 6 hours?
Kirsten: Just that day, and we talk every day.
Interviewer: Really?
Kirsten: Yeah, every day.
Interviewer: For that long every day?
Kirsten: I don't know, usually in 15 or 20-minute spurts, but usually twice or three times a day. So
it's about an hour a day.
Kirsten mentioned that both French and English were used and the frequency and duration of her
dialogues with Oliver demonstrated an authentic engagement that may or may not be a part of such
interactions when they are seen as class activities. As foreign language instructors and students know
well, authenticity is unfortunately not a product that can be readily distributed, but is rather a process, the
key factor for which is the participant's sense (and enactment) of agency. Van Lier makes the case that
language activity is authentic when "it realizes a free choice and is an expression of what a person
genuinely feels and believes," and is "intrinsically motivated" (1996, p. 13). In terms of motivation,
engagement, and desire, what might account for the success (at the level of time-in-interaction and
authentic engagement) of Kirsten's key-pal experience? In reference to successful uses of the Internet in
distance learning courses, Kirsten seems to have passed over what Wegerif (1998) terms a threshold .
Wegerif proposes that success or failure in on-line education (and one might argue in other endeavors as
well) depends on participants constructing a space of engagement through which they can position
themselves as insiders with a vested interest in the educational, social, and communicative activities at
hand. Wegerif's use of a threshold metaphor is derived from Lave and Wenger's (1991) notion of
legitimate peripheral participation (LPP), a developmental model contending that participants move from
initially peripheral and tentative engagement to full participation in a community of practice over time.
Though Wegerif's use of LPP and the threshold metaphor are useful as descriptors of some aspects of this
interaction, the case of Kirsten and Oliver is compelling for it shows that the threshold experience that led
to mutually satisfying and interpersonally "authentic" engagement (e.g., intrinsically motivated, van Lier,
1996) began as part of a formal educational process but attained its maturity when it migrated out of the
academy (course uses of e-mail and NetMeeting sessions) and into another communicative medium for
non-class related relationship building and language learning. Based on Kristen's interview data and the
transcripts of her e-mail and IM interactions, the catalyst moving their relationship over the threshold
from class task to authentic interpersonal relationship building was indeed tool-related -- the move to the
use of IM.
Kirsten: I asked him in [an e-mail message14], do you have a kind of chat like AOL IM or ICQ?
And I think that's probably what triggered it ... and then out of the blue I got the IM from him and
I was like "you have AOL IM?!" and he's like "this is Oliver" and I was like "holy mackerel!" you
know, and I put "bonjour!" and like 5 lines of exclamation points. I was like "how are [laughing]
you!" you know, and it went from there....
Interviewer: Is IM better for=15
Kirsten: =oh definitely=
Steven L. Thorne Artifacts and Cultures-of-Use in Intercultural Communication
Language Learning & Technology 49
Interviewer: =for you and Oliver to communicate with each other than e-mail? or
Kirsten: Yeah, e-mail is kinda like "ahh, here's my point, here ya go," but it's really hard to have a
conversation.
Kirsten's appraisal of IM is that it is a "conversational" environment. By contrast, e-mail supports a
temporally sequenced set of responsive monologues rather than dialogic interaction. As I will describe in
Case Three, nearly all the 20 students interviewed as part of the 2002 study found e-mail an awkward
medium for most age-peer interaction. It's not that e-mail doesn't serve a communicative function -- most
students reported using e-mail at least occasionally for hierarchical interactions with professors, TAs, and
parents and other family members. But for Kirsten, the move to IM was a pivotal and necessary condition
for moving her relationship with Oliver to a more intimate level.
Mediated Intercultural Communication and Language Development
Despite the positive affect associated with Kirsten's telecollaborative experience, questions remain as to
the efficacy of intercultural communication as it may promote language development. As Kern remarked
in reference to the use of intercultural exchanges in foreign language education, "students are certainly
engaged in communication. But has the communication led to any new understanding?" (Kern, 2000, p.
255). I extend Kern's query by asking, beyond the potential/purported benefits of communication with
cultural others, is there also evidence of language development at the level of linguistic and pragmatic
performance? The Penn State Foreign Language Telecollaboration Project (see note 10) includes an
extensive empirical investigation of quantifiable changes in foreign language use over time (which we
will share in numerous forms at the conclusion of the project). For this paper, however, I restrict my
scope to a micro-genetic analysis of Kirsten's language use in e-mail and IM and to the post-experience
reflections that she shared while reading over transcripts of her communicative activity with Oliver.
Tu/Vous Pragmatics
Areas of language learning that instructors often feel may not present significant obstacles often do. One
of these areas is in the pragmatic deployment of pronouns of address. Especially in a case of two-way
distinction (in contrast to languages that grammatically designate many more levels of politeness), one
would think that tu/vous (T/V) usage would be a fairly straightforward practice, where students would use
tu forms with peers, friends, in informal contexts and with younger people, and vous forms to show
respect and/or distance, in formal contexts, and with older people. Yet as Belz and Kinginger (2002, in
press) demonstrate, neither the pedagogical guidelines nor expert speaker explanations for T/V usage
present a consistent, rule based system. Changes in her use of T/V is the first example that Kirsten
brought to our attention in the interview:
Kirsten: If you read my first e-mail, too, I asked him to correct my grammar and he did. He was
really nice about it but like, we went [over] I guess my typical errors, and uh, he taught me some
things I wasn't quite grasping when the teacher taught it in French. =
Interviewer: =Yeah?
Kirsten: He talked to me in English, like, within five minutes I was better, so=
Interviewer: =Right, right. Is there any of that in here? [pointing to the e-mail and IM transcripts
Kirsten had brought with her].
Kirsten: Yeah, actually. If you read where he goes … We were talking about the election and the
fact that Le Pen, he didn't like him at all and it was such a disaster. And then [he said] "let's talk
about your French." And he went through and he said this [Kirsten points to a line in Oliver's e-
mail which reads "Bon je garde le 'vous' mais, de grace, utilize 'tu' avec moi!!"] And then, at the
very end of here [pointing to her e-mail response to Oliver], see, I do learn. I changed it!
Steven L. Thorne Artifacts and Cultures-of-Use in Intercultural Communication
Language Learning & Technology 50
In the final line of her e-mail, Kirsten had written, "J'attends impatiemment ton réponse!" (see I do
learn!), emphasizing her use of T forms throughout the message. Interaction with expert speakers is
thought to broaden the discourse options (and obligations) available to participating students, in part
because students are engaging in age-peer contact under less controlled conditions than would normally
be the case in intra-class small group or class discussion. This is a core rationale for telecollaborative
arrangements. Drawing on sociocultural and language socialization approaches, Belz and Kinginger (in
press) discuss the complexity of developing pragmatic competence and describe in detail the social-
interactive conditions under which interculturally engaged students gain pragmatic competence. In their
most recent study, they note that T/V usage is a destabilized and pragmatically complex issue for native
speakers (making citations to Agar 1994; Delisle 1986; Morford, 1997; Wylie & Brière, 1995) and thus
for foreign language students it is difficult to learn as a rule-governed behavior (despite the fact that it is
frequently taught as such).
T/V use is embedded in a system of meaning potentials that are realized in particular social interactions
(Belz & Kinginger, 2002, in press). When students engaged in telecollaborative interaction have
opportunities to observe appropriate pronoun use by expert speakers and to receive explicit feedback for
T form usage from peers, they gain a pragmatic awareness of T/V as an important part of their language
use. In their study, such "noticing" (e.g., Schmidt, 1990) led to the approximation of expert speaker norms
over time in most cases. Why don't students readily learn appropriate T/V use from the instructor or
foreign language texts? Belz and Kinginger suggest that peer interaction creates a social ecology wherein
students are motivated to maintain positive face (defined as positive self-image and the desire that this
self-image be appreciated and approved of; see Brown & Levinson, 1987, p. 61-62) with age-peers and
that the context of age-peer telecollaboration helps to crystallize appropriate usage in a social-interactive
forum that can be difficult or impossible to create in instructed educational settings. They conclude by
suggesting that multivalent participation, and understanding the social implications of the use of linguistic
forms, are crucial conditions for the development of pragmatic competence. "Participation" and language
socialization, rather than "acquisition" of a rule, may be a more apt descriptor for the development of
pragmatic competence (making reference to Sfard, 1998, in Belz & Kinginger, in press).
Interpersonal Mediation and the Acquisition of Prepositions of Location
Kirsten was quite concerned about what she considered to be her "horrible" French grammar, but her
ability to carry out extended IM discussions with Oliver bolstered her confidence.
Kirsten: And there was this whole portion of this conversation where he was like "I'm really
enjoying talking to you and I hope we can do it more often." You know, "I'll hear from you again
soon." I mean, it's kind of encouraging because that means he doesn't think that my French is so
bad that he [laughing] doesn't want to talk to me.
In terms of specific linguistic gains arising from her interactions with Oliver, Kirsten made the following
remarks:
Interviewer: What else beside the tu/vous stuff did he help you with?
Kirsten: Usage of "au" versus "en" versus "dans" versus "à" versus, you know, that kinda stuff. A
more in-depth vocabulary, for sure. When he speaks in French I'm like "whip out the [laughing]
dictionary!" And then you know, it's kind of nice to have a human dictionary on the other end
too....
Kirsten: ...I was like "how am I supposed to say?" like for example .... So the "de" and "à" thing,
"de la campagne," "à le cité," whatever, stuff like that. I was like "wow," you know, eeeeeee
[vocalization of glee; laughs]. Because I couldn't get that from a dictionary.
Interviewer: That's something you have to have a little help with, yeah?
Steven L. Thorne Artifacts and Cultures-of-Use in Intercultural Communication
Language Learning & Technology 51
Kirsten: Yeah, yeah, and how am I supposed to learn it? That's not in the grammar books, you
know [laughing], expressions like that, and other things. It was fun.
In these excerpts, Kirsten describes the interpersonally grounded context that allowed her access to the
French prepositional system for location that she "couldn't get … from a dictionary" and that is "not in the
grammar books." Though her claims may be empirically debatable, they are true enough for her since she
has studied French in high school and at the time of this interview was enrolled in a fourth semester
University French composition course focused extensively on grammar. Activity theorist Bonnie Nardi
notes that it is not possible to fully understand how people learn if the unit of analysis is "the unaided
individual with no access to other people or to artifacts for accomplishing the task at hand" (1996, p. 69).
Yet much SLA (and other developmentally oriented) research and assessment approaches privilege the
individual as an autonomous being, indirectly suggesting that real learning is a-social and unassisted (see
Lantolf & Thorne, in press). Many French language students have successfully developed the ability to
use French prepositions of location from grammar texts or from grammar lectures. Kirsten, however,
required the mediation of another person, specifically an age-peer who was willing to provide immediate
and explicit linguistic feedback as part of a socially meaningful relationship.
Oliver and Kirsten exhibit what Leont'ev terms a pedagogy of cooperation where "the relationship
established between teacher and pupils are primarily relationships between people, not between
participants in a mechanical and programmed process of the transmission of knowledge" (1992, p. 43).
They see themselves as peers and friends and do not occupy consistent teacher-student relations to one
another, as Kirsten provides limited grammatical assistance about Oliver's English as well.
Kirsten: What kind of errors do we make and what kind of errors do they make. What kind of
different things are, you know, like the "look" example [where Kirsten corrected Oliver's abrasive
use of "look" as a focalizer/discourse marker]. How would you know unless you actually used it
and you used it wrong? Apparently everyone he said "look" to didn't tell him!
The appropriation and appreciation of what might be called teacherly practices by both parties alters the
usual student division of labor in an educational setting. Occupying the position of peer-expert may
increase a sense of authority for participants who typically inhabit the discursive and institutional confines
of a 'student' subject position, the entailments of which are to receive and demonstrate knowledge but
rarely to act as an authority or expert (see also Thorne, in press).
Flow Activity and Self-Regulation
Building on her confidence expressed through the use of the French T forms, Kirsten provided an
extended description of her e-mail and IM transcripts and was able to point to specific instances where,
for the first time, she demonstrated what she perceived as an expanded competence to communicate in
French. (The IM excerpt has not been orthographically modified but a few lines have been removed to
save space.)
1) O: by the way, I don't know what smart means?
2) O: …
3) K: smart means ..hmmm
4) K: how to describe that
5) K: intelligent
6) O: I mean what does intelligent mean?
7) O: no I know what the word means
8) K: it's the same thing
Steven L. Thorne Artifacts and Cultures-of-Use in Intercultural Communication
Language Learning & Technology 52
9) O: but I'm not sure I grasp the idea
10) K: ooh..
11) K: hmmm
12) O: kind of philosophical huh?
13) K: yeah.. you know.. aux Etats-Unis nous avons deux type d'intelligence [in the US we have two
types of intelligence]
14) O: vraiment? [really?]
15) O: Je veux savoir!!! [I want to know!]
16) K: il y a "l'intelligence des livres" et "l'intelligence dans la vie" [there is "book smart" and "life
smart"]16
17) O: donc l'intellignece des livre c'est le savoir? [therefore book intelligence is knowledge?]
18) K: oui.. et l'autre est "common sense" [yes.. and the other is "common sense"]
19) O: on peut lire beaucoup et savoir beaucoup de choses tout en étant stupide je suis d'accord [one
can read a lot and know a lot of things and be stupid at the same time i agree]
20) K: oui! [yes!]
21) O: cool
22) K: le "common sense" est… par example, j'ai une amie qui sait beaucoup des choses.. mais elle a
mis METAL dans le microwave.. ["common sense" is … for example, I have a friend who knows
a lot of things.. but she put METAL in the microwave..]
23) O: oups [oops]
24) K: elle n'a pas de "common sense" [she doesn't have "common sense"]
Kirsten herself provides an exegesis of this dialogue. Her quotations from the IM transcript (IMT) are
labeled [IMT line #].
Kirsten: The first couple of lines of this [transcript], there's a particular example and I'll show you
... Here's where, this was the true part, where I was like, "wow, I really have learned a lot of
French!" [IMT 1] "By the way, I don't know what smart means." Smart means intelligent, like, I
made the translation, I was like, but that's stupid that he didn't know that because intelligent is the
same word in both languages! [IMT 6] "But what does intelligence mean." And he's like [IMT 7]
"no I know what the word means," like [ventriloquating Olivier] "come on stupid," I'm like, yeah
[IMT 8] "it's the same thing." And he said, [IM 9] "but I'm not sure I grasp the idea." And I said
[IM 10, 11] "ohh" "hmmm." And he said [IMT 12], "kind of philosophical." And I said [IMT 13]
"yeah," and then I went into French. And I was [laughing] so proud of myself. And I, you know,
then I wrote, [IMT 13] "aux Etats-Unis nous avons deux type d'intelligence," right, like life smart
and book smart, and then he's like [IMT 15, initially glossing Oliver's message in English then
referring to the French], "I have got to know this!!! Je veux savoir!!!" with three exclamation
points and that was like, that was the beginning of my explaining in French, and I was like
"wow!" .... That was the first one we, that was the first time that I was like, "I made a connection
in French." I was so proud. It was like, "wow, that's me, in French, and he understood me!"
Kirsten explained the significance of this short excerpt from her first three-hour IM session with Oliver as
a threshold moment in her ability to communicate in French. A combination of the use of IM and
Kirsten's tremendous enthusiasm for Oliver (that these two elements interrelate has already been
Steven L. Thorne Artifacts and Cultures-of-Use in Intercultural Communication
Language Learning & Technology 53
suggested) created the conditions for interpersonal communicative possibility that Csikszentmihalyi
describes as "flow activity" (1990). In Csikszentmihalyi's sense, flow involves engagement in an activity
that challenges physical or mental abilities. High challenge situations, such as Kirsten's threshold
experience as a first time successful communicator in French, induce a heightened sense of engagement.
Absorption in the activity, rather than a self-conscious focus on an eventual product, results in "a
harmonious rush of energy ... which comes as close as anything can to what we call happiness"
(Csikszentmihalyi, 1993, p. xiii-xiv). Csikszentmihalyi also describes the importance of immediate
feedback, such as that possible in IM interaction, to the attainment of a flow state of consciousness.
I would like to suggest a linkage between flow activity and the Vygotskyan and activity theoretical
characterization of development. Csikszentmihalyi describes flow as a complex activity that stretches
current abilities. Flow states of consciousness are most likely to be experienced when people can control
their immediate social-material conditions, or as Csikszentmihalyi proposes, that "make it possible to
adjust opportunities for action to our capacities" (1993, p. xiv). This is reminiscent of the familiar
Vygotskyan metaphor of the zone of proximal development and provides a succinct description of the
developmental context-activity from the participant's perspective.17 The locus of control through which
individuals gain access to interaction and information necessary to regulate thinking are developmentally
sequenced as object-, other-, and self-regulation. Object-regulation indicates instances when artifacts in
the environment regulate and/or afford cognition/activity. Other-regulation describes mediation by an
expert or more capable peer. Self-regulation indexes an activity that an individual can accomplish with
minimal or no external assistance (for SLA related applications of this approach, see Alm-Lequeux, 2001;
Frawley & Lantolf, 1985; Schinke-Llano, 1993). Each of these stages is "symmetrical and recoverable, an
individual can traverse this sequence at will, given the demands of the task" (Frawley, 1997, p. 98).
Kirsten's extreme enthusiasm, her flow state of optimal performance when in IM interaction with Oliver,
marks a transition point between the levels of object-, other-, and self-regulation. Her reflections suggest
the following developmental sequence. Kirsten at first required object-regulation that she characterized as
mediational affordances such as grammar texts with their verbal paradigms and vocabulary lists. Through
her IM and e-mail interactions with Oliver, she was able to benefit from other-regulation, for example, the
explicit linguistic assistance provided by Oliver as well as his confidence building enthusiasm for and
reassurance of Kirsten's French language use. These levels of object- and other- regulation made possible
a threshold experience during which Kirsten was able to self-regulate and participate in an extended and
unrehearsed dialogue in French. In this case, IM mediation supported a developmentally fecund flow
activity. Kirsten herself realizes her capacity for self-regulation when she states, "that was the first time
that I was like, 'I made a connection in French.' I was so proud. It was like, 'wow, that's me, in French,
and he understood me!'" Vygotsky might term this an example of Kirsten's "conscious realization" of her
own thinking and language use, a key aspect of development (1986).
Later in the interview, Kirsten added, "It really takes a special person, like him, and our interactions are
quick, to make it work." Of the two issues she raises in this statement, one re-emphasizes the real-time
speed of IM text messaging which affords virtually instantaneous exchanges. The second issue, her quick
intimacy with Oliver that developed over less than a one-week period, presents additional questions that I
address below.
Hyperpersonalization, Infatuation, and Language Learning
Kirsten: The click was that we were both so excited to hear from each other and we decided to
listen to each other's ideas and whatever. And then to find out that we had so much in common ...
He's really sweet. We're gonna be good friends I think, if we aren't already. We're pretty good
friends now. It all happened within a week, yeah, a week tomorrow.
As part of an explanatory framework for understanding the accelerated intimacy that developed between
Kirstin and Oliver, Walther (1996) examined a number of CMC and F2F experimental conditions and
Steven L. Thorne Artifacts and Cultures-of-Use in Intercultural Communication
Language Learning & Technology 54
developed a notion he terms "hyperpersonal interaction." The idea is this -- in comparison to F2F groups,
CMC groups can build interpersonal relationships that attain greater depth and intimacy, including CMC
groupings of culturally diverse partners who have never met F2F. Walther builds on what is termed the
SIDE model, or Social Identity/Deindividuation theory of group behavior (Lea & Spears, 1992; Spears &
Lea, 1992). In application to CMC contexts in which there is little or no prior knowledge of one's
conversational partner and none of the visual-social information common to F2F interaction, the cues
available take on increased significance. "This overreliance on minimal cues is more pronounced when
participants have no physical exposure to one another, as in CMC; they are 'deindividuated'" (Walther,
1996, p. 18). Expanding the SIDE model, Walther asserts that "not only do CMC senders overcome the
limits of the media to express personal cues, they may actually do so in ways that F2F communicators
cannot" ( p. 19), including the over-attribution of similar and positive characteristics which can result in
idealizations of one's conversational partner. Such over-attribution in dialogic communication creates an
ascending feedback loop, the outcome of which might be termed hyper-intimacy (for academic and
popular accounts of on-line relationship building and infatuation, see Cohen, 2001; Parks & Floyd, 1996;
Scharlott & Christ, 1995). An important update to Walther's "hyperpersonal interaction" concept is that he
claims e-mail, as an asynchronous environment offering time to craft a polished presentation of self, more
readily facilitates hyperpersonal effects in CMC mediated relationships. Though this may have been the
case in the mid 1990s, e-mail is becoming a tool of the past for age-peer communication for many of the
American undergraduates participating in the telecollaboration projects in 2002. For them, AOL Instant
Messenger and its synchronous, one-to-one functionality was the more likely tool to result in idealized
intention-ascription and relationships characterized by accelerated intimacy. Indeed, something very like
this appears in Kirsten's account of her relationship with Oliver:
Kirsten: He and I have become quite the [laughing] friends! I really do think he has a crush on
me. It's really cute. The moment I mention my boyfriend he's like "ohhh." My roommates spent
like 15 minutes saying [falsetto voice] "you have a crush on him too!" but I'm like "no I don't," I
just think it's really neat to be able to talk to someone in France, and in French! That's my goal.
That's why I'm taking the class.
What happens when Internet-mediated infatuation meets foreign language use? For Kirsten, the result was
intense periods of communicative activity that drew much of their energy from muted but obvious
flirtation. Conditions amenable to the development of hyperpersonal communication include perceived
commonality and/or a shared goal, a high sense of self-awareness among participants, communicators that
are non-proximal, and in cases where the medium involves a limited-cues channel that allows for editing
and selective self-presentation (Walther, 1996). The elusive, allusive world of hyperpersonal
communication may provide a powerful affordance for communicative activity, and in Kirsten's case,
demonstrably supported her foreign language development in the areas of syntax and pragmatics.
In the section below, the final case study further establishes my argument that specific Internet
communication tools correlate with specific forms of communicative in/activity.
Case Three: The Wrong Tool for the Right Job?
For many American students, an ever-expanding proportion of their lives is mediated by communication
and information technologies. Computer-mediated communication has become a habitual dimension of
social, academic, and professional communicative activity. That most of the American university students
participating in the French section of the 2002 Penn State Telecollaboration Project were spending three
or more hours a day using the Internet is not surprising (based on survey and interview data). Pushing
back to secondary school, a number of studies carried out as part of the Pew Internet & American Life
Project (2001) revealed that teenagers 12-17 years of age use the Internet as their primary source for
information for their most recent school project (71%) and communicate with teachers and peers outside
of school on a regular basis (41%). In another study, Pew researchers found that 90 million Americans
Steven L. Thorne Artifacts and Cultures-of-Use in Intercultural Communication
Language Learning & Technology 55
(approximately 84% of the total online population in the US as of October 2001), have participated in on-
line communities to get or give information and/or for social or professional purposes (Horrigan, 2001).
With often five or more years of Internet experience before they arrive at university, and then an increase
in daily usage once they are on campus (due to the availability of Ethernet in the Penn State dorms and
campus labs open 24 hours a day), specific cultures-of-use have developed that demonstrably contribute
to intercultural communicative processes (e.g., the case of Kirsten, above) while in other unforeseen
ways, present new challenges to the top-down organization of foreign language telecollaborative
interaction (e.g., faculty-researchers making decisions about which CMC tools to use and for what
communicative tasks).
In this brief section, I explore the ramifications of Internet communication tool choice and its relation to
the telecollaborative assignments that were part of a fourth semester French course (the same course in
which Kirsten, of Case Two, participated). The structured interactions called for each student to exchange
a minimum of three e-mails over the semester with their French key-pals (other CMC tools and activities
were also employed). Additionally, three in-class synchronous exchanges were carried out during which
the French and American key-pals had the opportunity to "chat" with one another in real-time (using the
program, NetMeeting). A video conferencing link was also used and students from both classes took turns
sharing video images of themselves, most of which involved waving or extended shots of student groups
typing at computer stations (sound was not available). At the end of the third and final NetMeeting
session, the following interaction was video recorded and subsequently transcribed. Three students were
both typing messages to their key-pals in France (two sharing a computer and one solo) while also talking
to one another about their key-pals and the intercultural experience.
1) Kate: I love François. He's so terrific. I would talk to him, like, doing this [indicating the
synchronous NetMeeting session in progress], like, on IM. I would talk to him. I just don't like
writing e-mails.
2) Grace: This isn't that great either, I mean … [indicating NetMeeting].
3) Stef: I would talk to him, like, if he was on AOL [IM]? I'd talk to him all the time. He's a sweetie.
4) Grace: Did he give you his ICQ number?
5) Stef: No.=
6) Grace: =He [laughing] gave me his. It's like, ICQ is like what they use in France instead of
Instant Messenger.
7) Kate: Well lucky you [jaded voice]
8) Grace: I don't, I don't [laughing] talk to him [on ICQ].
9) Stef: Poor François [relating to his self-disclosed isolation from women in France since his school
is mostly male]
10) Kate: He's so cute, I love him! François is the best person ever!
11) Researcher: Can you all follow up with e-mail or? [in reference to the final few minutes of the
last chat session of the term]
12) Stef: Yeah, but I hate writing e-mails.
13) Researcher: Really?
14) Grace: It's just that, this is just better because, it's not like, here's what I have to say and then all
these responses to it? Like I hated pen pals when I was little.
15) Kate: Yeah, I did too! I never liked them. I never did them.
Steven L. Thorne Artifacts and Cultures-of-Use in Intercultural Communication
Language Learning & Technology 56
16) Researcher: So are the e-mail exchanges just not as dynamic as this, or=
17) Stef: No [they aren't]=
18) Grace: =But I think it's also because we have, like we communicate with a lot of people now
through AOL [instant messenger]. That's so like that's how I talk to all my friends at different
colleges=
19) Stef: =and here=
20) Grace: =We don't send e-mails back and forth to each other to like catch up. Like we just talk
[using IM]. It's very like=
21) Stef: =Yeah, it's just, like, what we're used to.
22) Researcher: So you don't use e-mail that much normally?
23) Stef: I almost never do. I just use it for teachers and stuff=
24) Grace: =teachers, yeah. Or my Mom [laughs].
This dialogue illustrates a powerful and unexpected force that confounded the viability of the planned e-
mail exchanges for a number of the American students. All three of the students found François to be
likable, "the best person ever," and someone they would interact with on a regular basis, but only using
the "right" Internet communication tool. Grace and Stef in particular (lines 23-24) vocalized the
perception of many of the students interviewed for this paper: E-mail is a tool for communication between
power levels and generations (e.g., students to teachers; sons/daughters to parents) and hence is unsuitable
as a medium for age-peer relationship building and social interaction (the research project team's primary
aspirations for the intercultural exchange). Grace, perhaps representing a more extreme case, described
her views on e-mail this way.
Interviewer: Do you e-mail much?
Grace: Not not that much. Just mostly for communicating with professors.
Interviewer: And for your key-pal?
Grace: I just e-mailed him a couple of things in English … and then I was like, I'm not talking to
him any more except in the NetMeetings. And then [the Instructor] was saying how like we have
to do that, but then I didn't [laughs]. I didn't e-mail him any more .... Like I just, it just wasn't very
convenient I guess. Like if you had AOL Instant Messenger I would just, you know, type in
something every so often or whatever, but it's different than e-mail .... It's like, "Oh God, I have to
write an e-mail now." Like it's just like, you don't want to, it's like an effort.
Interviewer: So how many times a week do you e-mail friends?
Grace: Never.
Interviewer: Never?
Grace: Never.
For these undergraduate American students, e-mail was a constraining variable in the intercultural
communication process. Grace enjoyed her interactions with François. She states at a number of points
that she would have communicated with him more readily and eagerly had she had IM as a tool option.
For a number of students participating in the Spring 2002 telecollaboration section of this French course,
the e-mail interactions fell flat and did not result in rich, or for that matter, contentious or problematic
exchanges either (in contrast to Case One, presented earlier). They simply did not happen at all. This is
due, in part, to the fact that the communication tool decided upon by the project coordinators and
Steven L. Thorne Artifacts and Cultures-of-Use in Intercultural Communication
Language Learning & Technology 57
instructor, e-mail, carried with it the specific limitation of acting as a communicative medium well suited
for vertical communication across power and generation lines, but utterly inappropriate as a tool to
mediate interpersonal age-peer relationship building. For Grace, her conviction that e-mail was an
inappropriate tool for age-peer interaction even overpowered the coercive force of the direct (graded)
assignment given by the instructor to continue e-mail exchanges. In other words, though she liked her
key-pal and enjoyed the project generally, Grace chose not to participate when e-mail was the modality
option.
DISCUSSION
Mediational artifacts both complicate and help to reveal the dynamics of human communicative activity.
As an added mediational layer, CMC tools present additional variables and associations that may be
difficult to predict. However, as a medium that produces a persistent representation of communicative
interaction, CMC residua (in the form of on-screen or printed out log files) can be scrutinized and
reflected upon by researchers and participants and can help to locate specific developmental episodes.
Based on the data and analysis presented, what can we weave together from these three distinct cases of
intercultural communication? First, I'll make the reminder that I am encouraging a dialectical approach
emerging from the structuration lineage that emphasizes the relations between local social material
conditions, the cultures-of-use of Internet communication tools, and the communicative goals at hand. As
I have attempted to demonstrate, the mediational means available (e.g., IM versus e-mail) and its cultural-
historical resonance for users, play a critical role in how and even if the communicative process and
accompanying interpersonal relationships develop.
As illustrated in Case One, artifacts can form the nexus of diverse and heterodox activity (Bødker, 1997).
While "comprehension is the most primitive and important precondition for human solidarity" (Bruner,
1995, p. 28), differing cultures-of-use of an ostensibly "shared" or "common" mediational artifact may
invoke divergent communicative expectations. For Internet-mediated interpersonal or hyperpersonal
relationships to develop, I suggest that certain minimum alignments of cultures-of-use are a necessary
condition. In other words, the cultures-of-use of a communicative medium -- its perceived existence and
construction as a cultural tool -- may differ interculturally just as communicative genres and personal
style may differ interculturally (e.g., Case One). Internet communication tools and their cultures-of-use,
associated communicative genres, and for participant-actors, a shared orientation to activity, are necessary
before substantive intercultural communication might develop. Cases One and Three both illustrate
problems at these various levels and for many educators would be treated as unsuccessful encounters. It is
significant that artifacts take their character from activity. Cultures-of-use, however mitigating or
facilitative, are dynamic and will necessarily evolve in relation to the object of an individual or collective
activity. As Bødker notes, artifacts have a "double character": They are an "object in the world around us
that we can reflect on, and they mediate our interaction with the world" (1997, p. 150). As such, teachers
and students can interrogate mediational artifacts and their cultures-of-use as an important (and altogether
neglected) dimension of Internet-mediated intercultural communication.18
As an example of intercultural communication at work in the foreign language learning process, Case
Two illustrates the potential for intimacy-charged relationship-building through IM to result in a
tremendous volume of reading and typing in French and English. Though we have but a fraction of
Kirsten's non-course related IM and e-mail transcripts, the data show significant gains in the areas of T/V
usage and French prepositions of location (and additionally, reveal development in the use of logical
connectors such as "whereas" and "consequently"19). Her self-image as a speaker of French rose
considerably through her threshold IM conversation in which she was able to self-regulate during her first
authentic communicative experience in French (book smart and life smart discussion, above). Though not
in contradiction to some of the critiques I voiced earlier (that over-attribution and hyperpersonal
communication may elide otherwise developmentally worthwhile contestations with difference), Kirsten's
Steven L. Thorne Artifacts and Cultures-of-Use in Intercultural Communication
Language Learning & Technology 58
IM exchanges and concomitant interpersonal relationship with Oliver suggest that both pragmatic and
linguistic affordances were constructed through this communicative activity.
Cultural Artifacts and Socio-Historically Located Subjects
Instead of the presumption of "extreme dissembedding" (Miller & Slater, 2000, p. 4) between, say,
educationally oriented CMC activities and F2F interaction, or the position which suggests that CMC and
F2F communicative interaction achieves similar results save for differences in rate of transfer (e.g., social
processing theory discussed earlier), we might benefit from assuming that most forms of internet-
mediated educational activity are embedded in and functionally dissassociable from other habituated and
everyday communicative contexts. These may include casual F2F encounters, non-virtual relations of
power and knowledge (such as occur in formal F2F educational settings, for example), or importantly, as
I have argued elsewhere (Thorne, 1999, 2000a), that the process of becoming a competent member of one
digitally mediated speech community may have demonstrable effects on presentation of self and the
aesthetics of communicative performativity (e.g., Butler, 1993; Cameron, 2000) in another, quite
dissimilar digitally mediated interaction. In essence, an approach that presumes the existence of "the
Internet" and then seeks to understand its effects on identity, activity, social formations, or the genres
appropriate for intercultural communication risks becoming yet another argument that succumbs to the
reductionism implicit to technological determination on the one hand and of reifying a dualism between
agent and structure on the other (Miller & Slater, 2000).
Communicative activity articulates with and is a form of material culture (Bourdieu, 1991; Gee, 1990;
Lemke, 1995; The New London Group, 1996). As such, getting a handle on material culture and its
production, consumption, reproduction, and transformation involves interdependent correlations that can
include multiple forms of digitally mediated activity (e-mail, chat, Web use, instant messenger), non-
digital communicative and literacy practices, experience in and of brick-and-mortar institutions like
schools and universities, and language socialization practices (again, representing a wide array of contexts
and serving differing goals and needs). McDermott (1977) has remarked that people create environments
for one another. Focusing on the relationships between cultures-of-use and intercultural human
communicative activity mediated by the Internet, I suggest, inspired by Latour (1993, 1999) and
Tomasello (1999), that cultures-of-use and mediational artifacts co-evolve over time. It is this co-
evolutionary process that warrants attention and that correlates to how communication is carried out at
both the intra and intercultural level. People engaged with and mediated by material culture in all its
forms mark the profitable point of departure for research in the area of communicative practice and
intercultural understanding.
In this paper I have attempted to describe some instances of intercultural communication that attempt to
live up to the notion of ecological validity: that any analysis really ought to be consistent with the
participants' definition of situation (Cole, Hood, & McDermott, 1997). My tactical approach, to borrow a
phrase from de Certeau (1984), has been to balance the materiality of networked language-based social
interaction with the participant-relative perspectives of students. Showing that cultural, individual and
collective historical factors influence the ways students perceive Internet communication tools and their
(mis)uses provides insight into relationships between language use, mediational means, levels of
engagement, and the potential for authenticity in the communicative process, all of which are implicated
in the activity of language development.
Internet communication tools cannot be fully apprehended from a positivist vantage point as generically
"there" in the world. Cultural artifacts such as global communication technologies are produced by and
productive of socio-historically located subjects. Such artifacts take their functional form and significance
from the human activities they mediate and the meanings that communities create through them.
Steven L. Thorne Artifacts and Cultures-of-Use in Intercultural Communication
Language Learning & Technology 59
NOTES
1. The cultural historical perspective marks a radical epistemological shift from Cartesian-derived
theories of cognition and development that separate forms of knowledge from social practice. The key to
this shift away from Cartesian dualism is the notion of mediation and internalization in which the
mediational means are themselves cultural tools and artifacts (Cole & Engeström, 1993; Engeström,
1999; Wertsch, 1998).
2. Walther (1992, 1996) challenges the cues-filtered-out research by persuasively arguing that the
comparison is typically made between CMC log files and transcripts of face-to-face interactions. Since
transcripts of face-to-face interaction cannot convey the entirety of social and relational information that
may be critical to the ordering of communicative interaction, such comparisons "may be tainted" (1996, p.
34).
3. Acknowledging the debate within applied linguistics about the myth or reality of the native speaker
(e.g., Kramsch, 1997), as well as the fact the national languages discussed in this study (French for
France, English for the US) may not be the first language of participants residing in these countries, I use
expert speaker throughout this paper in place of the potentially inaccurate term "native speaker."
4. A lycée is an institution that meshes together high school and college or community college
environments.
5. Directed by Mathieu Kassovitz, "La Haine" (The Hatred) depicts the experience of three boys living in
housing projects in a Parisian banlieue (suburb).
6. Data throughout this paper have been made anonymous. In accordance with the differing human
subjects guidelines for the two research contexts involved, case study one uses only participants' first
names, and pseudonyms are used in all instances for case studies two and three.
7. Synchronous inter-class CMC was facilitated using a MOO server coupled with the MacMOOse client
which automatically tags user messages with their names (e.g., Eric says, "..."; Ken says, "...").
8. None of the orthography or grammar have been modified, but portions of these messages have been
deleted (marked by "…") due to space limitations.
9. Note that Richard Kern generously shared the French-American data included in both this paper and
that published by Kramsch and Thorne (2002). For his analysis, see Kern, 2000.
10. Genre as Kramsch and Thorne (2002) use it, and as it is employed in this paper, builds upon the
following key insights:
1) "Genres can be defined as the historically specific conventions and ideals according to which
authors compose discourse and audiences receive it" (Hanks 2000, p. 135).
2) Genre addresses the ways language functions in and co-produces social and cultural contexts.
3) Genre addresses how institutional, social, and medium effects produce regularities in discourse.
4) Genre creates expectations of communicative form at the levels of style, content, and register.
Genre suggests that language use is realized by means of a systematic relationship between cultural
context, situational context, and linguistic features (known collectively within the Hallidayan framework
as the text-context model, e.g., Halliday & Hassan, 1985).
11. From a cultural studies perspective, radically dissimilar cultures-of-use of CMC tools may mitigate
the construction of a "Third Space," which Bhabha suggests is a "precondition for the articulation of
cultural difference" (1994, p. 38). Bhabha describes the Third Space as "the discursive conditions of
enunciation" that move signification away from "primordial unity and fixity" and which "makes the
Steven L. Thorne Artifacts and Cultures-of-Use in Intercultural Communication
Language Learning & Technology 60
structure of meaning and reference an ambivalent process [and] destroys this mirror of representation in
which cultural knowledge is customarily revealed as an integrated, open, expanding code" (p. 36).
12. In a 2001 article on e-gateway titled "France Still Lags in Internet Use," Jüptner, using Nielsen Net
Ratings statistics for August, 2001, reports that 11.7 million, or 20% of the French population has regular
access to the Internet, with 22% going on-line at least once a week at home, work, or in cybercafes. By
contrast, the August 2001 Nielsen Net Ratings for the US and Canada (a combined north American
category) is 166.4 million, or 59.75% of the total population.
13. The purpose of the project is to examine the effects of intercultural communication in University-level
foreign language classes on students' language acquisition, cultural awareness, and beliefs about language
learning. Two each of intermediate-level French, German, and Spanish classes at Penn State are
participating in the project. One class in each language is partnered with a class abroad and uses
electronic media for communication and collaboration (i.e., the Telecollaboration or TC classes) while the
second class in each language uses the same communication tools for intra-class communication, but does
not correspond or collaborate with students abroad (i.e., the control classes). Each telecollaborative
partnership utilizes a number of Internet communication tools that minimally include e-mail, Web-based
threaded discussion, and synchronous chat. We have amassed a substantial and growing corpus of these
texts and have coded them for time (week of the semester), tool (chat, e-mail, threaded discussion, video
conference), and by language, student (and/or student "team" or working group), and activity type (e.g.,
writing and editing an essay for eventual posting to a Web site, a discussion of films or literature seen by
both partner classes, etc.). The project will be completed at the end of 2003.
14. Kirsten acknowledges that it was an e-mail message that sparked their subsequent flurry of IM
activity. In this message, Kirsten asked Oliver if he had access to an IM client (mentioning Yahoo
Messenger, ICQ, and AOL IM by name) and encouraged him to contact her using one of these tools,
stating that "je pense vous etes intelligent et gentil et j'aime parler avec vous" (I think you are intelligent
and nice and i like speaking with you). She continues in the second (of two) paragraphs with questions
about the recent French presidential primaries, ending with "Votre candidat extreme [Le Pen] ne gagnera
pas, je crois et j'espere! Je ne peut pas attendre de lire votre reponse!" (Your extreme candidate [Le Pen]
won't win, I believe and hope! I can't wait to read your response!).
15. An equals sign refers to an overlap between speakers' utterances, sometimes called latching.
16. This is the translation that Kirsten herself gives for "l'intelligence des livres" et "l'intelligence dans la
vie" in her gloss of this IM exchange.
17. The zone of proximal development (ZPD) is defined by Vygotsky as "the distance between actual
developmental level as determined by independent problem solving and the level of potential
development as determined through problem solving under adult guidance or in collaboration with more
capable peers." (1978, p. 86; for a discussion of the ZPD in second language education, see Kinginger,
2002, and Dunn & Lantolf, 1998). For Vygotsky, the ZPD is not only a model of the developmental
process, but also a conceptual tool that educators can use to understand aspects of students' emerging
capacities that are in early stages of maturation. In this way, when used proactively, teachers using the
ZPD concept as a diagnostic have the potential to create conditions that may give rise to specific forms of
development.
18. Some practical concerns are
• Though the participants may not represent all or even the majority of university students in North
America in terms of their Internet use, resistance to e-mail, and predilection for IM, the relative
homogeneity of their perspectives merits attention. Based on these, the following issues may
prove relevant to other institutions considering telecollorative foreign language projects.
• Tool selection may be critical to success, and even to achieve minimal interaction.
Steven L. Thorne Artifacts and Cultures-of-Use in Intercultural Communication
Language Learning & Technology 61
• Language learning and intercultural preparedness may benefit CMC intercultural communication
in terms of relationship building and general cultural awareness prior to students embarking on a
study abroad program. Wilkinson (1996), in a small sample study, found that prior cross-cultural
experience played a positive role in a French study abroad immersion program. A number of the
students we interviewed stated that they may keep in contact with their key-pals and a smaller
number intended to look them up in person when they went to France during their junior year.
19. In interview, Kirsten mentioned that Oliver read over and commented on one of her French essays,
saying, "The whole thing has been wow, you know? It's been an eye opener for me, it's been, you know,
as little progress I've seen myself make, and I'm like "oh I already knew that, oh I already knew that, wow
I don't understand that. Where'd that come from?" I feel like I got to that plateau of, "okay, I learned the
vocab, I learned the conjugation, I learned blah blah blah," now it's like structure and it's more the in
depth and the "okay, let's expand the vocabulary and use things like consequently, whereas, from this to
that, and you know, little stuff, little stuff."
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Some data for this article were collected as part of the Penn State Foreign Language Telecollaboration
Project funded by a United States Department of Education International Research and Studies Program
grant (CFDA No.:84.017A). The author of this paper is a co-principal investigator on the grant. The
author wishes to thank Joan Kelly Hall, Celeste Kinginger, James Lantolf, two anonymous LLT
reviewers, special issue editor Julie A. Belz, and LLT Associate Editor Richard Kern for feedback on this
paper.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Steve Thorne is the Associate Director of the Center for Language Acquisition, Associate Director of the
Center for Advanced Language Proficiency Education and Research (CALPER), and Assistant Professor
in Linguistics and Applied Language Studies at Penn State University. His research addresses activity
theory, additional language learning, and computer-mediated communication.
E-mail: sthorne@psu.edu
REFERENCES
Agar, M. (1994). Language shock: Understanding the culture of conversation. New York: William
Morrow.
Alm-Lequeux, A. (2001). Using the Internet as a zone of proximal development for teaching indirect
speech: A Vygotskian approach. Die Unterrichtspraxis / The Teaching of German, 34(1),1-9.
Archer, M. S. (1995). Realist social theory: A morphogenetic approach. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.
Belz, J. A. (2001). Institutional and individual dimensions of transatlantic group work in network-based
foreign language teaching. ReCALL, 13(2), 213-231.
Belz, J. A. (2002). Social dimensions of telecollaborative foreign language study. Language Learning &
Technology, 6(1), 60-81. Retrieved February 16, 2002, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/belz/
Belz, J. A. (2003). Linguistic perspectives on the development of intercultural competence in
telecollaboration. Language Learning & Technology 7(2), 68-117. Available in this issue at
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/belz/
Steven L. Thorne Artifacts and Cultures-of-Use in Intercultural Communication
Language Learning & Technology 62
Belz, J. A., & Kinginger, C. (2002). The cross-linguistic development of address form use in
telecollaborative language learning: Two case studies. The Canadian Modern Language Review / La
revue canadienne des langues vivantes, 59(2), 189-214.
Belz, J. A., & Kinginger, C. (in press). Discourse options and the development of pragmatic competence
by classroom learners of German: The case of address forms. Language Learning, 53(2).
Bhabha, H. (1994). The location of culture. New York: Routledge.
Blake, R. (2000). Computer mediated communication: A window on L2 Spanish interlanguage. Language
Learning & Technology, 4(1), 120-136. Retrieved February 15, 2002, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/
blake/
Bødker, S. (1997). Computers in mediated human activity. Mind, Culture and Activity, 4(3), 149-158.
Bourdieu, P. (1977). Outline of a theory of practice. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Bourdieu, P. (1991). Language and symbolic power. Cambridge, MA.: Harvard University Press.
Boxer, D. (2002). Discourse issues in cross-cultural pragmatics. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics,
22, 150-167.
Braun, B., & Castree, N. (Eds.). (1998). Remaking reality: Nature at the millennium. London: Routledge.
Breen, M., & Candlin, C. (1980). The essentials of a communicative curriculum in language teaching.
Applied Linguistics, 1, 89-112.
Brown, P., & Levinson, S. (1987). Politeness: Some universals in language usage. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Bruner, J. (1995). Meaning and self in a cultural perspective. In D. Bakhurst & C. Sypnowich (Eds.), The
social self (pp. 18-29). London: Sage Publications.
Butler, J. (1993). Bodies that matter: On the discursive limits of "sex." New York: Routledge.
Cameron, D. (2000). Good to talk? Living and working in a communication culture. London: Sage.
Chaiklin, S. (2001). The institutionalization of cultural-historical psychology as a multnational practice.
In S. Chaiklin (Ed.), The theory and practice of cultural-historical psychology (pp. 15-34). Aarhus,
Denmark: Aarhus University Press.
Chun, D. (1994). Using computer networking to facilitate the acquisition of interactive competence.
System, 22(1), 17-31.
Cohen, J. (2001, January 18). On the net, love really is blind. New York Times.
Cole, M. (1995). Socio-cultural-historical psychology: Some general remarks and a proposal for a new
kind of cultural-genetic methodology. In J. V. Wertsch, P. del Rio, & A. Alvarez (Eds.), Sociocultural
studies of mind (pp. 187-214). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Cole, M. (1996). Cultural psychology: A once and future discipline. Cambridge, MA.:The Belknap Press
of Harvard University Press.
Cole, M., & Engestrom, Y. (1993). A cultural-historical approach to distributed cognition. In G. Salomon
(Ed.), Distributed cognitions: Psychological and educational considerations (pp. 1-46). Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Cole, M., Hood, L., & McDermott, R. (1997). Concepts of ecological validity: Their differing
implications for comparative cognitive research. In M. Cole, Y. Engestrom, & O. Vasquez (Eds.), Mind,
Steven L. Thorne Artifacts and Cultures-of-Use in Intercultural Communication
Language Learning & Technology 63
culture, and actvivity: Seminal papers from the laboratory of comparative human cognition (pp. 49-58).
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Coughlan, P., & Duff, P. (1994). Same task, different activities: Analysis of a SLA task from an activity
theory perspective. In J. Lantolf & G. Appel (Eds.), Vygotskian approaches to second language research
(pp. 173-191). Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing Company.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The psychology of optimal experience. New York: Harper & Row.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1993). The evolving self: A psychology for the third millennium. New York:
HarperCollins Publishers.
Daft, R., & Lengel, R. (1984). Information richness: A new approach to managerial behavior and
organizational design. In B. M. Staw & L. L. Cummings (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior, 6
(pp. 191-233). Homewood, IL: JAI Press.
de Certeau, M. (1984). The practice of everyday life. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Delisle, H. (1986). Intimacy, solidarity, and distance: The pronouns of address in German. Die
Unterrichtspraxis, 19(1), 22-26.
Dubrovsky, V., Kiesler, S., & Sethna, B. (1991). The equalization phenomenon: Status effects in
computer-mediated and face-to-face decision making groups. Human Computer Interaction, 6, 119-146.
Dunn, W., & Lantolf, J. P. (1998). Vygotsky's zone of proximal development and Krashen's i + 1:
Incommensurable constructs; incommensurable theories. Language Learning, 48, 411-442.
Engeström, Y. (Ed.). (1999). Perspectives on activity theory. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.
Erickson, T. (2000, January). Making sense of computer-mediated communication (CMC): Conversations
as genres, CMC systems as genre ecologies. In J. F. Nunamaker, Jr. & R. H. Sprague, Jr. (Eds.), The
proceedings of the thirty-third Hawaii International Conference on Systems Science. New York: IEEE
Press.
Frawley, W. (1997). Vygotsky and cognitive science: Language and the unification of the social and
computational mind. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Frawley, W., & Lantolf, J. (1985). Second language discourse: A Vygotskyan perspective. Applied
Linguistics, 6, 19-44.
Furstenberg, G., Levet, S., English, K., & Maillet, K. (2001). Giving a virtual voice to the silent language
of culture: The cultura project. Language Learning & Technology, 5(1), 55-102. Retrieved February 18,
2002, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num1/furstenberg/
Gee, J. (1990). Social linguistics and literacies: Ideology in discourses. Bristol, PA: Taylor & Francis.
Giddens, A. (1984). The constitution of society. Cambridge, England: Polity.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1978). Language as social semiotic: The social interpretation of language and
meaning. London: Arnold.
Halliday, M. A. K., & Hassan, R. (1985). Language, context, and text: Aspects of language in a social-
semiotic perspective. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Hanks, W. (2000). Intertexts. Writings on language, utterance and context. Lanham, MD: Rowman &
Littlefield.
Hanks, W. (1996). Language and communicative practice. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Steven L. Thorne Artifacts and Cultures-of-Use in Intercultural Communication
Language Learning & Technology 64
Harvey, D. (1996). Justice, nature and the geography of difference. Oxford, England: Blackwell.
Herring, S. (Ed.) (1996). Computer-mediated communication: Linguistic, social and cross-cultural
perspectives. Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Herring, S. (1999). Interactional coherence in CMC. Proceedings of the Thirty-Second Annual Hawaii
International Conference on Systems Sciences (CD-ROM). Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer Society.
Horrigan, J. (2001). Online communities: Networks that nurture long-distance relationships and local
ties. Pew Internet & American Life Project. Released 6pm EST, October 31, 2001. Available online at
http://www.pewinternet.org/reports/toc.asp?Report=47
Kapetlinin, V. (1996). Computer-mediated activity: Functional organs in social and developmental
contexts. In B. A. Nardi (Ed.), Context and consciousness: Activity theory and human-computer
interaction (pp. 45-68). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kern, R. G. (1995). Restructuring classroom interaction with networked computers: Effects on quantity
and characteristics of language production. Modern Language Journal, 79(4), 457-476.
Kern, R. G. (2000). Literacy and language teaching. Oxford, England: Oxford U. Press.
Kinginger, C. (2002). Defining the zone of proximal development in US foreign language education.
Applied Linguistics, 23(2), 240-261.
Kinginger, C., Gouvès-Hayward, A., & Simpson, V. (1999). A tele-collaborative course on French-
American intercultural communication. French Review, 72(5), 853-866.
Kötter, M. (2003). Negotiation of meaning and codeswitching in online tandems. Language Learning &
Technology, 7(2), 145-172. Available in this issue at http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/kotter/
Kramsch, C. (1997, May). The privilege of the nonnative speaker. PMLA, May, 359-369.
Kramsch, C., & Thorne, S. (2002). Foreign language learning as global communicative practice. In D.
Cameron & D. Block (Eds.), Globalization and language teaching (pp. 83-100). New York: Routledge.
Lantolf, J. (2000). Second language learning as a mediated process. Language Learning, 33(2), 79-96.
Lantolf, J. (in press). Sociocultural theory and SLA: An exegesis. In E. Hinkel (Ed.), Handbook of
research in second language teaching and learning. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lantolf, J., & Thorne, S. (in press). Sociocultural theory and the genesis of second language development.
Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Latour, B. (1993). We have never been modern (Catherine Porter, Trans.). New York: Harvester
Wheatsheaf.
Latour, B. (1999). Pandora's hope. Essays on the reality of science studies. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991) Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Lea, M., & Spears, R. (1992). Paralanguage and social perception in computer-mediated communication.
Journal of Organizational Computing, 2, 321-341.
Lemke, J. (1995). Textual politics: Discourse and social dynamics. Bristol, PA: Taylor & Francis.
Leont'ev, D. A. (1992). Joint activity, communication, and interaction: Toward well-grounded "pedagogy
of cooperation." Journal of Russian and East European Psychology, 3(2), 43-58.
Steven L. Thorne Artifacts and Cultures-of-Use in Intercultural Communication
Language Learning & Technology 65
Levinson, S. (1995). Interactional biases in human thinking. In E. Goody (Ed.), Social intelligence and
interaction: Expressions and implications of the social bias in human intelligence (pp. 221-260).
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
McDermott, R. (1977). Social relations as contexts for learning in school. Harvard Educational Review,
47, 198-213.
Miller, D., & Slater, D. (2000). The Internet: An ethnographic approach. Oxford, England: Berg.
Morford, J. (1997). Social indexicality in French pronominal address. Journal of Linguistic Anthropology,
7(1), 3-37.
Nardi, B. A. (1996). Studying context: A comparison of activity theory, situated action models, and
distributed cognition. In B. A. Nardi (Ed.), Context and consciousness: Activity theory and human-
computer interaction (pp. 69-101). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
The New London Group. (1996). A pedagogy of multiliteracies: Designing social futures. Harvard
Educational Review, 66(1), 60-92.
Ortega, L. (1997). Processes and outcomes in networked classroom interaction: Defining the research
agenda for L2 computer-assisted classroom discussion. Language Learning & Technology, 1(1), 82-93.
Retrieved February 18, 2002, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/ortega/
Parks, R., & Floyd, K. (1996). Making friends in cyberspace. Journal of Communication, 23, 409-425.
Pellettieri, J. (2000). Negotiation in cyberspace: The role of chatting in the development of grammatical
competence. In. M. Warschauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Network-based language teaching: Concepts and
practice (pp. 59-86). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Pica, T. (1995). The textual outcomes of native-speaker-nonnative speaker negotiation: What do they
reveal about second language learning? In S. Kramsch & S. McConnell-Ginet (Eds.), Text and context.
Cross-disciplinary perspectives on language study (pp. 198-237). Lexington, MA: D.C.Heath.
Rommetveit, R. (1974). On message structure: A framework for the study of language and
communication. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Savignon, S. (1972). Communicative competence. An experiment in foreign language teaching.
Philadelphia: Center for Curriculum Development.
Savignon, S. (1983). Communicative competence: Theory and classroom practice. Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley.
Sawyer, K. (2002). Unresolved tensions in sociocultural theory: Analogies with contemporary
sociological debates. Culture & Psychology, 8(3), 283-305.
Scharlott, B., & Christ, W. (1995). Overcoming relationship-initiation barriers: The impact of a computer-
dating system on sex role, shyness, and appearance inhibitions. Computers in Human Behavior, 11, 191-
204.
Schinke-Llano, L. (1993). On the value of a Vygotskian framework for SLA theory and research.
Language Learning, 43(1), 121-129.
Schmidt, R. (1990). The role of consciousness in second language acquisition. Applied Linguistics, 11,
219-258.
Searle, J. (1992). The rediscovery of the mind. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Sfard, A. (1998). On two metaphors for learning and the dangers of choosing just one. Educational
Researcher, 27, 4-13.
Steven L. Thorne Artifacts and Cultures-of-Use in Intercultural Communication
Language Learning & Technology 66
Spears, R., & Lea, M. (1992). Social influence and the influence of the "social" in computer-mediated
communication. In M. Lea (Ed.), Contexts of computer-mediated communication (pp. 30-65). London:
Harvester-Wheatsheaf.
Swain, M. (2000). The output hypothesis and beyond: Mediating acquisition through collaborative
dialogue. In J. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language acquisition (pp. 97-114). Oxford,
England: Oxford University Press.
Thorne, S. (1999). An activity theoretical analysis of electronic foreign language discourse. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, University of California, Berkeley, CA.
Thorne, S. (2000a). Beyond bounded activity systems: Heterogeneous cultures in instructional uses of
persistent conversation. In S. Herring & T. Erickson (Eds.), The proceedings of the thirty-third Hawaii
International Conference on Systems Science. New York: IEEE Press. Available at
http://language.la.psu.edu/~thorne/cmchicss33.html
Thorne, S. (2000b). Second language acquisition and the truth(s) about relativity. In J. Lantolf (Ed.),
Sociocultural theory and second language acquisition (pp. 219-244). Oxford, England: Oxford University
Press.
Thorne, S. (in press). Cultural historical activity theory and the object of innovation. In O. St. John, K.
van Esch, & E. Schalkwijk (Eds.), New insights into foreign language learning and teaching. Frankfurt,
Germany: Peter Lang Verlag.
Tomasello, M. (1999). The cultural origins of human cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
van der Veer, R., & Valsiner, J. (1991). Understanding Vygotsky. Oxford, England: Blackwell.
van Lier, L. (1996). Interaction in the language curriculum: Awareness, autonomy, & authenticity. New
York: Longman.
van Lier, L. (2000). From input to affordance: Social-interactive learning from an ecological perspective.
In J. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language acquisition (pp. 245-259). Oxford,
England: Oxford University Press.
van Lier, L. (in press). The ecology of language learning. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic
Publishing.
Volosinov, V. N. (1973). Marxism and the philosophy of language. New York: Seminar Press.
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Vygotsky, L. (1986). Thought and language. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Walther, J. (1992). Interpersonal effects in computer-mediated interaction: A relational perspective.
Communication Research, 19, 52-90.
Walther, J. (1994). Anticipated ongoing interaction versus channel effects on relational communication in
computer-mediated communication. Human Communication Research, 40, 473-501.
Walther, J. (1996). Computer-mediated communication: Impersonal, interpersonal, and hyperpersonal
interaction. Communication Research, 23(1), 3-43.
Walther, J. (1997). Group and interpersonal effects in international computer-mediated collaboration.
Human Communication Research, 23, 342-369.
Warschauer, M., & Kern, R.(eds.) (2000). Network-based language teaching: Concepts and practice.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Steven L. Thorne Artifacts and Cultures-of-Use in Intercultural Communication
Language Learning & Technology 67
Wegerif, R. (1998). The social dimensions of asynchronous learning networks. Journal of Asynchronous
Learning Networks, 2(1). Retrieved February 18, 2002, from
http://www.aln.org/publications/jaln/v2n1/v2n1_wegerif.asp
Werry, C. (1996). Linguistic and interactional features of Internet Relay Chat. In Susan Herring (Ed.),
Computer-mediated communication: Linguistic, social and cross-cultural perspectives (pp. 47-63).
Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Wertsch, J. (1998). Mind as action. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Wilkinson, S. (1996). Foreign language conversation and the study abroad transition: A case study.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, the Pennsylvania State University.
Williams, R. (1980). Problems in materialism and culture: Selected essays. London: Verso.
Wylie, L., & Brière, J. F. (1995). Les Français (2nd ed.). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
