Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num1/net/
January 2003, Volume 7, Number 1
pp. 2-3
Copyright © 2003, ISSN 1094-3501 2
ON THE NET
Foreign Language Study and the Brain
Jean W. LeLoup
SUNY Cortland
Robert Ponterio
SUNY Cortland
Many foreign language teachers wishing to keep up with current ideas for improving their teaching based
on research findings may not be able to attend professional conferences as often as they might wish. Web-
based presentations may be a possible alternative to attending a live presentation on a particular topic.
While such Web presentations certainly do not replace conferences, they can represent an additional and
worthwhile avenue of access to current information and ideas, especially for those teachers who live far
from the typical conference venue and who receive little financial support for professional development.
Foreign Language Study and the Brain, a site created and maintained by Dr. Teresa
Kennedy of the University of Idaho, is a good place to start for those foreign
language (FL) educators who wish to find out more about how the brain works and
how those workings relate to second language acquisition. The goal of this Web site
is stated clearly on the home page:
Historical brain research, combined with a review of effective foreign language
methodology and research, provides a framework that teachers can utilize to
incorporate brain-sensitive activities that foster memory storage and language retrieval. Recent research
about the brain, general recommendations for classroom teaching and assorted activities are provided on
this Web site.
The site, in English and Spanish, is part of the University of Idaho Virtual Campus. The material
presented is organized by a clickable line at the bottom of the home page:
A brief synopsis of the material contained each section will provide the reader with an idea of what
resources can be found at this site.
Brain Research in the Foreign Language Classroom
Several general resources about the brain and learning appear in this section. These give the reader access
to background on the topic from the viewpoints of neuroscience, general pedagogy, and foreign language
pedagogy. Links include two to books that deal with brain studies and teaching: Brain Topics: A
Handbook for Teachers and Parents and How People Learn. Both works address issues of interest to
classroom teachers such as brain functioning, how to design an optimal learning environment, and
strategies for teacher learning to name a few. They also provide ample bibliographies for those wishing to
delve further into this subject. The article Summarizing Concepts about Teacher Education, Learning and
Neuroscience calls for teacher education researchers to begin to associate with their neuroscience
colleagues. The link to Brain Research and Education offers many articles for and by educators that
appear both in scholarly journals and in the public press.
In terms of research specific to second language learning, we find essays on early language learning and
language learning after puberty. Another essay discusses the limitations on foreign language study in the
U.S. One can also access Fred Genesees ERIC Digest on Brain Research: Implications for Second
Language Learning from this page.
Jean W. LeLoup and Robert Ponterio On the Net: Foreign Language Study and the Brain
Language Learning & Technology 3
Methods
Dr. Kennedy offers an annotated list of 16 FL teaching methods that will be a good refresher for those
long out of their FL methods courses. She includes some comments on the correlation between these
methods and learning in the FL classroom, emphasizing that "there is no single 'BEST WAY' to teach."
Activities
The page devoted to Activities gives a large nod to Gardner and his theory of Multiple Intelligences.  This
is indeed one area of brain research that has attracted the attention of many foreign language teachers. The
intelligences are listed with links to suggested concomitant activities of a general nature.  Another link
leads to some specific activity suggestions, complete with clip art. The passage from the research
principles to classroom implementation through sample activities helps teachers better grasp the potential
applications of the research in their daily lives.
Presentation
Finally, Dr. Kennedy has provided, in
PowerPoint format, a presentation on
Creating a Brain Compatible
Classroom: An Overview of Brain
Research and Language Learning,
given with Terry Armstrong at the
annual conference of the American
Council on the Teaching of Foreign
Languages in November, 2002.
In addition to the results of a study of
the brains of monolingual and
bilingual teachers, the presentation
includes a discussion of memory and
information storage.  The presentation
also offers numerous fascinating
graphics of the brain and its
component parts. One caveat: This presentation has been optimized for more recent versions of Microsoft
Internet Explorer and may not function on Netscape.
The Foreign Language Study and the Brain site is an excellent example of an effort to bring professional
development to foreign language teachers using the Internet for access to instruction that has traditionally
been found in the classroom, in conferences, and in the published literature. By using the Web to offer
easy access to a condensed overview of the topic as well as broader background information, appropriate
sample lessons, and an electronic presentation simulating the conference experience, Dr. Kennedy has
shown us a direction that many conference presenters could take to disseminate their professional
development offerings much more widely, bringing the word to teachers who would not otherwise have
been able to participate.
