Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num3/editors/
September 2003, Volume 7, Number 3
p. 1
Copyright © 2003, ISSN 1094-3501 1
FROM THE EDITORS
Welcome to Volume 7, Number 3 of Language Learning & Technology.
We regret to inform you that LLT Editor Mark Warschauer is on leave from the journal
following a family tragedy. Irene Thompson has kindly agreed to step in as Editor
during Mark's absence. Our thoughts and prayers are with Mark and his wife Keiko.
Margo Glew has done an excellent job guest editing this special issue under the keen
guidance of Associate Editor Irene Thompson. We thank and congratulate both on a fine
product. Please see the From the Special Issue Editor column for a description of the
content of the issue.
In addition to the articles, columns, and reviews related to the special issue topic
Distance Learning, we are pleased to include a commentary by Phillip Towndrow which
was motivated by LeLoup and Ponterio's On the Net column in our last issue (Vol. 7,
Num. 2). We encourage this kind of thoughtful response and welcome submissions of
commentaries (see Information for Contributors) as well as articles.
Speaking of submissions, please note the Call for Papers for an upcoming special issue
on Technology and Oral Language Development to be guest edited by David Nunan.
We would also like our readers to be aware of the upcoming AILA (International
Association of Applied Linguistics) 2005 conference. We encourage you to attend and
present. Links to HTML and PDF announcements are provided here:
• AILA 2005 announcement (html)
• AILA 2005 announcement (pdf)
Lastly, we proudly congratulate Julie Belz, LLT author and later special issue editor, for
winning second place in the "Best Article in an Electronic Journal Award, 2002" issued
by the American Educational Research Association Communication of Research Special
Interest Group for her article, "Social Dimensions of Telecollaborative Foreign
Language Study," published in Language Learning & Technology volume 6, number 1.
An announcement of the award can be found at http://aera-cr.ed.asu.edu/awards/.
Sincerely,
Dorothy Chun, Editor
Pamela DaGrossa, Managing Editor

