Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num3/emerging/
September 2003, Volume 7, Number 3
pp. 18-22
Copyright © 2003, ISSN 1094-3501 18
EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
Tools for Distance Education: Toward Convergence and Integration
Robert Godwin-Jones
Virginia Comonwealth University
Interest in the remote delivery of language instruction has increased significantly in recent years. As the
Internet has displaced synchronous video as the preferred platform for distance education, the
dramatically lower cost and more modest technical requirements of Web delivery make it a feasible
option for a much broader range of educational institutions. More broadband connections along with the
widespread availability of DVD players allow for incorporation of high-quality video into distance ed
courses, while new Internet audio tools make two-way voice communications possible. The power and
flexibility of the XML programming environment, now widely deployed on the Internet, make new
convergences of educational and entertainment environments possible.
New Web Options
Web environments for distance learning can be custom-created from scratch or built using an interface
supplied by a Learning Management System (LMS). A custom-built project offers the greatest amount of
flexibility while avoiding the temptation to follow a pre-conceived plan for the structure of the course. On
the other hand, this route makes higher demands on design and programming and thus increases cost and
development time. A good number of course sites use Macromedia Director or Authorware to create
content and Flash for delivery of animations and multimedia. Dreamweaver (Macromedia) and FrontPage
(Microsoft) facilitate not only the creation of Web pages, but also enable addition of JavaScript
interactivity through pull-down menus. To be used effectively, these tools need not just programming
skill (to varying degrees) but -- just as importantly -- an understanding of Web design and user interface
issues.
A key advantage of using an LMS is the built-in course framework, a template-based system into which
content is added. For distance learning, an LMS can supply crucial communication and management
tools, as well as assessment builders and gradebook functionality. Although the most widely used LMS
are Blackboard and WebCT, new less-expensive but still highly effective options exist. ETUDES, from
Foothill College offers an easy-to-use interface for distance learning and has features comparable to
Blackboard (and scores higher in Web accessibility). The Manila environment, part of Userland Frontier,
is innovative and powerful groupware which excels at creating a multi-user writing environment. It
allows new information to be easily posted to a weblog. For some purposes Manila may work better than
WebCT. One of the most welcome Web products for language learning is Wimba, which allows for
creation of a variety of voice-enabled Web pages, including voice boards which use the familiar format of
threaded discussion forums for the exchange of recorded messages. Wimba is being widely used in the
US in language learning, for example, at the University of Arizona to supplement use of a MOO in
teaching Mohave. Its use as an "online language lab" is especially useful for less commonly taught
languages, with scarce local availability of native speakers. The variety of functions available in Wimba's
WebLab could be used together as the core functions of a Web-delivered language class.
LMS excel at course and user management but they are not strong in content creation. Course developers
often create structured content outside the LMS using a mainstream multimedia authoring program or
programming environment, then link to that content from inside the LMS shell. The disadvantage of this
approach is the lack of functional and interface integration with the LMS. Recently, both Blackboard and
WebCT have opened up their proprietary systems to plug-ins and add-ons, which extend the system
functionality while retaining the familiar user interface and authoring conventions. One of the more
powerful content creation tools, available for both of the leading LMS, is Lectora from Trivantis. Lectora
enables creation of sophisticated learning modules which incorporate multimedia, branching, and   
Robert Godwin-Jones Tools for Distance Education: Towards Convergence and Integration
Language Learning & Technology 19
assessments. Performance on quizzes is automatically linked into the LMS gradebook. Advanced
interface options such as show and hide functionality, mouseovers, or object visibility, can all be added
without any need for programming knowledge. One of the key features of Lectora is its support for
Internet standards. Specifically, the content created is compliant with the SCORM guidelines (Sharable
Content Object Reference Model) as well as LRN (Learning Resource Interchange), Microsoft's
implementation of the IMS standards (Instructional Management System). Standards compliance
enhances the likelihood of content portability from one learning system to another as well as the ability to
share among colleagues. Lectora content, for example, can be imported and exported to XML and then
transferred to a different learning environment (i.e., from Blackboard to WebCT). Content can also be
delivered in Palm and PocketPC formats.
Hybrid Applications
A critically important component of distance education is multimedia, in particular streaming media and
Web-enabled DVDs. For language learning audio and video clips often form the meat and potatoes of
remotely delivered instruction. In fact, traditionally, distance education meant two-way video, usually in
the form of dedicated site-to-site connections using compressed video. Today, successors to the
pioneering CUSeeMe (NetMeeting, Paltalk, iVisit) provide much less expensive two-way video on PCs
through high-quality USB or Firewire cameras. Some chat programs have video as well as audio
capability. Apple recently announced multimedia enhancements of its iChat application, along with
introducing the new iSight camera. A recent review in LLT discussed a number of different audio
conferencing tools.
The problem with video conferencing remains the high throughput required for satisfactory size and
fidelity (especially in going beyond one to one connections). In a distance learning environment there are
likely to be participants without broadband Internet access. This issues arises as well in video distributed
through a streaming server. Although streaming technologies, including RealMedia, Windows Media, and
QuickTime, have provisions for adjusting streams to bandwidth availability, a dial-up connection
nonetheless will not usually provide a reliable and smooth video playback in a reasonably sized window.
This becomes an especially serious problem if a distance learning module is built around display of video
embedded in a Web page or other delivery environment. One of the options for incorporating streaming
media is to use a synchronizing tool to link streaming audio or video of lectures/presentations with slides,
Web pages or other content. Such products vary considerably in cost and functionality and include
Lecture Browser, PresenterOne, JITL (Just-in-time Lectures), and Microsoft Producer.
One solution to bandwidth issues is to supply the media, especially video, on CD or DVD. This option
provides a reliable video source, one which can be accessed independently of Internet connectivity. CD
burners have become standard equipment on new computers and DVD burners are now frequently an
option as well. Mass duplicators have dropped significantly in price in recent years and, with the current
low price of blank CDs, can quickly create a batch of CDs from a master. Both Blackboard and WebCT
allow for integration of content distributed on local CDs. An instructor links content from a CD to a Web
page, usually signaled on the page by a CD icon. The first time students access the content they provide
the location or name of their CD or DVD drive, which then becomes part of their LMS system
configuration. This type of hybrid approach works well also for audio files or any other static files an
instructor may have ready for distribution at the start of a course. This might include copies of utilities,
players, or plug-ins needed to access some course content (Microsoft players, QuickTime, Acrobat, etc.)
For delivery of video, a VCD (video compact disk -- 78 minutes) or high-quality SVCD (super video
compact disc -- 35 minutes) can be created with most CD authoring software. The subsequent discs can
be played on PCs as well as on most DVD players.
Of course, it is also possible to deliver video on DVD, through free or low-cost DVD authoring software
such as iDVD (Mac) or DVD Workshop (Windows) or through more powerful and expensive
Robert Godwin-Jones Tools for Distance Education: Towards Convergence and Integration
Language Learning & Technology 20
professional programs. As the current delivery system of choice for feature films, DVDs offer an
immense depository of video to tap for language instruction and cultural study. Interactive applications
can tap into video segments as was done with laser discs. Today the programming environment is most
likely to be a Web browser. In fact many feature films on DVD come supplied with a Web player/browser
(usually PCFriendly or its successor, InterActual Player, both from InterActual) which displays the video
in a window embedded in an interactive application. Video segments are shown in response to user
actions (mouse clicks, menu selections, branching choices, etc.).
DVDs containing non-video data such as HTML pages or graphics use the DVD-Others zone (outside the
VIDEO_TS directory). HTML pages stored on a DVD, for example, might link to a live Web site
containing related information. A more sophisticated approach is to build Web pages which define an
"object" to configure Windows Media Player to play particular segments. JavaScript based controls can
also change language tracks or hide/display subtitles. Ralph LaBarge has provided an extensive example
of the code he used in creating an astrology DVD, StarGaze, using InterActual Player 2.0. Products from
InterActual, Spinware, or Microsoft, can be used to create such a "WebDVD." However, the resulting
product will only run on recent versions of Windows, and not at all (or only partially) on Macintosh or
Unix computers. There is not yet an approach to authoring a hybrid Web/DVD that will be fully cross-
platform and cross-browser.
Task-Based Language Learning
The Open University (England) is using connected DVDs for delivery of distance ed courses. The
University of Wollongong (Australia) is implementing a hybrid environment for distance education of
DVD and WebCT in order to use media-rich content and try to span the digital divide between the
bandwidth rich and poor. At another Australian institution, Flinders University, an interactive CD
(containing video/audio clips as well as vocabulary and exercises) is being incorporated into a WebCT
course site for learning beginning French. Projects are underway for teaching beginning Hindi (North
Carolina) and elementary Swahili (Brigham Young) which will make extensive use of locally shot video
presented on DVD's or CDs. The possibility of using full-frame delivery of high quality video is a boon to
any discipline but could be particularly compelling in language instruction. DVDs offer a rich source of
interactive content, given features such as multiple viewing angles, up to eight different audio tracks, and
multiple subtitling possibilities. Target language subtitling can be particularly effective, as used in the
DVD edition of the classic Italian Film "C'eravamo tanto amati," developed at Brigham Young
University. This version features as well searchable transcripts, English translations, and grammar
exercises. Complete bar code access to the DVD is also possible.
A project which will make extensive use of video is ELLS (the E-Learning Language Project), a joint
project of the US Department of Education and the Chinese Ministry of Education to deliver Chinese and
English instruction to high school students and teachers. What is of particular interest in the planned
approach is the variety and innovation in the task-based approach to language learning. Borrowing from
the entertainment community, ELLS will make extensive use of adventure and mystery gaming as well as
of puzzles and simulations. Grammatical explanations and vocabulary help are supplied as needed to help
students in information gathering and problem solving, needed to find clues to game challenges.
Authentic video and images will be incorporated throughout with students placed in authentic cultural and
communication situations (restaurants, hotels, schools, etc.) One could certainly take advantage of the
versatility of the DVD format to help in creating such an environment, particularly the ability to include
hidden video segments that will play back only in response to certain user input (i.e., correct clue
provided) and are not selectable (or visible) from menus. It is possible as well to program the content so
that accessing particular parts of Web pages triggers video playback or that video playback triggers
display of particular pages.
Robert Godwin-Jones Tools for Distance Education: Towards Convergence and Integration
Language Learning & Technology 21
A considerable amount of effort and creativity are needed to create engaging and effective language
learning tasks. This is all the more the case if the project involves integrating different media and
distributing the resulting project through the Internet. If developers follow emerging standards for
"learning objects" in the creation of language learning content, it is possible to share and integrate the
products in a variety of learning environments. At a minimum, content modules can be archived in a zip
file with a simple XML file (preferably in the form of an IMS manifest file) identifying key
characteristics. In addition to the normal meta-data categories (name, title, author, date, size, etc.),
cataloging of proficiency level, pedagogical approach, preferred learning style, and professional
orientation, would be very helpful. Such cataloged modules could be used independently (as language
refreshers) or linked (together with a connection to a live tutor/teacher) to build a course. This could result
in the more wide-spread availability of opportunities for quality distance language learning.
RESOURCE LIST
Web Tools and Standards
Manila groupware from Userland
Using Manila from David Davies
Internet Audio Communication for Second Language Learning: A Comparative Review of Six Programs
by Gary Cziko (in LLT)
Wimba WebLab tools for language learning
Web software with audio used for language instruction on use of Wimba at the University of Arizona
Lectora authoring system from Trivantis
ETUDES Learning Mangagement System from Foothill College
A Door into Hindi Hindi language learning project from the Triangle South Asia Consortium (North
Carolina)
Distance Language Learning and Teaching: From Audiocassette to Internet Audio, Some Pedagogical
Implications for Learning to Speak a Foreign Language by Bernard Haezewindt and Lesley Shield (Open
University)
Lecture Browser tool for synchronizing lectures and audio/video (from Berkeley)
JITL Just-in-Time Lectures synchronizing software
Instructional Management System IMS standards for object interchange
LRN Microsoft's Learning Resource Interchange
SCORM object exchange project from Advanced Distributed Learning (ADL)
DVD, Video, and Convergence
Groove software peer to peer sharing and videoconferencing
Ivisit videoconferencing software
NetMeeting videoconferencing software from Microsoft
Paltalk videoconferencing software
CUWorld source of CUSeeMe videoconferencing
Robert Godwin-Jones Tools for Distance Education: Towards Convergence and Integration
Language Learning & Technology 22
Videoconferencing: an Interactive Communication Tool for Distance Learners by Trish Andrews
(University of Central Queensland)
Teaching and Learning Languages at a distance by Antonella Strambi and Eric Bouvet (Flinders
University)
DVD Workshop DVD authoring software for Windows
A Hybrid System for Delivering Web Based Distance Learning and Teaching Material by Joel Greenberg
(Open University)
Destinos DVD version
Review of C'eravamo tanto amati Italian film on DVD
Reviews of DVD authoring programs PC Magazine
WebDVD Products & Techniques by Ralph LaBarge
Interactual Web connected DVD authoring
Hybrid WWW and CD-ROM systems from the Advisory Group on Computer Graphics
