Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num1/review1/
January 2003, Volume 7, Number 1
pp. 15-27
Copyright © 2003, ISSN 1094-3501 15
INTERNET AUDIO COMMUNICATION FOR SECOND LANGUAGE
LEARNING: A COMPARATIVE REVIEW OF SIX PROGRAMS
Gary A. Cziko and Sujung Park
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
ABSTRACT
A vast and largely untapped resource for second language learners has recently become available:
native speakers of languages being learned who have access to the Internet. To explore the
potential of this new resource for second language learning, we reviewed six free programs for
Windows and Macintosh computers that permit synchronous audio (and some video)
communication via the Internet. It was found that although the audio (and video) quality varied
both among and within the programs reviewed, the communicative contexts created by these
programs can provide second language learners with an inexpensive means for useful audio
interaction with native speakers of their second language. We provide recommendations for
program choice according to user needs and preferences, with an emphasis on tandem language
learning, a context in which participants take turns being both second language learner and tutor
of their native language.
It should be quite obvious to anyone living in a technologically developed country today that the
widespread availability of personal computers and the Internet have brought about dramatic changes in
the way that we communicate. The use of electronic mail is the most obvious way in which our
communicative behavior has changed over the last two decades. Instant messaging systems are also
gaining widespread use with the integration of the Internet into various wireless devices such as portable
telephones.
However, none of these computer-mediated communication media has yet had a major impact on second
language (L2) teaching and learning. There are certainly many instructors and students who make use of
foreign-language materials on the Internet; and there are numerous foreign-language courses that make
use of the World Wide Web. But there remains a vast and largely untapped Internet resource for L2
teachers and learners that has recently become available, namely, audio access to native speakers of the
L2.
Native speakers who use the Internet comprise a particularly valuable resource for L2 learners since a
major barrier to the development of L2 listening and speaking proficiency is the lack of opportunity to
converse with native speakers of the target language. A high school student of French in Iowa is not likely
to have much, if any, opportunity to use French outside the French classroom. However, there are
millions of native French speakers throughout the world, many of whom have Internet access and would
welcome the opportunity to interact with English-speaking French learners in exchange for the
opportunity to converse in English with a native speaker.
There have been several projects that have used the Internet to link second language learners with native
speakers, but for the most part these efforts have been limited to text communication (Belz, 2002; Blake,
2000; González-Bueno, 1998; Negretti, 1999; Ortega, 1997; Toyoda & Harrison, 2002). One project that
made use of synchronous audio and video to link second language learners with native speakers (Wong &
Fauverge, 1999) was apparently successful in motivating students and providing a rich context for
conversing in the second language. In Europe, researchers, teachers, and students have been involved in
eTandem Europa (www.slf.ruhr-uni-bochum.de/etandem) in which telephone and Internet audio have
Gary A. Cziko and Sujung Park Internet Audio Communication for Second Language Learning
Language Learning & Technology 16
been used to allow pairs of learners with different native languages to interact and learn each others'
languages (see the Language Learning in Tandem Bibliography available at www.slf.ruht-uni-bochum.de
learning/tandbib.html, Brammerts, 2002; Apfelbaum, 1993; Gläsmann & Calvert, 2001; Helmling, 2002;
Rosanelli, 1992).
Until quite recently, synchronous audio and video communication required special software and hardware
along with the use of costly ISDN telephone lines. "Business quality" video conferencing that provides
full-screen video at 30 frames per second still requires special hardware such as that provided by
Tandberg and PolyCom. However, recent advances in programming, computer speed, and Internet
bandwidth have brought the ability to talk with and even see others anywhere in the world to millions of
home and educational computer users at little or no additional cost above that incurred for the computer
hardware and Internet connection. This is a particularly exciting development for L2 learners who speak
English as a native language. The emergence of English as the world's predominant international
language virtually guarantees that no matter which L2 a native English speaker is learning, there are many
native speakers of that L2 who are learning English, too. This fact greatly facilitates the establishment of
Internet tandem language learning partnerships involving English and other languages.
The availability of free, synchronous, computer-mediated audio communication (SCMAC) software
comes at a time when there is increasing agreement among L2 researchers and educators concerning the
importance of second language input, output, and interaction for second language acquisition. The
behaviorist-based audio-lingual theories and practices of L2 teaching of the 1950s and 1960s (e.g., Lado,
1957, 1964) and the subsequent opposing communicative competence perspective of the 1970s and 1980s
(e.g., Krashen, 1985; Krashen & Terrell, 1983) have both given way to a more encompassing view that
recognizes the importance of the quantity and quality of input, output, and interaction in communicative
settings where there is some focus on L2 form (e.g., Ellis, 2002). The use of SCMAC programs that allow
verbal communication between L2 students who are learning each others' languages appear to provide
particularly rich contexts for L2 acquisition with opportunities for L2 input, output, and communicative
interaction along with the possibility for focus on L2 form (see www.uiuc.edu/ph/www/g-
cziko/papers/scmac/contexts.html for a description of various L2 learning contexts made possible by
SMAC).
THREE COMMUNICATION ENVIRONMENTS
Three different kinds of communicative environments are offered by SCMAC programs: (a) instant
messaging, (b) conferences, and (c) chat groups. Some programs offer all three, and others offer only one
or two.
All programs reviewed provide instant messaging, which uses both text and audio between two users.
Some programs also provide video communication in their instant messaging modes.
A conference, like a telephone conference call, is a temporary gathering of three or more individuals,
typically fewer than 10. All programs providing conferences permit at least text communication and allow
users already in a conference to invite others into the conference. Some conferences add audio and video
capabilities as well, although these may be limited to one-to-one communication between two participants
of the conference. Conferences disappear after the last user leaves. It is usually not possible to find an on-
going conference itself, although it may be possible to request admission to a conference if a user's
acquaintance, also called a "friend," "buddy," or "pal," is in a conference.
A chat room, also called a "chat group" or just "group," is typically a more permanent gathering of up to
50 individuals. Chat rooms are of two types: pre-established (by the software provider) and user-created.
User-created chat rooms may be public or private, with the latter requiring non-public information
(usually obtained from the chat room creator) to enter. It is always possible to share text with all members
of a chat room. In addition, some programs make it possible to share audio and even video with one,
Gary A. Cziko and Sujung Park Internet Audio Communication for Second Language Learning
Language Learning & Technology 17
several, or all members of a chat room. On some systems, the creator of the chat room has special
privileges such as being able to control access to the chat room and mute or ban unruly users.
PURPOSE OF THE RESEARCH
Having considered the possible environments in which L2 learners and native speakers can interact using
Internet-based SCMAC, the question then arises concerning the extent to which available software
provides the means to create these communicative settings. The purpose of this research was, therefore, to
review free, widely-used SCMAC programs and to explore their potential use for L2 learning by allowing
L2 learners to converse with native speakers of the target language. To be included in this review, a
program had to be (a) available without cost, (b) widely used, and (c) capable of at least synchronous
audio communication between two or more Internet users using Windows or Macintosh computers. Based
on these criteria, six programs were selected: AOL Instant Messenger, Yahoo Messenger, MSN
Messenger, Windows Messenger, PalTalk, and iVisit.
The majority of the testing of the SCMAC software was conducted using high-speed Internet connections.
All reviewed programs can also be used with slower connections, such as telephone modems, but speed,
quality, and reliability of audio and video tend to suffer with slower connections. Even with high-speed
Internet access, Internet traffic jams can result in poorer performance than that noted below.
SCMAC PROGRAMS DESCRIBED AND REVIEWED
AOL Instant Messenger
AOL Instant Messenger (http://www.aim.com/) was the first instant messaging program to be adopted by
a large number of Internet users. Two versions of this program were reviewed: Version 4.8.2790 for
Windows (95, 98, 2000, NT, XP) and Version 4.3.1232 for Macintosh (OS 8, OS 9). The version for
Macintosh OS X (4.5.651) promised, but had not yet provided audio at the time of testing and so was not
reviewed.
AOL Instant Messenger provides text chat in both instant message (one-to-one) and conference
environments. File transfer is also provided. AOL Instant Messenger currently has no video capability and
while it does offer audio communication, its audio capabilities are limited.
Sound quality with AOL Instant Messenger was quite variable and often had longer latencies (more than a
second) than the other programs reviewed. The user has a choice between half- ("walkie-talkie mode")
and full- ("telephone mode") duplex audio, but audio works only one-to-one. As with other programs
offering both half- and full-duplex audio, the choice of one mode over the other depends on user
preferences and the ability of the program to maintain high-quality audio when used in the more
demanding full-duplex mode.
AOL Instant Messenger offers many "Chat Communities," but you must go to their Web site
(www.aim.com/community/chats.adp) to find groups of individuals who are engaged in text chat. A user
in a chat room may invite another into the chat room. A chat room participant may also request a one-to-
one audio link with anyone else in the room. Communication will be established only if the other party
agrees. There is apparently no option for users to set up their own chat rooms using AOL Instant
Messenger.
Nothing of interest related to second language learning opportunities was found in any of the chat rooms.
There is an "International Chat," but as with almost all of the chat rooms visited on AOL Instant
Messenger, it consisted primarily of sexually-oriented and defamatory communication.
A first-time user of AOL Instant Messenger is asked to provide information for the user directory, which
is accessible by other users. Directory information can also be added or edited later via My AOL Instant
Gary A. Cziko and Sujung Park Internet Audio Communication for Second Language Learning
Language Learning & Technology 18
Messenger > Edit Profile. Included is a request for country and personal interests. AOL Instant
Messenger provides a "find a buddy" function for locating someone with a "Common Interest." However,
no matter what interest we searched, we found no users with that interest, leading us to conclude that this
feature is not yet working. In any case, none of the common interests specified, with the possible
exception of Community > Hispanic were of interest to second language learners. The country field can
only be used when the searcher knows the name of the person being searched, so it is not possible to
obtain a list of AOL Instant Messenger users who live in a given country or region by specifying only a
country or region. However, one can search using a common name of a target country (e.g., Pierre for
France, Juan for Spain) to obtain a list of likely target language speakers.
In summary, while AOL Instant Messenger was the first widely used instant messaging program and now
includes audio chat as well, it has limitations for the second language learner. No video is provided, and
audio is limited to one-to-one. None of the pre-established chat rooms are of particular interest to students
learning a language other than English, although it may be possible to find users who speak other
languages. No user-created chat rooms are possible using the free software either, and the directory is not
fully functional. These limitations plus the fact that better communicative environments are available for
Windows users lead to the recommendation that AOL Instant Messenger be used only by acquaintances
wanting to communicate using audio when at least one party is using a Macintosh computer.
Yahoo Messenger for Windows
Yahoo Messenger (messenger.yahoo.com) Version 5.4 for Windows (95, 98, 2000, NT, and XP) is a very
versatile program, which provides both one-to-one and multiparty text chat as well as one-to-one audio
and video conferencing. A Macintosh version is also available, but it does not support audio and so was
not reviewed.
Yahoo Messenger can be used in three different environments: Instant Message, Conference, and Chat
Room. The instant message environment is for one-to-one communication. Here, conferences are
temporary gatherings of two to nine individuals, and chat rooms are permanent or semi-permanent multi-
user settings with up to 50 users that have been set up either by Yahoo or by individual users. A user can
have multiple environments open at the same time in different windows, but audio and video connections
can only be made to one window at a time. Yahoo Messenger users can make aliases so that while they
always use the same logon name and password, they can choose a different screen name to be shown to
other users of the program.
Text chat, audio, and video work similarly in all environments. Audio was found to be of good quality but
is essentially half-duplex only, even in the one-to-one Instant Message environment. In some situations, it
was found to be possible to interrupt another person's audio or to talk and be heard while another user was
playing music to the group. To use audio, users must either hold down the "Talk" button on the screen or
check the "Hands Free Mode." Video is available as a small frame that can be made two or three times
larger, resulting in a larger but same-resolution image. The frame rate was found to be quite slow, about
three per second, providing a very jerky video image for moving subjects.
Yahoo Messenger provides a large number of pre-established audio- and video-enabled chat rooms for up
to 50 participants at any one time. While the great majority of chat rooms use English, thereby providing
ESL learners opportunities to interact with native English speakers, chat rooms using many other
languages, including Spanish, French, German, Italian, and Korean, were found under the "Cultures and
Communities" and "Regional" headings.
There are several useful options for user-created chat rooms. In all cases, they exist only until the last
person leaves the room. These rooms can either be created as (a) public (in which case they will be listed
on the user-created chat room directory and can be accessed by all Yahoo users), (b) private, or (c) private
by invitation only. Private rooms are not listed in the directory and can be accessed only by joining a user
Gary A. Cziko and Sujung Park Internet Audio Communication for Second Language Learning
Language Learning & Technology 19
who is known to be in the desired chat room; whereas "private by invitation only" chat rooms are
accessible only to those who have been invited by someone already in the room. An individual can have
only one user-created chat room in existence at any one time.
Using Yahoo Messenger, a teacher can easily set up a private chat room for students that cannot be
entered by others. One way to do this is for the teacher to create a new Yahoo ID and use this ID to create
a private chat room. Students can then log into Yahoo Messenger using their normal ID, add the teacher's
new ID as a friend, and join this "friend" in the private chat room. However, since a user-created chat
room exists only as long as it is occupied, the Yahoo ID used to create the room would have to remain
connected continuously in order for students to have uninterrupted access to the chat room.
When you first use Yahoo Messenger, you are given the opportunity to provide personal information
including name, age, gender, location, and hobbies. By going to Tools > Manage Friend List > Search for
a Friend, you can search for friends in this directory using user ID, name, age, gender, and keyword
(including location). Individuals in the directory matching the search criteria are then listed with their ID,
gender, age, and location. You can then attempt to make someone from the search list your friend by
sending an optional message, and if he or she accepts your invitation, you can communicate with this new
friend by using an instant message or inviting him or her to a conference or chat room.
Since there is no directory field for native language, one way for Yahoo Messenger users to find native
speakers of a given language is to do a keyword search for a location such as Paris, Berlin, Madrid, or
Beijing. One can then select a friend from the resulting list and send a message inviting the potential
friend to become a language exchange partner.
Yahoo Messenger also provides a Web-based method for finding potential language resource friends at
members.yahoo.com. Here you can search Yahoo's extensive directory, which is not restricted to Yahoo
Messenger users, for people interested in various topics and consult the profile of potential language
partners. Since locations are included, one can look for individuals in selected countries or cities and send
them an invitation to communicate via email or instant message. Under the category of "Schools and
Education," there are the subcategories "Study Abroad," "Bilingualism," and "Exchange Student" which
offer additional possibilities for finding speakers of desired languages.
Yahoo Messenger does not offer complete documentation or support. Although a "Yahoo Helper" shows
up on your friends list when you start the program, despite repeated inquiries we received only one
response in which an "automated robot" offered to help but was not particularly helpful. Neither could we
find information on how user-defined chat rooms are accessed, and so we had to spend considerable time
investigating the various chat room options to figure this out ourselves.
In summary, Yahoo Messenger provides SCMAC capabilities that have good potential for second
language learners. It provides free multiparty text and audio and one-to-one video for users with
Webcams. It can also be used by individuals to find chat rooms that use the target language. Users can
then either lurk for input or actively communicate with those in the chat room via text, audio and/or
video. Teachers and learners can also set up private chat rooms to create tandem language learning
environments. The only notable disadvantages of Yahoo Messenger are that its audio and video
capabilities are available only to Windows users, leaving Macintosh users with only text, and that video in
conferences and chat rooms is limited to one-to-one connections.
MSN Messenger and Windows Messenger
MSN Messenger (messenger.msn.com) for Windows 95, 98, 2000, Me, and NT 4 (Version 4.6.0082
reviewed) provides multiparty text chat, but its "audio conversation" capability is limited to one-to-one
connections. MSN Messenger provides file transfer, allowing partners to share files (including photo
files) without the size constraints encountered on most email systems. There is also a version of MSN
Gary A. Cziko and Sujung Park Internet Audio Communication for Second Language Learning
Language Learning & Technology 20
Messenger for the Macintosh, but because it is limited to text communication, the Macintosh version was
not included in this review.
MSN Messenger has excellent audio capability, as it is capable of high-quality, full-duplex voice
communication with short latencies. Talking with another MSN Messenger user is much like talking on
the telephone, the only differences being more variable audio quality and a slight delay between the time
one speaks and the time one's voice is heard by the other party. As with Yahoo Messenger, users of MSN
Messenger can change the name that other users see.
Windows Messenger (messenger.msn.com) for Windows XP (Version 4.6.0078 tested) has all the
features of MSN Messenger plus a number of useful additional capabilities. Version 4 is included as part
of both Home and Professional editions of the Windows XP operating system, and a free upgrade to
Version 4.6 is available at messenger.msn.com.
Windows Messenger is used with a Webcam and allows users to see each other in a small video window
while talking. Its video, while limited to a small video frame and moderate frame rates, was among the
best of the programs reviewed and permits senders to monitor their own video in a corner of their
correspondent's video image.
Windows Messenger also provides several features beyond text, audio and video, and file transfer. These
include remote assistance, application sharing, and a whiteboard. Remote assistance allows User A to
give permission to User B to see and control User A's computer, which can be particularly useful for
troubleshooting. Application sharing allows two connected users to share any application located on
either computer so that, for example, the two connected users can work on the same document together.
The whiteboard provides an environment for collaborative drawing and graphics creation. The addition of
these collaborative capabilities, along with the text chat, audio, and video capabilities of Windows
Messenger, makes it the program of choice for one-on-one SCMAC where both partners are using
Windows XP.
Microsoft's extensive Hotmail directory can be accessed and searched from within both MSN Messenger
and Windows Messenger (Tools > Add a Contact). However, since one must specify both first and last
names to perform a directory search, it would appear that only acquaintances can be found. You can find
speakers of a given language by making up a common name and searching by country. Many were found
searching for Pierre Simon in France, and too many to display were found for Angel Garcia in Mexico.
The directory will not reveal Hotmail users' email addresses, but one can send an invitation message,
which includes information on how to install Windows Messenger, to anyone found. The directory does
not indicate if someone is currently online.
You cannot search by hobbies or other keywords from within MSN Messenger or Windows Messenger.
But you can do so by moving to the Web-based Hotmail directory at members.msn.com. Here one can
browse members by pre-established interests and obtain member listings indicating nickname, gender,
age, location, and interests. One can also establish contact with another by e-mail or check to see if the
member is already chatting online. By clicking on "Advanced Search," one can search using the following
fields: MSN nickname, first name, last name, gender, age, marital status, city, and country/region. This is
a very useful feature for users wanting to find tandem language learning partners in specific parts of the
world. For example, 175 individuals were found who listed Aix-en-Provence in France as their location.
From within both MSN Messenger and Windows Messenger, chat rooms are found by going to Actions >
Go To Chat Rooms. Since audio in these programs is limited to one-to-one communication, these text
chat rooms are not audio enabled. However, there are many text chat rooms available and it is possible to
check the profile and contact information for anyone in a chat room. Under the "General" category, we
found text chat rooms using English, French, German, Japanese, Dutch, Swedish, Korean, Portuguese,
Gary A. Cziko and Sujung Park Internet Audio Communication for Second Language Learning
Language Learning & Technology 21
Finnish, Danish, Italian, Norwegian, Chinese, Spanish, Czech, and Turkish. So this is another possibility
for finding potential tandem language learning partners.
Finally, it should be noted that an individual using the older MSN Messenger can communicate using text
chat and audio with another using the newer Windows Messenger. However, none of the added
capabilities of Windows Messenger are available in this hybrid environment.
In summary, MSN Messenger and Windows Messenger both provide useful audio environments for one-
to-one communication among Windows users. An extensive international directory of Hotmail users
provides potential access to millions of people and a multitude of languages worldwide. One may also
find potential language exchange partners in chat rooms, although chat rooms are text only. For users of
the Windows XP operating system, Windows Messenger provides the most feature-rich environment for
one-to-one communication among all of the programs reviewed here.
PalTalk
PalTalk (www.paltalk.com; Version 5 for Windows 95, 98, NT, 2000, XP) exists in both free and paid
subscriber modes (PalTalk Plus). In its free version, PalTalk offers instant messaging, conferences, and
chat rooms and is capable of multiparty half-duplex audio and still-frame video with up to three other
users. In its paid-subscriber mode (about $25 annually--not tested), PalTalk adds live-motion video with
up to three other users. A user can create a permanent chat room for a fee starting at $49 a month.
PalTalk's audio chat room environment is of particular interest to L2 learners and teachers. PalTalk
provides both pre-existing and user-created chat groups ("groups"). In its free version, user-created chat
groups are semi-permanent in that they exist only as long as the creator or the last user remains in the chat
group. The chat room is re-established the next time the creator ("administrator") enters a four-digit key
that was used to create the room. The creator can make the chat room private, which requires a password,
and he or she can silence or eject anyone in the room. The creator can also share the room's access code
with another trusted user who then becomes a "co-administrator" and who can then open and moderate
the chat room. Administrators' and co-administrators' IDs appear with a preceding "@" in the list of the
chat room participants.
PalTalk also provides some degree of adult ("parental") control over children's access to its rooms and
features. By entering a password, one can limit users to "General" rooms, which according to PalTalk
policy are for a "general audience ... including minors, in which offensive language is not permitted."
However, this does not provide protection to minors from potential predators who may enter general
rooms and cause problems before being blocked or banned by a PalTalk administrator. A knowledgeable
minor can circumvent the parental control by simply removing and reinstalling the program. There is no
way to limit minors so that they have access only to certain rooms.
Of all the programs reviewed, PalTalk provides the best environment for group audio chat. This is
because of its consistently good audio quality and because it includes a "req talk" button that one can
click to indicate intention to address the group. Clicking this button raises one's ID to a queue at the top of
the list of participants and adds a raised hand icon. In this way an administrator can see who has requested
to talk and pass the microphone in an orderly fashion from one user to another. Of all the programs
reviewed, PalTalk was the only one in which audio chat was almost always used in chat rooms, with users
of other programs tended to rely primarily on text chat.
In addition, of all the programs reviewed, PalTalk had what appeared to be the greatest number of
interesting and educational chat rooms. With other software it was often difficult to find any chat room
that was not dominated by sexual, obscene, or defamatory communication. PalTalk has its share of these,
too, but there are also more serious and educational chat rooms. Of particular interest are chat rooms
created for practicing English and other languages (listed under "Distance Learning"). Some of these were
moderated discussions in the target language while others were actual language lessons offered by
Gary A. Cziko and Sujung Park Internet Audio Communication for Second Language Learning
Language Learning & Technology 22
individual users wishing to help others learn the language. Many non-English-language chat rooms were
also found in all of the world's major languages as well as in many other languages.
PalTalk provides no user directory beyond a search of PalTalk nicknames, but as with the other programs
reviewed, it is possible to find individuals in chat rooms and then request to establish private two-way
communication with them. After using the program for a few days while on the lookout for users with
whom to practice Spanish, I (GC) was able to compile a list of Spanish-speaking PalTalk users who were
interested in improving their English. When added to my buddy list, I could then see which of them were
online at any given moment, allowing me to send an instant message invitation for a chat in Spanish and
English -- an invitation that was often accepted.
PalTalk also has three or more help rooms available at any given time. Here users can find assistance for
PalTalk problems from live helpers who appear quite knowledgeable about the program.
To summarize, PalTalk provides an environment of considerable value for L2 learners and teachers.
Individual L2 learners can find chat rooms using their target language and then either observe and listen,
participate, or attempt to connect to an individual in the chat room (perhaps after first participating in the
chat room and announcing their intention to engage in tandem language learning with any interested
user). Teachers can set up private chat rooms for their classes and moderate and control user access and
participation. Audio quality was also generally very good, and the ability to "raise one's hand" to speak
allows orderly group audio chat in contrast to the audio chaos typically found in other group SCMAC
environments. In addition to its unavailability for Macintosh users, the only serious drawback to PalTalk
is the frequent rate of distracting pop-up ads promoting the purchase of PalTalk Plus and other products
and services.
iVisit
iVisit (www.ivisit.com and www.ivisithelp.com; Version 2.8b2 for Windows 95 and higher; Version
2.8b2 for Mac OS 7.5 and higher, but not for OS X) differs in many respects from the other programs
reviewed. First, iVisit is unique in that virtually all of its features are available for both Windows and
Macintosh platforms. In addition, iVisit uses a multiparty peer-to-peer architecture instead of relying on a
central server. This means that when you enter a chat room on iVisit, your computer makes direct
connections with all of the other individuals in the room. This makes it possible for iVisit to offer
multiparty full-duplex audio, with half-duplex being the default option, and multiparty video, the only
program reviewed here with these capabilities. However, this also means that the quality of audio and
video is determined by the computer processing power, Internet connection speed, and reliability of the
connected parties. We found that audio and video quality can be quite good with two or three users
connected (with audio quality usually being better with paused video). The sound quality tends to
deteriorate with large groups, and the video frame rate often slows down to less than one frame per
second, particularly when someone joins the group who has a slow modem connection. Users taking the
trouble to fine tune iVisit's many user settings to their particular machine nevertheless may experience
significantly improved video and audio quality.
iVisit is also different from the other programs in that it does not use a typical sign-in procedure. A first-
time user simply enters a nickname he or she is connected with no registration or password required. One
disadvantage associated with this procedure is that one's list of contacts, called "bookmarks" in iVisit, is
stored on the local computer and is therefore not available to the user when using a different computer
unless the original bookmark file is transferred to the new computer.
iVisit provides both user-created rooms and pre-established rooms, including "Help Desks" staffed by
helpful and knowledgeable volunteers. It also provides what are called "listings" or "lobbies." When one
enters a room, one is immediately connected to everyone else in the room. However, when one enters a
listing or lobby, one first sees a list of other users in the listing and can then request one-to-one
Gary A. Cziko and Sujung Park Internet Audio Communication for Second Language Learning
Language Learning & Technology 23
communication with one of them. This could turn into a multiparty connection if the other user is already
connected to someone else. Users can create semi-permanent chat rooms that are either public or private
(password protected). Many families and groups of friends have established private chat rooms on iVisit.
These chat rooms continue to exist unless they are not used over a period of several days. Chat room
creators can eject users from their rooms and ban them from re-entering or temporarily remove them to
make room for new users to enter. Chat rooms can also be set up to be self-moderating, meaning that
anyone in the room for a certain length of time can obtain moderator privileges. iVisit chat rooms can
contain 16 or more visitors, but the standard listing contains a maximum of 12 users.
Chat room creation will be different in iVisit 3, which will likely be available by the time this review is
published. iVisit 3 will exist in both free and paid versions. The paid version ($30/year) will be required
to create chat rooms, but the free version of iVisit 3 will retain access to all created chat rooms.
An interesting and unique feature of iVisit is its ability to record all the text, audio, and video of a
communication session (after obtaining permission from all participants) for a period of up to 10 minutes.
It can then be played back locally or over the Internet to connected users. This feature was not completely
reliable when we tested it, but its potential is obvious for L2 learners and teachers. The Windows version
of iVisit also allows connected users to easily share Webpages with each other.
There is no user directory available on iVisit; but as with other programs lacking a user directory, it is
possible to find speakers of other languages in chat rooms and request two-way communication with
them. The chat room directory under "iVisit World" lists many rooms in many countries using many
different languages.
iVisit is primarily used as a video-plus-text environment, and a very high percentage of iVisit users have
live Webcams. The program offers 160 x 120 video resolution in a small window that can be enlarged
while the resolution remains the same. Users without a Webcam can paste a photo in their "Local AV
Window" for others to see as a still image. Audio is not used much in iVisit except by a minority of users
with more powerful computers and high-speed Internet connections. Audio rooms have been established
in several languages (under "iVisit World"), but they are seldom and sparsely occupied. Finally, it is
possible to restrict young users' access to certain directories of rooms and listings in iVisit, but not to
specific rooms and listings. However, the means by which this is done is not described in iVisit's public
documentation, and this control could easily be defeated by a savvy young user by simply removing a
single file from the iVisit directory or downloading and reinstalling the program.
iVisit is the only program reviewed here that provides multiparty video along with multiparty half- or
full-duplex audio, and it offers these features for both Windows and Macintosh computers. It is also the
only program we reviewed which allows the recording and playback of communication sessions.
However, as noted, audio and video quality may deteriorate for larger groups and the audio environment
may become chaotic in chat rooms with many users talking (and being heard) simultaneously with no way
to request to talk as in PalTalk. As personal computers continue to gain power, Internet connection speeds
increase, and iVisit continues to rapidly evolve, this program promises to become a powerfully useful
program for L2 learners and teachers, and it is quite useful in its current version for one-to-one and small-
group communication on both Windows and Macintosh computers.
MATCHING SOFTWARE TO L2 LEARNER NEEDS AND PREFERENCES
Having reviewed these six programs, we now provide a guide for program selection based on teacher and
learner needs and preferences. (See Table 1 for a summary of each program's features.)
Gary A. Cziko and Sujung Park Internet Audio Communication for Second Language Learning
Language Learning & Technology 24
Table 1. Feature Comparison of Six SCMAC Programs
Program Platform Audio Chat Video
Audio Chat
Rooms
User
Directory
Other Features
AOL
Instant
Messenger
Windows,
Mac OS 8
& 9
1 to 1,
half- or
full-duplex
No Pre-established Partly
functional
File transfer,
URL embedding
Yahoo
Messenger
Windows Multi-party,
half-duplex
1 to 1 Pre-established;
user created
Yes File transfer,
shared files, user
aliases
MSN
Messenger
Windows
(not XP)
1 to 1,
full-duplex
No No Yes File transfer
Windows
Messenger
Windows
XP
1 to 1,
full-duplex
1 to 1 No Yes File transfer,
remote assistance,
shared apps &
whiteboard
PalTalk Windows Multi-party,
half-duplex
Paid
version
only
Pre-established;
user created
No Mic request;
access control
iVisit Windows,
Macintosh
7.5+ (no
OS X)
Multi-party
half- or
full-duplex
Multi-party Pre-established;
user created
No Audio-video
recording &
playback; access
control
Dyads of Acquaintances
For users wishing to establish private one-to-one voice communication with an acquaintance, many
options are available, depending on the computer platforms being used. For Windows to Windows
communication, any of the reviewed programs will work, but MSN Messenger or Windows Messenger is
recommended. Windows Messenger provides the best communicative environment for dyads, including
high-quality, full-duplex audio, video, and many other features; but it can only be used if both parties are
using Windows XP. MSN Messenger has fewer features but can be used by older versions of Windows
and can also communicate with Windows Messenger if one user has Windows XP and the other a
previous version of Windows. AOL Instant Messenger and iVisit also provide audio communication
between two Windows users, but their audio quality was more variable than that of the two Microsoft
products.
For Macintosh users, both AOL Instant Messenger and iVisit are the only possibilities for audio
communication as they allow audio chat between a Windows computer and a Macintosh computer, or
between two Macintosh machines.
Dyads with New Contacts
If an L2 learner does not already have a native speaker acquaintance, he or she will need to find one. In
such a situation, the user directories provided by MSN (for use with MSN Messenger and Windows
Messenger) and Yahoo Messenger can be very useful for Windows to Windows communication as they
allow users to find other users with specific interests in specific locations around the world. Although
PalTalk does not have a user directory, it may be possible to find native speakers in a given language by
browsing through the many foreign-language public chat rooms.
For Macintosh users, neither of the two audio-capable programs, AOL Instant Messenger and iVisit,
provides a user directory. However, as with PalTalk for Windows users, it is possible for Macintosh users
Gary A. Cziko and Sujung Park Internet Audio Communication for Second Language Learning
Language Learning & Technology 25
to find chat rooms using the desired language. They can then attempt to establish one-to-one
communication with a prospective partner who is using either a Windows or a Macintosh computer.
However, for both Windows and Macintosh users, perhaps the easiest way to find a partner for SCMAC-
based language learning is to take advantage of an Internet-based service specifically designed for this
purpose. Parvis (www.etandemlearning.com) provides both free and paid services for matching
individuals who want to learn each other's languages via electronic media and has linked thousands of
language learners together worldwide.
Audio Chat Groups
For Windows users wanting to find and interact with pre-established audio chat groups in foreign
languages, PalTalk and Yahoo Messenger are recommended. PalTalk works best with groups using audio
for three reasons: (a) it allows users to request to talk, thus helping to reduce or eliminate audio chaos, (b)
audio is used in just about every chat room, and (c) more serious chat rooms were found on PalTalk
compared to the other programs. Yahoo Messenger also works well for this purpose for Windows users,
but users must "grab" the mic instead of requesting it. Yahoo Messenger, however, offers file sharing and
a user directory, both lacking in PalTalk. iVisit is less suited for group audio chat using Windows for
three reasons: (a) its audio quality can deteriorate with larger groups or when someone with a slow
Internet connection joins a session, (b) few groups use audio, and (c) when group audio is used, chaos
usually results. Nonetheless, iVisit is the only program reviewed that Macintosh users can use in audio
chat rooms.
PalTalk, Yahoo Messenger, and iVisit are also recommended for teachers or other individuals who want
to create their own public or private audio chat groups for L2 learning opportunities. They all allow users
to create public and private audio chat groups and to control many aspects of the chat room's operation.
PalTalk and Yahoo Messenger are recommended over iVisit for Windows users, for the reasons noted in
the preceding paragraph. Only iVisit provides multiparty SCMAC for Macintosh users and it is also the
only program reviewed here that provides multiparty video for either Windows or Macintosh users.
PREDATORS
It should not be surprising that the anonymous nature of Internet communication attracts a fair number of
predators who get their thrills by hiding behind screen names and harassing other users with shocking
words and images. In reviewing these programs, we have been subjected to text and spoken words that we
found offensive and shocking, solicited by instant messages inviting us to view pornography, and exposed
to obscene still and moving images. While all the programs reviewed make it possible for users to block
such offenders from a repeat offense, users must be warned that unless they restrict their SCMAC use to
acquaintances, it is inevitable that they will be exposed to this dark side of the Internet.
For this reason, we feel that none of the programs reviewed here are appropriate for unsupervised users
under the age of 18. PalTalk and iVisit allow some degree of administrative control (with increased
parental/teacher control promised for iVisit 3). These programs may be suitable for minors, but only when
supervised by a responsible adult. In any case, parents or teachers should carefully explore the
environment created by these programs and the controls provided by PalTalk and iVisit before making
these programs accessible to minors.
CONCLUSION
Several years from now, a look back at the SCMAC programs reviewed above will undoubtedly be quite
amusing. The continued evolution of computer hardware, software, and Internet speeds will soon make it
possible for computer users to communicate over the Internet using reliable high-fidelity audio combined
with DVD quality video. This will make the current programs appear crude and clumsy by comparison.
Gary A. Cziko and Sujung Park Internet Audio Communication for Second Language Learning
Language Learning & Technology 26
However, as this review has shown, it is not necessary for L2 learners and teachers to wait any longer in
order to take advantage of the ability to communicate online with native speakers of dozens of languages
who are already connected to the Internet and using audio and video. The technology is already here, the
software is free, and a polyglot world is already connected and waiting for the opportunity to share its
languages.
There are many barriers still to be overcome. Even at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign with
its international reputation for technological development and application (and where the first graphical
Web browser, Mosaic, was developed), language students do not yet have ready access to microphone-
equipped computers. L2 teachers will need to change their methods and lesson plans in order to allow and
encourage their students to use the Internet to interact with native speakers of the language they are
learning. Students will also have to learn to take risks to find and speak with native speakers of their L2,
and both students and teachers will have to become familiar with the software that now makes such
communication possible.
It is hoped that this review will help remove this last barrier and encourage L2 teachers and students to
begin to remove the others as well. The promise of a worldwide community of language learners sharing
their languages, along with the increased cultural awareness and understanding that inevitably accompany
international communication, is well worth any short-term risks involved in making use of this promising
new technology for language learning.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported in part by a TALENT grant from the College of Education of the University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, funded as part of the U.S. Department of Education's PT3 (Preparing
Tomorrow's Teachers to Use Technology) program. We wish to thank and acknowledge James W.
Bertelsen, Eunok A. Kim, R. Scott Wennerdahl, and James H. Yang for their assistance in reviewing the
software described here.
ABOUT THE REVIEWERS
Gary A. Cziko is professor of Educational Psychology and English as an International Language at the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. His interests include tandem language learning and the use
of computer-mediated communication for language learning.
E-mail: g-cziko@uiuc.edu
Sujung Park has a MATESOL degree from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and is
currently a PhD candidate in the Department of Educational Psychology. Her interests include second
language acquisition and pedagogy and CALL.
E-mail: supark@uiuc.edu
REFERENCES
Apfelbaum, B. (Ed.). (1993). Erzählen in Tandem: Sprachlernactivitäten und die Konstruktion eines
Diskursmusters in der Fremdsprache [Narrating in tandem: Language learning activities and the
construction of a discourse pattern in the foreign language] (Zielsprachen: Französisch und Deutsch; Vol.
387). Tübingen, Germany: Gunter Narr Verlag.
Belz, J. A. (2002). Social dimensions of telecollaborative foreign language study. Language Learning &
Technology, 6(1), 60-81. Retrieved August 20, 2002, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/BELZ/
Gary A. Cziko and Sujung Park Internet Audio Communication for Second Language Learning
Language Learning & Technology 27
Blake, R. (2000). Computer mediated communication: A window on L2 Spanish interlanguage. Language
Learning & Technology, 4(1), 120-136. Retrieved August 20, 2002, from
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/blake/
Brammerts, H. (2002). Language learning in tandem bibliography. Retrieved September 6, 2002 from
http://www.slf.ruhr-uni-bochum.de/learning/tanbib.html
Ellis, N. C. (2002). Frequency effects in language processing: A review with implications for theories of
implicit and explicit language acquisition. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 24(2), 141-188.
Gläsmann, S., & Calvert, M. (2001). Tandem language learning in schools. Sheffield, England: Philip
Armstrong Publications.
González-Bueno, M. (1998). The effects of electronic mail on Spanish L2 discourse. Language Learning
& Technology, 1(2), 55-70. Retrieved August 20, 2002, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num2/article3/
Helmling, B. (Ed.). (2002). L'apprentissage autonome des langues en tandem. Paris: Didier.
Krashen, S. D. (1985). The input hypothesis: Issues and implications. New York: Longman.
Krashen, S. D., & Terrell, T. D. (1983). The natural approach: Language acquisition in the classroom.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Alemany Press/Regents/Prentice Hall.
Lado, R. (1957). Linguistics across cultures. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Lado, R. (1964). Language teaching: A communicative approach. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Negretti, R. (1999). Web-based activities and SLA: A conversation analysis research approach. Language
Learning & Technology, 3(1), 75-87. Retrieved August 20, 2002, from
http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num1/negretti/
Ortega, L. (1997). Processes and outcomes in networked classroom interaction: Defining the research
agenda for L2 computer-assisted classroom discussion. Language Learning & Technology, 1(1), 82-93.
Retrieved August 20, 2002, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/ortega/
Rosanelli, M. (Ed.). (1992). Lingue in Tandem: Autonomie und Spracherwerb [Languages in tandem:
Autonomy and language acquisition]. Merano, Italy: Alpha & Beta.
Toyoda, E., & Harrison, R. (2002). Categorization of text chat communication between learners and
native speakers of Japanese. Language Learning & Technology, 6(1), 82-99. Retrieved August 20, 2002,
from http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/TOYODA/
Wong, J., & Fauverge, A. (1999). LEVERAGE: Reciprocal peer tutoring over broadband networks.
ReCALL, 11(1), 133-142.
