Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/review3/
May 2003, Volume 7, Number 2
pp. 32-37
Copyright © 2003, ISSN 1094-3501 32
REVIEW OF PRONUNCIACIÓN Y FONÉTICA, VERSION 2.1
Name of Product Pronunciación y Fonética, version 2.1
Creators Patricia V. Lunn, Michigan State University (program author)
Claire Bradin and Dennie Hoopingarner (software designers)
Daniel Park and Madhu Sridharan (software developers)
Distributor Instructional Media Center
Michigan State University
Contact Information P.O. Box 710
East Lansing, MI 48826-0710
Tel: (517) 353-9229
Fax: (517) 432-2650
http://msuvmall.msu.edu/imc
System Requirements MacIntosh PowerPC or Windows95/98/NT
no installation required
Support Offered Support available from CLEAR staff at (517)-432-2286 or clear@msu.edu
Target Language Spanish
Target Audience Majors or minors with at least a high-intermediate level of Spanish
proficiency; teachers of Spanish phonology and phonetics
Price $25 + s/h
Reviewed by Phillip Elliott, Southern University
The program contains 10 lessons, written in Spanish, on Spanish pronunciation and phonetics. As
mentioned in the program, the student learns how Spanish sounds differ among themselves and how such
differences may serve to distinguish one word from another. She also learns to recognize Spanish sounds
and produce them (the program allows the student the opportunity to record her voice during certain
exercises). The student studies some of the dialects of Spanish and learns how the study of phonetics can
facilitate the comprehension and the classification of Spanish dialects. The 10 lessons are as follows, their
length indicated by the number of screens they entail:
Syllable (25 screens)
Stress (20 screens)
Phoneme (13 screens)
Vowels: description (9 screens)
Vowels: pronunciation (10 screens)
Consonants: description (15 screens)
Consonants: pronunciation (27 screens)
Orthography (13 screens)
Dialects (23 screens)
Review (18 screens)
The lessons are organized on a menu screen with color-coded buttons. For example, la sílaba (syllable) is
written on a red button. Clicking on the button takes one to the lesson on the syllable, which entails 25
screens of explanation and practice. Navigation arrows on the right of each screen allow the student to
move from one screen to another. Also on the right of the screen are a menu button and an exit button.
DETAILED LESSON: THE SYLLABLE
The first lesson on the Menu screen, la sílaba, is reviewed in detail, to give the reader a sense of what a
student or teacher sees and does when completing an entire lesson. Summaries for the other nine lessons
appear below. The description of this lesson's content and procedures is organized screen by screen.
Screen 1
Rhythm is said to be the basis for pronunciation. Each language has its own rhythm. When an English
speaker speaks Spanish with English rhythm, she has a foreign accent. Spanish rhythm is examined.
Reviewed by Phillip Elliot Review of Pronunciación y Fonética
Language Learning & Technology 33
Screen 2
Spanish rhythm is based on the syllable. Each syllable has a vowel nucleus. A vowel constitutes a
syllable, and it may also constitute a word. Sentences with the five vowels used as words are given in
bold, indicating they have a sound file (e.g., No voy a clase).
Screen 3
A vowel may be accompanied by another vowel in the syllable or by a preceding or following consonant.
Monosyllabic words exemplifying this fact are given in bold for the student to click on and listen to (e.g.,
rey, tres, ay, lo).
Screen 4
A distinction between a letter (orthography) and a sound (phonetics) is made. Three words in bold
exemplify the difference between spelling and sound representation: casa [kása], hora [óra], voy [boj].
Screen 5
Consonants and vowels may combine in several ways to form a syllable. The prototypical combination in
Spanish is consonant-vowel (CV), which may be repeated productively to create more lengthy words.
Examples of this process are given in bold for students to listen to (la, bebé, mañana, mejorado,
mitológico, delicadísimo, etc.).
Screen 6
The prototypical CV in Spanish determines Spanish syllabification at both the word and phrase level.
Three example words are listed for students to hear: a-ma-re-mos, la-va-do, and a-ma-ri-llo.
Screen 7
Consonants generally appear in syllable final position only if not followed by a vowel: con, mal, mes. In
longer words, this CVC combination will be divided as CV-C: co-no-ce, ma-le-ta, me-se-ro. All of these
words are in bold and have sound files.
Screen 8
One of the main differences between Spanish and English pronunciation is that in English a consonant
need not accompany the next vowel to form part of the following syllable. Six Spanish proper names and
their English cognates are given in bold to illustrate this: Ana, Julio, Laura, Paula, Roberto, and Tere.
Screen 9
The six Spanish proper names of screen 8 are repeated in bold for students to listen to. Next to each word
are two buttons: one for the student to record herself saying the word, the other to play back the
recording.
Screen 10
The consonant groups ll, qu, rr, and ch all represent one sound and therefore belong in the same syllable.
Screen 11
Eight words in bold are presented for the student to hear. The student is asked to write in a text bar each
word's syllable division. The student may then click on a check mark to check her answer. Example
words include saqué, finito, and jamón, among others.
Screen 12
Because consonants tend to form the inital position of a syllable, consonant groups also tend to form the
same syllable-initial position, with the proviso that only consonant groups that may begin a word in
Reviewed by Phillip Elliot Review of Pronunciación y Fonética
Language Learning & Technology 34
Spanish are allowed to form the initial part of a syllable. Otherwise, they will be divided into separate
syllables (e.g., a-pren-der).
Screen 13
Eight bold-faced words are listed and the student is asked to listen to the words then choose, among three
options, the correct syllable division of each word.
Screen 14
There are two kinds of vowels in Spanish. The first is the strong vowel, which always forms the vowel
nucleus of a syllable. They are a, e, and o. In general, when two strong vowels are juxtaposed, each will
require its own syllable. The word teatro is bold-faced and the student can hear how the e and a are in
hiatus (hiato); there is a syllabic boundary between them: te-a-tro. Example words are caos, feo, maestro,
boa, and Noé.
Screen 15
The vowels i and u usually lose their syllabic quality when they combine with an adjacent vowel. They
are called weak vowels. Six words illustrate various vowel combinations containing i and u, including
Juan, fuego, and traición.
Screen 16
When two vowels combine and one is a weak vowel, they form a diphthong (diptongo). When three
vowels that are combined contain weak vowels, they form a triphthong (triptongo). The word Uruguay is
bold-faced and given as an example of a triphthong.
Screen 17
In Spanish, all syllables are pronounced more or less with the same duration, giving the language its
characteristic repetitive rhythm. Two columns of seven words, written in bold and paired off as minimal
pairs, illustrate the fact that the weak vowel of a diphthong, though brief, is still audible. Among the
minimal pairs the student listens to are dio/do and fue/fe.
Screen 18
Eight bold-faced words are listed. Students listen to the words then choose from three choices the correct
syllable division of each word. Words in the list include ciencia, cuidado, reaccionar, and traición.
Screen 19
Because syllable-initial position tends to be occupied by consonants and syllable-final position by vowels,
glides can be divided into two groups: semi-vowels that end a syllable (e.g., a-fei-tar), and semi-
consonants that begin a syllable (e.g., pa-tio). Four bold-faced words exemplify each type of glide.
Screen 20
The student listens to eight bold-faced words containing diphthongs. Then she is asked to write in the text
box next to each word whether the glide is a semi-vowel (semi-V) or a semi-consonant (semi-C).
Screen 21
Syllabification in Spanish occurs the same way in a phrase as it does in a word: a consonant will combine
with a following vowel to form a syllable. There are no phonetic boundaries between words in a sentence.
This is known as linking (enlace or encadenamiento). The bold-faced sentence "El inglés es un idioma" is
given as an example: e-lin-glé-se-su-ni-dio-ma.
Reviewed by Phillip Elliot Review of Pronunciación y Fonética
Language Learning & Technology 35
Screen 22
A Spanish couplet is bold-faced and serves as an example of linking. Linking between words in the
couplet is indicated by the ^ symbol. The student is then given each line of the couplet separately to listen
to. She next records herself saying the verse and then plays back the recording.
Screen 23
The student listens to six bold-faced sentences, then divides each sentence into syllables in the text box
that appears below each sentence.
Screen 24
The same six sentences of screen 23 are listed and the student is asked to read them aloud, attempting to
repeat each sentence with the correct syllable divisions.
Screen 25
This is a summary screen of the lesson.
LESSON SUMMARIES
Table 1 summarizes many of the points discussed in the other nine lessons of the program. These lessons
utilize a variety of exercises similar to those found in the Syllable lesson.
Table 1. Lesson Summaries for Nine Lessons
Stress
*It is contrastive.
*Most words do not have a
written accent mark.
*A written accent mark identifies
the stressed syllable.
*Words ending in a vowel or -n,
-s have stress on next-to-last
syllable.
*Words ending in a consonant
(except -n,
-s) have stress on the last
syllable.
*4 word stress categories.
Phoneme
*Phonemes are a class of sounds
that have a contrastive
function.
*One must learn a different
system of contrasts when
learning a second language.
*Minimal pairs help identify
phonemes.
*Allophones are realizations of
phonemes.
*Differences between phoneme,
allophone and letter.
Vowels: Description
*Mouth, lips, and tongue produce
the characteristic sound of a
vowel.
*Vowel identity based on tongue
movement and position (high,
mid, low/front, central, back);
degree of mouth aperture (open,
closed) and position of lips
(tensed, rounded).
Vowels: Pronunciation
*English vowels may vary from
syllable to syllable but Spanish
vowels retain their basic
characteristic, whether in
stressed or unstressed syllable.
*Some allophonic variation with
unstressed vowels in Spanish.
*Care needed to maintain the
speech organs in correct
position when producing
vowels.
Consonants: Description
*Consonants may be divided
into 2 types, depending on
whether airflow is constricted.
*Obstruent consonants may be
voiced or unvoiced.
*Non-obstruent consonants are
all voiced.
*Consonants identified by three
features: point and mode of
articulation, and voicing.
Consonants: Pronunciation
*/p/, /t/, and /k/ have only one
allophone that is unaspirated.
*The distinction between nasal
sounds is sometimes
neutralized before consonants.
*/l/ is not velarized as in English.
*/b/, /d/, and /g/ have fricative
and occlusive allophones.
*Distinction between /r/, /rr/
occurs in intervocalic position.
Reviewed by Phillip Elliot Review of Pronunciación y Fonética
Language Learning & Technology 36
Orthography
*u not pronounced between g_e
or g_i.
*ü indicates pronunciation of u
between g_e or g_i.
*[x] corresponds to g, j, and x.
*[y] corresponds to ll and y.
*[s] corresponds to c, s, and z.
*[rr] corresponds to r and rr.
*[k] corresponds to k, c, and qu.
*h is silent but may indicate
hiatus.
*b and v have the same
allophones.
Dialects
*Three universal generalizations
are that some dialects have
more phonemes than others;
pronunciation of consonants
will vary according to their
syllabic position; stressed
vowels are more stable than
unstressed vowels.
*Consonants may be altered or
lost in syllable-final position.
*Unstressed vowels may be
reduced, especially before [s].
*Dialects reviewed are Mexican,
Castillian, Argentinian, and
Dominican.
Review
*Division of words and phrases
into syllables
*Stressed and unstressed
syllables
*Word stress categories
*The phoneme and minimal pairs
*Allophones and phonetic
contrasts
*Vowels
*Consonants
*Voicing, point, and mode of
articulation
*Orthography
DISCUSSION
This program is valuable for both advanced students of Spanish and Spanish teachers. It introduces the
user to important concepts in phonetics, allows her to practice pronunciation, clarifies significant
differences between Spanish and English pronunciation, and presents the user with interesting features of
several regional dialects. I have used the program when teaching Spanish phonetics and it has been a great
supplement to our course textbook.
The program was updated in 2002, which helped rid the program of some of its procedural problems (de-
bugging issues). For instance, with the 1999 version 2.0, on a frequent basis it was hard to find the right
spot to click to hear a word or sentence, or to check a response. This has been improved with version 2.1.
Still, some minor distractions were missed in the update. For example, not all bold-faced words have
audio files as is suggested. There are also still some spelling mistakes, such as los consonantes for las
consonantes. On occasion, an activity is misleading. For instance, in the Syllable lesson, English and
Spanish cognates are given to show a difference in syllable division. The names Robert and Roberto are
used to show this difference, among others. However, although Robert may be divided in the dictionary
as Rob-ert, in actual practice most people say Ro-bert, which is similar to the syllable division of its
Spanish cognate Ro-ber-to. Thus, some of the examples chosen to illustrate a difference between English
and Spanish syllabification may actually confuse the students.
Having a dictionary with entries for its capitalized phonetic terms would have also aided the program's
user. An activity testing the student on the meanings of such terms would have also been useful. In
addition, I would suggest that audio files to accompany portions of the main text of each lesson would
benefit students. On many occasions, my students have asked me how to pronounce particular words in
the main texts of the program's lessons!
Although out-dated in some respects, the program remains a useful tool for introducing Spanish phonetics
to majors and minors. If future updates are considered, I hope careful attention will be given to the
content issues outlined here.
Reviewed by Phillip Elliot Review of Pronunciación y Fonética
Language Learning & Technology 37
ABOUT THE REVIEWER
Phillip Elliott is an Associate Professor in the Department of Foreign Languages at Southern University-
Baton Rouge, where he teaches Spanish and Mandarin Chinese. He holds a PhD in Second Language
Acquisition and Teaching from the University of Arizona (SLAT Program).
E-mail: oelliott@subr.edu
