Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/review1/
May 2003, Volume 7, Number 2
pp. 24-27
Copyright © 2003, ISSN 1094-3501 24
REVIEW OF LANGUAGE AND THE INTERNET
The Biggest Language Revolution Ever Meets Applied Linguistics in the 21st Century
Language and the Internet
David Crystal
2001
ISBN 0 521 80212 1
£15.00
272 pp.
Cambridge University Press
110 Midland Avenue
Port Chester, NY 10573-4930
http://uk.cambridge.org/
Reviewed by Steven L. Thorne, Penn State
That the Internet invokes profound opportunities for language educators and students has been long
discussed (with some of the better examples published in this very journal). In his 2001 book, Language
and the Internet, David Crystal only sporadically mentions educational issues or contexts, but this does
not diminish the importance or relevance of this book for applied linguists. Crystal, a prolific linguist who
has authored numerous scholarly and reference texts on a variety of language related topics, turns his
attention in this volume to the language practices visibly mediated by the Internet. In a personal preface to
the volume, he mentions that as a prominent linguist, he has often been asked about what effect the
Internet has had on language, a question for which he did not have a clear answer. This prompted him to
explore a variety of what he terms "Internet situations," each of which comes to form a chapter in this
272-page volume.
Crystal's linguist-eye perspective is just what language educators need in order to understand the broader
implications of the complex relations governing language-based communication and the Internet as a set
of distinctive modalities. Regrettably, Crystal selects the awkward and overly cute term "Netspeak" to
describe the many forms of language visible on the Internet. His selection of this term clearly arises from
the ephemeral neologisms common to digital culture in the mid and late 1990s, evidence for which
resides in the list of alternatives he considered -- "netlish," "weblish," and "cyberspeak." Though it is a
small critique, this text would be improved should he have selected a less quaint term such as simply
"computer-mediated communication" (CMC) or "electronic discourse." This small problem aside, Crystal
convincingly describes language use and language change within "Internet situations" such as e-mail,
synchronous and asynchronous "chat groups" (his term), virtual worlds (MUDs and MOOs), and the
World Wide Web. Within each Internet situation, he discusses and, where possible, explicates the
development of new graphic conventions such as emoticons and abbreviations, the emergence of novel
genres, Internet-derived neologisms, and features of communicative activity that could only have emerged
through electronic media (e.g., forms of interaction in synchronous chat, pp. 151-167, and "message
intercalation" in e-mail, p. 120.) Below, I review select chapters of this text in greater detail.
Crystal's treatment of e-mail (chapter 3) describes this modality's history, including its fixed discourse
elements (the header structure) and various epistolary conventions which were borrowed from earlier
textual modalities (notes, letters, memos, postcards). Despite its unglamorous everyday quality for regular
users, Crystal reminds the reader that e-mail use emphasizes "clarity of the message on the screen" (p.
110) and has precipitated the now common use of numbered and bulleted lists, a feature rare in earlier
written communication. Unlike the memo that preceded it, e-mail is often used as a tool for dialogue and
Reviewed by Steven L. Thorne Review of Language and the Internet
Language Learning & Technology 25
can include a string of anterior messages. In this sense, a new document is created as each interaction
builds upon prior messages. Crystal predicts that over time, e-mail will exhibit a "much wider stylistic
range than it does at present, as the medium is adapted to suit a broader range of communicative
purposes" (p. 107). Does this "much wider stylistic range," potentially outside of the norms of
prescriptivist grammatical and orthographic conventions, present a problem rather than an opportunity for
language educators? Crystal responds that e-mail is not a "medium to be feared for its linguistic
irresponsibility (because it allows for radical graphological deviance) but as one which offers a further
domain within which children can develop their ability to consolidate their stylistic intuitions and make
responsible linguistic choices." Addressing language education directly, Crystal argues that "Email has
extended the language's stylistic range in interesting and innovative ways. In my view, it is an
opportunity, not a threat, for language education" (p. 128). I agree with Crystal's optimism and
acknowledgement that the Internet has unquestionably expanded the average range and diversity of
specifically graphical (written) communication. I would also extend this line of reasoning to mention that
Internet situations are no longer optional communicative modalities, nor is the use of Internet
communication tools some sort of proxy or practice environment for subsequent communication in face-
to-face or formal writing contexts. Ever increasingly, everyday communication in work, school, and
interpersonal domains is Internet mediated. Understanding and acquiring new genres of communication
(at the level of style as well as lexicon and register) are critical dimensions of the process of becoming a
competent late-modern communicator.
In chapter 5, Crystal addresses group uses of CMC tools of both the synchronous and asynchronous
varieties. To help substantiate Crystal's assertion that the Internet has kindled the wide-spread use of
bulleted lists, here are the descriptive features Crystal attributes to group CMC use (what he subsumes
under the label synchronous and asynchronous "group chats"):
•  These modalities encourage an "I" language variety where personal reference and perspective
dominate.
•  "It" is used to introduce personal comments ("it seems to me…").
•  Participants frequently use private verbs such as "think," "feel," "know" (describing activity that
cannot be publicly observed).
•  Tag or rhetorical questions are used to express personal attitude, views, and to encourage
responses from interlocutors.
•  Synchronous and asynchronous tools lack (or differentially render) the face-to-face conventions
of turn-taking, floor-taking, and adjacency pairing, with implications for rate of topic decay,
coherence and cohesion, and simultaneity and overlap of messages.
In reference to the final point and quoting Herring, Crystal acknowledges that CMC environments are
"both dysfunctionally and advantageously incoherent" (p. 169). Though numerous features of Internet
communication have the propensity to drive language prescriptivists mad with rage, and certainly most
everyone has been the producer of an utterance that upon rereading makes us cringe, people adapt
language to meet new needs, new situations, and new modalities. This is the heart of language evolution.
As new digital communication tools become available, genres of communicative practice will develop
that are difficult to predict or possibly even to imagine.
Chapter seven describes language use on the World Wide Web which is "graphically more eclectic than
any domain of written language in the real world" (p. 197) and one that "holds a mirror up to our
linguistic nature, it is a mirror that both distorts and enhances, providing new constraints and
opportunities" (p. 198). In assessing this situation, Crystal suggests that this is because the language of the
Web is under no central control, does not respect national boundaries, and thus spawns new
communicative genres. Due to the Web's dual function of reception (finding texts) and production
(relative ease of producing HTML texts), "people have more power to influence the language of the Web
than in any other medium" (p. 208).
Reviewed by Steven L. Thorne Review of Language and the Internet
Language Learning & Technology 26
In this chapter Crystal also includes an interesting discussion on word processing. In contrast to the
flexible orthography and syntax in many CMC contexts, Crystal rightly points out that word processors
and some e-mail clients "must surely influence our intuitions about the nature of our language" through
the prescriptivist grammar and spell-checkers they include (p. 212). Though certainly useful as indicators
of typos or inadvertent grammar errors, Crystal is of the opinion that
a large number of valuable stylistic distinctions are being endangered by this repeated encounter
with the programmer's prescriptive usage preferences. Online dictionaries and grammars are
likely to influence usage much more than their traditional Fowlerian counterparts ever did. It
would be good to see a greater descriptive realism emerge, paying attention to the sociolinguistic
and stylistic complexity which exists in a language, but at present the recommendations are
arbitrary, oversimplified, and depressingly purist in spirit. (p. 212)
A few pages later, Crystal concludes that "[grammar and spelling] software designers underestimate the
amount of variation there is in the orthographic system, the pervasive nature of language change, and the
influence context has in deciding whether an orthographic feature is obligatory or optional" (p. 214). His
passion to affirm the many language varieties visible over the Internet, and his well-supported arguments
against grammatical and stylistic essentialism, provide language educators with the challenge to be
balanced in their assessment strategies of communication that occurs in digital environments. For
language educators, the Internet provokes the following tension -- to be accepting of creative innovation
while also corrective of language use that may fall too far outside of expert speaker norms.
Crystal also tackles the issue of language diversity and notes that roughly one quarter of the world's
languages have some Internet presence. For languages with few speakers or little telecommunications
infrastructure, he reasonably hypothesizes that "until a critical mass of Internet penetration in a country
builds up, and a corresponding mass of content exists in the local language, the motivation to switch from
English-language sites will be limited to those for whom issues of identity outweigh issues of
information" (p. 220). However, we need not fear total domination by English as the primary medium of
digital communication. Especially through wireless networks that bypass the infrastructural problems
associated with wires and cables, an increasing proportion of the world's population will participate in the
use and production of the Internet. This, Crystal notes, will afford a glimpse at "language presence in a
real sense … sites which allow us to see languages as they are" (pp. 220-221).
In the eighth and final chapter, "The Linguistic Future of the Internet," Crystal surmises that computer
mediated communication may become an obsolete notion as Internet information and communication
functionality migrates to other tools, notably mobile phones and personal digital assistants at the moment,
but also hand held units that will combine Internet access with digital photography and video, fax, and
traditional media like radio and television. He suggests that technology developments will have two broad
impacts: (a) new modalities and their effects on the nature of language and speech community and (b)
new modalities bringing languages and speech communities into contact with one another. As speakers of
distinct language varieties come together for an increasing number of purposes, automated speech
transcription and translation tools will likely improve and become ubiquitous. As noted above, however,
the more commonly spoken languages will likely remain far better served by the private sector services
that will support such development.
Crystal does discuss language education issues in this final chapter and remarks that second language
education and applied linguistics have been leaders in the use of the Internet for specific purposes.
Examples include asynchronous projects at intra- and interclass levels and "key-pal" international
partnerships (the topic of this LLT special issue). Synchronous tools and what Crystal terms "virtual
world" environments (MUDs and MOOs) facilitate real-time communication which may assist with "the
promotion of rapid responses," but cautions that the truncated forms of language found in chat
environments may "represent only a small part of the grammatical repertoire of a language" (p. 235). As
Reviewed by Steven L. Thorne Review of Language and the Internet
Language Learning & Technology 27
mentioned, Crystal also emphasizes the "'authentic materials"' and "'genuine written data"' that is
available via the Web. With all Internet technologies, Crystal warns that it is the teachers who must be
aware of the diversity of Internet speech communities, to know the relation between modalities and
expected genres of communication, and to be familiar with the nomenclature of the Internet itself. Well in
line with the language ideology he reiterates throughout the book, Crystal does not take a prescriptivist
approach and suggests that we embrace language change, including the flexible orthography, grammar,
and style common to the many varieties of "netspeak." However, he also points out that language
educators should be aware of the complex pragmatic competence L2 learners will need to evaluate the
appropriateness of language used on e-mail and chat groups. "The bending and breaking of rules," which
form the heart of ludic behavior, present "a problem to those who have not yet developed a confident
command  of the rules per se" (pp. 236-237).
Certain omissions are apparent in the book, but anyone writing about contemporary uses of technology
knows that it presents a moving target. In other words, it is not possible to predict even near-future
technology use with much accuracy. Crystal's book was published in 2001, however, and includes
references from 2000. It is mildly surprising that he does not address what can only be described as the
"Instant Messenger phenomenon." Instant Messenger (IM) has become the leading synchronous CMC
tool for undergraduate populations (see Thorne, 2003) and was tremendously popular even in the late
1990s. Per my experience using this text in applied linguistics courses, non-linguistically focused or
trained individuals have found his prose, linguistic descriptions, and argumentation to be clear and
inspiring. Very usefully, Crystal discusses and takes examples from widely referenced linguistic, CMC,
and Internet Studies research. This aspect of the book should prove useful to foreign and second language
educators who wish to glean a synoptic overview of the vast research on CMC and Internet Studies.
In the final analysis, Language and the Internet is a review text providing a useful and well-referenced
overview of Internet-related research. Commensurate with other books written for such purposes, this
volume provides few new or striking insights to Internet Studies enthusiasts. This said, Crystal has written
an engaging volume that language educators will find practical as they grapple with questions of how
Internet-mediated language may, and perhaps ought to be, different from language use in other
modalities. As such, this book is important for applied linguists who wish to understand the broader
background of language use and language change via the Internet, which he describes as "a linguistic
singularity -- a genuine new medium" (p. 238). Invoking Berners-Lee, the acknowledged developer of the
Internet, Crystal reminds us that the Internet is less a technological fact than a social fact, and "its chief
stock-in-trade is language" (p. 236). Brace yourself, for as Crystal notes, and I concur, "we are on the
brink of the biggest language revolution ever" (p. 241).
ABOUT THE REVIEWER
Steve Thorne is the Associate Director of the Center for Language Acquisition, Associate Director of the
Center for Advanced Language Proficiency Education and Research (CALPER), and Assistant Professor
in Linguistics and Applied Language Studies at Penn State University. His research addresses activity
theory, additional language learning, and computer-mediated communication.
E-mail: sthorne@psu.edu
REFERENCE
Thorne, S. (2003). Artifacts and cultures-of-use in intercultural communication. Language Learning &
Technology, 7(2), 37-66. Available at http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/thorne/
