Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num2/chen/
May 2004, Volume 8, Number 2
pp. 33-49
Copyright © 2004, ISSN 1094-3501 33
HOW A WEB-BASED COURSE FACILITATES
ACQUISITION OF ENGLISH FOR ACADEMIC PURPOSES
Jin Chen, Safia Belkada, and Toshio Okamoto
The University of Electro-Communications, Tokyo
ABSTRACT
This paper describes an experimental study aimed at investigating the learning effectiveness of a
Web-based course called Academic English (EAP) for Japanese learners of English. The main
focus of the study was to examine the form, function, and impact of interaction in the course.
Twenty university-level EFL students participated in this experiment. They were randomly
assigned to two treatment groups: a controlled group with inter-personal task treatment and an
experiment group with intra-personal task treatment. Regarding effectiveness of the interactivity
dimension in language acquisition, there was one independent variable, type of treatments, and
two dependent variables, achievement and attitude measurements. The achievement variable was
used to address the extent of learning due to the two treatment conditions. The attitude variable
was used to address the degree of motivation towards a Web-based communication platform as
well as the enforced interaction functions. Statistical analyses revealed no significant effect of
treatment on either comprehension or general L2 development, but significant differences were
found with respect to language interaction for task completion under different task treatments.
Therefore, it was concluded that this Web-based course was well designed to maximize the
students' language learning experience as well as to improve their language abilities in English.
Further research is needed to examine the notion of self-repair in students' production in the target
language.
INTRODUCTION
The advent of information communication technology has improved the quality of many scientific
disciplines, including language education (Chapelle, 2001; Farretti, 2001; Gonzalez-Lloret, 2003; Tsou,
Wang, & Li, 2002). Language learning through technology has become a fact of life with important
implications for second language acquisition (SLA; Chapelle, 2001). New theories and applications of
language learning and teaching are exploring the benefits of information communication technology to
facilitate SLA (Chapelle, 1998; Chen, Inoue, & Okamoto, 2001; Chen, Cristea, & Okamoto, 2003;
Gonzalez-Lloret, 2003; Okamoto, Kayama, Inoue, & Cristea, 2002). In these activities, instructional
design based on the communicative language teaching paradigm has shifted language teaching and
learning practices in computer-assisted language learning (CALL) environments (Box, 2003; Chapelle,
2001).
Educational research findings suggest that the success of any educational process should be based on
sound pedagogical principles and interactions (Box, 2003; Chapelle, 1998; Day & Shapson, 2001; Ellis,
1999; Gonzalez-Lloret, 2003). During communication, students draw on their abilities to anticipate new
information, notice insufficient knowledge, and relate the new information to pre-existing information.
Therefore, communicative language use is a successful and powerful approach to language learning
(Batstone, 2002; Gonzalez-Lloret, 2003; Izumi, 2002; Pica, 1991; Schollaert, 1998; Skehan, 1998).
The concept of communicative task (i.e., a meaning-focus activity), based predominately on the notion of
communicative language use, creates situations that encourage the production of comprehensible output
(e.g., a modified speech, written text) from the students. In support of communicative tasks, Nunan
(2000) posits that tasks promoting linguistic/conversational adjustments promote comprehensible input   
Jin Chen, Safia Belkada, & Toshio Okamoto How a Web-Based Course Facilitate Acquisition of English…
Language Learning & Technology 34
(i.e., elaborated learning routines). Similarly, Long (1996) found that learners are most likely to notice
linguistic form during interaction. According to Hegelheimer and Chapelle (2000), the most useful
interactions are those which help learners comprehend the semantics and syntax of input and improve the
comprehensibility of their own linguistic output. As stated by Gonzalez-Lloret (2003), interaction
facilitates comprehension better than learning conditions without interactions. Moreover, the discourse
produced through a task is given its identifiable shape and structure by the communicative purpose of the
task (Newton & Kennedy, 1996).
There are a number of experimental studies within the communicative language teaching paradigm that
have shown positive evidence of such interactions in CALL environments. For instance, using a task-
based course in a CALL environment, Gonzalez-Lloret (2003) showed that second language (L2)
interactions between students resulted in considerable high-quality output, although not as rich as the
interaction between native speakers and non-native speakers. However, her task-based CALL is more
similar to traditional face-to-face interactions: The computer served not as a medium of communication,
but as a presenter of materials meant to engage students in conversation.
Tsou et al. (2002) developed an individualized teaching tool for vocabulary learning that employs concept
map-mediated interactions based on the idea of linking students' prior knowledge with their new
knowledge. The learning tool is designed to help the learner acquire abstract vocabulary. However, this
learning tool cannot dynamically adapt the learning path (i.e., the sequence of the course) based on the
student-user's learning needs and task results. Therefore, it is easy to stray from the optimal learning path.
It was not clear from the authors' findings whether this communication pattern could help learners to
transfer their knowledge of the language into their academic lives.
In keeping with these findings, we proposed a communication-oriented framework, a combination of the
task-based approach common to communicative language teaching. This framework was adopted to
formulate a comprehensive instructional design that provides guidelines for instructional developers to
structure learning materials so as to accommodate sufficient situational exposures to language learning in
non-English speaking areas.
The main assumption underlying this research is that L2 interaction is necessary for language construction
and reconstruction. Each form of instructional interaction is assumed to play a role in the entire
educational process. Negotiation of meaning is also assumed to happen either in inter-personal or intra-
personal activities. The distinction between required and optional information exchange is operationalized
as a distinction between inter-personal (e.g., two-way information gap) and intra-personal tasks (e.g., one-
way note-taking). This distinction will be the key factor determining the optionality of interaction in our
experimental study.
As an illustration of our approach, we developed a Web-based course called Academic English aimed at
upgrading students' language ability in English for academic purposes (EAP). The prototype of Academic
English was designed to support distance learning as well as to supplement traditional classroom-based
activities. Various kinds of learning materials and information are stored as digital multimedia in the form
of pictures, videos, and sound tracks. Accessing the course from remote sites, students can select their
preferred video clips, participate in question/answer sessions, and receive feedback after each interaction.
In addition, opportunities for student-student and student-teacher interaction are also available via
communication tools (e.g., a chat tool). The Web-based course was built with the purpose of maximizing
their language-learning experience.
The main focus of our experimental study was to examine the effectiveness of different forms of
interactivity on language acquisition in the Web-based listening environment. In particular, we aimed to
examine how the form of interaction was defined by specific course modes (i.e., student-content
interaction) in which students' background knowledge of the subject is involved in the
communication/interaction processes. The following research questions guided our study:
Jin Chen, Safia Belkada, & Toshio Okamoto How a Web-Based Course Facilitate Acquisition of English…
Language Learning & Technology 35
1. What mode of interaction (i.e., negotiation of meaning in inter-personal versus intra-personal
activities) facilitates comprehension better and could lead to more effective language acquisition?
2. Does negotiation of meaning facilitate greater comprehension and production?
The remaining parts of this paper are structured as follows: (a) description of the Web-based Academic
English course; (b) experimental study of the Web-based course; and (c) results, discussion, and
suggestions for future research.
DESCRIPTION OF THE WEB-BASED ACADEMIC ENGLISH COURSE
The Web-based environment was designed to provide students with an outline of the course content (i.e.,
Artificial Intelligence, in the case of our pilot version), direct access to additional learning resources, and
system functionality. This environment included two types of user interfaces: a student interface and a
teacher interface. The student interface is divided into a frameset (i.e., five frames), as shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Main screen of the learning environment
The functions of the framesets are as follows:
1. The upper left frame displays a video-on-demand (VOD) presentation.
2. The lower left frame displays the learning path (i.e., the structure of the lesson, which allows
students to control the sequence and pacing of learning).
3. The upper right frame displays the question/ answer function and instructions for each task.
4. The middle right frame displays feedback from the teachers or other students.
5. The bottom right frame displays other tutorial functions including video script and learning
history of a student.
Jin Chen, Safia Belkada, & Toshio Okamoto How a Web-Based Course Facilitate Acquisition of English…
Language Learning & Technology 36
In the following section, we will explain how learning content is specified and structured to support
interactivity.
Instructional Strategies
Two instructional strategies (i.e., course strategies and dialogue strategies) were defined for the course as
a whole. Course strategy represents a method based on the theory of learning styles (i.e., student
preferences in learning) and is used to determine an appropriate dialogue strategy for a given instructional
goal (e.g., listening comprehension). For instance, a student with a sequential learning style prefers to
learning step by step. For such a student, a step-by-step course strategy would be selected to optimize the
learning process. A dialogue strategy, which is based on a specific teaching objective (e.g., defining a
concept), is used to determine the basic video input and the corresponding response modes to be used so
as to best situate the learning task. A single teaching objective may be achieved via one or several
dialogue strategies. The dialogue strategies in Academic English are categorized into three dimensions:
D1. Conscious induction,
D2. Sub-conscious induction from structured language input materials,
D3. Sub-conscious induction from unstructured language input materials.
Figure 2. The interface of Learning Path with lesson content
Jin Chen, Safia Belkada, & Toshio Okamoto How a Web-Based Course Facilitate Acquisition of English…
Language Learning & Technology 37
Course Structure
The bottom frame in Figure 2 shows an example of lesson content. In Academic English, the overall
course was structured into lesson layers and dialogue layers, where one or more dialogue components
constitute a lesson layer. The topics and the concepts which comprise the learning content (i.e., Artificial
Intelligence) are defined as the name/value of lesson and dialogue.
Around the topic-concept relationship, the input material in each lesson is generated for a particular
instructional goal (i.e., the selection of the concepts for a specific dialogue are to be included as part of
the topic of the overarching lesson). We defined two selection methods, Strategy A and Strategy B, to
generate the lesson contents. In Strategy A, the lesson is dynamically selected according to the student's
current knowledge level and a particular course strategy. For Strategy B, the students have the freedom to
select their learning tasks based on their own learning goals. An illustration of Strategy B is given in
Figure 3.
Figure 3. The interfaces of two different Learning Paths after opening the Lcontrol dialogue box
Course Content
The course content in each dialogue is specified following different dialogue strategies. In order to
optimize the learning process for individual students, a number of teaching techniques were utilized for
each instructional goal within the defined strategies. The content of each dialogue for a specific
instructional goal is organized into different knowledge modules (i.e., input resources and response
Jin Chen, Safia Belkada, & Toshio Okamoto How a Web-Based Course Facilitate Acquisition of English…
Language Learning & Technology 38
modes) by systematically following a simple-to-complex structure. Tables 1 and 2 show the organization
of defining features for input resources and task types, respectively.
The input material used for each task is delivered in the form of short video clips. Each video clip is
associated with a predefined task (e.g., a question/answer teaching technique is used for each interaction
task). In Figure 1, an example of a video clip is displayed in the top left frame and the instructions,
questions, and answer boxes for the corresponding task are displayed in the top right frame.
Table 1. Defining Features of the Input Resources
Text feature Slot-name Slot-value
Information familiarity D 1Complexity
Information complexity D 2
Number of propositions D 3
Syntactic difficulty D 2
Explicitness of language functions D 2
Difficulty
Subject-specific vocabulary D 3, D 1
Table 2. The Defining Features of a Task
Task types Descriptions Features
Dictation Relating structure to language functions Noticing of form
Note-taking Relating language to specific meanings Intra-personal negotiation
Information gap Relating language to academic activities Inter-personal negotiation
Learning Flows in the Course
Registered students receive the video presentation and associated predefined tasks when they click on the
dialogue name in the learning path frame. The lesson contents are displayed through a Web browser.
The student is required to study the lesson in the sequence generated by the course software. However,
the software does allow students to manipulate this sequence in two ways: by selecting a learning goal
and by choosing certain features of the learning path. The learning goal function (see Figure 4) allows
students to skip the current dialogue or return to the previous one based on their learning goals. The
learning path control function (see Figure 3), called Lcontrol and labeled LPC, allows students to re-
define their lesson contents according to two operation functions: focus or study. The focus function
allows students to study the tasks they learnt before. The study function allows students to redefine the
lessons based on their learning needs.
Jin Chen, Safia Belkada, & Toshio Okamoto How a Web-Based Course Facilitate Acquisition of English…
Language Learning & Technology 39
Figure 4. The interface of the main window with a pop-up dialogue box
Before performing a task, students read and accept the embedded instruction by clicking the "Chcck"
button (see Figure 1). They can also replay the video content until the task is accomplished. Furthermore,
after students input and submit their answers for each task, feedback information is displayed by either a
human teacher (in information-gap tasks) or the system (in dictation and note-taking tasks; see Figure 5,
middle right frame).
Afterwards, the students can review the current video script and re-visit the course via the recorded
learning history. A sample of the information contained in a learning history is displayed in Figure 5.
Jin Chen, Safia Belkada, & Toshio Okamoto How a Web-Based Course Facilitate Acquisition of English…
Language Learning & Technology 40
Figure 5. The interface of the learning enviornment with feedback and learning history information
Figure 6. The interface of the learner chat tool Figure 7. The teacher interface with chat
performance evaluation tools
Jin Chen, Safia Belkada, & Toshio Okamoto How a Web-Based Course Facilitate Acquisition of English…
Language Learning & Technology 41
Besides the student-content interaction in the learning process, student-student and student-teacher
interaction is also possible during task completion. Whenever needed, the environment provides an
opportunity for the student to interact with the other students or his teacher in real time. Figures 6 and 7
show student-teacher interaction data. Figure 6 shows a student chat tool that is activated when a
registered student selects his/her starting dialogue in the learning path frame. Figure 8 shows the teacher
interface, which also includes a chat tool.
Teacher Interface
The human teacher's interface allows teachers to talk with on-line students, access the students' answers,
and provide feedback on the students' performance either synchronously or asynchronously. As Figure 7
shows, this interface consists of three parts:
1. several text boxes for teachers to input their assessment of student performance (the upper part of
the interface);
2. the chat tool, displaying messages from on-line students (the middle part of the interface); and
3. a display of the student's current performance data (at the bottom of the interface).
EXPERIMENTAL STUDY OF THE WEB-BASED COURSE
Twenty university students (non-native English speakers, majoring in Computer Science) from Southwest
Normal University in China participated in this experiment via the Internet. The participants were
randomly divided into two groups and assigned to different treatment conditions (see Table 3). The first
group was assigned to the intra-personal treatment (i.e., where language is used for a functional purpose)
comprised of a note-taking task and a dictation task (abbreviated as N + D). The other group was assigned
to inter-personal treatment (i.e., where language is used for a communication purpose) comprised of an
information-gap task (abbreviated as IG).
Table 3. The Two Treatment Groups
Exchange Information
Treatment Required Optional
N + D O + N + D
IG R + IG
The N+D task was set up under an optional information exchange condition (annotated as O + N + D),
while the IG task was structured to require information exchange (annotated as R + IG).
Furthermore, two environmental conditions were defined: in one condition students were able to
manipulate their learning path while performing the task (abbreviated as the LP condition); in the other
condition students were not allowed to manipulate the learning path while performing the task
(abbreviated as the NLP condition).
Materials
The prototype course consisted of 20 dialogues. Each dialogue contained three videos from simple to
complex (specified to support the same instructional goal, though by different dialogue strategies)1 and a
set of questions in different task types as described in the Course Structure section, above. The structured
or unstructured input video clips are based on the topic "Search.." The task types are defined as dictation,
note-taking, and information-gap. The lesson contents were selected based on the participants' current
knowledge level and course strategies. The selection of level of the video for each dialogue was left to the
Jin Chen, Safia Belkada, & Toshio Okamoto How a Web-Based Course Facilitate Acquisition of English…
Language Learning & Technology 42
students themselves. The default level was based on the participants' progress. However, if the
participants were not satisfied with the default level, they were able to select their own preferred level
(see video levels in Figure 2).
The instructional treatment provided in this study focused on the target forms of subject-specific
vocabulary and language functions (e.g., defining, categorizing). The participants were instructed to try to
acquire the target forms by listening to the video clips.
Instrumentation
The independent variable was defined as type of treatment. The dependent variables were achievement
and attitude. The achievement variable was used to address the extent of learning associated with the two
treatments, N + G and IG, respectively. The attitude variable was employed to address the degree of
motivation reported for the Web-based communication platform as well as the different tutorial functions.
The tracked data (i.e., the participants' written responses to each question) were used to measure the
participants' levels of achievement. The first session was used to acquaint the participants with the
training process and was therefore not scored. Three of the remaining 19 dialogues were randomly
selected to be scored and were used to measure the participants' achievement in L2 learning in the Web-
based CALL environment.
Finn's (1977) type and token analysis was employed to score participant responses. Hunt's (1977) T-unit2
word count was also used to measure their syntactic complexity. Types are the number of different words
used in the participants' responses. The tokens are the total number of words written. The number of types
reflects a direct measure of the breadth of subject-specific vocabulary items acquired. The token analysis
was conducted on T-units. The assumption is that the length of the T-unit increases as learners mature or
develop intellectually (Hunt, 1977).
Two seperate questionnaires were used to measure participant attitudes and prior knowledge. A pre-
treatement questionnaire was used to examine the participants' background knowledge. Responses were
totaled to yield individual scores for prior knowledge about the topic of artificial intelligence. The data
extracted from this survey were used as a reference for interpreting achievement scores.
A post-treatment questionnaire consisted of five-statements which participants were to rate on a 5-point
Likert scale according to their level of agreement. Values on the scale were strongly disagree, disagree,
undecided, agree, and strongly agree. To facilitate scoring, these values were converted to numbers, from
one to five, respectively. The participants' attitudes toward the Web-based course (i.e. their language-
learning experiences) were measured using the following five statements:
1. Communication over the Web was as effective as in face-to-face situations.
2. Each of the automatically generated video and questions were suitable for my current individual
understanding.
3. I liked being able to manipulate my learning path (to create an individualized lesson).
4. The chat tool was an effective way to get information from other participants.
5. Getting feedback from a human teacher was helpful.
Finally, qualitative data regarding attitudes toward the two treatments and opinions on individual
improvements in listening comprehension ability were collected using an open-ended questionnaire (five
open questions), which was provided to the participants at the end of the experiment.
Procedure
Jin Chen, Safia Belkada, & Toshio Okamoto How a Web-Based Course Facilitate Acquisition of English…
Language Learning & Technology 43
The study consisted of six one-hour sessions and took place over a 2-week period. The participants were
required to access the course at the same time each session. The first three 1-hour sessions were placed in
the NLP condition; the second three 1-hour sessions were with the LP condition. The experiment
procedure was set up as follows:
1. Pre-treatment Questionnaire: Before the lab-test session, a questionnaire was administered. Participants
were asked to complete a questionnaire to assess their background knowledge.
2. Experimental Session: Participants in this study were asked to access the course three times a week, for
at least 1 hour per lesson. Each time, the participants were allowed to select their preferred video clips.
While listening, they participated in question and answer sessions and received feedback from remote
sites after each interaction. Afterwards, they could choose either to exchange comments with the teacher
and/or other students in the same group, to continue the lesson, or to end the session. The basic options
participants could choose in manipulating task complexity (which were triggered according to the
participant's progress) are shown in Table 4.
Table 4. The Basic Options
Option 1 amount of attention to meaning required for task completion
Option 2 amount of explicit explanation given prior to practice
Option 3 amount of attention to form practice required for task completion
Option 4 degree of complexity of content knowledge
Option 5 degree of difficulty of target language
Option 6 modes of L2 interaction
3. Post-Treatment Questionnaire: The participants were asked to fill out a 5-statement questionnaire after
each course. It was expected that the participants' attitudes would gradually change as they got more
familiar with the Web-based course.
At the end of the experiment, they filled out an open-ended questionnaire (e.g., Did you experience any
communication problems? If yes, what were they? If no, please elaborate on the advantages of the
course.). The data from the post-treatment questionnaire were used to measure the participants' attitudes
towards our Web-based course.
Results
Data collected from the three dialogues via the student-users' profiles were transcribed and coded to
examine the L2 interactions. The discourse was then analyzed following the type and token method
described in the Instrumentation section above. For the different dependent variables (i.e., achievement
and attitude), the values of the means and standard deviations (SD) were calculated for the 10 participants
in each group. For the independent variable (i.e., treatment condition), the Mann-Whitney's method was
used to compute the rank sums and two-tailed probability (p) values. In the following, the main
experimental results were presented in terms of achievement and attitude.
Achievement Measures
Table 5 shows the means of types, standard deviations (SD), rank sums, and two-tailed p values. In
relation to the task completion, there is no significant difference between the two treatments (p value for
the three dialogues is not significant in R + IG). By comparing the proportion of different words used by
participants in both groups, the task was well constructed to elicit language from both participants. This
revealed that the number of target language forms elicited through negotiation of meaning in the (N + G)
treatment is as much as that in the (IG) treatment.
Jin Chen, Safia Belkada, & Toshio Okamoto How a Web-Based Course Facilitate Acquisition of English…
Language Learning & Technology 44
Table 5. Mean Scores of Types in Each Dialogue
Types Mann-Whitney
Treatment n Mean DS RankSums p
O + N + D group 10 31.15 10.59 102Dialogue 4
R + IG group 10 36.26 7.76 118 .43
O + N + D group 10 40.25 12.59 97
Dialogue 8
R + IG group 10 36.26 7.76 119 .43
O + N + D group 10 23.25 11.19 106
Dialogue 12
R + IG group 10 27.76 8.06 114 .79
Table 6 reports T-unit token values (i.e., length of sentences/utterances) for each dialogue (each task
contained four questions). Analysis of the data revealed, as indicated in Table 6, that the T-unit token
values in R + IG were statistically significant. The p value for each dialogue is 0.080, 0.060, and 0.030,
respectively. This result confirms Newton's (1996) findings that language interaction elicited via optional
information exchange is not as much as that via required information exchange. The difference may result
partly from the different purpose of each task, and partly from the different level of the participants'
language ability. This result also supports Gonzalez-Lloret's (2003) findings that the purpose of the task
has a significant effect on the elicitation of negotiation of meaning in task completion.
Table 6. Mean Scores of T-Unit Lengths from Data in Each Dialogue
T-Unit Lengths Mann-Whitney
Treatment n Mean DS RankSums p
O + N + D group 10 4.30 .71 89Dialogue 4
R + IG group 10 8.70 .50 131 .080*
O + N + D group 10 5.05 1.2 85
Dialogue 8
R + IG group 10 9.69 .88 135 .060*
O + N + D group 10 6.1 1.05 80
Dialogue 12
R + IG group 10 10.31 .72 140 .030*
*p<0.1
Table 7 reports the type totals produced in the three dialogues. The mean difference for the type totals
between the two groups is only 64 words. This indicated that the O + N + D group (mean = 448.90)
performed nearly as well as the R + IG group (mean = 512.30) on the tasks.
Table 7. Mean Scores of Total Types in Data from All Dialogues
Types Mann-Whitney
Treatment n Mean SD Rank Sums p
O + N + D group 10 448.90 12.34 104
R + IG group 10 512.30 8.26 116 .58
In terms of the correctness of responses to each question in a task, there is no significant difference found
between treatments (see Table 8). Therefore, it can be concluded that there is no difference in
comprehension of meaning and vocabulary acquisition between groups. Although the information gap
seemed to have a greater impact on the number of attempts at language use, the two groups behaved
similarly in their overall success at reconstruction of their target language.
Jin Chen, Safia Belkada, & Toshio Okamoto How a Web-Based Course Facilitate Acquisition of English…
Language Learning & Technology 45
Table 8. Mean Scores of the Correct Responses to Questions on Each Dialogue
Types Mann-Whitney
Treatment n Mean SD Rank Sums p
O + N + D group 10 4.6 8.1
R + IG group 10 4.9 6.4 .56 .084*
The results of the experimental study also revealed a variety of comprehension indicators involved in the
interaction process for intra-personal task completion (see Table 9). In the intra-personal task, the
participants used the chat tool for target form request and comprehension check during the negotiation of
meaning process. The use of the chat tool indicated that a breakdown had occurred in student-content
interaction during task completion. As can be seen in Table 10, unknown content knowledge accounted
for most of the triggers of the chat tool, followed by target form (i.e., subject-specific vocabulary and
language function forms). These results revealed that the task types in this study were well structured to
promote both comprehension and L2 acquisition.
Table 9. Chat Tool Triggers During Intra-Personal Task
Indicator Total Number
Language function 16
Vocabulary 12
Language difficulty
Syntax 5
Text complexity Domain knowledge 20
Task complexity 3
Attitude Measures
Responses on the attitude measures were converted to numeric scores and ranged from 1 (negative
attitudes) to 5 (positive attitudes), with 3 indicating neutrality. All attitude scores in both groups were
above 3, indicating generally positive attitudes. Composite scores were calculated for attitudes toward
language learning experiences, participant's autonomy, and instructional strategies in the Web-based
environment and are reported in Tables 11, 12, and 13, respectively. The mean difference in attitude
values toward language learning experiences was significantly higher for both groups under the LP
condition: mean = 4.7, SD = .61, t (10) = -2.23, p = . 001. Moreover, positive attitudes were also found
towards participant's autonomy over the Web-based environment, as shown in Table 10: mean = 4.7, SD
= .51), t(10) = -1.34, p = .003.
Table 10. Comparison of Means on Attitude toward Teaching Strategies
Treatment n Mean SD t p
O + N + D group 10 3.90 .33
R + IG group 10 4.8 .89 .12 .23
Table 11. Comparison of Means on Attitude toward Learning Autonomy
Treatment n Mean SD t p
O + N + D group 10 4.5 .67
R + IG group 10 4.7 .51 -1.34 .23
Table 12. Comparison of Means on Attitude toward Language Learning Experiences
Treatment n Mean SD t p
O + N + D group 10 3.5 .71
R + IG group 10 4.7 .614 -2.23 .001*
*p<0.1
Jin Chen, Safia Belkada, & Toshio Okamoto How a Web-Based Course Facilitate Acquisition of English…
Language Learning & Technology 46
Opinion Questionnaire
The open-ended questionnaire solicited interpretive comments on the effectiveness of the Web-based
course concerning the instructional treatments, learning, and communication. Responses revealed a range
of opinions.
Communication Problems. Almost all of the participants under the NLP condition indicated that there
were problems with the form of communication/interaction in this environment. The complaints were
generally of two types: conflict with traditional way of communication and conflict with freedom in their
learning paths. Two subjects specifically stated that they did not feel comfortable using the limited form
of communication/interaction and that the lack of sufficient guidance impeded their ability to work
effectively. Specific comments regarding interactivity problems from both groups included, "to chat with
peer students is a good idea, but sometimes I couldn't find a student who could provide me the correct
knowledg" and "I don't like communication over the Web, because I cannot see the facial expression of
my communication partner." These comments revealed a conflict with traditional ways of
communication. The findings supported Chapelle's (2001) hypothesis that the multi-modal features of
electronic text as well as its interactive nature require significantly more than the ability to read and write
in a functional way. Thus, we can say that in the information age, language learners are entering a world
where their communication abilities should include electronic literacy, that is, communication registers
associated with electronic communication (Warschauer, 2000).
Communication Effectiveness and Advantages. Regarding communication effectiveness, comments
from both groups under the LP condition were similar. The comments supported the results of the attitude
questionnaire. The overwhelming majority of subjects stated that such an environment provides an
effective setting for SLA. One of the benefits is that the fear of making mistakes in face-to-face situation
can be avoided. The advantages to the interactivity of this environment most often cited by both groups
under the LP condition were (a) having someone available to provide help when needed; (b) having
greater control of one's own learning path; (c) besides the dialogue with the tutor, it is possible to find a
peer student to talk when needed; (d) the questions in the Q&A&F educational communication forum
give both hints and purposes while listening.
Effectiveness of Instructional Treatments. The differences between the two groups were most apparent
in opinions. They supported the results of the achievement measure (see Table 6). However, two
participants in the O + N + D group expressed negative feelings toward the instructional strategies. They
were not pleased with the strategy and cited the lack of peer students to talk with as the primary
disadvantage. Positive comments were given from the R + IG group under the LP condition, such as, "it is
a quite nice learning environment, I always felt confident in performing the task," "it is good that I can
control what to learn, i.e., my lesson path and the level of video, I don't need to wait for the slower
classmates," "I found it useful to replay the video as many times as I wanted," "I found my vocabularies
enlarged after two weeks," and "I can get clarifications and confirmations when I needed them."
The finding confirms the place of individualization as one of the basic features in language education.
The bipolarity of opinions in the individualized treatment may account for the significantly more positive
attitudes toward the Web-based course by both groups under the LP condition.
Under the NLP condition, the number of positive and negative responses was equally split. Negative
opinions centered on not having enough chances to interact within the learning environment and not
having enough opportunities to access the learning path. Those who positively commented on this
treatment cited greater concentration when alone and the benefits of individualized learner control of the
video. Typical comments included, "I like the time spent apart is good in that I can think on my own for a
period of time then get with my online classmates or teachers to get confirmation when I felt uncertain or
to discuss what I obtained and what my problem is."
Jin Chen, Safia Belkada, & Toshio Okamoto How a Web-Based Course Facilitate Acquisition of English…
Language Learning & Technology 47
Attitudes Towards Human Teacher's Interference. The number of positive and negative responses on
human teacher's interference varied. Some participants stated that they didn't care whether the human
teacher was available or not, because there were enough alternate tutorial functions, such as the learning
path function, learning history information, and the chat tool for talking with online students. On the other
hand, positive opinions on the interaction with a human teacher mainly stated that the teacher can give
them positive reinforcement on their language knowledge and that this type of support can greatly reduce
the fossilization of errors. All participants expressed positive feelings towards the simultaneous feedback.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
Regarding research question one (What mode of interaction [i.e., negotiation of meaning in inter-personal
versus intra-personal activities] facilitates comprehension better and could lead to more effective
language acquisition?), we can say that the modes of interaction (negotiation via inter-personal or intra-
personal tasks) were equally effective in promoting listening comprehension and L2 development. From
the achievement measures, we deduced that the task was constructed well enough to elicit language
meaning and form from both groups by comparing the proportion of types (T-unit token) and correct
response values. Negotiations via intra-personal tasks do offer a considerable amount of quality data,
although it was not as rich as the negotiations via inter-personal tasks. From the attitude measures, we
found that the students' attitudes were positive towards the initiate/response/feedback interaction form.
These results confirm the benefit of negotiated interactions in the production of comprehensible output as
shown in earlier SLA research. The main conclusion is that self-initiated clarification attempts and self-
negotiated comprehensible output involved in the learner-content interaction should be encouraged as one
of the preferred instructional strategies in a CALL environment.
In relation to research question two (Does negotiation of meaning facilitate greater comprehension and
production?), there is no data revealing that negotiation of meaning facilitates comprehension and
production, although the negotiation of meaning does occur with the purpose of task completion or
information exchange.
Despite the acknowledged importance of interaction in the language acquisition process, more research is
necessary to examine whether there is a difference in the extent of self-repair between inter-personal and
intra-personal tasks. Another challenge, in relation to interaction via production in a Web-based
environment, is to examine whether there is a difference between the dictation, note-taking and
information gap tasks in terms of ability to draw the student's attention to linguistic form.
Our research is motivated by the increased need for student cooperation both with the system and within
the system, where language acquisition can be assisted by various meaningful modes of L2 interaction in
a Web-based language learning environment. The task types that were widely used in traditional
classrooms to generate L2 interactions were effectively transferred to the Web-based CALL environment.
This paper represents a contribution to our understanding of Web-based course interactions and
implementation for language acquisition in general and EAP learning in particular. To illustrate the theory
and design of our system, we have presented and commented upon some actual screenshots from
communicative task application during language acquisition via listening comprehension training.
In conclusion, while these technological innovations foster changes in SLA, facilitate computer-based
learning activities, and encourage student autonomy, they are ultimately tools in the hands of course
authors who must use them creatively to maximize the students' language learning experience and to
enhance their language acquisition for communicative purposes. Although learning language through
communication has been proven to be successful in face-to-face language learning situations for
facilitating the restructuring of the student's linguistic knowledge, it has not yet been successfully
transferred to the new educational environment, the Web. In this paper we demonstrate how such a
transfer is possible. Such developments will form part of the research agenda for the 21st century.
Jin Chen, Safia Belkada, & Toshio Okamoto How a Web-Based Course Facilitate Acquisition of English…
Language Learning & Technology 48
NOTES
1. The three videos in one Dialogue were labeled as three levels according to their text features (i.e.,
information complexity and language difficulty).
2. T-unit was defined by Hunt (1977) as the single main clause plus whatever other subordinate clauses or
non-clauses are attached to, or embedded within, the one main clause.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Jin Chen is a PhD candidate in the Department of Information System Science of the Graduate School of
Information Systems at the University of Electro-Communications, Tokyo. Her research interests include
AI, CALL, instructional design, applied linguistics, knowledge representation and computing, ITS, and
Web-based educational environments. She is a member of ICCE. She was a paper reviewer for
ICALT2004.
E-mail: chenj@ai.is.uec.ac.jp
Safia Belkada graduated from the Graduate School of Information Systems at the University of Electro-
Communications, Tokyo, and worked at Motorola Japan, Ltd., Tokyo. Her research interests include AI,
neural networks, adaptive systems, UM, knowledge computing, concept mapping, ITS, and Web-based
educational environments. She has authored or co-authored several research papers and course booklets.
E-mail: safia@ai.is.uec.ac.jp
Toshio Okamoto obtained a PhD (Engineering) from Tokyo Institute of Technology in 1988. Presently,
he is a Professor in the graduate school of Information Systems, the University of Electro-
Communications. He is engaged in research on AI models for ITSs, computer supported collaborative
learning systems, collaborative memory and knowledge management, curriculum development/evaluation
of IT-education, and IT-education in the Internet environment.
E-mail: okamoto@ai.is.uec.ac.jp
REFERENCES
Batstone, R. (2002). Contexts of engagement: A discourse perspective on "intake" and "pushed output."
System, 30(1), 1-14.
Box, S. (2003). CALL - past, present and future. System, 31, 13-48.
Chapelle, C. A. (1998). Multimedia CALL: Lessons to be learned from research on instructed SLA.
Language Learning & Technology, 2(1), 22-34. Retrieved October 13, 2003, from http://llt.msu.edu/
vol2num1/article1/
Chapelle, C. (2001). Computer applications in second language acquisition: Foundations for teaching
testing and research. London: Cambridge University Press.
Chen, J., Inoue, I., & Okamoto, T. (2001). The development of a hypermedia language learning
environment on the Web for teaching academic English. In C-H. Lee, S. Lajoie, R. Mizoguchi, Y. D.
Yoo, & B. du Boulay (Eds.), Proceedings of  ICCE/SchoolNet 2001 Conference (November 12-15).
Seoul, Korea: Incheon National University of Education.
Chen, J., Cristea, A., & Okamoto, T. (2003). Communicative task modelling and its practice in academic
English language learning in a Web-based language learning environment. IET '03 Proceedings, France,
1748-1955.
Jin Chen, Safia Belkada, & Toshio Okamoto How a Web-Based Course Facilitate Acquisition of English…
Language Learning & Technology 49
Day, E., & Shapson, S. (2001). Integrating formal and functional approaches to language teaching in
French immersion: An experimental study. Language Learning, 51(1), 47-80.
Ellis, R. (1999). Theoretical perspectives on interaction and language learning. In R. Ellis (Ed.), Learning
a second language through interaction (pp. 3-31). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Farretti, R. R.(2001). Language acquisition in integrated language learning environment. The Prometheus
Journal, 1(4), 1-10.
Finn, P. J. (1977). Computer-aided description of mature word choices in writing. In C. R. Cooper & L.
Odell (Eds.), Evaluating writing (pp. 69-90). Buffalo, NY: State University of New York.
Gonzalez-Lloret, M. (2003). Design task-based CALL to promote interaction. Language Learning &
Technology, 7(1), 86-104. Retrieved October 13, 2003, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num1/gonzalez/
Hegelheimer,V., & Chapelle, C. (2000). Methodological issues in research on learner-computer
interactions in CALL. Language Learning & Technology, 4(1), 41-59. Retrieved March 4, 2002, from
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/hegchap/
Hunt, K. W. (1977). Early blooming and late blooming syntactical structures. In C. R. Cooper & L. Odell
(Eds.), Evaluating writing (pp. 69-90). Buffalo, NY: State University of New York.
Izumi, S. (2002). Output, input enhancement, and the noticing hypothesis. Studies in Second Language
Acquistion, 24(4), 541-577.
Long, M. H. (1996). The role of linguistic environment in second language acquisition. In W. C. Ritchie
& T. K. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of research on language acquisition: Vol. 2. Second language
acquisition (pp. 413-468). New York: Academic Press.
Newton, J., & Kennedy, G. (1996). Effects of communication tasks on the grammatical relations marked
by second language learners. System, 24(4), 309-322.
Nunan, D. (2000). Modified interaction and the negotiation of meaning. Retrieved October 13, 2003,
from http://www.floras.gr/user/MODIFIED%20INTERACTION.htm
Okamoto, T., Kayama, M., Inoue, H., & Cristea, A. I. (2002). The integrated e-learning system-RAPSODY
based on distance ecology model and its practice. International Journal of Educational Technology &
Society, 5(4), 124-136. Retrieved October 13, 2003, from http://ifets.ieee.org/periodical/vol_4_2002/
okamoto.html
Pica, T. (1991). Classroom interaction, negotiation, and comprehension: Redefining the relationship.
System, 19(4), 437-452.
Schollaert, R. (1998). The theoretical background to communicative language teaching. Retrieved
October 13, 2003, from http://www.curdev.hull.ac.uk/ecc/assets/images/TH_BCK.PDF
Skehan, P. (1998). A cognitive approach to language learning. Oxford, England: Oxford University
Press.
Tsou, W. L., Wang, W. H., & Li, H. Y. (2002). How computers facilitate English foreign language
learners acquire English abstract words. Computers & Education, 39(4), (415-428).
Warschauer, M. (2000). Computer-mediated collaborative learning: Theory and practice. Modern
Language Journal, 81(4), 470-481.
