Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num1/lee/
January 2004, Volume 8, Number 1
pp. 83-100
Copyright © 2004, ISSN 1094-3501 83
LEARNERS' PERSPECTIVES ON NETWORKED COLLABORATIVE INTERACTION
WITH NATIVE SPEAKERS OF SPANISH IN THE US
Lina Lee
University of New Hampshire
ABSTRACT
In this paper, I discuss a network-based collaborative project that focused on the learning
conditions non-native speakers (NNSs) of Spanish perceived to be necessary to satisfactoraly
communicate with native speakers (NSs). Data from online discussions, end-of-semester surveys,
and final oral interviews are presented and discussed. The results of this study demonstrated that
the NNS and NS online collaboration promoted the scaffolding by which the NSs assisted the
NNSs in composing meaning (ideas) and form (grammar). In addition, the NNSs praised the
unique learning condition of being exposed to a wide range of functional language discourse
produced by the NSs. Students perceived that open-ended questions for two-way exchange were
meaningful for them because they were encouraged to use specific vocabulary and structures
during the discussions. In spite of the positive conditions and benefits created by networked
collaborative interaction (NCI), it was found that there were some major issues that are crucial for
NCI. This study demonstrates that learners' language proficiency, computer skills, and age
differences are important factors to be considered when incorporating institutional NCI as these
may linguistically and socially affect the quality of online negotiation and students' motivation
toward NCI. Practical ideas for further research are suggested.
INTRODUCTION
Networked collaborative interaction (NCI) promotes lively exchanges by learners within a social context,
a setting that facilitates the development of their communicative competence. The online tools most
commonly used are e-mail, bulletin boards, and chat rooms. These tools create a socially and
linguistically enriched environment for NCI. Previous classroom-based research on networked
collaboration has focused primarily on the examination of linguistic discourse based on psycholinguistic
approaches to language learning (e.g., Blake, 2000; Chun, 1994; Kern, 1996; Lee, 2001; Pellettieri, 2000;
Sotillo, 2000; Toyoda & Harrison, 2002). Studies have noted that during their negotiation, learners
produce a wide range of discourse structures. To ensure mutual comprehension, learners use a variety of
modification devices, such as clarification checks, confirmation checks, requests for help, and self-
corrections. These devices indeed facilitate learners' negotiation for meaning and form (e.g., Chun, 1994;
Lee, 2002b). Furthermore, through negotiated input, corrective feedback, and modified output, learners
develop their grammatical competence and expand their L2 lexicons (e.g., Blake, 2000; Pellettieri, 2000).
While these findings on linguistic features have offered valuable insights into the understanding of the
role of online conversational interaction, studies on NCI between students at different U.S. institutions
have not yet explored the use of the socio-cognitive approach suggested by Kern and Warschauer (2000,
pp. 11-13). Specifically, no research has yet focused on the perceptions of non-native speakers (NNSs)
with respect to their online exchange with native speakers (NSs) of Spanish.
From a sociocultural point of view, language learning cannot be viewed as an immediate product of the
individual; rather, it is the process by which learners engage in co-constructing their L2 knowledge.
Through social engagement, learners collaboratively work with each other to achieve a high level of
performance (Donato, 2000; Kern & Warschauer, 2000; Ohta, 1995; Swain, 1995). Furthermore, learners'
experiences and motives for language learning and their linguistic, cognitive, and affective conditions
shape and influence the social interaction. In other words, other individual factors such as   
Lina Lee Learners' Perspectives on Networked Collaborative Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 84
language experience and linguistic skills influence the way they interact with each other. The theoretical
framework for this paper, therefore, is an examination of the social processes and contexts that underlie
learners' co-constructive efforts. The paper focuses on the learning conditions that NNSs of Spanish
perceive to be crucial to a satisfactory communicative engagement with NSs.
SOCIOCULTURAL PERSPECTIVE AND NETWORKED COLLABORATIVE INTERACTION
For years, L2 researchers have investigated the role of conversational interaction and negotiation in
second language acquisition (SLA). Researchers have examined comprehensible input (Krashen, 1985),
focus on form (e.g., Doughty & Varela, 1999), negotiated output (Swain, 1995) as well as task type and
negotiation strategies (e.g., Long, 1985; Pica, 1993). Not until recently, however, have researchers shifted
their attention from psycholinguistic approaches to the social-cognitive perspective that emphasizes
language development through meaningful social interaction (e.g., Donato, 2000; Ohta, 2000; Pavlenko &
Lantolf, 2000; Swain & Lapkin, 1998; van Lier, 1996; Warschauer, 2000). These researchers argue that
interactive negotiation through individual input and output modifications does not provide sufficient
conditions for acquisition and mastery of a second language. Rather, language learning goes beyond
"what" the individual produces (e.g., input and output) and focuses on "how" the individual interacts with
others through a joint activity (e.g., collaborative online exchange). The process of negotiation
encompasses the inter-relationship between two parties whose actions are influenced by their intentions,
goals and learning conditions.
From a sociocultural perspective, language is seen as a tool that the individual uses to socialize with
others. Through socialization, learners assist each other in performing a shared task. According to
Vygotsky (1978), social interaction fosters the individual's performance through the zone of proximal
development (ZPD) -- the distance between what they can achieve by themselves and what they can
achieve with assistance from others. Individuals who have knowledge and skills at a higher level assist
those who are less capable or know less. Vygotsky (1989) further claims, "social interaction actually
produces new, elaborate, advanced psychological processes that are unavailable to the organism working
in isolation" (p. 61). Through collaborative scaffolding, learners expand their linguistic and cognitive
skills to engage in problem-solving situations (e.g., negotiation of meaning and form). Previous research
in language learning has concluded that peer interaction either in groups or pairs results in the emergence
of a ZPD (e.g., Brooks, 1992; Ohta, 1995; Swain & Lapkin, 1998). These studies of social interaction
demonstrated L2 development in the ZPD. As a result of collaboration, learners gain language
competence with the assistance of others. Furthermore, in her recent study Ohta (2000) argues that the
expertise of the peer or expert, the nature of the task, and the goals of the learners affect their ZPD.
Lantolf (2000) claims that language learning is about the understanding of learners themselves as agents
whose conditions of learning affect the learning outcome. The degree of interaction and involvement in
the shared activity depends on learners' motives, beliefs, and attitudes and their investment in the learning
situation. The quality of social interaction depends on the participants, all of whom equally contribute
their time, turns, roles, and knowledge of subject matter in a shared agenda which van Lier (1996) called
"contingent interaction" (pp. 175-180). The "contingent interaction" stems from multidimensional levels:
between the instructor and the learner(s) and among the learners. In sum, the sociocultural approach
suggests that language learning is a developmental process whereby individuals use the language as a
cognitive tool for socialization and also use social interaction as a tool for cognitive growth. Social
interaction is more than the action of one person delivering information to another; rather, it shapes and
constructs learning through collaborative effort and scaffolding in expert and novice interaction
(Kinginger, 2001). Importantly, learners' linguistic, cognitive, and affective domains play a significant
role in the sociocultural perspective of language learning because they affect the degree and the quality of
social interaction.
Lina Lee Learners' Perspectives on Networked Collaborative Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 85
NCI allows language learners to interact with others through networking and as such can be studied from
a sociocultural perspective. One of the most commonly used modes of communication is synchronous
exchange in real time. Tools like online chats allow users to communicate simultaneously using a
keyboard to type messages. However, unlike a face-to-face exchange, NCI is a text-based communication
which cannot take advantage of certain social aspects of human interaction, such as nonverbal cues (e.g.,
gestures and facial expressions) and situational clues (e.g., time pressure). NCI relies heavily on writing
and readings skills; thus, learners may need more time to process input and output (Abrams, 2003), and
they may pay attention to certain aspects of discourse on the screen (Warschauer, 1996). In addition, the
mere fact that the participants interact with others whom they know they will not meet in person may also
affect how they interact with each other.
Several researchers (Belz, 2001, 2002; Kinginger, Gourves-Hayward, & Simpson, 1999; Warschauer,
2000) have investigated network-based language teaching from a sociocultural perspective. These studies,
using the online exchange with institutions from different countries (e.g., Germany, France, and the US),
reveal that learners' social and economic values, language proficiency, and electronic literacy contribute
to the application of networked settings and the development of language. However, one must take into
account the fact that these studies focused on cross-cultural issues. By focusing on a setting in two U.S.
institutions, this study attempts to explore learners' perceptions and concerns regarding online exchanges
with the NSs of Spanish who live in the US in order to expand the scope of understanding regarding the
role of NCI in foreign language learning.
METHODOLOGY
Participants
The networked collaboration by two U.S. institutions was designed, first, to provide the NNS from the
University of New Hampshire (UNH) with opportunities to use the target language outside the classroom,
and second, to grant the NSs from George Mason University (GMU) in Virginia, experience using online
technologies as part of the requirements for their course. A total of 13 NNSs from UNH and 13 NS of
Spanish from GMU participated in this project in Fall 2001. At the beginning of the semester, all
participants were given a questionnaire that touched upon their general personal, educational, and
linguistic backgrounds as well as their computer skills. Table 1 summarizes the profile of participants.
Table 1. Profile of Participants
Students from UNH (N = 13) Students from GMU (N = 13)
Gender Female = 12; Male = 1 Female = 13
Age 19 - 20 28 - 50
Nationality Americans Hispanics living in US
Education Undergraduates Graduates
Language Proficiency Intermediate level Native proficiency
Computer skills
Very good and familiar with the
Blackboard program
Good at using e-mail but not
familiar with other Internet
technologies
The students from UNH were enrolled in a third-year advanced Spanish course. They were required to
use the Blackboard program (visit http://www.blackboard.com for more information) to support their
language acquisition. Most of these students had three years of Spanish in high school and two semesters
of Spanish in college prior to the study. Students enrolled in this course were either majors or minors in
Spanish. Many of them did not have opportunities to use Spanish outside the classroom. More than 50%
of the students had reached the intermediate level of language proficiency based on the results of the
Spanish Oral Proficiency Test (SOPT) designed by the researcher. The SOPT adheres to the ACTFL
Proficiency Guidelines (for details of the test, see Lee, 2000). Students were informed that they would be
Lina Lee Learners' Perspectives on Networked Collaborative Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 86
chatting with the NSs from GMU using "Virtual Classroom," one of the communication tools of
Blackboard.
The GMU participants were native speakers of Spanish now living in the US who were from different
Spanish-speaking countries. All of them were Spanish teachers at secondary schools and graduate
students at GMU. They were enrolled in the course "Integrating Technology into Language Teaching"
and were required to design a homepage, design a WebCT site, and chat online with UNH students
outside the class using Blackboard. The native speakers did not chat with UNH students for the purpose
of gaining linguistic benefits; rather, the goal of their participation was to help them understand the
process of networked collaborative interaction that may assist them in designing online-based instruction
for their classes.
In terms of computer literacy, most of the NNSs from UNH had used the Blackboard program for other
classes on campus; they were familiar and comfortable with the program. In contrast, most of the NSs had
little experience with Internet technologies. Many of them had used only e-mail and had never used a
networked program. Insufficient computer literacy on the part of the participants, therefore, may have had
some impact on the effectiveness of the collaboration (Belz, 2001; Sotillo, 2000).
Research Design
For the purposes of this study, a researcher-developed survey was created to elicit learners' experiences
and opinions of the online collaboration with the NSs (see Table 2 for the items). A 5-point Likert scale
ranging from Strongly Disagree to Strongly Agree was used to gauge student perspectives and attitudes.
They indicated their level of satisfaction by ranking the question from 1-5 (5 is the highest score) along
with a brief explanation of each rating. In addition to the end-of-semester survey, a set of seven final
interview questions was given to the NNSs to gather additional comments and suggestions that they had
on NCI (see Appendix). A 20-minute final oral interview with each student from UNH was conducted by
the researcher and all interviews were tape-recorded for data analysis.
Tasks
Open-ended questions are viewed as two-way information exchange tasks. This type of question requires
more turn-taking during negotiation and leads to the use of comprehension checks, confirmation checks
and clarification requests (Duff, 1999). The open-ended questions were designed to be broad and relevant
to real life so that the students could relate the issues to their own experiences. Topics drawn from the
readings, such as the role of men and women in modern society, served as a point of departure for online
discussions:
Charla #1: Una juventud ideal (Chat #1: An ideal youth)
Charla #2: El papel de la mujer y del hombre en la
sociedad actual
(Chat #2: The role of women and men in
today´s society)
Charla #3: Las nuevas tecnologías (Chat #3: New technologies)
Charla #4: Los inmigrantes en los Estados Unidos (Chat #4: Immigrants in the United Status)
Charla #5: El ser humano y la naturaleza (Chat #5: Human being and nature)
Charla #6: "Yo" y "los otros" (Chat #6: "I" and "others")
Charla #7: ¿Una lengua y una nación? (Chat #7: One language and one nation?)
The open-ended tasks are intended to involve learners in sharing, exchanging, and debating information
relevant to life experiences through self-expression and self-discovery. Sample questions are as follows:
Lina Lee Learners' Perspectives on Networked Collaborative Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 87
Charla #2: El papel de la mujer y del hombre en la
socidad actual
(Chat #2: The role of women and men in
today´s society)
¿Qué papeles hacen la mujer y el hombre en la
sociedad actual? ¿Tienen los mismos derechos las
mujeres que los hombres? Explique sus razones.
(What are the roles of men and women in
today's society? Do women have the same
rights as men? Explain your reasons.)
Charla #3: Las Nuevas Tecnologías (Chat #3: New Technologies)
(1) ¿Están contribuyendo las nuevas tecnologías
de la información a la creación de la famosa
"aldea global"?
(Do the new information technologies
contribute to the creation of the famous
"global village"?
(2) ¿De qué forma influyen las nuevas tecnologías
en su vida profesional o en la de sus compañeros,
familiares, etc.? ¿Y en su vida personal?
(In what ways do the new technologies
influence your professional life or the life of
your classmates and families? And your
personal life?
(3) ¿Permiten las nuevas tecnologías de la
información el intercambio de ideas de una forma
más democrática? Ejemplos a favor y/o en contra.
(Do the new information technologies allow
the exchange of ideas in a more democratic
way? Give examples for or against.)
Procedures
Online exchange was carried out using Blackboard, a program that allows users to produce, store and
retrieve data when needed. The researcher from UNH and the instructor from GMU worked closely via e-
mail exchanges to design online-based activities. Before the activities took place, they provided students
with instructions on how to login, logout, and access information from Blackboard. All activities were
carried out in Spanish outside the classroom. Students from GMU were aided by their instructor, an
experienced Internet technologist. They were shown how to login and logout from the "Virtual
Classroom" located in Blackboard. The GMU instructor assigned each student to one UNH student. The
instructor provided students with a list of topics that were incorporated into the UNH chat schedule, as
well as the dates by which they had to chat online with their partner from UNH.
No particular instructions were given to the two institutional groups. They were, however, encouraged to
focus on the topic, to share ideas with each other, and to allow their partners to contribute as much as
possible. The researcher and the instructor did not participate in any of the discussions. The NSs,
however, served as experts to assist the NNSs in online discussions. All online exchanges were
automatically saved into the archives of Blackboard and were retrieved later for data analysis.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Data from online exchanges, the end-semester surveys, and final oral interviews were employed to report
and justify the findings. At the end of the semester, both NSs and NNSs were asked to fill out the survey
concerning their perspectives about using online chats with their institutional partners. The data presented
in Table 2 records the results of both the NNSs' and the NSs' reactions to the networked collaborative
interaction with their institutional partner. For the purposes of this study, discussions of Table 2 center on
the perceptions of the NNSs regarding the online exchanges with the NSs and only where relevant on the
NSs' point of view.
Lina Lee Learners' Perspectives on Networked Collaborative Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 88
Table 2. Learner Perspectives Concerning Networked Collaborative Interaction
Statements of the Survey
Native Speakers from
GMU
Non-Native Speakers
from UNH
1. Chats were useful for myself. M = 3.11 M = 4.12
2. Chats were useful for my UNH/GMU partner. M = 3.83 M = 2.25
3. I believed my partner from UNH/GMU
enjoyed online chats.
M = 2.99 M = 3.33
4. I had the feeling that I was leading the
discussion most of the time.
M = 4.28 M = 3.21
5. We focused on the topic. M = 4.03 M = 4.59
6. Topics were interesting to me. M = 3.55 M = 4.56
7. It was difficult to find common time to chat. M = 4.45 M = 4.32
8. Chatting online was intimidating for me. M = 2.50 M = 3.94
9. Chatting online enhanced my writing skills. M = 2.22 M = 4.76
10. Overall, it was a positive experience for me. M = 3.17 M = 3.78
General Reactions of Non-Native Speakers Regarding Online Exchange: Survey Results
The results of the end-of-semester surveys reveal that overall the students from UNH had a positive
experience with networked collaborative interaction. However, they experienced some difficulty and
disaffection with the exchange with their NS partners. Students commented on the surveys -- in their brief
explanation of each rating -- that the online exchanges offered a socially and linguistically meaningful
context for them to use the target language (see statements #1 and #10). The NNSs strongly believed that
text-based communication helped them improve their writing skills (see statement #9). They particularly
praised the topics of interest and perceived them as an effective way to exchange ideas and to express and
defend their points of view (see statement #6). Although both institutional groups encountered difficulty
in arranging common times to meet online (see statement #7), the NNSs in particular indicated repeatedly
on the survey that it was extremely difficult to meet online with their partners from GMU. Despite that
they contacted each other in advance via e-mail to schedule a time for the online chat, students found it
impossible to contact each other when unforeseen circumstances occurred. Several students felt frustrated
by having to wait for their NS partners in an empty chat room. In cases of unexpected contingencies, their
partners might not show up in which case they were not able to execute the assignment. Such students had
to go through the trouble of re-scheduling another time to meet.
From a linguistic point of view, the NNSs did not believe that their partners from GMU benefited from
chatting with them (see statements #2 and #3). Students believed that their NS partners might have felt
frustrated or even bored working with them because of their inferior language skills. They wrote in the
surveys that they were slow in composing ideas and sometimes they did not know what to say about
something on which they had limited knowledge. Although the students knew they would be chatting
with NS partners, some students experienced anxiety about communicating with NSs at the beginning of
the semester (see statement #9). Another discomfort that the NNSs experienced was that their limited
Spanish did not allow them to fully express their ideas. Comments made on the survey revealed that many
NNSs did not feel confident in their Spanish and were afraid to make mistakes. One very shy student
emphasized that she did not feel comfortable chatting with her NS partner by stating that she had no
desire to interact with other NSs in the future. Both the linguistic and the affective domains, such as
learner language ability and language learning anxiety, are crucial for online exchanges with NSs as these
language conditions affect learners' motivation and attitude toward the L2 learning. Such perceptions of
inequality were also reported in the study of Belz (2001). Future research could address how such
problems can be improved in future NCI designs.
Lina Lee Learners' Perspectives on Networked Collaborative Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 89
Essential Online Exchange Conditions Perceived by Non-Native Speakers
A close-up data analysis using extracts from NNS-NS exchanges as well as information gathered from
final oral interviews revealed several major issues that the NNSs perceived important and necessary for
integrating NCI into FL instruction. The following is a discussion of online exchange conditions the
students thought necessary for effective NCI with the NS group. The findings of this study demonstrate
and support theoretically motivated sociocultural learning practices and research. For the purposes of this
study, the discussion focuses on learning conditions: authentic language, task type, collaborative
scaffolding, and learners' linguistic and cognitive skills and computer literacy.
Language Authenticity Through Socialization. The utterances of NSs are original, authentic, and
accurate, in direct contrast to the non-target-like discourse produced by NNSs. NNS students perceived
advantages of working with the NSs from GMU. In spite of the difficulty in understanding some of the
messages from the NSs, students in this study praised the unique learning condition of being exposed to a
wide range of functional language discourse produced by the NSs. The UNH students live in an area
where the target language is rarely spoken; many of the students had never had the experience of dealing
with NSs before this study. Students acknowledged the importance of the fact that they were offered
opportunities to work with the NSs who served as experts in Spanish. They realized that the authenticity
of the target language becomes an essential learning condition for NCI, especially when the instructor is
absent (final interviews). Oral interviews revealed the following comments:
Online exchange allowed me to observe and imitate my NS partner's discourse as she used a
vocabulary and style very different from mine. To me, it was very helpful to observe how she put
ideas and thoughts together. I learned from her techniques of how to shape my writing better. At
the end, I managed to incorporate some new words and some advanced grammar that I learned
from my NS partner into my writing. I feel better about writing in Spanish.
Chatting with the NS was definitely a new experience for me. When I experienced difficulty
finding appropriate words for expressing specific ideas, my partner's speech often served as a
model for me to make adjustments to my imperfect Spanish. I observed how she wrote and I liked
the way she used vocabulary, grammar and a range of registers. I noticed that there was a gap
between her Spanish and mine. Mine was like "foreign talk" and not very coherent and
appropriate but hers was just perfect and sounded so natural. I found it very helpful to work with
someone who knows much more than I do. I am eager to improve my Spanish.
The following unedited example illustrates how negotiation skill allowed the NNS to receive authentic
language use from the NS, a use that was quite different from hers:
1. NNS: Me parece que la sistema educativa en esta
pais no es muy buena.
(I think the education system in this country
is not very good.)
2. NS: Hm, ¿por qué no es bueno el sistema? (Hm, why is it not very good?)
3. NNS: el sistema o la sistema? (the system [masculine] o the system
[feminine]?)
4. NS: El sistema como el problema, el tema, etc. (the system [masculine] like the problem, the
topic, etc.)
5. NNS: Oh, si. Gracias. Muchas personas no van a la
universidad. Ellos no tienen dinero. Es
mucho dinero ir a la escuela si tu no tienes
financial aid para ayudar pagar.
(Oh, yes. Thanks. Many people don't go to
the university. They don't have money. It is a
lot of money to go to school if you don't have
financial aid to help to pay.)
6. NS: Entonces, ¿no debemos pagar por la
educación en este país? En otras palabras,
¿piensas que debe ser gratis para todos? No
opino lo mismo. Pienso que cada uno es
responsable de sus propias decisiones. Si uno
valora la educación y desea asistir a la
universidad, entonces buscará la manera para
lograrlo.
(So, we should not pay for the education in
this country? In other words, you think it
should be free for everyone? I don't share the
same view. I think everyone is responsible
for his own decisions. If one values the
education and wants to go to the university,
then one will find the way to achieve it.)
Lina Lee Learners' Perspectives on Networked Collaborative Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 90
educación en este país? En otras palabras,
¿piensas que debe ser gratis para todos? No
opino lo mismo. Pienso que cada uno es
responsable de sus propias decisiones. Si uno
valora la educación y desea asistir a la
universidad, entonces buscará la manera para
lograrlo.
this country? In other words, you think it
should be free for everyone? I don't share the
same view. I think everyone is responsible
for his own decisions. If one values the
education and wants to go to the university,
then one will find the way to achieve it.)
At first, the student noticed the different article for the word "system" (masculine vs. feminine) and
immediately, made the negotiation move (line 3) for clarification. In response, the NS provided the
examples to show the correct article (line 4). In addition, line 6 shows the amount of authentic language
used by the NS including useful vocabulary in comparison to the language produced by the NNS (line 5).
Learners need to be provided with opportunities to be exposed to correct and authentic language in
meaningful contexts in order to achieve a high level of language proficiency.
NNS students also experienced the natural give and take of conversation as they communicated with NSs.
One of the students, reflecting on her actual language use with her NS partner, said during the final
interview,
Chatting with my NS partner was very stimulating. My NS partner was very patient and was
willing to help me out when I got stuck. I believe that chatting with NSs is a powerful way to
learn Spanish. I was exposed to authentic language use and a full range of conversation functions.
When I wrote to my NS partner, I had to think carefully how to express myself appropriately so
she understood me. Sometimes it was not easy for me but it was the best way I have ever learned
to communicate with others in the target language.
The positive online exchange experience indeed motivated this student to continue to write to her NS
partner via e-mail after the study. The extended exchange between the NNS and NS suggests that NCI
fosters language learning in a developmental and continuing process as it occurs and changes over time.
In the long run, this student may actually improve her writing skills in Spanish through informal social
contacts with her NS partner. Studies on whether electronic exchange over time in a socially collaborative
context improves learners' language skills will make a needed contribution to the sociocultural field of
inquiry.
Task Appropriateness. Crucial to SLA is the type of task that promotes the meaningful use of the target
language. Several studies have investigated the task effects (e.g., a "one-way" versus a "two-way" task)
on learners' performance (Pica, Kanagy, & Falodun, 1993; Shortreed, 1999). A two-way task involves an
exchange in which two interlocutors negotiate meaning. The key is to structure tasks that involve learners'
active participation in sharing, exchanging and debating information relevant to life experiences through
self-expression and self-discovery.
When asked if the topics were interesting to them, students from UNH in particular praised the fact that
the subjects were stimulating and meaningful, especially since the topics were related to real life
situations. The open-ended questions were broad enough for everyone to join in, encouraging the students
to express fully their ideas through negotiation. During the final interview, one of the NNSs
enthusiastically said,
Discussion on specific topics forced me to use certain vocabulary and phrases to get my ideas
across to my partner. I enjoyed very much the discussions with my partner from GMU. I learned
many new words and expressions from her because she is fluent in Spanish. In my opinion, it is
authentic and a true way to learn a foreign language.
Lina Lee Learners' Perspectives on Networked Collaborative Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 91
Many open-ended questions targeted the use of specific vocabulary and structures so that these functional
skills could be reinforced and developed from skill-getting to skill-using (Lee, 2002a). Two-way
information exchange also promotes the development of ZPD in an electronic environment. Students
indicated on the survey that task-based assignments not only allowed them to use Spanish to express ideas
in a meaningful context but also to listen to others' opinions. Through turn-taking, they debated issues that
allowed them to reflect on their own life experiences. With the assistance of the NSs, they were able to
articulate their thoughts in depth rather than in a superficial way. This study proves that open-ended
questions were powerful and interesting enough to motivate students as they participated in online
discussions.
In spite of the positive feedback received from many of the students, some of the NNSs experienced
difficulty writing for 50 minutes on the same topic. One of the NNS students wrote this comment on the
survey: "It was hard to explore the same topic in depth and for a long time. We should be given choices
for the topics that interested us most." Another student admitted that sometimes she did not know much
about the topic, therefore, she could not offer much information and would prefer to have options on the
topics. Two students agreed that the discussions were not dynamic and informative enough to be carried
on for 50 minutes. Suggestions were made to prepare students in advance so they were familiar with the
topic. To improve the quality of the discussion, one pedagogical technique would be to provide students
with a list of questions related to the topic so they can work on these questions beforehand to facilitate the
online collaboration. Another possibility is to have students work in small groups to discuss topics and
generalize ideas before chatting with their NS partners.
Negotiation Through Collaborative Scaffolding. From a sociocultural point of view, the learning
condition is crucial if learners are to feel impelled to engage in a shared activity. This study shows that the
students perceived the NCI with the NSs as beneficial to them; they were enthusiastic about and deeply
interested in chatting online with the students from GMU. A number of students pointed out that the NCI
with their NSs was a great idea because they were guided by experts of Spanish who assisted them
linguistically and cognitively in the process of online negotiation. Through scaffolding on the part of the
NSs, the learners were challenged to produce coherent discourse that goes beyond grammatical accuracy.
The following unedited excerpt illustrates how both the NS and the NNS collaborated in negotiation for
meaning:
1. NNS: piensas que la tecnologia es demasiada? (do you think there is too much technology?)
2. NS: De que manera piensas que es mas
democratica o no. Puedes ofrecer mas
ejemplos?
(In what way do you think it is more
democratic or not? Can you offer more
examples?)
3. NNS: creo que es mas democratica porque todos
los grupos tienen la misma poder.
(I believe it is more democratic because each
group has the same power.)
4. NS: Si, a veces es demasiado y me da miedo que
no se busque un balance entre la
computadora y la escritura.
(Yes, sometimes it is too much and it
worries me that there is no balance between
the computer and writing.)
5. NNS: si, con todo que ocurre en el mundo ahora,
tengo mucho miedo.
(yes, with all that's happening in the world
now, I'm very afraid.
6. NS: que ejemplos tienes tu? (what examples do you have?)
7. NNS: en muchos paises la gente no tiene
computadoras. Ellos son pobres.
(in many countries people don't have
computers. They are poor.)
Lina Lee Learners' Perspectives on Networked Collaborative Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 92
8. NS: que problemas hay con las personas que no
tienen ordenadores?
(what problems are there with people who
don't have computers?)
9. NNS: pues, hay muchas amenazas de guerras de
quemica y necesita la computadora para eso.
(well, there are many threats of chemical
warfare and computers are needed for that.)
10. NS: Como ayuda la computadora? Informar al
publico, comunicarse con los soldados --
como?
(How does the computer help? Inform the
public, communicate with the soldiers --
how?)
11. NNS: ellos no tendran una educacion ... es muy
triste. La computatdora es una forma de
educacion muy importante.
(they will not have an education  … it is
very sad. The computer is a very important
way to educate.)
12. NS: Las personas que no tienen un ordenador no
tendran una educacion?
(People who don't have a computer will not
have an education?)
13. NNS: si, solamente los ricos pueden acesar la
informacion.
(yes, only the rich people can have access to
the information.)
14. NS: Yo estoy en clase con una persona educada
y no tiene un ordenador.
(I'm in class with a well-educated person
and she doesn't have a computer.)
15. NNS: muchos veces si, porque mucho de la
educacion ahora es por la computadora.
(very often yes because a lot of education
now is via the computer.)
16. NS: No entiendo tu respuesta. Me puedes
explicar mas?
(I don't understand your response. Can you
explain it more to me?)
17. NNS: lo siento ... muchos veces las personas que
no tienen aceso a un ordenador nunca, son
personas de paises del tercer mundo, pero no
todos.
(I'm sorry … many times people who never
have access to a computer are people from
the third world, but not everyone.)
18. NS: Entonces no solo son las personas ricas --
verdad?
(so not only rich people -- right?)
19. NNS: hablo de las personas ricas del tercer mundo. (I'm talking about the rich people from the
third world.)
20. NS: Bien, ahora esta claro -- gracias. (Good, now it is clear -- thanks.)
This collaborative dialogue demonstrates that both the NS and the NNS became involved in a problem-
solving activity through social and cognitive engagement. The NS used multiple negotiation devices, such
as request for more information (lines 2, 6 and 16), clarification check (lines 10 and 12), and confirmation
check (line 18) to challenge her partner's opinions of computer technology. These questions enabled the
NNS to articulate her thoughts and she was able to clarify her point of view by offering additional
information (lines 15 and 17). For instance, the question (line 16) that the NS asked -- "Can you explain
more?" -- indeed pushed the NNS to find another way to clarify her point of view. Although the NS
scaffolding did not result in producing correct linguistic forms, it assisted the NNS in better expressing
herself using both cognitive and linguistic skills. At the end, both parties understood each other through
several turns of negotiation and collaborative effort.
During the final interview, this NNS expressed her satisfaction with collaborating with her NS partner,
especially the opportunity to learn how to express ideas clearly through debating different topics with the
NS. This student further explained,
Lina Lee Learners' Perspectives on Networked Collaborative Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 93
For the first time, I realized how hard it is to communicate online with a native speaker. Unlike
face-to-face interaction, you cannot use body language to express your ideas and feelings. NCI is
a challenge but with the help from my Spanish partner, I managed to use my limited Spanish
knowledge to discuss different types of tasks with her. I liked the way I was challenged. It pushed
me to go forward in my ability to find different ways to express myself.
The analysis of the above script and self-report from the NNS student provides the evidence of how NCI
facilitates the negotiation process through the NS scaffolding.
While students at the intermediate level of proficiency still struggle to produce correct language structures
and appropriate lexical items, the NCI affords learners great opportunities to exercise and further improve
their linguistic skills. This study shows that the NNS-NS online collaboration was beneficial to the NNSs
through linguistic scaffolding, as in the expert-novice relationship between the NNS student and the NS.
During the negotiation, students were able to notice their interlanguage system: the gap between their L1
and L2 and the correct Spanish produced by their NS partners. Although focusing on the form was not the
goal of the task, in many instances, the NSs assisted the NNSs in their linguistic problems. Linguistic
scaffolding from the NSs assisted the students in recognizing the incorrect usage of temporal and
aspectual morphosyntax, such as the use of trabajo (I work) versus trabajé (I worked) and fui (I went)
versus fue (he went). For instance, the learner realized that he had made an error in the conjugation of the
verb form (aprendió) after the NS used the recast to confirm the meaning in her response. The NNS
immediately self-corrected it to the correct form (aprendí).
1. NNS: Aprendió muchas cosas de mi padre. (He/She learned a lot of things from my father.)
2. NS: Hm, quién aprendió? (Hm, who learned?)
3. NNS: Yo aprendí. Lo siento. (I learned. I'm sorry.)
Linguistic scaffolding is a powerful forum in which the collaboration is played out between the NNS and
the NS. This type of linguistic exchange is crucial because the students are guided to write correctly.
Linguistic scaffolding may help maintain the balance between function, content and accuracy.
Data from this study also reveal that the NNS-NS online collaboration induced lexical scaffolding as
students encountered difficulty understanding the words that the NSs used. The unedited example below
illustrates how the NS directly provided the assistance to the NNS in acquiring a new lexical item.
1. NS: Hoy día muchas mujeres trabajan fuera de
casa. ¿No crees?
(Nowadays many women work outside of
house. Don't you think so?)
2. NNS: Sí. ¿Qué piensas de "sexual harassment" en
los trabajos? No sé las palabras. Lo siento.
¿Cómo se dice "sexual harassment"?
(Yes. What do you think about "sexual
harassment" on the job? I don't know the
words. I'm sorry. How do you say "sexual
harassment"?)
3. NS: Acoso sexual. (Acoso sexual).
4. NNS: Gracias. ¿Piensas que es más difícil para
las mujeres tener sus trabajos por el acoso
sexual?
(Thanks. Do you think that it is more difficult
for the women to keep their jobs because of
sexual harassment?)
With a superior knowledge of Spanish, the NS could offer an immediate solution to the problem that the
NNS encountered shown in the inquiry of the unknown vocabulary "sexual harassment." The student then
used the new lexical item immediately in her follow-up question. Additional studies should be conducted
to determine whether in the long run, the lexical scaffolding from the NS leads to improvement in the
learner's L2 vocabulary acquisition. In summary, the results of this study show that the NNS and NS
Lina Lee Learners' Perspectives on Networked Collaborative Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 94
online collaboration promoted the scaffolding by which the NSs assisted the NNSs in composing meaning
(ideas) and form (grammar) thus enhancing the performance through the ZPD.
Different Language Proficiency Levels and Age Difference. Learner's language proficiency plays an
important role in NCI, especially during NNS-NS communication (Belz, 2001). The results of online
collaboration between the NNSs and the NSs revealed that students acknowledged that their self-
confidence while participating in NCI with their NS partners was affected by their inferior language
proficiency. One linguistically weak student made these comments during the final interview:
My partner wrote very fast and used a different vocabulary than I did. I had a hard time
understanding some of the messages. I did not feel very confident about my Spanish and I was
more careful than usual to compose my messages before I sent them. She was too advanced for
me. It was not a very good experience.
The fact is that the NSs in this study are high school teachers. The NNS's feeling about her performance
might have been affected by the weight given to an authoritative figure. A student commented during the
final interview,
My partner asked me a lot of questions and it took me a long time to compose my ideas.
Sometimes she would interrupt my thoughts by asking me more questions. Not only did I feel
uncomfortable chatting with her but also I felt stupid when my partner tried to correct my
mistakes. Maybe because she is a Spanish teacher and she couldn't help doing this.
The quotation above demonstrates just how much the NNS felt intimidated by a partner whom she viewed
as a figure of authority and a language expert. In the final interviews, some students expressed their
preference for working with their own peers, NNSs, because they felt that they were at the same level as
their partners in their mutual ability to express their voice even though their language skills were not
perfect.
The quality of social interaction lies within the participants, all of whom must equally contribute their
time, turns, roles, and knowledge of the subject matter in a shared activity (van Lier, 1996). It appears that
the learners' collaborative effort was affected by participant language proficiency levels. Students
expressed the opinion that NCI was dominated by the NSs due to their superior language proficiency. One
student addressed the problems found in working with the NS on remarking, "I don't believe chatting with
the NS is a good idea because a person of higher proficiency tends to lead the conversation and is likely to
control the task while the partner with lower proficiency takes a passive role." The following unedited
example illustrates how the NS led the conversation by asking questions of the NNS:
1. NS: Como usas la tecnologia en tu vida actual? (How do you use technology in your daily
living?)
2. NNS: En mi vida la uso mucho. Tengo que
escribir a maquina a todos de mis papeles y
escribo mucho.
(In daily living I use it a lot. I have to type all
my papers and I write a lot.)
3. NS: ¿Usas la computadora o la máquina de
escribir?
(Do you use the computer or the typewriter?)
4. NNS: Uso la computadora. Tengo un laptop. (I use the computer. I have a laptop.)
5. NS: Parece que nos gusta tanto que no podemos
"vivir" sin ella.
(It would seem that we like it so much that
we cannot "live" without it.)
6. NNS: Tambien hago investigaciones en el internet
cada dia a mi trabajo.
(Also I do my research at work using the
Internet everyday.)
Lina Lee Learners' Perspectives on Networked Collaborative Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 95
7. NS: Investigaciones? Que haces exactamente? (Research? What do you actually do?)
8. NNS: Trabajo en una oficina adonde nosotros
investigamos aspectos diferentes del crimen
(I work in an office where we do research on
different aspects of crime.)
9. NNS: Seguro que el uso de la tecnologia en este
dominio es primordial
(Without a doubt, the use of technology in
this field is primordial.)
10. NS: De que otra manera usas la tecnologia? (What other way do you use technology?)
11. NNS: Pues, uso el telefono con mas frecuencia. (Well, I use the telephone more often.)
12. NS: Que piensas de la tecnologia y la creacion
de la "aldea global"?
(What do you think about technology and the
creation of the "global village"?)
13. NNS: "aldea global"? Que es esto? ("global village"? What is this?)
In this conversation, the NNS took a passive role by only answering questions from the NS and obviously
did not know how to initiate the conversation. The example shows that the NS asked a total of five
questions (lines 1, 3, 7, 10, and 12) whereas the NNS asked only one question to check the unknown
lexical item (line 13).
Most of the students had never had the experience of dealing with NSs and none of them had lived
abroad. Therefore, they might not know how to converse with people from different cultures. Students
suggested that the instructor should be aware of matching participants' proficiency levels when using
NCI. The results corroborate those found in the study of American and German telecollaboration by Belz
(2001). It would seem impossible to match native and non-native proficiency levels. In order to gain a
positive learning experience, participants need to be advised to be aware of individual differences in
language abilities as well as to be sympathetic and tolerant towards each other.
This study further reveals that students' motivation and comfort level with respect to NCI was affected by
the age difference between the two institutional groups. As mentioned in Table 1, the majority of the NSs
from GMU (age = 28-50) were much older than the students from UNH (age = 19-20). The following
unedited chat reveals the age difference between two parties:
1. NNS: Cuantos anos tienes? (How old are you?)
2. NS: Cuando yo era joven no usabamos
computadoras. Yo tengo cincuenta anos
(medio siglo). Tengo dos hijos y dos hijas.
Tambien tengo una nietecita de dos anos. Y
tu?
(When I was young we did not use
computers. I'm 50 years old (half century). I
have two sons and two daughters. I also have
a two-year-old little granddaughter. And
you?)
3. NNS: Tengo diez y nueve. Tengo un hermano.
Tiene 16 anos.
(I'm 19 years old. I have a brother. He is 16
years old.)
This NNS commented in the survey, "My partner from GMU and I really did not have much in common
to talk about. She did not seem to be interested in what I said. She did not respect my opinions." Another
student admitted during the final interview that she was somewhat disappointed in the NCI because of the
lack of common interests between her NS partner and herself. This student further stated,
I must say that I was quite surprised to know that she was 42 years old. Obviously, she knows
much more about the world than I do. Sometimes I did not know how to answer her questions.
Not only linguistically was I not able to fully express myself, but also I had a hard time to come
up with ideas. It did not seem that we had much in common to carry out a long conversation.
Lina Lee Learners' Perspectives on Networked Collaborative Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 96
 This seems to indicate that the age difference is a problem. These students suggested during the final
interview that it is important to find similar age groups and someone whom one knows rather than a
stranger. This commentary corroborates previous research findings that argue that age is an important
factor in the quality and outcome of NCI (Belz, 2002; Mülller-Hartmann, 2000). In the study of student
perceptions about a videoconferencing project conducted by Coverdale-Jones (2000), the students
confirmed the benefit of communicating with a real person from their own age group. A compensatory
strategy would be to encourage students to use e-mail beforehand so that they get acquainted with their
partner. They may then feel more comfortable with each other before executing class assignments.
Accessibility to Networking and Availability of Users. NCI requires highly reliable access to the network
system as well as a strong sense of responsibility on the part of the users. In her recent study, Belz (2001)
explored the differences in technological access and use between the German and the U.S. students in a
societal context. Her study reveals that the cost and lack of access to a network in Germany contributes to
a limited level of online communication. The results of this present study, however, identify different
technological aspects of NCI at the institutional level.
UNH hosted the network system of the Blackboard program for this study while WebCT was the
network-based program for online courses on the GMU campus. Some of the GMU students encountered
difficulty in accessing Blackboard. Occasionally, UNH students had to show the NSs how to access the
"Virtual Classroom" for online discussion. In a few cases, students also had a problem with their
password to login to the course. In general, NNSs who were experienced with a computer found their
partners' difficulties with the computer cut into the amount of time available. One student made the
following negative comments in her final interview:
Many times, I had to wait for my partner to get online and she did no know how to get access to
the chatroom. I had to give her instructions. We wasted a lot of time in trying to figure out her
computer problems. It was very frustrating.
Students also commented that detailed instruction for accessing the network systems should be provided
to all students and, if necessary, the training should be scheduled beforehand. Accessibility to institutional
networking including reliable access and clear instructions becomes essential for NCI.
In order to maintain a high level of quality within the NCI, students are held accountable for making
themselves available for activities outside of class. In this study, both native-nonnative speakers
experienced difficulty in finding a common time to chat online. Students negotiated online for scheduling
time to chat. To illustrate, one of the NNSs wrote to her partner (translation), "I'm sorry. I don't have time
on Friday. Also I have to work this weekend. Can you talk tonight at 10:00?" Her partner then responded
to her, "I cannot tonight. I have to join a study group for Chemistry review. Can we chat Sunday night?"
As a result of this conversation, this group finally managed to be online for less than 30 minutes and both
the quality and quantity of their work was unsatisfactory. In addition, NNSs complained about the lack of
technological skills on the part of their partners from GMU. The fact that the NSs were enrolled in the
course "Integrating Technology into Language Teaching" shows that it was likely that they did not have
sufficient computer skills to access and work in the networking environment. In sum, the lack of strong
commitment due to the time conflict and insufficient computer skills may have affected the quality of
online collaboration and students' motivation towards the project.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
Overall, the evidence presented in this study shows that NCI offered a powerful forum for learners to use
the target language to socially interact with the NSs. From the learners' point of view, the NCI is valuable
to them because it contributes to an important part of their language learning experience in a real-world
setting instead of in a traditional classroom environment. Online exchanges with the NSs also offered
authentic language discourse for the NNSs to acquire new lexical items and correct grammatical
Lina Lee Learners' Perspectives on Networked Collaborative Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 97
structures through collaborative scaffolding. More importantly, the NSs played the role of expert who
assisted their NNS partners in using both linguistic and cognitive skills to defend and articulate their
thoughts on the current topics. Topics related to real-life situations motivated the NNSs to engage in
lively discussions through self-expression and self-discovery.
In spite of the above positive conditions and benefits created by NCI, the NNSs experienced difficulty in
finding a common time to be online and getting access to the network at the host institution. In addition,
learners' language and computer skills as well as age differences are important factors to be considered
when incorporating institutional network-based instruction as these may affect the quality of online
interaction linguistically and socially. This study reveals important issues in need of investigation.
Further, study of native and non-native online exchanges will advance the knowledge of how learners'
language proficiency is developed over time in a socially collaborative context. Continued investigation
of the types of negotiation devices and feedback used by both NSs and NNSs to enhance online
communication will contribute to a clearer understanding of language learning.
In closing, this study demonstrates that the perspectives offered by the NNSs provide an insight into the
processes of network-based collaboration with the NSs. The unique network-based learning conditions
allowed the NNSs to expand and enrich their learning experience within a socially engaging context.
Carefully designed tasks which engage the learners and appropriate selection of participants along with
sufficient network training maximize the potential benefits of integrating NCI to language learning.
APPENDIX
End of Semester Oral Interview Questions
1) Briefly describe your experience with Blackboard for this course.
2) Share with me the most valuable and interesting part of online exchange and why.
3) Describe the most difficult or least important part of online exchange and why.
4) Tell me about your experience chatting with native speakers. Did you enjoy it and why?
5) What do you think about the topics for online discussions?
6) Do you think online exchange helped you improve your Spanish? How?
7) Overall, tell me how the experience of online exchange changed your perspective on the online
collaboration? Do you have any concerns about networked collaboration?
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Lina Lee is Associate Professor of Spanish at the University of New Hampshire. She has published
articles on language pedagogy and Internet technologies for foreign language instruction which have
appeared in Foreign Language Annals, Hispania, CALICO, System, ReCALL, and NECTFL Review. She
is the author of Web sites for the Spanish textbooks Mosaicos (2nd ed.) and Puentes as well as the e-book
for Avenidas.
E-mail: lina.lee@unh.edu
Lina Lee Learners' Perspectives on Networked Collaborative Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 98
REFERENCES
Abrams, Z. I. (2003). The effect of synchronous and asynchronous CMC on oral performance in German.
The Modern Language Journal, 87(2), 157-167.
Belz, J. A. (2001). Social dimensions of telecollaborative foreign language study. Language Learning &
Technology, 6(1), 60-81. Retrieved December 13, 2002, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/BELZ/
default.html
Belz, J. A. (2002). The myth of the deficient communicator. Language Teaching Research, 6(1), 59-82.
Blake, R. (2000). Computer mediated communication: A window on L2 Spanish interlanguage. Language
Learning & Technology, 4(1), 120-136. Retrieved December 13, 2002, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/
blake/default.html
Brooks, F. P. (1992). Communicative competence and the conversation course: A social interaction
perspective. Linguistics and Education, 4(2), 219-246.
Chun, D. (1994). Using computer networking to facilitate the acquisition of interactive competence.
System, 22(1), 17-31.
Coverdale-Jones, T. (2000). The use of video-conferencing as a communication tool for language
learning: Issues and considerations. IALL Journal, 32(1), 27-40.
Donato, R. (2000). Sociocultural contributions to understanding the foreign and second language
Classroom. In J. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 27-50). Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Doughty, C., & Varela, E. (1999). Communicative focus on form. In C. Doughty & J. Williams (Eds.),
Focus on form in classroom second language acquisition (pp. 114-138). Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.
Duff, P. (1999). Tasks and interlanguage performance: An SLA research perspective. In G. Crooks & S.
M. Gass (Eds.), Tasks and language learning: Integrating theory and practice (pp. 57-95). Bristol, PA:
Multilingual Matters Ltd.
Kern, R. (1996). Computer-mediated communication: Using e-mail exchanges to explore personal
histories into two cultures. In M. Warschauer (Ed.), Telecollaboration in foreign language learning. (pp.
105-119). Honolulu: Second Language Teaching and Curriculum Center, University of Hawai‘i.
Kern, R., & Warschauer, M. (2000). Theory and practice of networked-language teaching. In M.
Warchauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Network-based language teaching: Concepts and practice (pp. 1-19).
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Kinginger, C. (2001).Sociocultural approaches to teaching and teachers' research. In R. Z. Lavine (Ed.),
Beyond the boundaries: Changing contexts in language learning (pp. 201-225). New York: McGraw-Hill
Higher Education.
Kinginger, C., Gourves-Hayward, A., & Simpson, V. (1999). A tele-collaborative course on French-
American intercultural communication. French Review, 72(5), 853-866.
Krashen, S. (1985). The input hypothesis: Issues and implications. New York: Longman.
Lantolf, J. P. (Ed.). (2000). Sociocultural theory and second language learning. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Lee, L. (2000). Evaluating intermediate Spanish students' speaking skills through a taped test: A pilot
study. Hispania, 83(2), 127-138.
Lina Lee Learners' Perspectives on Networked Collaborative Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 99
Lee, L. (2001). Online interaction: negotiation of meaning and strategies used among learners of Spanish.
ReCALL, 13(2), 232-244.
Lee, L. (2002a). Enhancing learners' communication skills through synchronous electronic interaction and
task-based instruction. Foreign Language Annuals, 35(1), 16-23.
Lee, L. (2002b). Synchronous online exchanges: A study of modification devices on nonnative discourse
interaction. System, 30(3), 275-288.
Long, M. H. (1985). Input and second language acquisition theory. In S. Gass & C. G. Madden (Eds.),
Input in second language acquisition (pp. 377-393). Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Müller-Hartmann, A. (2000). The role of tasks in promoting intercultural learning in electronic learning
networks. Language Learning & Technology, 4(2), 129-147. Retrieved December 13, 2002, from
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num2/muller/default.html
Ohta, A. (1995). Applying socio-cultural theory to an analysis of learner discourse: Learner-learner
collaborative interaction in the zone of proximal development. Issues in Applied Linguistics, 6(2), 93-122.
Ohta, A. (2000). Rethinking interaction in SLA: Developmentally appropriate assistance in the zone of
proximal development and the acquisition and L2 grammar. In J. L. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory
and second language learning (pp. 51-78). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pavlenko, A., & Lantolf, J. P. (2000). Second language learning as participation and the (re)construction
of selves. J. L. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 155-178). Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Pellettieri, J. (2000). Negotiation in cyberspace: The role of chatting in the development of grammatical
competence. In M. Warschauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Network-based language teaching: concepts and
practice (pp. 59-86). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Pica, T. (1993). Communication with second language learners: What does it reveal about social and
linguistic process of second language learning. In: J. E. Alatis (Ed.), CURT 1992: Language,
communication and social meaning (pp. 435-464). Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
Pica, T., Kanagy, R., & Falodun, J. (1993). Choosing and using communication tasks for second language
instruction. In G. Crookes & S. Gass (Eds.), Tasks and language learning: Integrating theory and
practice (pp. 9-34). Clevedon, England: Multilingual Matters.
Shortreed, I. M. (1999). Variation in foreigner talk input: The effects of task and proficiency. In G.
Crookes & S. Gass (Eds.), Tasks and language learning: Integrating theory and practice (pp. 96-122).
Clevedon, England: Multilingual Matters.
Sotillo, M. S. (2000). Discourse functions and syntactic complexity in synchronous and asynchronous
communication. Language Learning & Technology, 4(1), 82-119. Retrieved December 13, 2002, from
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/sotillo/default.html
Swain, M. (1995). Three functions of output in second language learning. In G. Cook & B. Seidlhofer
(Eds.), Principle and practice in applied linguistics: Studies in honor of H. G. Widdowson (pp. 125-144).
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (1998). Interaction and second language learning: Two adolescent French
immersion students working together. Modern Language Journal, 82(3), 320-337.
Toyoda, E., & Harrison, R. (2002). Categorization of text chat communication between learners and
native speakers of Japanese. Language Learning & Technology, 6(1), 82-99. Retrieved December 13,
2002, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/TOYODA/default.html
Lina Lee Learners' Perspectives on Networked Collaborative Interaction…
Language Learning & Technology 100
van Lier, L. (1996). Interaction in the language curriculum: Awareness, autonomy and authenticity.
London: Longman.
Vygotsky L. S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1989). Concrete human psychology. Soviet Psychology, 27(2), 53-77.
Warschauer, M. (1996). Comparing face-to-face and electronic communication in the second language
classroom. CALICO Journal, 13(2), 7-26.
Warschauer, M. (2000). On-line learning in second language classroom: An ethnographic study. In M.
Warschauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Network-based language teaching: concepts and practice (pp. 41-58).
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
