Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num1/review1/
January 2004, Volume 8, Number 1
pp. 20-23
Copyright © 2004, ISSN 1094-3501 20
REVIEW OF CONVERSATION AND TECHNOLOGY
Conversation and Technology
Ian Hutchby
2001
ISBN 0-7456-2111-2 (pbk)
£15.99 (US $35.95)
221 pp.
Polity Press
Cambridge, England
Reviewed by Jean E. Conacher, University of Limerick, Ireland
Overview
Within the early pages of this volume, Ian Hutchby declares his intention to explore how a better
understanding of "technologies for communication," as he terms them, can help us appreciate better the
"relationship between forms of technology and structures of social interaction" (p. 2). As a sociologist, his
interest lies primarily in "analysing the ways in which non-human technological artefacts can become
important elements in the patterns of ordinary human conduct" (p. 5). While the volume is arguably
targeted first and foremost at those working in the areas of communication studies, organizational studies,
and cultural studies, and certainly not at those involved in language pedagogy, there is much that the
discerning teacher and researcher of language learning can gain from this book. It provides an intelligent,
insightful, and incisive discussion of the modern world of communication from the beginnings of the
telephone to the emergence of the computer-based chatroom, and argues convincingly that it is important
not only to consider what potential such technologies have to impact upon our social discourse, but also
to understand the complex ways in which human beings mould the exploitation of these technologies to
meet their own social ends. Reading the volume raises our awareness both of the potential of human-
computer interaction and of the seemingly never-ending subtleties of human conversation. While all
examples are based on native-speaker interaction, the volume would be useful as a reference tool and
sounding-board for those working in related areas of native-non-native speaker interaction or non-native
speaker interlanguage.
Hutchby's arguments in the course of the book, and indeed in each chapter, are particularly well sign-
posted and structured. This, in conjunction with the admittedly rather sparse index, makes the volume
extremely easy to dip back into on subsequent readings, but the cumulative nature of his main argument
can only truly be appreciated if the reader takes the time to sit down and read the book from cover to
cover.
Description by Chapter
The book is divided into 10 chapters. The brief introduction sets out the author's agenda and terms of
reference, arguing strongly for a re-appraisal of both familiar and established technologies such as the
telephone and more recent developments such as the Internet and its offshoot opportunities for
interaction. As Hutchby suggests, "patterns of talk-in-interaction change as people adapt to developments
in the circumstances and the possibilities for talk" (pp. 6-7) and therefore a fruitful approach might indeed
be to draw on studies of such patterns as a way of identifying how such processes of adaptation can be
seen to emerge. Thus, Hutchby argues for the need to bring research into the sociology of technology,   
Reviewed by Jean E. Conacher Review of Conversation and Technology
Language Learning & Technology 21
social interaction, and in particular conversation analysis to bear on an exploration of the "nature of the
relationship between forms of technology and structures of interaction" (p. 10).
The remaining chapters can be grouped in two main sections, with chapters 2, 3, and 4 providing a
discussion of theoretical issues which prevail in the areas of the sociology of technology, social
interaction, and conversation analysis. The subsequent five chapters offer a series of case studies
exploring the implications of these theoretical debates for different technologies, ranging from the
telephone (chapters 5 and 6), video links (chapter 7), and computer-based enquiry services (chapter 8), to
Internet Relay Chat (chapter 9), before, in the final chapter, Hutchby draws together the different threads
of his evidence to lay out his final arguments and conclusions.
Within the first group of chapters, Hutchby explores the "complex interplay between the normative
structures of conversational interaction and the communicative affordances offered by different
technologies" (p. 13). He begins in chapter 2, by discussing the arguments for and against approaches
which explore the relationship between social and technological change in terms of technological
determinism, interaction, and socio-technical networks. He concludes that, with certain caveats, it is more
useful to consider technologies as texts, "written" by all those involved in their development, production,
and marketing, only then to be read and re-read by consumers and users. Thus, while any technology may
be presented to the public as fulfilling specific needs in specific ways, it is ultimately the end-user who
defines and interprets the most appropriate use to which the technology can be put, often in areas never
previously conceived. It is in this light that Hutchby draws upon the psychologist Gibson's 1979 concept
of "affordances," forwarding the argument that each technology possesses an inherent range of
possibilities, not all of which will be apparent at time of production. As the social environment changes
and new people with new perceptions come into contact with the technology, so new affordances, new
possibilities for its exploitation, will become apparent. At each turn, however, a fine balance is
maintained between technology and user, between the possibilities opened up by the technology for its
use and the limits its affordances place on how humans can exploit it. The relationship between
technology and user is neither totally open nor totally closed.
Chapter 3 explores the different metaphors which have been used to describe and explain this relationship
between technology and user, arising from two main models of communication he terms the
"computational" and the "interactional." This chapter, with its discussion of communication as
transmission or as social interaction, is perhaps the least useful for language specialists, as it goes over old
ground better covered elsewhere and interestingly fails to mention at all the work of Vygotsky in this
field. Chapter 4, likewise, for those familiar with the work of Harvey Sacks and subsequent conversation
analysts, offers little new, although there is an interesting final highlighting of Sacks' own use of the
metaphor of a "technology of conversation." The purpose of this latter chapter in particular is, however, to
introduce, or highlight, the argument that even apparently spontaneous language production and
conversation are subject to certain underlying norms of interaction, of which users are consciously or
subconsciously aware, and which are drawn upon to make such conversation progress successfully. To
return to Gibson's terminology, one might argue that what Hutchby explores here are the "affordances" of
Schegloff's 1987 "talk-in-interaction," although again one wonders why no reference is made to Giles,
Coupland, and Coupland's 1991 work on communication accommodation theory.
In chapters 5 and 6, Hutchby draws on the techniques of conversation analysis to illustrate his arguments
in the previous chapters, taking as his focus that technology which has become almost invisible in its
ubiquity, the telephone. He explains how the social function of the telephone has changed since its
introduction, creating an important means of social interaction which is itself shaped by the features
afforded by the technology. New understandings of space, interactant roles, and identities are evidenced
in close analysis of native-speaker conversations. Language specialists interested in similar analyses of
cross-cultural comparisons and non-native speaker interaction will find supporting arguments for
Hutchby's work elsewhere (see, e.g., Aston, 1995; Duncan, in press; Halmari, 1993).
Reviewed by Jean E. Conacher Review of Conversation and Technology
Language Learning & Technology 22
In the chapter which follows, Hutchby consolidates his argument in relation to how interaction is afforded
by the available technology by exploring examples of video-mediated interaction and by examining the
challenge facing technological designers in trying to generate successful human-technology-interaction.
While, again Hutchby's volume provides a stimulating discussion of the generic issues, those looking for
more language-learning specific explorations of this field might look at Kinginger (1998), O'Dowd
(2000), or Belz (2002). Chapters 8 and 9 go on to explore the affordances of human-computer interaction
in more detail and question what new forms of interaction are afforded by computer-based virtual
conversation. While work in relation to language learning has concentrated upon the potential of such
virtual environments to improve motivation (Stepp-Greany, 2002), linguistic competence (Pelletieri,
2000), and intercultural competence (Thorne, 2003), less research has been carried out on whether, and
how, the use of such media significantly alters the way in which the linguistic and cultural performance of
language learners within such new learning environments impacts upon our understanding of models of
second language acquisition.
Conclusion
Hutchby concludes that "technologies do not make humans; but humans make what they do of
technologies in the interface between the organized practices of human conversation, and the technology's
array of communicative affordances" (p. 206). If this volume is to be of value to language teachers and
researchers, and I firmly believe that it is, our challenge lies equally in making what we can of the
potential afforded by this interface between sociology, technology, and communication, and applying it to
our own work. Hutchby's volume affords a clear mapping-out of a wide range of generic theories and
issues which can act as an invaluable lens through which to (re-)examine existing and future language-
learning research in the area of new technologies. Not least it might encourage us to look more closely at
the innovative ways our students use such technologies to meet their own socio-cultural and
communicative ends, which might not always match with our own as teachers!
ABOUT THE REVIEWER
Jean E. Conacher is Senior Lecturer in German within the Department of Languages and Cultural Studies
at the University of Limerick, Ireland. Her research interests focus on new learning environments,
particularly the use of new technologies in the promotion of self-directed learning. She is co-editor (with
Angela Chambers and Jeannette Littlemore) of ICT and Language Learning: Pedagogy and Practice, to
be published by Birmingham University Press, and is currently involved in a Telephone Partnership
Project with researchers in Scotland and France.
E-mail: jean.conacher@ul.ie
REFERENCES
Aston, G. (1995). Say "thank you": Some pragmatic constraints in conversational closings. Applied
Linguistics, 16(1), 57-86.
Belz, J. A. (2002). Social dimensions of telecollaborative foreign language study. Language Learning &
Technology, 6(1), 60-81. Retrieved November 25, 2003, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/belz/
Duncan, A. (in press) Interactions au téléphone entre Stirling et Besançon: des conversations naturelles?
Annales littéraires. Série linguistique et appropriation des langues. Besançon, France: Université de
Franche-Comté.
Halmari, H. (1993). Intercultural business telephone conversations: A case of Finns vs Anglo-American.
Applied Linguistics, 14(4), 408-430.
Reviewed by Jean E. Conacher Review of Conversation and Technology
Language Learning & Technology 23
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to perception. London: Houghton Mifflin.
Giles, H., Coupland, J., & Coupland, N. (Eds.) (1991). Contexts of accommodation: Developments in
applied sociolinguistics. Paris: Maison des Science de l'Homme.
Kinginger, C. (1998). Videoconferencing as access to spoken French. The Modern Language Journal,
82(4), 502-513.
O'Dowd, R. (2000). Intercultural learning via videoconferencing: A pilot exchange project. ReCALL,
12(1), 49-61.
Pelletieri, J. (2000). Negotiation in cyberspace. The role of chatting in the development of grammatical
competence. In M. Warschauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Network-based language teaching: Concepts and
purpose (pp. 59-86). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Schegloff, E. A. (1987). Between micro and macro: Contexts and other connections. In J. Alexander
(Ed.), The micro-macro link (pp. 193-206). Berkely: University of California Press.
Stepp-Greany, J. (2002). Student perceptions on language learning in a technological environment:
Implications for the new millennium. Language Learning & Technology, 6(1), 165-180. Retrieved
November 25, 2003, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/STEPPGREANY/
Thorne, S. L. (2003). Artifacts and cultures-of-use in intercultural communication. Language Learning &
Technology, 7(2), 38-67. Retrieved November 25, 2003, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/thorne/
