Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num3/editors.html
September 2004, Volume 8, Number 3
p. 1
Copyright © 2004, ISSN 1094-3501 1
FROM THE EDITORS
Welcome to Volume 8, Number 3 of Language Learning & Technology.
This issue is somewhat different from previous regular issues in that it offers a special
section on Global Englishes, in addition to two regular feature articles. The special
section on Global Englishes was guest edited by Denise Murray who was assisted by
Associate Editor Rick Kern. We would like to acknowledge and thank them both.
This issue also has two regular articles. In Supporting Synchronous Distance Language
Learning with Desktop Videoconferencing, Yuping Wang evaluates NetMeeting, a
popular videoconferencing tool, in terms of its ability to support oral and visual
interaction in distance learning. Through an empirical study of the use of NetMeeting by
university students learning Chinese, Wang found that this videoconferencing program
enhanced interactive learning. Testing L2 Vocabulary Recognition and Recall Using
Pictorial and Written Test Items by Linda Jones adds to the growing body of literature
on the beneficial effects of annotations on L2 vocabulary recognition and recall.
In their regular column, On the Net, Jean LeLoup and Robert Ponterio introduce us to a
a Web site that will be highly useful in the Spanish L2 classroom, El Museo Thyssen-
Bornemisza. This is just one example of authentic sites that offer a great deal for L2
learning materials and activities.
In his Emerging Technologies column, Bob Godwin-Jones explores several methods for
exploring the Web in the ESL and EFL classrooms, including Webquests, MOOs, and
chatterbots.
Reviews Editor Rafael Salaberry brings us reviews of three software products: Tell Me
More Spanish, La Chaise Berçante, and Live Action Spanish Interactive: TPR on a
Computer.
We are also happy to announce a call for papers on electronic literacy for a future issue
to be guest edited by Carla Meskill.
Finally, we'd like to let our readers know that we are in the process of creating PDF files
for volumes 1 through 4. This will be done over the next several months, and we will
make them available as they are completed.
Thank you for the support you've given us to date, and we hope that you will continue to
support our journal by submitting manuscripts and by taking out a free subscription. See
you in January with our special issue on "technology and young learners," guest edited
by Michelle Knobel and Colin Lankshear.
Sincerely,
Dorothy Chun and Irene Thompson
Editors
Pamela DaGrossa
Managing Editor
