Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num1/editors/
January 2004, Volume 8, Number 1
p. 1-2
Copyright © 2004, ISSN 1094-3501 1
FROM THE EDITORS
We are pleased to bring you Volume 8, Number 1 of Language Learning & Technology.
There have been a few administrative changes at LLT. Mark Warschauer resigned as
Editor shortly after our September publication. Mark is the founder of LLT and we are
pleased that he has agreed to continue providing input as a member of the Editorial
Board. Batia Laufer has kindly accepted our invitation to become an Associate Editor.
She will be joining our other Associate Editor, Richard Kern, in overseeing manuscripts
and assisting guest editors with special issues.
This issue contains four articles that we believe will be of interest to you.
In the first article, "Generalization Of Computer-Assisted Prosody Training:
Quantitative and Qualitative Findings," Debra M. Hardison reports on two experiments
investigating the effectiveness of computer-assisted prosody training, its generalization
to novel sentences and segmental accuracy, and the relationship between prosodic and
lexical information in long-term memory. Taken together, the results of these two
experiments demonstrate the effective pedagogical application of speech technology.
In the second article, "Composition Medium Comparability in a Direct Writing
Assessment of Non-Native English Speakers," Wolfe and Manalo seek to determine
whether performance on a direct writing assessment is comparable for TOEFL
examinees when given the choice to compose essays in handwriting versus word
processing. They found a weak two-way interaction between composition medium and
English language proficiency, with examinees with weaker English language scores
performing better on handwritten essays while examinees with better English language
scores performed comparably on the two testing media.
In the third article, "Towards An Effective Use Of Audio Conferencing in Distance
Language Courses," Hampel and Hauck present the pedagogical rationale underpinning
the virtual learning and teaching environment. They examine the process of development
and implementation of online tuition in terms of activity design, tutor training, and
student support. Their findings highlight the complexity of the organizational and
pedagogical frameworks that contribute to the effective use of online tuition via audio
conferencing in distance education settings.
In the fourth article, "Learners' Perspectives on Networked Collaborative Interaction
with Native Speakers of Spanish in The US," Lina Lee describes a network-based
collaborative project that focused on the learning conditions non-native speakers (NNSs)
of Spanish perceived to be necessary to satisfactorily communicate with native speakers
(NSs). The results of this study demonstrated that the NNS and NS online collaboration
promoted the scaffolding by which the NSs assisted the NNSs in composing meaning
(ideas) and form (grammar). The author suggests some practical ideas for further
research.
In their regular column "On the Net," LeLoup and Ponterio profile ICT4LT,
"Information and Communications Technology for Language Teachers," which is an
excellent resource for any FL teacher interested in becoming knowledgeable about
technology and language instruction. In his column "Emerging Technologies," Godwin-
Jones revisits the issue of dynamic Web page creation and describes what has changed
since his 1998
From the Editors
Language Learning & Technology 2
article on the topic. In particular, he discusses DOM, that is, the "Document Object
Model" of a Web page that provides a standard way to represent and access all the items
on the page, and DAV or WebDAV ("Web-Based Distributed Authoring and
Versioning"), a technology that supplements traditional http protocols with a variety of
additional actions.
Rafael Salaberry, our Book and Software Review Editor, brings you three helpful
reviews. Jean E. Conacher reviews Conversation and Technology by Ian Hutchby, an
investigation of the effects of technology on social interaction and the way humans use
it to advance their own interests. Joy Egbert reviews "Connected Speech," a software
program intended to improve communication skills of adult, non-native speakers of
English. Pamela Couch reviews "Business English: Meetings," a multimedia CD-ROM
designed to introduce non-native English speakers to the language and culture of North
American business meetings through the use of live-action video, still pictures, audio,
and text.
Finally, we would like to offer our sincere mahalo nui to those who reviewed
manuscripts during 2003. Their names are listed in this issue and we applaud and
recognize them for their contribution to LLT.
A healthy and happy New Year to all readers and supporters of our journal.
Sincerely,
Dorothy Chun and Irene Thompson, Editors
Pamela DaGrossa, Managing Editor
