Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num1/review3/
January 2004, Volume 8, Number 1
pp. 29-33
Copyright © 2004, ISSN 1094-3501 29
REVIEW OF BUSINESS ENGLISH: MEETINGS
Title Business English: Meetings
Platform Windows 95, 98, or NT
Macintosh 7.5 +
Minimum Hardware
Requirements
Windows: Pentium PC; Macintosh: Power PC processor; 16 MB RAM; 2x
CD-ROM drive; Quicktime 3.x or higher; SVGA monitor (Windows)
Producer English Language Centre, University of Victoria
Distributor Encomium Publications
2637 Erie Avenue Suite 203
Cincinnati, OH 45208 USA
1-800-234-4831
info@encomium.com
Support offered http://www.encomium.com/
Target language English
Target Audience Intermediate-level business English learners
Price $ 95.00 US
ISBN 4-900819-01-8
Reviewed by Pamela Couch, Boston University
Business English Meetings is a multimedia CD-ROM designed to introduce non-native English speakers
to the language and culture of North American business meetings. Through the use of live-action video,
still pictures, audio, and text, the program presents examples of effective oral and written business
communication and provides opportunities for language practice.
The users follow the story of Victoria Springs Ltd., a fictional bottled water company considering a
merger offer from a larger distributor. This plot unfolds in a series of video clips demonstrating the
various language and cultural components of a business meeting. Each unit contains information on
business vocabulary, idiomatic expressions, communication strategies, body language, and the use of
documents and visual aids, as well as exercises that provide practice and test the language presented.
DESCRIPTION
Business English Meetings includes a general introduction and seven learning units: Opening a Meeting,
Making a Presentation, Disagreeing, Interrupting, Persuading, Negotiating, and Closing a Meeting.
Although users can start with any of these topics, the story line develops throughout the seven units;
therefore, most users will find it beneficial to start with the first unit and progress in order. Each unit
begins with a written overview of the meeting and a still picture that sets the scene for the video. Users
can go directly to the video or click on various objects in the picture to get information on culture,
functional language, visual aids, body language, and documentation. For example, in the introductory
picture for Unit One, "Opening a Meeting," clicking on the water bottle brings up cultural notes on how a
typical meeting agenda is organized, while clicking on the handshake calls up information on different
forms of non-verbal communication often seen in business meetings.
Reviewed by Pamela Couch Review of Business English: Meetings
Language Learning & Technology 30
Figure 1. Opening a meeting: Introduction
Once the video icon is selected, users watch a three-minute scene illustrating the theme of the unit. The
number of characters in the video clips varies according to the topic. For instance, Unit One, "Opening a
Meeting," consists of five people, while Unit Six, "Negotiating," includes just two. The video clips are
supported by text in several ways. Before the video begins, users can read about the context of the
situation and a brief summary, as well as the language focus of the scene. Key vocabulary words are
underlined, allowing users to click and read definitions. Once the video begins, users can read the script to
the left of the video as it plays; they also have the choice of going to the glossary at any time to get a
definition and hear a word pronounced in isolation.
Figure 2. Giving a Presentation: Video
Reviewed by Pamela Couch Review of Business English: Meetings
Language Learning & Technology 31
Each unit includes three practice activities, which may be accessed at any point in the lesson. In Unit
Five, for example, users can test their knowledge of "persuasion" language by filling in a crossword
puzzle, doing a multiple choice listening activity, and playing a "golf game" that asks them to decide
whether an expression is one of "expressing doubt" or "reassuring."
Figure 3. Persuading: "Golf Match" Activity
The program concludes with the final unit, "Closing a Meeting," in which Victoria Springs announces its
decision on the merger proposal.
EVALUATION
Business English Meetings offers a wealth of language practice and cultural insights for non-native
English speakers planning to conduct business with North Americans. The program includes many
examples of functional language for business interactions, clearly differentiating between language for
oral communication and for written documentation.
Language Usage and Variety
The program presents the functional language necessary to increase oral fluency and communicate more
effectively in business situations. For instance, "Negotiating" includes a wide variety of expressions used
to get a negotiation started, make an offer, make conditions, and reject or accept an offer. In addition, the
language notes explain the importance of stating a condition in an optimistic manner to ensure a positive
impact on the interaction, giving examples of both negative and positive ways to express the same idea.
The language presented is natural-sounding, full of commonly used expressions for business transactions.
The users are presented with many alternatives for expressing their own ideas and their reactions to
others' ideas. The accents of the speakers vary slightly, exposing users to different North American
dialects without overwhelming them. Furthermore, the actors in the video exemplify the cultural and
gender diversity found in most North American workplaces. The program includes examples of the small
talk and informal exchanges that often take place at the beginning of an exchange. However, the emphasis
is on the more formal aspects of business interactions, so the informal side of communication is touched
on rather lightly. Although there are examples of friendly exchanges between colleagues and clients, the
Reviewed by Pamela Couch Review of Business English: Meetings
Language Learning & Technology 32
program does not demonstrate purely social interactions, nor does it include the use of humor. (The next
CD in the series, due out in 2004, will focus on social situations.)
Ease of Navigation
The navigation is simple and fairly intuitive. The language practice activities are clearly marked, and it is
easy to control the video sequences. Users can choose which unit they wish to study and progress through
the program in any order. Unfortunately, the program does not allow moving directly from one unit to the
next; this change requires returning to the main menu.
One slight navigational difficulty can be found in the links to the supplemental material. I had trouble
remembering the correspondence between some of the objects in the picture and the material connected to
them. For example, a water bottle is seemingly unrelated to North American culture; the phone could just
have easily been used. In addition, the introductory picture for each video is different, so it isn't
immediately clear what kind of supplementary material is available in that unit. I would find it easier to
access this material if the mouse-over function brought up a brief description, or if the notes were listed in
a more conventional manner, such as a clearly-marked button.
Figure 4. Interrupting: Cultural Notes
Another small suggestion I have for future versions is to provide users with the option of closing the
script while watching the video. This would allow learners to listen without seeing the text, which some
might find a distraction, especially upon repeated listening.
Usage
Business English Meetings can be used as self-study, in a multimedia laboratory, or in a business English
classroom. The program offers many practice exercises to help learners develop listening comprehension
and vocabulary, but does not offer direct practice in the productive skills of speaking and writing.
Therefore, an instructor may wish to develop class activities such as role-plays and business writing
assignments to help learners apply the content they have studied. One drawback to the program is that the
supplemental materials cannot be printed from the screen. This would make it difficult for a teacher to
incorporate the functional language into a class, as well as for a learner to study those expressions when
away from the screen. The users to whom I showed the program wanted to hand copy the functional
Reviewed by Pamela Couch Review of Business English: Meetings
Language Learning & Technology 33
language to practice it outside of the computer environment. A supplemental print package or
downloadable PDF files would be a welcome addition to future versions.
The program is designed for intermediate-level learners of business English. Although the program would
work best with this level, it would also lend itself to more advanced language learners who still need work
on specific language for business interactions.
I showed the program to Asian graduate students in an international MBA. Although they are quite
proficient in English, they were eager to look at the information on written documentation and learn the
functional expressions, many of which were unfamiliar to them. They also liked the video sequences and
the audio listening practice; the latter can be completed with or without textual support, which allows
learners to adjust the level of difficulty.
Comparison
When searching for business English multimedia materials, teachers may want to compare Business
English: Meetings to other programs that offer video listening and language practice activities. One such
program is Longman English Interactive, Level 4, which is not targeted for business students but presents
language in the context of a fictitious marketing campaign. Longman English Interactive, Level 4 features
a cast of young actors who depict characters at the beginning of their careers. Therefore, it may have a
greater appeal for students who have not yet entered the job market. Furthermore, Longman English
Interactive offers practice in a wide range of skills, with exercises on grammar, speaking, and writing as
well as vocabulary, reading, and listening.
Business English: Meetings focuses on real-life situations faced by business people in North America.
The actors in the story are appropriately cast in terms of age; in other words, they are people in their
thirties and older, who might find themselves in this situation. Users follow the story of a potential merger
and learn vocabulary and cultural information that will help them handle similar situations in their own
business interactions. Although the program does not offer practice in all the skills, it provides a clear
overview of business language and culture and will appeal to learners who want a focused approach to
business English.
SUMMARY
Business English: Meetings is a good program for non-native English speakers who want to learn the
communication strategies necessary for successful business interactions in North America. The program
covers all aspects of communication: formal and informal spoken language, non-verbal communication,
visual aids, and written documentation. It also provides the cultural information that underlies these
interactions and is vitally important to communication. Although the program description states that
Business English: Meetings is for intermediate-level English learners, more advanced learners will
undoubtedly find it a valuable resource as well. This CD-ROM program is part of a series. The next CD,
North American Culture and Etiquette, will be released in early 2004.
ABOUT THE REVIEWER
Pamela Couch teaches in the International Teaching Fellow Program at Boston University and the English
for Foreign Students program at Boston College. She has taught Business English in Boston University's
International Management Programs in Kobe, Japan, and Shanghai, China.
E-mail: pcouch@bu.edu
