Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num1/hardison/
January 2004, Volume 8, Number 1
pp. 34-52
Copyright © 2004, ISSN 1094-3501 34
GENERALIZATION OF COMPUTER-ASSISTED PROSODY
TRAINING: QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE FINDINGS1
Debra M. Hardison
Michigan State University
ABSTRACT
Two experiments investigated the effectiveness of computer-assisted prosody training, its
generalization to novel sentences and segmental accuracy, and the relationship between prosodic
and lexical information in long-term memory. Experiment 1, using a pretest-posttest design,
provided native English-speaking learners of French with 3 weeks of training focused on prosody
using a real-time computerized pitch display. Multiple exemplars produced by native speakers
(NSs) of French and stored on hard disk provided training feedback. Learners' recorded pre- and
posttest productions were presented to NSs for evaluation in two conditions: filtered
(unintelligible segmental information) and unfiltered. Ratings using 7-point scales for the prosody
and segmental accuracy of unfiltered samples revealed significant improvement in prosody with
generalization to segmental production and novel sentences. Comparison of prosody ratings for
filtered and unfiltered samples revealed some segmental influence on the pretest ratings of
prosody. In Experiment 2, involving a memory recall task using filtered stimuli of reduced
intelligibility, learners identified the exact lexical content of an average of 80% of the training
sentences based on prosodic cues consistent with exemplar-based learning models. Questionnaire
responses indicated a greater awareness of the various aspects of speech and increased confidence
in producing another language.
Many factors may influence a native speaker's judgment of a second or foreign language (FL) learner's
accent including suprasegmental features such as stress, rhythm, and intonation (Munro, 1995). These
features began to draw the greatest attention from teachers and materials developers with the advent of the
discourse-level focus of the communicative approach to language teaching and remained the principal
focus throughout the 1980s (e.g., Morley, 1991; Pennington & Richards, 1986). However, in recent years,
the field of pronunciation teaching appears to have adopted a more balanced viewpoint with regard to the
importance of both the segmental and suprasegmental aspects of language (e.g., Celce-Murcia, Brinton, &
Goodwin, 1996; Derwing, Munro, & Wiebe, 1998). Perhaps, then, an ideal training tool is one that can
produce a significant improvement in both levels of the spoken language with evidence of generalization
to novel stimuli.
The current study investigated such a tool in the form of computer-assisted training with visual feedback.
The study was divided into Experiments 1 and 2. Experiment 1 focused on both quantitative and
qualitative aspects of the acquisition of French prosody by native speakers (NS) of American English
(AE) using computer-assisted training that permits visual display of pitch contours in real time. This
experiment was designed to investigate (a) the effects of such training when exemplars from native
speakers (NSs) of French were used as feedback rather than models to imitate, (b) the extent to which the
training would generalize to improvement in segmental production and to both the prosodic and
segmental features of novel sentences, and (c) the potential influence (positive or negative) of segmental
quality on the NS ratings of prosody by comparing learners' recorded productions with filtered versions
that render the segmental information unintelligible while preserving the prosodic information. In
addition to the quantitative findings, observation notes I made during training and the responses to
participants' anonymous questionnaires following their training program provided qualitative information   
Debra M. Hardison Generalization of Computer-Assisted Prosody Training
Language Learning & Technology 35
on the learner-technology interaction and the learners' perceived usefulness of computer-assisted speech
training.
Experiment 2 was conducted to explore how prosodic and lexical information is stored in memory,
specifically whether these components of utterances are stored together in memory traces. A memory
recall task was used to investigate (a) whether probing memory with only the prosodic information from
familiar training sentences results in recall of the associated lexical information, and (b) what
characterizes the prosodic/lexical associations that are easiest for learners to recall. In other words, what
constitutes salient input in prosody training?
In this paper, prosody refers collectively to variations in pitch, tempo, and rhythm. Intonation represents
the patterns of pitch or melody. This association of intonation with a term such as melody that one
immediately associates with music will surface again later with a discussion of some of the learners'
questionnaire responses. Rhythm may be considered the perceived regularity of prominent units in
speech. The rhythmic structure of speech reflects a hierarchical organization of the temporal sequence of
speech sounds into syllables and higher level units of prosodic and syntactic structure. Part of learning a
spoken language is the acquisition of its systematic rhythmic organization. The current study makes
reference to computerized visual displays of pitch contours in prosody training, but because intonation,
tempo, and rhythm are inextricably linked, the study is one of the acquisition of prosody, not of intonation
per se.
Several reports have advocated the use of speech technology programs providing visual displays of
intonation for language learners (Anderson-Hsieh, 1992, 1994; de Bot, 1983; de Bot & Mailfert, 1982;
Leather, 1990; Molholt, 1988; Pennington & Esling, 1996; Weltens & de Bot, 1984) though few studies
have utilized research methodology to evaluate the effectiveness of this approach. De Bot (1983)
investigated visual pitch feedback with Dutch university students learning English. In a pretest-posttest
design, auditory-visual (AV) versus auditory-only (A-only) feedback, and the amount of practice (one
session of 45 minutes vs. 2 sessions) were investigated. After a sentence was presented auditorily, the
pitch contour was displayed and learners imitated the sentence. Their pitch contours then appeared on the
display below the target. They were allowed to repeat the process a nonspecified number of times.
Ratings of these productions were done by three teachers of English using a 5-point scale. Results
indicated that AV feedback was significantly better than A-only, but the amount of practice time was not
significant.
The benefits of AV versus A-only training (i.e., two channels of input vs. one) have also been
demonstrated in improving the perceptual accuracy of nonnative sounds for learners of English as a
second language (ESL) with generalization to novel stimuli and transfer to production improvement
(Hardison, 2003). The visual stimuli in this instance were full-sized images of talkers' faces on videotape.
Another study (Weltens & de Bot, 1984) with Dutch learners of English found that the duration of
feedback delay, that is, the period of time between the speech signal and pitch contour display (40 ms.,
250 ms., or at the end of the signal), did not significantly affect improvement, while the speech material
(i.e., the number of unvoiced segments) and the voice characteristics of a speaker were factors in the
quality of feedback. These studies with Dutch learners of English involved brief training periods and
focused on the learners' imitation of NS sentence models. Questions have arisen regarding the effects of
brief training sessions, limitations of earlier speech technology systems, and the learners' ability to
interpret displays -- all factors influencing a decision to incorporate such systems into pronunciation
teaching (Chun, 1998).
In addition to the above issues involved in prosody training, per se, theoretical and pedagogical questions
also arise, specifically regarding how the prosodic and lexical content of speech is stored in memory.
Results of an experiment dealing with recognition memory of English sentences by advanced learners
(native speakers of Cantonese) showed a high level of lexical memory in recognizing sentences they had
Debra M. Hardison Generalization of Computer-Assisted Prosody Training
Language Learning & Technology 36
heard before ("old" sentences) but the same learners did not recognize when an old sentence's prosody
had changed, even when the change was lexically relevant. This suggests that unanalyzed prosodic
patterns had been stored in memory and that learners had failed to generalize the information to new
examples (Pennington & Ellis, 2000).
In the current study, Experiment 2 used a memory recall task to explore the relationship between the
prosodic information and lexical content of the traces of the training stimuli from Experiment 1 stored in
long-term memory by using prosody as the lexical access cue through the use of filtered speech. In
multiple-trace theory, all attended perceptual details of an event are stored in a trace, so that prosodic
patterns as well as lexical information may be stored together in a trace, and a composite of such traces
forms the basis of episodic memory (Hardison, 20002; Hintzman, 1986). Recent studies have
demonstrated that episodic memory exists both in musically untrained listeners and in trained listeners for
"musical prosody," or the acoustic features (termed performance expression) that characterize particular
music performances (Palmer, Jungers, & Jusczyk, 2001).
Traces stored in long-term memory are said to return an echo to primary memory in response to a
retrieval cue or probe. The content of the echo is the summed contributions of all the traces reacting in
concert according to similarity between their properties and the probe. Differing levels of attention paid to
the various aspects of the speech signal result in a hierarchical structure of information in the trace such
that the strongest element is the one that received the most attention. This hierarchy, in turn, may be
influenced by factors such as the perceived relevance of the content to the performance of a task or the
uniqueness of the content. The echo can also enhance a probe's representation by filling in missing
details. Echoes for higher-frequency words do not reflect the detailed characteristics of any particular
trace, but they do produce a more generic echo as a result of multiple-trace activation; in contrast, the
echoes for lower-frequency words more closely resemble the stimulus, as they are the result of activation
of specific old traces (Goldinger, 1997).
The acquisition of French by speakers of AE presents an interesting contrast in terms of prosodic features
that often pose problems for learners. The traditional syllable-timed/stress-timed distinction used to
characterize the difference between French and English has not been supported by experimental findings
(e.g., Bertinetto, 1989). Wenk and Wioland (1982) and Fletcher (1991) suggest that the rhythm of French
is unlike that of English in that it is trailer-timed; that is, the salient element is a right-boundary phrase-
final prominence at the end of a word or sense group in contrast to English, which is leader-timed (left-
boundary foot-initial prominence). In French, the right-boundary stress is generally associated with a
perceptible fluctuation in pitch as well as some degree of lengthening.
In his description of the prosodic units of General French,3 Di Cristo (1998) notes that the language has a
single rhythmic stress (primary stress) assigned to the final full syllable of the last lexical item, usually a
content word, of a stress group (composed of the "stressable" word and adjacent clitics governed by it).
There is also emphatic stress (e.g., focal stress), and non-final (secondary) optional stress described by
some as generally assigned to the first full syllable of a phrase-initial content word (e.g., Fónagy, 1979;
Hirst & Di Cristo, 1984; Vaissière 1974). This is subject to rhythmic constraints within a stress group
(e.g., the number of syllables in the group generally does not exceed three according to Fletcher, 1991 and
to Wenk & Wioland, 1982) and across groups (e.g., there is a tendency to avoid adjacent rhythmic stress
in the same intonation unit). The stress group has also been referred to as a tonal unit (Hirst and Di Cristo,
1984) because pitch prominence is the main cue in signaling primary and secondary rhythmic stress, but
the syllable bearing final or primary stress is also lengthened.
The following basic description of French intonation patterns is guided by the characteristics reported in
most studies (for a recent, thorough discussion, see Di Cristo, 1998). The examples below were taken
from the stimulus set of the current study. The transcriptions were based on visual displays of the pitch
contours of native speakers and were generated by the Real-Time Pitch Program of the Kay Elemetrics
Debra M. Hardison Generalization of Computer-Assisted Prosody Training
Language Learning & Technology 37
Computerized Speech Lab (CSL) used in this study. The transcription system follows INTSINT
(INternational Transcription System for INTonation) developed by Hirst and Di Cristo (1998) for use
specifically with French and English, where ›  (Higher) and fl  (Lower) represent pitch points relatively
higher or lower than the immediately preceding pitch point; > (Downstep) and < (Upstep) represent a
slight downstepping (lowering) or upstepping (raising) of pitch relative to the preceding point (and are
used in this paper to indicate smaller pitch changes than those transcribed as Higher or Lower); and Ý
(Top) and ß  (Bottom) represent more extreme high and low values with respect to the speaker's vocal
range. These symbols are summarized below in Table 1.
Table 1. Pitch-Transcription Symbols
Higher Lower Same Downstep Upstep Top Bottom
› fl fi > < Ý ß
In the examples below, the left square bracket represents the beginning tone level. For a simple
declarative sentence, there is a rising pitch movement (from low to high) at the end of each stress group
except the last one which is produced with a falling pitch movement as in Example 1.
Example 1. Simple declarative sentence
Je suis allée à l'agence de voyage. "I went to the travel agency."
[ fi ›  Ý >  >  › > <   ß ]
Di Cristo (1998) groups interrogative forms into two categories: total questions (including syntactically
unmarked ones signaled by intonation that are frequently used in contemporary French, those with
inversion of a pronoun subject and verb, and those introduced by the expression Est-ce que…? "Is it
that…?") and partial (WH-) questions. Total questions seeking information (vs. confirmation of what is
already known) are characterized by a rising pitch associated with the last stressed syllable of the
utterance as shown in Example 2.
Example 2. Total question
Pardon, vous avez l'heure? "Excuse/pardon me, do you have the time?"
[ < >  > Ý ]
Partial (WH-) questions are marked with an interrogative morpheme (e.g., où "where"). As shown in
Example 3, neutral (vs. echo) partial questions generally have an initial pitch prominence on the stressed
syllable of the question word followed by a regular drop in pitch until the final syllable produced with a
low pitch in the speaker's vocal range.
Example 3. Partial (WH-) question
Où se trouve la gare? "Where is the train station?"
[Ý > > >   ß ]
French speakers can also use focal accents for intensification in which case a particular syllable as in
Example 4 (INcroyable "unbelievable") or word as in Example 6 (assez "enough") can be highlighted
with an extra pitch prominence.
Example 4. Intensification by syllable
Je viens de lire un livre incroyable. "I've just read an unbelievable book."
[ › > › > ›
Ý     >  > ]
Recall that the symbol ›  means the pitch is higher relative to the previous pitch point. In this example, the
pitch points for viens (part of the expression venir de) "have just" and lire "read" are at roughly the same
Debra M. Hardison Generalization of Computer-Assisted Prosody Training
Language Learning & Technology 38
frequency. There is a rise on livre "book" (though not as high as the first two) followed by an additional
rise for emphasis on the first syllable of incroyable "unbelievable."
Example 5. Intensification by word
J'en ai assez (de) travailler. "I've had enough of working."
[ < Ý    ® > >   > ]
In this example, de appears in parentheses as it was imperceptible in spontaneous speech.
To imply a contrast, a focused item can be characterized by a rising-falling pitch pattern as in Example 6
where the postnominal color adjective rouge "red" is in focus.
Example 6. Focus on "red"
Elle a choisi la jupe rouge. "She chose the red skirt."
[ ®    ­  Ý >  < ­  ¯   ]
The lexical item in focus is subject to the speaker's interpretation. In the above example, without
additional context or instruction, the speaker chose to convey the idea that it was a red skirt and not any
other color. Contrast this with the same sentence spoken by a different NS as shown in Example 7 where
the focused item is the noun jupe "skirt" rather than rouge "red" which conveys the idea that it was a red
skirt and not any other article of clothing.
Example 7. Focus on "skirt"
Elle a choisi la jupe rouge. "She chose the red skirt."
[ ®   ­  Ý >  ­   ¯ ]
I have outlined above the primary declarative, interrogative, and focal patterns of rhythmic stress and
their pitch characteristics. Although some researchers have noted relatively high onsets and steeper
overall slopes as features of pitch in the imperative modality, there is no overall specific imperative
pattern (Di Cristo, 1998). Only a few imperatives were included in the training set of the current study.
Experiment 1 was guided by the following objectives and hypotheses:
1. Evaluate the use in FL prosody training of computerized feedback in the form of visual pitch contour
displays in real time through a pretest-posttest experimental design and 3 weeks of training. Findings
from a previous study, on a more limited basis, had demonstrated that AV input was significantly
better than A-only (de Bot, 1983). I hypothesized that visual pitch displays would serve to enhance
input and draw learners' attention to the prosodic organization of the language. The decision to use 3
weeks for training in the present experiment was based on previous successful segmental-level
training studies for ESL learners (e.g., Hardison, 2003; Lively, Logan, & Pisoni, 1993) and the
hypothesis that more exemplars and practice, especially in the absence of explicit instruction, would
increase the potential for generalization. Periods longer than 3 weeks were problematic for
participants' schedules.
2. Limit the role of NS pitch contour displays to the role of feedback for comparison with learners'
attempts. This is in contrast to the use of NS data exclusively as models for imitation (de Bot, 1983).
While a direct comparison of these two approaches was not made in the present study, I hypothesized
that having learners produce a target sentence before the NS version was presented would provide
them with more confidence in their ability to produce FL speech and greater potential for
generalization to unscripted speech after the experiment was over.
3. Determine whether improvement following training with feedback on prosody only would generalize
(a) to higher ratings of segmental accuracy in the posttest and (b) to the prosodic and segmental
features of novel sentences in a generalization task. Two limitations of training in second- or foreign-
Debra M. Hardison Generalization of Computer-Assisted Prosody Training
Language Learning & Technology 39
language speech have usually been generalization and retention. This was also the rationale behind
the longer period of training compared to previous studies. Although retention could not be evaluated
for this experiment, a test of generalization involving novel sentences was conducted following the
posttest.
4. Compare NS ratings of learners' prosody in filtered versions (in which segmental information is
rendered unintelligible while prosody is preserved) and unfiltered versions to investigate the rating
procedure. I hypothesized that NSs might not be able to avoid being influenced by segmental quality
even when asked to focus their attention only on prosody.
5. Compile experimenter observations and learner comments during training on the use of technology in
FL speech learning. I was particularly interested in how interpretable the displays were for the
learners (Chun, 1998), how well such displays functioned to draw learners' attention to the prosodic
features of French, and how this changed over time.
6. Gather information from anonymous questionnaires completed by the learners on their perceptions of
the effectiveness of such training. As researchers and teachers evaluate computer-assisted learning, it
is important to consider the interaction between the learner and the technology (Pennington & Esling,
1996).
It is also important to note that this study's goal was not to compare different types of training, an issue to
which I will return in the General Discussion. The objectives, as stated above, centered around the
generalizability of prosody-focused training, the possible influence of segmental quality on ratings of
prosody, the preservation of salient pitch contours in memory, the sequence of elements that captured
learners' attention, and learners' views on computer-assisted training.
EXPERIMENT 1
Experimental Design
Experiment 1 had quantitative and qualitative components. A pretest-posttest design was used to measure
the effects of 3 weeks of training (13 sessions of about 40 minutes each) in French prosody using
computerized visual displays of pitch contours as feedback. Following the posttest, participants were
asked to produce a set of new sentences to test generalization of training. They were unaware that their
productions would also be rated for segmental accuracy as well as for prosody. They were also not
informed about Experiment 2 so as not to promote rehearsal or any exceptional attention to the training
stimuli. In addition, I kept a record of comments learners made throughout the training period on the
aspects of French that had captured their attention. Following the posttest, participants were asked to
complete anonymous questionnaires on the value of the training.
Method
Participants. A total of 16 native speakers of General American English volunteered to participate in this
study. Data collection required three training periods. All participants were female undergraduate students
at a large American university enrolled in the first semester of the second year of French study. Level
placement was determined by testing. None were language majors and none had studied or lived abroad at
that point. Through preliminary interviews with me (a former college French teacher), I concluded that
the participants were representative of the second year college level of proficiency (i.e., high beginner-
low intermediate). Classroom instruction was their sole source of input, and instructors had native or
near-native proficiency in French. The coordinator of first and second year French study indicated that
little class time was generally available for pronunciation practice. All participants were motivated to
improve their production of French. Some expressed an interest in studying abroad while others wanted to
travel. There was also a control group of 10 students with similar backgrounds. Although equally
interested in participating, they could work only the pretest and posttest sessions into their schedules and
Debra M. Hardison Generalization of Computer-Assisted Prosody Training
Language Learning & Technology 40
could not attend daily training.4 Those in the experimental group were paid $15.00 for their participation,
and all participants were offered the opportunity to obtain feedback on testing performance when data
analysis was completed.
Materials. Prosody Training. Selection of sentences for testing and training followed these guidelines: a)
familiar vocabulary (determined by examining instructional materials for the first and second years of
study and consultation with the supervisor of these courses), b) functional value to college students, c)
several exemplars within semantic domains such as food and wine, student life, travel, etc., d) sustained
phonation to provide the best possible continuous display of pitch contour, e) relatively short to facilitate
production from short-term memory rather than reading, f) structural variety (e.g., declaratives and
interrogatives of different types as outlined earlier), g) a range of sounds including those that are often
difficult for AE speakers such as nasal vowels and /{/, as well as liaison5 contexts (see Appendix for a
representative sample of testing and training sentences).
There were 20 pretest/posttest sentences and 20 novel sentences for the test of generalization. For
feedback purposes, the training sentences were recorded by NSs of General French direct to computer
hard disk using Kay Elemetrics Computerized Speech Lab (CSL) with a Shure unidirectional microphone
and JBL studio speaker. Each of three female NSs recorded a different set of 30 sentences for a total of 90
used in training. Each NS was instructed to look at a sentence printed on a card, look up, and then
produce it at a conversational rate of speech into the microphone. Sentences were played back to check
intelligibility and naturalness of expression. Some of the testing sentences were also recorded by NSs and
stored on hard disk for later comparison purposes.
Questionnaire. Participants were asked to complete an anonymous questionnaire consisting of the
following 5 open-ended questions: 1) What were the most difficult elements of French pronunciation for
you before this program? 2) What do you feel you focused your attention on during the 3 weeks of
practice? 3) What elements of the speech of native French speakers did you notice after this program that
you had not noticed before? 4) What have you noticed about your own pronunciation in French as a result
of this program? 5) What do you feel you've accomplished in terms of your pronunciation in French?
Procedure. Prosody Training. Participants were tested and trained individually. For the pretest, posttest,
and test of generalization, they were shown sentences printed on a card. They were allowed to practice the
sentence aloud before recording (primarily to deal with any anxiety especially during the pretest). After
looking at each sentence, they were instructed to look up and produce the sentence at a conversational rate
into the microphone. The sentences were stored as separate files on hard disk. During testing, there was
no visual or auditory feedback. Participants could not see the monitor screen. Following the posttest,
participants were given a test of generalization involving 20 novel sentences with no feedback.
For the training sessions, participants were shown each sentence printed on a card. As with testing, they
were then instructed to look away from the card, pause and produce the sentence into the microphone to
avoid 'read' speech. Each training session focused on one set of 30 sentences. The pitch contour of a
learner's utterance was displayed in real time in View Screen B on the bottom of the monitor screen and
played out through the speaker. The utterance was then replayed and redrawn. In View Screen A on the
top of the screen, the NS's version was displayed providing auditory and visual feedback. It was then
overlaid on the learner's in a contrasting color in View Screen B. The screens were then cleared and the
sentence was practiced again.
Questionnaire. At the conclusion of the study, participants were given the questionnaire to complete
anonymously and return to me through campus mail or to the department office.
Debra M. Hardison Generalization of Computer-Assisted Prosody Training
Language Learning & Technology 41
Results and Discussion
Prosody Training. Participants' recorded productions were evaluated on a 7-point scale by a total of three
NSs of French. Rating sessions were done individually. Each learner's pretest, posttest, and generalization
sentences were randomized. Raters were not told which productions had preceded or followed training.
The productions were blocked by learner for presentation to raters in filtered and then unfiltered versions.
These two versions were used in order to determine whether raters' judgments of prosody were being
influenced by segmental quality (either in a positive or negative direction). In addition, in the filtered
version, some NS samples were included to ensure that raters were able to rate native-like prosody
appropriately as none had had any experience listening to filtered speech. These samples received ratings
of 7 ("definitely native-like").
The digital filter (low pass, Blackman, 100th order) was created using the CSL to render the segmental
content of speech unintelligible, leaving only the prosodic information. The cutoff was set at 300 Hz
appropriate for adult female voices. To determine this value, a spectrogram with overlay pitch extraction
was generated for each speech sample to establish the point above which there were few, if any, F0
components. Each filtered sample was saved as a file on hard disk and then evaluated by NSs of French to
ensure that words could not be identified.6
For each version, raters were given the sentence on a response sheet along with a 7-point scale ranging
from "1" (definitely not native) to "7" (definitely native-like) for the prosody rating. In the unfiltered
version, there were two scales for each sentence: one for a rating of prosody and one for segmental
accuracy. Providing the sentence was necessary for the rating of filtered speech so this was also done for
the unfiltered samples. All speech samples were played directly from the computer through the studio
speaker for ratings. Ratings for the filtered ones were obtained first. To familiarize raters with filtered
speech, they were presented with filtered versions of several sentences I had recorded earlier that were not
part of the study.
Mean ratings were calculated separately for filtered and unfiltered prosody and for segmental accuracy
(present only in unfiltered speech). Interrater reliability was assessed using a method suggested by Hatch
and Lazaraton (1991) involving the calculation of mean interrater correlations with correction for use with
ordinal data by Fisher Z transformation. A Pearson (r) value of .83 was considered satisfactory reliability
for three raters especially in view of the absence of prespecified criteria for the evaluation of prosody. The
control group did not show any significant improvement. The mean prosody rating for that group declined
from 4.28 in the pretest to 4.18 in the posttest; the mean rating for segmental accuracy was 4.12 in the
pretest and 4.16 in the posttest. This is not surprising given that little attention can be paid in their classes
to features of the spoken language and the students were not engaged in any pronunciation practice
outside of class. As such, statistical analyses were conducted only with data from the experimental
group.7
Results for the experimental group are shown in Figure 1. The first two sets of bars represent the mean
ratings for prosody in the pretest, posttest, and test of generalization. The first of these sets is from filtered
speech and the second from unfiltered. The third set of bars provides data for segmental accuracy in the
three tests (recall that segmental information is present only in unfiltered speech). A two-factor ANOVA
involving Time (pretest, posttest) and Feature (prosody, segments) revealed a significant effect of time
[F(1,30) = 8.76, p < .01] indicating an improvement in both prosody and segmental accuracy as a result of
prosody training. Recall that learners had not been told that segmental accuracy would be assessed. The
Time x Feature interaction was not significant [F(1,30) = .719, n.s.].
Debra M. Hardison Generalization of Computer-Assisted Prosody Training
Language Learning & Technology 42
Figure 1. Effects of prosody training: Mean accuracy ratings for prosody (filtered and unfiltered versions)
and segmental accuracy in pretest, posttest, and test of generalization.
To determine whether improvement in both prosody and segmental accuracy had generalized to novel
sentences, ratings of the unfiltered productions in the test of generalization were compared to those of the
pretest. A two-factor ANOVA involving Test (pretest, test of generalization) and Feature (prosody,
segments) revealed a significant effect of test [F(1,30) = 11.43, p = .001] but no significant interaction
indicating comparable generalization of improvement in both prosody and segmental accuracy to novel
sentences.
As shown in Figure 1, mean ratings in the pretest were significantly lower for filtered prosody (4.11)
compared to unfiltered (4.40) [df = 15, t = 4.14, p < .001]; in unfiltered speech, segmental information
may have had a positive influence on NS assessment. Mean prosody ratings in the posttest for filtered and
unfiltered speech were not significantly different (means of 5.25 and 5.35 respectively) [t = 2.00, n.s.].
Following training, prosody had improved significantly, and ratings of its native-like quality were not
influenced by segmental accuracy as in the pretest.
Note that the three ratings for the generalization sentences shown in Figure 1 were quite similar (5.13
filtered prosody, 5.14 unfiltered prosody, 5.12 segmental accuracy). Segmental accuracy was actually
rated higher for these sentences than for the posttest ones. I would discount a mere practice effect here as
the prosody ratings (the focus of the training) were not similarly influenced. The mean prosody ratings for
filtered and unfiltered generalization sentences, while good and significantly higher than those for the
pretest, were a bit below those for the posttest. The high segmental accuracy could be the influence of the
content of the sentences. Although the testing sentences were made as equivalent as possible in terms of
length, familiarity of vocabulary, type, and number of syntactic structures, no attempt was made to count
up the number of /{/ sounds, nasal vowels, and so forth; as described below, learners did begin to notice
these segmental features in the later stages of training.
To demonstrate the type of visual feedback provided by this training program and the improvement in
pitch contour, Screen A on the top of Figure 2 shows a sample pretest version of the sentence Elles
adorent la couleur rouge (They love the color red) with the learner's posttest utterance in Screen B at the
bottom. One of the raters commented that the pretest was a good example of "English marching rhythm"
with no pitch prominence evident; however, in the posttest, the appropriate contour appears with the
highest pitch level on the second syllable of the verb adorent. In Figure 3, the NS version of this sentence
Debra M. Hardison Generalization of Computer-Assisted Prosody Training
Language Learning & Technology 43
appears alone in Screen A on the top, and on the bottom in Screen B it is overlaid on this learner's posttest
production. On the computer screen, these are shown in different colors.
Figure 2. Comparison of learner's pitch contour in pretest (top, Screen A) and posttest (bottom, Screen B).
Elles adorent la couleur rouge (They love the color red). The text follows the corresponding areas of the
pitch contour.
Debra M. Hardison Generalization of Computer-Assisted Prosody Training
Language Learning & Technology 44
Figure 3. NS pitch contour (top, Screen A). Elles adorent la couleur rouge (They love the color red). The
text follows the corresponding areas of the contour. Learners' posttest production (Screen B) shows NS
pitch overlay (the higher peak on the second syllable of the verb adorent).
Training Observations
Throughout the training program, I wrote down the comments that participants made at various points
with particular emphasis on the features of the language that drew their attention. The information
presented in this section is limited to what they actually verbalized and may not represent all the elements
of speech to which they attended.
Initially, all learners focused their attention on the "flatness" of their pitch contours which sometimes
appeared as just "dots on the screen" (also subject to the sustained phonation quality of the sentence) in
contrast to what many referred to as the "flowing" speech or "peaks and valleys" evident in the contours
produced by the NSs and displayed as feedback during training. Even though learners were not
encouraged to focus on rate of speech, the native-nonnative difference did capture their attention and it
appears on the screen as the duration of pitch tracking. At first, no one commented on liaison, vowels, or
other segmental features.
The visually salient convex shape of some final intonation patterns in French drew the attention of most
learners as did the steep slope of rising intonation to signal questions with declarative structure and no
question word (e.g., Pardon, vous avez l'heure? "Excuse me, do you have the time?"). This training
sentence example is shown in Figure 4 where Screen A is the NS version and Screen B is a learner's
production with NS overlay. These prosodic contours are so close that only the sections showing the rise
Debra M. Hardison Generalization of Computer-Assisted Prosody Training
Language Learning & Technology 45
on l'heure (time) are distinguishable because of the slight difference in the duration of their productions
although the slopes are comparable.
Figure 4. NS pitch contour (top, Screen A). Pardon, vous avez l'heure? (Excuse me, do you have the
time?) The text follows the corresponding areas of the pitch contour. The final steep rise is on the last
word l'heure. Learner's training production (Screen B) shows NS pitch overlay. The final rise on l'heure
"time" is the only clearly distinguishable difference; the leftmost pitch track belongs to the native speaker.
By the middle of Week 2, other elements were then mentioned. For example, one learner noticed she said
[de] instead of [d(«)]8 for the preposition de ("of" in this case although it has various meanings), failed to
make an obligatory liaison, and mispronounced some content words (e.g., maison "house"). Another
learner said she realized she sometimes mispronounced the interrogative pronoun que "what" [k(«)] as
[ke], which she attributed to having studied Spanish.
At the end of week 2 and the beginning of week 3, participants commented on the following features: the
contribution of liaison environments to fluent speech (e.g., eníhiver "in winter" where the nasal
consonant [n] of en is pronounced before the noun hiver which begins with a vowel sound)9; words with
"dropped" sounds (e.g., pauv(re) garçon "poor boy"); barely perceptible words (e.g, Je vais (lui)
téléphoner "I'm going to call him/her"); and the pronunciation of elided forms of articles (e.g., l'université
"the university"), some main content words, and finally individual sounds, especially [{].
In sum, over the course of the 3 weeks of training, there appeared to be a hierarchy of what the learners
noticed (i.e., what they explicitly mentioned), beginning with more global elements such as the pitch
Debra M. Hardison Generalization of Computer-Assisted Prosody Training
Language Learning & Technology 46
contour -- the obvious focus of training and visual feedback -- and moving towards an awareness of more
local elements such as individual sounds.
Questionnaire Responses
As noted earlier, at the conclusion of each training program, participants were given a questionnaire to
complete and return to me anonymously in order to assess their perceived value of this type of speech
technology in foreign language instruction. Of the 16 participants in the experimental group, 13 returned
the questionnaires. The responses shown below are listed according to frequency of occurrence on the
returned questionnaires. Several (here, in italics) emphasize the relationship between prosody and music
or make specific reference to voice characteristics that are often components of voice-training techniques
commonly used in the fields of music and theatre.
1) What were the most difficult elements of French pronunciation for you before this program?
·  avoiding monotone speech, intonation, "r" sound, liaison
2) What do you feel you focused your attention on during the 3 weeks of practice?
·  intonation, pronunciation, speed, liaison
3) What elements of the speech of native French speakers did you notice after this program that you
had not noticed before?
·  rise and fall pattern of intonation, more range of tones, pronunciation of "r, "declining
mountain peaks of pitch, pitch contour at the end of sentences, fluid speech like "humming a
tune"
4) What have you noticed about your own pronunciation in French as a result of this program?
·  intonation, more movement in my speech, comfortable with more words, "r," speed, vowels,
liaison
5) What do you feel you've accomplished in terms of your pronunciation in French?
·  "I try to sing phrases more."
·  "My sentences became more flowing, instead of just dots on the screen."
·  "I really had never thought about the intonation affecting the clarity and fluency of a
language. It is something I keep in mind now as I learn the language."
·  "I feel that a native French speaker will have an easier time understanding my speech as well
as the smoother rhythm of my sentences."
·  "I'm much better at pitch variation and less afraid of going to high pitches."
·  "I noticed that I could use my voice range more and that I could connect certain words for a
more authentic speaking rhythm."
·  "I feel more confident with my pronunciation for sure."
·  "I gained a better understanding of the language as well as developed my tone variation and I
had a lot of fun. Thank you."
EXPERIMENT 2
Experiment 2 explored the relationship between prosody and the lexical content of sentences in long-term
memory. In a training study with learners' attention focused on prosody, the question arises as to whether
the prosodic patterns of the training sentences, each of which was presented and practiced several times
over the training period, had become key components of memory traces so that the prosody itself (i.e.,
Debra M. Hardison Generalization of Computer-Assisted Prosody Training
Language Learning & Technology 47
through the use of filtered speech) could facilitate retrieval of the lexical content of a sentence from
memory. Based on Goldinger's (1997) findings, I hypothesized that the lexical information corresponding
to the prosodic patterns that drew the most learner attention would be the easiest to recall.
Method
Participants. All 16 participants from the experimental group and 10 from the control group in
Experiment 1 completed Experiment 2. Recall that they had not been told of this task in advance.
Materials. From the set of sentences used in training, 20 were selected to represent a range of structural
types and all training talkers. This subset was filtered using the CSL filtering program; however, as there
is not a unique correspondence between the suprasegmental and segmental features of sentences, the
objective for this experiment was to reduce substantially, but not eliminate, the intelligibility of the lexical
content of the sentences so that prosodic information was the principal lexical access cue. NS judgments
were used to determine the appropriate level of reduction.
Procedure. Experiment 2 was conducted following the test of generalization from Experiment 1. The
filtered sentences were played through the studio speaker to the participants who were asked to try to
recall as many of the words of each sentence as they could. Each sentence was played three times. Their
responses were made orally.
Results and Discussion
Results revealed that the training group from Experiment 1 was able to recall the exact lexical content of
an average of 80% of the filtered sentences, and the content words only of an additional 10% of the
sentences. Performance was quite consistent across participants. The recall of sentences J'en ai marre!
(I'm fed up!) and Comme c'est bizarre! (How strange!) by all participants may be attributed to their more
expressive semantic nature and corresponding prosodic contours. Other sentences were also recalled by
all participants such as Pardon, vous avez l'heure? (Excuse me, do you have the time?) and Vraiment?
Vous avez mangé tout ça? (Really? You ate all that?). These were associated with the auditorily and
visually salient pitch rise marking the utterance as a question that learners frequently commented on when
seeing the steep slope of the contour (see Figure 4).
The lexical content of sentences such as Elle a une soeur et deux frères (She has one sister and two
brothers) and Voilà Louise. Elle est française (There's Louise. She's French), both with simple declarative
intonation patterns, was recalled completely by about half of the participants. The others said the prosody
sounded "familiar" but could not recall the words. The lower rate of recall for simple declaratives is
compatible with Goldinger's (1997) findings for generic echoes from multiple-trace activation although
there were some apparent exceptions. For example, the sentence Elle a choisi la jupe rouge (She chose
the red skirt) may have been recalled because most learners had commented on the speaker's ability to
link the final consonant of jupe with the following word rouge.
Therefore, prosodic and lexical information does appear to be stored together in memory traces. The best
recall results were obtained for training sentences that attracted the attention of learners because of
visually and/or auditorily salient prosodic contours (e.g., those showing a substantial pitch range and/or
steep slope), expressive lexical content, and features they had identified as particularly difficult for them
to produce (e.g., the linking between jupe and rouge in the above example). Participants from the control
group of Experiment 1 who had not been exposed to the training sentences at all were unable to identify
any words.
GENERAL DISCUSSION
Results of Experiment 1 revealed significant effects of computer-assisted training in the acquisition of L2
prosody and, importantly, generalization to segmental accuracy and novel sentences.
Debra M. Hardison Generalization of Computer-Assisted Prosody Training
Language Learning & Technology 48
The question might arise as to whether other non computer-based training approaches such as the
traditional teacher-led instruction would be as or more effective, and one might be inclined to attempt to
compare these approaches experimentally. However, I would suggest that such a comparison is inherently
flawed. As there are numerous elements that make up a training approach, all but the specific one under
investigation would need to be the same in both approaches to avoid a confound. Such a degree of control
appears, at best, challenging. Simply using the same materials for the same period of time would not
provide a basis of comparison.
Consider the following elements of the present computer-assisted training program that would need to be
duplicated in an instructor-led approach. Feedback involved 30 sentences spoken by each of three talkers.
We know that talker and stimulus variability contribute significantly to successful L2 speech training
(Lively et al., 1993); therefore, in a non computer-assisted approach, three different instructors would be
needed to provide feedback throughout data collection that, in the present study, required blocks of
several hours set aside each day throughout the week for 3 weeks, and in total, spanned several months.
Moreover, what feedback (also a significant factor in successful training) would be given by the
instructors? Recall that segmental accuracy in this study was not a focus of training for the participants
but part of the investigation of generalization; therefore, an instructor would have to restrict feedback to
prosody only. Several more questions then arise. Could all instructors do exactly the same thing? If not,
another variable enters the picture. In addition, how would feedback be provided by instructors on
prosody only? The computer program provides a visual display in real-time and the opportunity to
overlay the NS version on the learner's -- a salient form of feedback that drew many positive comments
from participants. There is also the issue of the effects of learning styles and preferences. For some
learners, technology holds greater interest, which influences motivation. Some enjoy a greater comfort
level in working with a computer program than in face-to-face interaction where other personality factors
are involved. While not an exhaustive list, the above points serve to emphasize that comparison of
approaches, in general, is highly problematic. Note, however, that these comments are not intended as a
claim that a particular type of training is best for all learners nor that instructor-led approaches are not
beneficial, only that direct comparison is not well-founded.
This study's objective was not to determine whether computer-assisted training or a particular software
program was better than any other approach; the objectives centered on the generalization of computer-
assisted prosody training to segmental improvement and to novel sentences, the learners' allocation of
attentional resources throughout training, and their responses to the use of this type of technology as pitch
contour display is available in various products and web sites. Therefore, my control group was not
designed as a control for training approach but for training itself. Several authors have alluded to the
benefits of computer-assisted training but it had not been tested thoroughly nor investigated for its ability
to generalize -- also a hallmark of successful L2 speech training.
Learners did appear to allocate their attentional resources hierarchically, and the following questionnaire
comments support my observation during training further: "It's hard to get all of the elements together that
are necessary for producing accurate sentences" and "I gained an awareness of all the aspects of learning
to speak a language fluently." As the training program was explicitly designed to deal with prosody, and
the visual feedback best represents intonation, this feature took precedence and the learners' attention
initially; however, as they became more confident with this aspect of their language production, they were
able to notice other elements such as liaison and the production of specific sounds.
In addition, the results of Experiment 2 revealed that prosodic cues facilitated the recall of the lexical
content of sentences to which the learners had been exposed frequently during training. This finding is
compatible with exemplar-based learning models in which all attended perceptual details of events are
stored as traces in memory. Those exemplars whose prosodic and/or lexical content attracted the most
learner attention in the study were the easiest to recall.
Debra M. Hardison Generalization of Computer-Assisted Prosody Training
Language Learning & Technology 49
Taken together, the results of these two experiments demonstrate the effective pedagogical application of
speech technology. This training strengthened the association between the prosodic and lexical
components of sentences through frequent exposure and through practice opportunities involving
sentences of familiar content with informative feedback, and the training also resulted in improved
production at both the segmental and suprasegmental levels. Further experiments involving more learners
at different levels of proficiency and studies of retention would contribute to our understanding of the
potential of this approach. In addition to the quantifiable results, my observations during training and the
learners' responses to a questionnaire indicated an increase in their confidence in using the language and
the raising of their awareness of its various components. One learner commented that, "with practice the
sound patterns are easier to recall and produce." The obvious pedagogical implication of this statement is
consistent with the results of both experiments in this study; that is, frequent input, use of contextualized
vocabulary with applications to daily life, a range of syntactic and prosodic structures, practice
opportunities, and auditory and visual feedback contribute to learning.
APPENDIX
Sample Testing and Training Sentences
Il y a beaucoup de fleurs dans le jardin. "There are many flowers in the garden."
Ils ont lu des romans intéressants. "They read some interesting novels."
Mon amie Marie est très sérieuse. "My friend Mary is very serious."
Ma famille m'a envoyé des cadeaux. "My family sent me some gifts."
Ce sont des chocolats belges. "These are Belgian chocolates."
Caroline préfère le vin rouge. "Caroline prefers red wine."
Elle a une soeur et deux frères. "She has one sister and two brothers."
Est-ce que vous avez voyagé au Canada? "Did you travel to Canada?"
Quel âge a Jean? "How old is John?"
Quels livres avez-vous choisi? "What books did you choose?"
Excusez-moi, pourriez-vous m'aider? "Excuse me, could you help me?"
Jean est malade? C'est dommage. "John is ill? That's too bad."
Marianne va travailler demain? "Marianne is going to work tomorrow?"
Bonne idée! Allons au magasin aujourd'hui. "Good idea! Let's go to the store today."
Vous n'allez pas croire cette histoire! "You're not going to believe this story!"
J'en ai marre! "I'm fed up!"
NOTES
1. This study was supported, in part, by the Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR) at
Michigan State University. I gratefully acknowledge the assistance of Jayne Niemann, coordinator of
elementary and intermediate French courses at MSU, for help in stimulus selection and data collection,
and the native speakers whose voices were recorded and those who served as raters. Portions of this paper
were presented at the American Association for Applied Linguistics Conference in Salt Lake City in April,
2002, and the International Conference on Spoken Language Processing, Special Session on the
Debra M. Hardison Generalization of Computer-Assisted Prosody Training
Language Learning & Technology 50
Integration of Speech Technology and Language Learning, in Denver, 2002. I am grateful to attendees for
their questions and to Martha Pennington for comments on an earlier draft of this paper.
2. Episodic models based on multiple-trace memory theory also incorporate the storage of an abstract or
prototype representation (e.g., a phoneme). See Hardison (2000) for details on the application of this
theory to second-language speech development.
3. Di Cristo (1998) defines the term General French as the variety used by educated people and
professional radio and television speakers characterized by the absence of dialectal marks. He refers to it
as equivalent to General American for American English.
4. I do not consider the assignment of the participants to the control group a challenge to the concept of
random assignment as schedule conflicts were the sole determining factor and this is irrelevant to the
study. It was important to ensure that the control participants were equally motivated as those in the
experimental group given the role of motivation in learning.
5. Liaison refers to the linking between sounds, where a sound is produced at the end of a word when
preceding a certain context (e.g., the final consonant of one word pronounced before another word
beginning with a vowel sound) as in Ellesíadorent lire des romans (They love reading novels) where "s"
at the end of the feminine plural subject pronoun Elles is pronounced /z/ before the vowel sound
beginning the verb adorent. In contrast, this sound is not pronounced in the sentence Elles vont acheter du
fromage (They are going to buy some cheese) where the verb vont (from aller "to go") begins with a
consonant sound.
6. The CSL digital filtering program allows the user to determine various settings. A low pass filter was
used to reduce the level of signal components above the frequency level determined by examination of the
spectrogram with overlay pitch extraction. There are several types of windows; the CSL manual
recommends a Blackman window weighting for this purpose. A filter order can be selected between 3 and
100. The higher the number, the greater the filtering; therefore, to filter as much as possible, a 100th order
was selected. The determination of the cutoff was calculated relative to the Nyquist Frequency (half the
sampling rate, i.e., 12,800/2=6,400). Cutoff = Shoulder frequency (where filtering will begin or 300 in
this case) divided by the Nyquist Frequency (i.e., 300/6,400). Cutoff = .04
7. A reviewer suggested an ANOVA involving Group (experimental, control), Time (pretest, posttest),
and Presentation Type (filtered, unfiltered). This was not done for two reasons: (a) this approach omits the
segmental accuracy data, as filtered speech has no segmental content and (b) the raw data from the control
group do not justify their inclusion in statistical analysis.
8. Parentheses around « indicate its omission in some cases in connected speech.
9. There are two classes of words beginning orthographically with h: h muet and h aspiré. The first group
(e.g., hiver "winter," heure "hour") is subject to liaison and elision producing phrases such as eníhiver (in
winter) as described in the text, and l'heure (the hour) with the elided form of the article. Words in the
second group (h aspiré) also begin with a vowel sound in Modern French but are not subject to liaison or
elision (e.g., le haricot "bean" without elision of the article).
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Debra M. Hardison is assistant professor of second language acquisition at Michigan State University.
Research interests include spoken language processing and computer-assisted second-language speech
training. Publications appear in Language Learning, Applied Psycholinguistics, and various edited
Debra M. Hardison Generalization of Computer-Assisted Prosody Training
Language Learning & Technology 51
collections. She teaches courses on second language acquisition theory and research, advanced studies in
language teaching, and second-language speech.
E-mail: hardiso2@msu.edu
REFERENCES
Anderson-Hsieh, J. (1992). Using electronic visual feedback to teach suprasegmentals. System, 20(1), 51-
62.
Anderson-Hsieh, J. (1994). Interpreting visual feedback on suprasegmentals in computer assisted
pronunciation instruction. CALICO Journal, 11(4), 5-22.
Bertinetto, P.-M. (1989). Reflections on the dichotomy "stress" vs. "syllable-timing." Revue de
Phonétique Appliquée, 91-93, 99-130.
Celce-Murcia, M., Brinton, D. M., & Goodwin, J. M. (1996). Teaching pronunciation: A reference for
teachers of English to speakers of other languages. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Chun, D. M. (1998). Signal analysis software for teaching discourse intonation. Language Learning &
Technology, 2(1), 61-77. Retrieved July 22, 2002, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol2num1/article4/
de Bot, K. (1983). Visual feedback of intonation I: Effectiveness and induced practice behavior.
Language and Speech, 26(4), 331-350.
de Bot, K., & Mailfert, K. (1982). The teaching of intonation: Fundamental research and classroom
applications. TESOL Quarterly, 16, 71-77.
Derwing, T. M., Munro, M. J., & Wiebe, G. (1998). Evidence in favor of a broad framework for
pronunciation instruction. Language Learning, 48(3), 393-410.
Di Cristo, A. (1998). Intonation in French. In D. Hirst & A. Di Cristo (Eds.), Intonation systems: A survey
of twenty languages (pp. 195-218). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Fletcher, J. (1991). Rhythm and final lengthening in French. Journal of Phonetics, 19(2), 193-212.
Fónagy, I. (1979). L'accent français: Un accent probabilitaire. Studia Phonetica 15, 123-233.
Goldinger, S. D. (1997). Words and voices: Perception and production in an episodic lexicon. In K.
Johnson & J. W. Mullennix (Eds.), Talker variability in speech processing (pp. 33-66). San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Hardison, D. M. (2003). Acquisition of second-language speech: Effects of visual cues, context and talker
variability. Applied Psycholinguistics, 24, 495-522.
Hardison, D. M. (2000). The neurocognitive foundation of second-language speech: A proposed scenario
of bimodal development. In B. Swierzbin, F. Morris, M. E. Anderson, C. A. Klee, & E. Tarone (Eds.),
Social and cognitive factors in second language acquisition (pp. 312-325). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla
Press.
Hatch, E., & Lazaraton, A. (1991). The research manual: Design and statistics for applied linguistics.
New York: Newbury House.
Hintzman, D. L. (1986). "Schema abstraction" in a multiple-trace memory model. Psychological Review,
93(4), 411-428.
Hirst, D. J., & Di Cristo, A. (1984). French intonation: A parametric approach. Die Neueren Sprachen
83(5), 554-569.
Debra M. Hardison Generalization of Computer-Assisted Prosody Training
Language Learning & Technology 52
Hirst, D. J., & Di Cristo, A. (1998). A survey of intonation systems. In D. Hirst & A. Di Cristo (Eds.),
Intonation systems: A survey of twenty languages (pp. 1-44). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.
Leather, J. (1990). Perceptual and productive learning of Chinese lexical tone by Dutch and English
speakers. In J. Leather & A. James (Eds.), New Sounds 90 (pp. 72-97). Amsterdam: University of
Amsterdam.
Lively, S. E., Logan, J. S., & Pisoni, D. B. (1993). Training Japanese listeners to identify English /r/ and
/l/. II: The role of phonetic environment and talker variability in learning new perceptual categories.
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 94, 1242-1255.
Molholt, G. (1988). Computer-assisted instruction in pronunciation for Chinese speakers of American
English. TESOL Quarterly, 22(1), 91-111.
Morley, J. (1991). The pronunciation component in teaching English to speakers of other languages.
TESOL Quarterly, 25(3), 481-520.
Munro, M. J. (1995). Nonsegmental factors in foreign accent. Studies in Second Language Acquisition,
17(1), 17-33.
Palmer, C., Jungers, M. K., & Jusczyk, P. W. (2001). Episodic memory for musical prosody. Journal of
Memory and Language, 45, 526-545.
Pennington, M. C., & Ellis, N. C. (2000). Cantonese speakers' memory for English sentences with
prosodic cues. Modern Language Journal, 84(3), 372-389.
Pennington, M. C., & Esling, J. H. (1996). Computer-assisted development of spoken language skills. In
M. C. Pennington (Ed.), The power of CALL (pp. 153-189). Houston, TX: Athelstan.
Pennington, M. C., & Richards, J. C. (1986). Pronunciation revisited. TESOL Quarterly, 20, 207-225.
Vaissière, J. (1974). On French prosody (Quarterly Progress Report No. 114). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Research Laboratory of Electronics.
Weltens B., & de Bot, K. (1984). Visual feedback of intonation II: Feedback delay and quality of
feedback. Language and Speech, 27(1), 79-88.
Wenk, B. J., & Wioland, F. (1982). Is French really syllable-timed? Journal of Phonetics, 10, 193-216.
