Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num2/levy/
May 2004, Volume 8, Number 2
pp. 50-69
Copyright © 2004, ISSN 1094-3501 50
A TASK-CYCLING PEDAGOGY USING STIMULATED REFLECTION
AND AUDIO-CONFERENCING IN FOREIGN LANGUAGE LEARNING1
Mike Levy and Claire Kennedy
Griffith University, Australia
ABSTRACT
The aim of this paper is to describe a task-cycling pedagogy for language learning using a
technique we have called Stimulated Reflection. This pedagogical approach has been developed
in the light of the new technology options available, especially those that facilitate audiovisual
forms of interaction among language learners and teachers. In this instance, the pedagogy is
implemented in the context of introducing students to audio-conferencing (A-C) tools as a
support for their ongoing independent learning. The approach is designed to develop a balance for
learners between attention to fluency and meaning on one hand, and form and accuracy on the
other. The particular focus here is on the learning of Italian as a foreign language, although the
ideas and principles are presented with a view to the teaching and learning of any language.
The article is in three parts. The first considers appropriate theoretical frameworks for the use of
technology-mediated tools in language learning, with a particular emphasis on the focus-on-form
literature and task design (Doughty, 2003; Doughty & Williams, 1998; Skehan, 1998). The
second part sets out the approach we have taken in the Italian project and discusses specifically
the idea of task cycling (Willis, 1996) and Stimulated Reflection. The third part presents extracts
of stimulated reflection episodes that serve to illustrate the new pedagogic approach.
INTRODUCTION
An important guiding principle throughout this project has been the recognition that for long term success
language learners need to develop a balanced approach, one that engages them with multiple
opportunities to attend to both the meanings and the forms of the language they are learning. In Skehan's
(1998) terms, a balance is required between the pedagogical goals of fluency, accuracy, and complexity in
the longer term learning of the grammatical system. By complexity, Skehan means the learner's
willingness to use more challenging and difficult language. Following this line of thought, we aimed to
devise a balanced approach that would address these pedagogical goals by combining the notions of
stimulated reflection and task cycling (Willis, 1996) with the new options that technology-mediated
communication could provide.
In considering the different pedagogical goals in the light of the many interactive technology options now
available, the question arises as to whether particular technologies might suit particular pedagogical goals.
Little research has been done on this so far. However, one study conducted by Sotillo (2000) suggests this
line of thinking may be productive. She investigated discourse functions and syntactic complexity in ESL
learner output obtained via two different modes of CMC: asynchronous and synchronous discussions. She
concluded that "Asynchronous and synchronous CMC have different discourse features which may be
exploited for different pedagogical purposes" (p. 82). Sotillo located quantitative and qualitative
differences between the two kinds of discussions. While students communicating synchronously seemed
to focus on meaning and disregard accuracy, those communicating asynchronously had more time to plan
their answers and monitor spelling and punctuation. However, malformed sentences and inaccuracies in
spelling and punctuation were evident in many of the asynchronous postings.   
Mike Levy and Claire Kennedy A Task-Cycling Pedagogy Using Stimulated Reflection…
Language Learning & Technology 51
Such results need confirmation through further research. The literature on planning, for example, shows
that pre-task planning has the potential to significantly influence the language produced in the task that
follows (Skehan & Foster, 1997, 2001). Skehan and Foster (2001) divide pre-task activities into the
categories of teaching, implicit learning, parallel, modelled or pre-task activities, and consciousness-
raising activities. All these categories of preparatory activity have the potential to make an impact on the
language generated in CMC-based CALL tasks. From the research findings, there is strong agreement
now that complexity and fluency are enhanced by pre-task planning; the results for accuracy are not so
clear. Learners may use planning time to plan how to avoid using structures they are not comfortable
with; in such circumstances high levels of accuracy would still be recorded. Clearly, more work needs to
be done, but the notion that different CMC technologies may be used for different pedagogical purposes
remains significant and has influenced our approach in this project. In synchronous communication,
especially, where there are very real time constraints surrounding all interactions, the likelihood that
learners will rely on communication strategies, and complexity and accuracy will be diminished or
otherwise influenced, is high (Skehan, 1998).
We have also been influenced by Cumming's work in the early 1990s on the need for action and reflection
in learning. In the design of tutorial programs on the computer, Cumming argued that action and
reflection should be entirely separated in the design, and that within the program structure a task level and
a discussion level should be distinguished. In our project the same notion is pursued, but instead of
developing a tutorial style interaction, here the focus is on alternating between action and reflection in a
task cycle, with reflection activity facilitated, or "stimulated," by the use of recordings of the technology-
mediated interactions. Recording the talk along with the corresponding visual material on the shared
computer screen allows for the detailed documentation of interactions across two modes, the visual and
the aural (Doughty, 2003). This is important, firstly as part of our pedagogical procedure, which is the
focus of the discussion in this paper, and secondly, as a practice we are rehearsing and refining for the
research studies that relate to this project.
With these ideas in mind, the paper continues with a detailed presentation of the theoretical background
and principles. It then describes the Italian Project and the processes by which the principles were put into
practice in introducing students to computer-mediated audio-conferencing tools as a way of supporting
their ongoing, independent learning.
THEORETICAL FOUNDATIONS
Focus on Form
The question of how to achieve balanced attention to fluency and form is strongly represented in the
literature on "focus on form" and this corpus of work provides a number of important principles and
guidelines (Burgess & Etherington, 2002; Doughty, 2003; Doughty & Williams, 1998; Ellis, Basturkmen,
& Loewen, 2002; Swain & Lapkin, 2001; Williams, 2001). In this literature, meaning or communication
is always regarded as primary, and that is very much the stance taken here. In the words of Doughty and
Williams, "focus on form entails a prerequisite engagement in meaning before attention to linguistic
features" (p. 3). In other words, linguistic form is treated within the context of the learners performing a
communicative task (Ellis, Basturkmen, & Loewen, p. 419). In addition, when a focus on form does
occur, typically this arises in a way that is incidental or unplanned. Long and Robinson (1998) speak of
"an occasional shift of attention to linguistic code features -- by the teacher and/or one or more students --
triggered by perceived problems with comprehension or production" (p. 23; see also Williams, p. 325).
Thus, we are seeking tasks that are primarily communicative, meaning-focussed activities, with a
provision for an occasional or incidental focus on linguistic form that is initiated by either teacher or
student.
Mike Levy and Claire Kennedy A Task-Cycling Pedagogy Using Stimulated Reflection…
Language Learning & Technology 52
As far as the timing of an occasional focus on form is concerned, Lightbown (1998) elaborates on this
point and says that there is not a single prescriptive approach or technique that can be recommended.
While sometimes it is preferable to integrate a focus on form and meaning concurrently in the same
activity, at other times there is a case for separate self-study of the formal linguistic features at a later
time, although not too much later.
In discussions of focus on form in works such as Doughty and Williams (1998), there is no doubt that the
linguistic form primarily in view is the grammar of the language. In fact Ellis, Basturkmen, and Loewen
(2002) say that the term form is often used only to refer to "grammar" although, like Ellis et al. (2002), in
this article the term is used more generally to include any aspect of linguistic form, including
phonological, lexical, or grammatical forms. In this regard, DeKeyser (1998, p. 43) notes that a focus on
form "may not be necessary" for vocabulary, and "may not be sufficient" for pronunciation, although
really these domains of language learning have not been sufficiently researched to make any substantive
claims either way, that is either for or against the effectiveness of a focus on form in relation to
vocabulary or pronunciation.
Skehan's work on the need for balanced attention to a focus on form and meaning also stresses the
significance of the brain's limited capacity to process language in real time. For the purposes of this
discussion this constraint relates to the difficulty for learners in simultaneously attending to form and
meaning when the primary focus in a task or activity is communication. Greater time pressure will reduce
attention to form and accuracy in real time communication activities (Skehan, 1998). This is very relevant
for CALL because synchronous communication activities, as in chat and audio-conferencing sessions,
clearly allow less time for learners to formulate their utterances than in asynchronous communication
activities, as in e-mail interactions, for example (see Levy, in press). The focus-on-form literature helps us
to think about ways of guiding learners so that they may be encouraged to attend to both meaning and
form in a principled way. From a broader, educational computing perspective, another related concept can
assist as well.
The Task Level and Discussion Level
Cumming (1993) provides a complementary perspective on learning which emphasizes a distinction
between action and reflection. For learning interactions at the computer, he proposes a distinction
between a task level (TL) and a higher order discussion level (DL). The DL is intended to provide
detailed information about the TL, it requires the learner to "engage in metalevel activities" (p. 230) and
to reflect, evaluate, plan, and draw conclusions on actions performed at the TL.
Cumming (1993) goes on to suggest that the TL and DL should be separated or, "decoupled," that is kept
separate in two associated but distinct modules. A simple example of this idea in practice is the typical
word processor. When composing a new document, the user is operating at the TL with the focus very
much on the task at hand, that is formulating the words and the sentences to convey meaning. However, at
a certain point, the user will step back and consider what has been written; this may be signalled by a
printout of a draft version of the document, or it may also be flagged by the use of one or more of the
tools provided by the program that assist checking or reflection, such as the spell checker, thesaurus or
grammar checker.
Cumming's basic idea was put into practice in the conversational English multimedia CD project
described in Levy (1999). The decision to make a distinction between the TL and the DL was one of the
most significant design decisions made in the program, and the separation between the two levels was
maintained throughout. At the DL, learners have a learning journal available to them in the form of a
notebook. Using the notebook, they can record observations about the tasks they have completed at the
TL and then relate this work to out-of-class experience. Most importantly, as Schmidt (1990) points out,
material in the notebook at the discussion level may be used as evidence of noticing, and therefore
provides a valuable data source upon which to consider the effectiveness of the approach.
Mike Levy and Claire Kennedy A Task-Cycling Pedagogy Using Stimulated Reflection…
Language Learning & Technology 53
Language-Learning Tasks
Much has been written about the nature of language-learning tasks and there is now a very extensive
literature (Candlin & Murphy, 1986; Ellis, 1994; Littlewood, 2003; Nunan, 1989; Ribé & Vidal, 1993;
Salaberry, 2000; Skehan, 1998). There is not sufficient space here to provide an in-depth analysis, but it is
important to note that the ways in which language-learning tasks are defined have changed significantly
over the last 20 years. Ribé and Vidal's description, recently referenced by Littlewood, is still useful in
this respect. They speak of first, second, and third generation tasks. First generation tasks aim solely at
developing the students' communicative ability in a specific area of language. Second generation tasks
aim to develop not only communication skills, but also general cognitive strategies, such as analysing
what information is needed in order to complete the task, and include the idea of using language for a
"real" piece of work that has value outside the classroom. Third generation tasks extend this idea even
further. They not only aim to activate communication and cognitive strategies, but also to enrich the
students' personal experience more broadly by enhancing awareness, motivation, creativity, and
interpersonal skills. Third generation tasks have "a high degree of task authenticity, globality and
integration of language and contents and involvement of all the aspects of the individual's personality"
(Ribé & Vidal, p. 3). Goodfellow, Manning, and Lamy (1999) reinforce the nature of the change that has
taken place when they say, "Communicativeness itself is now less of an all-inclusive goal for language
pedagogy than it once was. In Little's (1997) view, the 'dominant form' of the communicative approach ...
fails to develop any kind of language awareness and does not foster learner autonomy" (p. 269). We
therefore have reached a point where we recognize that learners need reflective activities to develop
language awareness, as well as productive activities, in order to become effective and autonomous
learners.
These ideas provide a general background on the nature of the language-learning task, but a more specific
framework is needed to facilitate a design and a process for implementation. Here it is helpful to return to
Skehan's (1998) notion of balance. He argues that the learners' attention can be channelled toward
meaning or form and that an appropriate balance is required between the two pedagogical goals. He goes
on to suggest that we need "to implement sequences of tasks so that balanced development occurs as tasks
which concentrate on different objectives follow one another in a planned manner" (p. 135). He
emphasizes the value of cycles of task-based activity and opportunities for learners to "engage in cycles
of analysis and synthesis" (p. 91). This is the sense in which we draw on Skehan's work. The overall
balance required may then be achieved through effective task design and sequencing, and the careful
selection of communication technologies that fit the pedagogical goals. We require tasks and technologies
that alternately lead to focussing the learners' attention on communication and fluency or on accuracy and
form. But it is also important to recognize that Skehan employs the label "cycle" in other ways, too, as in
cycles of "accountability," cycles of "evaluation," and "monitoring" cycles where learners carefully reflect
upon what they have learnt through the task they have completed and thus make plans for future emphasis
and action. In sum, a cyclic approach permeates the kind of thinking about tasks and task sequencing that
Skehan espouses. Although these ideas are not discussed in this paper, they are very much part of our
planning for future iterations of the Italian Project.
Task Cycles and CALL
There is already considerable evidence that task cycles are being employed in CALL, using different
technologies for different pedagogical purposes, although a general framework has not been formulated as
yet. With one exception, the focus in the CMC-based CALL literature so far has been on developing post-
task rather than pre-task activities. The one interesting exception is Hewer, Kötter, Rodine, and Shield
(1999) who utilize email to allow practice before an A-C session, as a form of rehearsal. Otherwise, most
examples that could be located in CALL refer to post-task activities designed especially to encourage a
focus on form or accuracy.
Mike Levy and Claire Kennedy A Task-Cycling Pedagogy Using Stimulated Reflection…
Language Learning & Technology 54
One of the advantages of synchronous CALL interactions such as chat or MOO sessions is that language
interactions can easily be recorded in the form of logs. Unlike the chat session itself, which is transient
and dynamic, the log provides a stable reference for discussion later. Paralleling Skehan's (1998) and
Willis's (1996) suggestions, these logs may be used post-chat for discussion and analysis, by the student
alone, through pair work, or through teacher-student discussions. The CALL literature provides a number
of examples of task cycles which use the log for post-task analysis to facilitate a focus on form or
accuracy (e.g., von der Emde, Schneider, & Kötter, 2001; Toyoda & Harrison, 2002).
Post-chat logs can potentially be valuable for language learning, though they do have important
limitations. For example, in logs of synchronous CMC, Negretti (1999) noted that multiple parallel
sequences with overlaps and disjunctions were common and that the adjacency pairs typical in phone
conversations and face-to-face conversations were infrequent. Post-chat log transcripts can appear
haphazard and illogical to students as they try to follow the turns in overlapping conversations. Clearly,
care has to be taken in any post-chat analysis to avoid confusion. Here the teacher's role is very important;
for instance the teacher might highlight single sentences or limited sequences from the log for the
student's attention, or work one-to-one with the student. Multiple parallel sequences can often be avoided
if learners create their own private space or room for their conversation to take place.
THE ITALIAN PROJECT: INTRODUCING AUDIO-CONFERENCING THROUGH A TASK-
CYCLING APPROACH
Overview
A task-cycling approach using computer-mediated audio-conferencing (A-C) tools was recently
introduced to Italian and Spanish students at Griffith University. The overriding goal was to provide the
means for students to practise speaking in the target language outside scheduled class time and, most
importantly, to develop their confidence to continue independently, as part of their ongoing learning after
completion of formal studies. This paper concerns the experience of the Italian group, who were the first
cohort involved.
We felt it important that the students should perceive A-C conversations as a means to an end rather than
purely as a vehicle for decontextualized speaking practice. So we chose to engage them in a project, to
complete over a period of time, in which highly interactive conversations would be essential. The project
eventually defined was the preparation of material for a series of Italian Web pages on an agreed topic.
This was to involve the students in locating, discussing, and selecting authentic material and then
preparing a draft of the text, editing it, and polishing it for publication on the Web.
We refer to the project that the students carried out, rather than the task, in order to convey the idea of a
complex, multi-faceted activity carried out over a few months and comprising various phases leading to a
coherent, finished product. Although a task can potentially be viewed in this way, too (for discussion see
Bygate, Skehan, & Swain, 2001), we have applied a more restrictive interpretation of the term task and
clearly distinguished it from project work (Fried-Booth, 1986; Ribé & Vidal, 1993). Here task is used to
refer to shorter term activities carried out at a single sitting, such that the task is circumscribed by the
audio-conferencing session itself. Within a task, the focus is on communication, as the student works with
an interlocutor toward the goal of collecting and preparing information for the project. The attention is on
meaning rather than form, or at the task level rather than the discussion level, using Cumming's
terminology.
Within the students' projects, the concept of task cycle was implemented in the form of alternation
between A-C conversations, in which the learners' focus is on fluency, negotiation, and getting the
message across, and guided reflection activities on those conversations. Periodically, after an audio-
conferencing session had been completed and recorded, a "Stimulated Reflection" (SR) session followed,
Mike Levy and Claire Kennedy A Task-Cycling Pedagogy Using Stimulated Reflection…
Language Learning & Technology 55
in which the teacher and student discussed the recording, examining various linguistic and non-linguistic
elements of the interaction that either chose to raise. These reflection activities provided the learners with
the opportunity to focus on accuracy and complexity of their language, and on their strategies for
understanding and conveying meaning and maintaining appropriate social behaviour in a conversation.
The following sections outline the various preparatory steps that were taken: choosing NetMeeting as the
A-C tool; preparing the technology platform to allow for recording of A-C sessions; selecting the students
for a trial of the approach; and defining their projects and planning the phases of their work. This
description is followed by a section presenting the way SR sessions were conducted.
The Choice of NetMeeting
NetMeeting features real-time audio and video, text-based chat, document sharing, and whiteboard
graphics exchange. It is also widely available and free of charge to Windows users. We concur with
Sotillo's rationale (2002) in choosing NetMeeting for language-learning purposes in that such
conferencing software provides for shared practices that enhance understandings across the community of
learners (Sotillo, 2002). Furthermore, NetMeeting has particular features that make it an attractive option.
Its capacity for desktop sharing, so that partners at a distance may look at the same content on their
computer screens while passing control to and fro between them, was seen as a distinct advantage because
such features help create a shared context around which talk can occur (Mohan, 1992). This means, for
instance, that in a NetMeeting session two people can browse through Web sites together and see the same
on-screen material as they talk about it. Or they can jointly create or modify documents using a word-
processor, with control of the application -- through both mouse and keyboard -- passing from one to the
other as desired. In fact, without this capability, this project would simply not have been possible.
Preparation of Special-Purpose Workstations
To provide a prompt for later, stimulated reflection, we needed to be able to record selected A-C sessions.
This meant recording not only the voices at either end of a connection but also the dynamic screen
content, in order to track what the speakers were seeing on the screen and referring to as they spoke, and
to capture the way the desktop-sharing and application-sharing features were used. We therefore decided
to set up two workstations with recording facilities, which could be used by the participants when
necessary. On all other occasions they were to be free to use any computer they chose.
A hardware-based approach was taken in the recording of the A-C sessions, involving video capture
cards, sound mixer, and video-recorder. The setup is illustrated in the Appendix. Recording to videotape
was convenient as it allowed easy replay for students and staff at home or university. Operation was very
simple: Users just had to remember to press the record button on the video recorder at the start of their
session. The date and time code was enabled on the computer screen to ensure it appeared on all
recordings, for ease of identifying and locating specific segments during later SR sessions.
Selection of Students
We invited four students to participate in a trial of our approach. These students were chosen from among
those who had just completed all our language courses, in line with our interest in preparing students for
managing their own learning after graduation. We made a deliberate choice to involve students at the
higher end of the spectrum in terms of proficiency and motivation, as we anticipated the experience
would be quite demanding in time and energy, and there might be delays while we resolved technical
issues. The four students selected had all achieved grades of Distinction or High Distinction in their
Italian subjects.2 They hoped to visit Italy within the next couple of years and were keen to find
appropriate ways to keep working on their Italian. All were women, aged between 19 and 23; one was a
native speaker of Spanish and the other three of English. The reasons for choosing advanced and highly
motivated students at this early stage were purely practical. We would not envisage a different
Mike Levy and Claire Kennedy A Task-Cycling Pedagogy Using Stimulated Reflection…
Language Learning & Technology 56
pedagogical procedure for students at lower proficiency levels, although the content would need to be
suitable for less advanced students and the project carefully circumscribed so that it was manageable.
Definition of the Students' Project
The project was defined through negotiation between the students and the teachers. We initially proposed
a number of projects in broad terms, which we saw as consistent with the "third generation" approach to
task design referred to earlier. We then invited the participants to choose a project and tailor it to their
own interests. In devising types of projects we drew up the following criteria, drawing on the ideas of
Fried-Booth (1986) and Ribé and Vidal (1993) on project work in general, and the work of Debski (2000)
in relation to project-oriented CALL in particular:
• the project should motivate and engage the participants in collaborative work;
• the project should be authentic and involve problem-solving of the kind required in the wider
world outside the classroom;
• the project should entail practical outcomes that are useful and of interest to the participants
themselves and other students;
• the outcomes should also be of interest to a wider audience and reach beyond the lifetime of the
project;
• the definition of the project and its outcomes should be allowed to change and develop over time,
in accordance with the participants' interests, needs, and abilities;
• the project should encourage the development of learner autonomy, and be managed and
controlled primarily by the participants, with the teachers available to assist on request.
Two extra criteria related to the technology were also invoked. Firstly, the use of A-C was considered
central to the carrying out of the project. We wanted the projects to be such that conversations with
speakers in Italy would make a difference to the quality of the outcomes and the efficiency of the
students' work. Secondly, the project would entail the creation of a polished written product -- in this case
a series of Web pages -- as well as practice in listening and speaking. This would provide the opportunity
for the students to use application sharing to jointly edit drafts of their text(s) with a native-speaker
interlocutor. The engagement of writing skills implied the added benefit that the students would have the
opportunity to "focus on form" in various stages of work on the project itself, and not only in the
reflection activities.
The following project options were suggested: preparing a cine-club programme; planning a trip to Italy
for study or research purposes; setting up an on-line pen-pals register; or producing material for our
Italian Studies Web site. All four participants liked the last option and together they came up with a
specific proposal for the whole group: to create pages that would be useful to young Australians --
students or otherwise -- visiting Italy and living in an Italian city for a certain period of time. They chose
to focus on Bologna and Perugia, two cities they were particularly interested to visit and known to be
attractive destinations for Griffith students going to Italy to study. The Web pages were to include
material collected from Italian students at the universities in the two cities, people working in
administration there and Australians who had lived and studied in Italy. In addition to written text and
links to useful sites there were to be photographs and perhaps audio or video files contributed by the
interlocutors in Italy. The group formed two pairs and agreed on a division of labour for the project.
Planning the Phases of Work on the Students' Project
The participants discussed with us their project aims, plans for carrying them out and the ways they would
use A-C. We stressed that audio-conferencing should not be their only means of communication. They
would also meet with each other and their teachers face to face and use the telephone and e-mail as
necessary to contact each other. They were to call on their teachers freely, at any stage in their work, for
information, help in organizing their work, or feedback on what they had done. With all this in mind the
Mike Levy and Claire Kennedy A Task-Cycling Pedagogy Using Stimulated Reflection…
Language Learning & Technology 57
students drew up a plan for their work on the project which would culminate by them giving a public
presentation of their final product.
Onto the students' plan, which was concerned with achieving the aims of their project, we grafted a
second plan, related to our concerns for technical training and establishing task cycles. First, we
established a sequence for types of A-C sessions to allow the students to gain experience in a protected
environment with more robust communication technology links before dealing with the outside world.
Second, we set out a plan for task cycling in their work on the project, or for interleaving SR activities
with the A-C sessions.
They were to converse initially just with a teacher; then with a fellow participant; then with a native-
speaker stranger but locally, through the university network; and finally with a native-speaker stranger in
Italy or anywhere outside the university. This gradual approach was adopted with a view to reducing
stress and maintaining confidence as students familiarised themselves with the new technologies
involved. The earliest sessions, in which the students talked just with teachers, were focused on gaining
familiarity with the workstations and with NetMeeting operations, including making and accepting a call;
speaking; using the text-chat window for written messages and the whiteboard for drawing; sharing the
desktop and control of applications. However, this was not just a technical apprenticeship. The
participants were also developing confidence in talking across this particular medium, by practising first
on us and each other, before tackling conversations with strangers and dealing with time-zone differences,
firewalls, slow connections, and so on. Discussion of these activities with examples will be the focus in
the remainder of this paper.
Conducting Stimulated Reflection (SR) Sessions
The plan for an SR session was to allow a student to reflect on an A-C conversation, through interaction
and collaboration with a teacher, and in reference to a video recording of the voices and the computer
screen contents. It was usually held soon after the A-C session, so that the student's memory of the
conversation was fairly fresh, but with enough time in between for the teacher to preview the video and
prepare some notes and questions. During the SR session the student and teacher watched the video
recording together, stopping it at any point when either wished to make observations or ask questions.
The discussion in an SR session concerned both the language of the conversation and the process that
generated it, or, in other words, both "reflection on product" and "recall of process." In devising our
approach to Stimulated Reflection we drew on the technique of Stimulated Recall as discussed by Gass &
Mackey (2000), especially for the recall of process dimension of our sessions. On one hand, a session
provided an opportunity for the student to listen to the conversation and notice her own problems or
interesting language elements used by the interlocutor. The teacher's role was to help her both in this
noticing work, by bringing points to her attention or asking questions, and then in working out how to
improve her language, by providing clarifications, explanations, and/or confirmation. All components of
language could be addressed, from pronunciation and intonation to lexical and grammatical accuracy and
complexity to choice and rendition of register. On the other hand, the discussion served to revive the
student's memories of the process of the conversation, her affective responses and the strategies she had
used. These included ways of getting around language problems, getting her meaning across, clearing up
misunderstandings and maintaining an appropriate level of social interaction. The teacher's role was to
help raise the student's consciousness of her personal communication strategies and language learning
strategies and of how to most effectively employ them in the future.
The choice of language -- English or Italian -- for conducting each SR session was made by the student
(although this may be one of the situations in which students are likely to speak in Italian because they
assume we prefer them to do so). One student used Italian almost exclusively, only breaking into English
for odd words or questions when she felt it strictly necessary. Another spoke in English with the teacher
Mike Levy and Claire Kennedy A Task-Cycling Pedagogy Using Stimulated Reflection…
Language Learning & Technology 58
who was a native speaker of English but in Italian with the others. The other two appeared intent on using
Italian as much as possible, resorting to English when they felt the need.
EXAMPLES OF FOCUS ON FORM IN THE STIMULATED REFLECTION SESSIONS
In this section we present some extracts from the students' SR sessions and, where useful for reference,
the corresponding A-C excerpts. These examples illustrate the key principles underlying the approach:
• the primacy of communication during the task itself (the A-C session);
• the opportunity to focus on linguistic form embedded within a context of meaning-centred
interaction;
• the provision for two different timings of focus of form: spontaneous or "on the fly" reflection,
happening during an A-C session (at the task or action level), and scheduled reflection afterwards
(at the discussion or reflection level); and
• the aim of enhancing the scheduled reflection activities through the "stimulation" provided by the
videorecording.
We have chosen examples to illustrate two important characteristics of the types of focus-on-form activity
that can result in this environment. The first is the range of language aspects that the students can choose
to deal with, encompassing pronunciation, lexis, morphology, and syntax. The second characteristic is the
"open door" nature of the activity, in the sense that the students choose the forms or aspects to reflect
upon at any particular moment spontaneously; usually the points raised were not predicted by the teacher.
The four examples presented here are taken from the initial phase, when the A-C sessions were largely for
the purposes of technical training and practice in speaking and listening via this medium. In this phase,
each student was involved in at least three SR sessions, with three different teachers. At the time, the
students' work on their project was concerned with general planning: seeking information from the Web,
deciding what sort of people they would subsequently contact in Italy for information, and preparing the
types of questions they would put to them.
In the extracts shown, the speakers are identified as follows: T for a teacher, S for a student and P for a
partner (usually fellow student). The notation used is adapted from the transcription conventions set out
by Jefferson (1984).3 Explanatory notes are coloured blue and placed between curly brackets.
Example 1. Pronunciation: "dischetto" (diskette)
The first example (see Figure 1) shows a student spontaneously recognising and responding to an error in
pronunciation, when given the opportunity to notice it in an SR session. In the A-C session earlier, she
and her partner in the project had been talking about a file containing the questionnaire they were
preparing for their future Italian interlocutors. In lines 3 and 4 of the A-C extract, they had each used the
word dischetto (diskette), which the student concerned mispronounced. The sound she doubled was the
incorrect one, but her partner had subsequently pronounced it correctly. This situation is made clear in the
extract itself, so the omission of the IPA notation will not cause a problem. During the SR session the
student stopped the video tape on hearing those lines, without any prompting from the teacher, and
pointed out the difference, after which they discussed what was wrong with the pronunciation. While she
presented this as an example of a type of error she realized she was prone to -- having difficulties with
double consonants in Italian, as many native speakers of English and Spanish do -- it was clear that she
recognized this particular case only at the time of the SR session, not during the A-C conversation itself.
Mike Levy and Claire Kennedy A Task-Cycling Pedagogy Using Stimulated Reflection…
Language Learning & Technology 59
Audio-Conferencing Segment 1
S = student, P = partner
1. S: C'è un piccolo problema S: There's a small problem
2. P: Sì? P: Yes?
3. S: Non riesco a vedere il documento con i +
con l'email però ho + in un dischetto ho +
quel + le domande, quel questionario che
avevamo fatto prima
S: I can't see the document with the + with the
e-mail but I have + in a diskette I have + the
questions, that questionnaire that we did
before
4. P: Sì, se non c'hai + OK ce l'hai sul
dischetto?
P: Yes, if you haven't got + OK Have you got it
on the diskette?
5. S: Sì adesso sto vedendo se S: Yes now I'm looking to see if
Stimulated Reflection Segment 1
T = teacher, S = student, P = partner referred to
1. S: Si vede che io "dischetto" l'ho
pronunciato male, no? La prima volta
che ho detto "dischetto" ho fatto doppia
+ sound
S: You can see that I pronounced "dischetto"
badly, didn't I? The first time I said
"dischetto" I made a double + sound
2. T: Hai fatto la C doppia? T: You doubled the C sound?
3. S: Sì, invece della T. Oppure ho fatto più +
ehm + C'è + Il suono della C l'ho fatto
più forte da quello che doveva essere
S: Yes, instead of the T. Or I made more + I
made the C sound stronger than it should
have been
4. T: Come se avessi raddoppiato la C? [E la
T?
T: As if you were doubling the C? [What about
the T?
5. S: [Sì, invece della T S: [Yes, instead of the T
6. T: Quindi hai fatto "disccheto"? T: So you pronounced it "disccheto"?
7. S: "Disccheto" invece di "dischetto." Si
vede, perché dopo quando lo, quando P
lo dice + Che comunque P, è una delle
strategie che usa P, per mm + Perché io,
due cose che faccio sempre, degli errori,
sono ehm quando pronuncio + male una
parola che ha doppia, una consonante
doppia, oppure quando scrivo che c'è
qualche problema di + spelling? Come si
dice in italiano?
S: "Disccheto" instead of "dischetto." You can
tell, because later, when P says it + Anyway,
it's one of the strategies that P uses to +
Because two things I'm always doing, two
mistakes, are when I mispronounce a word
with a double consonant and when I write it
and make spelling errors. How do you say
spelling in Italian?
8. T: "Di ortografia" T: "Di ortografia"
Figure 1. Extracts from A-C and SR sessions for example 1
Example 2. Lexis: "cliccando" and "scrivendo" (clicking and typing)
The second example (see Figure 2) illustrates the value of an SR session to a student for clarifying and
going over vocabulary that had constituted an obstacle in the earlier A-C session. In this case, the A-C
segment was part of a discussion between the student and teacher about the student's prior experience in
using computer-based tools. The student was talking about "chatting" and used the verb form cliccando
(clicking) a couple of times when she meant to convey "typing" or "writing," as in "typing messages." It
was clear that she was searching for the right words for what she was describing, until she eventually
found and used an appropriate word, scrivendo (writing), in line 9.
In the SR session, the student reacted to the videotape immediately on hearing cliccando the first time, at
line 2. The tape was stopped and she initiated the discussion by observing that cliccando means "clicking"
rather than "typing," and then asking how to say "typing." It is not clear if she remembered that she had
Mike Levy and Claire Kennedy A Task-Cycling Pedagogy Using Stimulated Reflection…
Language Learning & Technology 60
eventually come up with scrivendo in the A-C session, but she evidently did remember having had
difficulty and wanted to obtain a clear answer on the options available. The teacher suggested scrivendo
initially and then offered a couple of other possibilities, after which both went back to the original
scrivendo messaggi. The student spoke this phrase out loud, apparently confirming it to herself.
The SR extract also provides an example of a teacher taking an opportunity to extend the answer to a
student's question and introduce further points, in this instance potentially new vocabulary. In the way we
orchestrated the SR situation there is no pre-set agenda, so the learner is free to choose which language
points to take up and which to leave aside from those offered by the teacher for lateral exploration. In this
case the student did not show a desire to explore digitare or battere a macchina further, but she was
certainly free to do so.
Audio-Conferencing Segment 2
T = teacher, S = student
1. T: Quando dici che lo usi per chatting vuoi
dire così come stiamo facendo adesso?
T: So when you say you use it {the computer}
for chatting, do you mean like what we're
doing now?
2. S: No, come, sì. No, cliccando con i
messaggi. Solamente con i messaggi. Non
faccio [l'audio, non audio
S: No, like, yes. No, clicking with messages.
Only with messages, no audio
3. T: [Ah ho capito T: I see
{Some turns not shown}
4. T: Allora io sono confusa, scuso, scusa.
Quindi "speaking with others" nel senso
di parlare come stiamo facendo adesso?
T: So I'm confused, sorry. Is it "speaking with
others" {reading from a questionnaire on
computer use they are referring to} in the
sense of speaking like we're doing now?
5. S: Ah, scusa, forse io mi sono confusa. No,
non faccio così. No, non parlo + così
come facciamo adesso. Solo + cliccando,
faccio i messaggi. Parlo usando + sì +
[Non parlo
S: Ah, sorry, maybe I'm confused. No, I don't
mean like this. No, I don't speak like we're
speaking now. Just clicking, I do messages. I
talk using + yes + I don't speak
6. T: [OK, quindi chatting T: OK, so chatting
7. S: Chatting S: Chatting
8. T: nel senso T: in the sense of
9. S: scrivendo messaggi S: writing messages
Stimulated Reflection Segment 2 (conducted largely in English)
T = teacher, S = student
1. S: "Cliccando." "Cliccando" is clicking, not typing
2. T: Yeah
3. S: Ah! "Typing"?
4. T: Um "scrivendo"
5. S: "Scrivendo," OK
6. T: I'd say, yeah, "scrivendo messaggi"
7. S: "Scrivendo"
8. T: The act of typing, I suppose you use + "digitare"
9. S: Ah!
10. T: No?
11. S: [["Digitare"
12. T: [[Pressing the keys, or
13. S: Sì
14. T: More in general you can say "battere a macchina," [means "to type" something
Mike Levy and Claire Kennedy A Task-Cycling Pedagogy Using Stimulated Reflection…
Language Learning & Technology 61
15. S: ["Battere a macchina," sì, mm
16. T: But I think in this case, yeah
17. S: "Scrivendo messaggi" (x)
18. T: Yeah, 'cause you were talking in general about writing rather than speaking weren't you?
Yeah?
19. S: (x) Yes, yep
Figure 2. Extracts from A-C and SR sessions for example 2
Example 3. Grammar: Gender of "programma" (program) and agreement with articles and
adjectives
The SR segment shown in Figure 3 is interesting because it provides an example of a student noticing an
error that she was surprised to find herself making, as she knew the correct form. On listening to the
videotape of the A-C session, the student realized (without prompting from the teacher) that she had
sometimes made mistakes in the agreement of articles and adjectives with the noun programma
(program), as if it were feminine. While most Italian nouns ending in -a are feminine, there are various
exceptions including several masculine nouns ending in -ma" such as programma. The student made it
clear she knew that programma was masculine and therefore should take un as indefinite article rather
than una, and questo for "this" rather than questa, and actually gave a list of other masculine ma-ending
nouns that she knew of, later in the SR session. But, as she put it in lines 3 and 13, it seemed the correct
combinations un programma and questo programma did not always come to her on the spot. Clearly, the
student believed she said questa programma automatically, suggesting perhaps that the general rule for
nouns ending in -a had been automatized and placed in long term memory, but not the specific -ma rule,
making the correct form more difficult to produce when time was short (see McLaughlin, Rossman, &
McLeod, 1983; Skehan 1998).
An important aspect of this episode is that the student noticed her errors with programma only during the
SR session, as she listened to the recording, despite the teacher's best efforts at giving a correct model
during the A-C session. The teacher concerned had deliberately included programma -- matched with a
masculine article -- into her own utterances on two occasions in the A-C conversation, but at the time the
student had not shown signs of consciously registering the difference, such as echoing or subsequently
producing the correct form. In fact, the student was clearly surprised on hearing herself later and so
discovering that she was apt to make this mistake even though she knew better. It would be interesting to
investigate what impact this discovery appears to have on her use of the word in future and whether it
becomes an element of the language that she monitors closely.
This example illustrates the usefulness of both spontaneous focus on form and the SR type of focus on
form which is scheduled and supported by a recording. The A-C session referred to includes at least one
situation in which the student did appear to detect a difference between her use of words and the teacher's,
at the time it happened, and to react to it by later recycling the teacher's word appropriately.
Stimulated Reflection Segment 3 (conducted in English)
T = teacher, S = student
1. S: {On hearing herself say "this program"} Oh. No, I just realized I made the wrong conjugation,
just thinking like "questa programa," "questo programa," masculine
2. T: Uhuh
3. S: Just little things that you think of. It's hard like + When you have to think about + on the spot
whether it's masculine, doesn't come to you straight away
{Some turns not shown}
4. T: But I think sometimes there it was + you used a masculine article with it and sometimes
feminine
Mike Levy and Claire Kennedy A Task-Cycling Pedagogy Using Stimulated Reflection…
Language Learning & Technology 62
5. S: Yeah, I used feminine, yeah, that's what I noticed as well
6. T: I mean just then
{Some turns not shown}
7. T: Let's, let's listen again 'cause I think other times you said
{They listen to part of the videotape again}
8. T: Yeah, so, it did seem "questo programma" the first time, didn't it? And [then "questa"
9. S: [And then
10. T: Mm
11. S: I don't know. Mm. Maybe it just comes out easier "questa programa"
12. T: Mm
13. S: 'Cause I think of "a" at the end. But I know + Just sometimes + yeah, on the spot I don't, you
know, you kind of + yeah
14. T: So it is something that you reckon you know? That you know that "programma" is masculine?
15. S: Yeah, I know, yeah, particularly now that, that I've used it a lot in Cinema {the course on
Italian cinema} like
16. T: Yes
17. S: we've talked and used these type of words, you know (x)
{Some turns not shown}
18. T: So are you saying you've learnt that during the course of + the course about cinema?
19. S: Yeah, well I knew
20. T: That before that you didn't know it was masculine?
21. S: I knew before that, I knew it was before that but particularly I talk, we use these words a lot
now when we're talking about TV
22. T: Mm
23. S: and things like that, but + And it came more evident that when a word finishes with an "a" it's
masculine usually, like "il clima" or "il tema" or
24. T: Those "ma" endings?
25. S: "ma" endings, sorry, yeah. But yeah, particularly + but I, yeah, it should come to me naturally
now but I don't know why it came out + like that, yeah
Figure 3. Extract from SR session for example 3
Example 4. Lexis and Grammar: "relying on someone"
We have included Example 4 (see Figure 4) because it so clearly shows a learner taking advantage of an
SR session as the opportunity to work on her language production by not only interacting with an expert
but also drawing explicitly on the expert's knowledge. As well as encompassing issues across both lexis
and grammar, the exchange includes three modes of correction: suggestions provided by the teacher in
response to the learner's request (lines 5, 12, and 16); unsolicited correction by the teacher (line 7); and
un-prompted self-correction by the learner (line 9). There is also an instance of the learner expounding
out loud a rule she has noticed: "So, 'contare su' but 'appoggiare a'" (line 13).
The segment also illustrates particularly well both the unplanned nature of SR sessions, in terms of
content, and the way they can facilitate alternation between focus on meaning and focus on form. Neither
the student nor the teacher had the prior intention of discussing how to express "I rely on her" and the
different prepositions required by the verbs they considered. Instead, these points arose in a focus-on-
form interlude that was embedded into a context in which the communication of meaning was primary:
the student was intent upon describing to the teacher an aspect of her relationship with a fellow student
that she found interesting.
Mike Levy and Claire Kennedy A Task-Cycling Pedagogy Using Stimulated Reflection…
Language Learning & Technology 63
Example 4: Stimulated Reflection Segment 4
T = teacher, S = student, P = partner referred to
1. T: E tu te ne sei accorta T: And did you just notice this
2. S: [[Sì S: [[Yes
3. T: [[oppure qualche volta è venuto fuori in
maniera esplicita tra te e P questo?
T: [[or did it come up explicitly at some time
between you and P?
4. S: Ehm, no, me ne sono accorta, anche
perché + ehm + io, non so come dire
questa espressione in italiano, I rely on +
il suo, la sua conoscenza dell'italiano, mi
S: No, I just noticed she does it + Partly
because I + I don't know how to say this in
Italian: I rely on her knowledge of Italian, I
5. T: "Mi appoggio"? T: {Suggests verb} "Mi appoggio"?
6. S: Mi appoggio, sì. Mi appoggio nella sua
conoscenza
S: {Uses wrong preposition after the verb} "Mi
appoggio," yes. I rely on [her
7. T: Alla T: {Gives correct preposition} [On
8. S: Alla? Alla. Mi appoggio alla sua
conoscenza dell'italiano anche nella
pronuncia, perché lei ha fatto più anni di
italiano rispetto a quello che ho fatto io
S: {Repeats the preposition and then starts the
sentence again, correctly} On? On. I rely on
her knowledge of Italian in pronunciation
too, because she's done more years of Italian
than me
{Some turns not shown}
9. S: Noi sappiamo qual è il nostro livello di
italiano e lei sa che io mi appoggio su la
sua conoscenza della lingua. Alla! Alla
conoscenza della lingua.
S: We know what each other's level of Italian is
and she knows that {Uses wrong
preposition} I rely on her knowledge of the
language {Suddenly corrects herself} On!
On her knowledge of the language
10. T: Sai che cosa, non + "Mi appoggio" si
capisce ma non è la parola che proprio +
Ci penso, perché non mi torna
completamente e ti farò sapere
esattamente come puoi rendere + sì, in
questo contesto.
T: You know + "Mi appoggio" is
comprehensible but it's not the right word +
I'll think about it, I'm not really happy with
"mi appoggio." I'll get back to you about how
to say + in this context
11. S: E lei comunque si + sa che io conosco
più come utilizzare il computer e queste
cose, quindi se c'è qualche problema,
diciamo tecnico, lei sa che + che so come
risolverlo oppure
S: And she knows that I know how to use the
computer better than her and things like that,
and so if there's a, say, technical problem,
she knows I'll know how to solve it
12. T: "Posso contare." Posso contare sulla sua
conoscenza della lingua e lei può contare
sulla mia competenza tecnologica. [Mi è
venuto!
T: {Makes another suggestion} "Posso
contare." I can count on her knowledge of
the language and she can count on my
technological competence. [It came to me!
13. S: [Quindi "contare su" e "appoggiare a" S: {Notes the different prepositions that the two
verbs take} [So, "contare su" and
"appoggiare a."
14. T: "A," uhuh, uhuh T: "A." Uhuh, uhuh
15. S: Quindi, sì, lei sa che può contare con me.
Con me? Sì
S: {Uses the new verb but with wrong
preposition; then checks the preposition} So,
yes, she knows that she can count on me. On
me? Yes
Mike Levy and Claire Kennedy A Task-Cycling Pedagogy Using Stimulated Reflection…
Language Learning & Technology 64
16. T: Contare su di me T: {Corrects the preposition} Count on me
17. S: Su di me + ehm + in + nell'uso del
computer oppure cose tecniche
S: {Repeats exactly} On me + in the use of the
computer and technical things
18. T: Mm, interessante! T: Mm, interesting!
Figure 4. Extract from SR session for example 4
CONCLUSION
This paper discusses the way we have carried through a set of theoretically-driven principles, conceived at
the more abstract level, to a practical and concrete set of pedagogical procedures at the level of
implementation. These procedures are designed to facilitate a balance between focus on form and
meaning within a communicative, project-based setting. Trials of our approach with a small group of
students have shown that action through the task and reflection through the audiovisual recordings can be
supported.4 The students are able to engage in focus-on-form work that is relevant to their individual
needs, especially as the SR work stems directly from a sample of their own language production in
meaning-focused interaction at their current proficiency level. They are very much working at the
interface between the language forms they know and can fluently reproduce in an online conversation and
those they cannot.
As this approach entails one-to-one sessions between teachers and students, it requires a considerable
commitment of the teachers' time for each student. It is therefore essential that the few sessions each
student participates in be useful beyond the specific reflection episodes they produce; that is, they equip
the student to better exploit future opportunities for reflection in a self-managed way. For this reason we
consider the approach will be most useful if it serves to cultivate in the students a task-cycling mentality,
a habit of alternating action and reflection or, more specifically, of using conversations with proficient
speakers -- regardless of the medium and context -- as material for reflection. Many learners already
realize how much they can exploit an interaction with a native speaker or teacher for "on-the-fly" focus
on form: asking for confirmation, clarification, explanation, or repetition in the course of a conversation,
and perhaps recycling what they hear. But few seem to practise deliberate post-task reflection, especially
of a stimulated kind, and this is what we are seeking to bring to their attention.
We are planning a series of longitudinal research studies examining our pedagogical approach in depth.
We want to track individual students and trace patterns of response to the recorded A-C text over time.
There are three main areas we will be investigating: the language focus of the reflection episodes;
evidence of learning as a result; and how their ability to reflect develops with experience. Specific
questions might be
• Are students focussing on particular areas of language more than others when they review the
recorded material?
• What are their strategies for reflection and how could they be improved?
• How can the teacher interventions be characterised and how can they be made more effective?
• Is there evidence that language points discussed in earlier SR sessions are absorbed and learnt
such that changes are evident in later A-C sessions?
• Is there evidence of increased student autonomy, and does the student become more able to
reflect and to critically assess the recorded material?
In sum, we want to be able to pinpoint the benefits, such as they are, in the longer term, and thereby
strengthen our understanding of the approach so we can refine and improve it.
In closing, we turn to Samuda (2001) who argues that the systematic details of task design require more
rigorous attention, "both as a research agenda and in pedagogic practice" (p. 136). She highlights the
Mike Levy and Claire Kennedy A Task-Cycling Pedagogy Using Stimulated Reflection…
Language Learning & Technology 65
importance of specific design features, "as a scaffolding device that may permit teachers to work at the
developing edge of current interlanguage repertoires" (p. 136). We hope that the pedagogical approach
described here involving Stimulated Reflection, task cycling, and audiovisual conferencing provides an
appropriate response to Samuda, and a way forward.
APPENDIX
Audio and Video Setup
NOTES
1. The study discussed in this paper is part of a wider project involving students of Spanish as well as
Italian. The project team is made up of the authors and Tiziana Miceli, Sara Visocnik Murray, Cristina
Poyatos Matas, and Greer Johnson. Griffith University is supporting the project through a Teaching Grant
and a Quality Enhancement Grant.
2. Possible grades in any subject at our university are High Distinction, Distinction, Credit, Pass, and Fail.
Mike Levy and Claire Kennedy A Task-Cycling Pedagogy Using Stimulated Reflection…
Language Learning & Technology 66
3. The symbol "+" indicates a pause of up to 1 second; (x) an undeciphered item; "[[" two utterances
starting up simultaneously; "[" and "]" the start and end of overlap between two utterances when they do
not start simultaneously.
4. From the technology perspective, we are continually reviewing audio-conferencing products so that the
most effective program to support our project may be used. We are also investigating the possibility of
digitally recording and distributing the A-C sessions with a audio/video capture program such as
"Camtasia" (see www.techsmith.com). Potentially this is beneficial because of the speed with which the
teacher or student may review a session by using a technique called scrubbing which, like a scroll bar in a
word processor, enables the user to scan a digitized video text very quickly. The main drawbacks of this
approach at the moment concern the cost of the software, the need for a dual or upgraded soundcard for
recording the twin audio tracks and a CD burner on the computer to record the A-C session, and concerns
that students may not have easy access to playback facilities either at home or elsewhere.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and suggestions.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Mike Levy is Associate Professor of Languages and Linguistics at Griffith University. His principal
interest is Computer-Assisted Language Learning (CALL), a field in which he has published widely.
Recently his research has focused upon pedagogical approaches using mediated communication
technologies.
E-mail: Michael.Levy@griffith.edu.au
Claire Kennedy is a Senior Lecturer in Italian Studies at Griffith University, where she teaches in courses
on language and contemporary history.
E-mail: C.Kennedy@griffith.edu.au
REFERENCES
Burgess, J., & Etherington, S. (2002). Focus on grammatical form: Explicit or implicit? System, 30(4),
433-458.
Bygate, M., Skehan, P., & Swain, M. (2001). Introduction. In M. Bygate, P. Skehan, & M. Swain (Eds.),
Researching pedagogic tasks: Second language learning, teaching and testing (pp. 1-20). Harlow,
England: Longman.
Candlin, C. N., & Murphy, D. F. (1986). Language learning tasks. Lancaster Practical Papers in English
Language Education, Volume 7. London: Prentice-Hall International.
Cumming, G. (1993). A perspective on learning for intelligent education systems. Journal of Computer
Assisted Learning, 9(4), 229-238.
Debski, R. (2000). Project-oriented CALL: Implementation and evaluation. Computer-Assisted Language
Learning, 13, 4-5. Lisse, The Netherlands: Swets & Zeitlinger.
DeKeyser, R. M. (1998). Beyond focus on form: Cognitive perspectives on learning and practicing
second language. In C. Doughty & J. Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in classroom second language
acquisition (pp. 42-63). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Mike Levy and Claire Kennedy A Task-Cycling Pedagogy Using Stimulated Reflection…
Language Learning & Technology 67
Doughty, C. J. (2003). Instructed SLA: Constraints, compensation, and enhancement. In C. Doughty &
M. Long (Eds.), The handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 256-310). Oxford, England:
Blackwell.
Doughty, C., & Williams, J. (1998). Focus on form in classroom second language acquisition.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Ellis, R. (1994). The study of second language acquisition. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Ellis, R., Basturkmen, H., & Loewen, S. (2002). Doing focus on form. System, 3(4), 419-432.
Fried-Booth, D. L. (1986). Project work. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Gass, S. M., & Mackey, A. (2000). Stimulated recall methodology in second language research.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Goodfellow, R., Manning, P., & Lamy, M-N. (1999). Building an online open and distance language
learning environment. In R. Debski & M. Levy (Eds.), WorldCALL: Global perspectives on computer-
assisted language learning (pp. 267-286). Lisse, The Netherlands: Swets & Zeitlinger.
Hewer, S., Kötter, M., Rodine, C., & Shield, L. (1999). The right tools for the job: Criteria for the choice
of tools in the design of a virtual, interactive environment for distance language learners and their tutors.
Paper presented at CAL '99: Virtuality in Education. London.
Hutchby, I. (2001). Conversation and technology: From the telephone to the Internet. Oxford, England:
Blackwell.
Jefferson, G. (1984). Transcription notation. In J. M. Atkinson & J. Heritage (Eds.), Structures of social
interaction. Studies in conversation analysis (pp. ix-xvi). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.
Levy, M. (1999). Theory and design in a multimedia CALL project in cross-cultural pragmatics.
Computer Assisted Language Learning, 12(1), 29-58.
Levy, M. (2002). CALL by design: Discourse, products and processes. ReCALL, 14(1), 58-84.
Levy, M. (in press). Effective use of CALL technologies: Finding the right balance. In. R. Donaldson &
M. Haggstrom (Eds.), Changing language education through CALL. Lisse, The Netherlands: Swets &
Zeitlinger.
Lightbown, P. M. (1998). The importance of timing in focus on form. In. C. Doughty & J. Williams
(Eds.), Focus on form in classroom second language acquisition (pp. 177-196). Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Little, D. (1997). Linguistic awareness and writing: Exploring the relationship with language awareness.
Language Awareness, 6(2/3), 95-104.
Littlewood, W. (2003, July 12-14). Task-based interactive learning: Exploring some conditions for
success. Keynote presentation at the Australian Applied Linguistics Association Conference, Brisbane.
Long, M., & Robinson, P. (1998). Focus on form: Theory, research and practice. In. C. Doughty & J.
Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in classroom second language acquisition (pp. 15-41). Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
McLaughlin, B. T., Rossman, T., & McLeod, B. (1983). Second language learning: An information
processing perspective. Language Learning, 33(2), 135-158.
Mike Levy and Claire Kennedy A Task-Cycling Pedagogy Using Stimulated Reflection…
Language Learning & Technology 68
Mohan, B. (1992). Models of the role of the computer in second language development. In M. C.
Pennington & V. Stevens (Eds.), Computers in applied linguistics: An international perspective (pp. 110-
126). Clevedon, England: Multilingual Matters.
Negretti, R. (1999). Web-based activities and SLA: A conversation analysis research approach. Language
Learning and Technology, 3(1), 75-87. Retrieved February 18, 2004, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num1/
negretti/
Nunan, D. (1989) Designing tasks for the communicative classroom. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.
Ribé, R., & Vidal, N. (1993). Project work. Oxford, England: Heinemann.
Salaberry, M. (2000). Pedagogical design of computer-mediated communication tasks: Learning
objectives and technological capabilities. The Modern Language Journal, 84(1), 28-37.
Samuda, V. (2001). Guiding relationships between form and meaning during task performance: The role
of the teacher. In M. Bygate, P. Skehan, & M. M. Swain (Eds.). Researching pedagogic tasks: Second
language learning, teaching and testing (pp. 119-140). Harlow, England: Longman.
Schmidt, R. (1990). The role of consciousness in second language learning. Applied Linguistics 11(2):
129-158.
Skehan, P. (1998). The cognitive approach to language learning. Oxford, England: Oxford University
Press.
Skehan, P., & Foster, P. (1997). The influence of planning and post-task activities on accuracy and
complexity in task-based learning. Language Teaching Research, 1(3), 16-33.
Skehan, P., & Foster, P. (2001). Cognition and tasks. In P. Robinson (Ed.), Cognition and second
language instruction (pp. 183-205). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Sotillo, S. M. (2000). Discourse functions and syntactic complexity in synchronous and asynchronous
communication. Language Learning and Technology, 4(1), 82-119. Retrieved February 18, 2004, from
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/sotillo/
Sotillo, S. M. (2002). Constructivist and collaborative learning in a wireless environment. TESOL
Journal, 11(3), 16-20.
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (2001). Focus on form through collaborative dialogue: Exploring task effects . In
M. Bygate, P. Skehan, & M. Swain (Eds.), Researching pedagogic tasks: Second language learning,
teaching and testing (pp. 99-118). Harlow: Pearson Education.
Toyoda, E., & Harrison, R. (2002). Categorization of text chat communication between learners and
native speakers of Japanese. Language Learning and Technology, 6(1), 82-99. Retrieved February 18,
2004, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/TOYODA/
von der Emde, S., Schneider, J., & Kötter, M. (2001). Technically speaking: Transforming language
learning through virtual learning environments (MOOs). The Modern Language Journal, 85(2), 210-225.
Williams, J. (2001). The effectiveness of spontaneous attention to form. System, 29(3), 325-340.
Willis, J. (1996) A framework for task-based learning. Harlow, England: Longman.
