Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num1/news/
January 2004, Volume 8, Number 1
pp. 13-19
Copyright © 2004, ISBN 1094-3501 13
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS
Sponsors
University of Hawai`i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC)
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR)
Co-Sponsors
Apprentissage des Langues et Systèmes d'Information et de Communication (ALSIC)
Australian Technology Enhanced Language Learning Consortium (ATELL)
Center for Advanced Research on Language Acquisition, University of Minnesota (CARLA)
Center for Applied Linguistics, Washington, DC (CAL)
Computer Assisted Language Instruction Consortium (CALICO)
European Association for Computer Assisted Language Learning (EUROCALL)
International Association for Language Learning Technology (IALLT)
University of Hawai'i National Foreign Language Resource
Center (NFLRC)
The University of Hawai`i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials
development projects and conducts Summer Institutes for language professionals among its many
activities.
CALL FOR PROPOSALS
Distance Education, Distributed Learning & Language Instruction: Reports from the Field (July
27-30, 2004, University of Hawai`i at Manoa)
The NFLRC invites language educators with significant experience using distance and distributed
learning models to propose presentations for the Symposium. Presentation proposals should address new
technologies, innovative software, research projects, or new uses for old software. Possible topics could
include but are not limited to
• Issues in distance/distributed learning administration, infrastructure, or delivery
• Instructional design or development of Web courses/materials
• Online interactions and community
• Electronic resources for educators
Proposals can be for 45-minute sessions, 75-minute sessions, or electronic poster sessions (e.g., class Web
site tours, multimedia instructional materials demos, etc.). Financial support is available for presenters of
45-minute and 75-minute sessions only -- up to $800 per session to help defray travel expenses, with the
possibility of supplementary support if there are multiple presenters in a session.  The deadline for
online proposal submissions is March 1, 2004. For more information, visit our symposium Web site.
Cultural Diversity and Language Education Conference (September 24-26, 2004, University of
Hawai`i at Manoa)
This conference, co-sponsored and organized by the NFLRC and the UH Center for Second Language
Research, will focus on theories, policies, and practices associated with cultural and language diversity in
educational contexts and will provide a forum for examining a broad range of issues concerned with the
potential and challenges of education that builds on diversity. The primary strands for exploring diversity
in language education at the conference are
Announcements News from Sponsoring Organizations
Language Learning & Technology 14
• Foreign/Heritage Language Education
• Bilingual/Immersion Education
• English Language Education
• Language Education Planning and Policy
• Literacy Education
Proposals for individual papers, colloquia, or workshops related to theory, research, practice, and policy
in these strand areas are welcome and can be submitted online -- deadline March 31, 2004. For more
information, please visit our conference Web site.
NFLRC Publications
Task-Based Language Teaching: A Demonstration Module (text, video, CD). This Research Note
illustrates Task-Based Language Teaching (TBLT) as developed by Michael H. Long. The set consists of
a demonstration video, audio CD, and an explanatory text. The introduction in the text describes TBLT,
the task-based needs analysis and materials development underlying pedagogic tasks, and teaching
procedures. In addition, the text contains a demonstration lesson including a Teacher's Manual and
Student Workbook (in both Korean, the demonstration language, and in English, as a template for other
languages), color maps, scripts, Korean language audio files on CD, transcripts of the audio files, and two
sample tests.
Group Dynamics in the Language Classroom (video). Group dynamics is one of the most, if not the most,
important areas for teachers who wish to create a well functioning, interactively supportive classroom for
language learning. The presentation in this video looks briefly at the recent research and theory in the area
and the practical aspects of dealing with forming, transition, performing, and closing with groups. The
cohesive group, shifting leadership styles, student roles, and the contribution of the environment, and how
we can adjust it, are demonstrated and discussed.
Michigan State University Center for Language Education
and Research (CLEAR)
CLEAR's mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States. To
meet its goals, projects focus on foreign language research, materials development, and professional
development training.
FOREIGN LANGUAGE RESEARCH
• Feedback to Learners: The Case of Heritage Language Learners
MATERIALS DEVELOPMENT
Products
• Business Chinese (CD-ROM)
• Modules for Assessing Socio-Cultural Competence for German (CD-ROM)
• Modules for Assessing Socio-Cultural Competence: Russian (CD-ROM)
• Pronunciación y Fonética (CD-ROM)
• African Language Tutorial Guide (guide and video)
• Thai Tutorial Guide (guide)
• Foreign Languages: Doors to Opportunity (video and discussion guide)
• Task-based Communicative Grammar Activities for Japanese and Thai (workbook)
• Test Development (workbook and video)
• The Internet Sourcebook for Business French (Web links)
• The Internet Sourcebook for Business German (Web links)
Announcements News from Sponsoring Organizations
Language Learning & Technology 15
• The Internet Sourcebook for Business Spanish (Web links)
• Business Language Packets for High School Classrooms (French, German, & Spanish; PDF files)
Coming Soon!
• Introductory Business German (CD-ROM)
• French Pronunciation and Phonetics (CD-ROM)
Newsletter
CLEAR News is a biyearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. Contact
the CLEAR office to join the mailing list or see it on the Web at http://clear.msu.edu/newsletter/.
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
Summer Workshops
Each summer, CLEAR offers professional development workshops for foreign language teachers on the
campus of Michigan State University. For more information, go to http://clear.msu.edu/training/.
Onsite Workshops
CLEAR offers foreign language teachers at K-13+ institutions around the country the opportunity to host
a CLEAR workshop. These 1-3 day workshops are led by CLEAR's professional development staff
members. For more information, visit http://clear.msu.edu/training/onsite/about.html.
For more information about CLEAR, contact
Center for Language Education And Research (CLEAR)
A712 Wells Hall
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824-1027
Phone: (517) 432-2286
Fax: (517) 432-0473
Web: http://clear.msu.edu/
E-mail: clear@msu.edu
Australian Technology Enhanced Language Learning Consortium (ATELL)
Contacts: Assoc. Prof. Mike Levy, Griffith University (michael.levy@mailbox.gu.edu.au)
Dr. Robert Debski, The University of Melbourne (r.debski@hlc.unimelb.edu.au)
ATELL is pleased to announce the availability of the CALL Catalogue:
http://www.callcatalogue.com.au/
The CALL Catalogue has been designed as a resource for researchers, designers, and teachers interested
in Computer Assisted Language Learning (CALL).
The CALL Catalogue is essentially a searchable bibliographic database. It consists of a large set of
abstracted articles on CALL and an index of specially designed keywords. The CALL Catalogue is an
ongoing research venture that began with the construction of a large corpus of CALL publications for
1999. As such the CALL Catalogue (1999) included all the chapters in four books (Cameron, 1999a,
1999b; Debski & Levy, 1999; Egbert & Hanson-Smith, 1999) and all the articles in four major CALL
journals: Computer Assisted Language Learning, CALICO, ReCALL, and the online journal, Language
Learning and Technology. This amounted to 177 journal articles and book chapters for the year. Each
item was then abstracted and indexed to form the original CALL Catalogue (1999). So far the CALL
Catalogue has been completed for 1999 and 2000.
The CALL Catalogue is an ongoing project and we are keen to have your contributions (see Abstracting
& Indexing Guidelines on the Web site). Our immediate goal is to add abstracted and indexed articles on
CALL for 2001, and then, subsequently, to work forward to the year prior to the current year of
Announcements News from Sponsoring Organizations
Language Learning & Technology 16
publication. The CALL Catalogue directly relates to published works by Levy (2000, 2002) where more
detail about the overarching framework and methods of production are given.
The CALL Catalogue is the first resource to be made available by ATELL, the Australasian Technology
Enhanced Language Learning network. ATELL is an informal grouping of CALL researchers and
practitioners in Australia and New Zealand. More resources for researchers and practitioners are to
follow.
References
Cameron, K. C. (Ed.). (1999a). CALL: Media, design and applications. Lisse, The Netherlands: Swets &
Zeitlinger.
Cameron, K. C. (Ed.). (1999b). CALL and the learning community. Exeter, England: Elm Bank
Publications.
Debski, R., & Levy, M. (Eds.). WORLDCALL: Global perspectives on computer-assisted language
learning. Lisse, The Netherlands: Swets & Zeitlinger.
Egbert, J., & Hanson-Smith, E. (Eds.). (1999). CALL environments: Research, practice and critical
issues. Alexandria, VA: TESOL Inc.
Levy, M. (2000). Scope, goals and methods in CALL research: Questions of coherence and autonomy.
ReCALL, 12(2), 170-195.
Levy, M. (2002). CALL by design: Products, processes and methods. ReCALL, 14(1), 129-142.
Apprentissage des Langues et Systèmes d'Information et
de Communication (ALSIC)
ALSIC (Language Learning and Information and Communication Systems, http://alsic.org/) is an
electronic journal in French for researchers and practitioners in fields related to applied linguistics,
didactics, psycholinguistics, educational sciences, computational linguistics, and computer science. The
journal gives priority to papers from the French-speaking community and/or in French, but it also
regularly invites papers in other languages so as to strengthen scientific and technical exchanges between
linguistic communities that too often remain separate. The editorial board of ALSIC invites you to contact
them for any prospective contributions at the following electronic address: infos@alsic.org.
Center for Advanced Research on Language Acquisition,
University of Minnesota (CARLA)
CARLA is one of several National Language Resource Centers whose role is to improve the nation's
capacity to teach and learn foreign languages effectively. Launched in 1993 with funding from the
national Title VI Language Resource Center program of the U.S. Department of Education, CARLA's
mission is to study multilingualism and multiculturalism, develop knowledge of second language
acquisition, and advance the quality of second language teaching, learning, and assessment by conducting
research and action projects sharing research-based and other forms of knowledge across disciplines and
education systems extending, exchanging, and applying this knowledge in the wider society.
CARLA's research and action initiatives include a focus on the articulation of language instruction,
content-based language teaching through technology, culture and language studies, less commonly taught
languages, language immersion education, second language assessment, second language learning
strategies, research on pragmatics and speech acts, support for study abroad, and technology and second
language learning.
Announcements News from Sponsoring Organizations
Language Learning & Technology 17
To share its latest research and program opportunities with language teachers around the country,
CARLA offers the following resources: an internationally acclaimed summer institute program for
teachers; a database which lists where less commonly taught languages are taught throughout the country;
listservs for teachers of less commonly taught languages and immersion educators; a working paper
series; conferences and workshops; and a battery of instruments in French, German, and Spanish for
assessing learners' proficiency in reading, writing, speaking, and listening at two levels on the ACTFL
scale. Check out these and other CARLA resources on the CARLA Web site at http://carla.acad.umn.edu.
The Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL)
The Center for Applied Linguistics is a private, nonprofit organization that promotes and improves the
teaching and learning of languages, identifies and solves problems related to language and culture, and
serves as a resource for information about language and culture. CAL carries out a wide range of
activities in the fields of English as a second language, foreign languages, cultural education, and
linguistics. These activities include research, teacher education, information dissemination, instructional
design, conference planning, technical assistance, program evaluation, and policy analysis. Publications
include books on language education, online databases of language programs and assessments, curricula,
research reports, teacher training materials, and print and online newsletters.
Major CAL projects include the following:
• ERIC Clearinghouse on Languages and Linguistics
• National Clearinghouse for ESL Literacy Education
• The Cultural Orientation Resource Center
• Pre-K-12 School Services
CAL collaborates with other language education organizations on the following projects:
• Center for Research on Education, Diversity & Excellence
• Improving Foreign Languages in the Schools Project of the Northeast and Island Regional
Laboratory at Brown University
• The National Capital Language Resource Center
• National K-12 Foreign Language Resource Center
• National Network for Early Language Learning
News from the ERIC Clearinghouse on Languages and Linguistics
The U.S. Department of Education decided to discontinue the 16 subject-specific ERIC Clearinghouses.
As a result of this decision, funding for the ERIC Clearinghouse on Languages and Linguistics
(ERIC/CLL), managed by the Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL), ended on December 31, 2003. For
information about the new ERIC database, visit www.eric.ed.gov.
Over the years, ERIC/CLL has produced a number of quality publications including digests, online
resource guides, print and Web-based newsletters, and books in the Language in Education and
Professional Practice series. ERIC/CLL has also maintained a Web site and provided question answering
services. Although funding for ERIC/CLL will end, CAL remains committed to providing quality
language education materials. To that end, CAL will continue to make free publications available in
downloadable format from the CAL Web site, including those that were developed by ERIC/CLL.
• ERIC/CLL Resource Guides Online provide links to relevant resources on various topics in second
language teaching and learning. New Resource Guides include: Resources for Elementary School
Foreign Language Programs.
Announcements News from Sponsoring Organizations
Language Learning & Technology 18
• ERIC/CLL Digests cover a range of topics in ESL, foreign language, and bilingual education. Our
most recent Digests include: Genderation 1.5 Students and College Writing, What Parents Want to
Know About Foreign Language Immersion Programs, Professional Development for Language
Teachers, and Strategy Training for Second Language Learners.
• Upcoming books in the Professional Practice series include Creating Access: Language and
Academic Programs for Secondary Shool Newcomers and Language by Video: An Overview of
Foreign Langauge Instruction Videos for Children. Creating Access will describe the ins and outs of
an exciting new education model – newcomer programs for immigrant students. Language by Video
will provide useful information about the effectiveness of video-based language programs in the
classroom. Both will be available early 2004 from the CALStore (http://calstore.cal.org/store/).
News from the National Center for ESL Literacy Education
• NCLE's new FAQ What do beginning adult ESL teachers, tutors, and volunteers need to know?
answers that question and offer resources for new practitioners in adult ESL. The FAQ describes four
crucial issues related to teaching adult English language learners: Principles of adult learning; second
language acquistion; issues related to culture; and instructional approaches that support language
development in adults.
• NCLE's new Q&A Working With Literacy-Level Adult English Language Learners addresses many
of the concerns teachers sometimes express concern about being able to effectively teach adult
learners in literacy-level classes.. The Q&A describes who literacy-level learners are, examines the
skills they need to develop, and discusses the appropriate scope of literacy-level classes, as well as
activities and techniques to support them. Two veteran practitioners, MaryAnn Cunningham Florez
and Lynda Terrill, wrote this Q&A drawing on years of experience with literacy-level classes. The
Q&A includes an extensive bibliography of print and online resources.
• Another new Q&A Discusses Four Assessment Issues Raised by the National Reporting System
(NRS). As the field of adult English as a second language (ESL) instruction moves towards content
standards, program staff and state and national policy makers need to be able to make informed
choices about appropriate assessments for adult English language learners. In NCLE's new Q&A,
Valid, Reliable, and Appropriate Assessments for Adult English Language Learners, Dorry Kenyon,
Director of Language Testing at CAL, and Carol Van Duzer, Adult ESL Assessment Specialist at
NCLE, examine these concepts from a language testing perspective as they apply to the NRS.
The current edition of NCLE's newsletter, NCLEnotes, focuses on assessment and accountability for adult
English learners.
Computer Assisted Language Instruction Consortium
(CALICO)
Since its inception in 1983, CALICO has served as an international forum for language teachers who
want to develop and utilize the potential of advanced technology to support their teaching and research
needs. Through its Annual Symposia, Special Interest Groups (SIGs), CALICO Journal, CALICO
Monograph Series, CALICO Resource Guide, and numerous other publications, CALICO provides both
leadership and perspective in the ever-changing field of computer-assisted instruction. The strength of
CALICO derives from the enthusiasm, creativity, and diversity of its members. It comprises language
teachers and researchers from universities, military academies, community colleges, K-12 schools,
government agencies, and commercial enterprises.
To learn more about CALICO activities and how to participate in them, visit the CALICO homepage at
http://www.calico.org.
Announcements News from Sponsoring Organizations
Language Learning & Technology 19
European Association for Computer Assisted Language
Learning (EUROCALL)
EUROCALL is an association of language teaching professionals from Europe and worldwide aiming to
• Promote the use of foreign languages within Europe
• Provide a European focus for all aspects of the use of technology for language learning
• Enhance the quality, dissemination, and efficiency of CALL materials
EUROCALL's journal, ReCALL, published by Cambridge University Press, is one of the leading
academic journals covering research into computer-assisted and technology-enhanced language learning.
The association organises special interest meetings and annual conferences and works towards the
exploitation of electronic communications systems for language learning. For those involved in education
and training, EUROCALL provides information and advice on all aspects of the use of technology for
language learning.
EUROCALL 2004 will be at the University of Vienna, Austria, 1-4 September 2004.
For full details, contact us at http://www.eurocall-languages.org/
International Association for Language Learning Technology
(IALLT)
Established in 1965, IALLT (formerly IALL) is a professional organization whose members provide
leadership in the development, integration, evaluation, and management of instructional technology for
the teaching and learning of language, literature, and culture. Its strong sense of community promotes the
sharing of expertise in a variety of educational contexts. Members include directors and staff of language
labs, resource or media centers, language teachers at all levels, developers and vendors of hardware and
software, grant project developers, and others. IALLT offers biennial conferences, regional groups and
meetings, the LLTI listserv (Language Learning Technology International), and key publications such as
the IALLT Journal, the IALLT Language Center Design Kit, and the IALLT Lab Management Manual. It
also offers guidance on defining career goals and expectations through the new "IALLT Statement of
Professional Responsibilities" (see under "About IALLT" > "Important Documents" on the Web site). For
information, visit the IALLT Web site at www.iallt.org/.
