Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num2/news/
May 2004, Volume 8, Number 2
pp. 13-19
Copyright© 2004, ISSN 1094-3501 13
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS
Sponsors
University of Hawai`i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC)
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR)
Co-Sponsors
Apprentissage des Langues et Systèmes d'Information et de Communication (ALSIC)
Australian Technology Enhanced Language Learning Consortium (ATELL)
Center for Advanced Research on Language Acquisition, University of Minnesota (CARLA)
Center for Applied Linguistics, Washington, DC (CAL)
Computer Assisted Language Instruction Consortium (CALICO)
European Association for Computer Assisted Language Learning (EUROCALL)
International Association for Language Learning Technology (IALLT)
University of Hawai'i National Foreign Language Resource
Center (NFLRC)
The University of Hawai`i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials
development projects and conducts Summer Institutes for language professionals among its many
activities.
UPCOMING PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT OPPORTUNITIES
Distance Education, Distributed Learning & Language Instruction: Reports from the Field (July
27-30, 2004)
Language education has been revolutionized by the availability of electronic resources. The boundaries
between distance education and traditional education are dissolving as both distance and non-distance
language classes make use of multiple technologies, especially the Web, for delivering educational
resources — hence the term “distributed learning.” The National Foreign Language Resource Center is
pleased to announce its 2004 Summer Institute Symposium Distance Education, Distributed Learning &
Language Instruction:  Reports from the Field.  Invited and selected language educators with significant
experience using distance and distributed learning models will be presenting on their work during the
three-and-a-half-day Symposium to be held on July 27-30, 2004. Please register and join us for this
exciting event!
Cultural Diversity and Language Education Conference (September 17-19, 2004)
This conference, co-sponsored and organized by the NFLRC and the UH Center for Second Language
Research, will focus on theories, policies, and practices associated with cultural and language diversity in
educational contexts and will provide a forum for examining a broad range of issues concerned with the
potential and challenges of education that builds on diversity. The primary strands for exploring diversity
in language education at the conference are
• Foreign/Heritage Language Education
• Bilingual/Immersion Education
• English Language Education
• Language Education Planning and Policy
• Literacy Education
Conference highlights will include keynote speeches (Sonia Nieto, Glynda Hull, and more), colloquia and
paper presentations, and hands-on workshops, plus a variety of planned social events (including a
News From Our Sponsors
Language Learning & Technology 14
fabulous ticketed reception at the Waikiki Aquarium). Registration forms and payment received by
August 27, 2004 will enjoy special pre-registration rates!
NFLRC Publications
Filmed on location in East Java, Indonesia, the Mari Belajar Sopan Santun Bahasa Indonesia set
consists of two videotapes, a manual, and extended notes on the individual video scenarios.
The videos present interactions among Indonesian native speakers and foreign language learners as they
engage in tasks and activities of everyday life. The purpose of the videos is to model for foreign language
learners how to speak politely in Indonesian by drawing their attention to the ways language is used and
the ways it varies according to the social context in which the interaction occurs. The manual
acompanying the videos includes the pedadogical background of this project, sample lessons, learning
focus, suggested activities, and bibliographies on Indonesian pragmatics and on the teaching of
pragmatics in foreign language classrooms. A docuent contatining extended notes on the videotaped
scenarios is available at no charge online.
Michigan State University Center for Language Education
and Research (CLEAR)
CLEAR's mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States. To
meet its goals, projects focus on foreign language research, materials development, and professional
development training.
FOREIGN LANGUAGE RESEARCH
• Feedback to Learners: The Case of Heritage Language Learners
MATERIALS DEVELOPMENT
Products
• Business Chinese (CD-ROM)
• Modules for Assessing Socio-Cultural Competence for German (CD-ROM)
• Modules for Assessing Socio-Cultural Competence: Russian (CD-ROM)
• Pronunciación y Fonética (CD-ROM)
• African Language Tutorial Guide (guide and video)
• Thai Tutorial Guide (guide)
• Foreign Languages: Doors to Opportunity (video and discussion guide)
• Task-based Communicative Grammar Activities for Japanese and Thai (workbook)
• Test Development (workbook and video)
• The Internet Sourcebook for Business French (Web links)
• The Internet Sourcebook for Business German (Web links)
• The Internet Sourcebook for Business Spanish (Web links)
• Business Language Packets for High School Classrooms (French, German, & Spanish; PDF files)
Coming Soon!
• Introductory Business German (CD-ROM)
• French Pronunciation and Phonetics (CD-ROM)
Newsletter
CLEAR News is a biyearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. Contact
the CLEAR office to join the mailing list or see it on the Web at http://clear.msu.edu/newsletter/.
News From Our Sponsors
Language Learning & Technology 15
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
Summer Workshops
Each summer, CLEAR offers professional development workshops for foreign language teachers on the
campus of Michigan State University. For more information, go to http://clear.msu.edu/training/.
Onsite Workshops
CLEAR offers foreign language teachers at K-13+ institutions around the country the opportunity to host
a CLEAR workshop. These 1-3 day workshops are led by CLEAR's professional development staff
members. For more information, visit http://clear.msu.edu/training/onsite/about.html.
For more information about CLEAR, contact
Center for Language Education And Research (CLEAR)
A712 Wells Hall
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824-1027
Phone: (517) 432-2286
Fax: (517) 432-0473
Web: http://clear.msu.edu/
E-mail: clear@msu.edu
Australian Technology Enhanced Language Learning Consortium (ATELL)
Contacts: Assoc. Prof. Mike Levy, Griffith University (michael.levy@mailbox.gu.edu.au)
Dr. Robert Debski, The University of Melbourne (r.debski@hlc.unimelb.edu.au)
ATELL is pleased to announce the availability of the CALL Catalogue: http://www.callcatalogue.com.au/
The CALL Catalogue has been designed as a resource for researchers, designers, and teachers interested
in Computer Assisted Language Learning (CALL).
The CALL Catalogue is essentially a searchable bibliographic database. It consists of a large set of
abstracted articles on CALL and an index of specially designed keywords. The CALL Catalogue is an
ongoing research venture that began with the construction of a large corpus of CALL publications for
1999. As such the CALL Catalogue (1999) included all the chapters in four books (Cameron, 1999a,
1999b; Debski & Levy, 1999; Egbert & Hanson-Smith, 1999) and all the articles in four major CALL
journals: Computer Assisted Language Learning, CALICO, ReCALL, and the online journal, Language
Learning and Technology. This amounted to 177 journal articles and book chapters for the year. Each
item was then abstracted and indexed to form the original CALL Catalogue (1999). So far the CALL
Catalogue has been completed for 1999 and 2000.
The CALL Catalogue is an ongoing project and we are keen to have your contributions (see Abstracting
& Indexing Guidelines on the Web site). Our immediate goal is to add abstracted and indexed articles on
CALL for 2001, and then, subsequently, to work forward to the year prior to the current year of
publication. The CALL Catalogue directly relates to published works by Levy (2000, 2002) where more
detail about the overarching framework and methods of production are given.
The CALL Catalogue is the first resource to be made available by ATELL, the Australasian Technology
Enhanced Language Learning network. ATELL is an informal grouping of CALL researchers and
practitioners in Australia and New Zealand. More resources for researchers and practitioners are to
follow.
References
Cameron, K. C. (Ed.). (1999a). CALL: Media, design and applications. Lisse, The Netherlands: Swets &
Zeitlinger.
News From Our Sponsors
Language Learning & Technology 16
Cameron, K. C. (Ed.). (1999b). CALL and the learning community. Exeter, England: Elm Bank
Publications.
Debski, R., & Levy, M. (Eds.). WORLDCALL: Global perspectives on computer-assisted language
learning. Lisse, The Netherlands: Swets & Zeitlinger.
Egbert, J., & Hanson-Smith, E. (Eds.). (1999). CALL environments: Research, practice and critical
issues. Alexandria, VA: TESOL Inc.
Levy, M. (2000). Scope, goals and methods in CALL research: Questions of coherence and autonomy.
ReCALL, 12(2), 170-195.
Levy, M. (2002). CALL by design: Products, processes and methods. ReCALL, 14(1), 129-142.
Apprentissage des Langues et Systèmes d'Information et
de Communication (ALSIC)
ALSIC (Language Learning and Information and Communication Systems, http://alsic.org/) is an
electronic journal in French for researchers and practitioners in fields related to applied linguistics,
didactics, psycholinguistics, educational sciences, computational linguistics, and computer science. The
journal gives priority to papers from the French-speaking community and/or in French, but it also
regularly invites papers in other languages so as to strengthen scientific and technical exchanges between
linguistic communities that too often remain separate. The editorial board of ALSIC invites you to contact
them for any prospective contributions at the following electronic address: infos@alsic.org.
Center for Advanced Research on Language Acquisition,
University of Minnesota (CARLA)
CARLA is one of several National Language Resource Centers whose role is to improve the nation's
capacity to teach and learn foreign languages effectively. Launched in 1993 with funding from the
national Title VI Language Resource Center program of the U.S. Department of Education, CARLA's
mission is to study multilingualism and multiculturalism, develop knowledge of second language
acquisition, and advance the quality of second language teaching, learning, and assessment by conducting
research and action projects sharing research-based and other forms of knowledge across disciplines and
education systems extending, exchanging, and applying this knowledge in the wider society.
CARLA's research and action initiatives include a focus on the articulation of language instruction,
content-based language teaching through technology, culture and language studies, less commonly taught
languages, language immersion education, second language assessment, second language learning
strategies, research on pragmatics and speech acts, support for study abroad, and technology and second
language learning.
To share its latest research and program opportunities with language teachers around the country,
CARLA offers the following resources: an internationally acclaimed summer institute program for
teachers; a database which lists where less commonly taught languages are taught throughout the country;
listservs for teachers of less commonly taught languages and immersion educators; a working paper
series; conferences and workshops; and a battery of instruments in French, German, and Spanish for
assessing learners' proficiency in reading, writing, speaking, and listening at two levels on the ACTFL
scale. Check out these and other CARLA resources on the CARLA Web site at
http://www.carla.umn.edu/.
News From Our Sponsors
Language Learning & Technology 17
The Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL)
The Center for Applied Linguistics is a private, nonprofit organization that promotes and improves the
teaching and learning of languages, identifies and solves problems related to language and culture, and
serves as a resource for information about language and culture. CAL carries out a wide range of
activities in the fields of English as a second language, foreign languages, cultural education, and
linguistics. These activities include research, teacher education, information dissemination, instructional
design, conference planning, technical assistance, program evaluation, and policy analysis. Publications
include books on language education, online databases of language programs and assessments, curricula,
research reports, teacher training materials, and print and online newsletters.
Major CAL projects include the following:
• National Clearinghouse for ESL Literacy Education
• The Cultural Orientation Resource Center
• Pre-K-12 School Services
CAL collaborates with other language education organizations on the following projects:
• Center for Research on Education, Diversity & Excellence
• Improving Foreign Languages in the Schools Project of the Northeast and Island Regional
Laboratory at Brown University
• The National Capital Language Resource Center
• National K-12 Foreign Language Resource Center
• National Network for Early Language Learning
News from CAL
With the closure of the ERIC Clearinghouse on Languages and Linguistics (ERIC/CLL), CAL remains
committed to providing quality language education materials. To see our on-line resource collection, visit
www.cal.org/resources.
CAL has compiled digests from the former ERIC Clearinghouse on Languages and Linguistics and briefs
from the Center for Research on Education, Diversity & Excellence (CREDE) and is making them
available for easy reference and use in workshops and trainings. Digests are succinct one-page (double-
sided) compilations of practical research and information on topics of interest to language professionals
(e.g., teaching, learning, testing, research, professional development). CALdigests are available in four
series: The Complete Collection, English Language Learners, Professional Development for Language
Learners, and Foreign Language Education. Visit the CALstore for more information.
News from the National Center for ESL Literacy Education
• NCLE's new Brief Issues in Improving Immigrant Workers' English Language Skills identifies
five issues to be addressed in workplace education and offers suggestions for addressing these
issues.
• Another new Brief, Second Language Acquisition in Adults: From Research to Practice discusses
what the research says about learner motivation, interaction, and vocabulary development and
how it applies to adults learning English.
• Two new online resource collections are available. First, Second Language Acquisition provides
background information about Second Language Acquisition (SLA) -- the study of how people
learn to communicate in a language other than their native language. The collection highlights
NCLE and ERIC resources as well as pertinent organizations, periodicals, and policy issues. Of
particular interest is the annotated bibliography of SLA research on learner motivation,
interaction, and vocabulary development.
News From Our Sponsors
Language Learning & Technology 18
The second collection combines the advice of experienced teachers with information about online
and print resources. What Beginning Teachers and Tutors of Adult English Language Learners
Need to Know provides a useful overview for those new to adult English as a second language
(ESL) teaching. The collection features comments from a focus group of experienced teachers
held at the Arlington Education and Employment Program (REEP) in Arlington, Virginia, a short
list of useful books for teachers as well as an annotated short list of curricula.
The current edition of NCLE's newsletter, NCLEnotes, features an article about NCLE’s work with Senior
Service America (SSA) to develop a guidebook for practitioners and programs working with linguistically
and culturally diverse seniors. Other NCLEnotes features include resource updates, descriptions of new
NCLE publications, and the The Book Shelf where Miriam Burt reviews Paper Fish by Tina De Rosa.
Computer Assisted Language Instruction Consortium
(CALICO)
Since its inception in 1983, CALICO has served as an international forum for language teachers who
want to develop and utilize the potential of advanced technology to support their teaching and research
needs. Through its Annual Symposia, Special Interest Groups (SIGs), CALICO Journal, CALICO
Monograph Series, CALICO Resource Guide, and numerous other publications, CALICO provides both
leadership and perspective in the ever-changing field of computer-assisted instruction. The strength of
CALICO derives from the enthusiasm, creativity, and diversity of its members. It comprises language
teachers and researchers from universities, military academies, community colleges, K-12 schools,
government agencies, and commercial enterprises.
To learn more about CALICO activities and how to participate in them, visit the CALICO homepage at
http://www.calico.org.
European Association for Computer Assisted Language
Learning (EUROCALL)
EUROCALL is an association of language teaching professionals from Europe and worldwide aiming to
• Promote the use of foreign languages within Europe
• Provide a European focus for all aspects of the use of technology for language learning
• Enhance the quality, dissemination, and efficiency of CALL materials
EUROCALL's journal, ReCALL, published by Cambridge University Press, is one of the leading
academic journals covering research into computer-assisted and technology-enhanced language learning.
The association organises special interest meetings and annual conferences and works towards the
exploitation of electronic communications systems for language learning. For those involved in education
and training, EUROCALL provides information and advice on all aspects of the use of technology for
language learning.
EUROCALL 2004 will be at the University of Vienna, Austria, 1-4 September 2004.
For full details, contact us at http://www.eurocall-languages.org/
News From Our Sponsors
Language Learning & Technology 19
International Association for Language Learning Technology
(IALLT)
Established in 1965, IALLT (formerly IALL) is a professional organization whose members provide
leadership in the development, integration, evaluation, and management of instructional technology for
the teaching and learning of language, literature, and culture. Its strong sense of community promotes the
sharing of expertise in a variety of educational contexts. Members include directors and staff of language
labs, resource or media centers, language teachers at all levels, developers and vendors of hardware and
software, grant project developers, and others. IALLT offers biennial conferences, regional groups and
meetings, the LLTI listserv (Language Learning Technology International), and key publications such as
the IALLT Journal, the IALLT Language Center Design Kit, and the IALLT Lab Management Manual. It
also offers guidance on defining career goals and expectations through the new "IALLT Statement of
Professional Responsibilities" (see under "About IALLT" > "Important Documents" on the Web site). For
information, visit the IALLT Web site at www.iallt.org/.
