Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num3/review2/
September 2004, Volume 8, Number 3
pp. 35-39
Copyright © 2004, ISSN 1094-3501 35
REVIEW OF LA CHAISE BERÇANTE
Title La Chaise Berçante (The Rocking Chair; 2001-2002)
Platforms PC/Mac
System
requirements
Windows 95 or higher; 200 MHz; 64MB RAM; 8X CD-ROM
Macintosh OS 8.6 or higher; 233 MHz; 64MB RAM; 8X CD-ROM
Publisher Les Éditions 3D & CBC Radio Canada
editions3D@telusplanet.net
http://www.telusplanet.net/public/dddware/chaise/
Support offered CD leaflet, Web site (see "Troubleshoot" section)
Target language French
Target audience those who enjoy French language and culture -- age 11 and up
Price $24.95 + GST (if applicable) + shipping and handling (rates are in Canadian dollars
for Canadian customers, and in U.S. dollars for all others)
ISBN n/a
Review by Lara Lomicka, the University of South Carolina
OVERVIEW
La Chaise Berçante CD-ROM is designed around a 15-minute
animated film, CRAC.1 This film provides a window into Quebec
culture and language through the motif of a rocking chair. The
producer, Frédéric Back,2 indicates that rocking chairs are significant
to the evolution of Quebec. In fact, this cultural artifact represents
memories and changes, as well as traditional life and values. In the
film, the rocking chair links the past with the present, recounting
experiences throughout many years of history. For children in the
film, the rocking chair also represents a place for dreaming and
imagining -- it is transformed into a boat, a house, and even a train.
The perspective through which the story is told (the eyes of the rocking chair) is quite original -- the
rocking chair provides viewers with a glimpse of rural life in Quebec. The story begins when a rocking
chair is crafted as a gift from a man to his fiancée; the chair then become an integral part of their family
life in rural Quebec. At the end of the story, it is rescued by a museum guard from the side of the road and
finds a new home in a modern art museum.
CRAC made its debut in 1981 by producer Frédéric Back, known as both an illustrator and animator.3
After winning numerous awards, CRAC was incorporated into a language learning laserdisc package (Vi-
Conte) in 1990 (Ledgerwood, 2002). Modifications to this program led to the development of the CD-
ROM program La Chaise Berçante. A substantial amount of new content was added to 2001 edition.
The animated feature film is used as the basis for the development of vocabulary, listening
comprehension, and cultural awareness in the CD-ROM package. Specific features of the program, such
as the notebook, dictionary, a narrated legend in two styles of language, traditional music, and art all
contribute to the development of linguistic and cultural knowledge.
Reviewed by Lara Lomicka Review of La Chaise Berçante
Language Learning & Technology 36
KEY FEATURES
There are two menus that facilitate navigation in La Chaise Berçante (See Figure 1). First, the menu
located on the bottom of the screen allows users to exit, return to the main menu, control the volume,
access the dictionary, obtain help, or access their notebook.
The top navigation menu allows users to choose “CRAC” (view the film), “Application” (application
exercises), “Culture” (additional cultural information), “Chasse-Galerie” (a legend narrated in French and
Canadian French), “Diapos” (slides of places and things in Quebec), “Aide” (help), and “Générique”
(credits).
Figure 1. Main menu of La Chaise Berçante
By clicking on “CRAC!,” users can view the 15-minute animated film (stop, start, pause, fast forward,
rewind, and volume options are available). While watching the film, users can click on “narration,” which
allows access to the text in order to follow along with the words, and “culture,” where additional cultural
information can be found. Students might be curious to find out what a bûcheron is, read song lyrics, or
have access to more information on festivals and people. “Application” provides different types of
exercises (e.g., cloze, matching the term with the corresponding picture [with text or by listening to each
word], listening comprehension questions, associations, grammatical exercises, and dictation style
activities) for three different levels: beginner, intermediate, and advanced. The “Culture” menu provides
information on artists and art, songs (including lyrics and music), festivals, paintings, and dances
(including video clips to illustrate). This area is indeed a rich source of cultural information for learners.
In fact, as learners study a cultural product, such as this traditional story along with its art and music, they
have opportunities to explore various cultural perspectives and gain a deeper understanding into the life
and culture of the people of that time (Pesola, 1991).
Reviewed by Lara Lomicka Review of La Chaise Berçante
Language Learning & Technology 37
Two other interesting features of the program include the “Chasse-Galerie” and “Diapos.” In the Chasse-
Galerie, users find a narrated legend in traditional French and in Québecois French (called, “Le Bucheron
raconte”). The CD-ROM explains that legends are often passed down through the generations by word of
mouth. The Chasse-Galerie, a story about a canoe that travels in the sky, is one of the most well known
legends in Quebec.  As they listen to the legend, students can navigate easily from “standard” French to
Canadian French. As in the animated film, CRAC, students have the option of displaying the text with
which they can follow along. It should be noted, however, that this option is not available when listening
in Québecois French.
When users access the “Diapos” area (see Figure 2) they are able to choose from a variety of slides
(Carnaval, Montréal, Québec, and Canadian art from the film) and manipulate these slides into a virtual
photo album. A music option is available for listening to as students decide on the slides to include in
their album.  Each slide can be enlarged. A search feature and a scavenger hunt option are available from
this menu as well. Students can look for a word, based on categories or they can participate in a short
scavenger hunt (essentially a comprehension quiz) on a particular topic such as the Carnaval.
Figure 2. Diapos and photo album
Two distinctive features located on the bottom menu are the Carnet and the Dictionnaire. The Carnet
serves as the personal diary or writing space throughout their journey with the rocking chair. There is also
assistance for typing accents provided for both PC and MAC (available through the “Aide” menu).
Students may organize their work at the top of each page by writing their name, the topic and the page
number. There is additional space in the body of the notebook to jot down personal thoughts, reflections,
and stories. A yellow menu, although partially hidden behind the page of the journal, allows users to
perform basic word process manipulations such as save, open, close, print, and so forth. The Dictionnaire
Reviewed by Lara Lomicka Review of La Chaise Berçante
Language Learning & Technology 38
(which includes over 1,000 words) is quite extensive and entirely in French. In addition to a definition for
each word and example phrases and/or sentences illustrating how it is used, this feature also provides
synonyms, antonyms, homonyms, and derivatives. By clicking on the sound icon, learners can hear the
pronunciation of the word as well. The dictionary is an impressive feature of the program -- almost every
word is glossed, and it is accessible simply by clicking on an unknown word.
EVALUATION
La Chaise Berçante is easy to install, navigation is simple, and the program is interesting and motivating
for users. Although some menus offer the option of reading items in English, overall the French language
dominates making this CD-ROM an excellent choice for advanced students or those in immersion
settings. One distinct advantage of using a short animated film as a vehicle for language learning is that in
it language is seen as a tool, not as an end in itself. It is rich in both content and language, exploring life
and traditions of rural Quebec to today. La Chaise Berçante offers an engaging experience for students in
that they can discover traditional Quebecois traditions and compare them to those of today (e.g., the
carnival).
CRAC tells a story and provides a context, which serves as a vehicle for learning culture and language.
Omaggio-Hadley (2001) has underscored the importance of teaching language in context and has attested
to the benefits of contextualization in language teaching. Story-based approaches focus on the use of
natural discourse and meaningful comprehension. Using this film, learners have access to longer samples
of discourse and can then work more specifically on the parts (Shrum & Glisan, 2000).
While the video provides authentic input to assist in developing linguistic competence and cultural
awareness, teachers should be advised to spend some time preparing and integrating previewing activities
(Joiner, 1990). These types of exercises help to prepare learners for the task at hand; they can approach
these tasks more easily, through advance organizers, when video work is in shorter segments. The
function “grands moments du film” enables the viewer to jump to or to watch shorter segments, or
selected scenes from the movie, so that the input becomes more comprehensible to students (Altman,
1989). This feature would be particularly helpful to teachers who wish to work on various segments of the
movie over a period of time.
The exercises contained in the CD-ROM (“Application”) are generally structured and focus primarily on
interaction between students and the computer. Direct feedback is provided, and students can repeat
exercises as often as needed. Teachers who follow more communicative approaches, however, would
need to supplement these materials with exercises that promote communication, interaction, and
negotiation among learners.
After a thorough evaluation of this CD-ROM, La Chaise Berçante may not be particularly well suited for
beginners of the French language. A substantial amount of work on specific vocabulary, even for
beginners (e.g., the names of animals, tools for cutting wood), would need to be incorporated into
previewing activities. At a minimum, students should have some background in French in order to be
successful at minimal comprehension of the videotext and its accompanying cultural materials. I would
also recommend that teachers unfamiliar with this program or its predecessor, Vi-Conte, take several
hours to familiarize themselves with the different features so that in-class time with the software can be
used in pedagogically sound ways. Having no prior experience with Vi-Conte, I found that some extra
time was needed to become comfortable and proficient using them as intended.
Overall, La Chaise Berçante represents an excellent integration of culture and language in the form of
story with cultural history. The animated film, music, and interviews are noteworthy additions to this
program. The variety in content, style of exercises, and type of information make La Chaise Berçante an
attractive way to learn about Quebec. This CD-ROM offers both an enriching and engaging experience
for students, teachers, or anyone with an interest in Quebec.
Reviewed by Lara Lomicka Review of La Chaise Berçante
Language Learning & Technology 39
NOTES
1. CRAC is an Oscar award winning animation (Best Animated Short Movie – 1982) and has won over
20 other awards. See http://www.awn.com/gallery/back/filmo.eng.html for a more detailed list.
2. Frédéric Back was born near Strasburg, France in 1924 but has resided in Montréal since 1948.
3. A short video clip is available on the CD-Rom showcasing an interview with Frédéric Back about his
life, work, and interests.
ABOUT THE REVIEWER
Lara Lomicka (PhD, Pennsylvania State University) is Assistant Professor of French at the University of
South Carolina in the Department of Languages, Literatures, & Cultures. Her research interests include
telecollaborative environments, online learning, and teacher education.
E-mail: lomicka@sc.edu
REFERENCES
Altman, R. (1989). The video connection. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Joiner, E. (1990). Choosing and using videotext. Foreign Language Annals, 23, 53-64.
Ledgerwood, M. (2002). Review of La Chaise Berçante. Calico Journal. Retrieved July 1, 2004, from
http://calico.org/CALICO_Review/review/chaise00.htm
Omaggio-Hadley, A. (2001). Teaching language in context. Boston: Heinle & Heinle Publishers.
Pesola, C. A. (1991). Culture in the elementary school foreign language classroom. Foreign Language
Annals, 24, 331-346.
Shrum, J. L., & Gilsan, E. W. (2000). Teacher’s handbook. Boston: Heinle & Heinle Publishers.
