Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num1/net/
January 2004, Volume 8, Number 1
pp. 3-7
Copyright © 2004, ISSN 1094-3501 3
ON THE NET
ICT4LT - Information and Communications Technology
for Language Teachers
Jean W. LeLoup
SUNY Cortland
Robert Ponterio
SUNY Cortland
Foreign language (FL) teachers have long been leaders in the use of technology in the classroom, from
short wave radio and newspapers, to film strips, to tape recorders, to records, 16 mm films, video, and
now computers, as a means of bringing authentic language and culture to their students. Computer and
Internet technologies require significantly more technical training than pressing the play button on an
audio cassette player, but the pedagogical skills needed to integrate these materials into a well designed
lesson plan are similar in many ways. Because there are FL teachers, and even methods instructors, whose
training has not prepared them to use these new tools, it has made sense for specialists to use this
technology to provide an introduction to these skills in the form of modules that can be plugged into a
methods course or explored by individual teachers to further their professional development. ICT4LT is a
very good example of these materials. Please note that the authors of this article developed another Web
site providing access to modules supporting a graduate course on technology in the FL
classroom:http://www.cortland.edu/flteach/mm-course/
The Project
The ICT4LT project located at http://www.ict4lt.org/, is the result of efforts by five institutions in the
United Kingdom, Finland, and Italy and was created with the aid of public funds, namely the Socrates
Programme of the Directorate for Education and Culture at the European Commission (EC). Socrates is
an EC program that encourages transnational cooperation in education and offers particular help to
projects involving the Least Widely Used and Least Taught (LWULT) languages. (This EC official term
for languages other than English, French, German and Spanish parallels that used in the United States:
Less Commonly Taught Languages [LCTLs]). The emphasis on LWULTs is reflected in the partnerships
with project colleagues in Italy and Finland, who developed the multilingual versions of the Web site.
Jean W. Leloup & Robert Ponterio On the Net: ICT4LT …
Language Learning & Technology 4
The original target audience was
European language teachers vis-à-vis
their need for training in technology
and its integration into the FL
curriculum. The materials were
developed and piloted with groups of
language teachers and teacher trainers
in the UK, Italy, and Finland. Currently,
these modules are available online in
English, Italian, Finnish and Swedish.*
In this review we will only examine the
English section.
The primary emphasis of the site is on the integration of technology for the express purpose of furthering
foreign language instruction and learning. As such, the modules are pedagogy and methodology based
and derive from years of experience held by language instructors keen on enhancing language learning
via the implementation of new technologies.
Ancillaries
The overall site is clearly designed and easy to navigate. Basic information about
the project goals, history, and authors is readily available.
The ICT4LT site offers several ancillaries, accessible from a sidebar: the home
page, contents leading to the teaching modules, Web resources, a search engine for
the site, glossary of technology terms, a help page, and contact information. A few
of these are discussed in more detail below.
Usage Requirements: Entry Level Ability
This Web site is designed for inservice FL teachers and presumes a nominal level of information
technology acumen. In general, knowledge of the following are presupposed: the basics of Windows 95
or higher, word-processing skills, use of a Web browser, and use of email software. To determine this, an
ICT Can Do List is offered (on the English site) for self-assessment.
ICT Can Do List (pdf)
This extensive self-evaluation is available for FL teachers to enable them to assess the development of
their own technology skills, experience and understanding before delving into any of the modules. While
the list of technologies is impressive, only six are fully developed, the others being labeled as "under
Jean W. Leloup & Robert Ponterio On the Net: ICT4LT …
Language Learning & Technology 5
construction." The assessments that are present are thorough and include knowledge of Windows, word
processors (Microsoft Word), browsers (Internet Explorer), e-mail software, presentation software
(PowerPoint), and spreadsheets (Excel). The portions yet to be developed have, at the very least, a
definition and brief explanation plus references to associated modules and occasionally links to topically
related sites on the Internet. The page is frequently updated by Graham Davies, clearly a time-consuming
endeavor, especially in light of the fact that these technologies are constantly evolving. Nevertheless, we
hope that Professor Davies will continue to expand on the information offered here and fill out the
remaining assessments. The latter include sound, video, and image editing, authoring tools, anti-virus and
firewall software, CDs and DVDs, parsers, and concordancers. This section is particularly helpful for
teachers who are frequently asked to assess their strengths, weaknesses, and abilities vis-à-vis
technologies in order to participate in workshops and conference sessions.
Hardware Requirements
According to the site, in order to complete the modules most efficiently and effectively, access to suitable
hardware is essential. This includes the following:
• a multimedia PC (MPC) with a Pentium processor: 350 MHz or higher
• at least 64 Mb of RAM
• 10 Gb hard disk drive with adequate free space
• Microsoft Windows 98 or higher
• a video card capable of displaying a variety of display screen resolutions and high colour
• a CD-ROM drive (12x or higher)
• a SoundBlaster-compatible soundcard, e.g. SoundBlaster
• a microphone
• access to the Internet via a modem (56 kbps or higher) or via an institutional network.
• a browser: Netscape or Internet Explorer
• Microsoft Office suite
• a printer
Although this list certainly represents the most common hardware and software generally found, it seems
to suggest that those using other operating systems (Mac) or non-Microsoft software may not benefit from
the expertise found here. That is actually not the case because so many of the skills presented are general
enough to be applicable far beyond these implied limits.
ICT4LT: English Glossary
This is an alphabetized list of technical terms specific to the ICT4LT project, with cross-referencing
indicated by italics. The site managers are in the process of activating the numerous additional URLs so
that they are clickable links.
ICT4LT: Resource Centre
This is a nascent section with offerings on getting started on the WWW/Internet, WWW links,
professional organizations, select bibliography and reference works, and CALL software information,
among other entries.
The Modules
The primary goal of the site is to provide training modules that are divided into Basic, Intermediate, and
Advanced Level sections with five modules each plus an additional section with room for expansion. Each
module begins with identification of the authors and a statement of their aims for the module. Several
topics follow, depending on the focus of the module. Frequently discussion questions and related Internet
links are included as well. The module ends with a bibliography and reference section and an opportunity
Jean W. Leloup & Robert Ponterio On the Net: ICT4LT …
Language Learning & Technology 6
for the user to provide feedback to the authors of the site. A listing of the modules offered at the time of
this writing follows, grouped according to level.
Basic Level Modules
1.1 Introduction to new technologies and how they can contribute to language learning and teaching
1.2 Introduction to computer hardware and software: what the language teacher needs to know
1.3 Using text tools in the modern foreign languages classroom
1.4 Introduction to Computer Assisted Language Learning (CALL)
1.5 Introduction to the Internet
Intermediate Level Modules
2.1 CALL methodology: integrating CALL into study programmes
2.2 Introduction to multimedia CALL
2.3 Exploiting World Wide Web resources online and offline
2.4 Using concordance programs in the modern foreign languages classroom
2.5 Introduction to CALL authoring programs
Advanced Level Modules
3.1 Managing a multimedia language centre
3.2 CALL software design and implementation
3.3 Creating a World Wide Web site
3.4 Corpus linguistics
3.5 Human Language Technologies (HLT)
An additional module is offered that deals with Computer-Aided Assessment (CAS) and language
learning:
4.1 Computer Aided Assessment (CAA) and language learning
The appearance of this final module is felicitous and hopefully signals the continuation of development of
this valuable resource. Indeed, the ICT4LT project description found in the Socrates database includes the
following notation: "The ICT4LT project is updated on a weekly basis and continues to grow. New
modules are under consideration, e.g. Early Language Learning and ICT." Such expansion would be most
welcome and would surely add to the knowledge base of integration of technology in FL instruction.
Site Statistics
The ICT4LT appears to be a much visited site, as indicated by the following statistics recorded for the fall
of 2003. Numbers are visits or "hits" to the site per day.
• October 2003: 661 per day
• September 2003: 572 per day
• Aug ust 2003: 463 per day
• Average over 3 months: 565 per day
There is even a "top ten countries" list, giving the origins of visitors to the site in October of 2003: United
Kingdom, Finland, Spain, USA, Australia, Netherlands, Italy, Canada, Belgium, and Greece. All told, the
site had visitors from over 70 different countries in that month. The site also rates the modules for
Jean W. Leloup & Robert Ponterio On the Net: ICT4LT …
Language Learning & Technology 7
"popularity" -- a sort of billboard of "hits" in both an Internet and a musical sense. Module 2.2 has held
the number one position for nearly three years; perhaps this would be a good place for an initial foray.
The ICT4LT is an excellent resource for any FL teacher interested in becoming knowledgeable about
technology and language instruction. The project represents an immense effort to assist colleagues in this
endeavor, and it continues as truly a labor of love by the authors who still maintain it despite the end of
funding. The modules can be beneficial to individuals learning through self-study as well as teacher
trainers wishing to use them for an additional resource in workshops or courses on language methodology
and/or integration of technology in the FL curriculum.
* While all language versions contain the entire module offerings, the English site is regularly updated
and maintained by Graham Davies, Visiting Professor, Thames Valley University and contains several
additional ancillaries such as the ICT Can Do List and the English glossary of terminology.
