Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num3/speced/
September 2004, Volume 8, Number 3
p. 2
Copyright © 2004, ISSN 1094-3501 2
FROM THE SPECIAL SECTION EDITOR
The theme of the special section of this issue is one that in many quarters is taken for
granted. English is considered the language of the Internet and conversely, the Internet
itself encourages the spread of English globally. However, the inevitability argument
needs to be problematized. A recent volume entitled Global Literacies and the World-
Wide Web (Hawisher & Selfe, 2000) demonstrates that the "global" communication
system is indeed both culturally determined and culturally transformed, that identities are
both transformed by this global communication and in turn formulated to resist the
networked world. Some writers, however, have noted that often communication in English
rather than the mother tongue may result in less culturally contextualized and rich
communication (Dragona & Handa, 2000).
In the first article, "Second Language Socialization in a Bilingual Chat Room," Lam
discusses how two bilingual immigrant Chinese girls became socialized into the discourse
community in a chat room where a variety of language use is adopted and co-constructed
by participants. This variety is a mixed-code variety of English that distinguishes them
from their English-only speaking peers and their Cantonese-only speaking peers. She also
shows that, through these global interactions, both girls' English was enhanced.
In the second article, "Second Language Cyberhetoric: A Study of Chinese L2 Writers in
an Online Usenet Group," Bloch directly addresses the issue of whether non-native
English speakers appropriate English to meet their own needs. His study demonstrates
how these Chinese writers borrow from their own Chinese rhetorical tradition to
communicate in a Usenet group in English, their second language. In so doing, they create
a new English for this particular discourse community.
In their commentary, Koutsogiannis and Mitsikopoulou note how identities are formed
and social relationships negotiated in both CMC environments, and how local and global
language practices lead to hybrid varieties in CMC. However, they caution that purely
descriptive approaches to analyzing the construction of such hybrid varieties of English
ignore the distribution of power that leads to English, in whatever new variety, being the
language chosen for interaction in the contact zone.
I want to pay special tribute to Managing Editor Pam DaGrossa and Co-Editor Richard
Kern, without whose indefatigable and patient help, these articles would not have reached
publication. In addition, I want to thank the authors and reviewers for their insights and
recommendations. I hope that these articles will stimulate further research and critique of
the effects of the Internet in developing global Englishes and how English is adapted and
appropriated for use in this new medium.
Sincerely,
Denise Murray
Guest Editor
REFERENCES
Dragona, A., & Handa, C. (2000). Xenes glosses: Literacy and cultural implications of the
Web for Greece. In G. E. Hawisher & C. L. Selfe (Eds.), Global literacies and the World-
Wide Web (pp. 52-73). London and New York: Routledge.
Hawisher, G. E., & Selfe, C. L. (Eds.). (2000). Global literacies and the World-Wide Web.
London and New York: Routledge.
