Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num3/net/
September 2004, Volume 8, Number 3
pp. 3-8
Copyright © 2004, ISSN 1094-3501 3
ON THE NET
Virtual Museums on the Web: El Museo Thyssen-Bornemisza
Jean W. LeLoup
SUNY Cortland
Robert Ponterio
SUNY Cortland
Museums and Culture
Big "C" culture is en essential component of the foreign language classroom in so far as it helps students
better understand what is important to native speakers from their cultural perspective. The national
standards for foreign language encourage us to focus on this perspective, through its cultural triangle
highlighting the relationships among Products, Practices, and Perpectives, while avoiding an approach
that reduces culture to a kind of "Trivial Pursuits" where artifacts are learned in isolation rather than
explored as part of a path to understanding the people. What are the qualities of an online museum that
help students explore this cultural perspective instead of just memorizing names and dates associated with
works of art? The Museo Thyssen-Bornemisza in Madrid gives us an example of the best of virtual visit
Web sites for the foreign language classroom.
Jean W. Leloup & Robert Ponterio On the Net:
Language Learning & Technology 4
Navigating the Museo Thyssen-Bornemisza Site
This museum site is extremely well designed to provide a broad overview of painting from the 13th
century to the 20th, with a comprehensive Web map to assist the viewer with initial navigation.
Additional pull-down menus on the home page make the site very user-friendly and inviting. The site is
available in Spanish but most features are also online in an English version. Below, we will take a look at
some of the interesting features and offerings of this site, which serves as an excellent example of virtual
museums, and whose features may be found in a variety of museums from many different countries.
Museum Areas of Interest
Beginning with the Colección (Collections) menu, the visitor has a
choice of the following selections: "Visita Virtual" (Virtual Visit),
"Obras Maestros" (Masterpieces), and "Recorridos" (Thematic Visits).
In the Virtual Visit, the viewer may select from three of the museum's
four floors and then proceed through each room on that floor,
displayed in a 360º Virtual Reality (VR) format with zoom
capabilities. The 48 rooms in the museum all are accompanied by an
audio text describing the room, the contents, the period and its
characteristics. The audio commentaries constitute a mini-art history
course in themselves.
Jean W. Leloup & Robert Ponterio On the Net:
Language Learning & Technology 5
The visitor can navigate the site by clicking on the rooms in the accompanying floor plan or can move
through the rooms in the virtual reality view by clicking on the doorway into adjacent rooms. This
combination allows quick access to the art via a visual map of the building or lets the viewer remain in the
VR mode as if we were in the building itself. Thus the paintings and accompanying information can be
viewed in their architectural setting as displayed by the museum staff allowing the student not only to
develop a visual image of the museum as it exists in the real world, but to experience moving through the
space that itself helps to organize the art. Clearly, any computer-based representation of these works of art
can only be a distant approximation to the real thing, but by creating an experience that approaches
reality, the computer can help us to make this approximation into a richer experience.
When the visitor clicks on a particular
painting, a separate browser window opens
displaying the work along with identifying
information. The speaker icon in this view
plays additional audio commentary about this
specific work. Another icon opens a window
for biographical information about the artist
while a second leads to text commentary
about the work.
Jean W. Leloup & Robert Ponterio On the Net:
Language Learning & Technology 6
  
These various modes for obtaining information are under the control of the visitor, allowing the viewer to
navigate through the information and extract what is of interest. The quality of the audio commentary is
excellent, even when listened to over a slow connection such as a modem. This gives us not only a
Spanish view of art history, but also an extensive sample of language that is interesting, natural, clearly
articulated, and not too fast for non-natives. The biographical information and text commentary help place
the work in context and help us see what information is important from the point of view of the curators.
Indeed, the very idea of a collection of this sort, one put together by an individual, is to open a window on
the world of art from a particular point of view. In the example shown of commentary about Picasso's
"Arlequín con espejo," we find important information that helps us understand the mentality of people in
the time period and how the work relates to their way of thinking.
The Recorridos (Thematic Visits) organize the paintings into four broad themes: the portrait and the
human figure; the city, an urban and human space; the landscape; and the still-life. For each work of art
displayed under these themes, the viewer may select icons that give access to an audio summary of the
artist and the particular painting; a more detailed account of the artist, life and work; a close-up of the
painting; and a brief description of the painting under consideration. 
The Obras Maestras (Masterpieces) section includes works of art from the old masters as well as works
from the 19th and 20th centuries. In addition, an emphasis on works from Impressionism, Post-
impressionism, Fauvism, the German Expressionist movements, the European avant-gardes and European
and American post-war art is evident in the collection. Again, as with the Thematic Visits, the viewer may
select icons that give access to audio and written summaries, descriptions, and commentaries.
The Actividades (Activities) menu offers a choice of Exhibitions,
Forthcoming Exhibitions, Painting of the Month, Lectures, and News.
While the Exhibitions are not necessarily limited to Spanish art, at this
writing, two upcoming exhibitions were centered on "Catalan Painting
from Naturalism to Noucentisme" and "Andalucia in the Carmen
Thyssen-Bornemisza Collection" -- both of which would be of
particular interest to Spanish learners. The "Painting of the Month" is a
feature wherein a writer approaches a chosen painting with his or her
own particular analysis and interpretation. The writer gives a lecture,
Jean W. Leloup & Robert Ponterio On the Net:
Language Learning & Technology 7
which the public may attend and which is subsequently available in pamphlet form in the gift shop.
Student groups planning on stopping in Madrid for a few days may wish to investigate the possibility of
attending a pertinent lecture.
The Educación (Education) menu has information about tours for
primary school, high school, and college students. Also mentioned is the
availability of teacher preparation guides for use before the visit. In
addition, the menu has a link for e-learning courses, a portion of which is
accessible for free and contains interactive games. A really outstanding
feature of this section of the museum is that of Pequeño Thyssen (Young
Thyssen).
Pequeño Thyssen
The "Aventuras en el museo Thyssen" section involves an interactive mystery that explores different
paintings in the museum and has a didactic bent. The "adventure" is led by Guido, an animated character
who poses different questions about the paintings and guides learners to greater knowledge about the
world of art. Because it is written for young native speakers of Spanish, the lexicon is accessible to non-
native learners of Spanish who are older but at various stages of their language learning process. Other
features of the education section are more detail about several works of art in the museum (Para saber
más); a place for student drawn artwork (Galería de arte); and a "laboratory" (Laboratorio) with some
.pdf files containing projects that learners can work on at home.
Conclusion
The Museo Thyssen-Bornemisza is an excellent site for Spanish instructors who wish to incorporate the
big "C" culture component in their lessons. All of the various groupings of the works as well as the
different kinds of information about them, especially the integration of audio commentary, may be used in
Jean W. Leloup & Robert Ponterio On the Net:
Language Learning & Technology 8
creative listening, writing, reading, and even speaking activities that enable contextualized language
learning and instruction. The English version could easily be used in classrooms of English as a Second
or Foreign Language. (NB: The grammar, vocabulary, and pronunciation are British English.) When
using the Internet for such activities, the classroom teacher should also consider contextualizing the Web
version with realia collected in the real world such as art books, post cards, posters, museum booklets,
and so forth. We can find many excellent online museums with virtual visits (perhaps we'll examine one
from a different country in an upcoming column), but this one includes many of the best features
available in such sites. Finally, this well-conceived and executed site is a delight for art lovers of any
language background and can inspire teachers of all languages with ideas for integrating Culture in the FL
classroom. Visit and enjoy.
