Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num2/editors/
May 2004, Volume 8, Number 2
p. 1-2
Copyright © 2004, ISSN 1094-3501 1
FROM THE EDITORS
Welcome to Volume 8, Number 2 of Language Learning & Technology.
In this issue we bring you four articles. Jin Chen, Safia Belkada, and Toshio Okamoto's
"How a Web-Based Course Facilitates Acquisition of English for Academic Purposes"
describes an experimental study which investigated the form, function and impact of
interaction in a Web-based course on Academic English for Japanese learners.
Significant differences were found with respect to language interaction for completing
tasks under two different task treatments, an inter-personal and an intra-personal task
treatment. Although negotiations via intra-personal tasks offered a considerable amount
of quality data, they were not as rich as the negotiations via inter-personal tasks.
In "A Task-Cycling Pedagogy Using Stimulated Reflection and Audio-Conferencing in
Foreign Language Learning," Mike Levy and Claire Kennedy describe the notion of
task-cycling using a technique called Stimulated Reflection that is implemented with
audio-conferencing tools. They based their pedagogical procedures on a set of
theoretically-driven principles and sought to facilitate a balance between focus on form
and meaning within a communicative, project-based setting. The trials of their approach
with a small group of students learning Italian revealed that action through the task and
reflection through the audiovisual recordings can both be supported.
"It's Just a Game, Right? Types of Play in Foreign Language CMC" (Chantelle N.
Warner) examines playful uses of language that occurred during a semester-long study
of two German language courses using a MOO. An analysis of the transcripts of the
MOO sessions reveal that a large portion of the language use online cannot be described
using standard referential definitions of communication, but rather is playful in nature.
However, students were not simply playing with the language, but playing within the
language. In such instances, it is not primarily meaning that is being negotiated, but also
the relations between speakers, their interlocutors, the medium, and the context.
Finally, Kenneth Reeder, Leah P. Macfadyen, Jörg Roche, and Mackie Chase in
"Negotiating Cultures in Cyberspace: Participation Patterns and Problematics" attempt
to problematize the notion of culture in the context of computer-mediated
communication (CMC). They challenge the assumption that cyberspace is a culture free
zone and claim that a less essentialist and more dynamic, discourse-based understanding
of culture is needed. Their multidisciplinary study of online participation by culturally
diverse participants in a distance adult education course offered in Canada revealed
variations in participation frequency as a function of broad cultural groupings.
In their regular column On the Net, Jean LeLoup and Bob Ponterio discuss the use of
authentic video in Internet Television News in the Classroom TF1: Improved Features
Make Sites More Useful. TF1, a French television channel, offers many authentic
language opportunities for foreign language classes on their Web site. In our other
regular column, Emerging Technologies, Bob Godwin-Jones describes the current status
of the somewhat controversial Sharable Content Object Reference Model (SCORM) in
Learning Objects: Scorn or SCORM?
This issue Reviews Editor Rafael Salaberry brings us reviews of one book and one
software product. Gillian Lord reviews Gavin Dudeney's The Internet and the Language
Classroom: A Practical Guide for Teachers and finds it to be a practical guide to
From the Editors
Language Learning & Technology 2
Streaming Speech, which seeks to help English language learners develop better
pronunciation and more fluid speech by using authentic fast spontaneous speech of
native speakers of English as input and training learners both in listening comprehension
and speaking “at speed” with accuracy and fluency.
As always, we extend a big mahalo (thank you) to our readers, contributors, and
reviewers.
Sincerely,
Dorothy Chun and Irene Thompson, Editors
Pamela DaGrossa, Managing Editor
