Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num2/review2/
May 2004, Volume 8, Number 2
pp. 23-32
Copyright © 2004, ISSN 1094-3501 23
REVIEW OF STREAMING SPEECH
Title Streaming Speech
Author Richard Cauldwell
Platform PC
Minimum hardware
requirements
Windows based multimedia computer, Processor at least 350MHz, Windows
95, 98, NT (SP4 or above), 2000, ME, XP with Internet Explorer 5 or later,
CD-ROM and Windows-compatible sound card, microphone, headset or
speakers.
Producer Richard Cauldwell, P. O. Box 10662, Birmingham B17 0ZE, United Kingdom
+44 (0) 121 240 9804, e-mail: Richard@speechinaction.com
Support offered Comprehensive Web site http://www.speechinaction.com/
Target language English
Target audience High Intermediate to advanced learners
Price Prices start at 40.00UK for a single user license, plus VAT at 17.5 % for UK &
EC; Student's Book 12.50UK plus shipping and handling
ISBN 0-9543447-0-7
Review by Andrew Lian, Rice University
Streaming Speech by Richard Cauldwell addresses, in an interesting and theoretically-argued way,
problems of speech perception and production as experienced by foreign language learners. The approach
used, while focusing on English, is not language-specific.
TECHNICAL MATTERS
Streaming Speech comes in the form of a CD inside a modest-looking package with minimal paper
documentation. It installs effortlessly. The material takes the shape of a Web-based interactive system (it
actually runs in Internet Explorer 5 or above) and is written in a Web-based authoring system called
Fabris (http://www.fab24.net). This system is loosely based on Toolbook by Asymetrix. Streaming
Speech has the potential to be deployed across the Internet (a version of it is, in fact, already available as a
demonstration http://www.fab24.net/SS_Demo/guest1.htm). In the long term, the ability to be served
across the Internet leading to the potential to integrate with other systems will enable Streaming Speech to
increase its user base as well as increase its range of related teaching and learning support. The system,
which consists of lesson materials and a recording applet installs itself painlessly and with no detectable
software problems.
PEDAGOGIC MATTERS
Streaming Speech is a self-study computer package arranged in 10 chapters. It presents itself as a series of
attractive pages, which are meant to be navigated sequentially within each chapter. Learners are also able
to connect to any part of the program at any time through access to a layered series of menus some with
drop-down boxes. The interface provided is simple yet information-rich, allowing learners to travel easily
from point to point in response to their perceived needs. The page in Figure 1 shows the range of options
usually available at any one time, including a drop-down menu of the chapter content.
Reviewed by Andrew Lian Review of Streaming Speech
Language Learning & Technology 24
Figure 1. Menu structure
The richness of the menu structure is supplemented with some presentation niceties. For instance, one of
the introduction pages (see Figure 2) features a photograph of the author (top right) and small
photographs of the speakers. When the mouse passes over each speaker some biographical information is
displayed in a popup window and the speaker's voice is heard. This side-by-side arrangement allows
quick contrasting and comparing of voice quality, speech rhythms, and delivery, while personalising the
learning experience and reinforcing the sense of friendship/closeness which the author clearly tries to
generate between himself, informants, and learners. Disappointingly, the author's picture remains silent.
Reviewed by Andrew Lian Review of Streaming Speech
Language Learning & Technology 25
Figure 2. Introducing the approach
The Introduction to Streaming Speech identifies potential users (upper intermediate/advanced learners of
English and language teacher trainees) and presents some key concepts. These include a description of
"fast spontaneous speech," the main object of study in the program, which is defined as being between
250 and 500 words per minute with significant inter and intra speaker variations depending on context
and communicative needs. The introduction also describes the format of each chapter.
The stated objective of the resource is to use "authentic fast spontaneous speech of native speakers of
English -- all friends or colleagues of mine -- to teach listening and pronunciation in a revolutionary
way."
Further, the author states,
If you have problems handling fast speech in listening, and problems in communicating fluently,
Streaming Speech will help. You will learn to bridge the gap between slow and fast speech.
Streaming Speech will present extracts of fast speech to do two things:
• first, train your ears to hear and understand
• second, train your voice to speak at speed with accuracy and fluency
You will use expert speakers (my friends) as your model: you will imitate them as accurately as
you can, at the same time and at the same speed as their original speech.
You will learn to handle fast speech, so you can understand it when you hear it, and speak it when
you need to.
Reviewed by Andrew Lian Review of Streaming Speech
Language Learning & Technology 26
This sets the scene, establishes priorities, and reveals the author's theoretical framework. Perception
comes first, then production. What is not stated explicitly but is implied, is that perception and production
are viewed as mutually reinforcing processes and that working with them in the way described above
results in a cyclical process of progressive refinement of both.
The first eight chapters of the program are based on the discussion and analysis of eight speakers of
British Isles English all identified as friends of the author and all having a connection with the University
of Birmingham. With one exception, they all produce unscripted speech as part of an interview and talk
spontaneously about their personal lives and the things that matter to them. The exception just mentioned
is in chapter 5 and consists of a fragment of a university lecture. Thus the corpus of speech samples is
fairly small and consists of the voices of educated people marked by some common regional and cultural
variations. This choice of example voices, though probably offering too little spoken language for a full
listening course and a full sensitisation to the range of British Isles English, is a reasonable one given the
practicalities of courseware production.
According to the author,
Streaming Speech teaches you to listen by using a standard three stage procedure.
First you get information about the speaker and the topic; second, you get an activity to do while
listening; and third, you focus on those parts of the recording that contain the answers for the
activities. You will do this in the first two sections of each chapter.
The focus will be on the fastest meaningful sections of the recording, or sections which illustrate
important features of the stream of speech. ... To help you focus on these stretches of speech, you
will see an extract in speech-units: you will be able to click on any line of the extract and hear it.
In addition, in the third section of each chapter (named "Discourse Features") you are taught
about a feature of the stream of speech (such as loss of, and merging of sounds; rhythm, level or
falling tones) and then you have to identify the same features in another extract of speech. This
section involves ear-training to make you comfortable with the features of fast speech.
This structure is adhered to consistently with awareness-raising exercises provided at each step of the
way. For instance, the screen below (Figure 3) is meant to bring to the learner's notice the prosodic
features of a speech-unit. It does that by using a special notation which identifies stressed syllables
(uppercase letters or large circles) and which is arranged in the shape of an intonation curve. Clicking the
speaker icon will play the speech-unit and each syllable is highlighted as it is pronounced. While there is
plenty of evidence that learners have difficulty in perceiving correct prosody, the feedback provided here
can begin to make learners aware of where stress patterns are supposed to occur and how speech melody
is organised.
Reviewed by Andrew Lian Review of Streaming Speech
Language Learning & Technology 27
Figure 3. Raising awareness of stress and intonation patterns
There are many similar awareness-raising exercises built into this program. The two screen displays
which follow represent some of the more complex ones.
Reviewed by Andrew Lian Review of Streaming Speech
Language Learning & Technology 28
Figure 4. Analysis of section of speech
Reviewed by Andrew Lian Review of Streaming Speech
Language Learning & Technology 29
Figure 5. Raising awareness to prosodic features
While awareness of prosodic features is crucial to the achieving the author's objectives, the "fast speech"
aspect of the programs is further developed through specific exercises which, for instance contrast slow
"dictionary" pronunciations of individual words with the same words produced in natural language. This
kind of exercise is valuable in that it heightens learners' awarenesses that "words" simply do not exist in
natural spoken language. In time, armed with their new sense of awareness, learners' expectancies as to
the content of natural spoken language will change.
Awareness and listening exercices are reinforced through the pronunciation practice which is available
throughout the program. This is based on a record and compare approach. Learners are required to match
the models provided in every way, thus hopefully developing their sense of the phenomena under
scrutiny. However, they are asked not only to record a final product such as "fast speech" in action, but
also to record some of the language which contrasts strongly with "fast speech," for example, "dictionary"
pronunciations of words. This is so as to give them opportunities for experiencing contrasts not only as
listeners but as producers, too. These changes in forms of perception are designed to give learners the
opportunity to listen and perceive differently, thus increasing the probability of changing the ways they
both hear and produce. While learners are likely to be able to detect gross errors in their performances
(e.g., speed mismatches between the model and themselves), such an approach is problematic in the more
subtle areas of pronunciation and runs the risk of reinforcing incorrect pronunciation habits unless the
learner's perceptions have been sufficiently sharpened to enable some degree of self-correction. To
counteract the problem, it might have been possible to incorporate a speech recognition engine of one
kind or another (e.g., the popular Auralog Tell Me More http://www.auralog.com). These programs, while
improving in their functionality probably have some way to go before they are fully reliable. It is possible
Reviewed by Andrew Lian Review of Streaming Speech
Language Learning & Technology 30
to envisage other ways of providing feedback such as incorporating visual displays, However, speech
recognition systems and visual displays are both expensive to incorporate and potentially difficult to
manage.
Though clearly linked to the production of correct sounds and prosody, the speed-matching exercises are
less likely to be problematic as ample support is provided to develop awareness of the global timing
issues involved. While the provision and nature of any feedback remains problematic in all programs such
as this one, the level of information and awareness-raising provided by this particular system through its
exercises, animations, and tests is likely to enable learners to begin making inroads into their perceptual
mechanisms. Of course, the ultimate effectiveness of the package will need to be tested over time.
The content for the approach just outlined is based on an integrated view of speech phenomena. Each of
the first eight chapters deals with a combination of features. For instance, chapter 2, "On the Move
Again," says it is about long vowels but lists the following activities: "speak in a distinct rhythm; speak
without a distinct rhythm; use prominences, non-prominences and pauses -- 360 words per minute."
Thus, this program adopts a standard intellectual position in relation to articulation phenomena, appearing
to focus on speech sounds but in fact doing something else: working on prosodic features, rate of delivery
and articulation phenomena. In a world where the study of pronunciation is still very strongly focused on
the study of individual sounds, such an approach makes discursive sense.
Chapter 9 consists of a "segment workshop: choose a speaker to work on the vowels and consonants of
English." Learners are asked to select from one of six speakers on whom they would like to model their
voices. This is in itself a positive original approach designed to enhance learners' comfort levels and
enable them to "tune in" to the kind of English that they wish to produce. The same approach is used here
in relation to fast and slow speech but this time there is special emphasis on particular groups of vowel
and consonants grouped together.
There is also a special section called the "cluster-buster" where an attempt is made to deal with problems
of consonant cluster, a difficult area for many learners of English.
Finally, chapter 10 provides theoretical and practical information in relation to "speech units" as well as
some practice in transcribing spoken language according to the system used throughout the program.
While this chapter may seem to be of primary relevance to potential teachers or persons wishing to
develop a better understanding of the prosodic features of English, learners are will undoubtedly benefit
from the pencil and paper transcription exercices offered. This is because transcription activities provide
one of the few possibilities for learners to confront what they think they heard with what is actually there
without the need to resort to the support of another person. The accuracy of their transcription will give
them at least the beginnings of an understanding of where their individual problems lie in a way which is
meaningful to them.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
This review has been written from a perspective that positions learners as central in the process of
learning and that identifies language learning as no more than a special case of learning in general. A
further principle is that the act of learning entails the construction of internal logical and representational
systems for making sense of the phenomena which surround us. In that perspective, it is further assumed
that learning is neither linear nor tree-structured but, rather, is rhizomatic in nature with connections and
flows being made by learners in ways which are individual and an outcome of their personal histories.
Streaming Speech is an ambitious program which deals with important issues of listening and speaking.
Unlike many other commercially-available products it draws on a specific theoretical base (the work of
David Brazil) to legitimize its actions. It is clear that the author has an in-depth understanding of the
issues raised by Brazil and makes good argued use of Brazil's work. The author is also highly committed
Reviewed by Andrew Lian Review of Streaming Speech
Language Learning & Technology 31
to continuing intellectual activity through his work in his Centre for Discourse Intonation Studies. While
Cauldwell clearly admires the work of David Brazil and may even think that he is making the case for
Brazil's work he is, in my view, rather making the case for a form of interactive learning based on
constructivist-like approaches.
While Brazil's work offers, in this specific context, a set of categorisations which provide a focus and a
way of talking about speech phenomena, the major strength of the program lies in the ways in which
awarenesses or perceptions are raised and adjusted through a feedback-modified listening-speaking loop
-- much as it occurs in real life but with enhancements. The problem is to assess the effectiveness of that
loop in the context of this program.
Importantly, the program focuses on the realities of language in action. We no longer have simplified,
"sanitised" language as the basis for study. In a theoretically-related perspective, the program, correctly in
my view, steers away from the impossible Krashenian task of adapting input to the learners' level in a
mass market context. Rather, it offers the following statement/question: "This is what you've got, how do
we deal with it?" To re-formulate this in the context of language-learning, the reality is that natural speech
is fast, complex, and fuzzy whereas teachers often tend to focus, in a commonsensical and therefore
discursively powerful way, on the slow, simple, and clear, to the detriment of their learners (at least in my
view). Rather than providing learners with comprehensible input, the approach here is to provide learners
with the tools which will enable them to develop internal mechanisms for making ordinary, everyday,
language comprehensible. These mechanisms can be generalised beyond specific texts and should help
learners to become self-managing in due course.
The fundamental problem with mastering (or even competently approximating) the sounds of a foreign
language depends largely on the ways in which the learner makes sense of the sound input. Both native
speakers and non-native speakers are exposed to the same sound waves. But they do not make sense of
those sound waves in the same way. This is because the non-native speaker's past (language) experience
enforces a specific way of organising sounds. The perceptual mechanisms accept interpretations that have
been legitimised by experience and refuse interpretations rejected by experience. Thus the trick to correct
structuring, and therefore learning, is to make legitimate that which had, so far, been refused legitimation
by our perceptual/organising mechanisms.
The question to ask in the context of Streaming Speech is whether, the program does enough to change
learners' ways of organising input. On the one hand, the program makes considerable and valuable use of
a number of procedures for raising awarenesses ranging from transcription to the use of animation. The
intention seems to be that the awarenesses generated will in fact enable the beginnings of a re-structured
processing. However, it should be noted that at no time is the student's output verified in any way by any
system or anyone other than themselves. Any analysis which occurs is in the form of what might be called
analysis by proxy, e.g. when the learners perform a transcription and discover that what they wrote down
was in fact not what was expected. This form of feedback then gives them the opportunity not only to
listen again but to listen differently. It is through the performance of this kind of work that perceptual
structures can begin to be modified when using a system such as Streaming Speech. In addition, though,
the provision of large amounts of information at every point of the program will certainly maximise the
potential of the awareness-raising exercises to make inroads into the learners' perceptions.
It is arguable that an approach which focuses on fast speech is possible only because the program is
dealing with intermediate/advanced learners. This is based on the notion of teachers "knowing" what is
difficult and what is not. While that may be true in a statistical sense, there is no guarantee that the
"statistics" will apply to any individual learner. Rather than "statistically" determining difficulty and
setting the program sequence, it might be more valuable to provide learners with opportunities for
grappling with a range of problems, discovering what is difficult for them and at least contribute to setting
their learning agenda. In effect, this is what Streaming Speech does. Further, the approach developed here
Reviewed by Andrew Lian Review of Streaming Speech
Language Learning & Technology 32
can be adapted to many different texts (with different kinds of speech-units) in many different contexts to
match needs and motivations. To put it another way, it may well be possible for less advanced learners to
derive benefits from this approach.
Finally, will learners become fluent listeners and producers of fast speech? That will depend on many
factors, including more opportunities to process speech and also access more of the same kind of
materials (the corpus of speech samples in the program is quite small). What is likely, however, is that
they will all have developed some sensitivity to some of the issues involved, that they will be able to
generalise some of their experiences and have the opportunity better to develop their comprehension and
production processes through interaction with real-world texts.
In that context Streaming Speech makes an interesting and valuable contribution to language teaching and
learning.
ABOUT THE REVIEWER
Andrew Lian specialises in the methodology of teaching foreign/second languages and has a special
interest in the uses of modern technology to enhance learning. He is Professor of Humanities and Director
of the Center for the Study of Languages at Rice University, Houston, Texas, and Emeritus Professor of
Languages and Second Language Education at the University of Canberra, Australia. Previously, he had
been Professor of Modern Languages at James Cook University and Professor of Computer-Enhanced
Language-Learning at Bond University, Australia.
E-mail: lian@rice.edu
