Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num3/wang/
September 2004, Volume 8, Number 3
pp. 90-121
Copyright © 2004, ISSN 1094-3501 90
SUPPORTING SYNCHRONOUS DISTANCE LANGUAGE LEARNING
WITH DESKTOP VIDEOCONFERENCING
Yuping Wang
Griffith University
ABSTRACT
This study involves three dimensions: distance language education (DLE) as the context,
videoconferencing as the technology, and the provision of synchronous oral and visual interaction
in DLE as the core research problem. This article follows on this author's previous research in
regard to the inclusion of oral and visual interaction in distance language learning through the use
of Internet-based desktop videoconferencing tools. It evaluates the findings from a two-stage
evaluation of a particular videoconferencing tool, NetMeeting. The results from this research
confirm that the present generation of Internet-based desktop videoconferencing tools are capable
of supporting oral and visual interaction in DLE. Recommendations are presented for future use
of videoconferencing in DLE.
INTRODUCTION
This research essentially concerns itself with the provision of synchronous oral and visual interaction in a
DLE context. Through an extensive review, Wang and Sun (2001) point out that this has been
problematic due to the existence of a physical distance between the learner and education provider. Print
matter and cassette-taped texts have remained as the major forms of subject matter delivery. The
development of distance students' speaking and interactional skills has largely been left to the students
themselves with little academic support and no spontaneous feedback. Consequently, the speaking and
interactional skills of distance language learners have often been poor and sometimes non-existent (for
discussions of listening and speaking problems in DLE, see Goodfellow, Manning, & Lamy, 1999;
Hampel & Hauck, 2004; Kötter, 2001;Wang & Sun, 2000; Wong & Fauverge, 1999). The significance
and urgency of finding a solution to this problem have led the author's research to an evaluation of the
capabilities of CMC, and Internet-based desktop videoconferencing tools emerged as a potential solution
to the problem. Due to technical difficulties, such as Internet bandwidth limitation and latency, few
empirical studies have been carried out to examine the potential of Internet-based desktop
videoconferencing in facilitating oral and visual interaction in DLE. The present study aims to fill this gap
through a formative evaluation of one specific videoconferencing tool, NetMeeting.
A preliminary evaluation with language teachers and computer specialists was carried out in 2001 to
investigate the technological capabilities of four Internet-based desktop videoconferencing tools
(CUseeMe, ICUII, Video VoxPhone Gold, and NetMeeting), and NetMeeting revealed itself as the most
potentially appropriate tool for supporting oral and visual interaction in DLE (Wang, 2004). Following
this preliminary study, a more in-depth two-stage evaluation of NetMeeting was conducted in both the
intranet and Internet environments, this time involving language learners. This article will first discuss the
importance of interaction (especially oral and visual interaction) to communicative distance language
learning and then report the findings from the two-stage evaluation of NetMeeting concentrating on issues
such as user friendliness, audio and video quality, reliability, and cost. Due to manuscript length
limitations, this article will not discuss language learning outcomes as they will require much more space
for a thorough analysis. Instead, it will concentrate on the technological capabilities of NetMeeting in
supporting oral and visual interaction in a DLE context and the participants' perceptions of this medium.
These capabilities will be discussed in the context of distance language learning and how they can be
Yuping Wang Supporting Synchronous Distance Language …
Language Learning & Technology 91
utilized to facilitate oral and visual interaction. It is hoped that this article will inform distance language
professionals of the capabilities and limitations of the present generation of Internet-based
videoconferencing tools and encourage them to constantly explore ways of providing oral and visual
interaction in DLE. Recommendations for employing videoconferencing tools will be made for future
research.
The two-stage evaluation saw the participation of eight language learners from Griffith University in
Australia, three on-campus and five distance students. A total of 44 videoconferencing sessions were
carried out: 15 in Stage 1 and 29 in Stage 2. A combination of data collection methods was employed
during the evaluation: post-installation surveys, post-session surveys and interviews, post-trial surveys,
and interviews and personal observations by the researcher.
INTERACTION AND LANGUAGE LEARNING
The importance of interaction to communicative L2 learning has long been established and interaction has
been regarded as an integral part of communicative language learning (Gass, 2003; Hall, 1995; Kitade,
2000; Lantolf, 1994; Mitchell & Myles, 1998; Ohta, 1995; Swain & Lapkin,1995). The facilitating effect
of interaction on L2 acquisition is best summarized by Long's (1996) iteraction hpothesis:
negotiation for meaning, and especially negotiation work that triggers interactional adjustments
by the NS [Native Speaker] or more competent interlocutor, facilitates acquisition because it
connects input, internal learner capacities, particularly selective attention, and output in
productive ways. (pp. 451-452)
In order to provide a theoretical framework to examine the problem of lack of provision of oral and visual
interaction in DLE, it is important to first look at what interaction entails, especially at a time when
computer mediated communication (CMC) is gaining importance. Probing the nature of interaction, one
cannot help but notice its complexity and hence the problem of defining it. Such complexity lies not only
in the inclusiveness and extensiveness of interaction, but also in its evolving content and roles in a time of
technological innovation. In other words, the concept of interaction today appears much richer in content,
scope, and depth than it did 20 years ago. Thus, interaction will be discussed here in relation to recent
developments in computer-assisted language learning (CALL) and CMC. A review of the literature on
interaction reveals two major basic traits of interaction: its social nature and its individual nature. Bates
(1997) neatly summarizes these distinctions as follows:
the first is an individual, isolated activity, and that is the interaction of a learner with the learning
material, be it text, television or computer program; the second is a social activity, and that is the
interaction between two or more people about the learning material. Both kinds of interactions
are important in learning. (emphasis in original; p. 100)
As the focus of this article is on interaction as a social activity, the individual nature of interaction will not
be discussed here. There is little controversy over the social nature of interaction. In fact, the word
"interaction" itself denotes such a characteristic. In other words, interaction is a socially reciprocal action
involving two or more people, and it can be face-to-face or technology-mediated. Twenty years ago, the
definition of interaction was largely in the realm of a face-to-face mode. Wells (1981, pp. 46-47) used it
interchangeably with the word "communication." He suggested firstly that "linguistic interaction is a
collaborative activity," and then moved on to say that "linguistic communication involves the
establishment of a triangular relationship between the sender, the receiver, and the context of situation."
Rivers (1987) renders Wells' understanding of interaction into a verbal version, "listening to others,
talking with others, negotiating meaning in a shared context" (p. 4). As interest in and research on
interaction grew, scholars (e.g., Neu, 1990; Oxford, 1995) began to identify the importance of the non-
verbal aspect of face-to-face interaction and its impact on communicative language acquisition.
Yuping Wang Supporting Synchronous Distance Language …
Language Learning & Technology 92
The rapid development of technology has vastly enriched the content and scope of interaction. In fact, a
new term has appeared to denote the influence of technology in interaction -- technologized interaction
(see Hutchby, 2001). Again, this type of interaction can be individual or social. Telephone and computer
mediated human-human interaction are two important forms of technologized social interaction offering
various types of interaction that have not existed previously. In such interaction, the technology is seen as
a tool to be used by the human to achieve communicative goals.
In comparison with telephone conversation, computer-mediated human-human interaction is the most
high-profile phenomenon at the start of the 21st century. This can happen in an oral, visual, or written
context or a combination of the three, between the learner and instructor, among the learners, and/or even
between native speakers in the target language speaking countries and learners in their own countries.
Wang (2004, p. 376) reviews the capacity of CMC in the provision of interaction in distance language
education, and proposes a new taxonomy of interaction supported by CMC: written interaction, oral
interaction, and oral-visual interaction.
Until the present, research in CMC for foreign language learning concentrates primarily on written
interaction using Web-based tools such as e-mail, Internet Chat Relay, Moo, Webchat, and MSN.
Interestingly, the potential of this type of interaction is often interpreted using theories pertaining to oral
discourse in a face-to-face interaction, such as conversation analysis (e.g., Negretti, 1999; Kitade, 2000),
and is regarded as a bridge to face-to-face interaction (e.g., Chun 1994; Kern 1995; Pellettieri 2000;
Smith 2003; Sotillo 2000; Tudini, 2003).
CMC-based oral interaction can be achieved through the use of audio conferencing tools (e.g., I-phone
and NetMeeting). The Open University developed its own Internet-based audio conferencing tool called
Lyceum, which has been reported in a series of articles (see Hampel & Baber, 2003; Hampel & Hauck,
2004; Hauck & Haezewindt, 1999; Kötter, 2001; Kötter, Shield, & Stevens, 1999; Shield, Hauck, &
Hewer, 2001).
Oral-visual interaction represents the highest level of CMC-based interaction at the present time. It offers
an authentic learning environment, in which language learners can orally and visually interact with
another human being in the target language much in the same ways as in face-to-face interaction.
However, research on oral-visual interaction in CMC has only occupied a marginal status in CMC
research. The few earlier videoconferencing projects such as The HIPERNET, LEVERAGE, and ReLaTe
in the 1990s have contributed to our understanding of this form of interaction, but these projects often
involve huge up-front expenses and on-going maintenance costs (for reports and reviews of these
projects, see Buckett & Stringer, 1997; Buckett, Stringer, & Datta, 1999; McAndrew, Foubister, &
Mayes, 1996; Wang, 2004; Wong & Fauverge, 1999). This research attempts to bridge this gap by finding
a technologically and economically viable videoconferencing tool for the support of oral-visual
interaction in DLE. The constant improvement in Internet products and bandwidth promises a worthwhile
effort.
THE IMPORTANCE OF ORAL-VISUAL INTERACTION TO DLE
The central debate in using videoconferencing at this point in time is probably whether video mediated
interaction is necessary or whether audio mediated interaction itself is sufficient for task-based
instructions. A review of the literature reveals a wealth of conflicting arguments, especially when CMC-
based interaction becomes the focus of the debate.
Cognitively and linguistically, it is generally maintained that paralinguistic cues such as head nods and
facial expressions reduce ambiguity in speech and improve understanding (see Bruce, 1996, for a review).
Sproull and Kiesler (1986) present an even stronger argument that lack of nonverbal information reduces
social cues and impairs interaction. Boyle, Anderson, & Newlands (1994) report that when performing a
Yuping Wang Supporting Synchronous Distance Language …
Language Learning & Technology 93
collaborative task, subjects produced shorter exchanges of speech and less problematic dialogues when
they could see each other, than when they could only hear each other.
In a CMC context, the multimodal (visual, audio, and textual) nature of this environment is often regarded
as beneficial to negotiation of meaning (see Chun & Plass, 2000). At the same time, the issue of lack of
body language and of depersonalization of communication in text- and audio-based CMC has been
recognized by scholars such as Lecourt (1999), Kress & van Leeuwen (2001), and Hampel & Hauck
(2004). The findings from Hampel & Hauck support the above arguments from a participant's point of
view. They point out that when "tutors do not receive visual clues and body language, it is easier for
students unsure of what is going on to sit quietly without participating and without getting help or
encouragement" (p. 78).
From a sociocultural perspective, the impact of video on building a learning community, increasing
confidence, and reducing isolation is also largely recognized in the literature (see Bloomfield, 2000;
Hampel & Hauck, 2004; Lake, 1999; Stacey, 1999). These issues are especially typical of distance
learners, who are physically isolated from one another, and video is perceived as being even more crucial
in reducing the impact of the distance.
In contrast to this view, some scholars believe that there are no demonstrated advantages for video-
mediated communication vis-à-vis audio-only interaction. For example, O'Malley, Langton, Anderson,
Doherty-Sneddon, and Bruce (1996) conducted a series of experiments in which pairs of subjects
performed collaborative tasks at a distance via video and audio links or audio links only. Their data
indicate that "users of video links produced longer and more interrupted dialogues than those who had
audio links only, although there were no differences in performance" and that "performance was affected
when the video links were of low bandwidth, resulting in transmission delays" (p. 177).
These conflicting findings need to be further investigated through empirical studies. With the use of CMC
in distance language learning, an important issue is whether the visual and non-verbal component should
be sacrificed to compensate for the quality of oral interaction in view of the present constraints in Internet
technologies.
DEFINITION OF INTERNET-BASED DESKTOP VIDEOCONFERENCING
A clear definition of the technology under investigation is deemed necessary at the outset of this research
as there is a variety of videoconferencing tools used in education. Broadly speaking, from a technical
perspective, videoconferencing can be categorized into desktop and studio-based conferencing. Studio-
based videoconferencing can be supported by the Internet or an intranet and often involves more
complicated set ups and technology, such as a codec, a multipoint control unit, a studio, and a visualiser.
In an educational setting, such videoconferencing is often designed to conduct lectures across campuses
or institutions. Obviously the initial investment and on-going maintenance costs are huge. In contrast,
desktop videoconferencing is a more economical option with minimum initial investment and no on-
going maintenance as some (e.g., NetMeeting) can be freely downloaded from the Internet. This option is
also more user-friendly and less place and time dependent as the learner can use it on his or her personal
computer (PC) at home or work. Again, desktop videoconferencing can be Internet or intranet based. In
an intranet environment data travel between LANs (Local Area Networks) with larger bandwidth and
minimum latency. However, Internet-based videoconferencing uses the Internet as its major data carrier,
in which data can be delayed due to Internet congestion and latency. Thus, bandwidth and latency are two
major problems facing Internet-based videoconferencing. This study will concentrate on the effectiveness
and efficiency of Internet-based desktop videoconferencing in the support of oral-visual interaction in
DLE.
Yuping Wang Supporting Synchronous Distance Language …
Language Learning & Technology 94
THE EVALUATION OF NETMEETING
NetMeeting 3.01 is an Internet-based videoconferencing tool developed by Microsoft. It integrates audio,
video and data conferencing into a single package (for more information on NetMeeting 3.01, see
http://www.microsoft.com/windows/netmeeting/).
The evaluation of NetMeeting involved two stages. It must be pointed out at the outset that data
presentation and discussion will concentrate heavily on the findings from Stage 2, the core stage of the
evaluation, not only because Stage 1 was a preparatory and debugging phase, but also because Stage 2
was conducted with the distance language learners through the Internet. Data from Stage 1 will only be
used as a point of comparison between the two stages in order to support findings from Stage 2.
Summary of Results from the Stage 1 Evaluation
Stage 1 took place between November 2001 and February 2002 at Griffith University in Australia, via its
Local Area Network (LAN) without using a modem (see Figure 1).
Figure 1.The intranet environment in Stage 1 of the evaluation of NetMeeting
The Intranet was chosen because it was easier to test and debug the technology in a controlled
environment. A controlled environment is imperative when evaluating a new technology for teaching and
learning purposes because such evaluation involves many unfamiliar factors. This is especially true when
the investigation relies on the Internet, which has more variables and is often unpredictable. Another
factor taken into consideration was the lack of on-site technical support for distance students.
In the intranet environment, NetMeeting proved to have reached a sufficiently high level of quality and
sophistication to support one-to-one interaction in real time synchronous language learning. The most
important finding was that both the video and audio were synchronized to a real time standard with
clarity, consistency, and minimum delays. Such a high performance standard ensures the flow and
authenticity of oral-visual interaction in a videoconferencing-supported learning environment.
NetMeeting proved to be pedagogically valuable and mature with the integration of the Whiteboard, File
Transfer, Sharing, and a self-image window. The Whiteboard was especially favored by the participants
and its importance to language learning was strongly emphasized in the interviews and surveys.
Furthermore, NetMeeting's user friendliness offers a relaxing environment for language learning.
NetMeeting performed exceptionally reliably with a crash rate of zero. The extremely positive results
from this stage have profound implications for the provision of oral-visual interaction to DLE. At the very
least, they indicate the feasibility of moving to Stage 2 of the evaluation.
Yuping Wang Supporting Synchronous Distance Language …
Language Learning & Technology 95
Stage 2 Evaluation of NetMeeting
The Network Environments
Stage 2 went through three network environments with the participants in various parts of Australia and
the author at Griffith University in Australia.
The Modem - Internet - Modem Environment
In this environment, both the teacher and the participants had to dial into an ISP through a modem, as
illustrated in Figure 2.
Figure 2. The modem - Internet - modem environment in Stage 2 of the evaluation of NetMeeting
The LAN - Internet - Modem Environment
On the teacher's side, the LAN was used to connect directly to the Internet without having to go through a
modem, while the participants were still using the commercially available ISP via a modem, as
demonstrated in Figure 3.
Figure 3. The LAN - Internet - modem environment in Stage 2 of the evaluation of NetMeeting
The LAN - Internet - LAN Environment
As shown in Figure 4, no modems were used in this environment.
Figure 4. The LAN - Internet - LAN environment in Stage 2 of the evaluation of NetMeeting
Yuping Wang Supporting Synchronous Distance Language …
Language Learning & Technology 96
Procedure
This stage of the evaluation witnessed the use of NetMeeting in a real distance language learning setting:
videoconferencing in the target language (Chinese) between the distance language students and the
author. Five videoconferencing sessions with specific tasks to improve students' speaking skills (such as a
telephone conversation and a job interview) were designed specifically for this evaluation and scheduled
for each participant, who was required to complete these tasks in an oral format. The length of each
session ranged from one to one-and-a-half hours. Due to technical difficulties, some sessions had to be
rescheduled to make up for the unsuccessful ones. Therefore a total of 29 tutorial sessions of NetMeeting
was attempted in this stage, with 19 successful sessions and 10 incomplete ones. The participants are
referred to here as Participants A, B C, D, and E. Participant C completed only three sessions and
withdrew from the trial due to personal problems. Participant C did not complete the post-trial survey.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Findings and discussions are presented following the criteria developed by Wang (2004) which are
summarized as follows:
1. user friendliness,
2. audio and video quality,
3. other features of pedagogical value,
4. reliability, and
5. cost.
(1) User Friendliness
The main concerns in this criterion are the ease of installing a videoconferencing tool and the ease of use.
Data presented here were obtained from two surveys -- a post-installation survey and a post-trial survey.
Ease of Installation
All participants set up NetMeeting following the instruction manual (see Appendix A) without requesting
any assistance from the author. A brief post-installation survey was conducted. In regard to the level of
difficulty of installation, participants' responses ranged from very easy to difficult. Table 1 summarizes
the length of time for the installation by each participant:
Table 1. Survey on Installation in Stage 2 -- Length of Time for Setting Up NetMeeting
Participant A Participant B Participant C Participant D Participant E
1 hour 1.5 hours 1 hour 20 minutes A few weeks*
* Participant E had a faulty Webcam that had to be replaced.
Ease of Use
The participants seemed to be very confident in operating NetMeeting during the sessions, thanks to the
simple interface design (see Figure 5).
Yuping Wang Supporting Synchronous Distance Language …
Language Learning & Technology 97
Figure 5. The interface of NetMeeting
In the post-trial survey, question PTS-2.12 asked the participants to rate the ease of use of NetMeeting on
a 10-point scale. Most of the choices concentrated on the very easy end of the scale with choices of 1, 3,
and 4, with the exception of Participant D, who chose 5 (see Appendix B, PTS-2.12; participant D
encountered great difficulties in the initial connections due to problems unrelated to NetMeeting itself,
e.g., a firewall and faulty headphones). Participant A commented on her choice by saying that
NetMeeting "was very easy to use, as the program is user friendly, and simple to follow" (see Appendix
B, PTS-2.12).
In conclusion, although the participants only had a basic level of computer literacy, all were able to set up
NetMeeting. As expected, some students found it easier and others found it less easy, depending on the
individual student's computer skills and knowledge. The user friendliness of NetMeeting was firmly
established in both the trials with the on-campus and Open Learning participants.
(2) The Audio and Video Quality
Data are presented and discussed separately on each of the three network environments so that a precise
account of what happened in each environment can be depicted and discussed.
Audio Quality in the Modem - Internet - Modem Environment
Personal Observation. In theory, a reduction in the audio and video quality of the conferences can be
expected when dialling up through a modem because data can be further bottlenecked and more latency
can be experienced. This assumption was proven to be true in this stage of the evaluation.
A total of 9 of the 29 sessions was conducted in this network environment. On average, the sound quality
was generally clear and continuous enough for accomplishing the planned tasks, if the timing of the
sessions was right. However, it was still not as good as that in an Intranet environment, and a delay in lip
synchronization was more noticeable than in an Intranet situation, but not prominent enough to interrupt
the general flow of the interaction. A major issue in the sound quality was its instability. In some sessions,
Yuping Wang Supporting Synchronous Distance Language …
Language Learning & Technology 98
the sound quality was quite similar to that in an Intranet environment, but in others the sound was
unreliable -- sometimes clear and continuous and sometimes jammed and lost. It was discovered that early
in the morning (before 8:00am) and weekends were the best times for videoconferencing sessions. Other
times the sound could be stuck for one or two seconds, resulting in a loss of words or unintelligible
sounds with echoing.
Participants' Perceptions. Participants' perceptions correspond largely to my observations -- the sound
was clear enough for successful interaction in the target language but unstable at times (see Table 2).
Table 2. Results From the Post-Session Interviews in Stage 2: Participants' Responses Regarding the
Sound Quality in the Modem - Internet - Modem Environment.
Participant
Session A B C
1
WED 5:00-6:00pm
Sometimes it was really good,
sometimes it broke into little
segments.
SAT 6:50-7:20pm
Good
SUN 10:00-11:30am
Very good and continuous
with only a few occasions
when the sound got stuck.
2
WED 5:00-6:00pm
A lot better first but became a
bit fuzzy towards the end. On
the whole, a little bit better.
WED 8:25-9:20pm
Very bad, disconcerting,
distracting.
SAT 10:00-11:00am
When it's running alright,
very clear, but getting worse
towards later in the morning.
3
SAT 10:30-12:00pm
Good, definitely better than
the previous session.
4
WED 7:30-8:30pm
Quite good, better than last
session at the start, but broken
up a bit at the end.
5
SAT 9:30-11:00am
Very good, the best out of the
five sessions
Note: Participants' feedback was only solicited on the successful sessions in the modem - Internet -
modem environment.
The following transcript of the post-session interview at the end of Session 5 provides a more detailed
account of the participants' perceptions of the sound quality. This session was conducted 9:30-11:00am on
a Saturday.
Participant B: It was quite good until the end, it started to sort of break up a little bit.
R: […] So at first it was ok, was it?
Participant B: Yeah, it was quite good actually.
R: […] So compared with the last session, was it getting better or worse? Or the
same?
Participant B: I remember our last session was not too bad either. I think the quality, if
anything, was a bit better early on. […]
R: Was it good enough for learning Chinese?
Participant B: Yeah.
To summarize, while timing was never an issue in Stage 1 in the Intranet environment, with no noticeable
difference in audio quality between different times of the day, in the Internet environment, timing became
a crucial factor. Internet conditions such as bandwidth and latency became decisive. In other words, the
Yuping Wang Supporting Synchronous Distance Language …
Language Learning & Technology 99
success of each session relied heavily on the Internet traffic conditions at the time of the session. Such a
constraint on time may have an adverse implication for the actual implementation of videoconferencing as
Internet off-peak time may mean that both the teacher and the learner would have to work at a time which
may not be convenient to them.
Audio Quality in the LAN - Internet - Modem Environment
Personal Observation. Of the 29 attempted sessions, 13 were carried out in this environment with 5
successful sessions. Eight sessions failed not because of this environment or NetMeeting, but because of
such problems as a firewall and faulty equipment. In this network environment, a faster transmission was
experienced on the teacher's side resulting in clearer and more continuous sound.
Participants' Perceptions. In contrast to the improvement experienced by the author, the participants'
perceptions of the sound quality were mixed (see Table 3).
Table 3. Results From the Post-Session Interviews in Stage 2: Participants' Responses Regarding the
Sound Quality in the LAN - Internet - Modem Environment
Participant
Session A B C
1
2
3
Really bad for about 20
seconds in the beginning, but
for the majority of the lesson,
it was very good.
Really good and clear. Better
than before.
4
Very good, but a little bit
worse than normal.
5
Good, same as the last
session.
Quite good
It crackled a bit. A little bit
delayed.
Note: Participants' feedback was only solicited on the successful sessions in the LAN-Internet-modem
environment.
Table 3 indicates that Participant A did not notice an obvious improvement on her side when commenting
on the sound quality of Sessions 3, 4, and 5. In contrast, Participant C observed better sound quality even
at 3:00 on a Friday afternoon, a comparatively busy Internet time, compared with her two previous
sessions on weekends.
The difference between the sound quality experienced by Participants A and C may be caused by the
different quality of the sound cards on their computers. The improved sound quality on my side indicates
the importance of a broader bandwidth for quality videoconferencing.
Audio Quality in the LAN - Internet - LAN environment
Personal Observation. In such an environment, with the exception of the Internet section in the middle,
data travelled through a much wider bandwidth (LAN) at both the teacher's and the participant's ends
without using a modem. The seven sessions with Participant E were conducted in this environment on
weekdays between 2:00pm and 6:00pm, a peak period for Internet traffic. Of seven sessions, two failed
because of the existence of a firewall in her school's ISP. During the two failed sessions, I could see and
hear her with the best clarity among all the sessions in this stage of the trial. Unfortunately, she could not
hear and see me. To avoid the firewall, Participant E had to use the computer lab at another university. It
was observed that the audio, on my side, was consistently clear and continuous with delays less than one
second, similar to the sound quality in the intranet. In fact, I had the best audio quality of the 19
Yuping Wang Supporting Synchronous Distance Language …
Language Learning & Technology 100
successful sessions. My observation suggests that the audio quality was not much affected by Internet
traffic when using a LAN - Internet - LAN connection, even at peak Internet times.
Participant's perceptions. Contrary to my expectation, the sound quality on the Participant's side was
not reported to be as good as it should be (see Table 4).
Table 4. Results From the Post-Session Interviews in Stage 2: Participant's Responses Regarding the
Sound Quality in the LAN - Internet - LAN Environment
Participant Session 1 Session 2 Session 3 Session 4 Session 5
E
Good, but with
crackly
interference.
Not so good.
Fading in and
out.
Much better
than the
previous two
sessions.
Sometimes it
was good,
sometimes it
was worse.
Second best .
Same as
Session 4.
Note: Participants' feedback was only solicited about the successful sessions.
The following excerpt from the post-session interview at the completion of Session 4 further explains the
participant's perception of the sound quality.
Participant E: Ok. Well it wasn't wonderful quality.
R: So you heard some crackling sound?
Participant E: I did.
R: Apart from that, what else did you ...
Participant E: Apart from that, it wasn't bad. It was, the major thing that happens is when you
are saying a sentence, I get crackles that have the effect of stopping me from
hearing a few of the words in the sentence.
[…]
Participant E: …. But sometimes it's good, sometimes it's worse. It varies a lot in the course.
The computing power of her laptop may have been a determining factor affecting the audio quality,
because many functions of laptops are compressed, limiting their power to support good audio or video
quality.
To summarize the findings in relation to audio quality in the three network environments, the best audio
quality was achieved in the LAN-Internet-LAN environment and the most uncontrollable environment
was the modem-Internet-modem. The main problem in sound quality lies in its instability. However, 19
videoconferencing sessions with the prescribed tasks were successfully completed and the participants
were all very positive about the potential of videoconferencing in supporting oral-visual interaction in
DLE. In particular, the high quality sound in the LAN-Internet-LAN environment indicates the immense
potential of videoconferencing tools once the Internet bandwidth is improved.
The Video Quality in the Modem - Internet - Modem Environment
Personal Observation. The video was mainly used by both parties to assist interaction during task
completion, through observing each other's facial expressions and body movements above the shoulders,
and demonstrating items to the other party, much like face-to-face interaction. For example, through the
video, the author demonstrated how to pronounce certain words or how to position the tongue when
pronouncing a word. The video on the teacher's side, though not as clear as in the Intranet environment
and often more delayed, was usually continuous and presented paralinguistic cues accurately and with
hardly any delay. Signs of comprehension, frustration, nervousness, and enjoyment were all evident in
Yuping Wang Supporting Synchronous Distance Language …
Language Learning & Technology 101
real time. Delays in transmission were not as obvious during continuous speech but became noticeable
during turn taking, sometimes causing start up collisions or false starts. A major problem with the video
was the freezing of images caused either by congested Internet traffic or the limited capacity of
participants' computers. The length of the freezing varied from 1 second to 10 seconds with the exception
of Session 2, in which the image of Participant B was frozen for the entire session.
Participants' Prceptions. Again, the perceptions of the video quality varied from participant to
participant and from session to session, although the participants were generally positive as far as the
pedagogical values of the video were concerned (See Table 5).
Table 5. Results From the Post-Session Interviews in Stage 2: Participants' Responses Regarding the
Video Quality in the Modem - Internet - Modem Environment.
Participant
Session A B C
1
Ok. Sometimes there was a
delay.
Quite good. Good.
2
Good.
Better than last session with
fewer delays and less
freezing.
Better than last session. Most of the time, it's very
good.
3 Quite good.
4
Very good at the beginning
but the image broke up a bit
towards the end of the
session.
5 Very good.
Note: Participants' feedback was only solicited on the successful sessions in the modem - Internet -
modem environment.
When asked to compare the video quality in Session 3 (which he said was quite good) and Session 4,
Participant B offered the following comments:
Participant B: It [Session 4] was better actually initially, and again towards the end, I guess the
Net gets busier, it started to sort of you know break up the image. But in, in the
beginning, it was very good, very good quality I feel.
R: So when I showed you how to write the character with my finger, could you see
it clearly?
Participant B: Yes.
R: Good enough for learning Chinese?
Participant B: Yes, definitely.
Again, although the video quality was not ideal in this environment, all participants perceived it to be
adequate for language learning.
Video Quality in LAN - Internet - Modem
Personal Observation. Similar to the sound quality, the video quality was noticeably better on the
author's side with clearer and more continuous images and less delays.
Participants' Perceptions. Again, the participants offered diverse opinions on the improvement of the
video quality (see Table 6).
Yuping Wang Supporting Synchronous Distance Language …
Language Learning & Technology 102
Table 6. Results From the Post-Session Interviews in Stage 2 -- Participants' Responses Regarding the
Video Quality in the LAN - Internet - Modem Environment
Participant
Session A C D
1
2
3
Fine. It was probably better
than previous sessions. Quite
continuous.
Very good. Much better than
the last session.
4
Good. A few little delays. A
little bit worse than previous
sessions.
5
Good. Just a delay in the first
20 seconds.
Very good. Sometimes it
froze for half a second.
Note: Participants' feedback was only solicited on the successful sessions in the LAN-Internet-modem
environment.
Participant C also verified the capability of the video in supporting distance language learning by saying
that she could see the movements of my lips and so on when she needed to.
Video Quality in LAN - Internet - LAN
Personal Observations. On my side, I enjoyed the highest and most consistent quality of the video
among the sessions with the distance participants, similar to that in the Intranet environment with the on-
campus students. The video was synchronized with good clarity, high resolution, and continuity
throughout all the sessions in this network environment.
Participants' Perceptions. However, the video quality on the participants' side was not reported to be as
satisfactory. In comparison with the feedback from other participants, Participant E seemed to have
experienced the worst video quality (see Table 7).
Table 7. Results From the Post-Session Interviews in Stage 2: Participant's Responses Regarding the
Video Quality in the LAN - Internet - LAN Environment
Participant Session 1 Session 2 Session 3 Session 4 Session 5
E
Very good, but
could not see
facial
expressions
clearly.
Not clear at all.
Blurred and
pixilated but
continuous.
A bit better than
last session but
still blurred and
pixilated.
Occasionally
clear.
Similar to the
previous
session, still
blurred and
pixilated.
Sometimes
clear but
blurred 55% of
the time.
Participant E further commented at the completion of Session 3:
It [the video quality], it still wasn't good. It's still I call pixelated. Sometimes it's clear and I can
see quite well. I could see that you had your hair tied back today, and you had black and white on.
But a lot of times it was still not that clear. Not as clear as I see myself in that corner box [the
"My Video" window].
This poor video quality on the participant's side was probably caused by the lower processing power of
her laptop. Thus a powerful desktop computer can be a crucial factor in supporting a quality video image.
In summary, despite the fact that the video quality in the three network environments varied from one
another, it was observed and perceived to have reached a satisfactory level of performance for distance
Yuping Wang Supporting Synchronous Distance Language …
Language Learning & Technology 103
language learning. The distance group highly valued the visual contact facilitated by videoconferencing.
Consequently they were more receptive of the video quality than the on-campus group. It was observed
that the distance participants were genuinely delighted to see me, especially on the first occasion, and they
watched the video much more constantly than the on-campus students. All of them believed that the video
was very important in reducing their sense of isolation and increasing their confidence in learning. After
confirming the quality of the video for learning Chinese, Participant A commented that "it's good to see
facial expressions" and "have that facial contact."
(3) Other Features of Pedagogical Value
Under discussion here are features of NetMeeting other than its video and audio functions. This includes
features such as the Whiteboard, Sharing, File Transfer, and My Video. As I discusses their pedagogical
values in detail elsewhere (Wang, 2004), this article will concentrate on the problems encountered in this
stage given the understanding that both the on-campus and distance participants unanimously confirmed
the pedagogical values of these features.
The Whiteboard
The on-screen Whiteboard is a pedagogically valuable feature offered by NetMeeting, which was mostly
used in this trial for character writing, linguistic explanations, and showing directions during task
completions (see Figure 6). It was perceived by all participants to be of great importance to language
learning. It was used frequently in each session and often activated by the participants.
Figure 6. Whiteboard contents in Session 2 with Participant A
It was generally reliable with only two crashes. One crash happened when, as soon as the Whiteboard was
clicked on, NetMeeting crashed. Another happened when the two parties were moving the Whiteboard at
the same time. In one session, the Whiteboard could not be started at all. These problems had never
happened in Stage 1, and may have been caused by the low capacity of the participants' computers.
Yuping Wang Supporting Synchronous Distance Language …
Language Learning & Technology 104
Sharing
The Sharing function enables the users to share with other parties multiple programs opened on the
computer desktop during a NetMeeting conference. For the NetMeeting sessions under discussion, it was
planned to use this feature for two purposes: to share a menu and to view a digital personal photo during
task completion. With some participants, the sharing of the menu (a 32 kB Word document) appeared on
the participants' screen almost instantly with excellent quality. With others, it took somewhat longer to
share a document. For example, it took about one minute to load onto Participant B's computer screen.
However, the photo (240 kB) could not be shared successfully and only a frame of the photo could be
seen on the participant's screen. This failure may have been caused by the slow Internet transmission or
the limited capacity of the participant's computer because in Stage 1 in the Intranet environment the
sharing of the same documents was instant with the same quality as in the original documents. To rectify
this situation, the photo was replaced by a family photo of a much smaller size (32KB) and was shared
with the participants with success. Thus in the Internet environment, the success of sharing a document
largely depends on the Internet traffic conditions, the size of the document and the capacity of the other
party's computer. In other words, the bigger the document is, the more the bandwidth it will take and the
slower the transmission will be. It is thus recommended that small sized documents be used for effective
document sharing.
File Transfer
Unlike in the function Sharing, documents sent through File Transfer can be viewed on the spot or kept
by the other party for future reference. The use of this function was planned for two occasions for each
participant -- the transfer of a video clip with a speech in Chinese and transfer of a word document. It was
the same 2.41MB video clip, which was transferred instantly in Stage 1. However, in this phase of the
evaluation the size of the video clip was too large for the Internet to transfer within a reasonable time
frame. For example, in one session, the transfer was still going when the session concluded. To further
test the function of File Transfer, a digital family photo of 32KB was transferred through this function to
the participant and the transfer was found to be much quicker, varying from one to three minutes. Thus it
can be concluded that this function was useful for transferring small sized documents, be it a Word
document or a photo. Similar to Sharing, its transmission speed was subject to the Internet traffic
conditions, latency, and the individual's computer power.
My Video
My Video is a picture-in-picture self-image window on the computer screen where one can see oneself
while watching the video of the other party. This function was utilized constantly in every session to
ensure that my image on the other side of the conference was still on the screen and, more importantly, to
adjust paralinguistic cues to assist the flow of interaction and negotiation of meaning. For example, a
quick glance at the My Video image of myself would remind me of the appropriate expression needed for
encouraging participants to produce output. Participant A also used it to adjust the photos she wanted to
show the teacher through the Webcam. Furthermore, the function of My Video is also an important source
of information when using a recording device (e.g., Camtasia) to capture the screen activities of both
parties.
(4) Reliability
Reliability here refers to the stability of NetMeeting in terms of its crash rate during a videoconferencing
session. Wang (2004) maintains that "more than one crash during a videoconferencing session will deter
students from using it" (p. 383). The reliability of NetMeeting had been established in Stage 1 in the
intranet environment, where NetMeeting never crashed. However, in Stage 2, NetMeeting crashed 5 times
among the 19 successful sessions, resulting in an average of 0.26 crashes per session. One of the crashes
happened in Session 4, when Participant E attempted to enlarge her video size. This action exceeded the
Yuping Wang Supporting Synchronous Distance Language …
Language Learning & Technology 105
capacity of her laptop and caused the crash. In Session 3, when Participant B tried to use My Video while
I was clicking on the Whiteboard, NetMeeting froze. Despite these crashes, participants, except
Participant D, who encountered a number of problems such as a firewall and faulty equipment, were all
very positive about the reliability of NetMeeting (see Appendix B, PTS-2.4). Although the issue of
reliability only concerns the stability of NetMeeting, the examination of the causes for these crashes led
this investigation to the discovery of factors other than NetMeeting itself, factors such as the participants'
limited computer power and a congested Internet transmission. In other words, the NetMeeting program
itself is reliable, but when used in an Internet environment, its reliability may be affected by factors other
than those in the program itself.
(5) Cost
The issue of cost has been discussed by Wang (2004). To summarize, NetMeeting is freely downloadable
from the Internet, and the only cost involved is the purchase of a Webcam (approximately US$50) and the
fee for an Internet connection. This research recognizes that the issue of affordability is of no less
importance than technological and pedagogical issues in distance language learning. In fact, affordability
is the foundation of any innovative attempt in teaching. Internet-based desktop videoconferencing offers a
low-cost alternative in comparison to studio-based videoconferencing.
SUMMARY
This stage of the evaluation reveals that Internet bandwidth and latency are two critical factors affecting
the consistency and reliability of audio and videoconferencing. The limitation of Internet bandwidth has
long been recognized as a major detrimental factor affecting videoconferencing (see Buckett & Stringer,
1999; Chou, 2001; Kötter, et al. 1999; McAndrew et al., 1996; Wong & Fauverge, 1999). Results from
this research show that, with the present generation of the Internet bandwidth, choosing a less congested
Internet time was crucial to the success of videoconferencing sessions. Presently, Internet bandwidth can
only comfortably accommodate one-to-one videoconferencing, while many-to-many videoconferencing
requires more complicated Internet technologies. Moreover, the findings from this research also direct our
attention to the existence and impact of communication latency. Communication latency is the time
interval for a message to travel from the source machine to the destination machine.
Having discussed these problems, I do not suggest that language professionals wait for the improvement
of the technology. Rather, language professionals should be informed of these problems and work to
maximize the potential of videoconferencing and minimize the effect of the bandwidth and latency.
Fortunately, with the rapid development in computer technology, more advanced videoconferencing tools,
improved Internet bandwidth, and reduced latency will be a reality in the near future.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR EMPLOYING INTERNET-BASED DESKTOP
VIDEOCONFERENCING TOOLS IN DISTANCE LANGUAGE LEARNING
During the course of this evaluation, a number of issues emerged that can be valuable references for
future users or researchers of Internet-based desktop videoconferencing tools.
1. An appropriate timetable needs to be negotiated with the learner in order to avoid Internet congestion.
Early mornings before eight o'clock or weekends appear to be better times for videoconferencing.
2. To receive the best audio quality, it is suggested that users wear headphones instead of using the
speakers of the computer. The use of speakers can produce feedback and echoes of one's own voice,
thus frustrating the other party.
3. If the Webcam has been used (e.g., to take a photo, to make a video clip) before videoconferencing, it
often takes the video away from NetMeeting. Restarting the computer before NetMeeting sessions
will reconfigure the video to NetMeeting.
Yuping Wang Supporting Synchronous Distance Language …
Language Learning & Technology 106
4. It is also recommended that too many or too quick movements in front of the Webcam be avoided
because the video image may become blurred.
5. Future researchers should be aware of the issue of firewalls when using a LAN or ISP to connect to
the Internet. Institutions or ISPs may erect firewalls in their network to block videoconferencing for
security reasons or in order to reduce cost.
6. Last but not least, before using NetMeeting, it is recommended that other applications on the desktop
be closed in order to save computer power for running NetMeeting. Too many applications will take
up too much computer power resulting in poor video and sound quality, slow program response, or
even crashes of NetMeeting or its functions.
7. Derived from the positive findings of this research are a number of implications for the design of a
distance language-learning program with oral-visual interaction as its component. Although the
distance Chinese language program at Griffith University was employed as a case study, NetMeeting
can be used to facilitate oral-visual interaction by any other distance language learning program
because it is a generic tool.
Firstly, it is proposed that the use of videoconferencing be incorporated into the course as an assessable
item. This is to avoid the pitfall that learners treat it as peripheral. For example, assessable speaking tasks
can be designed in such a way that they require the use of videoconferencing tools to cooperate and
communicate among learners. Advanced learners can be encouraged to use videoconferencing to
complete role-plays and so forth among themselves or with a native speaker on a regular basis. Students
can videotape their videoconferencing activities and send the videotapes to the instructor for grading. At
the same time, videoconferencing can help the distance learners build a learning community, an essential
social environment for effective language learning.
Videoconferencing tools can also be employed to provide regular speaking tutorials similar to the sessions
conducted in this research when the number of students is not too large. Tasks with clearly established
and achievable goals for each videoconferencing session should be set beforehand and carried out in these
tutorials.
Moreover, one-to-one videoconferencing can add a new dimension to distance language testing in that
speaking tests can be conducted in real time through NetMeetinig. More authentic and cheating-proof
than the telephone, videoconferencing supports interaction between the student and instructor in much the
same way as in face-to-face interaction. However, the occasionally inconsistent audio and video quality
should be taken into consideration when grading students' performance.
Videoconferencing-based student consultation can be a more academically and economically viable
option compared with telephone consultation. Instead of picking up a phone, the student can invite their
teacher online to answer their questions more effectively with built-in conferencing functions such as the
Whiteboard, Sharing, and File Transfer.
However, videoconferencing is only one of the tools to provide oral-visual interaction in distance
education. It thus should be used in combination with other forms of technologies and methods to
promote maximum language learning, as Kaye (1989) points out,
These technologies [CMC and other on-line services] should not be considered as a substitute for
existing media and methods which have already proved their worth for distance education. CMC
will not in every case replace teachers, texts, telephone tuition, or residential seminars -- for the
majority of learners it will complement these earlier technologies, and in so doing vastly enrich
the distance education experience. (p. 9)
Yuping Wang Supporting Synchronous Distance Language …
Language Learning & Technology 107
CONCLUSION
The two-stage evaluation of NetMeeting yielded a wealth of data strongly supporting the use of
videoconferencing in DLE for the provision of oral-visual interaction. This evaluation of NetMeeting
contributes, in many ways, to our understanding of the capabilities of the present generation of Internet-
based desktop videoconferencing. The ease of installation and use makes NetMeeting a user-friendly
videoconferencing tool, a merit that was unanimously agreed upon by both the on-campus and distance
participants. While acknowledging three major constraints (Internet bandwidth, latency, and the
computing power of the individual PC) on the quality of a videoconference, this research has successfully
confirmed the capability of NetMeeting in providing reliable and acceptable audio and video quality. This
finding is a major contribution of this research to the study of Internet-based desktop videoconferencing
because without good audio and video quality, videoconferencing would be impossible. Video has been
greatly appreciated by the distance participants and its pedagogical values are indispensable to language
learning at a distance. Particularly significant is the high performance standard of NetMeeting in the
LAN-Internet-LAN environment, which indicates that with improved Internet bandwidth, quality
videoconferences at a distance will be easily attainable.
In contrast to some commercially available videoconferencing tools (see Wang, 2004, for an evaluation of
some other videoconferencing tools), NetMeeting lends itself well to supporting interactive distance
language learning by offering features of great pedagogical value such as the Whiteboard, Sharing, and
File Transfer. As far as its reliability is concerned, NetMeeting itself proved to be reliable despite the fact
that the Internet could pose potential problems due to limited bandwidth and latency. In addition, the fact
the NetMeeting can be freely downloaded from the Internet and that there is no maintenance cost
involved effectively reduces the cost to both educational institutions and the learner, making it a more
economically viable and sustainable option. Even though the length of this article does not allow a
detailed discussion of the learning outcomes of the participants, data from the evaluation of NetMeeting
have confirmed the potential of videoconferencing in supporting interactive and communicative language
learning at a distance. Many specific pedagogical issues have emerged during this research and need to be
investigated in the future, issues such as videoconferencing-based learning task design, performance and
evaluation, and the positive impact of the video and videoconferencing on distance language learners'
confidence building and acquisition of communicative competence.
The issue of obsolescence of technology was recognized early in this research. However, the scope of this
research only allows for the examination of the capabilities of one videoconferencing tool. NetMeeting
was selected not only for its state-of-the art quality and capability, but also because it represents the future
of the technology of its kind. In fact, the basic technology of all desktop videoconferencing tools is quite
similar. The differences lie primarily in the video and audio quality, interface design, and built-in features
such as File Transfer, the Whiteboard, and Sharing. The author acknowledges the possibility that more
advanced desktop videoconferencing tools might be emerging to replace NetMeeting. However, the basic
characteristics and capabilities of videoconferencing tools discussed here should still be applicable. More
importantly, there is a crucial pedagogical concern at the heart of this research, that is, for distance
language professionals to be open to the use of whatever technology available to maximize the level and
quality of oral-visual interaction, and in so doing, create a more effective and efficient learning
environment for distance language learners. Although the technology is changing rapidly, the larger
pedagogical issue contained in this research is unlimited and beyond obsolescence.
In summary, this research has addressed a real need in distance language learning: providing oral-visual
interaction. Despite the relatively small number of participants, through 34 videoconferencing sessions,
this research has examined the capabilities of videoconferencing and participants' perceptions of this new
medium. Abundant data have been collected to establish that the present generation of Internet based
desktop videoconferencing tools will emerge as a cost-effective solution to the problem of lack of oral-
Yuping Wang Supporting Synchronous Distance Language …
Language Learning & Technology 108
visual interaction in distance language learning, and that videoconferencing was extremely well received
by the distance participants. With the employment of videoconferencing tools, distance language learning
can be transformed from asynchronous and non-real time to orally and visually synchronous and real
time. It is not an exaggeration to say that Internet-based real time technology is changing distance
education quantitatively as well as qualitatively, and this research represents only the beginning of the
important effort to make distance language learning a more effective endeavor.
To the knowledge of this author, there has been no empirical report in the literature which evaluates the
use of NetMeeting in the context of DLE. Findings from this research have therefore extended our
knowledge of the capabilities of Internet-based desktop videoconferencing tools and broadened our
horizons by opening up new possibilities for interactive language learning at a distance. Another major
significance of this study lies in its confirmation that the technology is in place and capable, and is
improving with the advancement of Internet technology. It is hoped that this research will provoke a
change in thinking that language professionals should utilize what is available to maximize the potential
of distance language learning.
Yuping Wang Supporting Synchronous Distance Language …
Language Learning & Technology 109
APPENDIX A.
Installation Manual for NetMeeting
Yuping Wang Supporting Synchronous Distance Language …
Language Learning & Technology 110
Yuping Wang Supporting Synchronous Distance Language …
Language Learning & Technology 111
Yuping Wang Supporting Synchronous Distance Language …
Language Learning & Technology 112
APPENDIX B
Questions and Summary of Results of the Post Trial Survey
Student Evaluation
N = 4 (Participant C did not complete the Post Trial Survey due to her withdrawal.)
Part One -- Background Information
1. How long have you been learning Chinese? PTS - 1.1
_________________________________________________________________________________
2. Apart from the Open Learning Chinese program you are now enrolled in, at what other
places have you studied Chinese? Please indicate the appropriate bracket (s) with an X.
You may select more than one. PTS - 1.2
(a) None ( )
(b) An institution in China ( )
(c) An institution in Australia ( )
(d) An institution in Taiwan ( )
(e) Other (please specify) ____________________ ( )
3. How did you practice your speaking skills before this trial? Please indicate the
appropriate bracket (s) with an X. You may select more than one. PTS - 1.3
(a) Never practiced ( )
(b) With Chinese friends ( )
(c) With my neighbours ( )
(d) With tapes ( )
(e) With my colleagues ( )
(f) With people in my family ( )
(g) Other (please specify) ____________________ ( )
Participants
Q1: Length of
learning Chinese
Q2: Other places of
study
Ways of practicing speaking Chinese
before this trial
Participant A 10 months none Never practised
Participant B A few years Taiwan and Germany With tapes, Rosetta Stone (an online
course)
Participant C 10 months none With tapes
Participant D 10 months none With tapes and Chinese speakers
Participant E 2 years Anther institution in
Australia
With tapes and colleagues
Yuping Wang Supporting Synchronous Distance Language …
Language Learning & Technology 113
Part Two - Evaluation of NetMeeting
1. Please rank the following features of NetMeeting according to their usefulness in
learning Chinese. Number 1 represents most useful and Number 5 least useful. Please
put an number in each bracket. PTS - 2.1
(a) Video (the image) ( )
(b) Audio (the sound) ( )
(c) File Transfer ( )
(d) Sharing (sharing document on your desktop ( )
(e) the Whiteboard ( )
(f) My Video (the self image window)
No.1 No.2 No.3 No.4 No.5 No.6
audio 4
video 3 1
File Transfer 1 1 2
Sharing 2
Whiteboard 1 3
My Video 2 2
Note: Participant E put number 1 for both audio and the Whiteboard. Sharing was not rated by Participant
D and E.
2. Below is a list of possible strengths of NetMeeting for language learning. Please put
an X in the appropriate bracket (s) when NetMeeting helped you. You may select more
than one: PTS - 2.2
Strengths Results
(a) Building my confidence in speaking Chinese (4)
(b) Reducing my anxiety in learning Chinese (3)
(c) Reducing isolation in learning in distance mode (3)
(d) Increasing my motivation in learning the language (3)
(e) Seeing the person I am talking to (3)
(f) Allowing instant feedback from the teacher (4)
(g) Allowing mistakes to be corrected on the spot (4)
(h) Providing me the opportunity to interact spontaneously with someone (4)
(i) Negotiating for meaning using Chinese (3)
(j) Allowing me to ask for more information using Chinese (4)
(k) Allowing me to clarify meaning using Chinese (4)
(l) Inferring meaning according to the context (3)
(m) Improving my listening skill (4)
(n) Other (please specify) __ having fun
Yuping Wang Supporting Synchronous Distance Language …
Language Learning & Technology 114
3. Below is a list of possible weakness of NetMeeting for language learning. Please put
an X in the appropriate bracket (s). You may select more than one PTS - 2.3
(a) It's too difficult to use (0)
(b) It's too difficult to set up (1)
(c) It's one-to-one mode only (1)
(d) The quality of the video is not good enough for language learning (1)
(e) The quality of the audio is not good enough for language learning (0)
(f) It lacks support for group discussion (0)
(g) The Internet transmission was not reliable (3)
(h) NetMeeting was not reliable (1)
(i) You have to do it at certain times because of Internet congestion (3)
(j) Other (please specify) _____________________ (0)
4. How reliable was NetMeeting? Please indicate on the diagram below with an X.
(Please Note: reliable here refers whether or how often NetMeeting crashed) PTS - 2.4
Very reliable Not reliable
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
(2) (1) (1)
Please explain why
• I have marked 2, basically very reliable, as even though the system froze a couple of times, it was
quickly remedied by either inviting the person to netmeet again, or a quick restart of the
computer. As I say, it only happened a few times, but was easily fixed.
• The problems I experienced were not due to the Netmeeting program itself, but more to the
connection between my school and Griffith University. Once we had established successful
contact the meetings were very smooth.
• Seemed quite reliable in terms of program stability, I can only remember having to re-boot it once
or twice during the sessions
• My net meeting [NetMeeting] trial had a lot of problems. Beyond the hardware problems, there
was difficulty with the internet connection and its speed, the netmeeting application. We tried to
achieve success many times, and only had one successful attempt.
5. Please write down what you liked when using NetMeeting for learning Chinese and
why. PTS - 2.5
• It was just so nice as a distant student learning a difficult language to have face to face tutor
contact. Distance students normally are studying via distance ed because they are busy- so it was
a bonus to be able to practice speaking Chinese with my tutor in my own home! Before the
sessions, I used to freeze when I tried to string a sentence together spontaneously! Netmeeting has
enabled me to overcome that initial fear of being asked a question in Chinese, to only feel
embarrassed that I cannot think of a response, even though I have learned the words! I am not
quite fluent yet (ha ha!), but I definitely have the confidence now to take on further challenges in
Chinese conversation! I also really liked putting a face to my tutor's name, which I have not been
able to do in any other open learning units.
• I liked the one on one nature of the medium which provided for very intensive lessons. Plus the
features of Netmeeting that allowed for instant feedback (e.g. whiteboard), and introduction of
other materials e.g.: documents (sharing) and video [sending a video clip] (although it did not
work in my case) relevant to the context of the face to face dialogue.
Yuping Wang Supporting Synchronous Distance Language …
Language Learning & Technology 115
• Although not related to the program per se, the difficulties encountered with unreliable internet
transmission was a real nuisance, particularly when then sound broke up or was not transmitted at
all. These problems do not seem to be insurmountable with e.g. faster internet connections on
both ends and judicious timing of link-up.
• I really liked being able to converse face to face. With no other Chinese speakers to converse
with, this was of immense benefit. I was able to ask questions and receive immediate answers,
was able to practice speaking and gain confidence, and was able to 'humanise' what had
previously been an isolated academic experience.
6. Please write down what you did not like when using NetMeeting for learning
Chinese and why. PTS - 2.6
• The first 20 seconds or so, the video and sound sticks, freezes and delays, but it seemed to go
alright after that. Occasionally during the session the video and sound would freeze again. This,
when it happened, made listening a little difficult, and the delays meant not being able to equate
the sound with facial expressions etc. But compared to the hundreds of positives I experienced
with netmeeting, this is really just a very minor inconvenience, and will only get better as
technology improves- which is very rapid these days! To put it this way, if it was not for having
the opportunity of these netmeeting sessions, I would be 500% worse at speaking and
understanding Chinese than I am now! So in the big scheme of things, these minor delays were
really not an issue.
• It was very difficult to attain success. A lot of the time, we did not know what was going wrong,
so perhaps more technical support would be of benefit. It was quite a difficult exercise. Other
than that, I found the whiteboard difficult to use in that the Chinese characters were difficult to
decipher. I don't think my character recognition was helped by netmeet [NetMeeting].
• Although not related to the program per se, the difficulties encountered with unreliable internet
transmission was a real nuisance, particularly when then sound broke up or was not transmitted at
all. These problems do not seem to be insurmountable with e.g. faster internet connections on
both ends and judicious timing of link-up.
7. Through the five NetMeeting sessions, what aspects of Chinese language learning did
you feel improved? Please put an X in the appropriate bracket (s) below that best
describe your own experience. You may select more than one. PTS - 2.7
(a) My fluency (3)
(b) My pronunciation (3)
(c) My listening ability (4)
(d) My vocabulary (3)
(e) My grammar and structures (3)
(f) My reading (0)
(g) My writing (0)
(h) My speaking ability (4)
(i) My conversational tactics (e.g., asking in Chinese for repetition and clarification of
meaning, inferring meaning from the context, etc.)
(3)
(j) Spontaneous replies (0)
(k) Other (please specify) ____________________
8. How important do you believe is the video in NetMeeting to the improvement of
listening and speaking skills? Please indicate on the diagram below. PTS - 2.8
Important Not important
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
(1) (1) (1) (1)
Yuping Wang Supporting Synchronous Distance Language …
Language Learning & Technology 116
Please explain why
• The video is very important, because it is more personal to speak to each other face to face than
on the phone. Silence is not a problem while you think of a response, because your tutor can see
that you are thinking (very hard!). You can see facial expressions which is very important to try
and guess what on earth your tutor just said when you can't understand any of the words! And
again it is nice to have that face to face contact, and put a face to the name, both for student and
teacher. The video can be a little scary at first, especially if you have not used netmeeting before
in other situations. But like any new technology, it is also exciting, and any nerves of using the
video quickly disappear!
• The importance of the video image lies in the fact that one gets the dialogue with the appropriate
body language and facial expression, which do not only aid in understanding meaning but are part
of the message itself. More specifically it seems to me that to achieve accurate pronunciation the
opportunity of seeing the actual sound being formed by a native speaker is very helpful. It also
would allow the teacher to do on the spot correction of mistakes through sound and visual
demonstration.
• The video quality I experienced was never good enough to allow me to see my tutor's lips clearly,
but I still got a lot from my sessions. I would love to experience the difference a good picture
could make. [Because she used a laptop, the video quality was affected by the limited power of
her computer]
• I think it is important, because it is helpful to 'see' your teacher. To have a telephone conference
would not be as good. Seeing your teacher is more personal, and it makes you more comfortable,
which assists with learning. Of course video is not as important as audio, but it is still significant.
9. If you were given a choice between one-to-one and many-to-many interaction (i.e. a
group discussion) supported by a videoconferencing tool, which one would you
choose? Please explain why PTS - 2.9
• I think for beginners, one to one maybe better, to give them the confidence and practice. Then
maybe for advanced students with a wider vocab, a group chat session would be better. I found
that when I did not understand something, my tutor had to keep asking me again and again until I
worked out the meaning. This is the best way to help a beginner like myself get used to hearing
and understanding, but I think other students would get a little bored of waiting! Group discussion
would be great for more experienced students, but I have never been involved in one, so I do not
know how the technology would cope, ie. delays etc.
• In an ideal world I would like to experience both, but if asked to choose, I would definitely
choose the one-to-one option because it provides more efficient communication in the short time
available. However, many-to-many would probably allow more variety of communication.
• I would choose one-to-one, because I feel a videoconference [with more than one person] would
be very difficult to learn and contribute to. I have been part of a video conference before, and I
did not find it to be beneficial. I would love to take part in a group that was face-to-face, but with
netmeet [NetMeeting], I would prefer to speak with just one other person.
• [one-to-one interaction is] particularly useful, because it allows for an intensity of interaction
which one rarely gets in the regular classroom setting.
10. Are there any other feature(s) do you think important for language learning? (other
features include File Transfer, the Whiteboard, Sharing Document, My Video and
audio.) PTS - 2.10
• Yeah the whiteboard helped heaps. When I could not understand a word my tutor could write it
on the board. (Well at first the character, which I was none the wiser with!), but writing the
pinyin was good, as sometimes I thought I was hearing a totally different sound. The more this
happened though, the more I got used to the way my tutor pronounced the words. (the correct
Yuping Wang Supporting Synchronous Distance Language …
Language Learning & Technology 117
way as opposed to my incorrect way!). We used the sharing files feature was to talk about family
photos. But this feature could be used for endless conversation possibilities.
• We used all those features at time and they were largely useful of specific purposes e.g. video in
conjunction with audio gives the opportunity to see body language and facial expressions which
contribute to the communication process.
• The whiteboard proved useful for instant demonstration of written language w.o. [without]
Having to go to cumbersome keyboard input methods [the use of the mouse to write characters].
• Perhaps more phone support at times could be helpful in order to motivate and reduceisolation.
11. How important do you believe is the oral-visual interaction provided by
NetMeeting to your learning of Chinese? Please indicate on the diagram below with
an X. PTS - 2.11
Important Not important
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
(1) (3)
Please explain why
• I think I have covered this response in my comments above.
• important in providing visual cues to involved in the communication process useful also for
demonstrating and correcting sound formation in establishing correct Pronunciation.
• If you cannot speak with and see anyone while you are learning a language, it is very difficult to
improve and to become fluent. It is integral that a student be able to practice what they are
learning.
• It creates more of a classroom feeling which is a useful adjunct to all of the individual study that
must be done by a distance education student".
12. How easy was it to use NetMeeting? Please indicate on the diagram below with an
X. PTS - 2.12
Very easy Very difficult
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
(1) (1) (1) (1)
Please explain why
• Netmeeting was very easy to use, as the program is user friendly, and simple to follow.
• Because of technical difficulties I did not find the Netmeeting program easy to use - that is I
experienced difficulties making connection, but this was a problem with firewalls. Once these
technical difficulties were fixed, the actual Netmeeting program is very user friendly, and easy to
operate. My low rating is due to the initial connection difficulties.
• There were many problems in my trial. NetMeeting seemed to have a lot of unexplainable
technical problems that we were largely unable to rectify.
• The visual layout of the program window and the conveniently arranged buttons for the ancillary
features (whiteboard, file share etc) were not too numerous and complex. Plus in case of
difficulties the person experienced with the program was able to give immediate face to face help.
The big bugbear was the reliability of the connection.
13. Do you think that NetMeeting should be incorporated into the Open Learning
Chinese Program after the trial? Why? PTS - 2.13
• Yes I do think that netmeeting should be incorporated into the OLA Chinese Program, because of
all the reasons above! The trial has been a great opportunity for me to improve my Chinese, and
therefore using netmeeting as a set part of the course would obviously be nothing but
Yuping Wang Supporting Synchronous Distance Language …
Language Learning & Technology 118
advantageous for students and their results, and most importantly their enthusiasm and motivation
by having fun learning Chinese!
• Yes, I do. Although my trial had a lot of technical problems, I can certainly see the immense
benefit in having NetMeeting in the Open Learning Chinese Program. Without it, Chinese is
extremely difficult to learn without any other support. I think Netmeeting is almost a necessity.
• Provided the technical problems related to unreliable and slow connection can be at least
minimized, I would strongly support the incorporation of NetMeeting into the Chinese program.
All the features of the program provide useful aids for the language learner, e.g.: sharing, video,
whiteboard. Initially one might consider using NetMeeting as the preferred form of liaising with
the tutor during the regular time slot provided for the purpose.
• I rarely found the quality of the picture really sharp, so it didn't really assist my learning to see
my tutor. However I absolutely loved having the opportunity to converse with someone in
Chinese. Apart from being exciting, it motivated me to continue studying, and gave me some
much needed contact with someone. Therefore I think some kind of video conferencing should be
used. The very best thing would be for some opportunity to speak with small groups including
other students on some occasions, and the opportunity to speak only with the tutor on other
occasions. I think I learned a lot in a short time while talking with my tutor, and would like to see
continued opportunity to develop spontaneous conversation skills in this way.
14. Other comments PTS - 2.14
• Thank you for the opportunity, I have appreciated it very much!
• The trial really showed me that it is possible to learn a language through distance education.
Although it is still difficult, and there are a range of technical problems, it is a great idea, and I
would recommend it as a significant educative tool.
• In my view, it is difficult to learn Chinese by distance education unless there is a component of
conversation included. Netmeeting could be an effective way to build some regular conversation
practice into Chinese studies. (Participant E)
This is the end of the questionnaire.
Thank you very much for helping me with this project.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
I would like to thank Associate Professor Mary Farquhar, Professor Chengzheng Sun, Professor Nick
Knight and Associate Professor Mike Levy for their valuable comments, which in many ways helped
shape this article. My gratitude also goes to the editor, Professor Dorothy Chun, and the anonymous
reviewers of LLT for their constructive and insightful comments on the earlier manuscripts. I am
extremely grateful to the reviewer of the revised draft of this article for his/her thorough review and
helpful criticism.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Yuping Wang is Lecturer of Chinese language at Griffith University, Australia. Her research interests are
the use of CMC in teaching Chinese language, Internet-based language teaching, distance education,
Chinese language software development and second language teaching methodologies.
E-mail: y.wang@griffith.edu.au
Yuping Wang Supporting Synchronous Distance Language …
Language Learning & Technology 119
REFERENCES
Bates, A. W. (1997). The impact of technological changes on open and distance learning. Distance
Education, 18(1), 93-109.
Bloomfield, D. (2000). Voices on the Web: Student teachers negotiating identity. Asia-Pacific Journal of
Teacher Education, 28(3), 199-212.
Boyle, E., Anderson, A., & Newlands, A. (1994). The effects of visibility on dialogue and performance in
a cooperative problem-solving task. Language and Speech, 37(1), 1-20.
Bruce, V. (1996). The role of face in communication: implications for videophone design. Interacting
with Computers, 8(2), 166-176.
Buckett, J., & Stringer, G. (1997). ReLaTe (Remote Language Teaching): Progress, problems and
potential. Paper presented at CALL'97, London.
Buckett, J. & Stringer, G. (1999) Internet Videoconferencing's 3Ms: Multiway, Multimedia, Multicast.
Retrieved November 28, 2001, from http://www.ex.ac.uk/pallas/relate/papers/peg99/stringer.htm
Buckett, J., Stringer, G. & Datta, J. (1999). Life after ReLaTe: Internet videoconferencing's growing
pains. In K. Cameron (Ed.), CALL and the learning community (pp. 31-38). Exeter, England: Elm Bank
Publications.
Chou, C. C. (2001). Formative evaluation of synchronous CMC systems for a learner-centered online
course. Journal of Interactive Learning Research, Summer-Fall, 173-187.
Chun, D. (1994). Using computer networks to facilitate the acquisition of interactive competence. System,
22(1), 17-31.
Chun, D., & Plass, J. (2000). Networked multimedia environments for second language acquisition. In M.
Warschauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Network-based language teaching: Concepts and practice (pp. 151-170).
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press
Gass, S. M. (2003). Input and interaction. In C. J. Doughty & M. H. Long (Eds.), The handbook of second
language acquisition (pp. 224-255). Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Goodfellow, R., Manning, P., & Lamy, M. (1999). Building an online open and distance language
learning environment. In R. Debski & M. Levy (Eds.), WORDCALL: Global perspective on computer-
assissted language learning (pp. 267-286). Lisse, The Netherlands: Swets & Zeitlinger.
Hall, J. K. (1995). "Aw, man, Where you goin'?": Classroom interaction and the development of L2
interactional competence. Issues in Applied Linguistics, 6(2), 37-62.
Hampel, R., & Baber, E. (2003). Using Internet-based audio-graphic and video conferencing for language
learning. In U. Felix (Ed.), Language learning on-line: Towards best practice (pp. 171-191). Lisse, The
Netherlands: Swets & Zeitlinger.
Hampel, R., & Hauck, M. (2004). Towards an effective use of audio conferencing in distance language
courses. Language Learning & Technology, 8(1), 66-82. Retrieved June 7, 2004, from
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num1/hampel/
Hauck M., & Haezewindt, B. (1999). Adding a new perspective to distance (language) learning and
teaching -- the tutor's perspective. ReCALL, 11(2), 46-54.
Hutchby, I. (2001). Conversation and technology: From the telephone to the Internet. Malden, MA:
Blackwell Publishers Inc.
Yuping Wang Supporting Synchronous Distance Language …
Language Learning & Technology 120
Kaye, A. (1989). Computer-mediated communication and distance education. In R. Mason & A. Kaye
(Eds.), Mindweave: Communication, computers and distance education (pp. 3-21). Oxford, England:
Perganmon Press.
Kern, R. (1996). Computer-mediated communication: Using e-mail exchanges to explore personal
histories in two cultures. In M. Warschauer (Ed.), Telecollaboration in foreign language learning (pp.
105-119). Honolulu: University of Hawaii, Second Language Teaching & Curriculum Centre.
Kitade, K. (2000). L2 learners' discourse and SLA theories in CMC: Collaborative interaction in Internet
chat. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 13(2), 143-166.
Kötter, M., Shield, L., & Stevens, A. (1999). Real-time audio and email for fluency: Promoting distance
language learners' aural and oral skills via the Internet. ReCALL, 11(2), 55-60.
Kötter, M. (2001). Developing distance language learners' interactive competence -- Can synchronous
audio do the trick? International Journal of Educational Telecommunications, 7(4), 327-353.
Kress, G., & van Leeuwen, T. (2001). Multimodal discourse: The modes and media of contemporary
communication. London: Arnold.
Lake, D. (1999). Reducing isolation for distance students: An on-line initiative. Open Learning, 14(3),
14-23.
Lantolf, J.P. (1994). Sociocultural theory and second language learning: Introduction to the special issue.
Modern Language Journal, 78(4), 418-420.
Lecourt, D. (1999). The ideological consequences of technology and education: The case for critical
pedagogy. In M. Selinger & J. Pearson (Eds.), Telematics in education: Trends and issues (pp. 51-75).
Amsterdam: Pergamon.
Long, M. H. (1996). The role of the linguistic environment in second language acquisition. In W. C.
Ritchie & T. K. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of research on language acquisition. Vol .2: Second language
acquisition (pp. 413-468). New York: Academic Press.
McAndrew, P., Foubister, S. P., & Mayes, T. (1996). Videoconferencing in a language learning
application. Interacting with computers, 8(2), 207-217.
Mitchell, R., & Myles, F. (1998). Second language learning theories. London: Arnold.
Negretti, R. (1999). Web-based activities and SLA: A conversation analysis research approach. Language
Learning & Technology, 13(1), 75-87. Retrieved June 6, 2004, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num1/negretti/
Neu, J. (1990).Assessing the role of nonverbal communication in the acquisition of communicative
competence in L2. In R. C. Scarcella & E. S. Anderson (Eds.), Developing communicative competence in
a second language (pp. 121-138). New York: Newbury House/Harper & Row.
Ohta, A. S (1995). Applying sociocultural theory to an analysis of learner discourse: Learner-learner
collaborative interaction in the zone of proximal development. Issues in Applied Linguistics 6(2), 93-121.
O'Malley, C., Langton, S., Anderson, A., Doherty-Sneddon, G. & Bruce, V. (1996). Comparison of face-
to-face and video-mediated interaction. Interacting with Computers, 8(2), 177-192.
Oxford, R. L. (1995). Patterns of cultural identity. Boston: Heinle
Pellettieri, J. (2000). Negotiation in cyberspace: The role of chatting in the development of grammatical
competence. In M. Warschauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Network-based language teaching: Concepts and
practice (pp. 59-86). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Yuping Wang Supporting Synchronous Distance Language …
Language Learning & Technology 121
Rivers, W. M. (1987). Interaction as the key to teaching language for communication. In W. M. Rivers
(Ed.), Interactive language learning (pp. 3-16). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press,
Shield, L., Hauck, M., & Hewer, S. (2001) Talking to strangers -- the role of the tutor in developing target
language speaking skills at a distance. Proceedings of UNTELE 2000, volume II. Retrieved August 18,
2003, from http://fels-staff.open.ac.uk/lesley-shield/webbed/untele/shieldhauckhewer/
talkingtostrangers.html PDF available at http://www.utc.fr/~untele/volume2.pdf.
Smith, B. (2003). Computer-mediated negotiated interaction: An expanded model. The Modern Language
Journal, 87(1), 38-57.
Sotillo, S. M. (2000). Discourse functions and syntactic complexity in synchronous and asynchronous
communication. Language Learning and Technology, 4 (1), 82-119. Retrieved June 6, 2004, from
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/sotillo/
Sproull, L., & Kiesler, S. (1986). Reducing social context cues: Electronic mail in organizational
communications. Management Science, 32, 1492-1512.
Stacey, E. (1999). Collaborative learning in an online environment. Distance Education, 43(2), 14-33.
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (1995). Problems in output and the cognitive processes they generate: A step
towards second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 16, 371-391.
Tudini, V. (2003). Using native speakers in chat. Language Learning and Technology, 7(3), 141-159.
Retrieved June 6, 2004, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num3/tudini/
Wang, Y., & Sun, C. (2000). Synchronous distance education: Enhancing speaking skills via Internet-
based real time technology. In X. Zhou, J. Fong, X. Jia, Y. Kambayashi, & Y. Zhang (Eds.), Proceedings
of the first international conference on Web information systems engineering (pp. 168-172). Los
Alamitos, CA: IEE Computer Society.
Wang, Y., & Sun, C. (2001). Internet-based real time language education: Towards a fourth generation
distance education. CALICO Journal, 18(3), 539-561.
Wang, Y. (2004). Distance language learning: Interactivity and fourth generation Internet-based
videoconferencing. CALICO Journal, 21(2), 373-395.
Wells, G. (1981). Language as interaction. In G. Wells (Ed.), Learning through interaction: The study of
language development (pp. 22-72). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Wong, J., & Fauverge, A. (1999). LEVERAGE -- Reciprocal peer tutoring over broadband networks.
ReCALL, 11(1), 33-142.
