Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num3/review1
September 2004, Volume 8, Number 3
pp. 21-34
Copyright © 2003, ISSN 1094-3501 21
REVIEW OF TELL ME MORE SPANISH
Title Tell Me More Spanish
Platforms PC or compatible; Windows 95/98, NT4, Millennium, 2000 o XP (Windows 95
and NT4 need Microsoft Internet Explorer 4 or higher.)
System requirements Windows: Pentium Celeron 333 MHz or equivalent; 64 MB of RAM (128 MB
for NT4, Millennium, 2000 and XP); 8x CD-ROM drive; 16 bit Windows
compatible sound card; microphone and loudspeakers or headsets; graphics
card: 800 X 600 with 65.536 colors (16 bit)
Publisher Auralog Inc.
2720 South Hardy Drive, Suite 3
Tempe, AZ 85282
Support offered Customer service (in the US): supportusa@auralog.com
(888) 388-3535 x11
Target language Spanish
Target audience Beginner level
Price Tell Me More Spanish Premium Collection (Levels Beginner-Intermediate-
Advanced): US $195. Can be ordered online in the US and Canada at
www.auralog.com/american.html; Network versions start at $1,500 for 15 PCs
ISBN ISBN 2-7490-0136-6
Review by Barbara A. Lafford, Arizona State University
OVERVIEW
Tell Me More Spanish (TMMS) forms part of a series of language learning software (CD-ROMs) by
Auralog, a French software development company. It is similar in format to Tell Me More Arabic,
French, German, Japanese, Chinese, Italian, Dutch, and ESL, and is directed toward individual users
(e.g., business professionals) a well as classroom learners (high school and adult). The object of this
review is the beginner-level CD-ROM for Tell me More Spanish.
The material in this program is divided into six workshops: lesson, cultural, vocabulary, grammar, oral,
and written. The lesson workshop consists of 12 lessons on topics normally covered in beginning classes
(e.g., vida familiar "family life," objetos y animals "objects and animals"), as well as some that focus on
business contexts (el ordenador "the computer," diálogo con el jefe "dialogue with the boss"). The
cultural workshop consists of an encyclopedia (cultural texts and maps) and activities related to this
information. The vocabulary workshop contains a glossary and eight different types of vocabulary
exercises from picture-word associations to crossword puzzles. Students can enhance their knowledge of
grammatical rules in the grammar workshop, through the use of grammatical explanations and six (mostly
discrete-point) exercises. The oral and written workshops essentially provide easy access to all program
activities that either practice listening/speaking or reading/writing skills. Several icons in the top right part
of the main menu page allow the student to access reference tools and help when necessary. The tools
menu provides access to a dictionary, conjugation tool, and printer interface. The Tell me More Spanish
learner also has access to online services, in the form of a Web site (http://tmmsi.auralog.com/) called the
Auralog Club, available to users of the Tell Me More language series.
DESCRIPTION
The program consists of 12 lessons on topics normally covered in beginning classes: vida familiar (family
life), aspecto físico (physical appearance), cifras y letras (numbers and letters), fecha y hora (date and
hour [time]), objetos y animals (objects and animals), adjetivos (adjectives), llegada a España (arrival in
Reviewed by Barbara A. Lafford Tell Me More Spanish
Language Learning & Technology 22
Spain), la fiesta (the party), Por Madrid (around Madrid), indicaciones (directions), el ordenador (the
computer), and diálogo con el jefe (dialogue with the boss). The last two lessons emphasize business
contexts. Within each of the 12 lessons there are several activities for students to complete in the various
workshops. In order to be able to review all of the program's activities, the author of this review used the
free-to-roam mode to navigate through the program.
Lesson Workshop
The lesson workshop provides overall access to various activities in each of the 12 lessons: pronunciation
(dialogue, word pronunciation, sentence pronunciation, phonetics exercise); activities (picture/word
association, word searches, word association, the right word, fill-in-the-blanks, words and topics, words
and functions, grammar practice, mystery phrase, crossword puzzles, word order, sentence practice,
dictation, written expression); video (video and questions); reference works (glossary and grammar
explanations). Sometimes, however, an activity with the same name will vary slightly according to the
skill being practiced; these variances are noted below in the explanations. Within each of the workshops,
a pop-up menu bar at the bottom center of each screen allows the student to select the activity of his/her
choice.
Cultural Workshop
The cultural workshop consists of an informational section (encyclopedia) with cultural texts and maps,
as well as an activities section containing activities to test cultural knowledge. The cultural texts consist
of several dozen "cultural capsules" about mostly Olympian culture (Big C National Standards cultural
"products") that are related by a hierarchical menu that groups them into categories: geografía
(geography), historia (history), tradiciones (traditions), gastronomía (gastronomy), literature (literature),
arte-arquitectura (art-architecture), ocio (leisure time), and socioeconomía (socioeconomics). The student
may access a total of 71 different cultural text summaries (one sentence descriptions of an accompanying
authentic photograph or sketch from the Spanish-speaking world). Key words in these texts are
highlighted to make them more salient in the input so learners can notice them more easily and make
them candidates for acquisition. The student can then click on an icon to get the entire text (approximately
100 words), which presents historical, artistic, and political information on topics ranging from García
Lorca to the Argentine tango. Another button allows the student to read an English translation of the
cultural text. The maps section contains physical (geographic), linguistic, and political maps of Spain,
Europe, and the world.
Reviewed by Barbara A. Lafford Tell Me More Spanish
Language Learning & Technology 23
The student can also test his/her retention of this material using various activities. The riddles exercise
presents the student with a cultural content question: ¿Qué artista español nació en Málaga en 1881?
(What Spanish artist was born in Malaga in 1881?). In the reply box, the student must type in the answer
(Pablo Picaso) by clicking on the letters of a keyboard to spell out his name. Several Spanish language
clues are also available to the student (Fue pintor, dibujante y escultor "He was a painter, sketch artist,
and sculptor"; Vivió en Barcelona y Paris "He lived in Barcelona and Paris"; and Pintó el Guernica "He
painted Guernica"). The use of these target/second language (L2) cues forces the student to make L2-L2
connections and to put forth mental effort for deep processing of the material (Craik & Lockhart, 1972).
The patchworks activity invites the student to click and drag a Spanish word to identify the picture that it
represents (e.g., Salamanca, La Habana); the fact that there are only two choices renders this exercise less
effective than others. Even though a great effort is made to include cultural artifacts from the entire
Hispanic world, the Eurocentric focus of this program is quite noticeable (from the maps of Europe to the
Castillian accent that predominates in the lessons); in addition, half of the ten historical cultural capsules
have to do with Spain.
Vocabulary Workshop
The glossary contains an alphabetized list of Spanish vocabulary words with their English counterparts.
Students are able to click on a word to hear it pronounced and can choose the level of difficulty of
vocabulary words ranging from elementary (profesor "professor") to specialized (pibe "kid")). The words
in the glossary can also be accessed by topic/semantic field (e.g., vida cotidiana "everyday life," esfera
intelectual "intellectual sphere," esfera social "social sphere," esfera profesional "professional sphere").
These four categories are then broken down more finely (e.g., esfera profesional  mundo del trabajo
Reviewed by Barbara A. Lafford Tell Me More Spanish
Language Learning & Technology 24
"the workworld," personal y organigrama "personnel and organizational flowchart"). When the last
hierarchical category is chosen, the words in that group are presented in an alphabetical list, instead of in
a meaningful context. A search function also allows students to look for specific words.
The picture/word association function allows learners to look at a photograph and click on the word that
describes the picture within a multiple choice format. The word search exercises invite the student to find
target vocabulary words related to the lesson topic hidden in a grid. In the word association exercise,
learners reinforce L2-L2 relationships by drawing lines between related concepts. The multiple-choice
right word click-and-drag activity asks the student to choose which of the given words fits appropriately
into a blank in a sentence (e.g., Se ________ que Ud. está redactando un informe (gritando, volver, vale,
trabajo, ha, supone, "One _______ that you are editing a report. ("yelling," "to return," "OK," "work,"
"has," "supposes"). The fill-in-the-blank activity requires students to complete sentences within a dialogue
by clicking and dragging words from a list into their proper slot in the dialogue. Students in the words
and topics exercise get a chance to make L2-L2 associations by grouping related words into categories
(semantic mapping; see Morin & Goebel, 2001; e.g., from a combined list of family relationships and
greetings, the learner must click and drag the words for family relations into the familia y entorno "family
and surroundings" category and place the greetings expressions into the saludos y formulas de cortesía
"greetings and courtesy formulas" box.) In the mystery phrase activity, the learner must produce (type) a
word that corresponds to the L2 definition given (e.g., cue = esposo, answer= marido). The crossword
puzzle provides L1 clues for the L2 words that fit into the crossword puzzle (e.g., "dinner"= cena).
Grammar Workshop
In the grammar workshop the student can choose the level of grammar explanation (also accessed via a
button on the main menu page, as described above) s/he wants: elementary, basic, average, advanced, or
specialized. However, it is sometimes difficult to understand why the forms conmigo, contigo, and
consigo ("with me," "with you," "with himself") are considered more difficult (specialized) than the
relative pronouns cuyo, lo cual, and el cual ("whose," "that [neuter] which," "that [masculine singular]
which"), which are categorized only as advanced. Within each level the student is presented with a list of
grammar topics that are also grouped by category (the sentence, nominal modifiers, the verbal group).
The grammar topics accompanied by a smiling face icon provide the learner with an example of the
grammar point used in context (in a spoken and written script to accompany a short cartoon narrative).
These cartoons are meant to be humorous and often contain sound effects (crowds cheering and high
pitched voices of animated characters) and enhanced written input (darkening the markers of the grammar
point illustrated) to attract the learner's attention.
Reviewed by Barbara A. Lafford Tell Me More Spanish
Language Learning & Technology 25
These cartoons might be entertaining for high school students, but they border on the ludicrous for many
adult learners. In addition, many reflect sexist attitudes and cultural stereotypes. At the end of the cartoon,
the students are automatically presented with the explanation of the grammatical point highlighted in the
cartoon (e.g., the formation of the plural) in their choice of either English or Spanish. Grammar topics
preceded by the letter X only provide the grammatical explanations, without the cartoons.
Several practice activities also comprise the grammar workshop. The right word and fill-in-the blank
activities have already been explained under the vocabulary lesson description. The words and functions
section requires students to group words according to grammatical function (nouns are extracted from a
sentence and put into a box -- mapping of forms, not concepts). The grammar practice activities are
comprised of written mechanical transformational exercises at the word level (e.g., make the following
words plural: un día  unos días, "day"  "days") in which students must produce (type in) the target
forms. The sentence practice activity involves the written production of larger transformations at the
sentence level (e.g., Mi marido trabaja  Mi marido está trabajando, "My husband works"  "My
husband is working").
Oral Workshop
The oral workshop brings together in a list various activities in the program that require listening
comprehension and oral production. Listening activities include the following: diálogo (listening and
speaking), video and questions, word searches, and crossword puzzles. In the diálogo activity within the
oral workshop the learner is presented with a picture and an oral question with three possible rejoinders,
only one of which is appropriate:
Reviewed by Barbara A. Lafford Tell Me More Spanish
Language Learning & Technology 26
The learner then pronounces one of the three answers and his/her speech is analyzed by the speech
recognition software.
The video and questions section provides a videoclip that is loosely related to the general theme of the
lesson. After the clip is seen, the learner is presented with a written multiple choice activity to test the
learner's of the video. Other listening exercises in the oral workshop are modifications of activities
already described (e.g., word searches in this workshop give oral cues to the student trying to pick the
word out of a grid of letters and crossword puzzles serve as mini-dictations by asking the student to listen
to the L2 word being pronounced and to type the word into the crossword puzzle). The dictation exercise
provides an opportunity for the learner to listen to longer phrases and write them down. The learner must
make sure s/he includes the relevant punctuation, or the written responses will be counted as wrong. Icons
allow learners to access grammatical explanations of items in the dictated sentences.
This workshop also contains several oral production activities involving speech recognition that are aimed
at helping the learner improve his/her pronunciation. Both the word pronunciation and sentence
pronunciation exercises provide waveforms and pitch curves for the oral native speaker cues as well as
for the learner's responses. The program then compares the learner's waveforms and pitch curves to that of
the native speakers and generates a score from between 1-7 (7 is the highest score) to indicate how well
the student's language matches that of the native speaker, and where pronunciation errors occurred
(highlighted in red). A cumulative visual record of the score is kept as the learner attempts to pronounce
the word correctly several times; as a result, the student can monitor his/her progress toward the native
speaker norm.
Reviewed by Barbara A. Lafford Tell Me More Spanish
Language Learning & Technology 27
The phonetics exercise is quite helpful to students, since it allows the student to choose the phoneme s/he
would like to improve. First, the student is urged to watch the 3-D animation as it demonstrates how the
lips and tongue should move in the mouth to produce the target sound. Then the student clicks on the
model and hears the target sound produced, along with waveforms and pitch curves. The learner then
pronounces the target word, and the program evaluates the student's pronunciation on the same scale of 1-
7 described above. The student may rehearse target sounds as often as s/he wishes and can see if sh/e is
improving by looking to see if his/her pronunciation score improves.
Other activities that require oral production and the use of speech recognition software include the word
order activity and picture/word association. In the word order activity, the student is asked to orally
produce a sentence by putting the words provided by voice cues in order (e.g., usted, hoy, Miguel, ¿Cómo
está? "You, today, Miguel, How are you?"  ¿Cómo está usted hoy, Miguel? "How are you today,
Miguel?"). The computer program evaluates the student's spoken response and indicates which part of the
answer was correct (in green) or incorrect (red). The learner then has the opportunity to correct his/her
response and once again get the program's feedback.
The picture/word association activity is a modification of previously described activity in which the
learner orally indicates which of three words in a list on the right side of the screen accurately describes
the picture to the left.
Reviewed by Barbara A. Lafford Tell Me More Spanish
Language Learning & Technology 28
If the correct choice is made, its written representation turns green; an incorrect choice (of the three) will
turn red. If the learner pronounces a word not on the list, the phrase "I do not understand you" or "No he
entendido" (if instructions are in Spanish) will appear in red at the top of the screen.
Written Workshop
The written workshop gives the student access to various reading and writing activities in the program.
The diálogo activity in the written workshop is a reading and listening exercise since the oral cues are
also provided in written form. In this workshop the student reads and listens to the oral cue from the
computer and then clicks on the correct/appropriate answer, instead of saying the answer out loud as s/he
did in the oral workshop. The grammar practice and sentence practice exercises that are accessible in the
written workshop have already been described above, since they also form a part of the grammar
workshop. The word order activity in the written workshop has the student click-and-drag words to create
a cogent sentence with proper word order. After the entire sentence is formed, feedback is given to the
student in the form of red (incorrect order) or green (correct order) cues in different words. Students take
dictation when they are provided with a button to push to hear the prompt, and the space to write down
their answers. The written expression exercise is by far the most creative exercise in the TMMS program.
The students are asked to look at a picture or a short videoclip and describe what they see in at least 30
words. Since the program cannot evaluate spontaneous written prose, this exercise must be printed off and
sent to the teacher for correction.
Reviewed by Barbara A. Lafford Tell Me More Spanish
Language Learning & Technology 29
EVALUATION
The overall look and feel of Tell Me More Spanish is very sophisticated. The high resolution graphics,
pictures, and video, high-end speech recognition and audio software, and an extraordinarily complex
network of hierarchical infrastructure make this product a monument to technology and to the creation of
an inviting learning environment. The use of relaxing background music (New Age compositions) on the
menu pages is reminiscent of the Suggestopedia approach. This soothing music is played while the
student decides what workshop activities to choose. After the learner chooses an activity, this music fades
to silence and the whirr of the CD-ROM player accompanies the presentation of the activity page chosen.
One of the strongest features of Tell Me More Spanish is the multimodal input presented to the learner.
Each lesson consists of pictures and videos that are related directly to Spanish words (with the English
translations available, but not intrusive). This use of multimodal input in language learning environments
is supported by Paivio's (1971) dual coding theory, which proposes that a learner possesses two
interconnected symbolic systems (verbal and non-verbal [objects or pictures]) and that representations in
one system can be activated by those in the other system. Dual coding also allows the learner to process
new L2 forms more deeply and to associate them directly with images from the target culture.
SLA scholars agree that the feedback learners receive helps them "notice the gap" (Schmidt & Frota,
1986) between their interlanguage system and the target language so that they can modify their output
(Swain & Lapkin, 1995). This type of feedback and opportunity for modified interaction is necessary for
the restructuring of the target language system and should be part of multimedia CALL activities
(Chapelle, 1998).
Tell Me More Spanish provides feedback to the student throughout all exercises in the program. For
instance, in the grammar practice exercise, after the learner types his/her answer, s/he clicks on the OK
button to obtain feedback. At that point the computer highlights any incorrect parts of the answer in red.
The learner is allowed to try again and follows the same procedure to get feedback. When the correct
answer is finally given, the entire phrase turns green. The solution button, represented with a light bulb,
can provide the correct answer at any time.
The speech-recognition software in Tell Me More Spanish is state-of-the art. Some feedback is given to
the student in the form of wave forms (amplitude), pitch curves (frequency) graphs, and pronunciation
evaluation scores, while other feedback occurs when students choose a particular response to a question
posed by the program, which offers rejoinders tailored to the answers given by students. However, care
must be taken to follow strict guidelines when using this speech-recognition software, or it will not be
effective. For instance, in order for the software to evaluate speech samples properly the student must
make sure to wait for the beep before speaking, they may not pause while speaking, and they need to fit
all of what they have to say in a five second span (long and short answers alike).
Although all of the technical innovations described above in Tell Me More Spanish are impressive, much
of its content and its approach to the teaching of Spanish constitute a classic example of missed
opportunities. For example, in Lesson 1 (vida familiar), the attempt at cogency provided by the "daily
routine" script of the video, is belied by several choices made by the developers of this software program.
In the first place, cultural authenticity is sacrificed, seemingly for the bottom line. The video in the video
and questions sections is of very high quality, but the images and sounds used do not usually come from
the target (Hispanic) culture. In the daily routine dialogue of Lesson 1 the images portray people, places,
and activities from a variety of cultures, but mostly from modern middle class urban European (often non-
Hispanic) and Asian contexts. No attempt is made to include images of Latin Americans from mixed
heritages (e.g., mestizos) or from lower socioeconomic status or rural communities in the Tell Me More
Spanish program. This fact, coupled with the Peninsular bias noted in the use of Castillian Spanish and
Reviewed by Barbara A. Lafford Tell Me More Spanish
Language Learning & Technology 30
cultural capsules heavily focused on Spanish topics, render this program less useful for a North American
audience of Spanish learners who focus heavily on the language and cultures of Latin America.
Although the use of images of people from various non-Hispanic cultural groups around the world allows
the learner to be more aware of the global village in which s/he lives, the use of visuals that do not come
from the target culture, and that are accompanied by a voiceover L2 narration instead of a dialogue among
L2 speakers, does not allow the learner to view the target language in situ as a form of social practice
(Kramsch, 1993). However, by using more global images and voiceover narrations that can easily be
rerecorded in different languages, the developers are able to reuse some of the same videos and pictures
not only in various lessons in the same program (the videos in the objetos y animales lesson is the same as
the video for the adjetivos unit), but also in other software products in the Tell Me More series that teach
other languages. In the process, however, the Spanish learner does not make connections between L2
words and target culture (C2) images; for instance, in Lesson 1 the video couples the word casa (house)
with a photograph of a very northern European-looking grey domicile, complete with a tall chimney stack
and a white picket gate (see picture below under picture/word association in the oral workshop).
In addition, these non-Hispanic global images are linked together by narrations accompanied by
background synthesized music in a surrealistic pastiche worthy of MTV. For example, in Lesson 1 (vida
familiar) instead of following a cogent script (Schank & Abelson, 1977) of the daily routine of one person
from a Spanish-speaking culture throughout a typical workday in an authentic cultural context, the
narrator "dialogues" with an erstwhile protagonist (portrayed by several images of people from various
cultural backgrounds) who never answers her questions. The video script often goes off on small tangents
with new and unexpected eye-catching colorful hip images that might entertain high school students, but
that could confuse the adult learner trying to make sense of the series of images strung together.
For instance, in lesson 1, the video opens with the sounds of morning birds as the female narrator tries to
wake up a sleeping boy with the words "Venga! Arriba! Perezoso!" (Come on! Get up! Lazy boy!). It
then provides several generic images with descriptive statements about nature El sol brilla "the sun is
shining," Los pájaros cantan "the birds are singing," followed by the phrase Lávate los dientes "Brush
your teeth" that accompanies a humorous photograph of an alligator with an open mouth displaying
several sharp white teeth. After the protagonist apparently leaves the aforementioned gray house to go to
work, the narrator asks if s/he takes the train (¿Coges el tren?) as a train whistle is heard in the
background and a picture of the train going through the countryside appears. Before that question is
answered, the next picture shows someone driving a small, urban commuter red car and the narrator states
"Vaya! Tienes un coche muy bonito. Es un coche rojo" (Hey! You have a very good-looking car. It is a
red car.) This mechanical statement of the obvious (the driver knows what color his car is) calls to mind
pre-communicative paradigms of language instruction.
The narration then goes on to ask where the protagonist (obviously not the same boy in the first image of
the video) works -- in the city? (picture of a North American city), at the zoo? (picture of a lizard or
iguana) -- and then asks what s/he likes to do on the weekends. The female narrator states that she likes to
go fishing (picture of a man fishing in a stream) because it is very relaxing, "just like going on vacation."
The narrator then asks "¿Viajas a menudo?" (Do you travel often?; picture of airplane appears) and "¿Has
ido a Tailandia?" (Have you been to Thailand?) as a picture of people riding an elephant in that country
pops up. Immediately afterwards, the narrator states "A mí me encanta Venecia" (I love Venice) and a
picture of Venice, complete with gondolas, appears. Although entertaining, this type of postmodern non-
linear "free association" of images from around the globe does not help Spanish L2 students form in
his/her L2 schemata the script of a daily routine in the life of a native speaker of Spanish in an authentic
C2 cultural context.
Although using the structure of a narrative has been shown to help students make predictions and guess
meaning from context (Bruner, 1996), this aleatory combination of scripts and images from around the
Reviewed by Barbara A. Lafford Tell Me More Spanish
Language Learning & Technology 31
world somewhat belies the possible facilitative function of the narrative structure attempted in this
program. The use of narration also prevents the learner from hearing and seeing authentic dialogues
among speakers of the target language in C2 contexts, and, therefore, denies the learner pragmatic models
of authentic language use.
The dialogue portions of each lesson also fall short of their potential. Language-related research has
shown that the practicing of routine patterns of language helps to establish functional "chunks" of
language in the mind of the L2 learner that s/he can use in conversations. From a connectionist standpoint
Ellis (1996) notes that the establishment of such patterned collocations in the mind of the learner
facilitates acquisition. In addition, modern communicative approaches to language instruction advocate
teaching functional uses of language (Savignon, 1997). Although the dialogues in Tell Me More Spanish
do provide the learner with chances to create oral interchanges with the computer program, most of the
interactions are limited to a series of short adjacency pairs (Schegloff & Sacks, 1973) that are loosely
strung together around a central theme (vida familiar) rather than forming a part of a larger whole with a
functional purpose to the entire dialogic interaction. (See examples of Tell Me More Spanish interactions
in the dialogue section above in the oral workshop discussion.)
Although the designer's attempt to create interactions that are communicative in nature is laudable, it does
not go far enough to allow more realistic communication to take place. For example, as noted above, in
the dialogue section of the lesson workshop, the student is presented with a question, but can only answer
with one of three rejoinders. It does not matter if any of the three answers bears any resemblance to the
reality of the life of the learner using the program (e.g., s/he may not live in Spain, France, or Sweden),
the learner must answer with one of the given rejoinders in order to make the program function. Since the
learner is, in essence, taking on a role of an interlocutor in order to communicate with the program, the
learner is not talking about his/her own personal situation and is thus not able to personalize his/her use of
the target language. The taking on of another role in and of itself, is not necessarily a bad pedagogical tool
for CALL software, especially in light of the lack of artificial intelligence programming and the
concomitant inability of the program to respond to unexpected answers with any facility. However, more
contextualization of roleplay interactions in a task-based functionally-driven activity would have greatly
improved this part of the program.
For instance, at the beginning of the dialogue section in the lesson workshop, a videoclip of a
conversational interchange among native speakers of Spanish on a focused topic could be shown to the
learners. The videoclip would dramatize a real world situation within the target culture and introduce
various characters involved in the script (e.g., a Mexican family prepares for the celebration of a
quinceañera; different family members talk about the various tasks they will perform to prepare for the
event). After observing native speakers taking part in functionally-driven conversational exchanges in
authentic cultural settings (making plans for the celebration in Mexico) the learner could then take on the
role of one of the family members in the video in order to carry out an assigned task (e.g., finding a venue
for the quinceaera celebration). The learner would then be led to another page of information that would
help him/her carry out the task to be performed (e.g., searching various Web pages to find out about the
cost and availability of three places to hold the celebration). The computer program could then ask the
learner questions about each of the three venues and would respond appropriately to the information
provided by the learner. In this way, there is a motivation for the task-based conversational exchange
between the computer and the learner, and cultural information is presented as part of the daily life of the
target culture, and not only as a cultural capsule, divorced from real language use. The use of native
speakers in model dialogues also would also allow for the presentation and instruction of various speech
acts in different social contexts, the first step in Olshtain and Cohen's (1991) five-step method of teaching
speech acts (pragmatics) to second language learners.
There are also problems with the cultural workshop, in which dozens of cultural facts are tied together by
general categories, but are somewhat Eurocentric. Even within a given category (historia) the culture
Reviewed by Barbara A. Lafford Tell Me More Spanish
Language Learning & Technology 32
capsules are presented as unrelated isolated historical facts from various parts of the Spanish-speaking
world. No insights regarding cultural perspectives and practices (National Standards, 1996) accompany
the "products" of Hispanic culture that are presented. Even though in the cultural workshop the cultural
images are authentic and of very high quality, this "cultural capsule" approach treats cultural knowledge
as a "fifth skill" (Kramsch, 1993), isolated from the use of language as social practice in daily life. Even
the video in the Por Madrid lesson of the lessons workshop is in the form of a travelogue with videoclips
showing historical monuments in Spain. Despite the fact that the program proposes to teach Spanish as a
second language, this Por Madrid video is the only one in the entire 12 lessons that specifically
concentrates on Hispanic culture. Unfortunately, in this videoclip, knowledge about the C2 culture is,
again, treated as an isolated unit, instead of being integrated into dialogues among native speakers of
Spanish in authentic cultural settings. These cultural capsules could easily have been created by
developers who were not even aware of the other activities that would be part of the same lesson. No
overall integration of cultural knowledge from the cultural workshop with the infrastructure and activities
contained in the grammar, vocabulary, oral, and written workshops is evident.
Even though the insights from the language-related research in the last quarter century have emphasized
the need for language learning to focus on language in its social context (Lafford, 2000; i.e., the
appropriate realization of communicative pragmatic speech acts and functions in culturally authentic
settings), the activities in the Tell Me More Spanish program seem to be structurally, rather than
functionally, motivated. Although the dialogues allow the learner to carry on short, and somewhat
artificial, interchanges with the computer, they often change direction abruptly by a seemingly
unmotivated change of topic. Also, many of the dialogues and video often appear to have been created
just to highlight a given grammatical structure rather than to demonstrate pragmatic functions; for
instance, most of the images in the video of the last lesson (diálogo con el jefe) are accompanied by a
narration that contrasts the present tense with the present progressive form (estar + -ndo). The video
consists of a string of sentences about people performing different actions, but no cogent narrative is
formed from this list of progressive structures. In addition, pronunciation exercises often have students
repeat short L2 chunks that have very little functional application in real word (e.g., Soy un fantasma "I
am a ghost"). Although the diálogo sections sometimes provide useful chunks of language (e.g., no me
diga "You don't say," creo que sí "I think so"), they are often part of short adjacency pairs that are not
well integrated into a larger dialogue.
To conclude, for the most part the language practice activities in this program do not seem to be
communicatively motivated; they are often decontextualized mechanical exercises that seem to have no
overall functional purpose. This pedagogical approach is the antithesis of contemporary communicative,
functional approaches to language teaching, which present learners with real world tasks to complete
(Doughty & Long, 2003; Long, 1985), instead of having them focus so heavily on pronunciation and
structures (mechanical exercises), techniques reminiscent of the audiolingual approach to language
teaching of the 1960s.
SUMMARY
Tell Me More Spanish is a technologically sophisticated multimedia program with high-end graphics and
excellent speech recognition software that provides the learner multiple opportunities to practice
speaking, listening, reading, and writing skills and to gain knowledge about some isolated cultural facts. It
is suited to the needs of individual learners, who are given a great deal of control over various elements of
the program so they can forge their own learning path. However, the program's focus on pronunciation,
structurally-based curriculum, mechanical exercises, decontextualized interaction, and use of culture
capsules (mostly isolated from vocabulary and grammar exercises and listening, speaking and writing
activities) causes this program to be out of step with modern communicatively-based views of task-based
Reviewed by Barbara A. Lafford Tell Me More Spanish
Language Learning & Technology 33
foreign language pedagogy -- views which are grounded in cultural authenticity and the notion of
language as social practice.
ABOUT THE REVIEWER
Barbara A. Lafford (PhD, Cornell University) is Professor of Spanish and Linguistics at Arizona State
University. Her research centers on Spanish second language acquisition (lexical acquisition,
communication strategies and the effect of contextual factors on SLA) and the application of the findings
of language-related research to the teaching of Spanish. She is a member of the CALICO board and has
given several workshops and presentations on various CALL applications.
E-mail: Barbara.Lafford@asu.edu
REFERENCES
Bruner, J. S. (1996). The culture of education. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Chapelle, C. (1998). Multimedia CALL: Lessons to be learned from research on instructed SLA.
Language Learning and Technology, 2(1), 22-34. Retrieved August 18, 2004, from http://llt.msu.edu/
vol2num1/article1/
Craik, F., & Lockhart, R. (1972). Levels of processing: A framework for memory research. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behaviour, 11, 671-84.
Doughty, C., & Long, M. (2003). Optimal psycholinguistic environments for distance foreign language
learning. Language Learning and Technology, 7(3), 50-80. Retrieved August 19, 2004, from
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num3/doughty/
Ellis, N. (1996). Phonological memory, chunking, and points of order. Studies in Second Language
Acquisition, 18, 91-126.
Kramsch, C. (1993). Context and culture in language teaching. Oxford, England: Oxford University
Press.
Lafford, B. (2000). Spanish applied linguistics in the twentieth century: A retrospective and bibliography
(1900-99). Hispania, 83, 711-32.
Long, M. (1985). A role for instruction in second language acquisition: Task-based language teaching. In
K. Hyltenstam & M. Pienemann (Eds.), Modeling and assessing second language development (pp. 77-
99). Clevedon, England: Multilingual Matters.
Morin, R., & Goebel, J. (2001). Basic vocabulary instruction: Teaching strategies or teaching words.
Foreign Language Annals 34(1), 8-17.
National Standards in Foreign Language Education Project. (1996). National standards for foreign
language learning: preparing for the 21st century. Lawrence, KS: Allen Press.
Olshtain, E., & Cohen, A. (1991).Teaching speech act behavior to nonnative speakers. In M. Celce-
Murcia (Ed.), Teaching English as a second language or a foreign language, 2nd ed. (pp. 154-165). New
York: Newbury House.
Paivio, A. (1971). Imagery and verbal processes. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
Savignon, S. (1997). Communicative competence: Theory and classroom practice (2nd ed.). New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Reviewed by Barbara A. Lafford Tell Me More Spanish
Language Learning & Technology 34
Schank, R., & Abelson, R.. (1977). Scripts, plans, goals and understanding: An inquiry into human
knowledge structures. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Schegloff, E. A., & Sacks, H. (1973). Opening up closings. Semiotica, 8(4), 289-327.
Schmidt, R. (1993). Awareness and second languge acquisition. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics,
13, 206-226.
Schmidt, R. W., & Frota, S. N. (1986). Developing basic conversational ability in a second language: A
case study of an adult learner of Portuguese. In R. Day (Ed.), Talking to learn: Conversation in second
language acquisition (pp. 237-326). Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (1995). Problems in output and the cognitive processes they generate: A step
towards second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 16(3), 371-91.
