Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num3/jeon/ 
September 2005, Volume 9, Number 3 
pp. 121-145 
 
Copyright © 2005, ISSN 1094-3501 121 
ORAL INTERACTION AROUND COMPUTERS 
IN THE PROJECT-ORIENTED CALL CLASSROOM  
Gumock Jeon-Ellis, Robert Debski, & Gillian Wigglesworth 
University of Melbourne  
ABSTRACT 
Language teachers need to provide students with a context for genuine communication (Sullivan, 
2000). Project-oriented computer-assisted language learning (PrOCALL) attempts to achieve this 
by orienting learners towards tasks, which encourages them to communicate in the target 
language while working towards completion of a project (Debski, 2000). The study investigates 
the oral interaction that takes place in this context.  
According to Vygotsky, social interaction mediates cognitive development. Swain's (2000) 
application of this concept to language learning suggests that collaborative dialogues mirror the 
moments of language development. Using this framework, the present study identifies "language 
related episodes" (Swain & Lapkin, 1998) and describes the characteristics of the oral interaction 
generated by two small groups of French learners working towards the completion of Web pages 
in a major Australian university. The study also describes instances of "triadic interaction" (van 
Lier, 2002) involving learners' interactions with each other and with the computer screen.  
In sum, the analysis suggests that the PrOCALL context can provide students with opportunities 
for collaborative dialogues, through which language learning occurs. However, the social context 
of these interactions is mediated by personal relationships, preferences, and motivations.  
 
INTRODUCTION  
The foremost goal of CALL activity is to provide language learners with an environment facilitating 
communicative situations where they are encouraged to engage in linguistic interactions (Chapelle, 1997). 
In attempting to achieve this goal, language teachers have increasingly turned to developing collaborative 
tasks and projects. Project-oriented CALL (PrOCALL) can be seen as a holistic learning approach aimed 
at employing modern technology to trigger students' ability to act with words and create social realities in 
and out of the classroom, and thus to facilitate learning. The specific implementation of PrOCALL at the 
University of Melbourne analysed in the present paper was based on the expectation that the goal-oriented 
activity of creating Web-based multimodal presentations may promote the need to communicate among 
students, thereby facilitating language development (Debski, Gassin, & Smith, 1997; Debski, 2000). 
In second language (L2) learning and teaching, project-oriented learning is best positioned as a 
curriculum design within the Communicative Language Teaching (CLT) framework. Its emergence can 
be linked to critiques of the objectivist curriculum and an increasing emphasis on the negotiated 
curriculum and the social reality of the L2 classroom (Breen & Candlin, 1980). For some time now, a 
number of shifts have occurred in CLT in the direction proposed by Breen and Candlin. The "learning 
task" has become the central focus of many second language classrooms (Candlin & Murphy, 1987; Ellis, 
2003; Prabhu, 1987), and learners are recognized as active and creative language users. Learners are also 
seen as members of a social group involved in managing the learning process (Allwright, 1984), making 
contributions to the curriculum (Nunan, 1988) and becoming aware of their own personalities and social 
roles (Candlin, 1987). Legutke and Thomas (1991) considered the role of learning tasks within project-
oriented language learning and developed a framework, which served as a guideline for the pedagogical 
setting of the present research (Debski, 2000).  
Gumock Jeon-Ellis, Robert Debski, & Gillian Wigglesworth Oral Interaction Around Computers... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 122 
A number of studies have explored the types of oral communications that students engage in during 
project-oriented classes that utilize computers. There is evidence that interaction in such classes creates 
unique learning opportunities and that the language produced in them is linguistically different from the 
language of more traditional classrooms. Applying discourse research methods, Ewing (2000) found out 
that PrOCALL classrooms produced a more varied flow of rhetorical relations and students had more 
control over the linguistic means they used to express themselves. He concluded that PrOCALL classes 
provided students with opportunities to develop linguistics skills unavailable in traditional L2 classrooms. 
Mueller-Hartmann (2000) found that project-oriented learning allowed learners to develop and express 
their views and made meaningful communication possible. Gu (2002) reported that PrOCALL classes in 
an EFL tertiary setting in China have provided students with authentic interaction with a variety of 
audiences, increased their levels of input and output, and enhanced motivation, engagement, and 
willingness to learn collaboratively. Toyoda and Harrison (2002) found that difficulties in understanding 
each other in a project-oriented classroom triggered negotiation of meaning between learners of Japanese 
and Japanese native speakers. However, anecdotal evidence also suggests that project-orientation and 
high levels of motivation to accomplish goals not directly related to language learning may discourage 
students from using the target language in the classroom, as does the use of technology in the case of 
students with poor computer skills (Debski, 2000).  
The present study investigates the oral interactions of two groups of French language learners occurring 
in a PrOCALL classroom over a semester. Importantly, the research locates the students' interactions in 
the social context, thus investigating the oral interaction and students' collaborative relationships as 
socially embedded activity. The social space in which interactions occur also involves computer screens 
where students perform actions with words and learn through "perception-in-action" (van Lier, 2002, p. 
147). Another emphasis of the research is, therefore, on the impact of the computer on creating learning 
opportunities.  
ACTIVITY AND ORAL INTERACTION: DESCRIBING L2 LEARNING AS EMBEDDED IN 
ACTIVITY  
Second language research has valued learner-centered collaborative approaches for some time. It is now 
almost axiomatic to say that language learning is a co-constructed process of communication skills 
(Meskill, 1999). Second language learning takes place while students interact with each other, or with the 
teacher, through participating in task-based collaborative activities in the classroom. These activities are 
important because they provide meaningful contexts for L2 development. Meskill highlights this point: 
The oral/aural negotiational aspect of teacher and task supported student-student configurations is 
seen as a powerful venue for second language acquisition to occur. Such configurations, in 
combination with well-designed and orchestrated language learning tasks, represent opportunities 
for learners to manipulate interdependent chunks of the target language in complex ways that see 
immediate, contextual affect. (p. 143) 
The emphasis on collaborative language learning is not new and many of the concepts and issues in L2 
research have emerged from the study of interaction in collaborative learning environments. Thus, our 
awareness of the importance of input, negotiation of meaning, noticing, modification, and output is a 
result of investigating the value and nature of collaboration between learners, between native speakers 
and non-native speakers, and between L2 learners and their teachers (see Chapelle, 1997; Hall & 
Verplaetse, 2000, for an overview on interaction studies). The studies have provided important insights 
into the interactive and negotiation strategies that learners use and the grammatical aspects of languages 
that L2 learners employ during their interactions (Donato, 1994).  
A persisting concern in L2 research has thus been its inclination to focus on the psychological and 
cognitive at the expense of the social dimensions of language learning, despite widespread recognition of 
Gumock Jeon-Ellis, Robert Debski, & Gillian Wigglesworth Oral Interaction Around Computers... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 123 
the importance of the social contexts of learning as one of the major forces of L2 development (e.g., 
Atkinson, 2002; Donato, 1994; Long, 1997; Rogoff, 1990). This increasing recognition of the importance 
of the social context of learning has developed in response to approaches positing language learning as a 
process isolated from the surrounding social factors. Atkinson (2002) conjures up the image of "a cactus 
in the desert" to describe such approaches in L2 research and argues that progress in language learning 
depends on success in the efforts made by students to participate in social activities that are carried out in 
the target language. This implies that, in the case of collaborative classroom situations, L2 learning relies 
on whether learners become successfully integrated into either a group or the class, or into any implicitly 
or explicitly existing social relationships within the classroom.  
The L2 classroom is a social context to which learners bring themselves and their past experiences, and in 
which they establish certain relationships and attempt to participate and engage in tasks in ways that best 
fit their social needs. Thus, describing their activities in relation to the other learners as social beings is an 
important part of the description of their L2 learning. Extracting production alone for analysis and 
ignoring the questions how this is achieved and in what environment, can only be part of the equation, 
because language learning cannot be separated from the activities for which the language is being utilized 
as a tool (Atkinson, 2002, p. 536). Coughlan and Duff (1994), who investigated the ways students' 
implemented ESL tasks, suggest this as a strong direction for L2 research:  
We stand to learn a lot about what goes on in the minds and experiences of individual language 
learners by looking at the activity that emerges from interactive second language situations. 
Perhaps, through this kind of discourse-based investigation, we will discover that variation in 
second language acquisition is not entirely intrapersonal -- rather, some answers must reside in 
the interpersonal relationships among participants engaged in second language activities, and in 
subject-task relationships. (p. 190; emphasis in original) 
Thus, the description of L2 learning has recently expanded its scope to include "contexts of use" (Meskill, 
2005), including perspectives on collaborative relationships, interaction with tasks, and interaction with 
other tools the learners might utilize. 
This inseparable connection of learning with social activity and the social setting in which it is embedded 
is also acknowledged in CALL research. A number of recent studies have attempted to describe L2 
learning in computer-mediated environments from a broader perspective by incorporating a sociocultural 
approach (e.g., Belz, 2002; Goodfellow & Lamy, 1999; Lee, 2004; Thorne, 2003; Warschauer, 2000). 
Investigations of social interaction or "conversational spin-off" (Piper, 1986) around computers has also 
received increasing attention. Recently, van Lier (2002) proposed an ecological-semiotic perspective in 
which language is learned in social spaces, and which includes considerations of the relationships 
between people as well as between people and objects such as computers. For example, he noticed a great 
deal of indicational work occurring in the context of collaborative work in front of a screen. From this 
perspective, language learning opportunities may arise in "triadic interaction" when reference is made to 
objects and actions and through meaningful action afforded by the situation. Work at the computer 
provides unique learning opportunities for meaningful language use and for learning through "perception-
in-action" (van Lier, 2002, p. 147). Similarly, Leahy (2004) referred to interaction involving L2 learners 
and the computer screen as "triangular relationship" (p. 133). She noticed that the triangular relationship 
led the students to produce a form of shorthand, including incomplete sentences, due to student oral 
production being intertwined with language on the computer screen. She expressed concern that such low 
accuracy in interlanguage could be counterproductive for language learning. However, such interactions 
mediated by gestures and objects could lead to language development if they were accompanied by a 
transition from using indexical to more symbolic modes of expression over time. Meskill (2005) 
examined the interactions the teacher orchestrates with children around computers and identified "triadic 
scaffolds" where the teacher uses the computer screen to motivate and capture learner attention.  
Gumock Jeon-Ellis, Robert Debski, & Gillian Wigglesworth Oral Interaction Around Computers... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 124 
Another recent area of research investigation has been on the role of the first language in the second 
language classroom, and the potential roles it may play. A variety of studies conducted particularly within 
a sociocultural framework have argued that "the learner uses the L1 as a cognitive tool to help 'scaffold' 
his/her learning" (Turnbull & Arnett, 2002, p. 206). In particular, it has been found that this can be used 
in peer-to-peer interaction and that where such assistance is used, it serves a number of different 
functions: 
By means of the L1 the students enlist each other's interest in the task throughout its performance, 
or develop strategies for making the task manageable, maintain their focus on the goal of the task, 
foreground important elements of the task, discuss what needs to be done to solve specific 
problems, and explicate and build on each others partial solutions to specific problems throughout 
the task. (Anton & Di Camilla, 1998, p. 321) 
Second language learning needs to be explained within the context of the learners' activities, where 
learners utilize language as well as other tools, and the given conditions of the classroom, to achieve 
particular goals that are driven by their motivations and intentions. This allows a description of language 
learning that is "embedded in, and emerging from, the experiences of others in the present (social), the 
experiences of others from the past (culture), and the immediate experiences of the individual with these 
others and with the artifacts they constructed" (Lantolf, 2002, p. 104). Ohta (2001) highlights the 
importance of describing the broader context in the description of oral interaction: 
Because learner's oral participation is embedded in context, and produced in collaboration with 
other persons and with artifacts of the classroom setting, learner utterances are intimately 
dependent on these factors. Other persons include the classmates and the classroom teacher with 
whom the learner interacts during learning activities, as well as those seated around the learner in 
the classroom, whose utterances and interactions the learner can overhear and appropriate. 
Artifacts of the classroom setting include the teacher's jottings on the blackboard, overhead 
transparencies, worksheets and other handouts, and textbook pages. In this view language is not a 
unique product of just the learner's individual brain, but of a mind that actively draws on the 
interactive environment of the setting in which language is used. (p. 4) 
The present study describes two groups of L2 learners' oral interactions in the context of a PrOCALL 
classroom where they were required to produce Web-based hypertext as part of a semester-long project. 
The specific aim of the research was to determine what impact the social setting, including the computer, 
had on creating learning opportunities for students. The following research questions guided the 
exploration: 
1) What impact has work on projects at the computer had on collaborative relationships between 
students? 
2) What impact have collaborative relationships had on the individual student's use of L2 in oral 
interactions? 
3) What has been the impact of the computer on collaborative relationships and oral interactions? 
METHODOLOGY 
Setting and Participants 
The participants were eight monolingual speakers of English enrolled in a first-year elective unit of 
French and francophone cultures, and their teacher. The main objective of the course was to develop oral 
and written communication skills in French through group work on multimedia projects related to the 
cultural interests of the students. The students formed two groups of three and one group of two and 
worked on Web pages on topics relating to French and francophone cultures: "The beautiful period [Belle 
Gumock Jeon-Ellis, Robert Debski, & Gillian Wigglesworth Oral Interaction Around Computers... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 125 
Epoche] in Montmartre," "Brittany," and "New Wave French Cinema." This was a mini-option that 
represented one of five contact hours and contributed 10% of the total marks of the subject. The class was 
based on a set of guidelines proposed by Debski (2000):  
1) Web-based projects created by students in the target language are central in the classroom.  
2) Students select projects that are personally meaningful and motivating.  
3) In order to accomplish class objectives, students collaborate in the classroom and outside the 
classroom using computer-mediated communication. 
4) The target language is used pervasively as a vehicle for negotiation of tasks and collaboration.  
5) The teaching of form is not scheduled but is driven by student needs, with direct reference to 
learning tasks. 
6) Students share the responsibility for the learning outcomes with their teacher.  
The specific tasks designed by the teacher included, for example, evaluation of existing Web sites, 
brainstorming topics, compiling of keywords to be used to search the Internet, searching for Internet 
resources, reporting on resources found, designing Web sites, elaborating criteria to be used for a peer 
review of sites, and presenting sites to students from other groups. The students received a group mark for 
their Web site, and individual marks for a portfolio, which included their individual contributions to the 
Web site, a review of another group's site, other work as negotiated with the coordinator (e.g., e-mail 
correspondence with a partner in France), and participation based on class work and e-mail 
correspondence with the coordinator.  
Two groups, A and B, are the focus of the present study. To provide background information, the students 
were asked to rate their French skills and experience in hypertext writing using a 5-point Likert scale 
(excellent, very good, good, fair, poor). Their self-evaluations are report in Table 1:  
Table 1. Participant Background 
Self-rated French skills 
Group  Participants  
General Writing 
Experience in 
hypertext writing1 
Self-rated hyper-text 
writing skills2 
Alice  v. good v. good yes, but in English fair 
Kelly excellent v. good no experience fair A  
Cathy good good no experience fair 
Elisa excellent good no experience good B Ruth  good good no experience good 
Biddy good-fair3 good-fair no experience poor 
Karen  fair fair no experience good C 
Darren discontinued  
 
Procedure 
The data were collected over a one-semester period from July to November, 2002. The students met for 1 
hour per week and worked consistently in the same groups developing a Web site. Data sources included 
video and audio recording of the class talk, and of the computer screen, interviews, questionnaires, as well 
as participant observation. Outcomes of the students' activities (e.g., drafts, Web pages) and a record of 
the on-line subject Web site were also collected for analysis.  
Each group was recorded in each class with a separate video camera, and the computer screen and 
students' cursor movement and keyboard operation, were recorded simultaneously. This is illustrated in 
Figure 1:  
Gumock Jeon-Ellis, Robert Debski, & Gillian Wigglesworth Oral Interaction Around Computers... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 126 
 
Figure 1. Classroom recording system 
In addition to the video recordings, students were interviewed individually during the semester or at the 
end of the semester using a method that fits comfortably with the concept of "qualitative interviewing" 
(Mason, 1996). The interviews were designed to obtain in-depth information about the students' hypertext 
writing processes and were semi-structured and conversational in style. Prior to the interviews being 
conducted, participants were asked to fill out a questionnaire. This was used to obtain general background 
information about the participants and also functioned as a warm-up activity through which the 
participants were "tuned" in discussion about the topics in the interviews. In addition, author Jeon-Ellis 
was a participant observer in the classroom, acting as the teacher's assistant. In situations where a 
technical problem occurred, the teacher would approach the researcher and ask for help to resolve the 
problem; at other times she helped the students directly, or arranged for other technicians to come. Being 
part of the learning situation with a specific role allowed the establishment of a relationship between the 
researcher and the students.  
Data Analysis  
The video/audio recordings were transcribed and the parts spoken in French were translated into English. 
The interviews were also transcribed. The analysis was qualitative and used the inductive strategies of 
grounded theory (Strauss & Corbin, 1998). As the analysis proceeded, themes related to the research 
questions were modified to reflect categories emerging from the data, for example, those related to 
collaborative relationships or the role of technology in producing learning opportunities. In order to 
achieve a deeper level of analysis, relationships between the emergent themes were examined. Careful 
attention was also given to any modifications of emergent themes so that an iterative process was 
established. The analysis was never linear or straightforward and involved repetition of reviewing and 
search for counter-evidence or alternative explanation.  
The qualitative data analysis program Nudist (Non-numerical Unstructured Data Indexing Searching and 
Theory-building) was used to assist the processes described above. Qualitative data analysis software can 
be a useful tool for managing and organizing the different types of unstructured data, for mapping the 
Gumock Jeon-Ellis, Robert Debski, & Gillian Wigglesworth Oral Interaction Around Computers... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 127 
relationships between codes, and also for aiding as a prompt search of certain words and text units 
(Denzin & Lincoln, 2000). 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The focus of our analysis is on the behaviours and interactions of two groups (A and B) engaged in 
composing hypertext in French. Several themes related to the impact of collaborative relationships on 
generating learning opportunities for students and the role of computers in creating learning opportunities 
emerged from the data set and they are discussed in this article.  
Collaboration at the Computer 
Group A consisted of Alice, Kelly, and Cathy. These three students appeared relatively well matched in 
terms of their skills (see Table 1). Alice and Kelly, two of the three members of this group, used French in 
their conversation more than the other students throughout the semester. Even when they spoke in 
English, their interests were often concerned with linguistic problems related to the target language. In the 
transcripts of their conversations, there are numerous examples of what Swain and Lapkin (1998) term as 
"language related episodes" (LREs). In example 1, in which Alice, Kelly, and Cathy are browsing French 
Web sites, and Kelly corrects Alice's pronunciation:  
Example 14 (Group A, week 4)  
  1 Kelly I'm sure that there's… [inaudible] … he's quite famous … is there a songwriter? 
  2 Alice Yes, ….It's [spelling] B, R,…  
  3 Kelly [spelling] U, A, N, T  
  4 Alice [spelling] U, A, N, T … What?  
  5 Kelly It's not easy to say, "Bruant"  
  6 Alice Bru-ant 
  7 Kelly Bruant 
  8 Alice Bruant 
  9 Kelly Not "bruyant" (meaning "noisy"), it's a bit like [inaudible] adjectif [inaudible]  
  10 Alice Ah, yes, yes. 
When Kelly notices that Alice's pronunciation is incorrect, she explains with a counter example (example 
1, line 9). Kelly adopts this teaching role spontaneously, and it is well-received by Alice (example 1, line 
10). A similar example follows: 
Example 2 (Group A, week 11) 
  1 Alice "le profil" [profile] and "l'eouvre" [works: mispronounced]  
  2 Kelly "l'oeuvre" [correcting pronunciation]  
  3 Alice "l'oeuvre," sorry, yep. Sorry. 
There are numerous cases in the collaborative dialogues between Kelly and Alice where Kelly appears to 
take on a teaching role: That is, Alice asks a question about a linguistic problem, and Kelly provides an 
answer. 
Gumock Jeon-Ellis, Robert Debski, & Gillian Wigglesworth Oral Interaction Around Computers... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 128 
Example 3 (Group A, week 7) 
  1 Kelly I wanted to make a gap so you could … I want to make a picture there of a cat. 
  2 Alice Yeah. 
  3 Kelly Cause the next bit's about a cat. 
  4 Alice Oh, very interesting. What's "un chat se chauffant au soleil"? 
  5 Kelly Sunning, warming itself in the sun. 
  6 Alice Oh, that's so cool. 
Similarly, Kelly often draws Alice's attention to uses of the French language. In the following dialogue, 
although Kelly and Alice were talking mainly in English, notice how Alice's attention was drawn to the 
word select used in French by Kelly: 
Example 4 (Group A, week 8) 
  1 Kelly Yes, musician. Come back here, ok. 
  2 Alice What? What are you doing? 
  3 Kelly Well, I need to get the musician one in front … okay, alright. Select, then… 
  4 Alice Click. 
  5 Kelly Click? 
  6 Alice Try click. Yep. It's selected. 
  7 Kelly Is it selected? 
  8 Alice It's selected. 
As Lantolf (2003) argues, this kind of interaction is a reflection of learning in which imitation is not 
merely a replication of someone else's utterance, but a reflection of paying attention to certain linguistic 
features. Here, the distinction between imitation and repetition is important. Repetition is significantly 
different from imitation in the sense that it does not entail intentionality or agency. Imitations carry 
constructive and creative intentions of learning as reflected in Alice's imitation (example 4, line 6) which 
is not a mere replication of what Kelly said in line 3. Alice's verbalization is embedded in a collaborative 
dialogue triggered by interaction with, or reaction to, the changing states of the computer screen, and 
consequently, because Kelly responds to this verbalization, Alice's internal effort becomes a shared 
process. In other words, Alice's internal processes have been mediated through the oral interaction. 
Example 5 is another occasion when Alice's internal thought processes become part of a collaborative 
dialogue and a learning opportunity.  
Example 5 (Group A, week 11) 
  1 Kelly There we go. 
  2 Alice That's it? 
  3 Kelly Yes. So, close everything and then open. 
  4 Alice Okay, okay, have we done everything? 
  5 Kelly I think so. 
  6 Alice I hope so…so, home, open, open, opened [ouvrir, ouvert] 
Gumock Jeon-Ellis, Robert Debski, & Gillian Wigglesworth Oral Interaction Around Computers... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 129 
  7 Kelly Open [ouvrez]? 
  8 Alice Open [ouvre], I open [j'ouvre], you open [tu ouvres], so, open [ouvre].  
  9 Kelly There we go. Let's preview it. 
In example 5, Kelly and Alice are trying to see whether they have been able to save the page they have 
been working on so they need to reopen the pages. In doing so, Alice produces speech that is clearly 
private in its purpose (example 5, line 6). That is, she retrieves her knowledge about conjugations of the 
verb open and recites them. Alice neither addresses Kelly, nor anticipates any response from her, but 
engages verbally in the process of conjugating the verb in an effort to internalize its usage. Alice's 
verbalization prompts Kelly to assist the effort by suggesting alternative form of the word, "ouvrez?" 
(example 5, line 7), to which Alice responds by overtly illustrating what she is trying to do, thus linking 
the newly acquired form to activity on the screen.  
From these examples, we may reasonably infer that Kelly and Alice interpret the classroom situation as a 
context for language learning. They are constantly directing each other's attention to linguistic points in 
each other's utterances, and as a result, create language-learning contexts. Example 6 illustrates Alice's 
ability to turn even a trivial incident to a language learning moment: 
Example 6 (Group A, week 11) 
  1 Alice (Sneezes) Excuse me. 
  2 Kelly Bless you. 
  3 Alice What do I say when I sneeze? 
  4 Alice Bless you. 
  5 Kelly No, me. 
  6 Alice Oh, you. Excuse me. 
  7 Alice Excuse me. 
In summary, the collaborative dialogues described so far suggest that, while working at the computer, 
Alice and Kelly were engaged in a relationship in which the roles of teaching and learning were tacitly 
agreed and accepted. Alice's internal effort at language learning became merged into the interaction and 
her internal learning processes are mediated through their verbalisation.  
Throughout the description of Alice and Kelly's dialogues, Kelly usually takes the role of peer-expert. She 
corrects the mistakes that Alice makes in her utterances, draws Alice's attention to linguistic features, and 
responds to Alice's language queries. She helps her focus on the correct form in her vocalizations and to 
link language use to activity performed on the computer, thus facilitating learning through "perception-in-
action" (van Lier, 2002, p. 147). However, as we will see below, their roles (Kelly as expert, Alice as 
novice) become less clearly delineated when computer technology itself becomes the object of their 
dialogues. 
Computer as a Trigger Changing Collaborative Relationships 
When complex technological matters become the objects of their dialogues, Kelly and Alice often resort 
to speaking English, and Kelly is no longer the peer-expert -- in fact, in example 7, where the teacher is 
explaining how to save images on the Internet onto individual files, Alice adopts this role: 
Gumock Jeon-Ellis, Robert Debski, & Gillian Wigglesworth Oral Interaction Around Computers... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 130 
Example 7 (Group A, week 7) 
  1 Teacher One silly thing…sometimes when you've looked for pictures on the Web and you 
put the  
  2   pictures in your webpages, it's very important to ensure that you've saved the 
picture's 
  3   file in the same fold as your text, because if you don't, when you move the text, 
the 
  4   picture won't appear. So you have to save everything in a folder. And it's good 
to have a 
  5   folder within your folder called IMG with your pictures. 
  6 Alice Quite clear… 
  7 Kelly How do I do it? 
  8 Alice Go down…click and hold an image…there it is…[inaudible], pictures. 
  9 Kelly Downloading it… 
  10 Alice Okay, now we need to put it in a good place…yes. This is, damn it. This is not 
14. 
  11   Cause, remember how we had to save it? 
  12 Kelly Oh… 
  13 Alice It's alright. It doesn't matter…we can open our own folder…Montmartre? 
  14 Kelly Yep. 
  15 Alice Create… 
  16 Kelly [inaudible] sounds good to me. 
Not only has Alice's role changed to become a more expert one, but she and Kelly stopped speaking 
French, even though the teacher's instructions were in French. Thus while there was a strong tendency to 
speak French among students in the class, this does not appear to be the case when they are engaged in 
solving technological problems. Leahy (2004) also found that problems with technology acted as triggers 
for switching to the L1 in a classroom where the use of L2 otherwise prevailed for communication around 
computers. In example 8, notice Alice's switch to English in line 6. 
Example 8 (Group A, week 7) 
  1 Alice It's a cabaret bar, more like a café. 
  2 Elise Like Brunswick Street. 
  3 Alice Yeah, but much cooler. 
  4 Elisa It's really good. 
  5 Kelly Good bye. 
  6 Alice See you later…What were we looking for?  
  7 Kelly We were looking for how to copy the whole folder onto the disk. 
Gumock Jeon-Ellis, Robert Debski, & Gillian Wigglesworth Oral Interaction Around Computers... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 131 
  8 Alice How do we do that ?  
  9 Kelly We can do it. Can we go in there and do it. We need, like, "my computer." 
  10 Alice I know…stop it, you stupid. Oh, I know, I know. No, I don't. What am I doing 
… and then  
  11   we go to this, and… 
  12 Kelly And copy. 
  13 Alice Move! Do not [inaudible] 
  14 Kelly  No, go "edit," "copy," and then go into "untitled." 
  15 Alice There is no "untitled" 
  16 Kelly  Is it in "desktop" or something 
 17 Alice  Oh, yeah, it's always desktop. 
 18 Kelly I think we're in "documents" at the moment. We need to get out of "documents" 
 19 Alice Oh, we aren't in… 
 20 Kelly Applications or whatever, get out of that. No… 
 21 Alice oops. 
 22 Kelly Oh, can we just click on "untitled"?  
 23 Alice Oh yes, we can. 
 24 Kelly And then just paste in there? 
 25 Alice We sure can. 
 26 Kelly Paste. 
 27 Alice Oh, it doesn't work. Show clipboard…yes. You, I want you to click, you, Oh 
why can't I… 
 28 Kelly  Steven [the teacher], how can we put the folder on diskette?  
 29 Teacher on the diskette?  
In example 8, lines 1-6, Alice is talking to Elisa (group B) about her topic, speaking French. Then turning 
back to the task at hand, she switches to English (example 8, line 6), focusing on the task of copying a 
folder (example 8, line 7). This time, Kelly is guiding the activity, and in trying to complete this 
technological task, both speak English, reverting to French as the teacher approaches.  
The well-established context of language learning in Alice and Kelly's mutual collaboration is not stable 
when they are engaged in unfamiliar technological problems. As a consequence, during these episodes, 
opportunities for language learning become rather scarce.  
However, this is not the only direction the student interaction takes when a technological problem occurs. 
In the following talk, a linguistic problem is related to a technological one.  
Example 9 (Group A, week 7) 
  1 Kelly what's a "champ de text" [text field]? 
  2 Alice Like a text box? Maybe that's a text box. 
Gumock Jeon-Ellis, Robert Debski, & Gillian Wigglesworth Oral Interaction Around Computers... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 132 
  3 Kelly Oh, maybe … "une zone de texte"… 
  4 Alice Okay, I know. We'll open two simultaneously so we can see what one means. 
  5 Kelly Okay. 
In example 9, neither of the two students is in a teaching or leading role. Rather, both are explorers with 
equally low expertise, as they do not know what functions the program can perform. Furthermore, the 
program is a French version, and they often encounter new French words or phrases in the menu bars of 
the program. In this case, an object of learning emerges. In the talk above, the emerged object of learning 
is a computer term, champ de text (example 9, line 1), which the students came across while exploring the 
HTML authoring program. When Alice's answer is not convincing (example 9, line 2), Kelly wonders 
about another similar term (example 9, line 3: une zone de texte? [Isn't it textbox?]). Alice does not know 
the answer. However, she is able to suggest a way to find out the meanings of the terms, that is, to see the 
two menu functions that the words "champ de text" and "une zone de texte" indicate respectively 
(example 9, line 4).  
Example 9 is different from those described earlier in the sense that the two students are dealing with dual 
learning objectives: to learn the meaning of the words (which are computer specific terms) and to learn 
how to use the functions of the program that the words are indicating. The role of the computer in this 
case is twofold: It is both the source of the linguistic problems or "accidents" (Barson, 1997), and it 
mediates Kelly and Alice's language learning by providing a tool to explore the language and to link 
meaning to activity, another example of learning through "perception-in-action" (van Lier, 2002, p. 147). 
In other words, the computer itself is both the object of learning, and a tool for learning language. In this 
attempt to utilize the program both as a source and a tool for language learning, Alice and Kelly form a 
relationship in which they have equal expertise as explorers. Example 10 is similar: 
Example 10 (Group A, week 7) 
  1 Alice Okay, so we have to go to… 
  2 Kelly "paste" … "addition"? 
  3 Alice Oh, what's paste? "Coller" [Paste]. 
  4 Kelly Coller? 
  5 Alice Cause "paste" is after "copy" 
In example 10, Alice and Kelly need to find the French word for "paste" in the menu, which they find 
through using the usual sequence on the menu bar of the program (where "paste" appears under "copy" in 
the Edit menu).  
We have seen that for Alice and Kelly, the PrOCALL classroom provides a range of opportunities for 
learning and that this is clearly achieved through their collaborative interaction. We have also seen how 
activity occurring on the computer screen changes relationships between learners, and affects the 
language they use and the learning opportunities they experience. The third member of Group A, Cathy, 
is less fortunate. As an outsider to the group, she has far fewer opportunities to participate in these kinds 
of activities and to learn.  
Exclusion in the PrOCALL Classroom 
Overall, group A did not seem to encounter major conflicts in making decisions or concerning any other 
issues related to the tasks. However, Kelly was explicit in her dissatisfaction with the group work and saw 
Cathy as an impediment since she appeared less committed and was frequently absent. 
Gumock Jeon-Ellis, Robert Debski, & Gillian Wigglesworth Oral Interaction Around Computers... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 133 
Example 11 (Interview, October 11, 2002) 
  1  Kelly  The text that Alice and I have written … we put it into colors and divided up into  
  2   pages, and we've made some links between pages but we haven't got Cathy's 
contribution.  
  3   Remember she hasn't been here for a while so we've been behind with that. […] 
  4  Int. I see. How are you doing with working in the group? 
  5  Kelly It's not too bad, but I find group work really difficult because… […] I'd like to 
  6   feel I have control, not like being bossy, but I like everything's organized. But 
sometimes it  
  7   can be unpredictable. For example, when Alice and I planned to finish it off on 
Wednesday  
  8   and then Cathy didn't turn up. We didn't … so, we couldn't finish. I just find it 
very stressful  
  9   on the whole process […] 
Notice Kelly's use of the pronoun we referring to herself and Alice, and her exclusion of Cathy in 
example 11, lines 1, 2, 3, and 8 by referring to her as "Cathy" or "she." The transcripts reveal that in 
general Cathy is not included in the talk, and her role is minimal: 
Example 12 (Group A, week 5) 
  1  Teacher [explains about Website evaluation criteria] … there are ways to limit the 
downloading  
  2   time, to simplify by reducing the definition of the image … and page layout … 
what did 
  3   you say about the page layout? What's important? We're talking about pay 
layout… 
  4  Kelly Yes. 
  5 Alice Um, it's good … on the home page to have all the introduction, and on the side 
here, 
  6    there are all the links to the other pages … so it's easy to follow. 
  7 Kelly And when the internal links stay on the side 
  8 Alice Yes, all the time 
  9 Kelly Yes, all the time 
  10 Teacher In a frame. 
  11 Alice Yes 
  12 Kelly Yes 
  13   […]  
  14 Teacher Okay…um…what about color? 
Gumock Jeon-Ellis, Robert Debski, & Gillian Wigglesworth Oral Interaction Around Computers... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 134 
  15 Alice Lots of colors 
  16 Cathy Yes 
  17 Teacher So you like colors 
  18 Alice Yes 
  19 Kelly Yes 
In the talk in example 12, Alice responds (example 12, lines 5-6) to the teacher's prompt (example 12, 
lines 1-3) and then Kelly adds to Alice's answer (example 12, line 7). In fact, Kelly's comment is almost a 
paraphrase of Alice's previous comment. Kelly and Alice agree throughout the interaction (e.g., example 
12, lines 8-9, 11-12, 18-19). These contrast sharply with Cathy's minimal participation (example 12, line 
16). Dismissal of Cathy's attempts to participate is well illustrated by example 13 which takes place while 
Alice, Kelly, and Cathy are discussing ways to present texts on their Web page.  
Example 13 (Group A, week 6) 
  1 Kelly Home, homepage… 
  2 Alice Together or…? 
  3 Kelly Yes. 
  4 Cathy Separate. 
  5 Alice Together. 
  6 Kelly Together. 
  7 Cathy Just one page for everything? 
  8 Kelly And what will we have … a home page … are we going to have the title … or…? 
  9 Cathy Is the home page just with…? 
  10 Alice A windmill. 
  11 Kelly A windmill. 
  12 Cathy Yes. 
  13 Alice Yes, but I think we need to have a bit of text too. 
  14 Cathy From the era. 
  15 Alice Not from the era but of our site.  
  16 Kelly Yes, yes. And, yes, something that explains the aim of the site. 
  17 Alice like the history of windmills and… 
  18 Kelly Windmills that… 
  19 Alice In that era. It's an era of prosperity because the, … I don't know … you know, all 
the… 
  20 Cathy Maybe… 
  21 Alice Grain. And I don't know what else they produced. 
Gumock Jeon-Ellis, Robert Debski, & Gillian Wigglesworth Oral Interaction Around Computers... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 135 
 
  22 Kelly The grain! 
  23 Cathy Maybe on the home page … the three paragraphs… 
The agreement between Kelly and Alice (example 13, lines 5-6, 10-11, and 21-22) stands in stark contrast 
to their rather negative reactions to Cathy's comments (e.g., lines 4-6, 14-16). Notice, also, how Cathy's 
question at line 7 (repeated at line 9) is ignored by the other two, who move on to discuss another topic. 
As Cathy becomes increasingly silent towards the end of the semester, there are few examples of any 
interaction between Cathy, and Alice and Kelly.  
Group interaction in the PrOCALL classroom is driven by a broad and naturalistic goal, and students 
negotiate their participation in achieving it, rather than by micro-tasks, simulated interaction, and 
scheduled responsibilities. In such a setting, personality and social skills are important factors 
determining what learning opportunities will emerge for individual students. In this study, Cathy's 
increasing isolation clearly results in fewer opportunities for her for language learning through 
collaboration. Conversely, the transcripts of Alice and Kelly's collaborative discussions reveal a variety of 
opportunities for resolving linguistic problems, practicing newly acquired knowledge, and therefore, 
language learning.  
Lack of Collaborative Dialogue 
Group B consisted of Ruth and Elisa. In general, Elisa was eager to speak French, to discuss the group 
topic, and to be engaged in the webpage writing activities. Ruth, on the other hand, had a rather negative 
attitude and often digressed from the tasks. While physically they sat together and interacted verbally, 
examination of their actual collaboration reveals that their Web page writing processes were independent 
from each other, and that they spoke in English most of the time, thus not making use of potential 
language learning opportunities.  
Example 14 illustrates Ruth's ability to initiate a digression. The utterance in line 2 is the beginning of a 
long digression in which the students constantly talk about "off-task" topics, and although they are 
sharing a computer and playing with it, what they are doing is not congruent with what they are talking 
about. Such digressions reduced the opportunities for linking language use to activity on the computer 
screen.  
Example 14 (Group B, week 7) 
  1 Teacher Now what would be good would be to put that in an html document and  
  2   experiment with different fonts and backgrounds. 
  3  Ruth Yeah, do you want to do, green? I think green's a good idea…So how have you 
been?  
  4  Elisa I've been good. 
  5 Ruth How's the boy? 
  6  Elisa Which one? No, the one here? 
  7  Ruth Marcus? 
  8  Elisa Oh, Marcus. No … good name though. 
  9  Ruth:  Hamish? Hamish? 
  10  Elisa Yeah 
Gumock Jeon-Ellis, Robert Debski, & Gillian Wigglesworth Oral Interaction Around Computers... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 136 
  11 Ruth I think I was in love with a guy called Hamish once…He doesn't happen to play 
violin 
  12    does he?  
  13  Elisa No. 
Of course, on rare occasions they do discuss the tasks, but note there is no attempt at any point to use 
French, and notice how rapidly the digression emerges in the following example (example 15, lines 7-10):  
Example 15 (Group B, week 7) 
  1 Elisa: This is html. 
  2  Ruth Yeah. But how do we put it on the net? 
  3  Elisa We haven't even done it yet. 
  3 Ruth Yeah, but can't we put it on anyway, just for fun? Just to see what's happening? 
No? 
  4  Elisa No … you have to write your thing first. 
  5 Ruth Oh, shit … I'm going to show you my high school Web site. I'm going back 
tomorrow.  
  6    Um … we have this concert on once a year, in this chapel somewhere and we 
have it with  
  7    the players, and we have to come back and play. Look, a virtual site … [talks 
more about the school] 
  8    I'll show you my history teacher who I'm totally in love with … he's my  
  9    history teacher. 
  10  Elisa This is html. 
There is some evidence that Ruth is reluctant to speak French and is not confident about her abilities. 
Ruth receives feedback from the teacher that is not entirely positive. She has done a draft of her Web site, 
which is a chronological list of Brittany's historical events. The teacher's feedback (week 7) is as follows: 
There are some good elements here, Ruth, but the quotes and the timeline take up too much room. 
Develop the first paragraph and take a stance on the possible conflict between the two identities 
… or, talk about your culinary experiences in Brittany… P [pass]  
In Example 16, Ruth refuses to show Elisa the draft, which is required for the Web site:  
Example 16 (Group B, week 7) 
  1 Elisa Okay, so let's see your text, mate.  
  2 Ruth No, you are not seeing my text.  
  3 Elisa But we have to put in onto the Web site.  
  4 Ruth I'm not putting it on the Web site. I'm correcting it. [complaining about the way 
the teacher wrote down the feedback]… 
  5   I knew it was shit. 
Gumock Jeon-Ellis, Robert Debski, & Gillian Wigglesworth Oral Interaction Around Computers... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 137 
  6   […] 
  7  Elisa So what do you want to change about your thing?  
  8  Ruth  Everything. 
  9  Elisa  I'll show you what I've got. 
  10  Ruth  You can look at yours but you can't look at mine.  
  11 Elisa Okay, so let's see your text, mate.  
Although Ruth refuses to share her draft with Elisa, she explains the content of her draft: 
Example 17 (Group B, week 7) 
  1 Ruth I knew it was rubbish. 
  2 Elisa  Because the first bit… 
  3 Ruth  Um, I was talking about how it was distinct geographically and culturally, and  
  4   Talking … and I sort of said, you know, some people think there's a bit of a 
conflict between  
  5   their identity and the French identity. That was sort of alright. But then I just 
sort of  
  6   wrote this boring history stuff because I couldn't really think of what to say. 
And then  
  7    some crap about some crepes. So, I'll redo it. Oh, well. I just like, have to take 
out the  
  8    boring stuff.  
  9  Elisa  What do you want to redo about? 
  10  Ruth  Oh well, it's not, you know, how ours is about … identity and I couldn't really 
... I did it at  
  11   the last minute and I couldn't really think of anything like, how to talk about, 
like, food  
  12   and talk about identity without sort of sounding like idiot. 
  13 Elisa  Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. 
  14 Ruth  So I think I'm going to get some documents in English as well.  
Ruth acknowledges that the content of her draft is not interesting (example 17, lines. 6-7), saying she did 
not know what to say about the group topic of identity in Brittany. She knows her draft needs revision, 
but notice the decision Ruth makes to resolve the problem. She says she is going to find documents 
written in English (example 17, line 14). This suggests that she is not well disposed toward learning 
French; in other words she is not oriented to the goal of language learning. This is further supported by 
the following extract in which Elisa offers to give Ruth some contact addresses of her French friends so 
that Ruth can obtain more information on the topic (example 17, line 1-2). Ruth appears reluctant to speak 
French (example 17, line 3), and although Elisa says that she may ask them in English (example 17, line 
4), Ruth still refuses and chooses to work by herself by saying "I don't want to be asking stupid questions" 
(example 17, line 6-7). 
Gumock Jeon-Ellis, Robert Debski, & Gillian Wigglesworth Oral Interaction Around Computers... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 138 
Example 18 (Group B, week 7) 
  1 Elisa But …[inaudible] do you want, do you want some email addresses of people, 
like you  
  2   could write to and ask them questions if you've got questions?  
  3 Ruth In French?  
  4 Elisa Or you could ask them in English … Cause I've got like … there's some 
amazing people that  
  5   I met over there who would be really happy to explain things to you and … you 
know. 
  6 Ruth I should probably still do some more backgroundy stuff. Like, I don't want to be 
asking  
  7    stupid questions. 
  8  Elisa Hey, I went over there not speaking French and I was asking questions the 
whole time. 
  9  Ruth Did you learn French when you were over there? 
  10  Elisa Yeah. 
  11 Ruth I don't know how you could do that. 
Part of the problem appears to be that Ruth does not particularly enjoy working in a group, and would 
rather work on her own: 
Example 19 (interview, Ruth, November, 2002) 
  Int. How do you feel about working with Elisa?  
  Ruth I'd prefer work on my own. In university setting, it's harder than at high school 
because people come and go at different times and they are not always around. Last 
week was really tricky because Elisa didn't seem to work and it was ready to finish on 
Wednesday. Then Elisa wasn't there. It was really hard. So in that sense, […] I don't 
think it worked too well as it might have.  
In a practical sense, Elisa and Ruth's official collaboration was realised only to the extent that their pages 
were linked to the same introductory page at the end. They really engaged in parallel activities which 
were independent of each other. This lack of collaboration stands in stark contrast to the collaborative 
atmosphere created by Alice and Kelly (although to the exclusion of Cathy) and suggests that group and 
pair work in language classes needs to be very carefully handled if it is intended to be used to enhance 
oral interaction in the target language in the classroom.  
Oral Interaction With the Teacher  
As she did not have many opportunities to speak French with Ruth, Elisa's oral interaction in French was 
between her and the teacher. These interactions are usually initiated by Elisa, and the topics that she 
initiates are often related to the tasks. In the following talk, notice Elisa's enthusiasm for speaking French 
with the teacher. 
Gumock Jeon-Ellis, Robert Debski, & Gillian Wigglesworth Oral Interaction Around Computers... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 139 
Example 20 (Group B, week 7) 
  1 Elisa Do you know there's a new film by Cédric… 
  2 Teacher [says something but inaudible] 
  3 Elisa L'auberge… 
  4 Teacher I've seen it. 
  5 Elisa You've seen it? 
  6 Teacher Yes. 
  7  Elisa All of my friends keep telling me "it's so good!" 
  8  Teacher Yes, it's pretty good. 
  9  Elisa With Audrey To … t … tou… 
  10  Teacher Tautou 
  11 Elisa Tauou 
  12 Teacher And the … the boy who is in several of his films … I've forgotten his name. 
  13 Elisa They've told me it's really great. 
  14 Teacher But what's quite interesting in that film, in my opinion, is that … [talking about 
the film]  
When Elisa asks the teacher about a French film (example 20, line 1), the conversation begins. Elisa's 
enthusiasm about speaking French stood in contrast to the other students' because, in fact, no other 
student in the classroom would talk to the teacher for the purpose of just "chatting" as is seen in the 
previous examples. She also did not seem to be afraid of making mistakes or being short of vocabulary.  
Example 21 (Group B, week 7) 
(The class had been previously asked to find Web sites related to their group topics and submit a 
bibliography to the teacher. Elisa is talking to the teacher concerning her bibliography.) 
  1 Elisa Did you read any of the site that I put in on …? 
  2 Teacher No 
  3 Elisa It's really good. I put the page somewhere.... 
  4 Teacher In the bibliography. 
  5 Elisa Yes, in the bibliography. He speaks a lot about what I'm doing, the importance 
of  
  6   maintaining Briton. But there's sense of, a sense of "humeur" [wrong word 
meaning "mood"],  
  7    is that what you say?  
  8  Teacher Of humour [providing the right word for humour]. 
  9  Elisa A really good sense of humour. He's a bit satirical, a bit… He's a Briton, so he 
can do it... [keeps talking about the Web site with the teacher] 
Gumock Jeon-Ellis, Robert Debski, & Gillian Wigglesworth Oral Interaction Around Computers... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 140 
In example 21, line 6, Elisa is aware that she may be using the wrong word humeur ("But there's sense of, 
a sense of 'humeur'") and immediately asks, "is that what you say?" This is a spontaneous request for help 
with this lexical choice problem. While the function of the request is to find out the correct word, the 
utterance serves the additional function of ensuring continuation of communication at hand. Therefore, in 
responding to the teacher's feedback, she produces the right word, not in isolation (i.e., merely mimicking 
the teacher's feedback), but in the context of the communication (i.e., "a really good sense of humour"; 
example 21, line 9).  
Elisa's dialogue with the teacher reveals an important characteristic that highlights her merit as a language 
learner. First, she is enthusiastic about using the target language (even though she is not certain she has 
the right word, she attempts to put the word into use), which allows her to learn from the teacher 
(example 21, line 8), and, second, she skillfully uses the teacher's assistance. That is, she applies the word 
given by the teacher immediately in her subsequent utterance (example 21, line 9). The following is a 
similar example: 
Example 22 (Group B, week 7) 
  1 Elisa If, at home … how do I say "the people that I live with"? It's not "concomitant,"  
  2   no…"flatmate" or "housemate"? 
  3 Teacher "housemate" [collocataire] 
  4 Elisa Is that it? Um, my housemate has Adobe Photoshop, so if I can use that … can I 
save onto  
  5   disk with Adobe?  
Elisa wants to say that her housemate has a program that might be useful for her Web page writing. In an 
attempt to say it, she needs the French word for "housemate." She paraphrases the word as "the people 
that I live with." She not only succeeds in asking for the word in French by paraphrasing, but also 
suggests possible words: "'concomitant,' no…'flatmate' or 'housemate'?" (example 22, lines 1-2). Again, 
she immediately puts the teacher's feedback into use (example 22, line 4). And again (as described for 
Kelly and Alice's interaction), Lantolf's (2003) concept of imitation is applicable to highlight another 
important characteristic of Elisa's language learning. Her imitation of the teacher's feedback is 
constructive in the sense that she does not merely replicate what the teacher says, but transforms it and 
uses it in context. Atkinson's (2002) account of language learning may be applied to a language learner 
like Elisa, who takes opportunities to use the target language for communicative ends:  
One acquires a language in order to act, and by acting,[emphasis added] in a world where 
language is performative. This is exactly why and how children learn their first language, and it 
accounts as well for most of the second/additional language learning going on in the world today. 
(p. 537) 
We have seen that good collaborative relationships between students in the project-oriented environment 
can provide a range of opportunities for language learning. However, it cannot be taken for granted that 
these are going to be used to their full advantage. Thus, some students may need to work harder than 
others to ensure that they have adequate opportunity to use the language. Some students may be less 
motivated to learn than others, or may be influenced by other affective factors. Personal relationships, as 
well as ability and ability to interact with computers, may also limit or enhance their opportunities to 
learn. It is also important that language students are oriented toward learning the language, and that they 
take advantage of the opportunities for learning that come their way.  
Gumock Jeon-Ellis, Robert Debski, & Gillian Wigglesworth Oral Interaction Around Computers... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 141 
CONCLUSIONS  
The present study has undertaken analysis of the oral interaction occurring between L2 learners working 
on Web-based projects in small groups. We adopted a sociocultural perspective which acknowledges that 
social spaces where collaborative dialogues (Swain, 2000) occur include physical objects such as 
computers and associated electronic spaces which interact with social behaviour and hence with learning 
itself (Leahy, 2004; Meskill, 2005; van Lier, 2002).  
The research demonstrates that the relationships which developed between the students had a profound 
impact on generating learning opportunities for the students and each individual's use of L2 in oral 
interactions as has been found in earlier research on learner interactions in task-based pair work (Storch, 
2002). Social exclusion in the PrOCALL classroom resulted in fewer "language-related episodes" (Swain 
& Lapkin, 1998) and fewer learning opportunities, while smooth collaboration generated learning 
opportunities through the resolution of linguistic problems and the provision of an arena for the practice 
of newly acquired knowledge. The analysis provided examples of naturalistic interaction at the computer 
where the learner does not merely repeat someone else's utterances, but reconstructs them and applies 
them in a different context, thus displaying intensionality and agency (Lantolf, 2003), the sine-qua-non of 
language use (Winograd & Flores, 1986). One direction of future research would be to explore what types 
of goal-oriented learning tasks performed using computers are most likely to contribute to the 
development of relationships between learners that are conducive to generating learning opportunities.  
In the analyzed data, collaborative dialogues in the PrOCALL classroom were often linked to activity on 
the computer screen and could be perceived as "triadic interaction" (van Lier, 2002) or "triadic scaffolds" 
(Meskill, 2005). In example 10, the students decided to resolve the meaning of an item on the menu bar 
by clicking on the bar and checking its function. Computer activity thus provided a link between an 
unknown L2 language item and its function to illuminate meaning. The study has provided examples 
where "triadic scaffolds" not only involved the student, the teacher, and the screen, as in Meskill (2005), 
but also groups of students and the screen where one student assumed the role of a more capable peer.  
The computer screen can be seen as a microcosm inviting interaction and extending the arena of the 
classroom, limited by the physical state of objects it contains. The changing relationships between various 
symbols systems on the screen provide ample opportunities for students to reflect, verbalize, and 
negotiate. The transcripts for example revealed instances where students' private speech, in the form of 
loud verbalizations, became part of collaborative dialogues and created learning opportunities. 
Interestingly, the computer screen had the ability to trigger private speech, which then became a shared 
effort between two students. In one instance, the computer screen set off a verbalization, which in turn 
prompted another student, who had assumed the role of a more capable peer, to suggest an alternative 
form of a word. Following this, the first student responded by overtly illustrating what she was trying to 
do and by performing an activity on the screen, an example of learning through "perception-in-action" 
(van Lier, 2002, p. 147).  
Overall, technology turned out to be an important factor shaping the collaborative relationships observed 
in the classroom and, consequently the learning opportunities available to students. The study has 
revealed that technical problems often changed the established roles between learners. A student who 
acted as the novice in language-related collaborative dialogues, often became the leader in situations 
involving technological problems. This change was accompanied by switching to using English rather 
than the target language. It is not entirely clear whether switching to English was triggered by the 
technical problems (a new topic; see Leahy, 2004) or the role switching. Situations were also observed 
when technological and language problems were linked together and none of the students was an obvious 
expert or novice. In such situations, students attempted to utilize the computer both as a source and tool 
for language learning and they formed a balanced relationship as explorers of technology and language.  
Gumock Jeon-Ellis, Robert Debski, & Gillian Wigglesworth Oral Interaction Around Computers... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 142 
More research is required on how social spaces interact with electronic spaces on the computer screen in 
the project-oriented classroom. Pair and small-group work in such classes needs to be very carefully 
handled if it is intended to enhance goal-oriented interaction in the target language and language learning. 
Personality differences and problems with group dynamics must be addressed prior to project work 
through "learning how to learn" and "learning how to collaborate." We need to know more about the role 
of the teacher or more capable peer and the learning task in assisting learners with noticing and taking 
advantage of the rich learning opportunities emerging from "triadic interaction" (van Lier, 2002) with the 
computer screen.  
NOTES 
1. The question was "Have you ever done webpage writing before, particularly in French? If so, in what 
context?" 
2. The question was "How would you rate your computer skills, especially those skills that are required to 
write webpage?" 
3. Biddy's answer was "between good and fair." 
4. In all transcripts, italics indicate that the original talk was in French and that this is a translation. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Gumock Jeon-Ellis has completed a PhD on the use of Web-based hypertext writing for second language 
learning at the University of Melbourne. Her interests include computer assisted language learning, 
second language acquisition, sociolinguistics, and Korean language teaching. 
E-mail: gumijeon@hotmail.com 
Robert Debski is Associate Professor and Director of the Horwood Language Centre, School of 
Languages, University of Melbourne. His research interests include technology in minority language 
maintenance and learning, 
project-oriented CALL, and epistemology of CALL. 
E-mail: rdebski@unimelb.edu.au 
Gillian Wigglesworth is Associate Professor and Head of the School of Languages at the University of 
Melbourne.  She has a wide range of research interests which broadly include both first and second 
language acquisition, language testing and assessment, and bilingualism and she has published widely in 
these areas.  
E-mail: gillianw@unimelb.edu.au 
 
REFERENCES  
Allright, R. L. (1984). The importance of interaction in classroom language learning. Applied Linguistics 
5, 156-171. 
Anton, M., & DiCamilla, F. (1998). Socio-cognitive functions of L1 collaborative interaction in the L2 
classroom. The Canadian Modern Language Review, 54(3), 314-342. 
Atkinson, D. (2002). Toward a sociocognitive approach to second language acquisition. The Modern 
Language Journal, 86(4), 525-545. 
Gumock Jeon-Ellis, Robert Debski, & Gillian Wigglesworth Oral Interaction Around Computers... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 143 
Barson, J. (1997). Space, time and form in the project-based foreign language classroom. In R. Debski, J. 
Gassin, & M. Smith (Eds). Language learning through social computing (Occasional Papers 16; pp. 3-
37). Parkville, Victoria: Applied Linguistics Association of Australia. 
Belz, J. A. (2002). The myth of the deficient communicator. Language Teaching Research, 6(1), 59-82. 
Breen, M., & Candlin, C. (1980). The essentials of a communicative curriculum in language teaching. 
Applied Linguistics 1, 89-112.  
Candlin, C. (1987). Towards task-based language learning. In C. Candlin & D. Murphy (Eds). Language 
Learning Tasks (pp. 5-22). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall International.  
Candlin, C., & Murphy, D. (1987). Language learning tasks. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall 
International.  
Chapelle, C. (1997). Call in the year 2000: Still in search of research paradigm? Language Learning & 
Technology, 1(1), 19-43. Retrieved April 23, 2003, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/chapelle/ 
Coughlan, P., & Duff. P. A. (1994). Same task, different activities: Analysis of SLA task from an activity 
theory perspective. In J. P. Lantolf & G. Appel (Eds.), Vygotskian approaches to second language 
research (pp. 173-193). Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing Corporation.  
Debski, R. (2000). Exploring the re-creation of a CALL innovation. Computer Assisted Language 
Learning, 13(4-5), 307-332.  
Debski, R., Gassin, J., & Smith, M. (Eds.). (1997). Language learning through social computing 
(Occasional Papers 16). Parkville, Victoria: Applied Linguistics Association of Australia. 
Denzin, N. K., & Lincoln, Y. S (Eds.). (2000). The handbook of qualitative research (2nd ed.). Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Donato, R. (1994). Collective scaffolding in second language learning. In J. P. Lantolf & G. Appel (Eds.), 
Vygotskian approaches to second language research (pp. 33-56). Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing.  
Ellis, R. (2003). Task-based language learning and teaching. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.  
Ewing, M. (2000). Conversations of Indonesian language students on computer-mediated projects: 
Linguistic responsibility and control. Computer Assisted language Learning Journal, 13(4-5), 333-356. 
Goodfellow, R., & Lamy, M-N. (1999). "Reflective conversation" in the virtual language classroom. 
Language Learning and Technology, 2(2), 43-61. Retrieved November 5, 2004, http://llt.msu.edu/ 
vol2num2/article2/ 
Gu, P. (2002). Effects of project-based CALL on Chinese EFL learners. Asian Journal of English 
Language Teaching 12, 195-210.  
Hall, J. K., & Verplaetse, L. S.(2000). The development of second and foreign language through 
classroom interaction. In J. K. Hall & L. S. Verplaetse (Eds.), Second and foreign language learning 
through classroom interaction (pp.1-20). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.  
Lantolf, J. P. (2002). Sociocultural theory and second language acquisition. In R. B. Kaplan (Ed.), The 
Oxford handbook of applied linguistics (pp. 104-114). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.  
Lantolf, J. P. (2003). Intrapersonal communication and internalisation in the second language classroom. 
In A. Kozulin, G. Gindis, V. S. Ageyev, & S. M. Miller (Eds.), Vygotsky's educational theory in cultural 
context (pp. 349-370). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.  
Leahy, C. (2004). Observations in the computer room: L2 output and learner behavior. ReCALL, 16(1), p. 
124-144.  
Gumock Jeon-Ellis, Robert Debski, & Gillian Wigglesworth Oral Interaction Around Computers... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 144 
Lee, L. (2004). Learners' perspectives on networked collaborative interaction with native speakers of 
Spanish in the US. Language Learning and Technology, 8(1), 83-100. Retrieved March 21, 2005, from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num1/lee/ 
Legutke, M., & Thomas, H. (1991). Process and experience in the language classroom. New York: 
Longman.  
Long, M. H. (1997). Focus on form in task-based language teaching. Text from the McGraw-Hill 
videoconference: Grammar in the communicative classroom. Retrieved June 15, 2004, from 
http://www.mhhe.com/socscience/foreignlang/top.htm 
Mason, J. (1996). Qualitative researching. London: Sage Publications.  
Meskill, C. (1999). Computers as tools for sociocollaborative language learning. In K. Cameron (Ed.), 
Computer assisted language learning: Media, design and applications (pp. 141-162). Exton, PA: Swets 
& Zeitlinger. 
Meskill, C. (2005). Triadic scaffolds: Tools for teaching English language learners with computers. 
Language Learners & Technology, 9(1), 46-59. Retrieved May 20, 2005, from http://llt.msu.edu/ 
vol9num1/meskill/ 
Mueller-Hartmann, A. (2000). The role of tasks in promoting intercultural learning in electronic learning 
networks. Language Learning & Technology, 4(2), 129-147. Retrieved November 6, 2004, from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num2/muller/ 
Nunan, D. (1988). The learner-centred curriculum. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.  
Ohta, A. S. (2001). Second language acquisition processes in the classroom: Learning Japanese. 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Piper, A. (1986). Conversation and the computer: A study of the conversational spin-off generated among 
learners of English as a foreign language working in groups. System, 14(2), 187-198.  
Prabhu (1987). Second language pedagogy. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.  
Rogoff, (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking: Cognitive development in social context. New York: Oxford 
University Press.  
Storch, N. (2002). Patters of interaction in ESL pair work. Language Learning, 52(1), 119-158.  
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and procedures for 
developing grounded theory (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.  
Sullivan, P. (2000). Practicing safe visual rhetoric on the World Wide Web. Computers and composition 
18, 103-121. 
Swain, M. (2000). The output hypothesis and beyond: mediating acquisition through collaborative 
dialogue. In J. P. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 97-114). Oxford, 
England: Oxford University Press.  
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (1998). Interaction and second language learning: Two adolescent French 
immersion students working together. The Modern Language Journal 82, 320-337.  
Thorne, S. (2003). Artifacts and cultures-of-use in intercultural communication. Language Learning & 
Technology, 7(2), 38-67. Retrieved January 9, 2004, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/thorne/ 
Toyoda, E., & Harrison, R. (2002). Categorization of text chat communication between learners and 
native speakers of Japanese. Language Learning & Technology, 6(1), 82-99. Retrieved November 6, 
2004, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/TOYODA/ 
Gumock Jeon-Ellis, Robert Debski, & Gillian Wigglesworth Oral Interaction Around Computers... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 145 
Turnbull, M., & Arnett, K. (2002). Teachers' uses of the target and first language in second and foreign 
language classroom. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 22, 204-218.  
van Lier, L. (2002). An ecological-semiotic perspective on language and linguistics. In C. Kramsch (Ed.), 
Language acquisition and language socialization (pp. 140-164). New York: Continuum. 
Warschauer, M. (2000). On-line learning in second language classrooms. In M. Warschauer & R. Kern 
(Eds.), Network-based language teaching: Concepts and practice (pp. 41-58). New York: Cambridge 
University Press.  
Winograd, T., & Flores, F. (1986). Understanding computers and cognition: A new foundation for design. 
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
