Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num3/news/ 
September 2005, Volume 9, Number 3 
pp. 13-16 
 
Copyright © 2005, ISBN 1094-3501 13 
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS 
Sponsors 
University of Hawai`i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR) 
Co-Sponsor 
Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL) 
 
University of Hawai'i National Foreign Language Resource 
Center (NFLRC)  
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials 
development projects and conducts Summer Institutes for language professionals among its many 
activities. 
CALICO 2006 IN HAWAI‘I! 
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) is proud to be hosting 
the 2006 Computer Assisted Language Instruction Consortium (CALICO) Annual Symposium on May 
16-20 in Honolulu. CALICO 2006 will feature uses of cutting edge technologies in foreign language 
teaching and learning with a focus on collaboration. Workshops, presentations, and courseware showcase 
demonstrations will all present information of vital importance to anyone interested in the field of 
computer-assisted language learning. This year’s theme, appropriately, will be "Online Learning: Come 
Ride The Wave."  For more information about CALICO and its annual Symposium, visit 
http://www.calico.org/ 
NEW NFLRC PUBLICATIONS 
Las voces de las mujeres de Xelajú by Tess Lane 
Women’s voices are infrequently heard in the male-dominated, Spanish-speaking world. Yet, the women 
interviewed in this DVD have much to share regarding their values and choices.  
Students of intermediate to advanced Spanish improve listening comprehension while they learn about 
Guatemalan culture by watching twenty Guatemalan women each answer the same seven questions. The 
repetition reinforces vocabulary and grammatical structures in a meaningful context. As students compare 
the women's answers and formulate their own responses, they develop critical thinking and writing skills. 
Students can work independently, in groups, or as a class. View a sample clip at the Voces Website 
(http://nflrc.hawaii.edu/voces). 
Song and music in language learning by Tim Murphey 
Tim Murphey returned to Hawai‘i in September to videotape the sixth in his series of popular teaching 
technique presentations. With this taping, NFLRC is instituting a new format for Tim Murphey 
presentations. This latest presentation will soon be available through our Website as part of a four-
presentation collection on DVD.  
ONLINE JOURNALS SOLICIT SUBMISSIONS 
Reading in a Foreign Language is a refereed online journal, jointly sponsored by the University of 
Hawai‘i NFLRC and the Department of Second Language Studies. RFL serves as an excellent source for 
the latest developments in the field, both theoretical and pedagogic, including improving standards for 
foreign language reading. For more information on submission guidelines, visit the RFL Web site.
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  14 
Language Learning & Technology is a refereed online journal, jointly sponsored by the University of 
Hawai‘i NFLRC and the Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research 
(CLEAR). LLT focuses on issues related to technology and language education. For more information on 
submission guidelines, visit the LLT Web site. 
 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education 
and Research (CLEAR)  
CLEAR's mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States. 
Projects focus on materials development, professional development training, & foreign language research. 
CONFERENCES 
CLEAR exhibits at local and national conferences year-round. We hope to see you at ACTFL, CALICO, 
MFLA, Central States, and other conferences. 
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
Onsite Workshops  
CLEAR offers foreign language teachers at K-13+ institutions around the country the opportunity to host 
a CLEAR workshop. These 1-3 day workshops are led by CLEAR's professional development staff 
members. For more information, visit http://clear.msu.edu/training/onsite/about.html. 
Summer Workshops  
Each summer, CLEAR hosts professional development workshops for foreign language teachers. For 
more information on future summer workshops, go to http://clear.msu.edu/training/index.html. We hope 
to see you in East Lansing in 2006! 
MATERIALS DEVELOPMENT 
Coming Soon! • Introductory Business German (CD-ROM) 
• French Pronunciation and Phonetics (CD-ROM) 
Products  
• NEW!  Language Learning Materials for Russian: A Content-Based Course Pack (learning 
modules) 
• NEW!  MIMEA: Multimedia Interactive Modules for Education and Assessment (German, 
Chinese, Arabic, Vietnamese; online video clips and activities) 
• NEW!  The Internet Sourcebook for Business Korean (Web links)  
• NEW!  SMILE (tool for creating interactive online exercises) 
• The Internet Sourcebook for Business Japanese (Web links)  
• The Internet Sourcebook for Business French (Web links) 
• The Internet Sourcebook for Business German (Web links) 
• The Internet Sourcebook for Business Spanish (Web links) 
• Business Language Packets for High School Classrooms (French, German, & Spanish; PDF files) 
• Modules for Assessing Socio-Cultural Competence: German (CD-ROM) 
• Modules for Assessing Socio-Cultural Competence: Russian (CD-ROM) 
• Business Chinese (CD-ROM) 
• Pronunciación y Fonética (CD-ROM) 
• African Language Small Group Instruction Guide (guide and video) 
• Thai Small Group Instruction Guide (guide) 
• Hindi Small Group Instruction Guide (guide)  
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  15 
• Foreign Languages: Doors to Opportunity (video and discussion guide) 
• Task-based Communicative Grammar Activities for Japanese and Thai (workbook) 
• Test Development (workbook and video) 
Newsletter 
CLEAR News is a biyearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. Contact 
the CLEAR office to join the mailing list, or check it out on the Web at http://clear.msu.edu/newsletter/. 
We welcome your submissions! 
 
The Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL)  
The Center for Applied Linguistics is a private, nonprofit organization that promotes and improves the 
teaching and learning of languages, identifies and solves problems related to language and culture, and 
serves as a resource for information about language and culture. CAL carries out a wide range of 
activities in the fields of English as a second language, foreign languages, cultural education, and 
linguistics. These activities include research, teacher education, information dissemination, instructional 
design, conference planning, technical assistance, program evaluation, and policy analysis. Publications 
include books on language education, online databases of language programs and assessments, curricula, 
research reports, teacher training materials, and print and online newsletters.  
Major CAL projects include the following: 
• The Center for Adult English Language Acquisition  
• The Cultural Orientation Resource Center  
• Pre-K-12 School Services 
CAL collaborates with other language education organizations on the following projects: 
• Improving Foreign Languages in the Schools Project of the Northeast and Island Regional 
Laboratory at Brown University 
• The National Capital Language Resource Center 
• National K-12 Foreign Language Resource Center  
• National Network for Early Language Learning 
News from CAL 
The Center for Adult English Language Acquisition (CAELA) was established in October 2004 with 
funding from the Office of Vocational and Adult Education (OVAE), U.S. Department of Education. The 
primary mission of CAELA is to assist states that have emerging ESL populations. CAELA staff will help 
states build their capacity to promote the English language learning and academic acievement of adults 
learning English. Resources available on its Web site include the Practitioner Toolkit: Working with 
Adult English Language Learners developed with the National Center for Family Literacy. It provides 
needed support and resources to adult education and family literacy instructors who are new to serving 
adults and families learning English. Also available are a new series of briefs, beginning with one on 
reading, and a newsletter, CAELA Currents, which includes information on how to subscribe. 
The Cultural Orientation Resource (COR) Center continues to provide materials that inform refugee 
service providers about refugee cultures and help newcomers understand fundamental aspects of life in 
the U.S. Culture Profiles provide short introductions to the cultural background of refugee populations. 
The latest Culture Profiles include Liberians, The Hmong, and Muslim Refugees. Also, a new edition of 
Welcome to the United States: A Guidebook for Refugees is now available as well as the Welcome to the 
United States: Refugee Guide to Resettlement Orientation Video, which reinforces key points from the 
guidebook. 
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  16 
CAL is pleased to support 2005: The Year of Languages in the United States. We will provide updates on 
our Web site with helpful information and news about activities throughout the year. Please visit 
www.cal.org/yol for more information. 
New Publications From CAL 
• Literacy and Language Diversity in the United States, 2nd Edition 
• Creating Access: Language and Academic Programs for Secondary School Newcomers  
• Language by Video: An Overview of Foreign Language Instructional Videos for Children  
• What’s Different About Teaching Reading to Students Learning English?  
 
