Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num3/review2/ 
September 2005, Volume 9, Number 3 
pp. 22-27 
 
Copyright © 2005, ISSN 1094-3501 22 
COMPARATIVE REVIEW: 
TEXTSTAT 2.5, ANTCONC 3.0, and COMPLEAT LEXICAL TUTOR 4.0 
Title  TextSTAT 2.5 AntConc 3.0 Compleat Lexical Tutor 4.0 
Platform PC and Macintosh PC PC  
Access Downloadable Downloadable Used from the Web site 
Minimum 
hardware 
requirements 
Windows 
(95/98/NT/2000/XP), 
Linux, and Mac OS-X 
Windows (version 3.0) and 
Linux (version 2.2) 
Windows or Linux  
Publisher  Mattias Huning 
http://www.niederlandistik.
fu-berlin.de/textstat/ 
software-en.html 
Lawrence Anthony 
http://www.antlab.sci.wased
a.ac.jp/antconc_index.html 
Tom Cobb 
http://www.lextutor.ca/  
Support 
offered 
No online manual or help; 
brief explanations and a 
few screenshots are 
provided in the software's 
Web site 
Very brief manual is 
provided in the software's 
Web site 
Directions are provided in 
each screen; contact: 
http://www.lextutor.ca/ 
mailer/  
Target 
language 
English and Dutch 
(interface) 
English English and French 
Target 
audience  
Beginning to advanced 
users 
Beginning to advanced users Beginning to advanced 
users 
Price Free Free Free 
Review by Luciana Diniz, Georgia State University 
INTRODUCTION 
With the advance of corpus linguistics research in the past few decades, there has been a proliferation of 
corpus software. Due to the high cost of most software products, however, having access to minimally 
sophisticated types of software is sometimes not possible. For this reason, this review will focus on three 
corpus linguistics programs that are available at no charge over the Internet: TextSTAT 2.5, AntConc 3.0, 
and Compleat Lexical Tutor 4.0. It should be noted that Compleat Lexical Tutor is not a single program, 
but a varied collection of tools for students, teachers, and researchers. Only the researcher's section of this 
application will be reviewed in this article.  
COMPARATIVE REVIEW 
Apart from being free of charge, the most important feature these three programs share is that they allow 
users to upload their own corpus. They also contain basic tools to analyze texts. This review will highlight 
each program's strengths and weaknesses and how they can be useful for both researchers and language 
teachers.  
All three programs have a user-friendly interface. AntConc and Compleat Lexical Tutor provide 
explanations on the screen for each feature that the user clicks on. Even though TextSTAT does not offer 
this same type of support, all the options in this program are also straightforward and transparent. Both 
Reviewed by Luciana Diniz Comparative Review: TextSTAT, AntConc, and Compleat Lexical Tutor 
 
Language Learning & Technology 23 
TextSTAT and AntConc have to be downloaded and installed in a computer, while Compleat Lexical Tutor 
is used directly from a browser with connection to the Internet. Although all three programs allow users to 
upload their own corpus, Compleat Lexical Tutor only permits the users to upload one file at a time. In 
the other two programs, on the other hand, users can upload numerous files. Compleat Lexical Tutor, 
however, contains several sample corpora that are available within the program, such as the Brown 
Corpus, the BNC (British National Corpus), and American TV talk, among others, in case users want to 
verify or compare information by using a general corpus. 
Another aspect that differentiates the three programs is their compatibility with multiple extension files. 
Compleat Lexical Tutor, for example, is compatible only with text (.txt) files, while TextSTAT also reads 
Word files (.doc). Both AntConc and TextSTAT are compatible with Internet files (.html), but AntConc 
only accepts HTML files saved on disk. A useful and innovative feature of TextSTAT is that it contains a 
Web spider that captures the text directly from the Internet. The users can type the Web address and 
choose the number of pages they want the Web spider to include in the corpus.  
 
Figure 1. TextSTAT screen capturing 10 pages from the CNN Web site and including them in the corpus 
At the same time that this element can be helpful, users have to be cautious because the Web spider is not 
selective on the information it collects from the Web pages, as it retains not only the relevant text, but 
also advertisements, tables, and any other types of texts. For this reason, it is safer to copy the content and 
paste it into a text file (or even a Word file if users are working with TextSTAT) and then upload this file 
to the software.  
All three programs provide concordance lines (i.e., list of sentences containing a certain word in its 
contexts) based on the uploaded texts. For instance, both TextSTAT and AntConc allow users to sort the 
concordance lines in several forms (e.g., alphabetically by the node word and by the left side and right 
side of the node word). TextSTAT also contains a feature named "query editor," which permits the 
localization of collocates (i.e., two words that have a high likelihood of occurring together in the same 
sentence). TextSTAT and AntConc provide access to the expanded context from the concordance lines. In 
Reviewed by Luciana Diniz Comparative Review: TextSTAT, AntConc, and Compleat Lexical Tutor 
 
Language Learning & Technology 24 
TextSTAT, by double clicking on the node word, the users can visualize the expanded context in the 
Citation Mode, while AntCont shows the context on the View File mode.  
 
Figure 2. TextSTAT screen showing the expanded context of a selected node word 
TextSTAT and AntConc provide word lists, sorting by frequency, alphabetically, and retrograde. This last 
feature sorts the word list alphabetically, but backwards. This can be helpful for teachers and students 
when they are learning poetry, for example, because it provides easy access to rhyming words in a text. 
Both TextSTAT and AntConc also run frequency lists either by pre-establishing the minimum and the 
maximum number of appearances in the corpus or by searching for a specific word.  
In both TextSTAT and AntConc, the users can save the output into separate files. In TextSTAT, word lists 
can be saved in CSV (comma-separated values format) or Excel files and concordances on text or word 
files. AntConc saves all the output in text files only. However, this program contains a helpful feature of 
allowing individual results to be displayed on separate windows, so that several sources of information 
can be compared on the screen. In Compleat Lexical Tutor, the user has to copy and paste the output into 
a different file, which sometimes can break the alignment of the results.  
Reviewed by Luciana Diniz Comparative Review: TextSTAT, AntConc, and Compleat Lexical Tutor 
 
Language Learning & Technology 25 
 
Figure 3. Three mini-screens containing concordance lines are displayed in AntConc; the user has access 
to several types of information on the computer screen 
AntConc and Compleat Lexical Tutors allow users to look for word clusters. Compleat Lexical Tutor, for 
example, contains a session called n-gram, in which users can upload only one small text at a time and 
search for word chunks. This program also has one feature that allows users to merge a maximum of 10 
files into one. However, the user still has to manually copy and paste the output into a text file before 
using it. AntConc apparently holds a great amount of texts. This program permits the search for different 
sizes and types of clusters.  
Even though Compleat Lexical Tutor does not offer the same conventional types of text searches as the 
other two programs, it contains unique features which can be useful for both researchers and teachers. For 
example, in the Vocabulary Profile feature, users can upload their texts (one at a time) and compare their 
texts to the most-frequent-words-in-English word list and to the Academic Word List (Coxhead, 2000). 
This element compares all the words from the uploaded text to those lists and generates an output 
containing all the words from the uploaded text that are included in the lists. This component can be 
helpful for teachers to analyze their students' texts and check the variety of words that students are using 
in their own texts. Moreover, this feature can help teachers and researchers to analyze the complexity of 
different texts, by looking at how many frequent and academic words the texts contain.  
Reviewed by Luciana Diniz Comparative Review: TextSTAT, AntConc, and Compleat Lexical Tutor 
 
Language Learning & Technology 26 
 
Figure 4. The Compleat Lexical Tutor Vocabulary Profile divides the uploaded text into word lists; blue 
list words are included in the 1000 most frequent words in English, yellow ones are included in the 
Academic Word List 
Along the same lines, AntConc has a KeyWord feature that allows users to choose the list of words to 
which they want to compare their texts. However, AntConc does not have embedded word lists as does 
the Compleat Lexical Tutor. Another resource provided by AntConc is the possibility of changing the font 
color, font size, background color, and so forth. This feature can be valuable when teachers are preparing 
concordance lines to hand out to students. Apart from that, AntConc can display the distribution of pre-
selected words or word clusters along the text. This feature can provide researchers with insights about 
the structure of the text.  
CONCLUSION 
One drawback of all three programs is that they do not provide any type of statistical analysis. Compleat 
Lexical Tutor provides some statistical information, but only about pre-established corpora, not the 
corpora uploaded by the user. Another drawback is that, apparently, none of the programs works with 
tagged texts.  
As this review has shown, all three programs provide basic text analysis features and can work with 
uploaded corpora. All three programs are user-friendly and straightforward, but they have limitations, 
especially for research purposes. The best program to use depends on the researcher's and teacher's needs. 
Because TextSTAT, Compleat Lexical Tutor, and AntConc are free of charge, they are accessible to 
researchers and teachers and can even be used simultaneously, depending on the project's purpose.  
Reviewed by Luciana Diniz Comparative Review: TextSTAT, AntConc, and Compleat Lexical Tutor 
 
Language Learning & Technology 27 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Luciana Diniz is a PhD student at Georgia State University. She has worked as an EFL/ESL teacher for 6 
years.  
E-mail: esllsdx@langate.gsu.edu 
 
REFERENCE 
Coxhead, A. (2000). A new academic word list. TESOL Quarterly, 34(2), 213-238. 
