Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num1/editors.html 
January 2005, Volume 9, Number 1 
p. 1 
 
Copyright © 2005, ISSN 1094-3501 1 
 
 
FROM THE EDITORS 
Happy New Year! Welcome to our special issue on Technology and Young Learners, a 
theme that runs throughout the articles, commentary, and columns of this issue.   
Special thanks go to Michele Knobel and Colin Lankshear for serving as guest editors 
and for the time and attention they devoted to producing this issue. We acknowledge 
their contribution to bringing invaluable new ideas and perspectives to the journal.  
We are proud to report that our readership is growing in scope and diversity. Our readers 
come from over 145 countries around the world, and we welcome their comments and 
suggestions.  
As always, we wish to thank the National Foreign Language Resource Center of the 
University of Hawai‘i and the Center for Language Education And Research of 
Michigan State University for their continued financial support that allows Language 
Learning & Technology to remain free to our readers and free from advertisements.  
We thank our hard-working and dedicated reviewers who reviewed manuscripts for us 
throughout 2004. Their contribution has helped to make Language Learning & 
Technology a continued success.  
We are grateful to our Editorial Board, especially those members who have recently 
been rotated off after many years of service: Graham Davies, Patricia Paulsell, Larry 
Selinker, Seppo Tella, and Yong Zhao. And we are pleased to welcome new Board 
members Phil Hubbard and Lara Lomicka. 
Please note the Call for Papers for an upcoming special issue on Technology and 
Listening Comprehension to be guest edited by Phil Hubbard. 
We ask all readers who have not done so to fill out your free subscription. We thank all 
of you for your continued support and hope you will find our 2005 issues interesting and 
informative.  
The year 2005 will be celebrated as The Year of Languages in the United States. It is 
modeled after the successful European Union Initiative in 2001 and is being spearheaded 
and coordinated by the American Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages 
(ACTFL).The goal of The Year of Languages is to advance the concept that every 
American should develop proficiency in a foreign language. Language Learning & 
Technology invites our readers involved in foreign language education to take part in the 
celebration of The Year of Languages. Click here to learn more about it. 
A very happy, productive and peaceful New Year to you. 
Sincerely, 
Dorothy Chun and Irene Thompson 
Editors 
Pamela DaGrossa 
Managing Editor 
 
