Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num1/richards/ 
January 2005, Volume 9, Number 1 
pp. 60-79 
 
Copyright © 2005, ISSN 1094-3501 60 
THE DESIGN OF EFFECTIVE ICT-SUPPORTED LEARNING 
ACTIVITIES: EXEMPLARY MODELS, CHANGING REQUIREMENTS, 
AND NEW POSSIBILITIES 
Cameron Richards  
Graduate School of Education, University of Western Australia  
ABSTRACT 
Despite the imperatives of policy and rhetoric about their integration in formal education, 
Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) are often used as an "add-on" in many 
classrooms and in many lesson plans. Nevertheless, many teachers find that interesting and well-
planned tasks, projects, and resources provide a key to harnessing the educational potential of 
digital resources, Internet communications and interactive multimedia to engage the interest, 
interaction, and knowledge construction of young learners. To the extent that such approaches go 
beyond and transform traditional "transmission" models of teaching and formal lesson planning, 
this paper investigates the changing requirements and new possibilities represented by the 
challenge of integrating ICTs in education in a way which at the same time connects more 
effectively with both the specific contents of the curriculum and the various stages and elements 
of the learning process. Case studies from teacher education foundation courses provide an 
exemplary focus of inquiry in order to better link relevant new theories or models of learning with 
practice, to build upon related learner-centered strategies for integrating ICT resources and tools, 
and to incorporate interdependent functions of learning as information access, communication, 
and applied interactions. As one possible strategy in this direction, the concept of an "ICT-
supported learning activity" suggests the need for teachers to approach this increasing challenge 
more as "designers" of effective and integrated learning rather than mere "transmitters" of skills 
or information through an add-on use of ICTs .  
  
 
The Internet is an embarrassment of riches that is next to worthless without an educator to 
facilitate learning and integration in classrooms … what tends to be in shorter supply are specific 
learning activities that make use of this wealth. (March, 2001) 
How do we understand persistence, but also the reasons for transformation -- decays of old lines 
of work and the emergence of really new ones? For this, we need an as yet unknown nonexistent 
theory of the structure and evolution of activities. (Disessa, 2000, p. 78) 
INTRODUCTION: THE CHALLENGE OF "DESIGNING" LEARNING FOR ICT 
INTEGRATION 
In general, ICTs are often used as an "add-on" in the classroom, demonstrations of cutting-edge programs 
and possibilities often intimidate rather than encourage educators, and teachers often resent the naïve 
rhetoric of ICT integration typically associated with top-down policy imperatives (Cuban, 2001; Healy, 
1998). The challenge for teachers to more effectively harness the educational implications and 
possibilities of ICT learning resources and tools is not simply a problem of finding sufficient time to 
develop appropriate computer skills or even think about potential applications. Relevant contexts or 
frameworks for practical integration which link to both the curriculum and the learning process are also 
needed, as are specific methods and models. Despite an often instinctive skepticism, many teachers have a 
Cameron Richards The Design of Effective ICT-Supported Learning Activities... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 61 
general awareness that the Internet offers a rich source of potential learning resources, that multimedia 
tools and design can make interesting, impressive, and interactive tools of learning, and that many of their 
colleagues are finding ways of harnessing the learning possibilities of ICTs in unique contexts. Even an 
ICT-resistant "traditional" teacher cannot deny that the World Wide Web (WWW) houses endless and 
ever-current information on all manner of topics, and that multimedia CD-ROMs are at the very least 
useful for skills-based tutorials or for making information links more attractive.  
The inquiry represented by this paper began with an interest in developing transferable design principles 
for a teacher education context out of the many good ideas and examples of good practice available. This 
goal initially proved to be most elusive because of the difficulty of distinguishing between context-
specific factors related to teaching and learning and any inherent principles of design that might be at 
work. Effective learning through an integrated use of ICTs often occurs despite, and not because of, the 
role of the teacher (Loveless, Devoogd, & Bohlin, 2001). Yet relevant designs for learning with ICTs can 
certainly enhance this possibility. An initial review suggested some inherent principles and strategies at 
work in effective examples and models of teaching with ICTs that emphasize an activity-based approach 
(e.g., Thomas & Knezek, 2002), hence the interest in alternative requirements needed to more effectively 
integrate ICTs in teaching and learning. This paper therefore investigates the idea that an emergent notion 
of "ICT-supported learning activity design" provides an antidote of sorts to an add-on use of ICT in 
education. This is insofar as the conventional generic structures of formal lesson-planning and syllabus 
design tend to reflect a view of learning as essentially a transmission of information or skills, as distinct 
from a dialogue between teacher and learner or an interaction between learners and the learning process 
(e.g., Laurillard, 2002)  
One principle which suggested itself from the outset is that effective teachers tend to see ICT resources 
and tools as much more than an extension of "traditional" print resources, existing classroom practices, 
and "curriculum-as-content" transmission. The integration of ICTs in teaching and learning is more likely 
if the tools and resources of the Internet, multimedia, and related technologies are seen as being integrally 
connected with literacy learning in the wider sense of learning as a matter of accessing information, 
communicating, and applying knowledge (Kress, 2003; Lankshear & Snyder, 2000). In other words, to 
the extent that they represent new tools, media, and functions of learning in the digital age, ICTs 
complement, extend, and transform the role of language-across-the-curriculum in learning as the very 
basis of generic skills or competencies and applied knowledge as well as mere skill or content 
transmission. Thus, it might be argued that an across-the-curriculum approach does not just complement 
and extend a more skills-focused and specialized use of ICT in formal education, but is a key to ICT 
integration in teaching and learning (Richards, 1998; Roblyer & Edwards, 2000).  
In addition to promoting the learning of generic skills and applied knowledge orientations instead of mere 
skill or content transmission, an across-the-curriculum approach is useful for recognizing and promoting 
the idea that to effectively integrate ICT in education teachers need to increasingly become designers 
rather than merely transmitters of learning (Kimber, 2003). Such an approach naturally also extends a 
"new literacies" perspective of how language and literacy learning as formal study is more effective and 
relevant in various ways if grounded in the functions and aspects of informal everyday discourses and 
interactions outside the classroom (Cope & Kalantzis, 2000). This is especially true in the digital age 
where young learners tend to be more confident and have greater familiarity with everyday (especially 
visual) literacy aspects and functions mediated by ICTs than older teachers and parents (Hird, 2000; 
Richards, 2000). The importance of every learner and teacher becoming designers of meaning through 
new ICT literacies has been well argued by Kress (1997), an influential critical literacy and language 
theorist. Kress's recent work has increasingly focused on how effective multimodal literacy learning 
needs to be grounded in (not merely imposed on) everyday practices and contexts. Kress's notion that 
design precedes yet is interdependent with evaluation in terms of the literacy (i.e., to the extent that 
Cameron Richards The Design of Effective ICT-Supported Learning Activities... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 62 
writing and reading are aspects of design and evaluation) as well as learning aspects of education in the 
digital age, suggests the need for new approaches to learning design also.  
As will be discussed further, many of the new learner-centred concepts and models point in a similar 
direction but are often either practiced or theorised in a way which inadvertently reinforces teacher-
centred or transmission approach assumptions. Practical concepts such as problem-based learning, 
collaborative learning, project work, authentic assessment, and inquiry-based activities all represent 
alternatives to the linear and hierarchical assumptions of formal lesson-planning and course design, yet 
tend to be seen in either opposition to or as an add-on to traditional educational design. To the extent that 
they provide exemplary foci for discussing the learner-centred implications of ICT tools and resources 
(Jonassen, Howland, Moore, & Marra, 2003), such approaches emphasize how effective learning should 
rather be understood as a process, cycle and/or set of stages proceeding from initial skill or information 
acquisition to more applied and reflective understanding, knowledge and even innovation . 
Kolb's (1984) influential model of the learning process usefully lends itself to the practical requirements 
of ICT integration in terms of how it outlines a practice-reflection cycle proceeding as distinct stages of 
concrete experience, observation, conceptual abstraction and testing. Likewise, Sandholtz, Ringstaff, and 
Dwyer (2000) have developed a well-known model of instructional "evolution" as a traversal of five 
stages (entry, adoption, adaptation, appropriation, and invention). However such models or theories tend 
to view learning processes, cycles, or stages independently of context and often fail to recognize the 
discontinuities or "missing links" between learner doing and thinking, educational practice and theory, 
and ICT skills or information and applied understanding or innovation (e.g., Beard & Wilson, 2002). The 
hands-on requirements of ICT integration suggest how such models need to be more effectively grounded 
in the very situational contexts of practice, application, and various related notions of activity which every 
teacher needs to negotiate. The challenge of ICT integration also represents a good opportunity for 
productive change and interesting innovations. 
THE CONTEXT AND DESIGN OF THE INQUIRY 
Context  
This paper represents an inquiry which proceeded for several years in teacher education ICT foundation 
courses taught in Singapore, and more recently Hong Kong, based on earlier interests and experiences of 
coordinating similar courses at Queensland University of Technology in Australia. It also developed as an 
implicit focus of two related projects undertaken in Singapore and Hong Kong: (a) the design and 
development of a model of activity-reflection e-portfolios as a learning and assessment strategy for ICT 
integration, and (b) a practical and conceptual investigation into a convergent model of ICT-supported 
learning environments (Richards, 2002, 2003). Whilst undertaken in different cultural contexts where 
language education and issues were significant, the most relevant context of the inquiry was a global one 
related to how new learner-centered practical models and theoretical projections offer the promise of a 
more effective approach to integrating ICTs in teaching and learning than still often dominant teacher-
centered, transmission and rote learning approaches and practices. 
The teaching modules which were the focus of the inquiry involved foundational ICT courses with 
common objectives for both across-the-curriculum classes and also language education classes from both 
primary and secondary level teacher education programs. While the specific purposes and contexts of ICT 
integration in teaching and learning varied somewhat in different classes, the inquiry addressed and 
responded to the challenge of the common main aim of foundational ICT teacher education modules, 
namely, to prepare future teachers to respond more effectively to the challenge of integrating ICTs in their 
pupils' learning and also in their own specific teaching contexts. In short, the specific inquiry represented 
by this paper is one of how might teachers be prepared and encouraged at practical, concrete, and "micro" 
as well as reflective levels of pedagogical design to integrate ICTs more effectively in their pupils' 
Cameron Richards The Design of Effective ICT-Supported Learning Activities... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 63 
learning and in their own teaching? In other words, how might we identify, represent, and make 
transferable the pedagogical principles of an alternative design strategy which seems to be implicit in both 
examples of good practices and influential practical design concepts such as project-based learning, 
problem-based learning, collaborative learning, authentic assessment, and so forth?  
The challenge of ICT integration in education is intensified, and therefore exemplified, in contexts such 
as Singapore and Hong Kong. The Hong Kong Department of Education followed Singapore's example in 
developing an initial five-year plan in the late 1990s to increase access to computers and the Internet in 
school classrooms. Both Singapore and Hong Kong have ambitious and innovative policy projections 
which strongly link the challenge of ICT integration to new student-centered theories of learning as well 
as to strategies of educational reform relevant to an emerging global economy (Hong Kong Education 
Commission, 2002; Singapore MOE, 2002). However, despite increased access to ICTs, the schooling 
systems in both countries still remain largely dominated by an exam-driven curriculum and traditional 
teacher-centered methods of pedagogy (Pearson, 2001). Such contexts thus made it more difficult in some 
ways and easier in others to emphasize to students how the challenge of ICT integration exemplifies a 
larger challenge for teachers of the future to design contexts for more active and effective learning, that is, 
to go beyond related paradigms of teaching and formal education in both "traditional" and industrialized 
societies as primarily the transmission of information or skills in isolation or for its own sake. 
 The comparative context of the study thus emphasized that a generational gap between older teachers and 
younger students, who embrace a global "wired" culture at home, was as significant as the cross-cultural 
clash between traditional educational practices and the imperative of progressive new theories of learning 
(Richards, 2004). The challenge of ICT integration is as much at the centre of a conflict between old and 
new pedagogies as it is in terms of how educational values are alternately influenced by institutional 
imperatives for change and existing social contexts.  
Design of Inquiry  
The three case studies below also represent three stages of the action research inquiry outlined above, as 
well as examples of different approaches taken to prepare future teacher educators in terms of a 
pedagogical design approach which might more effectively facilitate integration of ICTs in teaching and 
learning and go beyond a mere add-on approach. Harris's (1995, cited in Grabe & Grabe, 1998) threefold 
typology of meaningful ICT learning activities (information exchanges, interpersonal exchanges, and 
problem-solving projects) provided a useful focus for linking different approaches to related concept of 
stages which increasingly emphasize more higher-order, applied, and innovative approaches to 
pedagogical design for ICT integration in learning. Such a model also seems to reflect how both 
pedagogical and technological perspectives involve three convergent principles of design and 
development: the organization or dissemination of information, the facility for communication (including 
modes of either presentation or publication which potentially go beyond the teacher as sole audience) and 
some aspect of user interactivity exemplified by the challenge of problem-solving, and also the 
participatory possibilities of role or game playing.  
As performative action research, the inquiry represented stages of seeking to "change and improve" 
efforts to encourage participants to be more active designers of learning with ICTs (Richards, 2001). In 
other words, at each stage there was an ongoing action research cycle of design, implementation, and 
evaluation which linked up a focus on the generic structures of the models used with the larger interest or 
strategy in getting the student teacher cohorts involved to think more effectively about designing learning 
with ICT tools and media. Hence, this paper has further adapted a case study approach involving example 
artifacts by students from specific classes typifying the three different approaches and related stages 
trialled during the overall study. The names of students have been changed for reporting purposes.  
The three studies described focus on how particular cohorts typically responded to the main approach 
taken at that stage. While the overall inquiry included cohorts of both primary and secondary student 
Cameron Richards The Design of Effective ICT-Supported Learning Activities... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 64 
teachers, the examples for the discussion below mainly reflect a "middle school" focus. Sample activity 
designs were selected for their typicality as an example focus and a practical reference-point for 
discussing here the specific models reflecting these three different approaches and stages. These studies 
are all relatively autonomous although somewhat overlapping as a progression. They also reflect a 
progressive and comparative refinement of approach as well inquiry in terms of distinct stages. For 
instance, the specific models (i.e., webquests and microlessons) and general focus (i.e., ICT integration as 
a strategy for mainly harnessing information resources) adopted and trialed at the first stage were still 
being used as exemplary models in their own right as well as a foundation for the second and third stages 
where the activity focus was more on ICT communications and interactivity.  
The first stage involved subjects taught at the Singapore National Institute of Education in the academic 
year 2000-2001. Likewise, stage 2 also corresponds to relevant subjects taught at the same institution in 
2001-2002, and stage 3 similarly relates to a key focus taken in several subjects taught at the Hong Kong 
Institute of Education in 2002-2003. The main focus of the second stage was on the specific models of 
"Internet communication projects" and "multimedia project development" reflecting a general focus on 
ICT tools and media which encourage communication and collaboration in the process of knowledge 
construction. As will be discussed, the third stage trialed versions of a generic template conceived to 
encourage students to design and develop ICT-supported learning activities in interactive modes which 
might build on or even include aspects of both the specific models and approaches of the first two stages.  
As a series of three stages, the studies represent both an interdependent progression of sorts on one hand, 
and a comparative progression of sorts on the other. Implicit to the kind of typology outlined by Harris 
and also the various models looked at is a sense that effective ICT supported learning activity models all 
reflect some aspect of information resourcing, communication (including publication or presentation), and 
learning interactivity. For instance, the seminal model of hypermedia learning projects outlined by Lehrer, 
Erickson, and Connell (1994) describes a general sequence where students (a) choose a topic or focus to 
research for information and resources, then (b) design a way of transforming this into a presentation or 
publication, and (c) finally refine this in terms of effects aimed at purposefully engaging an audience. 
Likewise, the comparative progression inherent in the study focused on how the models and approaches 
investigated all resisted being reduced to the constraints of formal lesson planning and linear/hierarchical 
syllabus design. Similarities and differences between these models suggested the outlines of alternative 
generic structures which could inform the design of an effective lesson plan or larger module, but not be 
reduced to this.  
The models explored in the first two studies suggest the anatomy of an effective ICT-supported learning 
activity to the extent that they also seem to intrinsically "resist" merely linear and hierarchical approaches 
to educational design. This is might be better appreciated in terms of the kind of three-fold progression of 
knowledge inquiry and construction described in the methodology of dialogical hermeneutics; that is, an 
initial naive phase followed by a critical, or even procedural, phase and finally a dialogical, or applied 
phase. In this way our investigation sought to discern the design principles of how effectively designed 
"activity structures" involving ICT integration provide a context and focus for learning as a 
transformation in terms of bridging the gaps between learner doing and thinking, between practice and 
theory, and also between the literacy processes of design and evaluation. 
Study #1: Webquests, Microlessons, and a "Learning Design" Focus on ICT Information Resources  
Typical Learner Artifacts -- Class A, 2001 
Hitendra's webquest  
Because of the exam-driven curriculum (and despite official support for the introduction of project work), 
our Singapore students initially struggled to see the possibilities of webquests, and also found that many 
North American classroom examples did not translate well into a local learning context. However, many 
Cameron Richards The Design of Effective ICT-Supported Learning Activities... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 65 
soon become enthusiastic about developing webquests on their own Web sites and how this model would 
help motivate learners to search and use Internet information resources. Hitendra's webquest provides a 
context on one page and useful links on a related "resource pag"' to explore information about the 
regional Pilcher plant. At the end of the module there was a presentation sharing session which, with the 
approval of his peers, inspired Hitendra to collect and post the class webquests on a shared Web page 
resource.  
Brian & Kai Ming's microlesson 
The microlesson model usefully outlines the importance of designing learner-centred contexts. Although 
students in many other classes simply adapted their ideas to existing design templates, my class was 
encouraged to develop their own design schemes in a relevant way to the activity idea, and also use the 
often ignored multimedia functions of Powerpoint such as customized animation. Brian and Kai Ming's 
microlesson has a simple but effective design which links a wishful plan to save up for a mini disc player 
to a mathematical activity of interest calculation. They use a hypertext function well to get learners to 
explore different examples and scenarios, and an accompanying worksheet (not linked here). This 
microlesson could be undertaken by an individual learner or a small group.  
In the initial year of the study when working at the Singapore National Institute of Education, the models 
used for getting students to design effective ICT-supported learning were webquests and the locally-
developed microlessons. Typically the main focus of both these models is on providing contexts for 
students to collaboratively or individually engage with the use of ICT for information resourcing in either 
an actual classroom context or in distance education mode (McKenzie, 1999). Both are applicable to and 
provide many useful examples of across-the-curriculum applications.  
Webquests are usually presented in Web page format and aim at getting students to use information 
resources from the World Wide Web in terms of either provided URLs or tasks in which students need to 
find their own links. For instance, Hitendra's webquest on tropical pitcher plants provides the context of 
mayoral intervention in a debate between town residents. The term webquests has become for many 
teachers almost a generic term for getting students to interact with information on the Internet. Indeed, it 
was originally conceived by Dodge (1997) as a general strategy for learning with Internet resources: "a 
webquest is an inquiry-oriented activity in which some or all of the information that learners interact with 
comes from resources on the Internet."  
Microlessons, in contrast, are typically conceived as Powerpoint templates with one or two basic 
objectives for student-centred learning which may link to either Internet resources or some kind of 
worksheet (e.g., as a word processing or spreadsheet document) as exemplified by Brian and Kai Ming's 
microlesson. While webquests are typically posted online, microlessons may alternatively be saved to 
CD-ROM as multimedia learning activities. In theory, both models encourage independent and 
collaborative learner-centered inquiry as well as higher-order thinking. In practice, webquests mainly 
promote active engagement with information resources on the Internet, while microlessons encourage 
teachers to use Powerpoint as a multimedia activity format rather than just for standard presentations. 
Both models seemed to be -- and to a significant extent are -- useful templates for encouraging more 
active learning on one hand, and teacher designs for such learning on the other. However in practice both 
are often used to inadvertently reinforce the very inherent assumptions of the traditional lesson which 
their originators seemed to be challenging. 
This was evidenced by the typical use of microlessons in the Singapore foundation teacher education 
courses where I was first introduced to the concept. Students were generally not required to design their 
own variations of the multimedia templates but simply to add their own content. Also, the expectation of 
having lesson objectives at the outset (like a normal lesson plan) also seemed to me to contradict perhaps 
the most powerful implication of this model: the facility for allowing student teachers to design 
Cameron Richards The Design of Effective ICT-Supported Learning Activities... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 66 
interesting and authentic contexts for engaging the learning process. Therefore the second semester we 
used this model students were required to design their own slide templates (especially in terms of 
customized animation and other multimedia functions) as well as a context of activity linked to one or 
more specific learning outcomes. As also exemplified by Brian and Kai Ming's microlesson, our students 
were expected to put their learning objectives at the end rather than the outset.  
In these courses, webquests were found to be more useful for getting students away from the traditional 
lesson mindset for using ICT tools and resources, because they represented a more open-ended model. In 
other words, webquests provide typical examples and a basic design structure which is useful for 
promoting a design approach and also an appreciation of the power and possibilities of ICT-supported 
learning activities.  
Discussion  
Many educators still see the Internet as basically a reference or information resource. Dodge (1997) 
helped to promote and develop the idea of integrating Internet resources in terms of the teacher design of 
student-centered activities which mine the potential of the Internet to encourage more immediate, 
relevant, interactive, and authentic learning. His co-developer Tom March (1999) went on to develop a 
framework for Web-based learning activities which included webquest (alongside topic hotlist, 
multimedia scrapbook, treasure hunt, and subject sampler) as the one category which covered an 
integrated use of Internet resources. In contrast to conventional lesson planning designs, Dodge's model 
of a webquest incorporates the progressive structure of introduction, task, Internet resources, process, and 
outcomes. This is outlined in the online template he set up for teachers. Dodge also conceived it most 
typically as a collaborative activity where a group divides into different roles and perspectives for 
information searching in order to produce some kind of presentation report or publication outcome which 
addressed a particular topic or task in terms of focus questions.  
However, some of the limitations of Dodge's model provided a focus for going beyond this as a design 
model. For a start, Dodge's initial definition of a webquest is somewhat of a catch-all and potentially 
covers all manner of uses of the Internet as an information resource for teaching and learning purposes. 
Even its use as a mere reference resource still involves some degree of inquiry where there is a need to 
search and evaluate quality information. Yet Dodge himself conceived webquests as a particular method 
which he developed into an example template with an associated assessment rubric. Thus the term 
webquest is often used interchangeably in confused fashion as alternately a general approach and a 
particular method associated with his personal authorization and online models. Put another way, should 
any classroom learning activity which makes use of Internet resources be referred to as webquests? If not 
(and clearly not), where do you draw the line and how do you distinguish an authentic webquest?  
Although webquests were further defined by Dodge (1997) as "inquiry-orientated activities which include 
both specific or short-term and larger long-term projects," his examples have tended to be shorter 
activities. Dodge ended this his most definitive article about webquests with a plea for people to send him 
longer examples. It would seem that Dodge conceived his notion of webquests in the manner of a 
traditional self-contained lesson context and was thus confused about how this might be reconciled with a 
more general project-based learning approach. In short, the theoretical concept of webquests is ultimately 
a rather narrow and specific one, and is not able to contain extended and varied notions of learning 
activities which make use of Internet resources. As suggested by Dodge's own definition, the educational 
concept of project-based learning seemed to provide a more integrative context for not only different 
types and sizes of webquests, but also various types of ICT-supported learning activities.  
Cameron Richards The Design of Effective ICT-Supported Learning Activities... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 67 
Study #2: Project-Based Learning for Internet Communications and Multimedia Design 
Typical Learner Artifacts -- Class B, 2002 
Lena's monster exchange  
The monster exchange model was conceived for younger learners. Yet as an imaginative writing exercise 
(which may be done either individually or in groups) also involving both a drawing with a graphics 
program and some form of Internet communication for interacting and sharing files, it soon captures the 
enthusiasm of learners of all ages – including student teachers. Normally the monster idea is exchanged 
and drawn by the other party. Here Lena also drew her own monster and then exchanged that back to 
other party for comparison with their drawing. This model thus provides a useful prototype and exemplar 
of the possibilities of Internet communication projects. 
Mei's multimedia project 
Many of the multimedia projects undertaken in our classes, especially those involving more advanced 
authoring or extensive use of audio-visual files, would involve so much computer memory that they 
would need to be submitted on CD-ROM rather than as a Web page. Mei's project was saved to a file 
which took up little memory (one reason for being selected here) but is simple and effective. As a 
language lesson it focuses on skills learning, but does so in relation to an interesting and well-conceived 
context. Many of the student multimedia projects focused on setting interesting contexts for introducing 
topics of information or skills learning. Others used the connection between introductory animations and 
related hypertextual link options (requiring learner choices) to encourage more interaction and higher-
order learning.  
We continued to use webquests and microlessons as useful templates for getting my students to design 
learning contexts with ICT tools and media. However we found that project-based learning was an even 
more useful framework to get these students to link the design of learning contexts for ICT integration 
with a range of associated issues and challenges -- especially those to do with reconciling the quantitative 
emphasis of much formal assessment and qualitative aspects of the learning process on one hand, and an 
applied, problem-solving focus with the acquisition of multiple skills and knowledges on the other. So to 
extend the focus and possibilities of designing learning for ICT integration two other specific design 
models were used monster exchanges as an introductory example of Internet communication projects, and 
multimedia learning projects as a design cycle developed around a particular topic or idea (Lehrer, 
Erickson, & Connell, 1994). The latter uses Internet communications directly as a pretext for writing, 
drawing, and other learning activities, whilst the former provides a convergent, developmental, and often 
collaborative focus for seeking and transforming information into modes of indirect communication as 
presentations or publications designed to engage particular audiences.  
Monster exchanges exemplify the power of an interesting pretext for a range of ICT-supported learning 
activities within and between different classrooms, including international language exchanges. The basic 
idea of a monster exchange is that getting students to imagine in written and then also in graphic form 
their own unique monsters not only provides a powerful motivational focus for learning participation but 
also for interactive exchange in and between classrooms. A typical variation is students in two different 
classrooms send each other monster descriptions by e-mail to be drawn by the other as a focus for 
ongoing interactions. The originators of this particular model mainly conceived it terms of literacy 
learning, but other related models such as the Global Schoolhouse's "travel buddies" exemplify the power 
and across-the-curriculum possibilities of such exchanges and pretexts for learning. While we have used 
real-time chat programs such as ICQ as a means of conducting monster exchanges and organizing online 
dialogue (either with other classes running at the same time or groups within the same class), usually e-
mail or even webforums are the ways in which students interact and send attached graphic or word files in 
their monster exchanges. Using this model we found that imaginative drawing and writing activities 
Cameron Richards The Design of Effective ICT-Supported Learning Activities... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 68 
provided a powerful focus and example for even older learners such as Lena to get excited about using 
Internet communications and graphical tools on one hand, and linking of design activities with the 
learning process on the other. 
 The development model of hypermedia proejcts seminally conceived by Lehrer, Erickson, and Connell 
(1994) -- also developed and refined by others -- provides a useful focus for both developing and 
converging the learning design models of webquests and microlessons. Such models provide a context for 
connecting multimedia effects and some form of curriculum content in a common design process. 
Multimedia learning projects are similar in many ways to commercial models of multimedia project 
development, but much smaller, more manageable, and more flexible. The key learning design principle 
involved here is that the trajectory between an initial idea and a developed project or outcome at the end 
not only provides a framework for the learning process but also a convergent focus for acquiring, refining, 
and reflecting on a variety of multimedia design processes and project development skills along the way. 
This may be represented and evaluated effectively as an activity-reflection learning e-portfolio or some 
similar way of grounding assessment in the learning process. Multimedia learning projects provide an 
especially useful focus for reflecting on the interactions between individual and collaborative or team 
efforts and visions in relation to a specific idea or topics. Electronic concept-mapping programs provide 
the means to get learners to design and develop their work through mindmaps, concept maps, hypermedia 
flowcharts, and storyboards. Mei conveived and developed her multimedia project in this way and 
presented the final product as part of an activity-reflection e-portfolio assignment. 
Discussion 
A project-based learning (PBL) approach usefully goes beyond the notion of webquests because it 
represents a general integrative approach which can include as well be exemplified by, but not reduced to, 
specific learning activities, methods, and outcomes. A project may also include the collaborative 
emphasis of webquests, but ultimately encourages personal motivation for and ownership of the learning 
process. Any teacher who has used project-based learning strategies well should be able to attest to the 
power of a project topic (especially if negotiated) to capture a student's energies and enthusiasm for 
exploring knowledge. As an aspect and model of problem-based learning, project-based learning with the 
Web represents an exemplary focus and framework for the integration of ICT in education in terms of 
being a general approach which also embraces various types of Web-based learning activities or teaching 
methods.  
As a transformational focus for learning multimedia skills and knowledges in a doable, applied context, 
multimedia learning projects contrast with workshop models which either focus on skill acquisition 
without much effective connection to the design of learning process, or rather tease with the distant 
promise of advanced cutting-edge possibilities which the average teacher has little hope of attaining. 
Multimedia learning projects may be further developed as learning contexts in themselves in terms of 
how hypermedia may be approached as either an animated sequence or as a set of multimedia links. 
Commercial programs are usually some sort of mix involving an opening animated context followed by 
the options of hypermedia links. For example, the Winnie-the-Pooh literacy skills programs sets the main 
character in a forest and children then need to decide which path to take from there to engage in learning 
activities. The typical design for teacher multimedia learning projects typically involves an animated 
sequence which introduces a topic or process of learning linked to a menu of further topics or processes. 
However, many of the more effective multimedia projects tend to be more mixed with ongoing animation 
linking with interactive options for engaging learners in the negotiation of choices or selections (Mayer, 
2001).  
As the Challenge 2000 Multimedia Project (1999) outlines, "project-based learning is a model for 
classroom activity that shifts away from the classroom practices of short, isolated, teacher-centered 
lessons and instead emphasizes learning activities that are long-term, interdisciplinary, student-centered, 
Cameron Richards The Design of Effective ICT-Supported Learning Activities... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 69 
and integrated with real world issues and practices." As a context for discussing the integration of Internet 
resources in teaching and learning, PBL also goes beyond the webquest model in terms of emphasizing 
that problem-based and inquiry-based contexts for transforming information are ultimately part of a larger 
communication framework of learning, interaction, and presentation -- instead of vice versa -- by those 
who focus on the Internet as a gigantic database rather than primarily as a telecommunications media. 
While the student webquest report is typically produced for the teacher alone, influential models of 
Internet PBL emphasize the sharing and even wider publication or presentation of activity outcomes and 
products.  
As a communication tool, the Internet extends the process of learning in terms of a range of 
"telecomputing activity structures" (Grabe & Grabe, 1998, p. 44). Particular types of activities ranging 
from key pals or electronic mentoring through to tele-fieldtrips and social action projects may be adapted 
to and extend the specific contents of different subjects. Whether or not a particular project makes use of 
e-mail, webforums or even chat and other conferencing Internet functions or programs, influential 
organizations such as the Global Schoolhouse-- which has pioneered telecollaboration projects since 1984 
-- use the World Wide Web itself as a communication medium to advertise projects, to link classrooms 
across the world, and to develop online educational communities. Various communication options from e-
mail lists through to Internet chat provide contexts of interaction on these sites for teachers to discuss 
possible projects and for students to undertake projects (e.g., Lerman, 1998). Likewise, within a 
communication framework of collaborative projects, student Web sites provide a focus for reporting and 
interaction as well as developing information resources -- as exemplified by the International Schools 
Cyberfairs organized by the Global Schoolhouse. 
Although Internet communication projects typically involve more simple pretexts for learning and social 
interaction than the other models looked at, examples such as Monster Exchange and Travel Buddies 
illustrate how even simple pretexts can provide the focus for more varied and developed modes of ICT-
supported learning activity. Project-based learning might productively be considered as one useful sub-
category of problem-based learning in terms of not only designing a specific focus and context for student 
projects but in terms of getting students themselves to also (a) identify project constraints and feasibility; 
and (b), to plan and apply a "design" approach. Sternberg's (1997) "six A's of designing projects" provides 
a useful overview of relevant criteria for an effective PBL context: authenticity, academic rigor, applied 
learning, active exploration, adult/effective guidance, and assessment practices.  
At this stage of the inquiry some of the convergent principles (or "anatomy") of an effective ICT-
supported learning activity are clearer and more explicit. In particular, it is the function of learning 
activity "pretexts" to engage learner interest, participation, and their very process of learning and focus 
this in the direction of some kind of applied learning, explicit knowledge, and effective outcomes. This 
initial transformatory connection is a crucial not just accidental or add-on function of learning activity 
design. Such a learning design structure is significantly different to that associated with formal lesson 
planning although the latter may be used to develop the former. The whole more effectively informs the 
parts in a progression of learning focus from implicit to explicit knowledge, both in terms of individual 
lessons and larger modules. As indicated, for instance, by Blue N'Web's typology of ICT resources and 
learning designs, a specific learning task (i.e., a narrow conception of a learning activity) may organize 
the plan for up to several classroom lessons. In contrast, a project is an educational focus which is able to 
provide an organizing framework across and beyond a series of lessons and many quite distinct even if 
related activities (March, 2001).  
Cameron Richards The Design of Effective ICT-Supported Learning Activities... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 70 
Study #3: Interactive Learning with ICT and the Quest for Generic Alternatives to the Traditional 
Lesson Plan 
Typical Learning Artifact -- Class C 2003 
Kristina's ICT-supported '"learning activity" idea template  
Section B is actually the activity template and generic structure (which was conceived out of the first two 
stages of inquiry) for generating and developing a range of ICT-supported learning ideas. In effect this 
represents an initial draft or stage which can be further developed in terms of various models or modes. 
Section A is a warming-up task where students are asked to come up with three innovative ideas for 
transforming a typically boring lesson plan objective into a much more interesting context. Kristina's 
responses are more typical than exemplary. A bit mixed in quality, her activity design nevertheless 
indicated some innovative context ideas and she started to develop this quite well as an activity sequence. 
Her idea could be adapted and refined in different ways. 
In this third phase, we continued to use earlier models both as useful examples in their own right and also 
as ways of getting our students teachers to think about designing effective learning with ICTs. However 
in this phase we generated a template which would try to exemplify some of the structural resemblances 
of these other models to the extent that this was quite different to the traditional lesson plan. The use of 
this learning activity "generic structure" either in its own right as a design strategy or as a complement to 
the use of various models (such as webquests, multimedia projects, and various kinds of problem-based or 
inquiry-based learning using ICTs) might still be applied to formal lesson planning and module or subject 
design -- but not vice versa. Feedback from both student evaluation surveys and learning activity 
assignments indicated that this template was useful in getting student teachers away from merely 
replicating particular models or specific examples and to think about and apply the generic learning 
activity functions of (a) providing effective and interesting contexts for engaging learners and (b) linking 
this to organizing learning objectives ranging from skill and information acquisition to various higher-
order understandings, syntheses, and applications. 
The template used by Kristina includes a "warming up" activity as introduction to the exercise of 
conceiving, developing, and outlining an ICT-supported learning activity idea -- along the lines suggested 
in Figure 1. In the activity of this initial section, which is modeled in class, students are challenged to 
transform boring curriculum learning objectives into exciting pretexts or foci for interaction. In this way 
they should become ready to choose and develop one idea with promise.  
1. CONCEIVE OF AN AUTHENTIC OR IMAGINARY SITUATION/CONTEXT/PROBLEM. 
2. WHAT WILL LEARNERS NEED TO DO AS THE PURPOSE OF INITIAL INTERACTION 
(solve a problem, address some issue or challenge, etc.)? 
3. HOW WILL THIS PROVIDE A PRETEXT FOR SPECIFIC LEARNING OUTCOMES IN A 
CHOSEN SUBJECT AND RE: MAIN LEARNING OBJECTIVE? 
4. PROVIDE AN OVERVIEW OF KEY STAGES OR STEPS OF ACTIVITY.  
5. WHAT IS THE MAIN ICT-SUPPORTED LEARNING FOCUS AND WHAT ADDITIONAL 
RESOURCES NEEDED FOR THIS ACTIVITY? 
Figure 1. Design aide for developing an ICT-spported learning activity  
In terms of the structure indicated in Figure 1, an effective learning activity design will involve two 
transformations as the foundation for learning as an effective connection between learning activity and 
reflection or doing and thinking. Firstly, the authentic or imaginary context for an activity must somehow 
lead into an activity involving curriculum learning through some kind of use of ICTs for information 
resourcing, communication, or interactive engagement. Although ICTs may be used for a combination of 
purposes (e.g., initial access to digital information resources as the basis for a multimedia presentation or 
Cameron Richards The Design of Effective ICT-Supported Learning Activities... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 71 
web publication), one mode should be primary. Kristina's nascent activity describes the imaginary context 
of leaners being asked to help an alien stranded on Earth get back to his own planet. This pretext for 
interaction is then linked with a curriculum learning activity focus on identifying distinct words in 
relation to supermarket items. The second transformation should represent a stage of applied learning 
which realizes an organizing learning objective which has been implicit from the beginning but emerges 
directly out of the curriculum focus of the learning activity. Kristina's lesson involves English as second 
language learning. Although her plan has yet to be developed in detail yet, there is indication that a 
communicative or conversational framework is being provided for learning new words in a second 
language context.  
Whilst the curriculum focus of the learning activity is central, the initial context idea is crucial as both a 
stage and in terms of indirectly engaging learners in the learning process generally, and their own learning 
process in particular. In other words, designs for interactivity are a key to the learning process itself as a 
productive transformation of information and/or skills into actual knowledge (Salmon, 2002). The generic 
structure of an ICT-supported learning activity outlined in the template is also consistent with the kind of 
dialogical model of learning with ICTs advocated, for instance, by Laurillard (2002). This model, often 
associated with the Socratic model of teaching through questions which engage and challenge the learner, 
views the learning process as kind of a "conversation" between learner and teacher, other learners, and 
even the curriculum mediated as much by "technologies" of communication as language itself (Light & 
Cox, 2001). Thus, relevant focus questions are another way of setting up interesting and effective pretexts 
for engaged learning -- contexts to critically explore or developmentally engage with topics or issues, and 
to encourage active learning as a process of transforming knowledge in terms of understandings, 
applications and transferable principles.  
The common stages and dialogical trajectory of effectively designed learning are depicted in Figure 2 in 
terms of effectively linking both content and process, and also leaner thinking and doing. In contrast to 
the linear and hierarchical assumptions of the traditional lesson, the two related transformations of 
learning outlined above are framed here in terms of the three phases of a dialogical methodology: naïve, 
critical, and applied modes of the learning process corresponding to introductory, 
explanatory/procedural, and synthesizing stages of knowledge construction. The diagram attempts to 
depict how the generic structure of an ICT-supported learning activity represents an activity-reflection 
cycle grounded in contexts of both individual performance and social knowledge (Richards, 2003). It can 
be visualized as either a threefold process or as open-ended design spiral. A naïve phase initially engages 
learner interaction and understanding as a basis for achieving a subsequent phase of "disciplined" 
performance, adequate explanation, or critical reflection. In turn, a dialogical phase represents the 
potentially innovative transformations implied by any effective grounding of reflective knowledge and the 
learning process generally in concrete contexts of application and interaction. Such a design strategy is as 
applicable to larger contexts of curriculum design as it is to specific activity design or lesson planning.  
doing (using) 
 
process 
 
thinking 
 
content 
 
1. Naive/activity phase  
(initial familiarisation/ 
innovation) 
 
2. Critical/reflection phase  
(procedural/theoretical explanation 
- discipline) 
 
3. Dialogical/transformative 
phase  ( specific/innovative 
application) 
 
threshold of temporary 
vs perpetual frustration  
(especially where ICT 
is concerned)   
 
 
Figure 2. ICT integration and learning as an activity-reflection cycle (adapted from Richards, 2004) 
Individual performance 
Social knowledge 
Cameron Richards The Design of Effective ICT-Supported Learning Activities... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 72 
The process of learning to use ICT tools and programs effectively and with confidence, especially across 
different contexts of application, can be most frustrating and often is not achieved without adequate 
support. In this way the hands-on requirements of ICT integration exemplifies the inherent dilemmas of 
the learning process generally. Thus, relevant and appropriate designs for learning are needed which 
provide contexts or frameworks for bridging the missing links between learner doing and thinking (and 
also content and process) so that confidence, application, and even innovation begin to be achieved. 
Practical ICT skills and even related new learning concepts are often taught in somewhat of a vacuum. 
ICT-supported learning activities provide an applied focus for learning which extends from a primary 
focus on ICT skills and knowledge acquisition through to ICT integration in various modes of and 
subjects of across-the-curriculum learning. In other words, it is an approach which suggests that technical 
competence in using ICT tools and programs can actually be enhanced when linked to either (a) 
applications which also encourage the design process at the same time or (b) any key or convergent 
learning objectives, even if this focused on the content of different subject or disciplinary areas of 
knowledge. 
Discussion 
The three stages of the inquiry represented in this paper have linked the challenge to get teachers to be 
more active and effective designers of learning with the tools and media of ICTs with a response to how 
formal lesson syllabus planning seems to involve an inherent tendency for add-on uses of ICTs in 
teaching and learning. In a way, the dialogical methodology and related constructivist learning approach 
that underlies the generic structure and alternative model of an ICT-supported learning activity represents 
a turning-on-its-head of the formal lesson plan format and associated assumptions about educational 
design and even the learning process.  
The need for a better exemplary model or strategy for designing ICT-supported learning is given weight 
by a closer examination of the assumptions and limitations of two currently influential approaches or 
general theoretical perspectives -- instructional design and social constructivist learning theory. Both 
approaches represent a range of diverse interests and methods but also general assumptions about learning 
design. Also despite ostensibly opposing the linear and hierarchical tendencies of traditional formal 
education, it may be argued that both approaches are often used to reinforce such tendencies, likewise, 
oppositional views of the relation between pedagogy and technology.  
Gagne's (1987) theory exemplifies this tendency in instructional design. Taking specific and typically 
lower-order learning outcomes or tasks as its reference point, this theory proceeds retrospectively in linear 
fashion to describe the required "learning hierarchy" of skills and processes. Gagne's associated theory of 
"instructional events" then proceeds in terms of the typical linear and hierarchical assumptions of formal 
lesson planning: gaining attention, lesson objectives, recall of prior learning, presentation, guidance, 
learner performance, reinforcement, retrieval, and generalization. Adaptations of instructional design as 
"instructional technology" thus tend to view the educational use use of ICTs (and any technology media) 
in terms of their add-on facility to this process. Gagne's collaborator David Merrill developed this 
approach further to outline a model of reusable ICT "learning objects" and metadata which barely 
recognize the role of teaching or learning performance in context.  
Different versions of instructional design theory make use of constructivist learning theory as they do 
cognitivist and behaviourist models. However, social constructivist learning theory can be regarded as 
distinct for present purposes insofar as it represents an influential approach to how learning with ICTs 
lends itself to collaborative activities and the concept of bonded learning communities and "rich" learning 
environments (e.g., Barab, Kling, & Gray, 2004). Such an approach is most notably associated with the 
theoretical work of David Jonassen which has long explored the learner-centred and "cognitive tool" 
implications of ICTs. For instance, Jonassen's (2000) adaptation of cultural-historical activity theory tends 
to be more interested in the concept of activity as a systemic use or context of cognitive tools rather than 
Cameron Richards The Design of Effective ICT-Supported Learning Activities... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 73 
specific and transferable designs for grounded hands-on use of ICTs as a form of media literacy. Such 
theories have a tendency to discuss in vague abstraction how ICT tools and media lend themselves to 
learning community development, collaborative interactions, and knowledge building, rather than specific 
and transferable ideas applicable by the average teacher. Thus, for instance, Scardamalia & Bereiter's 
(1994) well-known CSILE (Computer-Supported Intentional Learning Environments) model of 
knowledge building is really not so much about ICT integration in education as such, but functions of 
learning linked to one particular program which many teachers find difficult to use in average classrooms.  
In sum, both models make useful gestures about how ICT might not only be integrated in learning but 
enhance the learning process. However, it may be argued that both models retain implicit linear, 
hierarchical, and oppositional assumptions about learning which represent tendencies for an add-on use of 
ICT in education and fail to most effectively overcome missing links between practice and theory and 
learner doing and thinking. Just as the cultural-historical model of activity theory derived from the work 
of Vygotsky and others represents a more systemic and abstract model of the technology-learning process 
connection, so too there are related instructional design models (e.g., concepts such as intelligent learning 
or tutoring systems, often associated with knowledge management principles) which see learning 
primarily in terms of networked information systems. The message from this short discussion of two 
particularly influential approaches is that the discussion about the challenge of ICT integration in terms of 
teacher designs for learning has largely remained at macro levels of theory as well as policy and rhetoric. 
The many good ideas and useful concepts associated with these general approaches might be even more 
relevant if related to a more bottom-up perspective on how effective practice presumes some kind of 
design strategy grounded in performance or dialogue.  
Thus, in contrast to the more abstract cultural-historical notion of ICT-supported learning activity, the 
approach taken here focuses at the outset on simple practical design models which any teacher can soon 
begin to customize and apply ICT both as discrete tools and as a general media interface (i.e., both as 
physical and cognitive extensions of human activity) in relation to his/her own specific contexts of 
practice. In this way any teacher can soon become an innovative designer of learning contexts which 
encourage not only ICT integration in learning and the learner-centred implications of ICT generally, but 
also the learning process in relation to any specific pedagogical objectives or strategies. Such a bottom-up 
perspective is able to appreciate in practice how specific or situational contexts of individual performance 
both ground and open up for potential transformation any implicit or explicit (i.e., designed) structure of 
social knowledge -- and thus ultimately the kinds of cultural-historical structures or relevant macro 
objectives emphasized by activity theory and related models. 
The effective design of an ICT-supported learning activity as some kind of doing-thinking or activity-
reflection transformation relates to, complements and reinforces the kind of dialogical approach to 
learning outlined in Laurillard's (2002) conversational framework for the effective use of learning 
technologies -- the designed contexts of either actual or virtual learner interactions with (a) teachers, (b) 
other learners, and (c) mediated knowledge itself. The importance placed on designed pretexts recognizes 
the need for grounding learning in context, and the greater efficacy-- at least where ICT integration is 
concerned -- with emergent and developmental rather than arbitrary or fixed and imposed learning 
objectives and processes. As new modes of literacy and learning, the models, which provide a practical 
design focus for the inquiry, have exemplified alternative ways, structures, and strategies for harnessing, 
in formal contexts of education, the great interest and seemingly natural confidence that the young have 
for the kind of new digital media worlds and cultures similarly outlined, for instance, by the critical 
pedagogist Peter McLaren and the new media critic Douglas Rushkoff. Figure 3 provides a comparative 
breakdown of how the kind of generic activity design investigated represents an alternative generic 
structure to a top-down formal lesson plan format.  
If the "generic activity design" structure were imagined visually, then it might be represented as three 
stages or even two interpenetrating spirals informing (a) an overall link, connection, or transformation 
Cameron Richards The Design of Effective ICT-Supported Learning Activities... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 74 
between doing and thinking as well as skills or information and higher-order learning; and (b) the two 
specific links or transformation indicated earlier which engender effective participation and then potential 
achievement or realization of key or convergent learning objectives. Instead of designs for showing' being 
a mere add-on to telling, the link between designed or virtual and actual contexts is recognized as crucial 
for an emergent and developing learning process along the lines of the dialogical framework outlined 
above.  
Formal lesson plan format Generic activity design 
• key learning objective/ outcomes explicitly 
outlined from outset (also tendency for 
confusion of implicit and explicit objectives)  
• linear and often 'closed' or fixed sequence of 
topics or procedures 
• hierarchical and oppositional view of relation 
between thinking and doing, theory/content and 
practice/examples  
• introduction and conclusions gesture towards 
learners prior and developing knowledge  
• initial activity context and focus encourages 
and frames convergent modes of participation 
and learning – implicit links between learner 
involvement and key learning objective/s  
• more open-ended, transformational relation 
between (a) initial activity context and specific 
'curriculum' context and (b) content and key 
learning objective/s 
•  spiral structure underlies learning design 
connections between doing and thinking, 
practice and theory/content 
• introduction and conclusion frame the learning 
process as an activity-reflection cycle and as 
dialogical stages (naive/critical/applied) 
Figure 3. A contrast between formal lesson-planning and learning activity design  
The concept of an ICT-supported learning activity has some initial resemblance to the task-based 
pedagogy (and larger communicative) model in language education (e.g., Nunan, 1993). In the 
communicative language classroom, tasks serve the purpose of making sure that the learner's "attention is 
focused on meaning rather than linguistic structure" (Nunan, 1989, p. 10), that is, it is an initial and key 
requirement that learning activities engage interaction and understanding. Tasks thus provide pretexts for 
grounding various aspects of language study (grammar and vocabulary as well as conversation) in some 
everyday context of application or topic of interest. The term activity has been used here to refer to both a 
process and a generic structure which encompasses pretexts, tasks and specific activities. In both senses 
activities inform a larger convergent focus and design for learning in time. In this way, activity as a 
generic organising structure of learning complements an associated notion that effective learning often 
proceeds as an activity-reflection cycle grounded in context, and is a process by which learners both 
individually and collaboratively transform skills or information into applied knowledge.  
The later work of Paul Ricoeur (e.g., 1994) has powerfully argued how the discursive and textual 
applications of language in context not only mediate but transform the connection between interpretative 
processes of thought and reflection and the world of human action; and, also, how the mind-body dualism 
in western and modern thought is transformed in practice as a dialogical interplay of understanding and 
explanation, innovation and structure, and individual performance and social knowledge. Activity in 
context as both individual performance and social process opens up structures of knowledge and thus 
learning to processes of innovation as well as habituation or discipline. Just as Hannah Arendt (1958) 
identified intrinsically meaningful action rather than labor or work as the key to her famous study of the 
human condition, other thinkers such as Huizanga have proposed that play is the characteristic human 
activity which precedes and transforms work. Not only does the generic structure of a learning activity 
represents a design framework for linking learner doing and thinking, but also play and work in ways we 
will need to understand better if we are to harness the extra-curricular ICT literacies of younger learners 
(e.g., Gee, 2003).  
Cameron Richards The Design of Effective ICT-Supported Learning Activities... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 75 
An important related aspect of pedagogical design for ICT integration which will be investigated further 
beyond the scope of this particular paper is the link between learning activity design and visual interface 
design as convergent aspects of the growing importance of interaction design principles. Educational 
interaction design has much to learn from the cultural and commercial contexts of how various popular 
and visual aspects of interaction with ICTs such as digital gaming represent transformations of old media 
as well as new possibilities, requirements, and innovations (Bolter & Grusin, 2000; Johnson, 1997; 
Murray, 1997; Manovich, 2001). A key to linking interface design with educational content and structures 
of learning thus lies in the convergent functions of visual metaphors and narrative structures for 
encouraging interactivity in a dialogical and applied fashion. Digital games in particular exemplify the 
importance and possibilities of designing engaging and structured participation or interaction which hook 
in, engage, and direct the attention of users through functions of virtual navigation and goal-directed 
interaction of some kind (Aldrich, 2003; Prensky, 2000). In contrast to the commercial purposes and 
various entertainment genres of many popular games -- especially open source games which exemplify 
the process of collaborative learning communities -- effective educational multimedia designs for learning 
face the additional challenge of needing to extend interaction design principles to include educational 
content or specific learning objectives.  
As Norman (2002) has argued, any effective design process needs to be understood as an interactive 
communication with "users" in terms of functionality and flexibility as well as form. ICTs need to be 
integrated in teaching and learning to the extent that they represent a new or extended mode literacy in the 
digital age, and effective designs for ICT-supported learning need to be grounded in activity as both 
process and structure. As Kress (2003) has recognized, the design possibilities and literacy implications of 
multimodal learning with ICTs tools and media represent a convergent focus for language and technology 
in general, and verbal and non-verbal modes of interaction in particular. This is consistent with how any 
teacher who attempts to effectively integrate ICT in his/her teaching and the learning of their pupils or 
students is a curriculum as well as learning designer of sorts. The generic structure of an ICT-supported 
learning activity represents one strategy in this direction which many teachers are already finding useful 
in the guise of various models and practices, and which may be refined further to encourage even more 
effective designs for learning.  
CONCLUSION 
To more effectively harness the exciting educational implications and learner-centred possibilities of 
ICTs, teachers need (a) new design strategies for teaching and learning which promote the applied 
integration of ICTs, and (b) to avoid the kind of add-on tendencies associated with still dominant 
assumptions about formal lesson planning and syllabus design on one hand, and are often inadvertent in 
the use of top-down models such as instructional design and social constructivism learning theory. This 
inquiry has investigated how the exemplary use of practical design models (a) provide a useful focus in 
teacher education for encouraging teachers to become more active and innovative "designers" of ICT-
supported learning in the digital age, and (b) indicate the generic structure or anatomy of an effective 
ICT-supported learning activity. Practical activity-based learning with ICTs that provides pretexts for 
more effective curriculum learning and reflective practice exemplify a dialogical approach to educational 
design. Such an approach to educational design goes beyond (rather than merely oppose) the linear, 
hierarchical and transmission assumptions still dominating formal education in a way which is able to 
ground critical and applied thinking in transferable contexts of practice and knowledge. The dialogical 
stages of naïve, critical, and applied learning represent a framework for not only linking educational 
content and process and also learner thinking and doing, but the very transformations which exemplify an 
ICT literacy transition from mere competency to applied understanding, knowledge and innovation.  
The alternate challenges of integrating the Internet and related ICTs in education on one hand, and 
encouraging innovation and applied thinking in students on the other, are helping us to appreciate that the 
Cameron Richards The Design of Effective ICT-Supported Learning Activities... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 76 
new 'literacy and learning' skills of the electronic age revolve around the complementary organizing 
concepts of design and evaluation, and also learner doing and thinking. This paper has argued that there 
is a similar need to reconstruct the role of the teacher as a designer and evaluator of learning activities, 
contexts, and environments in a way which more effectively links the learning process to the curriculum, 
especially when using the Internet or ICT generally. In short, teachers need to consider overall design 
elements when outlining or setting up specific assignment contexts, criteria, and outcomes which 
exemplify effective ICT-supported learning. The emergent notion of an effective ICT-supported learning 
activity provides a useful focus for encouraging teachers to approach the challenge of ICT integration in 
education more as designers of interesting and applied learning rather than mere transmitters of skills or 
information through an add-on use of ICTs in teaching and learning.  
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Dr. Cameron Richards is a senior lecturer in the Graduate School of Education, University of Western 
Australia. His main research and scholarly interests currently revolve around the interdisciplinary and 
across-the-curriculum possibilities and challenges of effectively integrating ICT in new and changing 
contexts of education.  
E-mail: Cameron.Richards@uwa.edu.au 
REFERENCES 
Aldrich, C. (2003). Simulations and the future of learning: An innovative (and perhaps revolutionary) 
approach to e-learning. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass/Pfeiffer. 
Arendt, H. (1958). The human condition. London: University of Chicago Press. 
Barab, S., & Duffy, T. (2000). From practice fields to communities of practice. In D. Jonassen & S. Land 
(Eds.), Theoretical foundations of learning environments (pp. 25-56). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.  
Barab, S., King, R., & Gray, J. (Eds). (2004). Designing for virtual communities in the service of 
learning. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. 
Beard, C., & Wilson, J. (2002). The power of experiential learning: A handbook for trainers and 
educators. London: Kogan Page 
Bolter J., & Grusin, R. (2000). Remediation: Understanding new media. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Challenge 2000 Multimedia Project. (1999). Why do project-based learning. Project-based learning with 
multimedia. Retrieved June 29, 2004, from http://pblmm.k12.ca.us/PBLGuide/WhyPBL.html 
Cope, B., & Kalantzis, M. (Eds.). (2000). Multiliteracies: Literacy learning and the design of social 
futures. New York: Routledge. 
Cuban, L. (2001). Oversold and underused: Computers in the classroom. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 
Disessa, A. (2000). Changing minds: Computers, learning and literacy. Cambridge, Ma: MIT Press.  
Dodge, B. (1997). Some thoughts about WebQuests. San Diego State University. Retrieved June 29, 
2004, from http://edweb.sdsu.edu/courses/EDTEC596/About_WebQuests.html 
Gagne, R. (1987). Instructional technology foundations. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.  
Gee, J. (2003). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy. New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
Cameron Richards The Design of Effective ICT-Supported Learning Activities... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 77 
Grabe, M., & Grabe C. (1998). Learning with Internet tools: A primer. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.  
Healy, J. (1998). Failure to connect: How computers affect our children's minds -- and what we can do 
about it. New York: Simon & Schuster. 
Hird, A. (2000). Learning from cyber-savvy students: How Internet-age kids impact on classroom 
teaching. Sterling, VA: Stylus 
Hong Kong Education Commission. (2002). Learning for life: Report on the education reform. Hong 
Kong: Printing Department. 
Johnson, S. (1997). Interface culture: How new technology transforms the way we communicate and 
create. New York: Basic Books.  
Jonassen, D. (2000). Revisiting activity theory as a framework for designing student-centred learning 
environments. In D. Jonassen & S. Lund (Eds.), Theoretical foundations of learning environments (pp. 
89-122). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.  
Jonassen, D., Howland, J., Moore, J., & Marra, R. M. (2003). Learning to solve problems with 
technology: A constructivist perspective (Rev. Ed). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education.  
Kimber, K. (2003). Technoliteracy, teacher agency and design: Shaping a digital learning culture. 
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Queensland University of Technology, Australia. 
Kolb, D.A. (1984). Experiential learning: Experience as the source of learning and development. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.  
Kress, G. (1997). Visual and verbal modes of representation in electronically mediated communication. In 
I. Snyder (Ed.), Page to screen: Taking literacy into the electronic era (pp. 53-79). Sydney: Allen & 
Unwin. 
Kress, G. (2003). Literacy in the new media age. London: Routledge.  
Lankshear, C., & Snyder, I. (2000). Teachers and techno-literacy. Sydney: Allen & Unwin. 
Laurillard, D. (2002). Rethinking university teaching: A conversational framework for the effective use of 
learning technologies (2nd Ed). London: Routledge. 
Lehrer, R., Erickson, J., & Connell, T. (1994). Learning by designing hypermedia documents. Computers 
in the Schools, 10(1-2), 227-254.  
Lerman, J. (1998). Ten nifty ways your teachers can use e-mail to extend kids' learning. Electronic School 
Online. Retrieved June 29, 2004, from http://www.electronic-school.com/0398f5.html 
Light, G., & Cox, R. (2001). Learning and teaching in higher education: The reflective professional. 
London: Paul Chapman.  
Loveless, A., Devoogd, G., & Bohlin, R. (2001). Something old, Something new: Is pedagogy affected by 
ICT? In A. Loveless & V. Ellis (Eds.), ICT, pedagogy and the curriculum (pp. 63-83). London: 
Routledge.  
March, T. (1999). Theory and practice on integrating the web for learning. Ozline.Com. Retrieved June 
29, 2004, from http://www.ozline.com/learning/theory.html 
March, T. (2001). What's on the Web? Retrieved June 29, 2004, from www.ozline.com/learning/ 
webtypes.html 
Manovich, L. (2001). The language of new media. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Mayer, R. (2001). Multimedia learning. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press 
Cameron Richards The Design of Effective ICT-Supported Learning Activities... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 78 
McKenzie, J. (1999). The research cycle. From Now On: The Educational Technology Journal, 9(4). 
Available at http://www.fno.org/dec99/rcycle.html 
Murray, J. (1997). Hamlet on the Holodeck: The future of narrative in cyberspace. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press. 
Norman, D. (2002). The design of everyday things (2nd Ed). New York: Doubleday. 
Nunan, D. (1989). Designing tasks for the communicative classroom. Cambridge, England: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Nunan D. (1993). Task-based syllabus design. In G. Crookes & S. Gass (Eds.), Tasks in a pedagogical 
context: Integrating theory and practice (pp. 55-68). Clevedon, England: Multilingual Matters.  
Pearson, J. (2001). IT in Education: Policy and provision in Hong Kong schools. Journal of Information 
Technology for Teacher Education, 10(3), 271-282.  
Prensksy, M. (2000). Digital game-based learning. New York: McGraw-Hill.  
Richards, C. (1998). An across the curriculum framework for computer literacy in education. Proceedings 
of Australian Computers in Education Association conference. Retrieved June 29, 2004, from 
http://www.cegsa.sa.edu.au/acec98/acec98.htm 
Richards, C. (2000). Hypermedia, Internet communications, and the challenging of redefining literacy in 
the electronic age. Language Learning and Technology, 4(2), 55-77.  
Richards, C. (2001). Changing with the times: Using action research to introduce IT in classroom 
teaching. REACT, 20(2), 7-16. 
Richards, C. (2002). ICT integration, e-portfolios and learning as an activity-reflection cycle. Proceedings 
from the 2002 Australian Association for Research in Education. Available at http://www.aare.edu.au/ 
02pap/ric02309.htm 
Richards, C. (2003). ICT-Supported Learning Environments: The challenge of reconciling technology 
and pedagogy. Proceedings of International Conference on Computers in Education [CD-ROM].  
Richards, C. (2004). From old to new learning: Global dilemmas, exemplary Asian contexts, and ICT as a 
key to cultural change in education. Globalisation, Societies and Education, 2(3), 399-414.  
Ricoeur, P. (1992). Oneself as another (trans. K. Blamey). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.  
Roblyer, M. D., & Edwards, J. (2000). Integrating educational technology into teaching (2nd Ed.). 
Merrill, NJ: Prentice Hall.  
Salmon, G. (2002). E-tivities: The key to active online learning. London: Kogan Page 
Sandholtz, J., Ringstaff, C., & Dwyer, D. (2000). The evolution of instruction in technology-rich 
classrooms. In R. Pea (Ed.), Technology and learning (pp. 255-276). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.  
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1994). Computer support for knowledge-building communities. Journal 
of the Learning Sciences, 3(3), 265-283. 
Singapore Ministry of Education. (2002). Masterplan II for IT in education. Retrieved August 15, 2004, 
from http://www.moe.gov.sg/edumall/mp2/mp2.htm 
Sternberg, A. (1997). Real learning, real work: School-to-work as high school reform. New York: 
Routledge.  
Cameron Richards The Design of Effective ICT-Supported Learning Activities... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 79 
Thomas, L., & Knezek, D. (2002). Standards for technology-supported learning environments. State 
Education Standard, 14-20. Available online at ISTE http://www.iste.org/news/2002/10/23-nasbe/nasbe-
tech-supported-2002.pdf 
