Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num3/volle/ 
September 2005, Volume 9, Number 3 
pp. 146-163 
 
Copyright © 2005, ISSN 1094-3501 146 
ANALYZING ORAL SKILLS 
IN VOICE E-MAIL AND ONLINE INTERVIEWS 
Lisa M. Volle 
Central Texas College 
ABSTRACT 
This study investigated the acquisition of speaking skills in an online distance education course of 
19 first semester Spanish learners. The possibility of oral development in a strictly online course 
was examined based on students' pronunciation production in two types of recorded speaking 
activities and in two real-time conversations. Students created two types of voiced audio e-mails 
each week during the semester: read aloud passages and grammar-drill completions. In order to 
determine whether students' pronunciation indeed improved over the course of the semester, their 
performance on these two types of audio e-mails were compared at the beginning of the semester 
and at the end of the semester. In addition, students participated in two Internet-mediated oral 
conversations with their instructor using MSN messaging at the mid-term week and final week of 
the semester. Three kinds of data were collected from the conversations: an articulation score 
(articulation = pronunciation, stress, and intonation), an accuracy score, and a proficiency score. 
Students' performance on these interviews provided further evidence regarding the development 
of their oral skills. The findings suggest that only in the area of oral proficiency were there 
significant gains in scores. 
 
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND  
Distance Education courses in foreign languages (FL) must concern themselves with delivering 
instruction that covers all aspects of language learning. This includes reading, vocabulary, grammar, 
writing, listening, culture, and (frequently underreported in course design) speaking. Students often report 
that their most important learning objective is speaking the target language (TL). There are functional 
applicable uses for speaking Spanish that most students recognize in their jobs and with their extended 
families.  
While some institutions offer "distance" education foreign language classes, they often still require the 
students to meet face-to-face (F2F) on a regular basis. These types of classes are often referred to as 
technology enhanced or hybrid courses. To offer a true distance education course in a foreign language 
and not provide computer-mediated communication oral production and spoken interactive opportunities, 
now that simple technology can be used, may reduce the course to grammar study.  
This research project focused on the oral development of Spanish for first semester learners in an online 
distance education Spanish course without F2F meetings since the enrolled students (military personnel 
and their family members) were located around the world. The aim was to capture and describe how 
students progress in terms of their speaking skills including pronunciation and conversational ability 
during one semester in an online learning environment.  
Distance Education at Central Texas College began in the 1970s with correspondence courses and 
telecourses. In 1995, conference courses were offered to different locations in real-time -- called V-Tel. 
By 1997, the first Web-based distance education courses were developed and offered to military 
personnel and their dependents at Central Texas College's U.S. continental campus sites and around the 
world. Today, more than 150 distance education courses are offered. Fall 2003 was the first semester in 
Lisa M. Volle Capturing the Development of Foreign Language Oral Skills... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 147 
which an exclusively online foreign language course was offered. The current study investigates speaking 
activities and measures for this first semester online Spanish course. 
This article first presents the pertinent literature on Internet-based foreign language activities and 
computer-mediated communication (CMC) addressing the lack of literature on online foreign language 
classes. Next follows a review of the literature of second language speech development, after which I 
introduce the research questions and study's methodology. The last section presents the findings and 
analyses, concluding with implications for teaching and suggestions for future studies.  
LITERATURE REVIEW  
The Internet and CMC in FL Learning 
Most literature focuses on the Internet as an adjunct to the classroom and not as the focus of the meeting 
classroom itself (Swaffar, Romano, Markley, & Arens, 1998; Warschauer, 1996). Students attend 
laboratory sessions to complete activities independently from the regular flow of the classroom. To foster 
communication in authentic ways, many propose the use of e-mail as a tool for use in foreign language 
classes (Aitsiselmi, 1999; Gonzalez-Bueno, 1998; Leahy, 2001; Stockwell & Harrington, 2003; Van 
Handle & Corl, 1998). Van Handle (1998) used e-mail with intermediate FL German students for learner-
to-learner exchanges. It was found that the quality of messages was enhanced but not the accuracy. 
Gonzalez-Bueno's (1998) study with third semester FL Spanish students found that there was no effect on 
accuracy in the e-mailed journal entries. However, the quantity of words used in the entries increased as 
compared to the notebook and pencil entries. Aitsiselmi (1999) used e-mail with first and second semester 
FL French students in a non-native speaker (NNS) to native speaker (NS) exchange. He found that the e-
mail pattern of communication resembled oral F2F chats. Students perceived the activity as similar to 
speech, reporting that the message was more important than grammatical accuracy.  
Leahy (2001) conducted an international e-mail exchange between German students learning English and 
British students learning German. They were paired based on language level abilities and alternated target 
language use between e-mail exchanges. The FL German students gained in "content" and "language" use 
and were able to transfer written e-mails to a more formalized written report as well as oral report. 
Stockwell and Harrington's (2003) study of a 5-week email exchange between advanced learners of 
Japanese and native speakers resulted in significant increases in syntax, lexicon, and proficiency. 
Other researchers describe the features, outcomes, and uses of synchronous chat in networked classrooms 
(Abrams, 2003; Beauvois, 1998; Blake, 2000; Chun, 1994; Kern, 1995; Kim, 1998; Payne & Whitney, 
2002). Chun's seminal article suggested that written synchronous chat might produce a positive effect in 
F2F oral production. Beauvois and Kim suggested that there is a link between written and oral production 
in support of Chun's transferability of writing competence to speaking competence. Kern compared 
synchronous chat with F2F oral discussion in a second semester French class and noted that there was a 
larger quantity of language use in a CMC chat as apposed to the F2F oral discussion. He suggested that 
networked-based chat should be used to facilitate classroom discussion, but not as a replacement to F2F 
oral discussions. 
In a study with FL German students, Abrams (2003) compared two CMC environments (networked-based 
synchronous chat and asynchronous discussion boards) with F2F discussion. Abrams suggested that 
training with synchronous chat can help students produce more idea-units than training with F2F 
discussion and asynchronous discussion boards. Payne and Whitney (2002) looked at proficiency 
development through synchronous CMC. Third-semester students of Spanish participated in one of two 
conditions: F2F oral group meetings in class four times a week for traditional instruction and discussion 
tasks and the experimental group that held F2F meetings twice a week for instruction with two online chat 
room meetings. The findings suggested that by participating half of the time in a synchronous online 
environment, oral proficiency development was higher than for those learners in the control group.  
Lisa M. Volle Capturing the Development of Foreign Language Oral Skills... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 148 
Blake (2000) discussed the type and kind of discourse produced in written chat under differing task 
conditions, focusing primarily on lexical development. Learners of Spanish used synchronous networked 
chat to complete activities with native speakers. He found that the native speakers maintained the 
conversation pace and were more in control. He also found that for the learner, the focus of the 
communication was much less of form, but on negotiating meaning to reach the task goal. 
 The above studies of language learning with e-mail, networked-based classroom activities, and computer 
assisted language learning (CALL) activities are in addition to the F2F sessions that students attend. For 
the online distance education language learner, these tasks are regular events. 
Distance Education in FL Learning 
Although there are many studies about distance education (DE) or distance learning, there are very few 
that address foreign languages. Of two studies about languages in a DE context, one discussed general 
achievement in terms of all skill areas except speaking between the DE and F2F instruction. Although the 
attrition rate was high for the DE learners, there were no differences in achievement for completers of the 
DE course (Despain, 2003). Despain mentioned that three voice samples were submitted: two readings 
and one response to questions. No mention was made whether these voice submissions were made in a 
synchronous or asynchronous context. Despain acknowledged that a more in-depth investigation into 
proficiency development in this context is warranted.  
The second report discussed supplementing audio conferencing with a text-based conferencing tool 
(Kotter, Shield, & Stevens, 1999). It was predicted that the participants would develop greater fluency 
rather than accuracy by participating in the study but a definitive conclusion was not formed. Emphasis in 
the report was on the tasks as promoting language development in the target language. Included in the 
report was a detailed description of how the media functioned for the participants. A relevant finding was 
that in spite of students participating in an anonymous fashion in the synchronous chat, participants were 
more "reserved" (p. 58) in comparison to written chat; students revealed that they were more aware of 
mistakes and gaps by participating in this mode.  
Speech Development in FL and L2 (Second Language) 
SLA research in the area of speech has not come to a consensus on an approach to phonological 
instruction (Chun, 1992; Moyer, 1999). Pronunciation studies appear to trail behind research on syntax 
and discourse (Leather, 1999). Leather suggests "one reason for this is that for many learners 
intelligibility in spontaneous speech is a sufficient goal" (p. 1). Even if "getting one's point across" is the 
main goal in speaking a second language, at some point an "accent" interferes with comprehension 
(Munro & Derwing, 1995). Moyer (1999) suggests that if students focus on the phonology early on, they 
"may acquire a comfortable level of fluency, and subsequently focus primarily on morphosyntactic and 
lexical accuracy, as well as pragmatic awareness" (p. 99).  
There are not many studies in early FL speech production (e.g., Salaberry, 1999; Camps, 2000, 2002). 
Camps (2002) looked at the aspectual distinctions of preterit and imperfect use in a F2F context. It is 
worth mentioning a study (DeKeyser & Sokalski, 2001) that investigated the role of comprehension and 
production practice of first-year Spanish students in a traditional F2F context. Students were divided into 
a control group, an input group, and an output group for practicing material in different ways. The 
interaction pattern by skill acquisition theory was found: Input practice is better for comprehension and 
output practice for production.  
 The present study is designed to offer a look at the oral development of adult learners in a first semester 
online Spanish course. As far as I am aware, no research has been done in the area of voiced e-mails in 
FL studies in a DE environment at this time. This study seeks to investigate the nature of this 
development as well as accuracy and proficiency in real-time online conversations. 
Lisa M. Volle Capturing the Development of Foreign Language Oral Skills... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 149 
THE PRESENT STUDY  
Research Questions  
1) Can distance education FL students demonstrate improvement in terms of articulation during one 
semester of study? 
2) Do different voiced audio file tasks reveal differences in terms of articulation? 
3) What do synchronous online oral conversations reveal in terms of articulation, accuracy, and 
proficiency (based on the curriculum criteria) from the mid-term and final conversations? 
Participants  
This study analyzes the oral production of 19 first-semester learners of Spanish at the university level (18 
female and 1 male).1 All were native speakers of English and had completed other coursework online. 
The age of the participants ranged from 18 to 40. Sixteen are employed at least part-time, and 18 are full-
time students. Seventeen live with children and 4 are living as single parents. Two of the single parents 
have husbands deployed in Iraq. All participants report that the course is a requirement for their degree 
plan. Two students identify themselves as "heritage" speakers and 3 had never studied a foreign language 
before.2 
The Course Materials and Tools 
Student learning materials for the semester of elementary Spanish come from three sources: a textbook 
bundle, an electronic workbook Web site, and a course Web site. The textbook bundle consists of a 
traditional textbook that included one audio CD to correspond to textbook activities, two interactive CD-
ROMs for learning activities and tutorials, one DVD program, and a student key code to access the online 
electronic workbook (see Figure 1)  
 
Figure 1. Screen shot of the interactive CD-ROM lesson display 
In the Interactive CD-ROM, the Contextos section introduces the vocabulary with audio; and the 
Fotonovela section is a smaller version of DVD program segments with dialog. In Fotonovela, students 
have the ability to listen and read the words in Spanish, listen without the words, or listen and read the 
English translation. The textbook has pictures of video scenes with a dialog transcript below. 
Comprehension activities follow. The interactive CD Fotonovela is listening comprehension practice, 
while the Fotonovela in the textbook is reading comprehension practice. 
Lisa M. Volle Capturing the Development of Foreign Language Oral Skills... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 150 
The electronic workbook, also called the student activity manual (Web SAM), is maintained on 
www.quia.com (see Appendix A) This contains four types of activities: (a) written practice for 
vocabulary, drill work, and open-ended writing; (b) reading comprehension containing culture and 
authentic material; (c) listening practice for vocabulary, structures, narrations, and dialog; and (d) video 
clips with various listening, culture, and writing activities (see Appendix B). 
The main course Web site was housed on Prometheus.3 Like Blackboard, Prometheus has a place for 
announcements, a syllabus, frequently asked questions, contact information, a communication area (to 
include chat rooms), testing area, and lecture files (see Appendix C). MSN Messenger is a free chat room 
program that was added during the sixth week of the course. In written synchronous chat, many 
participants can communicate. Using, MSN Messenger with microphones limited participation to pair 
work, but still allowed for written communication.  
As a prerequisite for the course, all students were required to have their own or regular access to a multi-
media computer, speakers, computer-based recorder (found in accessories in Windows-based operating 
systems), a microphone, e-mail account, and regular Internet access. It was further suggested that the 
student have prior experience in a distance education class.  
Online Oral Training  
The instructor/researcher advised students to approach a lesson beginning with the information presented 
in the textbook and followed by a multimedia presentation in either the interactive CD-ROM, PowerPoint 
presentation or a real media video file created by the instructor. I gave the students a list of explicit 
assignments to complete so they could follow the suggested ordered plan or they were free to explore and 
complete tasks out of order if they so wished. 
Each lesson contained a pronunciation section accessible in the textbook with a corresponding audio 
followed by repetition drills. The same lesson was repeated in the Web SAM lab manual with a different 
set of repetition drills. The interactive CD-ROM contained the same pronunciation lesson with listen, 
repeat and record drills.  The student could listen to the native speaker and compare his or her own 
recording. The activities moved from one word to phrase to sentence level (see Appendix D). In addition, 
2 -3 minute real media video files were created by the instructor/researcher to correspond to 
pronunciation topics. These videos were embedded in the lesson description on Prometheus. 
In the assignments, the students created audio WAV files (a format of audio file) of lesson readings and 
drill exercises and sent these WAV files to me via e-mail. There were a total of seven readings WAV files 
and 25 drill WAV files per student.  
Students made audio files by going to  
All Programs > Accessories > Entertainment > Sound Recorder 
A small box appears with a microphone, and students record themselves and save the recordings in WAV 
files.  
The WAV files were very large and had to be recorded in 30-second intervals for the Distance Education 
mailbox to open them. Some students sent drills in two or three WAV files because they needed more 
time to complete responses.  
Additional Output: Simulating Spoken Chat 
In addition, other supporting exercises were required in written form and sent in e-mail as word file 
attachments or were posted in discussion board folders. Students were encouraged to complete written 
drills together online in chat rooms. If students worked in pairs or groups, only one person would have to 
e-mail the responses. The only requirement was that a chat record be created to document the written 
chat. If the chat was oral (via Instant Messenger) then a written summary to document the day, time, and 
Lisa M. Volle Capturing the Development of Foreign Language Oral Skills... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 151 
length of the session needed to accompany answers. After MSN Messenger was installed in student 
computers (week 6), the amount of pair and group activity increased as evidenced by the number of 
written transcripts that were preserved. Students reported that the ability to see the blue icon (online 
signal) next to the student's name made them feel comfortable enough to send an instant message.  
 Included in these collaborative homework assignments were conversational questions that corresponded 
to the theme of the lesson and the syntactical structures. Students could write their own responses or work 
out and exchange responses with other students. These questions formed the basis for the mid-term (week 
8) and final (week 16) real-time synchronous conversations with the instructor. Students signed up for 30-
minute sessions to meet their instructor for the mid-term and final oral "interviews." The interview 
session lasted 6-10 minutes, the remaining time was dedicated to equipment checks and other coursework 
concerns. 
The Data and Method of Analysis 
In order to evaluate students' oral production during the semester, two types of voice e-mails were 
collected: read aloud passages and grammar-drill completions. An articulation comparison between lesson 
1 (week 3) and lesson 7 (week 15-16) reading passages was made. An articulation score is based on three 
components: pronunciation, stress, and intonation (Koren, 1995). This idea is derived from Tarone (1983, 
cited in Koren) because it was found that speech output varied as a result of the task type. In addition, a 
second articulation score comparison was made between grammar drills in week 4 and week 15.  
Students participated in two Internet-mediated oral conversations with the instructor using MSN 
messaging in week 8 and week 16; these conversations were recorded. Three kinds of data were collected 
from the conversations: an articulation score, an accuracy score, and a proficiency score. The accuracy 
score is adapted from Weir's Communicative Language Testing (1990). The proficiency evaluation is 
adapted from ACTFL Proficiency Guidelines (1983). The data from conversation one was compared to 
the data from conversation two (see the score cards in Appendices E and F).  
Two raters were given tapes of oral reading 1, drill exercise 1, and conversation 1 and were instructed to 
rate each based on the scales described above. Both raters are native Spanish speakers; the male rater is 
originally from Argentina, the female rater from Puerto Rico. Both raters teach Spanish and are 
accustomed to working with adult learners of Spanish. The raters spent about 1 hour receiving rating 
instruction and scoring examples from five drills, five readings, and five conversations. These samples of 
student work came from students who had withdrawn from the course and the study. Afterwards, the 
raters were given tapes of the 19 participants to rate the read aloud tasks, drill completion tasks, and the 
two student-instructor conversations. 
A Pearson's product-moment correlation was performed to determine the coefficient (Pearson r) for 
measuring intra-rater agreement. These two raters positively correlated (r = .9932). I, as 
researcher/instructor, also rated the data set. A week later, intra-rater reliability was performed between 
the first set of rater scores and my scores. The correlation between the scores of the NS raters and the 
NNS instructor was r = .9966. For both correlations, a significance level of .05 was adopted. For this data 
set, there appears to be no effect on scoring based on whether the rater is NS or NNS.  
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
An SPSS package was used to run the five sets of paired t tests on the mean scores. This compares the 
average score at the beginning of the semester to the average score at the end of the semester in five 
measures: articulation in three tasks (read aloud, drill, and conversation) and accuracy and proficiency in 
conversation. Being equally interested in outcomes at either tail distribution, the 2-tailed t test was 
preferred (see Tables 1, 2, 3, and 4). 
Lisa M. Volle Capturing the Development of Foreign Language Oral Skills... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 152 
Table 1. Articulation Scores for Reading, Drill, and Conversation 1 
Articulation Scores M N SD SE 
Reading 1 3.36 19 1.02 .23 
Drill 1 3.10 19 1.05 .24 
Conversation 1 3.23 19 1.02 .23 
Table 2. Articulation Scores for Reading, Drill, and Conversation 2 
Articulation Scores M N SD SE 
Reading 2 3.55 19 .90 .21 
Drill 2 3.49 19 1.05 .24 
Conversation 2 3.52 19 1.26 .28 
Table 3. Conversation Accuracy Scores for Week 8 and Week 16 
Accuracy Scores M N SD SE 
Conversation 1 1.98 19 1.12 .26 
Conversation 2 1.97 19 .99 .23 
For conversation accuracy 1 and 2 , t = 2.10 which was not significant at t(18) = .07, p<.05.  
Table 4. Conversation Proficiency Scores for Week 8 and Week 16 
Proficiency Scores M N SD SE 
Conversation 1 3.74 19 1.56 .36 
Conversation 2 4.74 19 1.63 .37 
Paired sample correlations show that the first set of scores is similar to the second set of scores, and the 
larger the number, the more benefit there is to the pairing (see Appendix G). The correlation between the 
two repeated measures for reading articulation, drill articulation and conversation proficiency is .66, .66, 
and .67, p >.05 respectively. The correlation between conversation articulation and conversation accuracy 
is .69 and .68, p >.05. These scores are significant.  
The statistical data show trends and are not generalizable. Even though four out of five mean score sets 
increased from pretest to posttest, three changes were not large enough to be significant.  
Research Question 1: Can distance education (online) students demonstrate improvement in terms 
of articulation during one semester of study?  
The results from these measures showed no significant difference in articulation in each compared 
measure. Even though this model of scoring was adopted for the ease of scoring, averaging the subscores 
in pronunciation, accent, and intonation may have washed any subtle changes in articulation. Perhaps one 
semester is not enough time to demonstrate improvement when there are so many competing aspects of 
language learning.  
Another reason that scores may not reflect significant improvement is that as the lessons progress, 
readings and drill exercises increase in level of difficulty. Students who scored high on initial WAV files 
may not have scored as high on subsequent WAV files. The opposite may also be true. Students with 
native-like and near-native-like articulation scores in the beginning of the semester scored the maximum 
on the scale, and therefore, could not demonstrate improvement.  
A final reason that scores may not reflect a significant gain in articulation is due to the influence of the 
raters. Anderson-Hsieh and Koehler (1988) reported that raters assigned higher comprehension scores to 
taped speech for two types of speakers: for those who were native speakers and for those (both NS and 
NNS) whose rate of speech was slower. In this study, reading and drill audio WAV files were submitted 
primarily in 30-second intervals which may have affected the scores assigned to the student.  
Lisa M. Volle Capturing the Development of Foreign Language Oral Skills... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 153 
Major, Fitsmaurice, Bunta, and Balasubramanian (2002) investigated the comprehensibility of NN speech 
in an ESL context and found that native and nonnative listeners scored significantly lower scores when 
listening to nonnative speakers. Although, the inter-rater and intra-rater reliability was established in this 
study, Major's findings suggest that the raters are influenced by nonnative-like speech. 
Research Question 2: Do different voiced audio WAV file tasks reveal differences in terms of 
articulation?  
Although the mean scores for the three tasks all improved, the improvement was not significant. It is 
interesting to note the pattern between the different articulation scores (see Figure 2). In both charts, the 
first bar represents the mean articulation score for read aloud passages. The second bar represents the 
mean articulation score of a drill activity. The articulation means in both charts from reading to drill 
exercises drops.  
Articulation Means in Three Speaking Tasks
Online First Semester Spanish
CONV1ARTDRLART1RDGMART1
M
e
a
n
3.4
3.3
3.2
3.1
3.0
 
Articulation Means in Three Speaking Tasks
End of Semester - Online First Semester Spanish
CONV2ARTDRLART2RDG2ART2
M
e
a
n
3.6
3.5
3.4
3.3
 
Figure 2. Three articulation means -- beginning of semester (left) and end of semester (right) 
Koren (1995) described this in terms of "rising degree of care in pronunciation" (p. 391). The students' 
attention is more focused when the task involves reading: making sense of the letters and producing the 
sound. In answering drill exercises described as "slightly attended," pronunciation was predicted to fall as 
it did.  
The third bar represents the mean articulation scores in conversations. The mean articulation scores of 
drill articulation time 1 and conversation articulation time 1 show an increase. Similarly, the scores in 
drill and conversation articulation increase at the end of the semester. Students participated in 
synchronous written chat conversations with the instructor and with other students. I provided written 
feedback to written conversational responses for each lesson. Perhaps, the students prepared written 
responses to read aloud during the real-time oral conversations. Students reported great stress and anxiety 
prior to and during each conversation time, but less stress and anxiety during the final conversation since 
they experienced the process before. This initial stress may account for the articulation means in 
conversation time 1 to be lower than reading 1. However, the reverse is true at the end of the semester. 
The articulation mean is higher in conversation 2 than in reading articulation 2. Having reduced stress 
may have allowed the students to better articulate in the final conversation.  
 In contrast, conversation articulation means from time 1 to time 2 increased. This is contrary to the 
"careless" end of the continuum that Koren (1995) described. It was believed that if students focus their 
Lisa M. Volle Capturing the Development of Foreign Language Oral Skills... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 154 
attention on being understood then their attention is on word choice or grammar and not on phonology. 
However, in this current study, the mean articulation score increased, but not significantly. The different 
tasks appear to affect articulation. 
Figure 3 summarizes the mean task score for each articulation measure. The lines allow the comparison 
among the three sets of articulation mean scores. The point to the left is the first measurement, and the 
point on the right is the last measurement. The colors represent the different tasks.  
 
Time 1 Measure Time 2 Measure 
 
Legend  
 
Green Line = Drill Articulation Mean 
Blue Line = Conversation Articulation Mean 
Red Line = Reading Articulation Mean 
Figure 3. Articulation means of oral reading, drill, and conversation tasks 
 
Research Question 3: What do synchronous online oral conversations reveal in terms of 
articulation, accuracy, and proficiency (based on the curriculum criteria) from the mid-term and 
final conversations? 
In terms of articulation, there is not significant improvement between the mean scores of the first 
conversation and the final conversation. Accuracy mean scores decreased from time 1 to time 2. This 
decrease in mean accuracy score was not significant. Output accuracy appears secondary to 
communication goals in real-time communication.  
In terms of proficiency mean scores, there was significant improvement from conversation proficiency 1 
to conversation proficiency 2. The conversations were designed to follow the flow of the interviewee. I 
made every attempt to link themes and ideas from one speaking turn to another. All proficiency check 
criteria were attempted, but if time ran out, some checks could not be made (see Appendix F). 
Lisa M. Volle Capturing the Development of Foreign Language Oral Skills... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 155 
One reasonably explanation for the significant improvement in proficiency was timing. Students were not 
focused on some of the grammatical structures that were checked at the midterm. For instance, the past 
tenses continued to be one criteria check most students (89%) could not perform at the midterm. By the 
final conversation, the majority (84%) was able to communicate in the past tenses.  
Another reason there was significant improvement was the scale of measurement. It might have been too 
simplistic. Students could or could not communicate on topic X or in tense X.  
The assigned work mimicked the type of personal questions that were tested in the conversation with the 
instructor. These written chats (possibly spoken chats since students could use any mode available to 
practice with partners online) may have helped script some of the responses and therefore, in some cases, 
may have become reading exercises. Kotter et al. (1999) made this same observation.  
With the voiced interviews conducted online, it was easy to notice the amount of English used in the 
conversations as opposed to written chats. Sometimes, students thought aloud in English for two 
purposes: to translate the question posed or as a strategy to respond -- talking out the rules and listing the 
necessary vocabulary. With out an actual "body" to talk to, the students felt free to softly speak out their 
thoughts before attempting the answer in Spanish. Several students verbally signaled they were finished 
making remarks by using the phrase "Es todo" (that is all). The students self reported that they felt they 
were improving their oral skills in Spanish with their audio files and individual conversations.  
Study Limitations 
There are several areas of limitation with this study: the number of participants, the level of control of 
extraneous variables, the nature of communication without visual cues, and the issues with technology, to 
mention a few. The study began with 38 participants and had an attrition rate of 50%. The sample 
population of 19 weakened the study.  
Several extraneous variables could not be controlled. Six students (42%) reported that they redid their 
voice recordings if they were not satisfied. This may have provided some students with extra practice. 
Other students said that they only recorded the speaking task one time. Having only 30 seconds to record 
per file may have rushed students who could have benefited from having more time.  
It was interesting to hear the interviews that were conducted via the computer. In some cases, the pages of 
the book could be heard being turned when students wanted to look up a word or find a phrase. Paper 
rustling could be heard behind obviously prepared responses, especially noticeable when the response had 
nothing to do with the question asked. There were also competing interests during the interviews. 
Children could be heard crying and yelling for attention; three conversations were put on hold in order to 
deal with children. This is unnerving for the participant and may have affected performance. 
It is difficult to control the atmosphere of the testing situation when it is in an online format, and students' 
prepared notes raise serious questions about this assessment format's validity and reliability.  
Another issue that arose was that without visual cues, the interviewer can be heard on the tape repeating 
"sí" (yes) and "ah" over and over to signal she is listening and paying attention to what the student is 
saying. This may have been distracting to the students. Several students verbally signaled they were 
finished making remarks by using the phrase "Es todo" (that is all).  
A final issue concerned the use of technology. The technology did not always work well. After attempting 
to connect through MSN messenger three times, the conversation moved to a backup plan. The students 
phoned in and the conversation was performed on speaker phone. This occurred five times in 
conversation 1 and four times in conversation 2. Sometimes the connection was fine, but one student did 
not have all her equipment. Another did not produce oral practice the entire semester and was not able to 
participate in the study. Yet another student had very poor quality speakers/microphone, so an echo was 
persistent and interruptive. Occasionally there was feedback noise that would require the repetition of the 
Lisa M. Volle Capturing the Development of Foreign Language Oral Skills... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 156 
question. In some cases, it was necessary to display a written message in Spanish during the conversation 
because the echo became so intrusive.  
Implications  
Synchronous online oral tasks and online oral interviews are valuable experiences to the students and 
provide permanent records of oral development. The reading and drill tasks were short and offered 
frequent glimpses into students' interlanguage development. The 30-second files were quick and easy 
tasks for the students to perform and the instructor to listen to. Students have the opportunity to check and 
redo their file as many times as they want. Instead of choral responses or mimicking (lip-synching) a 
response that may happen in F2F classes, each student has a true voice and cannot hide online.  
Using desktop recorders and creating sound (WAV) files is quick, easy, and inexpensive. Blackboard has 
the ability to hold larger files in the digital drop box than in a mailbox system. At this time, I am unaware 
of software that can be applied to evaluate all aspects of speech of the foreign language learner. Until that 
software is created, FL students will continue to depend on the judgments of native and non-native 
speakers to determine their comprehensibility level in terms of fluency, competency, and proficiency. The 
language teacher will continue to play a major role in providing feedback to learners' oral performance. 
Although no significant oral changes were documented, there were trends in the right direction, and these 
electronic procedures allowed me to "capture" these trends. 
Suggestions for Further Research 
The technological capabilities in language learning are changing the dynamics and dimensions of online 
learning. Since this study, the current online Spanish courses use desktop video conferencing tools for 
tutoring, pair, and small group work. Adding the dimension of facial visuals to online synchronous oral 
communication is changing not only the nature of the output, but also the students' socio-cultural, visual 
and audio perception of the input. Comparing these oral tasks with F2F students would be the next step in 
getting a fuller picture of oral development in these dynamic environments.  
 
APPENDIX A. Screen Shot of Online Workbook, Student Sign-In Page 
 
Lisa M. Volle Capturing the Development of Foreign Language Oral Skills... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 157 
APPENDIX B. Screen Shot of QUIA, Lab Manual Listening Activity 
 
APPENDIX C. Screen Shot of Prometheus Course Page (After Sign-In and Portal Pages) 
 
Lisa M. Volle Capturing the Development of Foreign Language Oral Skills... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 158 
APPENDIX D. Screen Shot of Interactive CD-ROM Pronunciation Practice 
 
APPENDIX E. Articulation Score Card 
SPAN 1411 Online: Voice-Mail Articulation Score Card 
 
1 = very heavy non-native pronunciation 
2 = poor 
3 = reasonable 
4 = close to native 
5 = native-like 
 
Task:________________________ Week:___________________ 
 
Participant Pronunciation Stress Intonation = Articulation 
     
     
     
Adapted from: Koren, S. (1995). Foreign language pronunciation testing: A new approach. System, 22(3), 
387- 400. 
Lisa M. Volle Capturing the Development of Foreign Language Oral Skills... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 159 
APPENDIX F. Conversation Score Card 
Part I: Articulation 
1 = No effort at all; often incomprehensible 
2 = Meaning obscure by poor pronunciation; minimally comprehensible; very "American" 
3 = Pronounced foreign accent requiring extra-sympathetic listening; comprehensible 
4 = Tries to sound "native," mispronunciations but still clear 
5 = Native-like  
 
Score 1 2 3 4 5 
Pronunciation           
Stress           
Intonation           
 
Part II. Accuracy Check*  
  0 1 2 3 
(Listening function) 
comprehension of 
questions posed 
No understanding Comprehended 
few questions 
Comprehended 
most questions 
Comprehended all 
questions 
Appropriate 
responses 
Unable to function Able to operate in 
a very limited 
capacity 
Signs of 
developing 
attempts at 
response but 
misunderstandings 
arise 
Almost no errors 
in conventions: 
error not 
significant enough 
to cause 
misunderstanding 
Word order Incorrect word 
order 
Minimal word 
order usage 
Developing signs 
of correct word 
order 
Correct word 
order 
morphology No words in 
correct form  
Minor control of 
word form 
Developing signs 
of control 
Good control of 
work form 
Adequacy of 
vocabulary for 
purpose 
Totally inadequate Limited to that 
necessary to 
express simple 
elementary needs 
Signs of 
developing active 
vocabulary 
although 
hesitations and 
circumlocution 
are frequent 
Almost no 
inadequacies or 
inaccuracies in 
vocabulary for the 
task. Only rare 
circumlocution 
Grammatical 
Accuracy: 
correct use of 
tense(s) 
Unable to function Syntax is 
fragmented- 
frequent grammar 
errors 
Some errors, but 
developing 
control of major 
patterns 
Almost no 
grammatical 
errors. Occasional 
imperfect control 
(4)correct use of 
gustar 
All erroneous 
usage 
Mostly used 
erroneously 
Some errors Almost no error in 
usage 
* Adapted from Weir, C. (1990). Communicative language testing. 
 
Lisa M. Volle Capturing the Development of Foreign Language Oral Skills... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 160 
III. Proficiency** -- Student can or cannot… yes/no  
1) Greet someone, answer questions about how he feels, say good bye &  
Describe where his is from and where he currently lives (personal data) _____ 
2) Answer questions about schedule (school – morning routine) _____ 
3) Identify and describe specific items (family, clothes, weather, etc.) _____ 
4) Describe what he likes (to do in his free time, etc.) _____ 
5) Talk about the past _____ 
6) Talk about the future _____ 
**Adapted from ACTFL Proficiency Guidelines (1983) and Course Objectives for First Semester Spanish 
 
APPENDIX G. T-Test -- Paired Sample Tests 
Paired Samples Statistics  
  Mean N SD SE 
Pair 1 RDGMART1 3.3553 19 1.01639 .23318 
  RDG2ART2 3.4890 19 .89676 .20573 
Pair 2 DRLART1 3.0965 19 1.05162 .24126 
  DRLART2 3.3487 19 1.05127 .24118 
Pair 3 CONV1ART 3.2281 19 1.02018 .23405 
  CONV2ART 3.5175 19 1.25818 .28865 
Pair 4 ACCONV1 1.9812 19 1.12230 .25747 
  ACCONV2 1.9677 19 .99130 .22742 
Pair 5 CNVPFC1 3.7368 19 1.55785 .35740 
  CNVPFC2 4.7368 19 1.62761 .37340 
 
Paired Samples Correlations 
  N Correlation *Sig. p > .05 
Pair 1 RDGMART1 & 
RDG2ART2 19 .656 .002* 
Pair 2 DRLART1 & 
DRLART2 19 .663 .002* 
Pair 3 CONV1ART & 
CONV2ART 19 .692 .001* 
Pair 4 ACCONV1 & 
ACCONV2 19 .679 .001* 
Pair 5 CNVPFC1 & 
CNVPFC2 19 .672 .002* 
 
 
Lisa M. Volle Capturing the Development of Foreign Language Oral Skills... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 161 
Paired Samples Test 
  
    Paired Differences 
    
95% Confidence 
Interval of the 
Difference 
*Sig. 
(2-
tailed) 
Pair   Mean SD SE Lower Upper t df 
Alpha 
level .05 
1 RDGMART1 
RDG2ART2 -.1338 .80094 .18375 -.5198 .2523 -.728 18 .476 
2 DRLART1 
DRLART2 -.2522 .86318 .19803 -.6682 .1638 -1.274 18 .219 
3 CONV1ART 
CONV2ART -.2895 .92102 .21130 -.7334 .1544 -1.370 18 .188 
4 ACCONV1 
ACCONV2 .0135 .85540 .19624 -.3988 .4258 .069 18 .946 
5 CNVPFC1 
CNVPFC2 -1.0000 
1.2909
9 .29617 -1.6222 -.3778 -3.376 18 .003* 
NOTES 
1. Normally at the college, the gender distribution in a traditional classroom is 60% female and 40% male. 
There are no numbers available to determine if this is also a normal gender ratio for online classes at this 
institution. However, the 4th Infantry Division was deployed to Iraq at the time of this study and many 
students began to withdraw from courses in February, 2003 and did not re-enroll for the Fall semester. 
(Many students are directly associated with the U.S. Army as military dependents or retirees. The main 
campus is located adjacent to Ft. Hood, Texas.) One semester is 16 weeks long (15 instructional weeks 
and 1 examination week). 
2. The term heritage speaker is used here in the broadest sense. It can refer to a person who speaks any 
dialect of Spanish or a person who speaks no Spanish but is from a Spanish speaking family. 
3. Prometheus is copyrighted to Georgetown University in Washington, DC. At some point during the 
semester the function of the oral chat room ceased to operate and in week 6 we were able to perform oral 
communication with MSN messenger.  
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Lisa Volle is a professor of Spanish and cultural anthropology at Central Texas College. She is a PhD 
student in Foreign Language Education at The University of Texas at Austin. Her research interests are in 
the evolving dynamics of language learning and teaching in distance education. 
E-mail: Lisa.Volle@ctcd.edu 
Lisa M. Volle Capturing the Development of Foreign Language Oral Skills... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 162 
REFERENCES 
Abrams, Z. (2003). The effect of synchronous and synchronous CMC on oral performance in German. 
The Modern Language Journal, 87(2), 157-167. 
American Council for the Teaching of Foreign Languages. (1983, revised 1985). ACTFL proficiency 
guidelines. Hastings-on-Hudson, NY: ACTFL Materials Center. Retrieved June, 10, 2003, from 
http://www.sil.org/lingualinks/LANGUAGELEARNING/OtherResources/ACTFLProficiencyGuidelines/
ACTFLProficiencyGuidelines.htm 
Aitsiselmi, F. (1999). Second language acquisition through email interaction. ReCALL, 11(2), 4-11.  
Anderson-Hsieh, J., & Koehler, K. (1988). The effect of foreign accent and speaking rate on native 
speaker comprehension. Language Learning, 38(4), 561-613.  
Beauvois, M. (1998). Conversations in slow motion: Computer-mediated communication in the foreign 
language classroom. The Canadian Modern Language Review, 54(2), 198-217. 
Blake, R. (2000). Computer mediated communication: A window on L2 Spanish interlanguage. Language 
Learning & Technology, 4(1), 120-136. Retrieved March 11, 2005, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/ 
blake/ 
Camps, J. (2000). Preterit and imperfect in Spanish: The early stages of development. In R. P. Lowe & C. 
Sanz ( Eds.), Spanish applied linguistics at the turn of the millenium (pp. 1-19). Somerville, MA: 
Cascadilla Press.  
Camps, J. (2002). Aspectual distinctions in Spanish as a foreign language: The early stages of oral 
production. International Review of Applied Linguistics, 40, 179-210. 
Chun, D. (1992). The state of the art in teaching pronunciation. In J. Alatis (Ed.), Linguistics and 
language pedagogy: The state of the art. Georgetown University roundtable on languages and linguistics 
(pp. 179-193). Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.  
Chun, D. (1994). Using computer networking to facilitate the acquisition of interactive competence. 
System, 22(1), 17-31.  
DeKeyser, R. M., & Sokalski, K. J. (2001). The differential role of comprehension practice. Language 
Learning, 51(supplement 1), 81-112. 
Despain, J. S. (2003). Achievement and attrition rate differences between traditional and Internet-based 
beginning Spanish courses. Foreign Language Annals, 36(2), 243-257. 
Gonzalez-Bueno, M. (1998). The effects of electronic mail on Spanish L2 discourse. Language Learning 
& Technology, 1(2), 55-70. Retrieved March 11, 2005, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num2/article3/ 
Kern, R. (1995). Restructuring classroom interaction with networked computers: Effects on quantity and 
characteristics of language production. The Modern Language Journal, 79(4), 457-476. 
Kim, Y. S. (1998). The effect of a networked computer-mediated discussion on subsequent oral 
discussion in the ESL classroom. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, The University of Texas. 
Koren, S. (1995). Foreign language pronunciation testing: A new approach. System, 23(3), 387-400. 
Kotter, M., Shield, L., & Stevens, A. (1999). Real-time audio and email for fluency: Promoting distance 
language learners' aural and oral skills via the Internet. ReCALL, 11(2), 55-60. 
Leahy, C. (2001). Bilingual negotiation via e-mail: An international project. Computer Assisted Language 
Learning, 14, 15-42. 
Lisa M. Volle Capturing the Development of Foreign Language Oral Skills... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 163 
Leather, J. (1999). Second-language speech research: An introduction. Language Learning, 49(1), 1-56. 
Major, R., Fitsmaurice, S. M., Bunta, F., & Balasubramanian, C. (2002). The effects of nonnative accents 
on listening comprehension: Implications for ESL assessment. TESOL Quarterly, 36(2), 173-190. 
Moyer, A. (1999). Ultimate attainment in L2 phonology. Studies in Second Language Learning, 21, 81-
108.  
Munro, M., & Derwing, T. (1995). Foreign accent, comprehensibility, and intelligibility in the speech of 
second language learners. Language Learning, 45(1), 73-97.  
Munro, M., & Derwing, T. (1999). Foreign accent, comprehensibility, and intelligibility in the speech of 
second language learners. Language Learning, 49(1), 285-310. 
Payne, J. S, & Whitney, P. J. (2002). Developing L2 oral proficiency through synchronous CMC: Output, 
working memory, and interlanguage development. CALICO Journal, 20(1), 7-32.  
Salaberry, M. R. (1999). The development of past tense verbal morphology in classroom L2 Spanish. 
Applied Linguistics, 20, 151-178.  
Stockwell, G., & Harrington, M. (2003). The incidental development of L2 proficiency in NS-NNS email 
interactions. CALICO Journal, 20, 337-359. 
Swaffer, J., Romano, S., Markley, P., & Arens, K. (1998). Language learning online: Theory and 
practice in the ESL and L2 computer classroom. Austin, TX: Labyrinth.  
Tarone, E. E. (1983). On the variability of interlanguage systems. Applied Linguistics, 4(2), summer, 142-
164. 
Van Handle, D. C., & Corl, K. A. (1998). Extending the dialogue: Using electronic mail and the Internet 
to promote conversation and writing in intermediate level German language courses. CALICO Journal, 
15(1-3), 129-143. 
Warschauer, M. (1996). Comparing face-to-face and electronic discussion in the second language 
classroom. CALICO Journal, 13, 7-26. 
Weir, C. (1990). Communicative language testing. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
 
