Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num3/net/ 
September 2005, Volume 9, Number 3 
pp. 4-8 
 
Copyright © 2005, ISSN 1094-3501 4 
ON THE NET  
First, You Have to Hear It! ESL Oral Language Practice 
Jean W. LeLoup  
SUNY Cortland  
Robert Ponterio  
SUNY Cortland  
There is no question that the development of oral language skills in second (as well as first) language 
learners is of prime importance. Language learners must focus on oral language proficiency because it is 
eventually the skill they will most use. Indeed, "...oral language interactions account for the bulk of our 
day-to-day communications, remaining the primary mode of discourse through out the world" (Peregoy & 
Boyle, 2005, p. 119). But oracy in second language learners does not develop in a vacuum. It is 
inextricably intertwined with the other language skills (reading, writing, and listening). In addition, by the 
time students are studying a second language, they have begun learning literacy skills that we also wish to 
develop in the target language. The National Standards for Foreign Language Learning clearly support the 
notion of integration of skill areas with the goal area of Communication. The first standard in this goal 
area is 1.1: Students engage in conversations, provide and obtain information, express feelings and 
emotions, and exchange opinions (National Standards, 1999). This interpersonal communication standard 
implies two-way communication in which aural and oral language both play a key role.  
Oral language development needs two essential elements in order to be maximally realized: 
comprehensible input (CI) and social interaction (Peregoy & Boyle, 2005). The language learning 
environment, be it a classroom or other venue, should be structured to include CI as well as encourage the 
aforementioned two-way communication qua social interaction. In this column, we examine two sites that 
provide CI for English language learners and also make provision for subsequent two-way interchanges 
that allow learners to practice their oral output. 
 
Randall's ESL Cyber Listening Lab provides the English language learner with many audio files that 
offer language sound bites on numerous topics. These sound files are graded "easy," "medium," and 
"difficult" as a guide for the instructor and/or self-motivated learner. According to the creator of the site, 
Randall Davis,  
"the main goal has been to try to combine pedagogically-sound content while making use of 
Internet technology to deliver it .... to create listening activities with pre-, listening, and post-
listening activities to build content schemata, help check students' understanding while 
introducing new vocabulary, and then encourage speaking activities to expand on language 
students have learned." (personal communication, July 14, 2005) 
To that end, each audio file is supported by several components that enable the language learner to 
prepare for, negotiate, and master the CI. The example below, "Camping under the Stars," shows the 
information available to the learner who selects this audio clip and its concomitant activities. This 
particular clip is graded "medium." It is a conversation between a man and a woman, and lasts 1:17 
minutes. 
Jean W. LeLoup and Robert Ponterio On the Net: First You Have to Hear It! ESL Oral Language Practice 
 
Language Learning & Technology 5 
 
As shown above, the language learner initially encounters pre-listening exercises: generally topical 
questions that serve as advance organizers (see Ausubel, Novak, & Hanesian, 1978; Hadley, 2001) for the 
listener. Next come listening exercises. The student presses a button on the screen to listen to the audio. 
While listening, the student can click on radio buttons for each question to make multiple choice 
responses. After finishing the quiz, the learner can click another button to see the score and correct 
responses.  
 
The learner also has access to the audio script on 
another page, complete with glossed vocabulary. 
Some of the RealPlayer audio clips include 
scrolling captions for reading the script while 
listening -- for instance, the College Life audio. 
In addition, the learner may take a text completion quiz with a modified cloze format and word bank. 
Again, the learner can click to see the score and correct responses. Finally, post-listening exercises lead 
the learner to and through the social interaction phase, suggesting topics for further expansion and 
discussion, organizing paired dialogs, or recomending group activities for learners.  
On the Self-Study Guide page, the listening activities and audio files have been organized into topics. 
Generalized language functions are also indicated. The 15 topics listed are broad enough to be included in 
most any language course, from introductory to advanced levels: Introductions, Education and Work, 
Living Arrangments, Shopping and Money, Family Life and Relationships, Daily Schedules, Directions, 
On the Phone, Travel, Food and Dining Out, Descriptions, Sports and Recreation, Entertainment, Health, 
The World.  
Jean W. LeLoup and Robert Ponterio On the Net: First You Have to Hear It! ESL Oral Language Practice 
 
Language Learning & Technology 6 
 
Mr. Davis has chosen to concentrate on listening and conversation activities, rather than try to be all 
things to all people. He does, nevertheless, offer several helpful ancillaries in addition to the main pages 
outlined above. 
 
Instructors as well as language learners will appreciate his detailed instructions 
about working with the audio files in "Help with audio." The sound files are not 
complicated, all are either .wav or RealAudio files, though the student may need 
to download and install the RealPlayer software. "First-time users" offers a 
guide to navegate the site for those just discovering the cyber lab. Also provided 
are "Free handouts" that enable learners to keep track of their progress and 
understand completely how the site works. The "FAQs" are also helpful for all, 
and the "Tips for teachers" provide special assistance to this group of users. The 
site was mainly designed for self-access and individual learning, but clearly the 
creator welcomes any pedagogical support. 
Jean W. LeLoup and Robert Ponterio On the Net: First You Have to Hear It! ESL Oral Language Practice 
 
Language Learning & Technology 7 
 
Breaking News English is a more modest site also dedicated to providing good comprehensible input 
(CI) for ESL and EFL learners. As is the case for Randall's ESL Cyber Listening Lab, this site is the 
product of one person, Sean Banville. Each day a new listening file and accompanying lesson is added. 
The material comes from "breaking news" stories, hence the title of the site. The author's idea is that 
students can listen to and subsequently discuss CI containing information about topics they would 
generally be discussing in their first language (personal communication, July 14, 2005). The home page 
gives a general explanation of the materials provided on the site:  
 
The lessons and associated listening files are graded "easier" and "harder." These designations reflect the 
speed of the news broadcast, the vocabulary and idioms involved in the news story, and the difficulty of 
the related activities. In many cases, a wide variety of activities are presented, allowing students or 
teachers to select those that they prefer. Each lesson begins with suggested "Warm-ups," followed by 
"Before reading/listening" activities, a "While reading/listening" section, an "After reading/listening" 
section, and a "Discussion" portion with guiding questions for partner practice. Other activities included 
in many lessons are cloze exercises, charts, and tables that students complete and then use as a basis for 
conversation practice, matching tasks, and true/false comprehension checks.  
 
As demonstrated here, 
each lesson is headed by 
the date of the news, the 
level of difficulty, 
download options for the 
activities and audio, and 
the length of the audio 
file. Information on 
using Podcast software 
for using Breaking News 
English audio files with a 
computer or MP3 player 
is clearly presented as 
well.  
Jean W. LeLoup and Robert Ponterio On the Net: First You Have to Hear It! ESL Oral Language Practice 
 
Language Learning & Technology 8 
Archived materials go back to November 1, 2004; the audio archives go back to April 11, 2005. Links to 
approximately 2 weeks' worth of lessons are presented on the home page. There is a link to older archived 
lessons on each page that takes the learner back successively a month at a time. The news stories are 
composites taken from a variety of sources, including the BBC World Service radio, the BBC and CNN 
television news, press releases posted on the Internet, and Internet news sites. Mr. Banville researches the 
information and topics from these sources and then writes the articles used in the lessons. Several 
different sources are used for each story in order to corroborate its veracity. This approach enables him to 
include and/or focus on particular vocabulary items and idiomatic expressions, as he can word the stories 
accordingly. The author views the concentration on lexical items (and the parallel dearth of attention on 
structure and/or grammar) as a means to emphasize communication.  
CONCLUSION 
The relationships among the four skills of listening, speaking, reading, and writing are complex and 
intertwined, suggesting a scaffolding of mutual support. A focus on and practice in any one skill area 
contributes to overall movement along the interlanguage continuum, making knowledge available for 
application to the other skill areas (Peregoy & Boyle, 2005). Oral language development is clearly a key 
skill for second language learners, but it does not stand alone. As we see in these sites, audio-based 
second language learning activities can also integrate written components and serve as a jumping off 
place for interactive conversation practice as well. Listening to natural speech can be daunting for many 
language learners. Embedding the audio in a conext with pedagogically sound pre- and post-listening 
activities and focusing the listener's attention through activities that help motivate the listener to try to 
understand all help make the audio more comprehensible. Delivery of a wide variety of meaningful and 
interesting CI is facilitated by Internet technology, giving students easier access to the tools that can help 
them develop their language skills either in the context of a class or on an independent basis as lifelong 
learners. 
 
REFERENCES  
Ausubel, D., Novak, J., & Hanesian, H. (1978). Educational psychology: A cognitive view (2nd ed.). New 
York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.  
Hadley, A. O. (2001). Teaching language in context (3rd ed.). Boston: Heinle.  
Peregoy, S. F., & Boyle, O. F. (2005). Reading, writing, and learning in ESL. Boston: Pearson Education. 
National Standards in Foreign Language Education Project. (1999). Standards for foreign language 
learning in the 21st century. Lawrence, KS: Allen. 
