Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num2/ware/ 
May 2005, Volume 9, Number 2 
pp. 64-89 
 
Copyright © 2005, ISSN 1094-3501 64 
"MISSED" COMMUNICATION IN ONLINE COMMUNICATION: 
TENSIONS IN A GERMAN-AMERICAN TELECOLLABORATION  
Paige Ware 
Southern Methodist University 
This qualitative study explores the factors that contributed to limited interactional involvement in 
a telecollaborative project linking two groups of participants: 12 advanced-level students of 
English in northeastern Germany and 9 advanced-level students of German in the southwestern 
United States. Drawing on data from online transcripts, interviews, and questionnaires, I examine 
the tensions that arise when students' attempts at communicating online result in missed 
opportunities for engaging with their online partners. I report on the results of a discourse analysis 
of the online transcripts and rely on extensive interview and survey data to examine which factors 
made it difficult for students to maintain sustained interpersonal involvement in the online 
discourse. I document three main contextual tensions that arose from the different socially and 
culturally situated attitudes, beliefs, and expectations that informed students' communicative 
choices in the online discourse. I address the pedagogical implications of each of these three 
tensions. The findings suggest that research needs to focus not only on how students jointly 
construct online discourse, but how they co-construe the context for their participation. The paper 
concludes by addressing the implications of these findings for future research promoting language 
and culture learning online. 
 
 
Recent research has consistently documented how telecollaboration, a form of network-based language 
teaching that links students using Internet-mediated communication tools, can be used as a viable 
classroom alternative for meeting a range of pedagogical goals. For promoting communicative 
competence, telecollaboration can increase student motivation and promote greater target language output 
(Beauvois, 1998; Kelm, 1996; Kern, 1995, 1996; Meagher & Castaños, 1996; Toyoda & Harrison, 2002; 
Warschauer, 1996a, 1996b, 1998). Research addressing cultural and social issues has explored the 
potential for international online encounters to promote greater cultural awareness (Furstenberg, Levet, 
English, & Maillet, 2001; Kramsch & Thorne, 2002; Warschauer, 1999) and intercultural competence 
(Belz, 2003; Brammerts, 1995; Müller-Hartmann, 2000; O'Dowd, 2003).  
Attention has recently turned, however, to documenting the tensions that can arise in these international 
language-learning partnerships. Students have been found, for example, to engage in polarized 
discussions about cultural values (O'Dowd, 2003). Misunderstandings online are often difficult to resolve 
because of differences in social and institutional dimensions of online learning (Belz, 2001, 2003). 
Students and teachers must negotiate different, culturally contingent understandings of the purpose of 
online discussions (Belz & Müller-Hartmann, 2003; Kramsch & Thorne, 2002), and the online medium 
itself supports a range of avoidance strategies that would not otherwise be available to students 
communicating face to face (Ware, 2003). In short, research has shown that telecollaboration does not 
automatically promote the kinds of language learning that educators often anticipate (Kramsch & Thorne, 
2002).  
In this qualitative study, I contribute to recent work on the tensions that can occur in telecollaboration by 
examining factors that contribute to limited interaction among foreign language students in a German and 
American telecollaborative project. In particular, this project complements the recent work of Julie Belz 
(2001, 2003), whose focus on the institutional and individual dimensions of telecollaborative partnerships 
has provided evidence of factors that contribute to "high group functionality" (2001, p. 216) and "low 
group functionality" (p. 220) among American and German foreign language students. She found three 
Paige Ware "Missed Communication" in Online Communication... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 65 
factors that appeared to contribute to how "low group functionality" unfolds at the micro-interactional 
level: a) differences in how each culture values the study of foreign languages; b) diversity of prior 
experiences with electronic communication; and c) institutional differences in how foreign languages are 
taught at each participating site. In a later article, Belz (2003) provided linguistic evidence for factors 
leading to miscommunication, including culturally contingent differences in conversational style, in 
appraisal patterns, and in the use of language-specific features for indexing of speaker attitude. 
This article focuses specifically on the tensions that arise in groups that exhibited low functionality in a 
telecollaborative project between students in former East Germany and students in Texas. I draw on 
discourse analysis tools within a qualitative framework to demonstrate how students in these low 
functioning groups co-construct their interactions in ways that negatively contribute to the unfolding of 
online discourse. In this respect, the study extends Belz's (2001, 2003) work in three significant ways. 
First, whereas the German students in Belz's studies had less ease of access to technology than their 
American partners, in this study German students were provided with two free hours of Internet access 
each day to complete their assignments. Second, usage norms for online communication differed in 
unanticipated ways from those previously documented. Finally, my findings draw more extensively on 
student evaluations of the exchange through interview data elicited from face-to-face interviews with 
students on both sides of the exchange. 
FROM CO-CONSTRUCTION OF ONLINE DISCOURSE TO CO-CONSTRUAL OF THE 
ONLINE CONTEXT  
In a sociocultural view of online communication (Belz, 2002; Kinginger, Gourves-Hayward, & Simpson, 
1999; Lee, 2004; Warschauer, 1999), social interaction is co-constructed, such that discourse is the "joint 
creation of a form, interpretation, stance, action, activity, identity, institution, skill, ideology, emotion, or 
other culturally meaningful reality" (Jacoby & Ochs, 1995, p. 171). Such jointly constructed interactions 
unfold between interlocutors through verbal speech, or between correspondents through written 
interactions. In both modes -- oral and written communication -- the exchange of words takes place at two 
levels of context: the context of situation and the context of culture (cf. Kramsch, 1993). In the context of 
situation, people are primarily concerned with grasping the immediate meanings, motives, and 
directionality of the words. These words and beliefs are intimately linked to a larger context of culture 
that provides speakers or writers with a framework for interpreting and acting upon the immediate context 
of situation. Social interaction, taking place within both layers of context, includes not just the exchange 
of words, but the exchange of words-as-actions.  
What people say or write is an act of communication that is always oriented toward particular addressees 
(Bakhtin, 1981; Voloshinov, 1973), contingent on the affordances of their learning environment (Lantolf, 
2000; van Lier, 2000), and partially governed by social practices. In the unfolding of social interaction 
that takes place online, what participants write to one another indexes their position within a situational 
context in which they must make sense of words without many of the non-verbal cues that often 
accompany face-to-face interaction. To help interpret the words on the screen, writers draw on 
expectations about communication norms and processes that have been formed across a personal history 
of other culturally conditioned experiences with communication. They use the immediate 
contexualization cues (Gumperz, 1982) in the context of situation -- that of reading and responding to the 
words on the screen -- to help them interpret the meaning in light of their context of culture, what they 
know from shared cultural experience about social expectations and interpretive norms. 
To understand what is meant by the "missed" opportunities for communication in the telecollaborative 
project reported here, it is helpful to start by outlining how successful communication has been defined in 
other studies of online exchanges. First, telecollaboration appears to be a viable way to promote co-
construction of online discourse. Whereas instructors have had to rely mainly on decontextualized 
textbook presentations of the target language and culture, the Internet provides for the enrichment of 
Paige Ware "Missed Communication" in Online Communication... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 66 
traditional print materials (Breindl, 1997; Richter, 1998) and allows for the creation of meaningful, rich 
forums for interaction in which students have personal interactions (Brammerts, 1996; Kern & 
Warschauer, 2000; Warschauer, 1999). Such online discussions serve as a forum for eliciting a wide 
range of discourse functions (Belz & Kinginger, 2003; Blake, 2000; Pellettieri, 2000; Sotillo, 2000) and 
produce a database of interactional language that can be used for in-class discussions (Sengupta, 2001). 
Second, a recent interest in the development of intercultural competence (Byram, 1997; Byram & Zarate, 
1994) through telecollaboration has led to studies that document the viability of telecollaboration for 
promoting intercultural learning. O'Dowd (2003), for example, in an exchange between British and 
Spanish students, used Byram's (1997) model of intercultural competence to document features of e-mail 
correspondence that fostered "interculturally rich" (p. 138) relationships, including sensitivity to the 
sociopragmatic rules of their partner's native language, willingness to share personal opinions, attempts to 
establish personal relationships beyond the academic tasks, abilities in asking questions that elicited 
responses, and awareness of when and how to react to their partners' requests and interests.  
Belz (2003) also used Byram's theoretical model, with an emphasis on the attitudes component, to analyze 
data between German and American students. She provided a linguistically grounded analysis of what 
successful intercultural competence might look like in a telecollaborative project by analyzing student 
messages using a range of discourse analytic tools including rates of positive and negative appraisal, 
epistemic modality, and question types. She offered insight into what online intercultural learning might 
look like linguistically; learners should not simply mirror or parrot the interactional "norms" of their 
language partners, but rather "become aware of the existence and, most importantly, the meaning of the 
pattern" (p. 91). These discourse patterns, she suggests, are "integral components of sociolinguistic and 
interactional competence ... and the speaker who is unaware of them will suffer the interactional 
consequences" (p. 92). Ultimately, what is hoped for in such intercultural online exchanges is a 
developing ability on the part of students to take an intercultural stance (Kramsch, 1999; Ware & 
Kramsch, in press), from which they willingly engage in an exploration of difference, not just in an 
assumption of similarity, and from which they develop a decentered perspective that invites them to go 
beyond the meaning of words into the culturally situated logic that informs them. 
While these studies collectively demonstrate the possibilities for a wide range of communication 
opportunities for students in online intercultural exchanges, students do not always engage at this deeper 
level of online interaction (Belz 2001, 2003; Kramsch & Thorne, 2002; O'Dowd, 2003; Ware & Kramsch, 
in press). Successful online communication requires that students sustain their engagement in intercultural 
interaction across at least several weeks or longer. As Wong (2000) suggests, for native and non-native 
speakers engaged in interaction of any kind, the possibility for miscommunication is already amplified, 
and therefore many learners choose strategies that "aim at averting, avoiding, or correcting 
miscommunication and misunderstanding in the talk" (p. 244). In the virtual world, language learners' 
aversion to miscommunication can lead them to avert other kinds of positive learning interactions, 
including the potential for gradual development of intercultural competence. As the data in this project 
demonstrate, the turn-by-turn unfolding of discourse reveals that many students avoided directly engaging 
with their online partners. This avoidance strategy, while potentially helpful for saving face, can lead to 
"missed" communication, or missed opportunities for approximating the kind of rich, meaningful 
intercultural learning that instructors often intend with telecollaborative projects.  
This study focuses on how students' communicative choices online can lead to a lack of communication 
despite their self-reported interest in maintaining and deepening their cross-linguistic and cross-cultural 
interactions. I begin by extending Belz's (2001) notion of low group functionality to include the construct 
of missed communication. Using a linguistically grounded analysis of the written transcripts of 
discussions among 9 students of German in the southwestern United States and 12 students of English in 
northeastern Germany, I show how the use of questions and personal pronouns provides a lens for 
identifying missed communication online. I then turn to interview and survey data to examine what 
Paige Ware "Missed Communication" in Online Communication... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 67 
factors inform this lack of communicative convergence. The analysis results in three areas of tension: a) 
different expectations and norms for telecollaboration; b) social and institutional factors that shape 
tensions; and c) individual differences in motivation and use of time. I conclude by addressing the 
pedagogical implications of each of these three tensions.  
METHODOLOGY  
This study is guided by three overarching research questions: 
1) What general views of technology and communication inform students' interactions in an 
international telecollaborative exchange? 
2) How might the social and institutional settings in which telecollaboration takes place influence 
the communicative and interpretive choices that individuals make online? 
3) How might the findings of this study extend current pedagogical knowledge about 
telecollaborative projects? 
In answering these questions, I developed a classroom-based, qualitative study that linked 12 university 
students learning English in northeastern Germany and 9 university students learning German in the 
southwestern United States in an online exchange in which they wrote in both English and German.1 The 
choice to write in both languages was informed by current work in telecollaborative partnerships in which 
students write in both languages (see Belz, 2003; Furstenberg, et al., 2001; O'Dowd, 2003). From 
sociocultural and sociocognitive perspectives, writing produced in one's home language serves as one 
among many layers of cultural material that can be used to offer a window on the logic of another 
person's thoughts and beliefs.  
The American students were enrolled in an upper-division German course, and all 9 had chosen German 
as either a major or minor. The German students were pursuing a newly created Bachelor of Arts degree 
and chose to attend the voluntary 3-week intensive English course because they believed that proficiency 
in English was an essential part of their later job marketability. Linguistic proficiency in both groups was 
relatively even. Most of the American students had not been studying German as long (4-6 years) as their 
German peers had been learning English (7-8 years). All of the American students had lived for varying 
lengths of time (6 months to 2 years) in a German-speaking country, whereas fewer than half of the 
German participants had lived in an English-speaking country.2 
The study took place over the course of one semester, and the online exchange took place for a 3-week 
period in March. Using Blackboard, a Web-based interface that allows for asynchronous (delayed time) 
discussions, students were assigned to five groups of 3-5 partners to discuss texts related to the course 
topic of language in the media with a focus on current events and media (see Appendix A for a summary 
of discussion prompts). Students were encouraged to read the postings in other groups, but were only 
required to participate online within their own assigned group. Students were asked to alternate between 
their native and target languages with each assignment.  
Drawing on interactional transcripts, interviews, and pre- and post-exchange questionnaires, I examined 
which factors contributed to students' ability to co-construe a context of situation that supported (or 
hindered) cross-cultural interactions online. I conducted interviews with participants at both sites. The 
interviews (see Appendix B) followed a semi-structured protocol (Glesne & Peshkin, 1992; Miles & 
Huberman, 1994). Both groups of students responded to parallel pre- and post-questionnaires (see 
Appendix C for an English version of the pre-questionnaire).  
Paige Ware "Missed Communication" in Online Communication... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 68 
Table 1. Data Collection and Analysis 
Phase Researcher role Data Type Analysis3 
I 
January-
February 
Participant 
Observer 
(U.S. classroom) 
9 pre-exchange questionnaires 
9 face-to-face student interviews 
8 classroom observations 
Triangulating evidence: 1) 
background information, 2) open 
and axial coding of emerging 
themes using acts and stances 
II 
March 
Teacher 
Researcher 
(German 
classroom) 
12 face-to-face student interviews 
167 pages of online transcripts 
2 focal group interviews 
Discourse analysis: 1) question 
types, 2) personal pronoun deixis, 3) 
topic development, 4) frequency 
and length of interactions;  
Triangulating evidence 
III 
April 
Participant 
Observer 
(U.S. classroom) 
8 face-to-face student interviews4 
4 classroom observations 
9 post-questionnaires 
Triangulating evidence: 1) 
background information, 2) member 
checks, 3) thematic coding with acts 
and stances 
I did a hybrid of qualitative participatory research (Bogdan & Biklen, 1998; Strauss, 1987) and teacher 
research (Wallace, 1998; Warschauer, 1999) by positioning myself as a participant observer on the 
American side of the exchange and as a teacher researcher on the German side of the exchange. Before 
the exchange began in January and February, I was a participant observer in the United States in an 
upper-division German course, which was taught by a professor of German. I worked closely with the 
collaborating instructor to develop the course assignments for the 3-week exchange component of the 
course5 and to troubleshoot problems with technology, but I was not in the position of an instructor for the 
American students. During those 2 months, I conducted classroom observations and interviewed each of 
the 9 students enrolled in the German course. In March, I flew to Germany to teach the intensive English 
course that took place across a 3-week time period. During this time, my role was that of a teacher 
researcher, while the German professor continued to work with the students in the United States. Each 
day across the 3-week period of the exchange, I taught for 4 hours, then interviewed students, and ended 
the days by writing my observational fieldnotes. During this period, all classroom sessions with the 
American students were tape-recorded to provide triangulating evidence for analysis. In April, I returned 
to the United States to conduct follow-up class observations and post-interviews with the American 
students. 
To triangulate my findings with how students perceived and evaluated the online exchange, I analyzed 
interview data using the notions of "acts" and "stances" (Ochs 1990, 1993). Acts are social performances 
similar to the notion of speech acts (Searle, 1970), such as interrupting, asking a question, or apologizing. 
Stances are demonstrations of attitudes or points of view that are socially recognized (Biber & Finnegan, 
1989; Ochs & Schiefflin, 1989). They include such markers as epistemic modality, or the certainty or 
uncertainty of a statement, as well as affective stances of emotion or involvement (Besnier, 1990; Ochs & 
Schieffelin, 1989). In follow-up interviews with the American students, and with focal group interviews 
with German students in late March, I invited students to interpret excerpts from their online discussions 
to provide triangulating evidence. 
The results of the analyses are presented as a series of three overarching tensions in the findings section. 
These tensions became manifest in the communicative choices that students made online, often in choices 
that reflected limited interactional involvement. To provide a lens for viewing each of these three tensions 
in turn, the first part of the findings section illustrates the concept of missed communication. 
Paige Ware "Missed Communication" in Online Communication... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 69 
FINDINGS 
Hey you guys, me (Anna) and Nina are with you in a group, as you probably already know! By 
now, we have some information about you, Sara. You are from France, right? That's kind of cool. 
What about you Andrew? --Anna,6 student in Germany  
Ja, ich bin Französin. Wenn Du mehr über mich wissen möchtest, kannst Du meine Webseite 
angucken. (Paige hat die Adresse.) Hier ist meine Aufgabe für Mittwoch.  
[Yes, I am French. If you want to know more about me, you can look at my Web site (Paige has 
the address.) Here is my assignment for Wednesday.] --Sara, student in the United States 
These two excerpts, taken from the first week of online writing, provide an illustration of how missed 
communication online might begin. The difference in conversational tone established by Anna and Sara 
on the first day of the online exchange is striking. Anna displayed her enthusiasm for the project and 
writes a message marked by an informal term of address, exclamatory sentences, and personal questions. 
In contrast, the message posted by Sara was much more task-oriented, as she redirected Anna's request for 
personal information and turned immediately to the assignment. In a later interview, Anna described her 
reaction as feeling brushed aside by this initial response, and in her subsequent online reply to Sara, she 
shifted to a more formal tone. Sara, however, whose own experiences with online writing were informed 
by different norms of Internet etiquette, abides by growing conventions of Internet chat, in which 
individuals "invite" others to learn about them through their Web sites. It was clear from follow up 
interviews that she did not intend to come across as dismissive. 
This brief episode illustrates a subtle way in which both students' assumptions about the nature of online 
writing must be negotiated as they work to develop a compatible online relationship. In their group, Anna 
and Sara were able to develop a rapport characterized not by the personal chattiness Anna used early on, 
but by the task-oriented, yet interested, orientation that Sara introduced. However, in this study many of 
the students were not as able to negotiate these unwritten assumptions about online communication. 
Using the results of a discourse analysis of their transcripts, I briefly illustrate this limited involvement by 
highlighting students' use of personal pronouns and questions.  
One plausible way of establishing social alignment in online writing is through the use of personal 
pronoun deixis, with a greater frequency of using second person pronouns viewed as a display of 
interpersonal interest. Deixis is a way to refer to something usually outside of the immediate here-and-
now of the linguistic interaction, such as location, time, or speakers (Loos, Anderson, Day, Jordan, & 
Wingate, 1999). Social deixis, in particular, also provides a way to index one's status within a social 
structure. In German, for example, the formal pronoun Sie can index power and distance, whereas Du can 
index solidarity and closeness. English has lost the pronoun distinction (thou), but speakers can use names 
and titles to accomplish some of the social positioning. Table 2 displays the use of second person 
pronouns across all five groups. It is noteworthy that the Sie form of address was not used by any of the 
students.  
Table 2. Number of Uses of Second Person Pronouns in Student Writing by Group  
 Students in Germany Students in the US 
Group 1 77 13 
Group 2 98 9 
Group 3 50 9 
Group 4 95 34 
Group 5 64 44 
Total 384 109 
Paige Ware "Missed Communication" in Online Communication... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 70 
The German students used second person pronouns three times as frequently as their peers in the 
American classroom. In Group 5, the group characterized as "high functioning," there was a more 
balanced use of Du and you. One would have expected students to use personal pronoun deixis in 
relatively equal ways to align themselves with one another and index a degree of closeness, particularly 
since all students invoked the Du form of address when writing in German. It remains unclear whether the 
use of personal pronoun deixis provides, in and of itself, a reliable measure of students' attempts at 
establishing social alignment.7 Nonetheless, the absence of second person pronouns did not go unnoticed 
by many of the German students, who felt that their peers "only wrote in response to the assignments" 
(Inma, interview). The absence of particular verbal contextualization cues such as social deixis is perhaps 
more notable in a medium that does not readily provide the means for non-verbal cues such as gestures, 
tone, or inflection. 
Questions can function to situate students and their partners in particular communicative roles: 
information-seekers, information-givers, and cultural informants (Belz, 2003; Schiffrin, 1994). Table 3 
compiles the descriptive results of a tabulation of the number of questions students posed to their online 
partners.  
Table 3. Number of Questions Posed by Online Partners by Group 
 Students in Germany Students in the US 
Group 1 6 5 
Group 2 37 0 
Group 3 13 3 
Group 4 50 17 
Group 5 10 10 
Total 116 35 
The results show a striking imbalance in how students on each side of the exchange used questioning as 
an interactional strategy, with the exception again of group 5, which was evenly balanced. The students in 
Germany posed questions with three times the frequency of their online peers. This lopsided involvement 
led to frustration on the part of many German students, who reported that their partners had little interest 
in them or in jointly pursuing topics.  
These two examples reflect an involvement trend in the telecollaborative project. With such different 
approaches to the online writing, students are likely to miss out on opportunities to engage in the kind of 
cultural interactions that language instructors intend telecollaboration to provide. To help explain 
students' inability to co-construe their online relationship in ways that promoted greater interaction, I turn 
to the three tensions that emerged from qualitative analyses of student interviews and questionnaires.  
Tension 1: Different Expectations and Norms for Telecollaboration  
Differences in Expectations. In their interviews and questionnaires, the German students reported being 
extremely pleased to use instructional technology in their English course. None of the students had used 
any form of technology in the language classroom except a proficiency placement exam. Bates (1995) 
characterizes individuals' experiences with technology on a continuum that begins with an early stage of 
"awe and high expectations" (p. 227). The German students could be characterized by this stage. They 
embraced technology as "always good" (Heiko, interview), as something that "simply has to be there" 
(Marie, interview), that is inherently "relevant" (Anna, interview), and that should be incorporated into 
every subject. They saw Blackboard as an inherently beneficial vehicle for interacting with speakers of 
English.  
In contrast, questionnaire data showed that students in the American class had significant experience 
using technology in the classroom. They wanted technology to meet very specific learning goals, not 
Paige Ware "Missed Communication" in Online Communication... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 71 
simply to provide them with native speaker contact. Prior to this course, they had used a range of 
Blackboard technology in other university-level coursework, from public bulletin boards to assignments 
carried out in synchronous chat environments. Under the pressures and commitments common to 
university students juggling a variety of academic and social obligations, many viewed the virtual 
encounter as an academic task: 
Like, I have to get on line again, because you know most of us have got computers at home, you 
know, the thrill wasn't there .... and most of us have traveled in another country before. So I'm 
gonna talk to another German -- you know? It didn't strike us as being that out of the ordinary. I 
think we're jaded. Quite frankly. (Ned, interview) 
I mean it's cool that they had pictures to take and all -- but nobody really cares about that -- I 
mean I know they had a great time because everybody just sent all these pictures out. (Andrew, 
interview) 
I'm a professional at this game ... of school .... I didn't feel any more motivated to chat with the 
Germans when I did my assignments. It's fine. It's what you're here for. Just do it. (Matt, 
interview)  
Belz (2001) hypothesized that American students tend to have more opportunities to engage in electronic 
discourse communities and therefore "might view the telecollaborative partnership as an expansion of 
their already prolific electronically-mediated activities to include German" (p. 227). As these comments 
suggest, several of the American students in this project not only viewed the partnership as an additional 
activity, they saw it as relatively mundane. As Ned suggested, virtual encounters simply did not have the 
same "thrill" for them that he supposed it did for his German partners.  
Differences in interactional purpose. Interview data further illustrate striking differences of opinion in 
students' expectations of the purposes of telecollaboration. In the syllabus, the students were told before 
the onset of the exchange that the instructors expected them "to increase opportunities for interacting 
cross-culturally and to jointly analyze texts from different sources in an attempt to develop better 
intercultural understanding of how opinions and interpretations are guided by cultural attitudes, values, 
and belief systems." Students interpreted the instructors' purposes differently. For example, Peter, a 
student in Germany, viewed the online component primarily as a way to connect personally: 
When I saw that we would be using the Internet and have students in the US where we could 
write, I was really excited ... Those are two different cultures, and about different topics, they 
have totally different opinions, so this is pretty interesting -- yeah, just to share experiences and 
opinions -- that's really interesting. (Peter, interview) 
Andrew, on the other hand, saw the telecollaboration as an efficient way of meeting his academically-
oriented goals of his German course:  
This is the chance to practice your grammar, practice your writing, without it being such a dead-
set grade. This is a chance to use [German] a lot more and see what your mistakes are when you 
just start popping it out. When you just write, you can look at it, and see what mistakes you've 
made, then after you think you've corrected it, you can send it and see what mistakes you've 
made. (Andrew, interview) 
Andrew viewed his online partners more as electronic tutors who could provide him feedback on his 
German grammar, not as potential same-aged peers who could afford him different cultural perspectives.8 
These two diverging attitudes were played out in the students' online writing. Peter's first message to his 
group included personal markers such as formulaic greetings and closures and the use of the informal 
"Du" form of personal pronoun address: 
Paige Ware "Missed Communication" in Online Communication... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 72 
Guten Morgen! Hier die Umfragen Auswertung! ... Mein Freund Ulrich schreibt Dir gerade die 
positiven Umfrage Ergebnisse und ich habe die Aufgabe Dir nun die negativen, oder besser 
gesagt die unterschiedlichen Meinungen der verschiedenen Studenten näher zu bringen. ... Hoffe 
bald von Dir zu hören! Tschööö Peter  
[Good morning! Now for the analysis of the survey! My friend Ulrich is writing you the positive 
survey results, and I've got the task of showing you more closely you the negative, or better said, 
the different opinions of various students... Hope to hear from you soon! See ya!] (Peter, March 5 
posting) 
Andrew's, however, contained none of these markers and was instead directed immediately at the 
assignment without framing his posting as an interpersonal conversational move: 
Here is my list of ten consequences of September 11 .... It is actually very interesting to read 
articles from two very different perspectives on September 11. It was at first obvious that the 
English article focused mainly on emotions and used specific examples... The German article 
focused more on tangible effects of the tragedy. (Andrew, March 5 posting)  
Differences in Using Linguistic Conventions. Students further differed in how they viewed abbreviated 
spelling, inattention to grammatical form, and colloquial language, which often characterize informal 
Internet communication. In their post-questionnaires, students on both sides unanimously agreed that their 
interactions had not provided much help in improving their linguistic accuracy. Some students attributed 
this failure to attend to conventional grammar and punctuation rules:  
The German students were sloppy in the way they write. I'm very rigorous about it. If I don't 
know something -- a name, der, die, das -- I will check in the dictionary before writing 
something. I wouldn't say, "It doesn't matter." Maybe because of the type of medium we use -- on 
the Internet, nobody cares. (Sara, interview)  
In her own writing, Sara carefully attended to form and accuracy, as well as to the communicative import 
of the message. Her disparaging term "sloppy" to describe her partners' online writing echoes the 
concerns and frustrations of more traditional educators who view the unique language of the Internet as a 
diluted form of a supposed "standard" national language.  
For many advocates of Internet-based writing, however, the lack of capitalization and the different 
punctuation patterns of online writing represent an emerging and legitimate genre of Internet writing (see 
Crystal, 2001; Herring, 2001). Sara's context of culture, in this case, frames her social expectation that 
people should care about formal linguistic features when writing, regardless of the medium, but it would 
seem that the context of culture in which the majority of her peers operate -- at least regarding 
punctuation and capitalization norms -- is informed by different belief systems about the genre of Internet 
writing. When asked to comment on these transcripts for data triangulation, for example, Ruth, in the 
American class, accepts the writing and attributes the punctuation and capitalization features to the 
tendency for online writing to reflect "spoken" language: 
I think a lot of that had to do with time, because people aren't going to resort to their dictionaries 
for every single article... -- is this feminine? Neuter? You take to writing the way you would 
speak. I think in the email and discussion groups, people resort to the spoken word not the written 
form .... I thought [this kind of writing] was on both -- I think there were students here who said, 
hey, do you want accuracy or do you want us to do it? [Laughs] I heard that comment one time. 
So, I guess it's the level that people are willing to work at. (Ruth, interview)  
In addition to viewing online writing as more akin to oral language, Ruth also pointed out that the 
tendency to compose messages more informally is tied together with choices about how to make use of 
time.  
Paige Ware "Missed Communication" in Online Communication... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 73 
Tension 2: Social and Institutional Factors that Shape Tensions 
Social Factors. Students in Germany viewed learning English as a necessity for helping them obtain 
access to a lingua franca that promised access to better jobs and that provided social mobility within the 
new European Union. They frequently made reference to English as the world language, and indicated 
that with the Internet they could easily access information about other cultures and communicate across a 
variety of language barriers: 
And so I think ... that English is still the language, because you find it everywhere in the world -- 
where you can understand it, of course -- and I think it's cool, because it would get pretty hard 
somehow, if you go to Brazil, for example, and they can't speak German and you can't speak 
Portuguese. (Anna, interview, in the German class) 
[I like] that I can communicate with almost every person from all over the world -- it doesn't 
matter where you go -- if you go to Spain, you speak English and they speak English. (Peter, 
interview, in the German class)  
Both Peter and Anna echoed a version of current discourses of mobility and globalization (Cameron, 
2000) that leave unexamined the assumption that English is "the" language for communication around the 
world. Situated in a country in which students of higher education are encouraged through scholarships 
and educational programs to study abroad and travel, Peter and Anna were quick to point out the value of 
speaking this lingua franca. 
Anna also pointed out that simply knowing English well is not enough to achieve a competitive 
advantage. She attributed this to the increasing numbers of people in Europe who are fluent in English 
and suggests, "English is practically the norm because so many people know it. So you're not special 
anymore" (interview). Questionnaire data corroborate her view. In the German class, all students had 
experience studying a third or fourth foreign language. French was studied by 88% percent of the 
students, Russian by 29%, Latin by 6%, and Finnish by 6% of the students. The students had begun 
English instruction in the fifth grade9 and, as Anna suggested, knowing at least one foreign language well 
is the norm for university students. 
In contrast, the study of foreign languages in the United States is generally promoted only at the high 
school and college levels and opens a range of travel and study abroad options.9 Spanish, not German, is 
more likely to be the foreign language that has currency in American education because of immigration 
patterns and the growing marketability of Spanish in business and advertising. However, for students in 
the American class, the limited social valuation of German as a foreign language was not viewed as 
negative. Rather, learning German afforded them unique status. For example, Ned explained that his 
choice to study German in college was in part because "nobody takes that" (interview). Other students 
expressed frustration that many of their peers had a limited understanding of the purpose behind pursuing 
a foreign language:  
And everybody asks you -- you meet someone, you get their name, and they ask you, "What's 
your major," you say, "German,' and they ask, "What are you going to do with that?" ... so it's 
like, "Oh, you're going to be a German teacher." Well, maybe -- but that's not my hope. (John, 
interview, American class) 
John's description of his peers is unsurprising since the study of foreign languages in the United States 
poses, as Bernhardt (1998) suggests, a "tension between the traditional, humanities-based, reading-
oriented study of belles lettres and views advocating functionality and oral proficiency" (p. 51). For many 
students, learning a language such as Spanish, which is widely spoken in the U.S. southwest, is often 
directed toward communicative functionality and proficiency, whereas the study of German is often 
viewed as an end-point in itself, pursued for its own sake as part of a humanities-based course of study.  
Paige Ware "Missed Communication" in Online Communication... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 74 
Institutional Factors. Belz (2001) discusses the impact of "institutionalized classroom scripts" (p. 227) 
on the functionality of student discussion groups. Her findings reveal that "based on culture-specific 
differences in the structure of US and German university-level classroom scripts, German students are not 
socialized to orient to evaluation scenes within individual courses in the same way that Americans are" (p. 
228). In this study, attitudes toward performance assessment marked the most salient difference in these 
institutionalized classroom scripts. 
Students in the American class overwhelmingly cited grades as one of the primary motivations for their 
participation in the telecollaboration, whereas their German partners showed no interest in grades, only in 
making interpersonal contact: 
I love learning, but all the deadlines -- it really makes it a headache ... if you want me to do it, you 
have to make an assignment and give me a grade for it. It's one of those things -- it's a form of 
motivation. (Cecil, American class, interview) 
In his post-exchange interview, Matt in the American class suggested that future online exchanges move 
beyond a participation grade and toward more clearly established grading criteria: "You could base it 
more on grades. That's what a lot of people care about" (interview). Echoing this suggestion, John added 
the rationale: "because it's always about what's due because we're worried about grades" (interview).  
Cecil, in the American class, acknowledged that telecollaborative interactions were difficult to evaluate 
using traditional assessment criteria. He was most interested in just doing what was needed to perform 
German academically by doing "the nitty-gritty, what can bring the German the farthest, what's getting 
the most bang out of our buck, and Blackboard and these videos aren't so much" (interview). His desire to 
streamline language learning echoes a utilitarian discourse (Scollon & Scollon, 1995) that values those 
activities that efficiently meet criteria deemed adequate by traditional academic evaluations. This 
discourse draws on a language of expediency and efficiency that highlights the benefits of immediacy and 
of cost-effective accessibility.  
Citing grades as the impetus, students in the American class tended either to skim through the responses 
or to read selectively and to justify their limited participation based on what was explicitly required. They 
meted out their time in proportion to the weight their participation carried with their grades: 
I don't think we were really interacting with them, because we weren't required to read what they 
wrote, and I don't think they were required to read what we wrote, so it was kind of like just 
doing the assignment, that's it, there wasn't too much commentary on what they wrote. (Matt, 
interview) 
In contrast, the German students were socialized into an academic system that evaluates students based on 
their performance on high-stakes exams that typically occur outside of the formal classroom. As a 
consequence, students in this study were perplexed by the concern for grades exhibited by their American 
peers. They themselves had voluntarily chosen to use their vacation time during the winter break to 
pursue a foreign language without the structured environment of a formal grading system.  
As Stefan and Maren explained, the motivation for learning is intrinsic to their personal desire to improve, 
not to the extrinsic motivation of grades: 
Everybody from us is here in a voluntary way and we want to improve our English. We don't 
have to do this .... You choose that and you have to know that you have to do a lot of writing and 
speeching to other people; if you don't want it, you to don't have to. And so everybody who wants 
to improve -- it's the best way to improve. (Stefan, interview) 
During the intensive course, I really wanted to do something from this, and at home I sat down, 
wrote something, did something, did the homework, and normally .... during these three weeks, I 
really wanted to. (Maren, interview) 
Paige Ware "Missed Communication" in Online Communication... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 75 
Tension 3: Individual Differences in Motivation and Use of Time  
Differences in Motivation. Students in the American class, without a social imperative to become 
bilingual, generally cited personal reasons for pursuing the study of German, whereas most of the German 
students agreed that learning English was simply a necessity. Brad, in the American class, described his 
choice as motivated by intrinsic enjoyment: "I just love the language. I don't know -- I have this passion 
for the language." John, also American, indicated that his choice to continue studying German in college 
stemmed from doing well in high school and wanting to pursue something he had started: "It interested 
me. I'd done all these competitions and stuff, and I'd done pretty well, so I decided to study German." As 
a journalism student, Ned attributed his choice to a desire for greater academic status that would "make it 
look like I had actually studied something while I was at college" (interview).  
One might anticipate that the American students, having chosen to continue their study of a foreign 
language despite its social currency, would have been actively involved in the interactions with native 
German speakers. One might also posit that the German students would be equally eager to interact, given 
the social imperative to learn English. When asked to self-evaluate their experiences of the language 
exchange, however, students were strikingly unanimous in judging the German student involvement as 
higher. 
I thought the German students were very into it. That's the impression I got. They were there, and 
ready to go. I don't know that we always were, looking at the times we posted -- my own 
involvement, time constraints. (Ruth, American, interview) 
I guess the Germans were surprisingly open. They were really enthusiastic about it, and on our 
side, we were kind of unenthusiastic about it. I wasn't so much surprised that the Germans were 
so enthusiastic, but I was surprised by how ambivalent we were towards it on our part, because 
everybody was like -- it just seemed like a chore for everyone. (Ned, American, interview)  
You always wrote a lot which I thaught was awesome but it was only about the assignments. 
What do you think about that. I'm excited to read your thaughts tomorrow. (Nina, German 
student, March 20 posting) 
Students in the American class offered reasons for this lopsided involvement. Ned, surprised at how 
unenthusiastic he and his classmates were, suggested that the writing had turned into a "chore" for them 
because of the time commitment. In a similar vein, Ruth attributed their limited involvement to the time 
pressures they were under. Unlike the German students who were voluntarily attending class during the 
winter break, Ruth, Ned, and their peers had multiple courses to balance and felt more constrained by 
both the institutional demands and time constraints of the regular semester.  
Differences in Use of Time. A difference in how students allocated time to participate in the exchange 
was a constant source of tension. In an attempt to head off a potential source of tension arising from a 
lack of Internet access and cost of access that Belz (2001) found to be problematic for the German 
students in her study, I organized up to two hours a day for the German participants to access the Internet 
at no cost. Even though American students had 24-hour access to computers on campus, and all had home 
access, they reported in their post-questionnaires that they had allocated little time to participation.  
German students voiced disappointment with the limited amount of time the American students invested 
in the project. Marie captured this sentiment in her interview, echoing the writing of one of her discussion 
group partners: "I have learned that the Americans have no time. 'Sorry, I have no time. I have no time'" 
(interview). Both of Marie's American partners repeatedly apologized for posting short messages because 
they had no time: 
OK--Howdy, Now I am writing in English so it should not take any time at all. (John, March 5 
posting) 
Paige Ware "Missed Communication" in Online Communication... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 76 
I am not sure I will be able to hold an interesting discussion today because I have had a very bad 
and long day and have a lot of work to do. (Rob, March 5 posting) 
OK, tut mir leid, muss kurz sein, hab' wenig Zeit, fahre gleich weg...  
[OK, I'm sorry, it's gotta be short, have very little time, leaving soon... ] (Rob, March 8 posting) 
Ich merke alles nicht, denn ich hab wenige Zeit.  
[I don't notice everything because I don't have much time.] (John, March 19 posting) 
In their messages, both John and Rob apologize for not having much time to write. Before the exchange 
began, they anticipated that participation would not take much time and they could "just shoot something 
out, and [the German students] can come back to you with something else. It doesn't take a lot of time. 
You can sit down and in two minutes you can write a reply to something they have" (Andrew, interview). 
At the end of the exchange, John evaluated his time commitment as minimal: "It didn't take up a whole lot 
of time. We all have access all the time, and it didn't take me but twenty minutes to throw something up 
there every other day" (John, interview).  
This timesaving approach toward writing messages was a source of tension, however, when students were 
asked about the time it took them to read and interpret their partners' messages. Despite what participants 
said about online writing as quick and easy, they viewed reading responses and composing well-
considered replies as much more time-consuming: 
I tried to look at the past two postings and answers and stuff, but like I said with time, it didn't 
always happen. (John, interview) 
I wish I could have spent more time reading what they thought which I didn't do a whole lot, 
because it wasn't for a grade. (Cecil, interview)  
You only have a given amount of time to express -- in another language -- your feelings on a 
topic. Not only are you spending time typing it in, but you're spending time thinking it out, how 
to express it. (Ruth, interview) 
This tension might well have stemmed from the instructors' choice of the asynchronous medium for the 
online exchange. The rationale for choosing this medium was based on the time allowed for reflection and 
composition. It is certainly plausible, however, considering that many of the students valued the speed 
and efficiency of online writing, that the addition of a synchronous component to the exchange would 
have altered how students on both sides participated. In the asynchronous-only medium used in this study, 
students reported that the tasks of reading other students' responses in depth and replying with careful 
reflection were much more time-consuming, and by extension, more likely to be viewed as academic 
tasks rather than as communicative moves. Consequently, students tended to fill up the screen with 
words, but not necessarily after having fully read and reflected upon what their partners wrote. 
Pedagogical measures could be taken, of course, to help mitigate the tendency for students to attend only 
superficially to their partners' messages. Müller-Hartmann (2000), for example, has pointed out the 
important role of carefully constructed tasks for fostering intercultural interaction. Kern (1998) has 
previously shown that more reflective writing can occur when students compose their messages offline 
before posting or combine their online messages with other textual products. O'Dowd (2003) also 
provides students with explicit guidelines and samples of student writing that are based on clearly 
defined, research-informed criteria. In this project, students were given explicit guidelines and class time 
was dedicated to discussing emails, but such pedagogical precautions provide no insurance against 
miscommunication. In fact, one would hope that students would not be engaged merely in a happy volley 
of messages that seek to avoid miscommunication at all costs. At issue is not miscommunication, which 
can provide some of the most valuable learning experiences in an online exchange (Ware & Kramsch, in 
Paige Ware "Missed Communication" in Online Communication... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 77 
press); rather, at stake is missed communication, disengagement from attempting to grapple with such 
moments of learning in the first place.  
DISCUSSION 
As foreign language educators turn with greater frequency to technology as either an extension to or an 
integral part of their pedagogical repertoire, they need to be well informed of the potential for 
unanticipated tensions to develop in online exchanges. Ideally, online exchanges can invite students to 
explore further the individual and social histories that inform their partners' views and beliefs (Belz, 2001; 
Kern, 2000; O'Dowd, 2003), to understand a wider range of linguistic features and discourse pragmatics 
of the language they are studying (Belz, 2003; Belz & Kinginger, 2003), and to examine the nature of the 
emerging genre of Internet writing with its resources and constraints (Kramsch & Thorne, 2002). Such 
involvement also entails a commitment to stay engaged in communication in the face of 
miscommunication and to view differing opinions or unfamiliar interactional styles as opportunities to 
grow.  
In this project, two of the five groups of students in this study were indeed more successful at co-
construing their online relationship in ways that were mutually compatible. They mirrored one another's 
interactional features by responding to and elaborating upon questions, using personal forms of address, 
following up on other-initiated topics, and converging on a conversational tone. Like the students reported 
by O'Dowd (2003), they wrote frequently, requested their partners' opinions, and worked to develop a 
personal relationship.  
The main focus of this paper, however, has been on exploring groups that were low functioning. First, 
expectations about the use of technology differed based on different levels of prior experience of online 
writing. The American students were more accustomed to using technology in their language courses and 
therefore saw the telecollaboration as a familiar extension of previous coursework. They were critical of 
particular aspects of Blackboard, such as the slow navigation speed and the accessibility of multiple 
discussion threads. The German students, on the other hand, were more enthusiastic about using it simply 
to communicate with native-speaking peers, possibly because the use of technology in a language class 
was a novelty for them. Students' interactional purposes ranged from seeking interpersonal contact to 
practicing grammar with a native speaker, and opinions differed on what linguistic conventions were 
appropriate online. The American students viewed brevity and time efficiency as positive, whereas the 
German students wrote lengthier messages to try and engage their peers in extended discussions.  
I next turned to an examination of how the social and institutional settings might have influenced the 
communicative and interpretive choices that students made online. Despite differences in how the study 
of English and German are viewed in Germany and the United States, respectively, students converged on 
the personal importance of studying a foreign language. Nonetheless, the German students had given up 
part of a vacation to study a foreign language, which points to the social importance for them of learning 
English. They were viewed by both groups of students as more motivated. Differing institutional 
constraints played a role in influencing the communicative choices that students made and how they 
interpreted the messages they received. For example, the importance of grades for the American students 
weighed in as a strong factor in influencing how they valued the time spent writing to the German 
students. Most of the American students felt they had a pedagogical mandate to perform a reply, even 
when they felt they had more pressing, institutionally imposed deadlines. Most of the German students, in 
contrast, were taking the course for a grade outside of the regular semester with no grade attached, and the 
time they spent writing was voluntary. 
The third research question asked how the findings of this study might extend current pedagogical 
knowledge about telecollaborative projects. I address this question by examining it in light of each of the 
three tensions documented.  
Paige Ware "Missed Communication" in Online Communication... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 78 
Tension 1 
In the first tension, differences in expectations and norms for telecollaborative projects can be addressed 
by preparing students through explicit class discussions. With the increasing amount of research available 
on telecollaboration, students can jointly analyze published episodes of successful and unsuccessful 
communication before the exchange begins to open discussions about missed communication and help 
deflect potential tensions in their own communication.  
Students should also be encouraged to discuss usage norms and expectations with their online peers. 
Many students in this study echoed the dissatisfaction cited by students in other telecollaborative projects 
who were frustrated with feeling ignored and with receiving limited feedback (Belz, 2001; O'Dowd, 
2003). Often such frustrations are the manifestations of different beliefs about appropriate communication 
online. Instead of making and acting on assumptions about communication norms, students need to 
openly discuss their expectations of linguistic and grammatical accuracy, message length, and response 
time. For example, teachers can draw students' attention to how online writing in a classroom differs 
significantly from online writing in non-classroom situations. In asking students, for example, to consider 
how "netiquette" norms favor brevity in online communication (Tella & Mononen-Aaltonen, 1998), 
teachers can introduce the notion of netiquette "stances" that value intercultural engagement. As O'Dowd 
(2003) argues, "if students are to learn anything more than superficial knowledge about the target culture" 
(p.138), then they must be willing to take such an intercultural stance. As this study has shown, such 
online stances may well necessitate flouting the norms of informal email communication that favor 
brevity and instead expect longer messages that require greater time commitments.  
Tension 2 
The second tension addressed social and institutional factors. In many ways, this type of tension cannot 
be "pre-empted" by using particular instructional strategies, as these factors form the very fodder by 
which students engage with cross-cultural understanding. Students rely on the discourses available to 
them in their local and institutional settings to make sense both of what counts as language learning in the 
classroom, and of what practical and symbolic values the use of technology carry. Teachers can invite 
them to examine these discourses as they become manifest in the interactions. By examining critically the 
metaphors that drive talk about communication, for example, teachers can invite students to challenge 
prevalent utilitarian (Scollon & Scollon, 1995) notions that optimal communication is about a maximum 
exchange of information with minimal effort. Then, when a student like Cecil declares that he wants 
online learning to allow him "to get the most bang out of the buck," he and his peers on both sides of the 
exchange can be invited to explore that comment, to examine what social and institutional factors 
contribute to his choice of an economic metaphor. Teachers can also encourage students to discuss openly 
and critically the criteria by which they evaluate their own and others' involvement in the online 
exchange.  
Tension 3 
Turning to the third tension, logistical constraints often influence student motivation and time investment 
in telecollaboration. As with other international (Belz, 2001, 2003) and intranational encounters (Lee, 
2004), it is difficult for individuals to commit to a balanced time investment or to avoid concerns about 
grades, but students can be invited to examine openly these concerns with their peers. Teachers can also 
provide students with basic discourse analysis tools to show them how certain communicative choices 
online index various degrees of openness and carry traces of culturally situated views. For example, 
teachers could invite students to analyze the types of questions they pose (Schiffrin, 1994) to examine 
how they open up and close down particular interlocutor roles for their online partners. 
Such pedagogical turns as these require constant attention to the discursive relationship between text and 
context (Kramsch, 1993) and to a view of social interaction as a dynamic process of engagement, one in 
Paige Ware "Missed Communication" in Online Communication... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 79 
which the basic rule is to stay in play (Kramsch, 1996). Online writing needs to be viewed as more than 
just a series of messages sent in an electronic volley for purposes of practicing the target language, but 
rather as a collage of foreign language texts borne out of an ongoing inquiry among individuals who are 
situated in both an immediate context of situation and in a larger context of culture. In such a view, each 
message is viewed as part of a larger semiotic whole, an instantiation of language that has indexical, 
representational, and symbolic functions (Kern, 2000).  
DIRECTIONS FOR FURTHER RESEARCH  
Many theorists argue for empirical work that grounds the justification for using particular forms of 
technology for specific educational and communicative purposes (Barton, 1994; Haas & Neuwirth, 1994; 
Selfe & Hilligoss, 1994). In foreign language education, studies on telecollaboration like this one are 
often limited in their generalizability because of the small number of participants, the socially and 
institutionally situated nature of data collection, and the scheduling difficulties that international 
collaboration poses. For these reasons, more studies are needed that can extend the work of previous 
research to provide corroborating evidence for substantiating or challenging findings in the field.  
Additionally, research is needed that is longitudinal (O'Dowd, 2003) on the one hand, and that analyzes a 
greater number of student cohorts using the same study design on the other. As multimedia technologies 
become more available, researchers will need to expand their investigations from primarily text-based 
online exchanges to designs that incorporate other technology-mediated modes. These multimedia 
technologies allow for multiple modes of self- and other-representation in online environments (cf. Beers, 
2001; Kramsch & Andersen, 1999; Plass & Chun, 1996; Warschauer, 1999).  
Further research could also ask how virtual cross-cultural encounters are woven back into real-time, in-
class conversations. Communicating across cultures affords opportunities for personal reflection, which 
may or may not have an immediate impact during the actual time of the course (cf. Kramsch, 1993; 
O'Dowd, 2003), but may well leave traces during classroom discussions. The benefit of having a virtual 
interlocutor can lie not just in the opportunity for online intercultural learning, but also for classroom 
learning. However momentarily, in response to the social interactions that take place online, students' 
familiar divisions and affiliations can be rendered unfamiliar long enough to allow them to call into 
question their previously unexamined assumptions.  
Finally, more linguistically grounded research is needed that documents how students position themselves 
and their partners in online discourse (cf. Belz, 2003; Ware & Kramsch, in press), and how these 
discursive moves are both products of and producers of students' locally and culturally situated 
perspectives. An intercultural stance online must be seen as a joint responsibility (Jacoby & Ochs, 1995), 
in which individuals agree to stay engaged in the interaction even in the face of miscommunication. 
Ultimately, educators need to uncover more ways of creating learning environments that promote 
sustained engagement in online writing so that students can benefit from the kinds of intercultural 
encounters that technology has the potential to provide. 
NOTES 
1. I had taught an Intensive English course at the university in northeastern Germany during the previous 
academic winter intersession in March. The following year, this site served as a sister class for developing 
an online exchange for a group of students learning German at a large state university in the southwest of 
the United States. 
2. It is easy to assume, as did the participants in the online exchange, that residence abroad would be 
advantageous. Research on study abroad, however, offers evidence that this is not always the case (see 
Kinginger & Farrell, 2004; Polanyi, 1995).  
Paige Ware "Missed Communication" in Online Communication... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 80 
3. The range of the discourse analytic tools used to examine this notion is beyond the scope of this paper. 
Written transcripts were coded and analyzed using a) topic analysis (Chafe, 2001); b) turn-taking 
structures, repetition, repair, and coherence for conversational flow (Markee, 2000); c) epistemic, 
boulomaic, and deontic modality (Simpson, 1993; Belz, 2003); d) the function of questions and question 
uptake (Schiffrin, 1994); and e) formulaic language as a contextualization cues (Gumperz, 1982). 
4. One student canceled his interview in the follow-up stage. 
5. Differences in how instructors present telecollaborative projects and how differences in instructional 
goals and assessment present an interesting area of research in this field. In this study, we attempted to 
control for presentation of the assignments and therefore for students' understanding of what was 
expected of them by having me introduce the project and the assignments to students on both sides of the 
exchange. Grades presented a more difficult problem, since the German students were voluntarily taking 
the course. They could only receive an overall participation certificate. We therefore decided that students 
in the American class would also only receive a participation grade for the three-week period of the 
exchange. As is discussed in the findings, the lack of explicit grading criteria proved problematic for 
American students, who were accustomed to what Belz (2001) has previously explored using Hatch's 
(1992) notion of classroom scripts.  
6. All participant names are pseudonyms. 
7. I am grateful to a reviewer for pointing out alternative explanations for the differences in use of second 
person pronouns between the Americans and Germans. American students, in particular, might find it 
difficult to understand and subsequently use the various forms of the second person pronouns in German, 
which have a wider range of sociopragmatic meanings than in English. There is recent research that deals 
more specifically with the use of addressive pronouns in telecollaboration (see Belz & Kinginger, 2002, 
2003; Kinginger, 2000). 
8. The findings from two recent survey studies of foreign language students at the post-secondary level 
(Chavez, 2002; Kubota, Austin, & Saito-Abbott, 2003) suggest that this detachment may well be linked to 
some students' preference for keeping culture out of the formal classroom. Chavez surveyed 200 first, 
second, and third year students of German and found three major concerns voiced by foreign language 
students: a) the real purpose of instruction should be the language itself, not culture; b) culture is often 
taught as superficial knowledge; and c) the teaching of culture is politicized. Kubota et al. (2003) 
surveyed 244 beginning learners of Japanese, Spanish, and Swahili, and advanced learners of Spanish, 
and asked if foreign language learning invited them to reflect on issues of race, gender, class, and social 
justice. Their results showed that some, particularly male students in beginning-level classes, resist 
engaging in sociopolitical issues.  
9. Students in this project began English instruction in fifth grade, but in many states in Germany, 
instruction now begins as early as first grade. 
Paige Ware "Missed Communication" in Online Communication... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 81 
APPENDIX A 
Summary of Small Group Discussion Prompts 
Assignment A 
1) Respond to the survey "What is Culture?/Was heisst Kultur?" Fill out the blanks as quickly as you can. 
Answer in your native language. 
2) This survey is designed to help you think about the link between language and culture. The prompts 
will be in English for the students in the American class and in German for students in the German class. 
Your first assignment will be to discover and report the similarities and differences of your word 
associations and sentence completions. Include a short analysis of potential reasons for the similarities 
and differences. Write in German. 
Assignment B 
1) Read the articles from Der Spiegel and Time magazines about public reactions to 9/11/2001. Create a 
list of the "Top Ten Consequences" as reported in these two articles.  
Include in your analysis not just what you think, but what you learn from the readings and from your 
interactions with others in your group. Write in English. 
Morse, J., Corliss, R., Ripley, A., Stein, J., & Tyrangiel, J. "Tending the Wounds." Time. 10/1/01. 
Deggerich, Markus. "Die hilflose Frage 'Warum?'" Der Spiegel Online. 9/12/01. 
Assignment C 
1) Read two parallel articles about Muslims in the United States from Der Spiegel and Time magazines. 
Make a list of the top ten similarities: five in content and five in language. Include a commentary on what 
you know (or have learned) about similarities (or differences) in German and American news reporting. 
Where do you think the differences or similarities originate? Write in German. 
Patalong, Frank. "Droht nun die Hexenjagd?" Der Spiegel Online. 9/12/01. 
van Biema, David. "As American As. . ." Time. 10/1/01. 
Assignment D 
1) Respond to the German students' messages about language and humor. Read and comment on any 
other topics initiated. Be sure to give yourself plenty of time to read carefully and to give lengthy 
responses to their questions. Write in German. 
Assignment E 
1) Summarize the class discussion on Monday. Follow up on any questions that came up. Write in 
English. 
2) Visit at least two news websites in German and in English. Contrast the German and American styles 
in online news reporting. Find the top ten differences: five in content and five in language use. Include a 
commentary on what you know (or have learned) about similarities (or differences) in German and 
American news reporting. Where do you think the differences or similarities originate? Write in English.  
Assignment F 
1) Follow up on any questions that came up. Answer the following questions in your groups: 
Knowing what you have learned about your small group, how would you characterize the ways in which 
different participants address issues? Beyond the personal level, what suggestions can you make about 
ways to get an "insider's perspective" on another culture through the media. Which media is effective? 
Which viewpoints are missing in mainstream media? Write in the language of your choice.  
 
Paige Ware "Missed Communication" in Online Communication... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 82 
APPENDIX B 
Interview Protocol 
Thank you for coming. I appreciate the time you've taken to come in for this talk. The purpose of it, other 
than giving me a chance to know each of you a little better, is also to find out how more about English 
teaching in Germany, which helps my research project. It's not often that educators ask students their 
perspective, and that's partly what my project is about. So, first off, would you prefer that we speak in 
English or in German? And second, do you mind if I have the tape recorder running? 
If you see me writing, it is simply that I want to remember to follow-up on something you say.  
Background Tell me a little about what brought you to the BA program. What role 
does the English course play? 
Tell me a little about what brought you to this particular section of the 
intensive English course. 
English experience  Describe your English classes here at the university. What differences or 
similarities do you see between English instruction here and in your high 
school? 
What are some of the ways you enjoy learning English?  
What is your opinion about English as the "world language" or 
"international language"? 
Why do people learn foreign languages?  
What role does English play in the European Union? How might that 
affect you personally? 
Technology Tell me about any experiences you have had using technology in your 
language courses? In any courses?  
Think back to the beginning of this Intensive course and describe the path 
of your thoughts about it. First, before the class started, what did you 
expect, then in the first week, what did you experience, and finally now 
what do you hope we will still do/experience? 
Attitudes toward 
writing in a foreign 
language 
Can you highlight any particular part of the email/SG writing that you 
found surprising or interesting? Show me in these transcripts [provide 
artifacts of student's writing]. What interests you about this excerpt? 
Compare the experience of writing to the American students online with 
that of writing to your peers in this class. 
Improvement In your opinion, what could improve an exchange with American 
students?  
Expansion Is there anything that I have not addressed that you would like to 
contribute? Is there anything you would like to ask me? 
 
Paige Ware "Missed Communication" in Online Communication... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 83 
APPENDIX C 
Pre-Questionnaire of Language Background  
Thank you for taking the time to fill out this questionnaire. Your answers will be helpful for giving a 
sense of your abilities and interests related to the learning of German.  
1. How long have you been learning or studying German? ________________________________ 
2. What other languages do you know besides German and English? ________________________ 
3. Have you spent any time in a German-speaking country? Yes No 
If so, please note how much time you spent there and the nature of your stay (travel, study, living 
with family, etc.) 
4. Why are you learning German?  
5. Will you be spending any time in a German-speaking country this year? Yes No 
If so, please note how much time you will spend there and the nature of your stay (travel, study, 
living with family, etc.) 
6. In what ways do you practice or use German outside of university classes?  
Please circle the word that describes your activities in the six choices below. If you choose "other(s)," 
please write the specific activity/ies to which you are referring. 
a. Talking in German with friends or 
relatives never once/month once/week other: 
b. Reading German books or 
magazines never once/month once/week other: 
c. Watching movies or TV programs 
in German never once/month once/week other: 
d. Using the Internet to find German 
websites never once/month once/week other: 
e. Participating in German clubs never once/month once/week other: 
f. Other(s): never once/month once/week other: 
7. Please rate yourself as best you can in these language areas: 
a. Grammar intermediate advanced near-native 
b. Listening intermediate advanced near-native 
c. Speaking intermediate advanced near-native 
d. Reading intermediate advanced near-native 
e. Writing intermediate advanced near-native 
f. Cultural knowledge intermediate advanced near-native 
g. Other: intermediate advanced near-native 
8. In your experience, which of the above categories are emphasized the most in the language classroom?  
9. Which of the categories (grammar, listening, speaking, reading, writing, cultural knowledge, other) do 
you most want to improve?  
10. Why is it/are they important to you?  
Paige Ware "Missed Communication" in Online Communication... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 84 
Please rank the following personal reasons for learning German from 1-7, with the number "1" as the 
most important reason and number "7" as the least important. If you do not have an item for "other," rate 
it as a seven. 
____ For fulfilling a foreign language 
requirement 
____ For communicating with relatives or 
friends 
____ For traveling to German-speaking countries ____ For better job opportunities 
____ For enjoyment ____ For continuing something you started 
____ Other     
11. What plans or hopes do you have, if any, for your future use of German (e.g. study abroad, career, 
graduate study)? 
 
Course-Specific Questions 
This course emphasizes language learning through reading and writing in tandem with German students 
online.  
12. How often do you write in the following modes (in any language)? Please circle the word that 
describes the amount of time you spend in the four activities below. If you choose "other," please write 
the specific time frame.  
a. Email never once/month once/week other: 
b. Online "chatting" never once/month once/week other: 
c. Personal (creative, letters) never once/month once/week other: 
d. Academic essays/writing never once/month once/week other: 
e. Other: never once/month once/week other: 
13. What problems do you have, if any, with accessing the Web? (e.g., inconvenience, technical 
difficulties, no home computer, time commitment)  
14. Circle the best description of your typing ability:  
very slow (I have to look at the keys) 
slow (I have to look at the keys some of the time) 
intermediate (ten-finger typing) 
fast (I can ten-finger type without looking) 
15. Have you ever participated in an email language exchange or Blackboard-type online group 
discussion? Yes No 
If so, please indicate what type of exchange: (e.g., classroom language courses -- college or high 
school, other credit courses, independent study, personal interest in listserves, etc.) 
16. Please rank the following from 1-6 to describe what you would like to practice during the language 
exchange with native speakers of German. Use "1" for the area you are most interested in and "6" for the 
area you are least interested in. If you do not have an item for "other," rank it with a six. 
____ Developing correctness/complexity (e.g. 
grammar, vocabulary, syntax) 
____ Using everyday language (e.g. slang, 
idioms, jokes) 
____ Gaining "insider" knowledge about others ____ Giving me good tips about other cultural 
information 
____ Providing an opportunity to practice 
regularly with a native speaker (no 
particular focus on any skill or topic) 
____ Other: 
Paige Ware "Missed Communication" in Online Communication... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 85 
17. List several topics you think would be interesting or important to write about in this language 
exchange:  
18. In your opinion, what might be the benefits of writing to a native speaking exchange partner over the 
Internet? 
19. In your opinion, what might be the potential drawbacks of writing to a native speaking language 
partner over the Internet? 
20. Which types of texts do you prefer using in a foreign language class? Please rank the following types 
of texts in order of preference. Use "1" for the type you most prefer and "8" for the type you least prefer: 
____ Textbook ____ Handouts from teacher 
____ Course handbook (with articles, etc.) ____ Instructor-selected websites 
____ Self-selected websites/articles ____ Films/TV programs 
____ Online discussions with classmates ____ Online discussions with native speakers 
____ Real-time chat     
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Paige Ware is a recent PhD graduate from the Education, Language, Literacy and Culture program at the 
University of California at Berkeley. Her research focuses on telecollaboration in language learning, 
writing and second language development, and multimedia technologies and literacy. 
E-mail: pware@smu.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Bakhtin, M. M. (1981/1934-5). The dialogic imagination. Austin: University of Texas Press. 
Barton, E. (1994). Interpreting the discourses of technology. In C. Selfe & S. Hilligoss (Eds.), Literacy 
and computers: The complications of teaching and learning (pp. 56-75). New York: Modern Language 
Association.  
Bates, A. W. (1995). Technology, open learning and distance education. London:Routledge. 
Beauvois, M. H. (1998). E-Talk: Computer-assisted classroom discussion -- attitudes and motivation. In J. 
Swaffar, S. Romano, P. Markely, & K. Arens (Eds.), Language learning online: Theory and practice in 
the ESL and L2 computer classroom (pp. 99-120). Austin, TX: Labyrinth Publications.  
Beers, M. (2001). A media-based approach to developing ethnographic skills for second language 
teaching and learning. Zeitschrift fuer Interkulturellen Fremdsprachenunterricht, 6(2). Retrieved May 22, 
2003, from http://www.ualberta.ca/~german/ejournal/beers1.htm 
Belz, J. A. (2001). Institutional and individual dimensions of transatlantic group work in network-based 
language teaching. ReCALL 13(2), 213-231. 
Belz, J. A. (2002). Social dimensions of telecollaborative language study. Language Learning and 
Technology, 6(1), 60-81. Retrieved January 3, 2003, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/belz/ 
Belz, J. A. (2003). Linguistic perspectives on the development of intercultural competence in 
telecollaboration. Language Learning & Technology, 7(2), 68-117. Retrieved December 19, 2003, from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/belz/ 
Paige Ware "Missed Communication" in Online Communication... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 86 
Belz, J. A., & Kinginger, C. (2002). The cross-linguistic development of address form use in 
telecollaborative language learning: Two case studies. Canadian Modern Language Review/Revue 
canadienne des langues vivantes, 59(2), 189-214. 
Belz, J. A., & Kinginger, C. (2003). Discourse options and the development of pragmatic competence by 
classroom learners of German: The case of address forms. Language Learning, 53(4), 591-647. 
Belz, J. A., & Müller-Hartmann, A. (2003). Teachers as intercultural learners. Negotiating German-
American telecollaboration along the institutional faultline. The Modern Language Journal, 87(1), 71-89. 
Bernhardt, E. B. (1998). Sociohistorical perspectives on language teaching in the modern United States. 
In H. Byrnes (Ed.), Learning foreign and second languages: Perspectives in research and scholarship 
(pp. 39-57). New York: Modern Language Association. 
Besnier, N. (1990). Language and affect. Annual Review of Anthropology, 19, 419-451. 
Biber, D., & Finnegan, E. (1989). Styles of stance in English: Lexical and grammatical marking of 
evidentiality and affect. Text, 9(1), 93-124. 
Blake, R. (2000). Computer mediated communication: A window on Spanish L2 interlanguage. Language 
Learning & Technology, 4(1), 120-136. Retrieved April 2, 2002, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/blake 
Bogdan, R., & Biklen, S. K. (1998). Qualitative research in education: An introduction to theory and 
methods. Needham, MA: Allyn & Bacon. 
Brammerts, H. (1995). Tandem learning and the Internet: Using new technology to acquire intercultural 
competence. In A. A. Jensen, K. Jæger, & A. Lorentsen (Eds.), Intercultural competence: A new 
challenge for language teachers and trainers in Europe. Volume II: The adult learner (pp. 209-222). 
Aalborg, Denmark: Aalborg University Press. 
Brammerts, H. (1996). Language learning in tandem using the Internet. In M. Warschauer (Ed.), 
Telecollaboration in foreign language learning (pp. 121-130). Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.  
Breindl, E. (1997). DaF goes Internet: Neue Entwicklungen in Deutsch als Fremdsprache. Deustche 
Sprache, 25(4), 289-342. 
Byram, Michael. (1997). Teaching and assessing intercultural competence. Clevedon, England: 
Multilingual Matters. 
Byram, M., & Zarate, G. (1994). Definitions, objectives and assessment of sociocultural competence. 
Strasbourg, France: Council of Europe. 
Cameron, D. (2000). Good to talk? Living and working in a communication culture. London: Sage.  
Chafe, W. (2001). The analysis of discourse flow. In D. Schiffrin, D. Tannen, & H. E. Hamilton (Eds.), 
The Handbook of discourse analysis (pp. 673-687). Oxford, England: Blackwell Publishers.  
Chavez, M. (2002). We say "culture" and students ask "What?": University students' definitions of 
foreign language culture. Die Unterrichtspraxis, 35(2), 129-140. 
Crystal, D. (2001). Language and the Internet. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. 
Furstenberg, G., Levet, S., English, K. & Maillet, K. (2001). Giving a virtual voice to the silent language 
of culture: The Culture Project. Language Learning & Technology, 5(1), 55-102. Retrieved September 
13, 2002, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num1/furstenberg/ 
Glesne, C., & Peshkin, A. (1992). Becoming qualitative researchers. New York: Longman. 
Gumperz, J. (1982). Discourse strategies. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. 
Paige Ware "Missed Communication" in Online Communication... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 87 
Haas, C., & Neuwirth, C. (1994). Writing the technology that writes us: Research on literacy and the 
shape of technology. In C. Selfe & S. Hilligoss (Eds.), Literacy and computers: The complications of 
teaching and learning (pp. 319-335). New York: Modern Language Association. 
Hatch, E. (1992). Discourse and language education. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. 
Herring, S. C. (2001). Computer-mediated discourse. In D. Schiffrin, D. Tannen, & H. Hamilton (Eds.), 
The handbook of discourse analysis (pp. 612-634). Oxford, England: Blackwell Publishers.  
Jacoby, S., & Ochs, E. (1995). Co-construction: An introduction. Research on Language and Social 
Interaction, 28(3), 171-183.  
Kelm, O. (1996). The application of computer networking in foreign language education: Focusing on 
principles of second language acquisition. In M. Warschauer (Ed.), Telecollaboration in foreign language 
learning (pp. 19-28). Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.  
Kern, R. (1995). Restructuring classroom interaction with networked computers: Effects on quality and 
quantity of language production. Modern Language Journal, 79(4), 457-476.  
Kern, R. (1996). Computer-mediated communication: Using e-mail exchanges to explore personal 
histories in two cultures. In M. Warschauer (Ed.), Telecollaboration in foreign language learning (pp. 
105-120). Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. 
Kern, R. (1998). Technology, social interaction and FL literacy. In J. Muyskens (Ed.), New ways of 
learning and teaching: focus on technology and foreign language education (pp. 57-92). Boston, MA: 
Heinle & Heinle Publishers. 
Kern, R. (2000). Literacy and language teaching. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.  
Kern, R., & Warschauer, M. (Eds.) (2000). Network-based language teaching: Concepts and practice. 
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. 
Kinginger, C. (2000). Learning the pragmatics of solidarity in the networked foreign language classroom. 
In J. K. Hall & L. S. Verplaetse (Eds.), Second and foreign language learning through classroom 
interaction (pp. 23-46). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.  
Kinginger, C., & Farrell, K. (2004). Foreign language learning in study abroad: Case studies in alienation 
and desire. Clevedon, England: Multilingual Matters. 
Kinginger, C., Gourves-Hayward, A., & Simpson, V. (1999). A tele-collaborative course on French-
American intercultural communication. French Review, 72(5), 853-866. 
Kramsch, C. (1993). Context and culture in language teaching. Oxford, England: Oxford University . 
Kramsch, C. (1996). Toward a dialogic analysis of cross-cultural encounters. In L. Bredella & H. Christ 
(Eds.), Begegnungen mit dem Fremden (pp. 176-205). Giessen, Germany: Verlag der Ferber'schen 
Universitaetsbuchhandlung. 
Kramsch, C. (1999). Thirdness: The intercultural stance. In T. Vestergaard (Ed.), Language, culture and 
identity (pp. 41-58). Aalborg, Denmark: Aaalborg University Press. 
Kramsch, C., & Andersen, R. (1999). Teaching text and context through multimedia. Language Learning 
& Technology, 2(2), 31-42. Retrieved August 25, 2002, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol2num2/article1/ 
Kramsch, C., & Thorne, S. (2002). Foreign language learning as global communicative practice. D. Block 
& D. Cameron (Eds.), Globalization and language teaching (pp. 83-100). London: Routledge. 
Kubota, R., Austin, T., & Saito-Abbott, Y. (2003). Diversity and inclusion of sociopolitical issues in 
foreign language classrooms: An exploratory survey. Foreign Language Annals, 36(1), 12-24. 
Paige Ware "Missed Communication" in Online Communication... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 88 
Lantolf, J. P. (2000). Introducing sociocultural theory. In J. P. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and 
second language learning (pp. 1-26). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. 
Lee, L. (2004). Learners' perspectives on networked collaborative interaction with native speakers of 
Spanish in the U.S. Language Learning & Technology, 8(1), 83-100. Retrieved May 23, 2004, from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num1/lee/ 
Loos, E., Anderson, S., Day, D. H., Jr., Jordan, P. C., & Wingate, D. (Eds.). (1999). Glossary of linguistic 
terms. Dallas, TX: SIL International. Available at: http://www.sil.org/linguistics/ 
GlossaryOfLinguisticTerms/ 
Markee, N. (2000). Conversation analysis. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.  
Meagher, M. E., & Castaños, F. (1996). Perceptions of American culture: The impact of an electronically-
mediated cultural exchange program on Mexican high school students. In Herring, S. C. (Ed.), Computer-
mediated communication: Linguistic, social, and cross-cultural perspectives (pp. 187-202). Amsterdam: 
John Benjamins. 
Miles, M., & Huberman, M. (1994). An expanded sourcebook: Qualitative data analysis. Thousand Oaks, 
CA: SAGE Publications.  
Müller-Hartmann, A. (2000). The role of tasks in promoting intercultural learning in electronic learning 
networks. Language Learning & Technology, 4(2), 129-147. Retrieved March 30, 2005, from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num2/muller/ 
Ochs, E. (1990). Indexicality and socialization. In J. W. Stigler, R. Shweder, & G. Herdt (Eds.), Cultural 
psychology: Essays on comparative human development (pp. 287-308). Cambridge, England: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Ochs, E. (1993). Constructing social identity: A language socialization perspective. Research on 
Language and Social Interaction, 26(3), 287-306. 
Ochs, E., & Schieffelin, B. (1989). Language has a heart. Text, 9, 7-25. 
O'Dowd, R. (2003). Understanding the "other side": Intercultural learning in a Spanish-English e-mail 
exchange. Language Learning & Technology, 7(2), 118-144. Retrieved January 3, 2004, from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/odowd/ 
Pellettieri, J. (2000). Negotiation in cyberspace: The role of chatting in the development of grammatical 
competence in the virtual foreign language classroom. In M. Warschauer, & R. Kern, (Eds.). Network-
based language teaching: Concepts and practice, (pp. 59-86). Cambridge, England: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Plass, J., & Chun, D. (1996). A hypermedia system for CALL in a networked environment. In M. 
Warschauer (Ed.), Telecollaboration in foreign language learning (pp. 83-103). Honolulu: University of 
Hawaii Press.  
Polanyi, L. (1995). Language learning and living abroad: Stories from the field. In B.F. Freed (Ed.), 
Second language acquisition in a study abroad context (pp. 271-292). Philadelphia: John Benjamins. 
Richter, R. (1998). Interkulterelles lernen via Internet? Zeitschrift fuer Interkulturellen 
Fremdsprachenunterricht, 3(2). Retrieved June 22, 2003, from http://www.ualberta.ca/~german/ejournal/ 
richter1.htm 
Schiffrin, D. (1994). Approaches to discourse. Oxford, England: Blackwell. 
Scollon, R., & Scollon, S. W. (1995). Intercultural communication. Oxford, England: Blackwell. 
Paige Ware "Missed Communication" in Online Communication... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 89 
Searle, J. R. (1970). Speech acts: An essay in the philosophy of language. Cambridge, England: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Selfe, C., & Hilligoss, S. (Eds.). (1994). Literacy and computers: The complications of teaching and 
learning. New York: Modern Language Association. 
Sengupta, S. (2001). Exchanging ideas with peers in network-based classrooms: An aid or a pain? 
Language Learning & Technology, 5(1), 103-134. Retrieved on July 14, 2002, from http://llt.msu.edu/ 
vol5num1/sengupta/ 
Simpson, P. (1993). Language, ideology, and point of view. London: Routledge. 
Sotillo, S. M. (2000). Discourse functions and syntactic complexity in synchronous and asynchronous 
communication. Language Learning & Technology, 4(1), 82-119. Retrieved on March 7, 2002, from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/sotillo/ 
Strauss, A. (1987). Qualitative analysis for social scientists. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Tella, S., & Mononen-Aaltonen, M. (1998). Developing dialogic communication culture in media 
education: Integrating dialogism and technology. Helsinki: Media Education Publications. Retrieved 
March 22, 2004, from http://www.helsinki.fi/~tella/mep7.html 
Toyoda, E., & Harrison, R. (2002). Categorization of text chat communication between learners and 
native speakers of Japanese. Language Learning and Technology, 6(1), 82-99. Retrieved on November 
29, 2003, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/TOYODA/ 
van Lier, L. (2000). From input to affordance: Social-interactive learning from an ecological perspective. 
In J. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 245-60). Oxford, England: 
OUP. 
Voloshinov, V. N. (1973/1929). Marxism and the philosophy of language [Trans. by L. Matejka & I. R. 
Titunik]. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.  
Wallace, M. J. (1998). Action research for language teachers. Cambridge, England: Cambridge 
University Press.  
Ware, P. D. (2003). From involvement to engagement in online communication: Promoting intercultural 
competence in foreign language education. Unpublished dissertation, University of California, Berkeley. 
Ware, P. D., & Kramsch, C. (in press). Toward an intercultural stance: Teaching German and English 
through telecollaboration. Modern Language Journal.  
Warschauer, M. (1996a). Comparing face-to-face and electronic discussion in the second language 
classroom. CALICO Journal, 13(2), 7-26. 
Warschauer, M. (1996b). Motivational aspects of using computers for writing and communication. In M. 
Warschauer (Ed.), Telecollaboration in foreign language learning (pp. 29-48). Honolulu: University of 
Hawaii Press. 
Warschauer, M. (1998). Interaction, negotiation, and computer-mediated learning. In M. Clay (Ed.), 
Practical applications of educational technology in language learning. Lyon, France: National Institute 
of Applied Sciences. Retrieved March 30, 2003, from http://www.insa-lyon.fr/Departments/CDRL/ 
interaction.html 
Warschauer, M. (1999). Electronic literacies: Language, culture, and power in online education. Mahwah, 
NJ: Erlbaum.  
Wong, J. (2000). Delayed next turn repair initiation in native-nonnative speaker English conversation. 
Applied Linguistics, 21(1), 244-267. 
