Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num1/news/
January 2005, Volume 9, Number 1
pp. 23-24
Copyright © 2005, ISSN 1094-3501 23
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS
Sponsors
University of Hawai`i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC)
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR)
University of Hawai'i National Foreign Language Resource
Center (NFLRC)
The University of Hawai'i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials
development projects and conducts Summer Institutes for language professionals among its many
activities.
UPCOMING PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT OPPORTUNITIES
Designing Effective Foreign Language Placement Tests (June 20 - July 1, 2005)
In this 2-week Summer Institute workshop, participants will gain a solid understanding of the
fundamentals of creating sound language tests, with a particular emphasis on designing tests to facilitate
placement decisions. In the morning, participants will be introduced to various testing concepts in a clear
and non-threatening manner. No previous statistical or measurement knowledge is assumed. Discussions
of "real world" issues and problems from the participants' home institutions are welcome. In the
afternoon, participants will get hands-on practice creating test items and analyzing test results. The use of
commonly available computer programs (e.g., Excel) to facilitate test analysis will be highlighted.
Participants are encouraged to bring data sets from their program's placement tests to practice setting up,
analyzing, and interpreting their data. This workshop is aimed at foreign language teaching professionals
with placement testing responsibilities who feel they have had limited training and experience in language
testing concepts.
Japanese for Non-Native Teachers (August 8 - 19, 2005)
This Summer Institute workshop serves as an online professional development opportunity for non-
native-speaking teachers of Japanese language at the K-16 level. It is a 2-week intensive online language
course in Japanese reading and writing especially for teachers who have learned Japanese as a foreign
language. The intensive course, delivered entirely over the World Wide Web employing authentic
language texts, focuses on the development and maintenance of communicative language skills at the
Advanced Low ACTFL proficiency level, with a strong emphasis on written communication meeting
high standards of literacy. The workshop, team taught by two native speaking instructors, is offered free
of charge to eligible participants.
NFLRC PUBLICATIONS
NFLRC announces two Filipino (Tagalog) publications in 2004, both by Teresita V. Ramos. The first,
Pakinggan At Unawain: Comprehending Intermediate Filipino (two-DVD set) focuses on watching while
listening to promote understanding and to make learning Filipino a lively and engaging experience.
The second publication by Dr. Ramos is a re-issue of a text originally developed in 1988. Tagalog for
Health Care Providers is aimed at nurses, social workers, and public health professionals.
Tim Murphey returned to Hawai'i in September to videotape the fifth in his series of teaching technique
videos, Juggling with Language Learning Theories. Tim demonstrates how effective steps for learning to
juggle are often parallel to effective steps for learning foreign languages, or, indeed, learning anything.
News From Our Sponsors
Language Learning & Technology 24
Michigan State University Center for Language Education
and Research (CLEAR)
CLEAR's mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States. To
meet its goals, projects focus on materials development, professional development training, and foreign
language research.
CONFERENCES
CLEAR exhibits at local and national conferences year-round. We hope to see you at ACTFL, CALICO,
MFLA, Central States, and other conferences. In May 2005, CLEAR will be hosting the CALICO
conference here on the Michigan State University campus. Watch our Web site for details!
MATERIALS DEVELOPMENT
Coming Soon!
• Introductory Business German (CD-ROM) • French Pronunciation and Phonetics (CD-ROM)
Products
• NEW!  SMILE (tool for creating interactive online exercises)
• NEW!  Hindi Small Group Instruction Guide (guide)
• The Internet Sourcebook for Business Japanese (Web links)
• The Internet Sourcebook for Business French (Web links)
• The Internet Sourcebook for Business German (Web links)
• The Internet Sourcebook for Business Spanish (Web links)
• Business Language Packets for High School Classrooms (French, German, & Spanish; PDF files)
• Modules for Assessing Socio-Cultural Competence: German (CD-ROM)
• Modules for Assessing Socio-Cultural Competence: Russian (CD-ROM)
• Business Chinese (CD-ROM)
• Pronunciación y Fonética (CD-ROM)
• African Language Small Group Instruction Guide (guide and video)
• Thai Small Group Instruction Guide (guide)
• Foreign Languages: Doors to Opportunity (video and discussion guide)
• Task-based Communicative Grammar Activities for Japanese and Thai (workbook)
• Test Development (workbook and video)
Newsletter
CLEAR News is a biyearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. Contact
the CLEAR office to join the mailing list, or check it out on the Web at http://clear.msu.edu/newsletter/.
We welcome your submissions!
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
Summer Workshops
Each summer, CLEAR offers professional development workshops for foreign language teachers on the
campus of MSU. For more information, go to http://clear.msu.edu/training/. Watch the Web site for
updates about next summer's offerings!
Onsite Workshops
CLEAR offers foreign language teachers at K-13+ institutions around the country the opportunity to host
a CLEAR workshop. These 1-3 day workshops are led by CLEAR's professional development staff
members. For more information, visit http://clear.msu.edu/training/onsite/about.html.
