Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num2/news/
May 2005, Volume 9, Number 2
pp. 13-15
Copyright © 2005, ISBN 1094-3501 13
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS
Sponsors
University of Hawai`i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC)
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR)
Co-Sponsor
Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL)
University of Hawai'i National Foreign Language Resource
Center (NFLRC)
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials
development projects and conducts Summer Institutes for language professionals among its many
activities.
READING IN A FOREIGN LANGUAGE – a refereed international online journal of issues in
foreign language reading and literacy
Reading in a Foreign Language, co-sponsored by the NFLRC and the Department of Second Language
Studies at the University of Hawai‘i at Manoa, has established itself as an excellent source for the latest
developments in the field, both theoretical and pedagogic, including improving standards for foreign
language reading.
This fully-refereed journal is published twice a year, in April and October. The editors seek manuscripts
concerning both the practice and theory of learning to read and the teaching of reading in any foreign or
second language. Reviews of scholarly books and teaching materials, conference reports, and discussions
are also solicited. The language of the journal is English, but lexical citations of languages other than
English are acceptable. From time to time, special issues are published on themes of relevance to RFL
readers. For more information on submission guidelines, visit the RFL Web site.
Try RFL out today and sign up as a subscriber!  Like LLT, Reading in a Foreign Language is a free
online journal, and your support as a subscriber assists in continuing to obtain institutional support for the
journal, keeping it free of charge.
OTHER NFLRC PUBLICATIONS
NFLRC announces two Filipino (Tagalog) publications in 2004, both by Teresita V. Ramos. The first,
Pakinggan At Unawain: Comprehending Intermediate Filipino (two-DVD set), focuses on watching
while listening to promote understanding and to make learning Filipino a lively and engaging experience.
The second publication is a re-issue of a text originally developed in 1988. Tagalog for Health Care
Providers is aimed at nurses, social workers, and public health professionals.
Tim Murphey returned to Hawai‘i in September to videotape the fifth in his series of teaching technique
videos, Juggling with Language Learning Theories. Tim demonstrates how effective steps for learning to
juggle are often parallel to effective steps for learning foreign languages, or, indeed, learning anything.
News From Our Sponsors
Language Learning & Technology 14
Michigan State University Center for Language Education
and Research (CLEAR)
CLEAR's mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States.
Projects focus on materials development, professional development training, & foreign language research.
CONFERENCES
CLEAR exhibits at local and national conferences year-round. We hope to see you at ACTFL, CALICO,
MFLA, Central States, and other conferences. In May 2005, CLEAR will be hosting the CALICO
conference here on the Michigan State University campus. It’s not too late to register! Go to
http://www.calico.org/conference/index.html to register, or you can register onsite May 17-21.
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
Summer Workshops
Each summer, CLEAR offers professional development workshops for foreign language teachers on the
campus of MSU. For more information on our seven summer 2005 workshops, go to http://clear.msu.edu/
training/05workshops/index.html. Hurry! The application deadline is June 1, 2005.
Onsite Workshops
CLEAR offers foreign language teachers at K-13+ institutions around the country the opportunity to host
a CLEAR workshop. These 1-3 day workshops are led by CLEAR's professional development staff
members. For more information, visit http://clear.msu.edu/training/onsite/about.html.
MATERIALS DEVELOPMENT
Coming Soon! • Introductory Business German (CD-ROM)
• French Pronunciation and Phonetics (CD-ROM)
Products
• NEW!  SMILE (tool for creating interactive online exercises)
• NEW!  Hindi Small Group Instruction Guide (guide)
• The Internet Sourcebook for Business Japanese (Web links)
• The Internet Sourcebook for Business French (Web links)
• The Internet Sourcebook for Business German (Web links)
• The Internet Sourcebook for Business Spanish (Web links)
• Business Language Packets for High School Classrooms (French, German, & Spanish; PDF files)
• Modules for Assessing Socio-Cultural Competence: German (CD-ROM)
• Modules for Assessing Socio-Cultural Competence: Russian (CD-ROM)
• Business Chinese (CD-ROM)
• Pronunciación y Fonética (CD-ROM)
• African Language Small Group Instruction Guide (guide and video)
• Thai Small Group Instruction Guide (guide)
• Foreign Languages: Doors to Opportunity (video and discussion guide)
• Task-based Communicative Grammar Activities for Japanese and Thai (workbook)
• Test Development (workbook and video)
Newsletter
CLEAR News is a biyearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. Contact
the CLEAR office to join the mailing list, or check it out on the Web at http://clear.msu.edu/newsletter/.
We welcome your submissions!
News From Our Sponsors
Language Learning & Technology 15
The Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL)
The Center for Applied Linguistics is a private, nonprofit organization that promotes and improves the
teaching and learning of languages, identifies and solves problems related to language and culture, and
serves as a resource for information about language and culture. CAL carries out a wide range of
activities in the fields of English as a second language, foreign languages, cultural education, and
linguistics. These activities include research, teacher education, information dissemination, instructional
design, conference planning, technical assistance, program evaluation, and policy analysis. Publications
include books on language education, online databases of language programs and assessments, curricula,
research reports, teacher training materials, and print and online newsletters.
Major CAL projects include the following:
• The Center for Adult English Language Acquisition
• The Cultural Orientation Resource Center
• Pre-K-12 School Services
CAL collaborates with other language education organizations on the following projects:
• Improving Foreign Languages in the Schools Project of the Northeast and Island Regional
Laboratory at Brown University
• The National Capital Language Resource Center
• National K-12 Foreign Language Resource Center
• National Network for Early Language Learning
News from CAL
The Center for Adult English Language Acquisition (CAELA) was established in October 2004 with
funding from the Office of Vocational and Adult Education (OVAE), U.S. Department of Education. The
primary mission of CAELA is to assist states that have emerging ESL populations. CAELA staff will help
states build their capacity to promote the English language learning and academic acievement of adults
learning English. Resources available on its Web site include the Practitioner Toolkit: Working with
Adult English Language Learners developed with the National Center for Family Literacy. It provides
needed support and resources to adult education and family literacy instructors who are new to serving
adults and families learning English. Also available are a new series of briefs, beginning with one on
reading, and a newsletter, CAELA Currents, which includes information on how to subscribe.
The Cultural Orientation Resource (COR) Center continues to provide materials that inform refugee
service providers about refugee cultures and help newcomers understand fundamental aspects of life in
the U.S. Culture Profiles provide short introductions to the cultural background of refugee populations.
The latest Culture Profiles include Liberians, The Hmong, and Muslim Refugees. Also, a new edition of
Welcome to the United States: A Guidebook for Refugees is now available as well as the Welcome to the
United States: Refugee Guide to Resettlement Orientation Video, which reinforces key points from the
guidebook.
CAL is pleased to support 2005: The Year of Languages in the United States. We will provide updates on
our Web site with helpful information and news about activities throughout the year. Please visit
www.cal.org/yol for more information.
New Publications From CAL
• Creating Access: Language and Academic Programs for Secondary School Newcomers
• Language by Video: An Overview of Foreign Language Instructional Videos for Children
• What’s Different About Teaching Reading to Students Learning English?
