Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/morris/ 
January 2005, Volume 9, Number 1 
pp. 29-45 
 
Copyright © 2005, ISSN 1094-3501 29 
CHILD-TO-CHILD INTERACTION AND CORRECTIVE FEEDBACK 
IN A COMPUTER MEDIATED L2 CLASS 
Frank Morris 
University of Miami 
ABSTRACT 
The current study examined the provision of corrective feedback and learner repair following 
feedback in the interactional context of child-to-child conversations, particularly computer 
mediated, in an elementary Spanish immersion class. The relationship among error types, 
feedback types, and immediate learner repair were also examined. A total of 46, fifth-grade 
children participated in the study. Using Blackboard, the instructor randomly paired students and 
created a "virtual group" for each pair. Each pair was asked to interact and complete a jigsaw task 
in the "virtual classroom." Blackboard recorded the pairs' interactions, which were later printed 
and coded for types of error (syntactic/lexical), types of negative feedback 
(explicit/recasts/negotiation) and immediate learner repairs. Findings indicate that learners did not 
provide explicit negative feedback. Learners provided implicit negative feedback (recasts and 
negotiation) while completing the jigsaw task in the virtual classroom. The majority of lexical 
errors and syntactic errors were corrected using negotiation. Over half of feedback moves led to 
immediate repair. Negotiation moves proved more effective at leading to immediate repair of 
errors than did recasts.  
 
INTRODUCTION 
While second language acquisition (SLA) researchers agree that input plays an important role in second 
language acquisition (e.g., Gass, 1997), many debate the form that input needs to take (whether positive 
or negative) in order for second language acquisition to occur. Some researchers have maintained that 
positive evidence alone is sufficient for adult SLA (e.g., Krashen, 1977, 1994). Others consider positive 
evidence as insufficient for second language (L2) learning to occur, and propose a role for both positive 
and negative evidence (e.g., Hatch, 1978; Long, 1983, 1996; White, 1987). Positive evidence tells the 
learner that linguistic features in the input are possible in the target language (TL). As an example, 
consider that in English, pronouns and nouns can be deleted in sentences with conjoined verbs as in the 
following example:  
1) The bird sang and flew back to its nest. 
Upon first hearing a sentence such as the above, it is possible for a learner of English to infer that subject 
use in English is optional in sentences with conjoined verbs. In contrast to positive evidence, negative 
evidence provides information to learners about what is not possible in the TL (e.g., Lightbown & White, 
1987; Long, 1996; White, 1990). As an example, consider the following: 
2) Speaker 1: Yesterday I did spoke to my parents. 
Speaker 2: Did speak?  
In the example above, Speaker 1 receives feedback about the ungrammaticality of what was said. Of 
course, it is possible that Speaker 1 may not understand that it was intended as a correction and may think 
that Speaker 2 simply did not hear what was said and asked for clarification. Negative evidence can be 
provided preemptively or reactively (see Long & Robinson, 1998). Preemptive negative evidence is 
presented to learners before they attempt to produce language structures (e.g., by providing and 
explaining grammar rules), while reactive negative evidence is provided as a response to an ill-formed
Frank Morris Child-to-Child Interaction and Corrective Feedback… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 30 
utterance. Reactive negative evidence "highlights differences between the target language and a learner's 
output and as such is described as negative feedback (NF)" (Oliver, 2000, p. 120). In his updated version 
of the Interaction Hypothesis, Long (1996) argues that negotiation for meaning elicits NF, and that NF 
contains various types of reformulation and repetition in addition to input modifications that serve to 
make L2 target forms salient to learners. Thus, NF facilitates L2 development. As a reaction to a learner's 
erroneous utterance, NF can be explicit. An explicit correction supplies a correct TL form after the ill 
formed utterance and clearly indicates that what the learner has said is incorrect, as in "No that is not how 
you say X. You say it like Y."  
NF can also include implicit indications that an utterance is not well formed. Recasts, for example, 
reformulate a learner's ill-formed utterance and can provide relevant information that is obligatory but is 
either missing or wrongly supplied in the learners' utterance (e.g., "My mother works all day" as a recast 
of the incorrect "My mother work all day"). Researchers have argued that recasts as a discourse structure 
can provide implicit negative feedback, positive evidence (in that TL forms are provided), and enhanced 
salience through the juxtaposition of the original ill-formed utterance and the TL recast form (Leeman, 
2000; Saxton, 1997; Saxton, Kulcsar, Marshall, & Rupra, 1998).  
In contrast to explicit correction and recasts, negotiation of form (see Lyster, 1998a; Lyster & Ranta, 
1997) does not provide learners with the correct TL form. Instead, it indicates to learners that they have 
produced an error and that the error requires repair. Negotiation can take several forms, for example, 
clarification requests are utterances made by the listener to clarify what the speaker said (e.g., “Pardon?”, 
“What do you mean?”); elicitations are used to obtain correct forms from learners by asking questions 
(e.g., “How do we say that correctly?”); metalinguistic clues are comments, information or questions 
regarding the well-formedness of a learner's utterance but without providing the correct form (e.g., “Is 
that masculine or feminine?”); and repetition restates the learner's error(s).  
Negative (corrective) feedback has also been identified as a focus-on-form procedure (see Long & 
Robinson, 1998). Long (1991) defines focus-on-form as "…overtly draw[ing] students' attention to 
linguistic elements as they arise incidentally in lessons whose overriding focus is on meaning or 
communication" (p. 46). The support for focus-on-form is based largely on three different claims about 
SLA. First, L2 learners acquire new linguistic structures while attending to those forms in contexts where 
the primary goal is the message and not the code (see Hatch, 1978). Second, L2 learners may experience 
difficulty in attending to and producing linguistic forms in communication because they possess a limited 
information-processing capacity (see VanPatten, 1990), and, as a result, L2 learners benefit from the 
opportunities that take place during communication to give specific attention to form (e.g., Long, Inagaki, 
& Ortega, 1998; Mackey & Philp, 1998). It seems then that focus-on-form can draw learners' attention to 
linguistic forms within the context of performing communicative activities, and such focus can occur in a 
variety of classroom activities, including when a learner provides corrective feedback in response to her 
conversational partner's L2 errors.  
NF carries important pedagogical and theoretical implications for classroom SLA If research shows that 
classroom interactions make NF available to learners, in a form that is usable and used by learners, and 
thus facilitates L2 development, we can gain a better understanding of the relevance of classroom 
interactions between teacher-learners and between learners. Negative feedback could then be encouraged 
in language classrooms in teacher-student interactions and pair work. Despite the possible benefits of 
negative feedback, its role in SLA has been questioned. In order to play a role in language acquisition, it 
must meet several criteria: it has to exist, be useful, used by learners and necessary for acquisition to 
occur (Grimshaw & Pinker, 1989; Pinker, 1989). Beck and Eubank (1991) have echoed similar arguments 
for L2 acquisition and pose that the "universality" of NF must be documented. Thus, researchers argue 
that the impact of interaction and feedback in SLA must be examined in different social and instructional 
contexts. Hall (2000), for example, calls for sufficient research "to help us compare the scope and 
circumstances of contextual conditions … the myriad issues connected to classroom interaction and 
Frank Morris Child-to-Child Interaction and Corrective Feedback… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 31 
additional language learning in all learning contexts require more examination" (pp. 296-297). Echoing 
Hall's argument, Breen (2001) proposes that if we perceive interaction and interactional features such as 
feedback "as the catalyst for language development," we must pay more attention to classroom contexts 
(p.136).1 
Early studies on negative feedback demonstrated that feedback in the form of explicit correction is 
seldom available (e.g., Chaudron 1986, 1987; Chun, Day, Chenoweth, & Luppescu, 1982). It is possible 
that explicit correction is avoided because it may be perceived as abrupt and impolite. Recent SLA 
research has developed a noticeable interest in the role that implicit negative feedback, such as recasts and 
negotiation, plays in second language development (Ayoun, 2001; Doughty & Varela, 1998; Han, 2002; 
Leeman, 2003; Long, Inagaki, & Ortega, 1998; Mackey & Philp, 1998; Morris, 2002a; Muranoi, 2000; 
Nabei & Swain, 2002). Findings suggest that implicit negative feedback facilitates learners' L2 
development. Because of the potential benefits of implicit negative feedback, research has attempted to 
examine whether it is available to learners in different interactional contexts (e.g., Braidi, 2002; 
Buckwalter, 2001; Chaudron, 1977, 1986, 1987; Doughty, 1994; Ellis, Basturkmen, & Loewen, 2001; 
Fanselow, 1977; Hamayan & Tucker, 1980; Lin & Hedgcock, 1996; Lyster, 1998a, 1998b; Lyster & 
Ranta, 1997; Mackey, Oliver, & Leeman, 2003; Moroishi, 2001; Morris, 2002b; Nystrom, 1983; Ohta, 
2001; Oliver, 1995, 1998, 2000, 2002; Oscoz & Liskin-Gasparro, 2001; Panova & Lyster, 2002). These 
studies demonstrate that implicit negative feedback is frequently available and used by L2 learners. 
However, the majority of these studies have been carried out in adult contexts. Only a limited number 
have been carried out in the context of child-to-child conversations (e.g., Mackey et al., 2003; Oliver, 
1995, 2000, 2002). Research on child-to-child interactions, either non-native-speaker/non-native-speaker 
interaction or native-speaker/non-native-speaker interaction, reveals that while children provide implicit 
negative feedback in the form of recasts and negotiations, negotiations are the most common form of 
feedback. With regard to repair, children in child-to-child conversations frequently incorporate the 
feedback in their subsequent L2 production, while the rate of repair is higher when the interlocutor is a 
non-native speaker. Although these findings are valuable, research has yet to examine whether results 
would be similar in the context of child-to-child conversations in Spanish immersion classrooms.  
The context of second language learning in Spanish immersion classes in the United States is 
communicative, experiential, and thoroughly content-based (i.e., limited grammar instruction), where 
feedback is often avoided. In fact, Spanish immersion teachers have indicated that error correction is best 
avoided because it only leads to temporary changes in learners' language achievement and may cause 
learners to develop negative attitudes towards the study of the language (see Truscott, 1999). Feedback, 
however, provides learners with the language evidence on crucial and complex L2 morphosyntactic 
structures that they have yet to master in the L2 (Long, 1996). Thus, SLA research must examine whether 
children in Spanish immersion classes provide feedback in response to their peers' errors. This paper 
assumes that feedback can also be available to language learners through peer and group interactions, and 
that peer feedback fosters learners' increased awareness of language forms and, consequently, plays a role 
in their L2 development. 
Computer Mediated Communication (CMC) 
The use of computers in second and foreign language classrooms has increased during the last ten years. 
In particular, language teachers have incorporated "chat" programs that allow learners to interact in 
virtual rooms without engaging in face-to-face contact. Although CMC can be used for L2 teaching, its 
role cannot be seen as "transparent" (see Haas & Neuwirth, 1994). In other words, it cannot be assumed 
that CMC will resemble and generate the same learning context as face-to-face interactions. Therefore, 
research must seek to understand and assess the norms of CMC. It is important to examine how this 
technology affects learner-learner interaction and the extent to which it may differ or be similar to face-to-
face interaction. Thus far, research indicates that CMC elicits more learner participation (Beauvois, 1992; 
Kelm, 1992; Kern, 1995; Kim, 1998; Warschauer, 1996) and creates a less stressful environment for 
Frank Morris Child-to-Child Interaction and Corrective Feedback… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 32 
language learning (Chun, 1998). However, research to date with regard to CMC has been limited, as only 
a handful of studies have examined the effect of CMC on learner-learner interaction (e.g., Blake, 2000; 
Darhower, 2002; Fernández-García & Martínez-Arbelaiz, 2002; Pellettieri, 1999; Smith, 2001, 2003). 
These studies reveal that when learners engage in CMC, most of the focus during negotiation is on lexical 
items and little attention is paid to linguistic form. While these findings are valuable, they may apply only 
to adult learners. It may be that the findings could vary according to the age of learners, whether adult or 
child. In addition, these studies have focused mostly on the overall incidence of negotiation, which may 
not provide an accurate picture of the learning opportunities that arise as a result of corrective feedback 
provided during CMC. Therefore, it is necessary that research on CMC examine whether implicit 
negative feedback is provided to learners in response to their non-target-like utterances, because such 
feedback is perceived to play a facilitative role in promoting L2 development. 
Current Study 
The current study joins the established efforts that have attempted to assess the existence and use of 
implicit negative feedback in child-to-child interactions, and the recent studies that have explored the 
benefits of negotiation in CMC. The goal is to examine the provision of corrective feedback and learner 
repair following feedback in the context of child-to-child conversations in an elementary Spanish 
immersion classroom during CMC. The relationship among error types, feedback types, and immediate 
learner repair will  also be examined examined. The questions motivating the current study are: Do 
Spanish immersion school children working in CMC provide implicit negative feedback in response to 
their peers' non target-like utterances? What types of learner errors lead to what types of implicit negative 
feedback? When Spanish immersion school children working in CMC receive implicit negative feedback 
from their peers, do they immediately repair the original ill-formed utterance? What types of implicit 
negative feedback lead to the immediate repair of what types of learner errors? 
METHOD 
School and Classroom Context 
The current study was conducted in a private Spanish immersion school (K-5) located in the southeast 
region of the United States. The school was selected based on feasibility and the willingness of the staff to 
allow this study to be carried out. Children come from home backgrounds that represent a wide range of 
socioeconomic levels. The vast majority of the children attending the school come from monolingual 
English-speaking families.2 The school is located in a Spanish speaking community in a metropolitan area 
where Spanish is considered a second language. Therefore, students who attend this school generally have 
opportunities to speak Spanish outside the school. The curriculum emphasizes thematic and cultural 
content over linguistic form. The pedagogical approach at the school is student-centered and grounded in 
the principles of whole language and communication (i.e., that there is an integral connection between 
language and culture and that culture learning is a major contributor to second language learning). The 
school curriculum and instruction, including reading and language arts, is in Spanish in kindergarten and 
first grade. English is introduced for the first time in second grade. Computer lab class is introduced in the 
fifth grade and is conducted in Spanish. Fifth grade is the end of elementary education at this school. All 
teachers in this school are bilingual (English-Spanish), either native speakers of English or Spanish.  
The fifth grade level was selected for the current study because it was the only grade level to incorporate 
the use of computers in the curriculum. The particular class chosen for the study was computer lab class 
because it was the only course that utilized computers and technology enhanced instruction during class-
time. Three sections of a fifth grade computer lab class participated in the study. At the time the study 
was conducted, students had been enrolled in the course for almost 6 months. The course met Monday 
through Friday for a period of 1 hour and 10 minutes each day and provided learners with opportunities to 
learn basic computer skills such as uploading and downloading documents, browsing the Internet, 
Frank Morris Child-to-Child Interaction and Corrective Feedback… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 33 
creating Web sites, creating and engaging in online chat rooms, reading online magazines and 
newspapers, and playing computer games.  
Participants 
A total of 46 fifth grade students (29 girls and 17 boys, mean age 10.6) enrolled in three separate 
computer lab classes. Almost all students were native, monolingual English-speaking students of non-
Hispanic origin. One student was Korean, one Japanese, one was German, and two were French. There 
were no Spanish-heritage language speakers3 in the classrooms examined. Although the school has no 
language placement test or language proficiency exam to determine learners' levels of language 
attainment, informal conversations with school teachers and the researcher's classroom observations 
suggest that the participants in this study had achieved an intermediate to high-intermediate level of 
language proficiency (i.e., extensive vocabulary allowing them to produce discourse related to daily 
activities, family, school, and child-associated activities such as games, and grammar limited to present 
and past tense forms).  
One teacher participated in the study, and she was in charge of the three computer lab classes. The teacher 
had been teaching this grade level for two years and the class for one year. She is a native speaker of 
Spanish, born and raised in a Spanish-speaking country. Her native English-speaking peers at the school 
considered her to be highly proficient in English. The teacher always spoke Spanish to the students in and 
out of the classroom. At the time the study was conducted she was in the process of getting her State 
Teaching Certificate and was completing a Masters in Education at a nearby university.  
Data Collection Procedures 
The activities employed in the current study were used by the classroom teacher as typical activities 
planned for students to engage in interactional sequences with their peers while engaged in CMC. The 
researcher was not the instructor for the course. The teacher provided all directions. Following classroom 
protocol, all directions were provided in Spanish. Immediately after class began, learners were randomly 
placed at different computer terminals. Using Blackboard (Version 5), the instructor randomly paired 
students and created a "virtual group" or chat room for each pair (see description of software). Students 
did not know where their partners were sitting or who their partners were.4 Each pair was asked to interact 
and complete a jigsaw activity in the "virtual classroom." The teacher chose a jigsaw because it is 
believed that communicative activities that require information to be supplied by both learners to achieve 
a common goal are most likely to generate opportunities for learners to receive and produce 
comprehensible input, feedback and language modification (Pica, Kanagy, & Falodun, 1993). All pairs 
worked on the same jigsaw, a set of pictures (N=15) numbered 1 through 15 that represented La rutina de 
Esteban (Esteban's routine). Each dyad member got half the pictures (one student received pictures 
numbered 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, and 15, and the other received 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, and 14). The pictures were 
not available online but provided to students in hardcopy. Participants were asked to work together and, 
according to the pictures they had available, to produce in 25 minutes one collaborative essay that 
represented "Esteban's routine."5 Blackboard recorded the pairs' interaction (synchronous and text-based 
CMC) while completing the jigsaw activity, and each pair's interactional sequence was later printed and 
coded for types of error, types of feedback and immediate repairs (see Data Analyses section). The time 
restriction established for the jigsaw (25 minutes) was consistent with the teacher's lesson plan and 
curriculum design, which employs activities that need to be completed within 25 minutes. No modeling or 
training session was held because students in these classes had already completed similar jigsaws and 
were comfortable working via CMC.  
The Computer Program 
Blackboard is a software platform that delivers a course management system and creates a customized 
institution-wide portal and online communities. Each course offered by an institution is hosted on a 
Frank Morris Child-to-Child Interaction and Corrective Feedback… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 34 
Website. The instructor assigned to a course Web site oversees the course through the Instructor Control 
Panel. While the instructor has control over the course Web site, the administrator sets overrides that 
restrict or require content areas and tools. A course Web site consists of a navigation path, a button bar, 
and a content frame. The navigation path allows users to return to any page accessed between the main 
course page and the current page (see Appendix A for a frame sample). The button bar links users to the 
available content areas and tools. The content frame displays Web pages accessed through the buttons or 
navigation path. All course administration is done through the Instructor Control Panel. This area is only 
available to users who have been designated as "professor," "instructor," or "teaching assistant" (see 
Appendix B for frame sample). One of the Instructor's features is the "virtual classroom." The virtual 
classroom, or the chat room, allows the instructor and students to participate in real-time lessons and 
discussions and also view archives of previous classroom sessions. It can be used to hold online 
classroom discussions, TA sessions, and office hour type question/answer forums. All communication 
and interaction is carried out through (synchronous) typed text. The system has the capacity to welcome 
guest speakers and subject matter experts who can address the class (see Appendix C for a sample 
template).  
Data Analysis 
To answer the questions posed in this study, the interactions were coded for learner errors, learner 
corrective feedback used in response to errors, and learners' repairs. In addition, the errors were examined 
in relation to three main feedback types and in relation to learner repair. The researcher and one additional 
coder independently coded the data.  
The current study examined the errors that learners produced while completing the jigsaw and during 
CMC. The errors coded were (a) syntactic errors (e.g., lack of or use of articles, determiners, prepositions, 
pronouns, errors with subject/verb agreement, gender, verb morphology, pluralization, and word order); 
(b) lexical errors (e.g., inaccurate, imprecise or inappropriate choices of lexical items and non-target 
derivations of nouns, verbs, adverbs and adjectives); (c) unsolicited uses of L1 (e.g., instances when 
learners used English when Spanish would have been more appropriate and expected). Interrater 
reliability for error type was high (r = .96).  
Three categories were used to assess corrective feedback: explicit correction, recasts, and negotiation of 
form. Interrater reliability for corrective feedback type was high (I = .91). Explicit correction directly and 
clearly indicates that what the learner has said is incorrect (translation of the example and comments are 
on the right):  
 S1: Comer mucho todos los días. I to eat (wrong form) every day. 
 S2: Don't say comer. Say como. Don't say to eat (wrong form). Say I eat (correct 
form). 
Recasts are immediate implicit reformulation of an ill-formed utterance and reformulate all or part of the 
utterance as a recasts of the incorrect:  
 S1: Él lavar...  He washes... (wrong form) 
 S2: Él lava... He washes... (correct form) 
Negotiation of form provides learners with signals that facilitate peer and self-repair rather than mere 
rephrasing of their utterances. Negotiations differ from explicit correction and recasts in that negotiations 
do not provide learners with a correct form. Signals to learners can be given in the form of clarification 
requests (include statements such as What did you say?), metalinguistic clues (comments, questions, or 
information regarding the well formedness of the learner's utterance without providing the correct form 
such as Is it masculine?), elicitation (obtains correct forms from learners by asking questions such as How 
do we say that in Spanish?, or by asking students to reformulate their utterance), and repetition (the 
Frank Morris Child-to-Child Interaction and Corrective Feedback… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 35 
learner's error is repeated). Once learners received feedback from their peers, their immediate responses 
to feedback were coded as repair or not repair. Interrater reliability for response to feedback was high (r = 
.98). Repairs do not necessarily constitute that a learner has developed the form corrected. However, they 
allow learners to produce modified output and possibly notice the TL form, which creates conditions that 
may facilitate development (Swain, 1985, 1995). The following example represents an instance of repair:  
 S1: Ella correr en el parque. She to run (wrong form) in the park. 
 S2: Ella corre en el parque. She runs (right form) in the park. 
 S1: Oh…yeah corre. Oh…yeah runs (right form). 
RESULTS 
The analysis yielded a total of 135 errors, each initiated by a student turn, containing at least one error 
coded as syntactic, lexical, or L1. Table 1 presents the distribution of error types in the database. The 
majority of errors (64%) were syntactic, whereas 33% were lexical, and 3% were L1 uses. A chi-square 
test shows that the differences were statistically significant, X2 (2, N = 135) = 76.6, p = .0001.  
Table 1. Number and Percentage of Errors by Error Typs 
Syntactic 87 64% 
Lexical 44 33% 
L1 4 3% 
Total 135 100% 
Of the 135 errors, 76 were followed by corrective feedback. Table 2 reveals the distribution of corrective 
feedback across the different error types. The majority of feedback moves followed lexical errors: 58% of 
all feedback followed lexical errors, 40% followed syntactic errors and 2% followed uses of L1. These 
differences were statistically significant, X2 (2, N = 76) = 30.8, p = .0001.  
Table 2. Number and Percentage of Feedback Moves per Error Type 
Lexical 163 58% 
Syntactic 114 40% 
L1 5 2% 
Total 282 100% 
Fifty-six percent of learners' errors received corrective feedback from their peers. Table 3 reveals the rate 
at which each error type received corrective feedback: 100% for L1 uses, 97% for lexical errors, and 33% 
for syntactic errors. Therefore, the rate at which L1 uses and lexical errors were corrected was higher than 
the rate at which syntactic errors were repaired.  
Table 3. Rate of Feedback per Error Type 
L1 4/5 100% 
Lexical 43/44 97% 
Syntactic 29/87 33% 
Total 76/135 56% 
The feedback moves were distributed across three feedback types as follows: recasts, negotiation, and 
explicit correction. Of the 76 feedback moves, 72 (95%) were negotiations, 4 (5%) were recasts, and none 
were explicit corrections. Thus, negotiations were more likely to follow learner errors. A comparison of 
the distribution of these feedback types across different error types appears in Table 4. Negotiations were 
more likely than recasts to follow lexical errors (98%), syntactic errors (93%), and L1 uses (75%).6 
Frank Morris Child-to-Child Interaction and Corrective Feedback… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 36 
Table 4. Distribution of Errors Receiving Feedback Across Feedback Types and Error Types 
  Lexical Syntactic L1 Total 
Recasts 1 (2%) 2 (7%) 1 (25%) 4 (5%) 
Negotiation 42 (98%) 27 (93%) 3 (75%) 72 (95%) 
Total 43 29 4 76 
Of the 76 feedback moves, 52 led to learner repair within the error treatment sequence. Of the 52 errors 
repaired, 37 (71%) were lexical, 13 (25%) were syntactic, and 2 (4%) were L1 uses. These differences 
were statistically significant, X2 (N = 52) = 36.9, p = .0001. Thus, the majority of the errors repaired were 
lexical. Table 5 provides the rate at which each error type was repaired. The overall rate of repair was 
high (68%). The highest rate of repair was for lexical errors: Of the 43 lexical errors with feedback, 86% 
were repaired. The next highest rate of repair was for L1 uses (50%): Of the four errors with feedback, 
two were repaired. Only 45% of the syntactic errors with feedback were repaired. All repairs resulted 
from negotiations. Recasts did not lead to repairs.  
Table 5. Rate of Repairs of Errors with Feedback 
Lexical 37/43 86% 
L1 2/5 50% 
Syntactic 13/29 45% 
Total 52/76 68% 
The following excerpt illustrates learners' overall pattern of error correction and repair while engaged in 
CMC7: 
Turn 26 Jorge: Y dime las que tienes. And tell me which ones you have 
  27 Carlos: Pues que tengo que mirar. <wait>8 So I have to look 
  28 Jorge: Ya pues <wait> . (OK) 
  29 Carlos: Le veo que parece que eschucha las 
canciones o algo por como igual…y … 
es…<wait>. 
I see that it seems that he listens to 
songs or something like that…and it 
is… 
  30 Jorge: Where are you? You alive? <wait> .   
  31 Carlos: Sorry! Sorry! I am back like yeah I 
could not figure it out! LOL! Escucha 
las canciones con un radio amarillo y 
tiene unos headphones de los que no 
tiene los cables de por encima y que te 
ponen el pelo todo mal como sabes… 
Listens to songs with a yellow radio 
and he has one of those headphones 
that does not have cables over your 
head and do not get your hair looking 
bad you know 
  32 Jorge: ¿huh?? ¿los headphones?   
  33 Carlos: LOL! Los audio los de los de esos los 
de que se me olvida… …audífonos… 
¿ya sabes no? 
LOL! The sound [incorrect/incomplete 
word] the the the ... I forget... ... 
headphones ... You know what I mean, 
right? 
  34 Jorge:  Que me vuelves loco…BRB! You drive me crazy...BRB! 
  35 Carlos: <wait>   
  36 Jorge: ¿Y lo otro que necesitamos?? And what else do we need? 
Frank Morris Child-to-Child Interaction and Corrective Feedback… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 37 
  37 Carlos: ¡Que creo tienes la actividad que sigue 
y yo no la tengo…menciona <sigh> and 
decribe las que hay contigo!!! 
I think that you have the following 
activity and I don't have it … mention 
and describe the ones you have. 
In turn 31 in the excerpt above, Carlos produces the English equivalent of audífonos, headphones. 
Immediately in turn 32, it appears that Jorge does not understand what Carlos says or at least wants 
Carlos to utter the item using Spanish. Jorge, thus, engages in a negotiation: …los headphones? 
Immediately in turn 33, Carlos produces a repair and utters the Spanish form audífonos. By turn 36, the 
pair moves on to attempt to complete the task.9  
DISCUSSION 
The findings permit the following responses to the four questions posed earlier in the study. Do Spanish 
immersion school children working in CMC provide implicit negative feedback in response to their peers' 
non target-like utterances? Yes, over 50% of errors received implicit negative feedback in the form of 
recasts and negotiations. What types of learners' errors lead to what types of implicit negative feedback? 
The majority of lexical, syntactic, and L1 errors invited negotiations. When Spanish immersion school 
children working in CMC receive implicit negative feedback from their peers, do they immediately repair 
the original ill-formed utterance? Yes, learners repaired over 60% of errors that received feedback. What 
types of implicit negative feedback lead to the immediate repair of what types of learners' errors? All 
repairs followed negotiation.  
When the children in this study engaged in CMC, they provided feedback in response to their peers' L2 
errors. The results support the findings of previous face-to-face, child-to-child interaction studies that 
suggest that implicit negative feedback is available to learners within the error treatment sequence. It has 
been argued that children are risk takers and are comfortable in correcting their peers' error (see Dekeyser, 
2000; Singleton, 1995) which may explain why the rate of feedback was high. While all L1 uses and the 
majority of lexical errors were corrected, the rate of syntactic error correction was low. Why were all L1 
uses repaired? At the school where data were gathered, the staff, the curriculum, and the teachers do not 
tolerate the use of English (except of course in the English class) during class-time or in school 
surroundings. Children are encouraged to constantly use Spanish, the L2. Thus, the children may have 
just been following school protocol in tolerating their peers' L1 uses. That lexical errors were corrected at 
higher rates that syntactic errors should not come as a surprise, as the methodologies encouraged at the 
school concentrate more on lexical growth over grammatical accuracy. In addition, these Spanish 
immersion students have not had any formal instruction of Spanish grammar and, therefore, many lack a 
solid syntactic base to correct linguistic form.  
With regard to the type of feedback, there were no corrections in the form of explicit feedback. Although 
learners provided feedback in the form of recasts and negotiations, the most common form of feedback 
was negotiation. The same results have been obtained in studies that examined face-to-face, child-to-child 
interactions (e.g., Mackey et al., 2003; Oliver, 1995, 2000, 2002). It is possible that children negotiated 
their peers' errors instead of using recasts because recasts require a solid linguistic knowledge and 
communicative competence, which these children are still in the process of developing.  
Over sixty percent of learners' errors that received feedback were repaired. Studies that examined face-to-
face, child-to-child interactions have also reported that children frequently repair their errors immediately 
following feedback (Mackey et al., 2003; Oliver, 1995, 2000, 2002). It is possible that the rate of repair 
was high because, as indicated earlier, children are considered "risk takers," and thus may not be afraid to 
take chances when producing or modifying their L2. Following feedback, children repaired the majority 
of lexical errors and most of the L1 uses. Children repaired less than half of the syntactic errors. It is 
possible that syntactic errors are more difficult to process than lexical errors because processing and 
Frank Morris Child-to-Child Interaction and Corrective Feedback… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 38 
accessing the rules of grammar is far more complex than retrieving lexical items. In addition, students are 
not used to focusing on form, as the school curriculum encourages content over linguistic form.  
Findings indicate that all repairs followed negotiations. Recasts failed to promote any learner repair. It 
appears that negotiations are more likely to promote repairs because, in contrast to recasts, they may 
(through clarification requests, metalinguistic clues, elicitation, and repetition) incite learners to notice 
that they have produced a non-target-like utterance and to reprocess it. Repairs may be important, as they 
allow learners to practice the structures and to produce output (Swain, 1985, 1995) which may create 
conditions needed for language acquisition. However, even when learners fail to repair their non target-
like structures after receiving feedback it does not necessarily mean that the feedback provided is 
ineffective in promoting acquisition. It helps to remember that feedback, such as recasts, can do more 
than simply signal an ungrammatical utterance. Recasts can also promote L2 development by making the 
target language form salient and by providing positive evidence (e.g., Leeman, 2003; Saxton, 1997). In 
fact, Morris (2002a) and Mackey and Philp (1998) have also shown that recasts may be beneficial for 
short-term interlanguage development even when they are not immediately incorporated by learners. 
What learners may have to do for acquisition to take place is to notice the feedback and accurately 
perceive it as intended; it may not be necessary for them to produce an immediate repair.  
CONCLUSIONS 
The significance of this study lies in demonstrating that interaction via CMC provides opportunities for 
learners to write and "chat" (in a synchronous text-based format) about language, provide feedback and 
use the feedback, elements that are considered to be crucial for L2 development.10 When these Spanish 
immersion school children engaged in CMC, they corrected many of their peers' errors, and, following 
feedback, learners produced repairs of the errors corrected. The majority of errors were corrected using 
negotiations, which proved to be more effective at leading to immediate repair of errors than did recasts. 
Overall, these findings demonstrate that the pattern of error correction and repair following feedback 
resembles that of face-to-face interactions (see Mackey et al., 2003; Oliver, 1995, 2000, 2002).  
But did CMC play a particular role in the provision and use of feedback? It is possible that the incidence 
of feedback and learner repair following feedback was high because, as Kern (1995) argues, interaction 
which is implemented in a synchronous electronic environment generates high rates of students 
participation and language production, offers more time to develop and refine comments, and allows for 
more collaboration between participants. However, synchronous CMC blocks interpersonal cues and 
reduces much of the nonlinguistic aspects of face to face interaction that may facilitate communication 
and understanding (Walther, Anderson, & Park, 1994). Thus, CMC may take away the support that face-
to-face cues provide, focusing the burden of communication on written messages. As a result, the use of 
persistent indicators, such as providing feedback and immediately responding to feedback, may have 
occurred to establish the intended utterance and avoid a communication breakdown between participants. 
These explanations are, however, speculative at the moment and must be viewed with caution. To fully 
determine how CMC shaped these learners' provision and use of feedback, we must also examine how 
these learners correct their peers' errors and how they respond to feedback in the context of face-to-face 
interactions. The results should be compared to those in this study. The overall findings may reveal 
specific interactional features that may or may not be particular to context.  
The current study takes on the position that new technologies and their application to L2 classrooms, must 
be looked upon with caution. Much work needs to be conducted in order to examine how these new 
technologies and their applicability to language classrooms affect the learning context. Researchers and 
educators must continue to ask, for example, how technology improves the quality and process of L2 
learning. In the field of CMC very little work has been done to particularly examine the identification of 
the pedagogical objectives that this type of technology-based teaching is intended to fulfill and to explore 
the demands that CMC activities place on learners (Salaberry, 2001). Without a doubt, communication 
Frank Morris Child-to-Child Interaction and Corrective Feedback… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 39 
settings substantiated in CMC still require a substantial amount of investigation before reliable 
pedagogical guidelines are developed.  
The current study does not argue that all child-to-child interactions via CMC will yield the same results. 
Additional studies should examine the provision and use of feedback in Spanish immersion schools, 
evaluating other levels and classes, and comparing CMC to face-to-face conversations. The lack of pre- 
and post-tests measures make it impossible to determine the effects of feedback and repair following 
feedback on L2 development. One must also be cautious when interpreting the results, as socio-cultural 
factors may have played a role in the interactions and feedback patterns represented in this study. For 
example, learners' preference for negotiation over recasts may not necessarily be attributed to the CMC or 
the classroom itself but to other variables such as learners' conversational and learning styles and 
strategies. Perhaps the participants in this study were courteous students who have been taught to 
negotiate their peers' errors instead of correcting those errors using explicit feedback. Additional studies 
are needed to determine what social and cultural aspects may predict the pattern of error correction and 
repair. Another question that remains speculative and future research should address is why learners 
demonstrated a lack of awareness of grammatical inaccuracy.  
NOTES 
1. These claims also support Tarone's position (see Tarone & Liu, 1995) arguing that the study of L2 use 
in its social context is essential to the study of SLA. 
2. The exact demographics of the school are not known because the school administration chose not to 
disclose that information. Only the students who participated in the study could, and only if they chose to, 
disclose their ethnic-racial-language background. The limitations placed on the research by the school 
administration and the Institutional Review Board/Human Subjects Committee were done to safeguard 
the children who volunteered to participate in the study. 
3. The term is used to refer to a student who is raised in a home where Spanish was spoken and who is to 
some degree bilingual in English and Spanish. 
4. Once the activity began, the teacher could not control whether students would eventually recognize 
their partners, as many students immediately shared their identity. 
5. The reason participants were asked to write an essay was to give a purpose for the jigsaw task. The 
essay that the students produced was collected and the students received feedback from the teacher, as is 
customary when learners hand-in any written work. 
6. Statistical analyses were not conducted for the data in Table 4 because the number or items and 
frequencies in some of the cells are low. 
7. The names of participants have been changed to protect their identity. The Internal Review 
Board/Human Subjects Committee allowed only the researcher (and coders) access to the original 
dialogues with names. 
8. <Wait> indicates one waits or the other person should hold/wait; LOL means laugh-out loud; BRB 
means be right back. 
9. As stated earlier, the purpose of the current study was to examine the overall pattern of error correction 
and repair following feedback. The current study did not attempt to evaluate discourse techniques, CMC 
strategies, language use, or general interactional patterns. Future research should examine these 
interactional patterns and determine, for example, children's use of language (whether English or Spanish) 
when engaged in CMC, and the interactional features (e.g., LOL ["laugh out load"] and happy faces  ) 
that communicate emotion and help learners compensate for the lack of face-to-face contact. 
Frank Morris Child-to-Child Interaction and Corrective Feedback… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 40 
10. The terms "chat" or "chatting" are commonly used when individuals engage in online conversations 
such as "instant messaging."  
 
APPENDIX A 
Sample Template -- Blackboard Welcome Page  
 
APPENDIX B 
Sample Template 2 -- Blackboard Control Panel 
 
Frank Morris Child-to-Child Interaction and Corrective Feedback… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 41 
APPENDIX C 
Sample Template 2 -- Blackboard Virtual Classroom / Chat Room 
 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Frank Morris teaches in the Department of Foreign Languages and Literatures at the University of Miami. 
He obtained a PhD in Hispanic Linguistics at the University of Minnesota (2002). His current research 
explores whether collaborative work and classroom pair work fosters second language acquisition.  
E-mail: fmorris@mail.as.miami.edu, morrisfrnk@aol.com 
REFERENCES 
Ayoun, D. (2001). The role of negative and positive feedback in the second language acquisition of the 
Passé Composé and the Imparfait. Modern Language Journal, 85(2), 226-243.  
Beauvois, M. H. (1992). Computer assisted classroom discussion in foreign language classrooms: 
Conversation in slow motion. Foreign Language Annals, 25(5), 455-464.  
Beck, M. L., & Eubank, L. (1991). Acquisition theory and experimental design: A critique of Tomasello 
and Herron. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 13(1), 73-76.  
Blake, R. (2000). Computer mediated communication: A window on L2 Spanish interlanguage. Language 
Learning and Technology, 4(1), 120-136. 
Braidi, S. (2002). Reexamining the role of recasts in native-speaker/nonnative-speaker interactions. 
Language Learning, 52(1), 1-42.  
Breen, M (2001). Overt participation and covert acquisition in the language classroom. In M. Breen (Ed.), 
Learner contributions to language learning: New directions in research (pp. 112-140). London: 
Longman.  
Frank Morris Child-to-Child Interaction and Corrective Feedback… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 42 
Buckwalter, P. (2001). Repair sequences in Spanish L2 dyadic discourse: A descriptive study. Modern 
Language Journal, 85(3), 380-397.  
Chaudron, C. (1977). A descriptive model of discourse in the corrective treatment of learners' errors. 
Language Learning, 27(1), 29-46.  
Chaudron, C. (1986). Teachers's priorities in correcting learners' errors in French immersion classes. In R. 
R. Day (Ed.), Talking to learn: Conversation in second language acquisition (pp. 64-84). Rowley, MA: 
Newbury House.  
Chaudron, C. (1987). The role of error correction in second language teaching. In B. K. Das (Ed.), 
Patterns in classroom interaction in Southeast Asia (pp. 17-50). Singapore: SEAMEO Regional 
Language Centre. 
Chun, D. M. (1998). Using computer-assisted class discussion to facilitate the acquisition of interactive 
competence. In J. Swaffar, S. Romano, P. Markley, & K. Arens (Eds.), Language learning online: Theory 
and practice in the ESL and L2 computer classroom (pp. 57-80). Austin, TX: Labyrinth Publications. 
Chun, A. E., Day, R. R., Chenoweth, N. A., & Luppescu, S. (1982). Errors, interaction, and correction: A 
study of native-nonnative conversations. TESOL Quarterly, 16(4), 537-547.  
Darhower, M. (2002). Instructional features of synchronous computer-mediated communication in the L2 
class: A sociocultural case study. CALICO Journal, 19(3), 249-277.  
DeKeyser, R. M. (2000). The robustness of the critical period effects on second language acquisition. 
Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 22(4), 499-533.  
Doughty, C. (1994). Fine tuning of feedback by competent speakers to language learners. In J. Alatis 
(Ed.), Georgetown University Round Table (GURT) 1993 (pp. 96-108). Washington, DC: Georgetown 
University Press. 
Doughty, C., & Varela, E. (1998). Communicative focus on form. In C. Doughty, & J. Williams (Eds.), 
Focus on form in classroom SLA (pp. 114-138). New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Ellis, R., Basturkmen, H., & Lowen, S. (2001). Learner uptake in Communicative ESL lessons. Language 
Learning, 51(2), 281-318. 
Fanselow, J. (1977). The treatment of error in oral work. Foreign Language Annals, 10(4), 583-593.  
Fernández-García, M., & Martínez-Arbelaiz, A. (2002). Negotiation of meaning in non-native speaker-
non-native speaker synchronous discussions. CALICO Journal, 19(2), 279-294.  
Gass, S. (1997). Input, interaction and the second language learner. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates.  
Grimshaw, J., & Pinker, S. (1989). Positive and negative evidence in language acquisition. Behavioral 
and Brain Science, 12(2), 341-342.  
Hamayan, E., & Tucker, E. (1980). Language input in the bilingual classroom and its relationship to 
second language achievement. TESOL Quarterly, 14, 453-468.  
Haas, C., & Neuwirth, C. M. (1994). Writing the technology that write us. In S. Hilligoss & C. Self 
(Eds.), Literacy and computers (pp. 319-335). New York: Modern Languages Association. 
Hall, J. (2000). Classroom interaction and additional language learning: Implications for teaching and 
research. In J. Hall & L. Verplaetse (Eds.), Second and foreign language learning through classroom 
interaction (pp. 287-298). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Frank Morris Child-to-Child Interaction and Corrective Feedback… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 43 
Han, Z-H. (2002). A study of impact of recasts on tense consistency in L2 output. TESOL Quarterly, 
36(4), 543-572.  
Hatch, E. (1978). Discourse analysis and second language acquisition. In E. Hatch (Ed.), Second 
language acquisition: A book of readings (pp. 401-435). Rowley, MA: Newburry House. 
Kelm, O. (1992). The use of synchronous computer networks in second language instruction: A 
preliminary report. Foreign Language Annals, 25(5), 441-454.  
Kern, R. (1995). Restructuring classroom interaction with network computers. Effects on quantity and 
characteristics of language production. Modern Language Journal, 79(4), 457-476.  
Kim, Y. (1998). The effect of a network computer-mediated discussion on subsequent oral discussion in 
the ESL classroom. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Texas at Austin. 
Krashen, S (1977). The monitor model for adult second language performance. In M. Burt, H. Dulay, & 
M. Finocchiaro (Eds.), Viewpoints on English as a second language (pp. 152-161). New York: Regents.  
Krashen, S. (1994). The Input Hypothesis and its rivals. In N. Ellis (Ed.), Implicit and explicit learning of 
languages (pp. 45-77). London: Academic Press. 
Leeman, J. (2000). Towards a new classification of input: An empirical study of the effect of recasts, 
negative evidence and enhanced salience on L2 development. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, 
Georgetown University, Washington DC. 
Leeman, J. (2003). Recasts and second language development: beyond negative evidence. Studies in 
Second Language Acquisition, 25(1), 37-63.  
Lightbown, P., & White, L. (1987). The influence of linguistics theories on language acquisition research. 
Language Learning, 37(4), 483-510.  
Lin, Y. H., & Hedgcock, J. (1996). Negative feedback incorporation among high-proficiency and low 
proficiency Chinese speaking learners of Spanish. Language Learning, 46(4), 567-611.  
Long, M. (1983). Linguistic and conversational adjustments to non-native speakers. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition, 5(2), 177-193.  
Long, M. (1991). Focus on form: a design feature in language teaching methodology. In D. C. K. de Bot, 
C. Kramsch, & R. Ginsburg (Eds.), Foreign language research in a cross-cultural perspective (pp. 39-
52). Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Long, M. (1996). The role of the linguistic environment in second language acquisition. In W. Ritchie, & 
T. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 413-468). New York: Academic Press. 
Long, M., & Robinson, P. (1998). Focus on form: theory, research and practice. In C. Doughty & J. 
Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in classroom second language acquisition (pp. 15-41). Cambridge, 
England: Cambridge University Press. 
Long, M., Inagaki, S., & Ortega, L. (1998). The role of implicit negative feedback in SLA: Models and 
recasts in Japanese and Spanish. Modern Language Journal, 82, 357-371. 
Lyster, R. (1998a). Negotiation of form, recasts explicit correction in relation to error types and learning 
repairs in L2 classrooms. Language Learning, 48, 183-213. 
Lyster, R. (1998b). Recast, repetition and ambiguity in L2 classroom discourse. Studies in second 
language acquisition, 20, 51-81. 
Lyster, R., & Ranta, L. (1997). Corrective feedback and learner uptake: Negotiation of form in 
communicative classrooms. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 19, 37-66.  
Frank Morris Child-to-Child Interaction and Corrective Feedback… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 44 
Mackey, A., Oliver, R., & Leeman, J. (2003). Interactional input and the incorporation of feedback: An 
exploration of NS-NNS and NNS-NNS adult and child dyads. Language Learning, 53(1), 35-66.  
Mackey, A., & Philp, J. (1998). Conversation interaction and second language development: Recasts, 
response and red herrings? Modern Language Journal, 82(3), 338-356.  
Moroishi, M. (2001). Recasts and learner uptake in Japanese classroom discourse. In X. Bonch-Bruevich, 
W. J. Crawford, J. Hellermann, C. Higgins, & H. Nguyen (Eds.), The past, present and future of second 
language research. Selected proceedings of the 2000 Second Language Research Forum (pp. 197-208). 
Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.  
Morris, F. (2002a). Learner-learner interaction in the Spanish foreign language classroom: The effects of 
recasts and negotiation on L2 development. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis. 
Morris, F. (2002b). Negotiation and recasts in relation to error types and learner repair. Foreign Language 
Annals, 35(4), 395-404.  
Muranoi, H. (2000). Focus on form through interaction enhancement: Integrating formal instruction with 
a communicative task in EFL classrooms. Language Learning, 50(4), 617-673.  
Nabei, T., & Swain, M. (2002). Learner awareness of recasts in classroom interaction: A case study of an 
adult EFL student's second language learning. Language Awareness, 11(1), 43-62.  
Nystrom, N. (1983). Teacher-student interaction in bilingual classrooms: four approaches to error 
feedback. In H. W. Seliger & M. H. Long (Eds.), Classroom oriented research in second language 
acquisition (pp. 169-188). Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
Ohta, A. (2001). Second language acquisition processes in the classroom: Learning Japanese. Mahwah, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Oliver, R. (1995). Negative feedback in child NS-NNS conversation. Studies in Second Language 
Acquisition, 17(4), 459-481.  
Oliver, R. (1998). Negotiation of meaning in child interactions. Modern Language Journal, 82(3), 372-
386. 
Oliver, R. (2000). Age differences in negotiation and feedback in classroom and pairwork. Language 
Learning, 50(1), 119-151.  
Oliver, R. (2002). The patterns of negotiation for meaning in child interactions. Modern Language 
Journal, 86(1), 97-111.  
Oskoz, A., & Liskin-Gasparro, J. (2001). Corrective feedback, learner uptake, and teacher's beliefs: A 
pilot study. In X. Bonch-Bruevich, W. J. Crawford, J. Hellermann, C. Higgins, & H. Nguyen (Eds.), The 
past, present and future of second language research Selected proceedings of the 2000 Second Language 
Research Forum (pp. 209-228). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.  
Panova, I., & Lyster, R. (2002). Patterns of corrective feedback and classroom uptake in an adult ESL 
classroom. TESOL Quarterly, 36(4), 573-595.  
Pellettieri, J. (1999). Why talk? Investigating the role of task-based interaction through synchronous 
network based communication among classroom learners of Spanish. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, 
University of California at Davis. 
Pica, T., Kanagy, R., & Falodum, J. (1993). Choosing and using communication tasks for second 
language instruction. In G. Crookes & S. Gass (Eds.), Tasks and language learning (pp. 9-34). Clevedon, 
England: Multilingual Matters. 
Frank Morris Child-to-Child Interaction and Corrective Feedback… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 45 
Pinker, S. (1989). Resolving a learnability paradox in the acquisition of the verb lexicon. In M. L. Rice, & 
R. L. Schiefelbusch (Eds.), The teachability of language (pp. 13-62). Baltimore, MD: P. H. Brookes.  
Salaberry, R. (2001). The use of technology for second language learning and teaching: A retrospective. 
Modern Language Journal, 85(1), 39-56.  
Saxton, M. (1997). The contrast theory of negative input. Journal of Child Language, 24, 139-161.  
Saxton, M., Kulcsar, B., Marshall, G., & Rupra, M. (1998). Long term effects of corrective input and 
experimental approach. Journal of Child Language, 25, 701-721.  
Singleton, D. (1995). Introduction: A critical look at the critical period hypothesis in second language 
acquisition research. In D. Singleton & Z. Lengeyl (Eds.), The age factor in second language acquisition 
(pp. 1-29). Clevedon, England: Multilingual Matters. 
Smith, B. (2001). Taking students to task: Task-based computer mediated communication and negotiated 
interaction in the ESL classroom. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Arizona, Tucson. 
Smith, B. (2003). Computer-mediated negotiated interaction: An expanded model. Modern Language 
Journal, 87(1), 38-57.  
Swain, M. (1985). Communicative competence: Some rules of comprehensible input and comprehensible 
output in its development. In S. Gass & C. Madden (Eds.), Input in second language acquisition (pp. 235-
253). Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
Swain, M. (1995). Three functions of output in second language learning. In G. Cook & B. Seidlhofer 
(Eds.), Principle and practice in applied linguistics (pp. 125-144). Oxford, England: Oxford University 
Press. 
Tarone, E., & Liu, G. (1995). Situational context, variation and SLA theory. In G. Cook & B. Seidlhofer 
(Eds.), Principles and practice in applied linguistics: A festschrift for H. G. Widdowson (pp. 107-124). 
Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. 
Truscott, J. (1999). What's wrong with oral grammar correction. Canadian Modern Language Review, 
55(4), 437-456.  
VanPatten, B. (1990). Attending to form and content in the input: An experiment in consciousness. 
Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 12(3), 287-301.  
Walther, J., Anderson, J., & Park, D. (1994). Interpersonal effects in computer mediated interaction: A 
meta-analysis of social and antisocial communication. Communication Research, 21(4), 460-487.  
Warschauer, M (1996). Comparing face-to-face and electronic communication in the second language 
classroom. CALICO Journal, 13(2), 7-25.  
White, L. (1987). Against comprehensible input: The input hypothesis and the development of L2 
competence. Applied Linguistics, 8(1), 95-110.  
White, L. (1990). Second language acquisition and universal grammar. Studies in Second Language 
Acquisition, 12, 121-133.  
