Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num3/barr/ 
September 2005, Volume 9, Number 3 
pp. 55-78 
 
Copyright © 2005, ISSN 1094-3501 55 
TOLD LIKE IT IS! AN EVALUATION OF AN INTEGRATED 
ORAL DEVELOPMENT PILOT PROJECT 
David Barr, Jonathan Leakey, and Alexandre Ranchoux  
University of Ulster, Northern Ireland. 
ABSTRACT 
Much established pedagogical and CALL (computer-assisted language learning) research 
advocates an integrated constructivist approach to the use of technology in language learning. 
This paper reports on a pilot project delivered to first year undergraduate French students. The 
project aim was to deliver a blend of collaborative and individual learning through a combination 
of CALL programs and online activities alongside traditional face-to-face conversation classes. 
Using quantitative analysis of a pre- and posttest and a variety of questionnaires, this project 
assessed student progress in developing oral skills across two groups, one (the treatment group) 
using technology and the other (the comparison group) being a traditional conversation class. 
Each group covered the same content and underwent the same assessment procedures. In 
addition, through qualitative analysis measures, the project evaluated the role played by 
additional variables in the learning process, as well as student and staff reactions to the two 
approaches. The study concludes by showing that while progress was made by both groups, the 
progress made by those not using technology was significantly greater than that made by students 
using technology over a short-term study. It also highlights the need for developing pedagogy to 
ensure that CALL-based teaching goes beyond rehearsal activity to achieve message-orientated 
communication. 
 
INTRODUCTION -- BACKGROUND TO THE RESEARCH 
A glance through relevant literature since 2000 shows very little reference has been made to the role of 
computer technology in oral language development.1 More frequently, the role of oral work is hinted at in 
titles referring to content looking at "CMC" (computer-mediated communication), "multimedia," "e-
learning," or "online interaction." On closer inspection, however, these latter, more general, references 
tend to deal with written communication forms such as tandem learning via e-mail, discussion forums, or 
chat-rooms.  
Levy's CALL survey of 1990 has two interesting findings in this respect. Of 17 categories of teaching 
approaches, the "communicative" approach was the most popular, with the "oral" approach and "direct 
method" coming in seventh and eighth, respectively (Levy, 1997, p. 123). 
However, of 17 categories of CALL software development activity "Speaking" appears in the 15th 
position, just ahead of "Vocabulary" and "Other," the top three items on this list being "Reading," 
"Writing," and "Gap-filling" (Levy, 1997, p. 143). Clearly, developmental work in those "early days" 
lagged behind the pedagogically desirable and normal classroom practice.  
Most CALL-based teaching and learning has tended to focus on non-oral activities such as software or 
Web-based reading, writing, or gap-filling type activities. The conversation class, pair and group role-
plays, and discussions have for the most part taken place in ordinary classrooms. Felix (2001) lists "lack 
of speaking practice" first on the students' list of disadvantages of using Web-based programs for 
language, along with "distraction," "no interaction with peers," "inadequate feedback," and "absence of 
teacher" (p. 47). According to Boullier (2000),  
David Barr, Jonathan Leakey, and Alexandre Ranchoux  TOLD Like It Is! 
 
Language Learning & Technology 56 
The combination of various media and techniques has always existed: oral practice did not 
disappear with the advent of writing, the same applies for hand-written practice with printing, 
newspapers with TV, post with telephone … each media and technique re-defined its sphere of 
actions according to its specificity. (p. 145; author's translation) 
The teaching of all the language skills has gone through just such a phase of re-definition in response to 
the latest computer-based media; in the case of the oral skill, it is merely taking a little longer. 
Technology and oral language development have been rare bedfellows and for one main obvious reason: 
The technology for oral language development has posed the greatest challenge to both hardware and 
software developers. More specifically, one of the main challenges has been to create speech recognition 
software that is sensitive and accurate enough for language learning (Hincks, 2003). Speech recognition 
software lends itself mainly to drill-type activities; further logistical and technological hurdles must be 
crossed if one aims to get beyond purely text-based tandem exchanges and encourage real-time oral 
communication across campuses or across national boundaries.  
There have been experiments using telephone and video-phone link-ups where there are gains in 
smoothness of data transfer but loss in terms of cost, which has usually been prohibitive. The main 
hurdles in any attempt at Internet-based link-ups appear to be the challenge of overcoming time-zones and 
timetabling differences, ensuring adequate bandwidth at both ends, and the cost of calls. Goodfellow, 
Jeffreys, Miles, and Shirra (1996), in their study of a "video-conference try-out," draw several 
conclusions that will still apply however good the technology becomes. They state that the "language 
interaction [video-conferencing] supports is in many ways different from the 'face-to-face' equivalent" 
and cite, amongst others, such aspects as the restrictions the video-conference imposes on the teacher's 
moderation of group interaction, the distortion of the normal use of body language to manage interaction, 
and problems of managing camera viewpoints as challenges imposed by the technological context (p. 16). 
They conclude by saying that "we have to plan for it [i.e., videoconferencing] and adapt our teaching and 
learning methodologies accordingly. That way we will be able to enhance, rather than merely repackage, 
the educational service we offer" (p. 16). An overall pedagogy for successfully integrating technology 
into oral work, be it in local or remote mode, still seems to be lacking along with a holistic approach to 
technology-based assessment of oral development. The initial TOLD (Technology and Oral Language 
Development) project at the University of Ulster has focussed on communication within the classroom/e-
lab, but the aim in future realisations of TOLD is to explore a workable and cost-effective link-up with a 
francophone university. Such a collaboration will aim to prepare students at both ends to work in a 
structured way and to integrate the content of live exchanges with ongoing curriculum work. 
Research at the University of Ulster has looked closely at the issues of student resistance (Gillespie & 
McKee, 1999) and staff reluctance (Gillespie & Barr, 2002) with regard to CALL. From a psycho-
linguistic perspective it would seem likely that of all communication mediated by technology, using 
technology for face-to-face speech would generate the greatest affective hurdles in the minds of teacher 
and student since it is the skill that least needs technology. As Levy puts it, "Face-to-face speech is the 
only technology-free mode of communication, aside from sign language" (2000, p. 184).  
The TOLD Project has been designed to examine the value of technology-mediated oral communication 
by piloting a blended learning approach making full use of a recently installed multimedia laboratory and 
measuring student progress over three years. Perhaps the greatest challenge for the project was to ensure 
the principle of the real need to communicate applied in our use of technology for oral communication. 
By integrating technology into perhaps the most authentic and meaningful form of communication -- oral 
conversation -- this project goes some way to addressing the criticism of Warschauer (1996), who 
highlighted a weakness of much multimedia based language teaching: "Using multimedia may involve an 
integration of skills (e.g., listening with reading), but it too seldom involves a more important type of 
integration -- integrating meaningful and authentic communication into all aspects of the language 
David Barr, Jonathan Leakey, and Alexandre Ranchoux  TOLD Like It Is! 
 
Language Learning & Technology 57 
learning curriculum" (p. 6). While this pilot project falls short of oral communication over the Internet or 
by video conferencing, the aim is, in its next stages, to apply the lessons learned in-house and trial a 
pedagogical approach to remote oral communication as well. 
Our approach drew primarily on communicative and constructivist theories of second language 
acquisition. In exploring these theories, we found that the following elements were particularly pertinent 
to oral development. According to the communicative approach to language learning, activities are best 
geared to flow in an ordered progression from rehearsal to meaningful performance. Carl Dodson (1978), 
for example, advocates a two-staged training approach for communicative acts: the rehearsal stage and 
the performance stage. Dodson emphasises the importance of allowing the student to pass from "medium-
orientated communication" to "message-orientated communication" (p. 48).  
According to constructivist theories, learning should be multi-modal, task-based, and content-based 
(Warschauer & Healey, 1998). There should be a strong focus on learner-centredness, with the teacher 
acting as a facilitator and the learner free to make his or her own interpretations. According to Driscoll 
(1994), student ownership of learning should be fostered through reflection. Examples of this might 
include learner logs and goal-setting, reflection, and monitoring of progress. Self-awareness of knowledge 
construction should also be encouraged (Driscoll, 1994). Another aspect of constructivist learning is 
Vygotsky's zone of proximal development (1978), which involves developing a scaffolding for 
knowledge construction through student collaboration. All of these features were considered important in 
underpinning the pedagogy behind the TOLD project. 
In constructing a project looking at assessment and aiming also to measure progress, the TOLD Project 
team was also mindful of past criticism levelled at weaknesses of much research involving quantitative 
measurement of student progress using CALL. Due to various constraints (e.g., pressures of timetabling, 
small class sizes, problems with the obtaining of comparison groups, unfamiliarity with statistical 
analysis) it has often been difficult for language teachers to address charges of small sample sizes, faulty 
statistical analysis, and inadequate length of treatment to measure educational outcomes (Reeves, 1993; 
Schmitt, 1991;). Salaberry (1996) has called for a careful combination of qualitative and quantitative 
analysis that addresses these various design problems and that is founded on a sound basis of pedagogical 
theory.  
This paper examines the following questions: 
1) Does computer technology enhance significantly progress in students' oral language 
development?  
2) What factors may affect students' oral language development when using computers? 
3) How do staff and students react to the use of computer technology for oral language 
development? 
Our null hypothesis is that a CALL environment makes no difference to learning gains in oral language 
development. The alternative hypothesis (i.e., that it does make a significant difference, be it positive or 
negative) will be gauged by a configuration of data collection methods (Levy, 2000, p. 180) including 
quantitative analysis of learning gains. 
With only one semester of a three-year quasi-experimental study2 completed, our sample size of 29 drops 
just short of enabling us to assume normality and we have had to run appropriate analyses for small 
samples (see the later description of the Mann-Whitney test, Wilcoxon's matched pairs test, and the 
Spearman Rho test) alongside the usual parametric tests. Nevertheless, the project team aims to repeat the 
study over the next six semesters with first year students so as to ensure a larger sample size and will also 
follow their progress over the course of their degree programme, with the aim of obtaining increasingly 
reliable data. 
David Barr, Jonathan Leakey, and Alexandre Ranchoux  TOLD Like It Is! 
 
Language Learning & Technology 58 
METHODOLOGY  
Context of Project 
1) Hours -- 1 hour per week over a 12-week semester, the standard time allocated to French conversation 
classes 
2) Language groups -- The students were divided into four small conversation classes of between 5 and 
11 students, along course lines. This was determined mainly by timetable considerations. Two foreign 
language assistants each taught two classes. 
3) Comparison groups -- Two of the four groups were "comparison" groups taught in the "traditional" 
manner (i.e., usually in the classroom, sometimes also in the [analogue] language laboratory; never in 
the multimedia lab). For the purpose of this paper we will refer to these two groups as one entity: "the 
comparison group." 
4) Treatment/test groups -- two of the four groups were "treatment" groups and were taught every week 
in the multimedia laboratory. For the purpose of this paper we will refer to these two groups as a 
single entity: "the treatment group." 
5) The comparison groups were made up of Combined Arts students and the treatment groups made up 
of Applied Languages students. Our analysis of student ability found broad comparability between 
the two groups. 
6) Resources available to the two treatment groups were 
• FLA;  
• digital multimedia laboratory; and 
• the software TellMeMore® (Version 5) by Auralog. This software includes speech 
recognition technology with a variety of colourful interactive activities rehearsing all the four 
main language skills and provides an interactive glossary and grammar. 
Data Collection and Evaluation Methods3 
1) Language Experience Questionnaire. This asked for data such as language qualifications, number of 
foreign languages studied, amount of time spent in the country of the target language, and student 
confidence and fluency levels across the range of language learning skills. An overall percentage 
rating was obtained for each student. This was correlated with student progress (posttest percentage 
less pretest percentage). 
2) ICT-use survey. This collected information on student access to and use of a range of common ICT 
(information and communications technology) applications, e-mail, and the Web for personal and 
study purposes. It also gathered data on student use of mobile phones. An overall percentage rating 
was obtained for each student. Again this was correlated with student progress. Both surveys support 
the theory of Driscoll (1994), advocating self-awareness of knowledge construction.  
3) Journals. Students were given a paper-based log at the start of the project and were asked to list their 
goals for progress in their oral language development from a checklist of oral skills and then, for each 
session, to record their impressions of the lesson. They were asked to comment on what they thought 
had worked well and make suggestions as to how it could have been improved. This supports 
Driscoll's theory about student ownership of learning. 
4) Pre- and Posttest. All students sat the same pre- and posttest under the same conditions. The setting 
for the tests was a traditional (analogue) language laboratory. There were five sections to the test: a 
pronunciation task; some personal questions; a listening comprehension exercise presented initially 
without transcript of the text and questions, and then with these, for which the students recorded oral 
answers; and lastly, an oral résumé of an extract of a television documentary. 
David Barr, Jonathan Leakey, and Alexandre Ranchoux  TOLD Like It Is! 
 
Language Learning & Technology 59 
PROJECT ENVIRONMENT, CONTENT, AND DELIVERY  
The Environment  
The Faculty of Arts at the University of Ulster is spread across multiple campuses. Our project utilized 
the language resources available to us on the Coleraine campus. The facilities at hand include a 
Multimedia lab computer-based and an audio-visual laboratory.  
The multimedia classroom possesses a comprehensive video and audio switching system for the 
management of the classroom. SmartClass® Plug and Play computer supervisory system enables the 
teacher to maintain audio and visual contact with each student and the computer screen they are using. 
The system has a teacher console and 16 workstations each networked and equipped with Robotel 
technology, in particular the SmartClass® multimedia language-learning environment (see Figure 1). The 
language tutor can monitor and communicate with individual students or the whole class, broadcast 
material from and to any workstation in the network, or take control of any student's screen, keyboard or 
mouse functions at any time.  
 
Figure 1. Controlling the multimedia classroom: the SmartClass® visual interface  
The hardware was used in conjunction with TellMeMore® (version 5, Auralog), including speech 
recognition technology S.E.T.S. (spoken error tracking system) which automatically detects pronunciation 
errors. The TellMeMore® software includes a variety of colourful interactive activities rehearsing all the 
four main language skills as well as providing an interactive glossary and grammar. 
Content  
Our pedagogical approach was informed by a desire to draw on the effectiveness of both traditional 
teaching and learning methods as well as the benefits of a technological environment. An effective 
traditional method is the small group discussion with its emphasis on human interaction in a meaningful 
context, which is difficult to replicate in a technological setting. One of our aims in this project was to 
replicate this small group intimacy factor within the potentially impersonal e-lab. An example of an 
effective technological method might be the use of CALL software for pronunciation drilling with 
David Barr, Jonathan Leakey, and Alexandre Ranchoux  TOLD Like It Is! 
 
Language Learning & Technology 60 
individualised instant feedback. We felt it important to make the most of this feature in the e-lab, and for 
the sake of comparability we introduced a pronunciation-drilling element into the comparison (Non-Tech) 
group's routine. Thus, to a large extent our pedagogical approach was determined by our desire to keep 
the content similar across the two groups. 
Planning 
Our lesson planning was informed by the desire to blend the best of both approaches. Activities were also 
designed to flow in Dodson's (1978) progression from rehearsal to meaningful performance, allowing the 
student to pass from "medium-orientated communication" to "message-orientated communication" (p. 
48).  
The design of the CALL software used (TellMeMore®) seemed to reflect an awareness of these stages 
(e.g., start with pronunciation drilling and progress to simulated interactive role-plays). However, we 
were conscious that the software gave no opportunity for face-to-face communication between the 
students and they saw this too. For this reason, our lesson design included progression beyond the 
software to the message-orientation phase of more traditional group discussion and presentation. 
Planning and Content Features Common to Both Groups. Lesson plans shared a similar structure 
involving progression from pre-communication to rehearsal, information retrieval, assimilation, and final 
meaningful production in the target language. All groups shared the following 11 oral language 
development skills targets:  
• pronunciation 
• accent and intonation 
• fluency 
• one-to-one with a French person 
• one-to-one with an English speaker 
• responding spontaneously in a conversation 
• responding to visual or aural input (e.g., from TV/Radio) 
• taking an active part in a structured group discussion 
• taking an active part in an unstructured group discussion 
• giving a group presentation 
• giving a presentation on my own 
These skills informed lesson planning and student goal setting and were integral to monitoring, feedback, 
and students' reflection on their own learning. This was drawn from social constructivist theory, for 
example Vygotsky's Zone of Proximal Development (1978), which involves developing a scaffolding for 
knowledge construction through collaboration. 
Delivery 
For the complete list of lesson plans and topics, please refer to http://www.arts.ulster.ac.uk/lanlit/french/ 
research/told/ 
Although classes for the treatment group took place in the multimedia teaching lab, while students in the 
comparison group did not have these facilities at their disposition, the lesson topics, texts, comprehension 
questions, and pronunciation drills remained common to both groups. Students in the treatment group 
recorded their pronunciation of a passage or respond to a series of pre-recorded questions digitally, while 
the comparison group recorded themselves using an analogue recorder. An example of a pronunciation-
comprehension-oral production activity can be found in Appendix A. 
Multimedia was a feature of all the oral classes for the treatment group, and not just an add-on. The only 
time that students regularly broke from interaction with the computers was for the purpose of group 
discussion or conversation. Given the restrictions of the software and hardware resources available to us 
David Barr, Jonathan Leakey, and Alexandre Ranchoux  TOLD Like It Is! 
 
Language Learning & Technology 61 
and the fact that we were not using CMC (computer mediated communication) for this project we 
concluded that the multimedia lab was best suited for the tutorial and rehearsal and assessment phases of 
oral work. We found a strong case can be made for the use of technology for these phases of oral skills 
teaching and learning.  
Although our pedagogical approach reflects a combination of objectives and requirements set out a priori, 
in practice, each tutor enjoyed a degree of flexibility in terms of his/her content delivery, presentation, 
and style. Also, the original pedagogical plan evolved during the course of the semester, in light of 
ongoing feedback from tutors, students, as well as research staff. The original goals given to the students 
remained unchanged, as did the guiding principles of message-orientated communication via the process 
of pre-communication, rehearsal, information retrieval, assimilation, and final meaningful production.  
QUANTITATIVE ANALYSIS  
Research Question 1: To evaluate the learning gains in oral language made by the treatment and 
the comparison groups and test for significance 
For an analysis of individual learning gains see Appendix B, which presents the collated raw data, 
showing individual scores for the predictor (or independent) variables of attendance, language learning 
experience, and ICT-use, and the individual scores for the outcome (or dependent) variables of the pre- 
and posttest, as well as the difference between the two. These are all expressed as percentages. What 
follows below is primarily an analysis of the group mean scores taken from the raw data. 
An Analysis of Group Learning Gains 
Figure 2 and Table 1 show the mean improvement, or group learning gain, from the pre- to the posttest 
for the treatment group (Tech) and the comparison group (Non-Tech). At this stage we are looking at 
global mean scores, not the learning gains in each of the oral skills tested for. 
 
Figure 2. Mean improvement from the pre- to the posttest for the treatment group (Tech) and the control 
group (Non-Tech)  
David Barr, Jonathan Leakey, and Alexandre Ranchoux  TOLD Like It Is! 
 
Language Learning & Technology 62 
Group Statistics for the Means of Pre-/ Post-Test Totals (see also Figure 2) 
Table 1. Mean Improvement From the Pre- to the Posttest for the Treatment Group (Tech) and the 
Comparison Group (Non-Tech) 
  Tech or Non-Tech N M SD Std. Error Mean 
Tech 15 70.60 13.222 3.414 Total % 
Non-tech 14 63.64 15.184 4.058 
Tech 15 77.20 7.408 1.913 Ptotal 
Non-tech 14 77.21 10.519 2.811 
From Figure 2 and Table 1 we can see that over the course of the semester and between pre- and posttest, 
both groups on average made progress, while the Non-Tech group made more progress than the Tech 
group. This quantitative data raises several qualitative questions:  
• Why did the comparison group (those not exposed to technology), while starting from a lower 
mean starting point (64%) make a 13% leap up to 77%, compared with the treatment group's 6% 
rise from 71% to 77%? 
• Was the technology a hindrance, and if so at what point and for how long? And would this hurdle 
over a longer study period be reduced as the students got used to the technology? 
• How much did the time spent coaching in how to use the multimedia lab and associated software, 
and dealing with technical glitches, affect the progress of the treatment group? 
• Can we triangulate data from the qualitative data (the student and staff logs and evaluations) that 
would clarify the quantitative data? 
• If we look closer at the individual tasks and skills do they reveal if the progress is being made in 
some tasks and skills more than others? 
• Are other variables (such as language learning experience, ICT-use, attendance) influencing the 
data? 
Having looked at the global group learning gains we can now compare progress in each of the different 
tasks and skills tested for in the pre- and post-test. In Table 2, the first 11 rows cover the pre-test scores 
for the five tasks and five skills assessed and the total (Total%); the next 11 rows cover the equivalent 
scores for the post-test. (Note: Tasks 1 and 3 became unusable for the purposes of comparison because the 
wrong text/procedure in the pre-test was mistakenly used in one of the pre-test sittings.) 
The following explanations refer to the abbreviations we have used to denote different sections of the pre- 
and post-tests: 
 Task 1,2,3,4,5 refers to the pre-test score 
 ptask 1,2,3,4,5 refers to the post-test score 
 Task 1 and ptask1 Pronunciation task -- students read from a text selected to assess 
command of a range of phonemes that typically pose a challenge to 
anglophones, and are marked for Pronunciation, Accent/Intonation, and 
Fluency. 
 Task 2 and ptask2 Students answer questions (x5) about themselves (e.g., how long they've 
been learning French/ where they come from/ describe their personality/ 
interests/ plans for the summer). They are marked for Pronunciation, 
Accent/Intonation, Fluency, Content, and Grammar. 
 Task 3 and ptask3 Students answer, orally, questions on a heard text (no transcript). They are 
marked and graded by the teachers. 
 Task 4 and ptask4 Students answer, orally, questions on the same text as above, but this time 
seen as a transcript; the questions are also seen this time. 
 Task 5 and ptask5 Students view a short (3 minute) video clip (from a documentary about 
France 2) and give an oral résumé of the content (after 2 viewings). 
David Barr, Jonathan Leakey, and Alexandre Ranchoux  TOLD Like It Is! 
 
Language Learning & Technology 63 
Students were not given freedom to replay the video. 
 Total and Ptotal refer to the respective totals from the two tests 
 Pronunciation and 
ppron, etc. 
likewise refer to the respective (pre- and post-test) scores for each skill 
assessed in the different tasks 
Teachers conducted all marking after the tests were completed. All answers were recorded on audio-
cassette. 
Table 2. Task-by-Task and Skill-by-Skill Comparison of Pre- and Posttest Scores for Both the Treatment 
and Control Groups 
  
Tech or 
Non-Tech N M SD 
Std. Error 
Mean 
Task 1% Tech 6 69.67 11.639 4.752 
  Non-tech 4 69.00 5.477 2.739 
Task 2% (PRE) Tech 14 70.57 14.053 3.756 
  Non-tech 14 62.14 22.017 5.884 
Task 3% Tech 6 71.67 13.110 5.352 
  Non-tech 3 58.00 12.288 7.095 
Task 4% Tech 14 75.57 15.820 4.228 
  Non-tech 13 72.15 16.411 4.551 
Task 5% Tech 15 65.47 17.900 4.622 
  Non-tech 14 60.00 14.655 3.917 
Pronunciation % Tech 15 65.60 13.087 3.379 
  Non-tech 14 58.21 10.504 2.807 
Accent/Intonation % Tech 15 67.80 12.531 3.236 
  Non-tech 14 57.36 10.135 2.709 
Fluency % Tech 15 75.60 14.966 3.864 
  Non-tech 14 68.36 18.333 4.900 
Content % Tech 15 73.60 15.099 3.898 
  Non-tech 14 70.14 18.691 4.995 
Grammar % Tech 15 72.53 15.514 4.006 
  Non-tech 14 61.64 18.612 4.974 
Total % Tech 15 70.60 13.222 3.414 
  Non-tech 14 63.64 15.184 4.058 
ptask1 Tech 15 77.80 7.103 1.834 
  Non-tech 14 71.71 10.730 2.868 
ptask2 (POST) Tech 15 79.53 9.219 2.380 
  Non-tech 14 77.57 11.863 3.170 
ptask3 Tech 15 72.27 10.720 2.768 
  Non-tech 14 74.71 20.435 5.462 
ptask4 Tech 15 83.53 8.383 2.164 
  Non-tech 14 78.43 20.114 5.376 
ptask5 Tech 15 71.73 10.899 2.814 
  Non-tech 12 68.50 11.180 3.227 
ppron Tech 15 74.40 7.405 1.912 
  Non-tech 14 71.93 10.269 2.745 
pAccInt Tech 15 78.60 10.642 2.748 
  Non-tech 14 78.64 15.653 4.183 
David Barr, Jonathan Leakey, and Alexandre Ranchoux  TOLD Like It Is! 
 
Language Learning & Technology 64 
pfluency Tech 15 81.60 9.132 2.358 
  Non-tech 14 81.50 13.178 3.522 
pcontent Tech 15 80.33 7.247 1.871 
  Non-tech 14 82.29 12.356 3.302 
pgrammar Tech 15 74.93 9.830 2.538 
  Non-tech 14 72.43 10.471 2.799 
PTotal Tech 15 77.20 7.408 1.913 
  Non-tech 14 77.21 10.519 2.811 
In Table 2, the highlighted Task 2 boxes (in which students answered questions about themselves) show, 
as an example, progress in both the treatment and the comparison groups. For this skill greater progress 
was made by the comparison group.  
In order to show whether there are any significant relationships between compared data, the following 
comparisons were of interest: 
1) Comparing the students' pre- and post test total scores for a broad gauge of progress over the 
semester. Had progress been made by everyone irrespective of which group they were in?  
2) Comparing the students' pre- and post-test scores by the independent variable of which teaching 
group they were in. Here we were interested in comparing progress made across the two groups, 
comparison and treatment, to see if significantly more or less progress was made by one or other. 
The above comparisons were carried out for each of the five tasks in the test and for each of the five skills 
under analysis (pronunciation, accent/intonation, fluency, content, and grammatical accuracy) to see if 
more progress had been made in certain skills rather than others and whether there were any reasonable 
assumptions possible as to the causes for this. Finally, in order to assess whether it was possible that 
factors, other than which group they were in, were influencing students' progress, an analysis of the other 
variables we had tested (attendance, language learning experience, ICT-use) was made. 
The most useful tests for our project were those which 
1) Compare the means in the pre- and posttests to see if there has been any general improvement 
over the semester in the whole cohort ("within-subjects" analysis). 
2) Compare the means of two or more independent samples (groups of individuals), in our case the 
treatment group and the comparison group, to see if one group has made significantly more 
progress than the other ("between-subjects" analysis).  
For both of the above, an independent samples t-test (for parametric samples) was carried out, and its 
non-parametric equivalent (Mann-Whitney Test). A parametric sample is one where the sample is 
sufficiently large (30 or more records) for one to be able to make reasonably safe generalisations. Non-
parametric analysis is required for small samples such as ours where normality, or safe generalisability, 
cannot be assumed (i.e., the total sample size was N=29 and the independent samples were no larger than 
N=15). Given that the results of the two types of analysis were very similar, for the interests of brevity we 
have only included here the parametric data and tables for this and all remaining analyses. 
Test Differences of the Mean From Two Sets of Observations From the Same Group of Individuals. 
Here we were interested in comparing one group's performance under one set of conditions (i.e., the 
pretest by overall totals, or by task and skill) with their performance under another set of conditions (i.e., 
the posttest, again looking at overall totals and separate tasks and skills). 
Our null hypothesis is that exposure to technology in oral language development makes no difference. We 
can accept the alternative hypothesis (i.e., that exposure to technology, even over the course of one 
semester, does make a difference to progress in oral language development) if our p value in our 
David Barr, Jonathan Leakey, and Alexandre Ranchoux  TOLD Like It Is! 
 
Language Learning & Technology 65 
compared means tests for pre- and posttest scores across the two groups is less than or equal to 0.05 (i.e., 
is at a 95% or higher level of confidence). 
Test the Degrees of Relationship or Correlation Between Variables. This test was to see if there was a 
positive or negative correlation between the variables attendance, language learning experience, and ICT-
use, and to see how strong this correlation was. It is worth noting that correlation does not imply 
causation. As with any correlation, there could be a third variable which explains the association between 
the variables we measured. So in the case of the TOLD project, even if we showed that there was a strong 
positive correlation, say, between ICT-use score and progress in the Tech group, a third variable such as 
"positive exposure to something new" (the so-called "Hawthorne effect") may be playing a significant 
role, especially as these were undergraduates in their first weeks of experiencing a new multi-media lab. 
For this analysis, a Pearson's Product Moment Correlation Coefficient (Pearson's r) Test was carried out 
and its non-parametric equivalent (Spearman's Rho Test). Tables 3 and 4 confirm the above conclusions 
by means of a paired t-test showing that improvement took place in both groups. This paired t-test shows, 
by group, the differences in the compared means of the pre- and posttests. A minus sign before the figure 
in the mean column actually denotes an increase (not a decrease) from pre- to posttest. A comparison of 
the p-values (final column) shows that the confidence levels that improvement was not down to chance 
are high for both groups, but highest for the Non-Tech (comparison) group. The significance values (p or 
Sig.) are both less than 0.01 (i.e., above the 99% confidence level). We therefore reject the null 
hypothesis (that in this case the sample means of the pre- and post-tests are equal across both groups) and 
accept the alternative hypothesis that improvement did take place. However, we must conclude that 
because the comparison group also made significant progress the improvements cannot be attributed to 
technology. 
Table 3. Paired t-Test Showing, by Group, the Differences in the Compared Means of the Pre- and 
Posttest Totals for the Control Group (Non-Tech) 
Paired Differences 
95% Confidence Interval 
of the Difference 
  
M SD 
Std. 
Error 
Mean Upper Lower t df 
Sig. (2-
tailed) 
Pair 1 
Total % = PTotal -13.571 8.925 2.385 -18.724 -8.419 -5.690 13 .000 
Table 4. Paired t-Test Showing, by Group, the Differences in the Compared Means of the Pre- and 
Posttest Totals for the Treatment Group (Tech) 
Paired Differences 
95% Confidence Interval 
of the Difference 
 
M SD 
Std. 
Error 
Mean Upper Lower t df 
Sig. (2-
tailed) 
Pair 1  
Total % = PTotal -6.600 8.069 2.083 -2.131 -11.069 -3.168 14 .007 
 
David Barr, Jonathan Leakey, and Alexandre Ranchoux  TOLD Like It Is! 
 
Language Learning & Technology 66 
Table 5. (Parametric) Independent Samples Test -- Comparing the Means of the Two Groups Against 
Each Other 
Levene's 
Test for 
Equality of 
Variances 
t-Test for Equality of Means 
95% Confidence 
Interval of the 
Difference 
  
F Sig t df 
Sig 
(2-
tailed) 
Mean 
Differ
-ence 
Std. Error 
Differ-
ences Lower Upper 
Equal varliances 
assumed 1.318 27 .198 6.957 5.277 -3.871 17.785 
To
ta
l %
 
Equal variances 
not assumed 
.331 .570 
1.312 25.877 .201 6.957 5.303 -3.946 17.860 
Equal varliances 
assumed -.004 27 .997 -.014 3.360 -6.908 6.879 
PT
ot
al
 
Equal variances 
not assumed 
1.144 .294 
-.004 23.205 .997 -.014 3.400 -7.045 7.016 
In the parametric test described in Table 5 the p (Sig.) values highlighted for both the pre- and posttest 
across the two groups are greater than 0.05, that is, falling below acceptable confidence levels for us to 
infer a significant difference between the two groups sets of results. We, therefore, cannot accept the 
alternative hypothesis (H1) that exposure to technology over the course of one semester makes a 
significant difference to progress in oral language development. 
We must now check, task by task and skill by skill, whether there are any exceptions to this inference that 
might show that significant progress was made only in the treatment group. Tables 6 and 7 show the 
results of submitting the data to a paired samples t-test in which mean progress in each task and skill in 
the pre-post test is tested for significance. We were surprised to see that most results seemed to favour the 
comparison group.  
Table 6. Task-by-Task and Skill-by-Skill Paired Samples t-Test for the Treatment Group (Tech) 
Paired Differences 
95% Confidence 
Interval of the 
Difference 
 
M SD 
Std. 
Error 
Mean Lower Upper t df 
Sig. 
(2-
tailed) 
Pair 1 Total % - PTotal -6.600 8.069 2.083 -11.069 -2.131 -3.168 14 .007 
Pair 2 Task 2% - ptask2 -8.429 11.817 3.158 -15.252 -1.605 -2.669 13 .019 
Pair 3 Task 4% - ptask4 -7.357 13.703 3.662 -15.269 .555 -2.009 13 .066 
Pair 4 Task 5% - ptask5 -6.267 18.219 4.704 -16.356 3.823 -1.332 14 .204 
Pair 5 Pronunciation % - 
ppron -8.800 9.615 2.483 -14.125 -3.475 -3.545 14 .003 
Pair 6 Accent/Intonation % 
- pAccInt -10.800 10.930 2.822 -16.853 -4.747 -3.827 14 .002 
Pair 7 Fluency % - pfluency -6.000 11.458 2.958 -12.345 .345 -2.028 14 .062 
Pair 8 Content % - pcontent -6.733 13.128 3.390 -14.004 .537 -1.986 14 .067 
Pair 9 Grammar % - 
pgrammar -2.400 11.224 2.898 -8.615 3.815 -.828 14 .421 
 
David Barr, Jonathan Leakey, and Alexandre Ranchoux  TOLD Like It Is! 
 
Language Learning & Technology 67 
Table 7. Task-by-Task and Skill-by-Skill Paired Samples t-Test for the Control Group (Non-Tech) 
Paired Differences 
95% Confidence 
Interval of the 
Difference 
 
M SD 
Std. 
Error 
Mean Lower Upper t df 
Sig. 
(2-
tailed) 
Pair 1 Total % - PTotal -13.571 8.925 2.385 -18.724 -8.419 -5.690 13 .000 
Pair 2 Task 2% - ptask2 -15.429 18.912 5.054 -26.348 -4.509 -3.053 13 .009 
Pair 3 Task 4% - ptask4 -7.000 27.139 7.527 -23.400 9.400 -.930 2 .371 
Pair 4 Task 5% - ptask5 -7.917 14.311 4.131 -17.010 1.176 -1.916 11 .082 
Pair 5 Pronunciation % - 
ppron -13.714 11.317 3.024 -20.248 -7.180 -4.534 13 .001 
Pair 6 Accent/Intonation % 
- pAccInt -21.286 14.824 3.962 -29.845 -12.726 -5.373 13 .000 
Pair 7 Fluency % - pfluency -13.143 13.132 3.510 -20.725 -5.561 -3.745 13 .002 
Pair 8 Content % - pcontent -12.143 12.347 3.300 -19.272 -5.014 -3.680 13 .003 
Pair 9 Grammar % - 
pgrammar -10.786 15.338 4.099 -19.642 -1.930 -2.631 13 .021 
This data can also be displayed as bar charts (see Figures 3 and 4). Confidence levels are marked with 
asterisks: * = confidence from p = 0.05 (i.e., at the 95% level) up to, but not including, p = 0.01 (i.e., at 
the 99% level); ** = confidence from 99% to 100% confidence level, or p = 0.01 or less.  
 
Figure 3. Progress for the Tech (treatment group) with significance values (*/**)  
David Barr, Jonathan Leakey, and Alexandre Ranchoux  TOLD Like It Is! 
 
Language Learning & Technology 68 
 
Figure 4. Progress for the Non-Tech (comparison group) with significant values (*/**)  
Research Question 2: What factors may affect students' oral language development when using 
computers? 
Tables 6 and 7 and Figure 3 and 4 reflect the progress made in both groups with the comparison group 
actually showing more areas (overall total, one task, and all five skills) than the treatment group (overall 
total, one task, and only two skills) of significant progress that cannot be attributable to chance. Neither of 
the remaining tasks (Task 4, the hear-and- respond comprehension; and Task 5, the résumé of a video 
extract) showed significant improvement for either group. Such results must be left to one side. 
However, for the skills of fluency, content, and grammar, the comparison group did make significant 
progress while the treatment group did not. What factors were at play here? One is not so surprised that 
fluency and content improved more in the comparison group as more time was spent in this group on 
meaningful communication. What is more surprising is the fact that the treatment group, which had access 
to grammar drilling software with built-in feedback, did not progress more in the area of grammar. One 
would expect, however, that a group with access to CALL grammar reference and drilling tools as well as 
Web-based topic-based content would benefit in the longer term. 
The one task that both groups had in common in terms of significant progress made was Task 2 (the five 
personal questions) and the skills they had in common were pronunciation and accent/intonation. Progress 
in Task 2, one could say, is not a surprising outcome given that students are likely to feel most 
comfortable when talking about familiar topics such as themselves whatever the context (technology 
based or not). This tends to be the area that FLAs use to start weekly conversation classes. From a skills 
point of view, one would expect pronunciation and accent/intonation would be the skills that a 
conversation class with a native speaker would develop the most, again regardless of the environment. 
A configuration of our data sources might help to highlight those factors contributing to learning gains 
and differences across the two groups. The student logs, for example, point to the human element or lack 
of it as being a key factor influencing student (and to some extent staff) reactions. The qualitative analysis 
David Barr, Jonathan Leakey, and Alexandre Ranchoux  TOLD Like It Is! 
 
Language Learning & Technology 69 
below will assess this. Further research including targeted questions in a Focus group might also have got 
closer to the factors thrown up by the quantitative findings. A larger sample size would also have enabled 
multivariate analysis which would have highlighted possible other factors involved. 
SUMMARY OF QUANTITATIVE FINDINGS 
In answer to our first research question as to whether computer technology significantly enhances 
students' progress in oral language development we have drawn the following conclusions: 
1) The parametric and non-parametric results were very similar for all the tests analysed for this paper, 
implying that the sample size for these tests (N=29) was sufficiently reliable data from which to make 
inferences. Nevertheless, a larger sample size would be preferable from which to make generalizable 
statements. 
2) The language learning experience survey showed that both the treatment and the comparison groups 
were, when viewed as a whole, starting from the same ability/experience benchmark. This went some 
way towards countering the skewing effect that might have been caused by the fact that these groups 
were not randomly selected but self-selecting according to course. 
3) Given that our data showed that the CALL environment did lead to improvement we might have been 
tempted initially to reject our null hypothesis (that the CALL context does not make a significant 
difference to oral language development). However, in the light of the between-subjects comparison 
(paired t-tests) we have seen that the difference/improvement cannot, over the short term in any case, 
be attributable to a computer-based environment since both groups progressed, and if anything the 
comparison group made more progress. We controlled as much as we could also for differences 
attributable to teacher input, by ensuring that the two native-speaker tutors both taught in each context 
and that the subject matter was similar.  
4) While both groups were shown to have made significant progress over the semester, the comparison 
group (Non-Tech) generally made more progress than the treatment (Tech) group. This can be seen 
by comparing, skill by skill, the mean of each group's progress from pre to post-test (see Table 2). 
This shows that the comparison group made significantly more progress than the treatment group, 
which also made progress. The average percentage gain for the treatment group was 5.44, whereas 
that of the comparison group was 15.64.  
5) It is now clear that two alternative hypotheses will now need to be tested in greater depth: H1 = The 
CALL environment does make a positive difference in certain aspects (skills or tasks) of oral 
language development, such as accent and pronunciation/intonation; and H2 = The CALL 
environment hinders certain aspects (skills or tasks) of oral language development. 
In answer to our second research question which aimed at isolating the factors that may affect oral 
language development, the following conclusions were drawn: 
1) According to our statistical findings, it appears that the CALL environment inhibited progress in oral 
language development more than the traditional non-CALL setting. While overall both groups 
progressed, the comparison group showed significant progress in more oral skill areas than the 
treatment group. Nevertheless, given the cohort size, it would be inappropriate to say conclusively 
that the technology hindered performance. A more likely explanation would be that more of the 
curriculum could be covered in the Non-Tech classes than in the Tech group because time did not 
need to be spent adjusting to the technology and this ensured good linguistic progress could be made 
by those students not using technology.  
2) Factors that may have acted as inhibitors or brakes on progress may have been: the short length of the 
study so far combined with the fact that the treatment group lost some time actually getting used to 
David Barr, Jonathan Leakey, and Alexandre Ranchoux  TOLD Like It Is! 
 
Language Learning & Technology 70 
the computer-based environment and software, time which the other group were able to use on task; 
also the fact that the students and the teaching staff were novices in the CALL environment, which 
may have exacerbated resistance and reluctance on the part of some of them, just as much as for some 
it may have had a positive (Hawthorne) effect. We did not in this study isolate quantitatively which 
effect resulted in individual cases. However, it may be possible to map statements (positive or 
negative) from the student logs with individual scores to see if there was a correlation. Focus groups 
could have teased out the reasons on a skill by skill and task by task basis. 
3) A negative correlation was found to exist between student improvement over the semester and their 
language learning experience in both the treatment and comparison groups. In other words both 
contexts most encouraged the weaker students. Given that we have shown that the ICT environment 
did not contribute significantly to progress, we must look elsewhere for an explanation of this finding. 
It might, for example, be due to the smaller group context (as opposed to the more threatening lecture/ 
large seminar environment) and the closer attention students received in the experimental situation, 
which may have raised the confidence of the weaker students.  
4) No significant correlation was found to exist between ICT-use scores and progress and attendance 
and progress. The first variable (ICT-use) we attributed to the fact that this was a new ICT 
environment for most, if not all, and that new ICT skills were therefore being learned by all. The 
second variable (attendance) we felt was not significant given the short-term nature of the study. Both 
variables may well play a larger role in results over a longer-term study. 
QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS 
Even though the statistical evidence showed that the pedagogical benefit of using technology for oral 
work was unclear (thereby answering the first of our research questions), all the same, the effect of 
computer technology is not just measured in these terms. The views of students and staff towards the use 
of technology in oral language development also merit consideration to allow us to gauge the reaction of 
both groups to the technology and help us answer the third of our research questions. The qualitative 
evidence has been drawn from student and staff logs and reports as well as classroom observations. 
Acceptance by Learner 
The reaction of students towards the use of technology also helps us to consider some of the factors that 
may affect their oral development and therefore help us address the second of our research questions. In 
the treatment group, the initial weeks of the semester were spent learning how to use the multimedia lab 
technology. In the first few weeks, there were problems using the digital voice recorder. That said, 
however, what one student considers problematic, another student may find advantageous. This was the 
case with the use of headphones to record answers to a video comprehension. One student considered the 
headphones difficult to use, while another student welcomed using them as it meant answers to questions 
could be recorded without other students hearing what was said, which was less intimidating for the 
student. In addition, the information provided on the logs from students in the technology group made 
very little reference to problems using the technology and certainly the number of students who described 
these problems as affecting the efficacy of the classes was limited (one student). One possible explanation 
for this is that students saw beyond the shortcomings of the technology and felt it was making a 
difference in their learning because of the opportunities for practice through pronunciation exercises. This 
supports the findings of Burnage (2001), who discovered that the most popular CALL package among 
students at the University of Cambridge was a difficult-to-use DOS-based program, because students 
appreciated its pedagogical value (p. 169). 
The statistical data have shown that students made progress in oral development in both treatment and 
comparison groups and that this cannot easily be attributed to the use of technology. These findings are 
supported by the results of the student logs, which showed that every student (in both the comparison and 
David Barr, Jonathan Leakey, and Alexandre Ranchoux  TOLD Like It Is! 
 
Language Learning & Technology 71 
treatment group) who took the time to complete a log felt that progress in oral work was made in several 
of the areas listed in the oral skills checklist outlined earlier in this paper. The fact that the use of 
technology in this experiment did not add anything significant to the learning process calls into question 
the need for using it -- an issue that was not lost on the teaching colleagues in their assessment of the 
project. It also highlights a wider issue in the area of CALL and ICT -- whether perceived pedagogical 
benefit of technology corresponds to the actual benefit derived. Students in the treatment group were 
willing to use technology and generally were very upbeat about its use. In fact, in some cases the use of 
computer technology was cited as the most positive aspect of the classes, making classes more interesting. 
This supports a widely held view in CALL research that technology motivates students: even critics of 
CALL technology concede this point (Ross, 1991, p. 65). That said, however, improving motivation on its 
own does not mean that CALL is an effective pedagogical tool. In the case of this project, CALL software 
and resources were used to maximise the learning opportunities for students; however students in the 
comparison group were exposed to similar learning opportunities in more traditional surroundings. As a 
result, the pedagogical impetus for using the technology was lessened.  
Student logs also revealed that just under half the students in the treatment group (7 out of 15) described 
the group discussions and debates as the best aspect of the oral development classes. These activities were 
the least technological aspects of the oral development classes, although students in the treatment group 
used the Web to conduct research for ideas before starting the group debate. One of the main reasons 
given by students for this preference was that the debates allowed them to engage in meaningful and 
relevant, "message-orientated" communication. This feedback highlights an important question regarding 
the use of computer technology in oral development: Is message-orientated communication enhanced by 
technology? The technology may help in the development and practice of oral skills through drill and 
practice and pronunciation exercises (the rehearsal stage) but its role in the application of this practice 
(the performance stage) is not as clear. This differs from other language skills where technology can be 
used for both stages. Written skills, for example can be practised through CALL exercises, and it is 
possible to put these skills into practice through e-mail or other forms of text-based electronic 
communication. 
Acceptance by Tutor 
Discussions with the tutors showed that they were not opposed to the technology in itself, but felt it did 
not always fit in with the aims of the oral classes. One colleague remarked that the use of headphones in 
the multimedia lab created a gap between the students and her. The staff feedback in general pointed to a 
dehumanisation of oral classes when technology is introduced, and this was supported from classroom 
observations. In the early classes, computer technology was used for many aspects of student-staff oral 
communication, even though everyone was situated in the same room: in those circumstances, technology 
was creating an artificial barrier for all concerned. Such a barrier made it difficult for the tutors to 
appreciate the potential of using computer technology -- a theory that is supported by Partee (1996, p. 79). 
These views showed that unlike students, they had more reservations about using the technology because 
it did not seem to contribute to the learning outcomes of the oral classes. As a result, we found the tutors 
reaction to be one of pragmatism, in other words, only using the technology when it makes a difference to 
the learning process, a view confirmed by Gillespie and Barr (2002, p. 131).  
See Appendix C for a tabular comparison of the benefits of a CALL and non-CALL environment for oral 
language development classes drawn up as a result of our experiences with the TOLD project. 
David Barr, Jonathan Leakey, and Alexandre Ranchoux  TOLD Like It Is! 
 
Language Learning & Technology 72 
CONCLUSION 
The results of this paper are inconclusive in proving whether computer technology makes a significant 
difference in enhancing students' oral language development. Clearly, this study was limited by time, 
which meant that the experiment was really only effective over a 10-week period. Conducting the 
research over a longer period might reveal more definitive conclusions.  
Despite the limitations of the project, our findings show that one main factor affected such development. 
The content of the classes meant that the use of technology in this project was not always relevant in 
achieving learning outcomes. This may also help us to explain why the students who did not use 
technology seemed to perform better: the students and the tutor in the comparison group did not need to 
spend valuable time in class to learn how to use the technology. The time taken up learning and using the 
technology in the treatment group was used for valuable oral practice in the comparison group. Other 
possible factors may be prior use and experience of ICT and attendance, although the results of this paper 
do not demonstrate a significant correlation between student performance and these factors and more 
evidence is required. Other factors, such as student learning styles may well be a significant variable and 
this is being looked at as part of a longer-term study.  
Despite the inconclusive findings of the paper, we have discovered that students in general welcome the 
use of computer technology to enhance oral skills. In general, students saw the benefits of using computer 
technology for drilling oral skills such as pronunciation, although when it came to using these skills for 
meaningful communication, the traditional approach of class discussions and one to one conversations 
without any technology proved more successful. These findings are broadly confirmed by the reaction of 
the class tutors who believed that oral communication skills in a "real" context are best developed through 
spontaneous contact with human tutors and classmates. Under the current arrangements, technology is 
perhaps better kept out of free conversation and integrated more into pronunciation drilling and the 
development of associated skills as well as opening up the possibilities for video and audio conferencing, 
including tandem oral work with students from francophone universities. This would require a 
redefinition of the format of free oral conversation classes at Ulster. 
FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS 
After running the project for one semester, a number of lessons have been learned and the experiment will 
be repeated subject to the following changes: 
1) carry out the project over a longer period (one academic year as opposed to one semester and to 
repeat the project with the following year's cohort of first year students); 
2) re-visit the variables studied in the pilot project (ICT-use, language learning experience and 
attendance) to see whether over the longer period of the study their correlation with progress is more 
significant; 
3) explore more comprehensively the influence of different variables such as gender and learning style; 
4) develop individualized learning paths based on diagnostic surveys and tests, to cater for all levels of 
student ability;  
5) modify the pedagogy used in the pilot project to make the technology more relevant to the learning 
experience (e.g., explore the possibilities of message-orientated communication locally, for example,  
turning the multimedia lab into a newsroom, and remotely, including cross-campus and international 
multimedia video conferencing); and 
6) pay heed to a recent study by Hubbard (2004, p. 165) of over 90 research articles which sounds a note 
of caution regarding the overdependence on using for research data what he calls "neophytes" to the 
David Barr, Jonathan Leakey, and Alexandre Ranchoux  TOLD Like It Is! 
 
Language Learning & Technology 73 
CALL environment. He found that a high percentage of CALL research appears to have the following 
characteristics: 
• Research subjects, whether students or teachers, are novices to CALL. 
• They are also novices to the task or application under study. 
• They are often studied exclusively during their initial experience. 
 
APPENDIX A. Sample Lesson Plan With Follow-Up Activity 
Activity -- Week 3 
"Une loi contre les signes religieux ostensibles à l'école"  
Première partie: Compréhension orale  
2 écoutes successives du texte (écoute a froid, sans aucun support) 
1ere écoute des questions (idem) 
Re-écoute du texte 
2ème écoute des questions 
Ecoute découpée du texte 
Deuxième partie: Production orale 
3ème écoute des questions Réponses des étudiants pour chacune des questions 
1er travail sur la prononciation Répétition de mots et d'expressions entendues 
2ème travail sur la prononciation Lecture du texte par les étudiants 
 
Questions posées aux étudiants 
1) A quelle date a été remis le rapport? 
2) Qu'est-ce qui va être interdit à l'école? 
3) A qui le rapport a-t-il été remis? 
4) Combien y a-t-il de propositions dans le rapport? 
5) Quel adjectif caractérise les signes qui vont être interdits dans les écoles? 
6) De quelles religions sont les fêtes qui vont devenir jours fériés? 
7) Quel code va être modifié? 
8) A quelle date le Président de la République s'est-il prononcé sur le rapport? 
9) Est-il favourable ou non à ce rapport? 
10) Qu'en est-il du projet actuellement ? 
Mots & expressions à répéter 
La commission -- La commission Stasi sur la laïcité -- les signes religieux ostensibles -- le principe de 
laicite -- une appartenance religieuse ou politique -- la santé publique -- les jours fériés -- le Code du 
travail -- un jour de fête religieuse -- le credit de jours fériés -- favorable au projet -- entre les mains des 
parlementaires. 
French Oral Skills Checklist 
• Pronunciation √ 
• Accent and intonation √ 
• Fluency √ 
• One-to-one with a French person √ 
• One-to-one with an English speaker   
David Barr, Jonathan Leakey, and Alexandre Ranchoux  TOLD Like It Is! 
 
Language Learning & Technology 74 
• Responding spontaneously in a conversation   
• Responding to visual or aural input (e.g., from TV/radio)  √ 
• Taking an active part in a structured group discussion   
• Taking an active part in an unstructured group discussion   
• Giving a group presentation   
• Giving a presentation on my own   
 
Follow-up: Listen-Watch-Respond-Discuss Activity 
In another class, students in both groups watched a video extract on the theme of "laïcité." This was a 
news clip from a TV5 satellite broadcast, which had been recorded in analogue format (for the 
comparison group) and then digitised for the treatment group. Each class was divided into two groups 
(one group for and one group against) in order to prepare answers to these questions and to lead into a 
discussion of the topic of wearing of Islamic head-dress in French educational establishments. 
 
APPENDIX B. Descriptive Statistics -- The Collated Raw Data 
The following is an analysis of individual learning gains. 
Here we present the collated raw data showing, individual scores for the predictor (or independent) 
variables of attendance, language learning experience, and ICT-use, and the individual scores for the 
outcome (or dependent) variables of the pre- and posttest, as well as the difference between the two. 
These are all expressed as percentages. 
In the following table, N=30 (10 males, 20 females; however 1 female in the non-tech group was absent 
for the post-test, reducing N to 29 for most comparisons). Also, 
 Column 1 1 = Tech group (the treatment or test group) = 15; 
2 = Non-Tech group (the comparison group) = 15 
 Column 2 1 = male student; 2 = female student 
 Column 3 Attendance score; maximum possible was 12 hours out of 12 
 Columns 4 & 5 Percentage scores for the identical pre- and posttests 
 Column 6 Denotes the difference between students' pre- and post-test scores 
 Column 7 The language learning experience survey score. This score represents a 
combination of objective measures (e.g., qualifications/ amount of time spent in 
the foreign country) for which we devised our own scoring system, and subjective 
measures (e.g., students' assessment of their own confidence and fluency levels in 
their language skills) for which we asked them to give a score on a scale of 1-5. 
The scores showed a measure of comparability between the groups in that the 
mean of each group's survey was nearly identical: 58.2% for the Tech group and 
58% for the Non-Tech group. Of course, comparability student to student would 
be much more difficult to obtain. 
 Column 8 The ICT-use survey. This percentage score summarises a range of student 
responses covering their experience of using a range of applications (word-
processing; spreadsheets; databases; WWW, etc.), their frequency of use of these 
applications, their access to computers in university and at home, and also their 
use of mobile phones. Most of these scores were given on a 1-5 scale. 
 
David Barr, Jonathan Leakey, and Alexandre Ranchoux  TOLD Like It Is! 
 
Language Learning & Technology 75 
Spreadsheet of Collated Raw Data for Full Cohort (Tech and Non-Tech), Showing N=29 in Most Cases 
(TOLD Project, Semester 2, April 2003) 
Oral Group 
Tech (1); 
Non-Tech (2) 
Gender 
M (1); 
F (2) 
Attendance 
% classes 
(max = 
12/12) 
Pre-test 
% 
Post-test 
% 
Post less Pre 
% 
Language 
learning 
experience 
survey % 
ICT-use 
survey % 
1 1 90 76 78 2 69 64 
1 1 90 65 69 4 51 73 
1 2 80 50 71 21 39 - 
1 2 90 89 86 -3 58 48 
1 2 80 67 74 7 53 71 
1 2 50 45 64 19 49  
1 1 80 79 87 8 76 58 
1 1 100 95 86 -9 73 71 
1 2 80 70 86 16 57  
1 2 67 78 78 0 57 55 
1 2 92 57 68 11 60 61 
1 2 75 68 71 3 58 71 
1 2 67 72 81 9 62 66 
1 2 67 77 80 3 57 52 
1 2 75 71 79 8 44 53 
2 2 80 47 62 15 59 64 
2 2 40 73 absent - 60 - 
2 2 70 76 89 13 69 - 
2 1 50 61 70 9 64 - 
2 1 50 77 79 2 77 - 
2 2 90 63 84 21 44 68 
2 2 100 81 89 8 53 50 
2 1 70 74 82 8 60 - 
2 1 30 50 75 25 65 - 
2 2 100 69 86 17 54 59 
2 2 100 64 72 8 67 53 
2 2 70 72 87 15 50 66 
2 1 90 77 74 -3 58 - 
2 2 90 54 79 25 spoiled - 
2 1 70 44 53 9 54 46 
 
David Barr, Jonathan Leakey, and Alexandre Ranchoux  TOLD Like It Is! 
 
Language Learning & Technology 76 
APPENDIX C. Comparative Benefits of a CALL and Non-CALL Environment for Oral Language 
Development Classes 
Benefits of Computer Technology in Oral 
Language Development 
Benefits of Technology-free Oral Language 
Development classes 
Monitoring 
• Tutors can monitor and intervene unobtrusively 
in students' activities in a number of ways that 
are not available in analogue language lab facility 
or traditional classroom context (keyboard, 
screen and mouse control). 
• Monitoring and intervention is less discreet in 
traditional classroom context. 
Pronunciation 
• Students can listen repeatedly to the recording of 
their own efforts against the standard of the 
native speaker 
• Students have individual access to resources on 
the Web, which give coaching in pronunciation, 
extending the boundaries of the classroom. 
• Sometimes a student can go through a whole 
class without having spoken more than seconds/ 
a few minutes of French 
• Students cannot hear their own voice played back 
to compare against the native speaker or after 
correction 
• The tolerance threshold of the teacher is variable 
and can be more flexible than CALL packages. 
Responding spontaneously in a conversation 
• Possibility for distance learning through 
computer-mediated video conferencing software, 
with target language institutions 
• Development of banks of role plays that are 
accessible on demand 
• Traditional class lends itself better to this form of 
interaction 
Responding to visual or aural input (eg. From TV/Radio) 
• A digital lab with streamed digital video/audio 
providing individual access and control of 
PLAY/PAUSE/ REWIND functions and the 
recording of student responses to stimuli or 
questions. Teacher can also take control of 
student consoles 
• The traditional approach with one teacher and 
access to just one TV/Video/DVD player does 
not allow for individual control -- the advantage 
of this is that the teacher may not always want 
the students to have control. 
Taking an active part in a group discussion 
• Possibility for distance learning through 
computer-mediated video conferencing software, 
with target language institutions 
• Traditional classroom is better suited to this 
activity in the same room. 
Giving a presentation 
• Advantage of a multimedia lab would mainly be 
for those presentations where the presenters wish 
for the audience to take an active part in looking 
at/hearing and responding to material on line 
• Best advantage at a distance 
• More suitable where audience are in passive 
mode and where the presenters wish their faces to 
be seen by audience 
 
David Barr, Jonathan Leakey, and Alexandre Ranchoux  TOLD Like It Is! 
 
Language Learning & Technology 77 
NOTES 
1. For example, an analysis of the titles of all of the articles that appeared in one of the leading CALL 
journals, ReCALL, between 2000 and 2004 reveals that the word "oral" appeared only twice. 
2. A quasi-experimental study is different from an experimental study in that, while both have pre- and 
posttests and treatment and control groups, in the former there is no random assignment of subjects (see 
Nunan, 1992, p. 41). For this reason, too, we have used the term "comparison" group (rather than 
"control" group), as in our case the division into groups was not random but determined by the course and 
timetabling/teaching group considerations. 
3. Project documentation such as the pre- and posttests, the surveys, and some lesson plans are available 
online at http://www.arts.ulster.ac.uk/lanlit/french/research/told/ 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
David Barr teaches French at the University of Ulster. He completed his PhD in the area of computer-
based language-learning environments and has published articles and a book in this area. He is a member 
of IALLT and EUROCALL and is the UK's national representative for the EUROCALL organisation. 
Email: jd.barr@ulster.ac.uk  
Jonathan Leakey is a Lecturer in French and German in the School of Languages and Literature at the 
University of Ulster, Northern Ireland. His principal research interest is computer-assisted language 
learning. He is currently undertaking doctoral research in the area of quantitative measurement of student 
progress in CALL. 
Email: ja.leakey@ulster.ac.uk 
Alexandre Ranchoux is currently a full-time PhD student at the University of Ulster, researching the area 
of pedagogy in CALL. 
Email: a.ranchoux@ulster.ac.uk  
 
REFERENCES 
TellMeMore (Version 5) [Computer software]. Tempe, AZ: Auralog. Information is available at 
http://www.auralog.com/en/tellmemore.html 
Boullier, D. (2000). La loi du support: Leçons de trois ans d'enseignement numérique à distance [The 
golden rules of pedagogical support: lessons learned from 3 years of distance digital teaching]. Les 
cahiers numériques, 1(2), 145.  
Burnage, G. (2001). Approaches to university network-based language learning. ReCALL, 13(2), 167-178. 
Dodson, C. J. (1978). Bilingual education in Wales. Schools Council Committee for Wales, pp. 5-11.  
Driscoll, M. P. (1994). Psychology of learning for instruction. Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon. 
Felix, U. (2001). The Web's potential for language learning: The student's perspective. ReCALL, 13(1), 
47-58. 
Gillespie, J. H., & Barr, J. D. (2002). Resistance, reluctance and radicalism: A study of staff reaction to 
the adoption of CALL/C&IT in modern languages departments. ReCALL, 14(1), 120-132. 
David Barr, Jonathan Leakey, and Alexandre Ranchoux  TOLD Like It Is! 
 
Language Learning & Technology 78 
Gillespie, J. H., & McKee, J. (1999). Resistance to CALL: Degrees of student reluctance to use CALL 
and ICT. ReCALL, 11(1), 38-46. 
Goodfellow, R., Jeffreys, I., Miles, T., & Shirra, T. (1996). Face-to-face language learning at a distance? 
A study of a videoconference try-out. ReCALL, 8(2), 5-16. 
Hincks, R. (2003). Speech technologies for pronunciation feedback and evaluation. ReCALL, 15(1), 3-20. 
Hubbard, P. (2004, September). Some subject, treatment and data collection trends in current CALL 
research. In 11th International CALL Conference on CALL & Research Methodologies -- Proceedings. 
Antwerp, University of Antwerp, 165-166. 
Levy, M. (1997). Computer-assisted language learning: Context and conceptualization. Oxford: 
Clarendon. 
Levy, M. (2000). Scope, goals and methods in CALL research: Wuestions of coherence and autonomy. 
ReCALL, 12(2), 170 – 195. 
Nunan, D. (1992). Research methods in language learning. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Partee, M. (1996). Using e-mail, Web sites & newsgroups to enhance traditional classroom instruction. 
T.H.E. Journal, 23(11), 79 – 82. 
Reeves, T. (1993). Pseudoscience in computer based instruction: The case of learner control research. 
Journal of Computer Based Instruction, 20(2), 39-46. 
Ross, M. (1991). The CHILL factor (or computer hindered language learning). Language Learning 
Journal, 4, 65-66. 
Salaberry, M. R. (1996). A theoretical foundation for the development of pedagogical tasks in computer 
mediated communication. CALICO Journal, 14(1), 5-36. 
Schmitt, R. (1991). Methodological weaknesses with CAI research. Journal of Computer Based 
Instruction, 18(1), 75 – 76. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press. 
Warschauer, M. (1996). Computer-assisted language learning: An introduction. In S. Fotos (Ed.), 
Multimedia language teaching (pp. 3-20). Tokyo: Logos International.  
Warschauer, M., & Healey, D. (1998). Computers and language learning: An overview. Language 
Teaching, 31, 57-71. 
