Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num3/jepson/ 
September 2005, Volume 9, Number 3 
pp. 79-98 
 
Copyright © 2005, ISSN 1094-3501 79 
CONVERSATIONS -- AND NEGOTIATED INTERACTION -- 
IN TEXT AND VOICE CHAT ROOMS 
Kevin Jepson 
Monterey Institute of International Studies 
ABSTRACT 
Despite the expanded use of the Internet for language learning and practice, little attention if any 
has been given to the quality of interaction among English L2 speakers in conversational text or 
voice chat rooms. This study explored the patterns of repair moves in synchronous non-native 
speaker (NNS) text chat rooms in comparison to voice chat rooms on the Internet. The following 
questions were posed: (a) Which types of repair moves occur in text and voice chats; and (b) what 
are the differences, if any, between the repair moves in text chats and voice chats when time is 
held constant? Repair moves made by anonymous NNSs in 10, 5-minute, synchronous chat room 
sessions (5 text-chat sessions, 5 voice-chat sessions) were counted and analyzed using chi-square 
with alpha set at .05. Significant differences were found between the higher number of total repair 
moves made in voice chats and the smaller number in text chats. Qualitative data analysis showed 
that repair work in voice chats was often pronunciation-related. The study includes discussion 
that may affect teachers' and learners' considerations of the value of NNS chat room interaction 
for second language development. 
 
LANGUAGE LEARNING VIA INTERACTION AND REPAIR MOVES  
Social interaction is essential to language learning, according to the arguments presented by studies based 
in the communicative approach to language teaching (see, e.g., Hall & Verplaetse, 2000; Lantolf, 2000; 
Long, 1983, 1996; Pica, 1994). Empirical evidence suggests that social interaction is a wellspring for 
negotiation of meaning, a communicative exchange that sustains and repairs conversations (Long 1983, 
1996; Pica, 1994). Negotiation of meaning is a cognitive process that speakers use to better understand 
one another, that is, to increase the comprehensibility of language input. Furthermore, negotiation of 
meaning may result in modified interaction (Ellis, Tanaka, & Yamazaki, 1994; Pica, 1994; Smith, 2004), 
which ostensibly optimizes second language acquisition (SLA; Ellis et al., Gass, 1997). Modified 
interaction, as defined by Long (1983), is partly accomplished through the conversational repair moves of 
negotiation of meaning, including utterances such as clarification requests, comprehension checks, and 
incorporations in learners' speech.  
In addition to increasing the comprehensibility of input, negotiation of meaning may also raise speakers' 
awareness of target language forms. Speakers may be alerted that their speech is inaccurate when 
interlocutors make the repair moves of negative feedback, such as the recasts and explicit corrections 
interlocutors make to inform speakers of grammatical inaccuracies (Ellis, 1995; Gass, 1997; Long, 1996; 
Mackey, 1999; Spada, 1997). As a result, if the speaker recognizes the various types of negative feedback 
provided by interlocutors, the speaker may attempt to self-correct (Long, 1996).  
The repair moves related to negotiation of meaning and negative feedback may do more than increase the 
potential for accuracy and comprehensible input. Swain (1985) emphasized that repair moves force 
learners subsequently to generate modified output, or self-correction. Swain argued that when speakers 
seek comprehension using only the receptive modalities of listening, they may not pay attention to their 
syntactic development. However, when speakers engage their productive modalities by speaking, they 
may be pushed to pay attention and change their syntactic output in order to communicate effectively. In 
the same vein of research, Pica (1994) established that non-native speakers (NNS) modify their language 
Kevin Jepson Conversation -- and Negotiated Interaction...  
 
Language Learning & Technology 80 
output lexically, syntactically, and phonologically in order to make their messages clearer. Lyster (1998) 
posited that NNSs pay attention and modify grammatical form and proceduralize their language 
competence during modified negotiation. Swain (1995) concluded that output may enhance language 
accuracy in the following four ways: Output may provide learners with opportunities to (a) notice gaps 
between their language and the target language; (b) test their hypotheses about appropriate target 
language use; and (c) apply metalinguistic knowledge during the process of noticing gaps and confirming 
hypotheses. Thus, a speaker's output may lend to second language development by increasing language 
accuracy, intelligibility, and appropriacy (Lyster, 1998; Pica, 1994; Shehadeh, 1999; Swain, 1995).  
In particular, certain conversational repair moves may be more conducive than others to generating 
modified output (Pica, Holliday, Lewis, & Morgenthaler, 1989) and increased accuracy (Nobuyoshi & 
Ellis, 1993). Indeed, Pica et al. noticed that the types of repair moves affected the amount of modified 
output more than the type of tasks in which speakers engaged. Subsequent studies showed that 
clarification requests in particular pushed speakers to produce modified output that was more accurate 
both in regards to tense and syntax (Linnell, 1995; Nobuyoshi & Ellis, 1993). Shehadeh (2001) found that 
self-initiated modified output is important to consider along with other-initiated modified output. Finally, 
from a pedagogical perspective, the interactionist principles outlined here, including negotiation of 
meaning and modified output as well as negative feedback, are advocated by many coursebooks, 
including those by Ellis (1999), Gass and Selinker (2001), Hall and Verplaetse (2000), and Richards 
(1998), and recently for the computer-mediated communication (CMC) environment by Doughty and 
Long (2003) as part of their Language Teaching Methodological Principles for CALL (computer-assisted 
language learning). 
Non-Native Speakers Negotiating With Non-Native Speakers  
Research on exclusively non-native speaker interaction has most often focused on repair moves made 
while performing set tasks (see, e.g., Iwashita, 2001; Pica, Lincoln-Porter, Paninos, & Linnell, 1996; 
Shehadeh, 1999). Iwashita conducted an empirical study of how differences in Japanese NNSs' language 
proficiency impacted repair moves and modified output in three task types, concluding that groups of 
learners of either similar or different proficiency levels may derive valuable interactional benefits. In 
English NNS-NNS task-based interaction, Shehadeh found a greater amount of negotiation stemming 
from NNS-NNS interactions than from NNS-NS interactions. One study found that the modified 
interaction and feedback in Japanese NNSs of English was comparable in regards to quality and quantity 
as NS-NNS interactions (Pica et al., 1996). 
At the same time, the benefits of NNS face-to-face "spontaneous" conversational interaction with other 
non-native speakers have been reported (Ellis et al., 1994; Gass, 1997; Mackey, 1999; Pica, 1994). 
Varonis and Gass (1985) discovered a greater degree of repair work in conversations between NNSs of 
diverse backgrounds and English language proficiency, as compared to conversations held by control 
groups of NS-NNS and NS-NS. Van Lier and Matsuo (2000) corroborated similar findings in three NNS 
conversations, and both studies found that in conversations between NNSs of similar proficiency and 
backgrounds, repair moves were used less often. In the text and voice chat environment, NNS dyads were 
found to produce more negotiation moves than NS-NNS dyads, according to Sauro (2001). 
Online Language Learning and Interaction 
In the past decade, opportunities for language learning have evolved beyond the limits of time and place 
that are inherent to face-to-face interaction (Blake, 2000). Electronic wide-area networks, spread across 
the World Wide Web, connect speakers from a wide range of backgrounds and enable expanded 
opportunities for social interaction and language learning (Bonk & Kim, 1998). Indeed, the online 
language learning environment has greatly impacted the cognitive and social aspects of language learning. 
Interaction patterns sway -- and are swayed by -- the unique social activity of the electronic context. Over 
their computers and the Internet, early-morning risers from Japan may chat with Brazilian night owls; 
Kevin Jepson Conversation -- and Negotiated Interaction...  
 
Language Learning & Technology 81 
English teachers in Florida can teach a multicultural group of students across the globe. Typed messages 
are used to interact in real-time text chats. These messages have evolved as a new hybrid of spoken, 
written, and electronic chat discourse (Blake, 2000; Muniandy, 2002; Sullivan & Pratt, 1996; Warschauer, 
1996; Werry, 1996). For example, Muniandy and Werry both found that text chat participants used more 
short forms and contractions than in other written forms. Warschauer and Ortega (1999) found that the 
discourse of text chats was more complex and formal than face-to-face interaction, yet revealed fewer of 
the elements of negotiation of meaning and negative feedback. 
Likewise, sociocultural patterns have emerged from the anonymous nature of the online environment, 
where students can participate with nicknames, "faceless." Some participants use Internet chat rooms to 
play out their fantasy selves, for example (Turkle, 1995). Socioeconomic and gender roles may be 
reversed (Huff & King, 1988; McGuire, Kiesler, & Siegel, 1987): McGuire et al. found that in networked 
decision-making experiments, female executives were just as likely as male executives to be the first to 
suggest proposals, whereas in face-to-face discussions, men were five times as likely to be the first to put 
forth proposals. Both learning environment and sociocultural patterns are important considerations in 
language learning, because they certainly influence language development (Lantolf, 2000; Spolsky, 
1989). Furthermore, Internet chats may facilitate the conditions for optimal language learning 
environments (Egbert, Chao, & Hanson-Smith, 1999). Thus, teachers, learners, and researchers alike may 
have much to gain from the growing distance-learning environment. 
Synchronous Text and Voice Chat for Language Learning 
The popularity and significance of the synchronous chat room for language learning is increasing; 
therefore, it is presumably imperative to investigate aspects of language development that may result 
(Doughty & Long, 2003; Ortega, 1997; Smith, 2003; Warschauer & Kern, 2000). Synchronous chat 
environments are conducive to investigations of interactionist theory (Blake, 2000; Smith, 2004). In text 
chat rooms, language learners converse in real-time using personal computers and the Internet to send 
typed messages, which appear within seconds on their interlocutors' computer screens. Each textual turn 
appears in the same format in which it was sent, containing the learner's language and typographical 
errors. 
Because of its real-time nature, text chat is lauded for resembling face-to-face interaction, and thus may 
carry many of the same language development benefits such as negotiation for meaning and repair moves 
(Smith, 2003; Warschauer, 1996). For example, Sotillo (2000) found that participants in synchronous text 
chat sessions used interactional modifications similar to those used in face-to-face sessions. A number of 
studies have noted that NNSs pay more attention to their lexical development than their grammatical 
development while negotiating for meaning in both networked and face-to-face environments (Blake, 
2000; Pellettieri, 2000; Smith, 2003).  
Of course, not all aspects of the text chat and face-to-face environments are similar. In text chat, it is 
possible for several participants to send messages simultaneously and regarding unrelated and previously 
abandoned topics, thus creating a discourse sequence that is different from face-to-face, where 
participants often speak in turn on a single topic thread (Doughty & Long, 2003; Negretti, 1999). As a 
result, the text chat environment may promote more of a need for repair moves due to breakdowns in 
communication related to topic incoherence (Herring, 1999; Werry, 1996). Furthermore, negotiation 
routines in task-based synchronous chat may differ slightly from face-to-face interaction, due to features 
such as potential delay in repair after a communication breakdown and continued negotiation well after an 
initial repair or piece of negative feedback (Smith, 2003). These features are largely due to the fact that 
participants in text chat often do not adhere to turn adjacency conventions that face-to-face speakers 
follow (Smith; Werry). 
Even though text chat withstands comparison to face-to-face interaction, it may be that voice chat 
negotiation routines are an even closer hybrid of face-to-face interaction. In voice chats, learners orally 
Kevin Jepson Conversation -- and Negotiated Interaction...  
 
Language Learning & Technology 82 
converse in real-time using personal computers, the Internet, microphones, and earphones or speakers. 
Each spoken turn is transmitted within seconds, and is broadcast with varying degrees of clarity over the 
interlocutor's headphones or speakers. Whereas text chat participants in this study did not practice face-to-
face turn-adjacency conventions or adhere to discourse coherence structures, voice chat participants did. 
Unlike face-to-face interaction, however, voice chat speakers cannot see one another or one another's 
environment, gestures, or facial expressions.  
Unlike text chat, there is a meager quantity of published research concerning second languages and voice 
chat at the time of this writing. The only published study found reported on how two NNSs of English 
shifted positions of power in task-based interaction depending on which of the two chat room modes they 
used, either text or voice, and the modality they used, either written or oral (Sauro, 2004). Sauro's 
findings, however, would not seem to directly contribute to the present study, which investigated 
cognitive aspects of conversational repair. 
Chat, Sociocultural Theory, and Cognitive Processes 
Sociocultural corollaries of Internet text chat interaction have been detailed. Various accounts suggest 
that, as compared to face-to-face interaction, computer-mediated communication (CMC) has an 
equalizing effect on the quantity and quality of participation across gender, socioeconomic status, and 
age, because participants feel less anxious or shy (Beauvois, 1992; Kelm, 1992; Kern, 1995; Sullivan & 
Pratt, 1996; Warschauer, 1996, 2000). Consequently, students may also be more willing to experiment 
with linguistic forms (Kelm, 1996; Kern; Turbee, 1996, 1999). Warschauer (2000) reported that 
participants felt a resultant empowerment from discussing topics important to their identities and from 
increased electronic literacy.  
Conversely, an English e-mail discussion list was the basis for learner frustration due to the considerable 
control teachers brandished during the electronic interaction (Warschauer & LePeintre, 1997). In addition, 
Sauro (2004) questioned the idea that electronic chat rooms necessarily engender democratic 
relationships, discovering a shifting power relationship between the same two speakers in text and voice 
chat rooms. Even so, text chat seems to enable participants from varying levels of expertise to assist one 
another in co-constructing social activity (Ortega, 1997; St. John & Cash, 1995; Schultz, 1996; Warner, 
2004). 
Research on sociocultural corollaries of text chat has been complemented by investigations into cognitive 
processes and resulting modified interaction (Pellettieri 1996, 2000; Iwasaki & Oliver, 2003; Smith, 2003, 
2004), which are more closely related to purposes of the present study. In the electronic realm, repair 
moves in English NS-NNS electronic text conversations have been confirmed (Rodriguez, 1998; Smith, 
2004). Smith (2003) discovered in a study of task-based (teacher-set or teacher-led) chat that about one 
third of the total turns taken by English learners were related to negotiation. In a study of NNSs and 
teachers in English for Academic Purposes (EAP) classes, chat tools were used in set tasks between NNSs 
and teachers as well as exclusively amongst NNSs to negotiate meaning regarding both language and 
content (Chen, Belkada, & Okamoto, 2004). Similarly, Smith (2004) found that task-based text chat 
engendered negotiation of meaning as well as short-term SLA amongst NNSs of English, especially 
surrounding attempts to resolve confusion over lexical items.  
In research on languages other than English, Pellettieri (1996, 2000) suggested that electronic, task-based, 
synchronous text discussions between Spanish NNS university students triggered a higher degree of 
repair work than did face-to-face interaction. In addition, the task-based chats facilitated negotiation of 
meaning that was meaning- and form-related. In a separate study of task-based text chat, Spanish L2 
participants who were part of an experimental group of teacher-led chat and classroom interaction 
demonstrated gains in their oral proficiency that were greater than their counterparts in the control group 
of teacher-led classroom interaction (Payne & Whitney, 2002). Meanwhile, a study of negative feedback 
given by Japanese NSs to their NNS partners found that the NNSs were able to use negative feedback as a 
Kevin Jepson Conversation -- and Negotiated Interaction...  
 
Language Learning & Technology 83 
means to modify their output in task-based chat room interaction (Iwasaki & Oliver, 2003). The authors 
concluded that NNSs used more than a quarter of NS negative feedback in their subsequent production, a 
figure which was considered useful but lower than in previous face-to-face studies.  
Tudini's (2003) research is more closely related to the conversational variable of the present study, in that 
the research explored open-ended conversations regarding a set topic between Italian NSs and NNSs in 
text chats. Tudini discovered that speakers engaged in modified interaction, triggered mainly by lexical 
confusion, which could facilitate SLA. When investigating open-ended text chat conversations between 
Japanese NSs and NNSs, Toyoda and Harrison (2002) also discovered several triggers for repair moves 
and recommended that teachers attend to those triggers in task-based interaction. In light of these studies, 
the conversational mode of chat interaction is possibly significant to interactionist theories of second 
language development: Language learners may benefit from the opportunity to negotiate meaning in 
entirely authentic target language settings. Furthermore, authentic, conversational settings, which are 
typical of many online text and voice chat rooms, are often the most practical and accessible for people 
across the globe who are attempting to learn English.  
Sauro's (2001) unpublished work with text and voice chat and negotiation of meaning, which was set in 
task-based interactions, found that voice chat technology generated more challenging tasks for learners. 
However, as relates to the present study, published research concerning conversational repair moves 
between English NNSs in text and voice chats seems to be nonexistent at the time of this writing, which, 
along with the substantial amount of NNS interaction in text and voice chat rooms across the Web, 
implies that this study may be essential. As related to voice chat, the absence of research may be 
explained by the fact that voice-based chat technology is relatively new to online language schools. In any 
case, substantive research has emphasized the value of NNS conversations for language development 
(Nakahama, Tyler, & van Lier, 2001; Schwartz, 1980; van Lier & Matsuo, 2000; Varonis & Gass, 1985). 
Nakahama et al. (2001) acknowledged that conversational repair moves, as one facet of face-to-face 
conversation, may contribute to second language development. Hence, because of the potential value of 
NNS-NNS interaction for SLA, its practicality for language learners, and the increasing availability of 
chat rooms for conversation-based language learning, NNS-NNS conversational repair moves in both text 
and voice synchronous chat rooms deserve further investigation.  
Repair Moves in Text and Voice Chats 
The purpose of the exploratory research reported here was to investigate the differences in the repair 
moves used by NNSs during conversations in synchronous Internet chat rooms when (a) the chat was 
text-based and (b) the chat was voice-based. Because I am unaware of previous research conducted for 
this purpose, alpha level was set at .05 under a nondirectional (two-tailed) hypothesis. The research 
design is best described as mixed methods (Creswell, 2003), thus contrasting with the dominant 
experimental paradigm. Hypotheses were posed and tested in order to reveal any significant differences 
between the two pre-existing groups (text and chat); therefore, in the experimental tradition, the design is 
closest to ex post facto criterion groups (Hatch & Lazaraton, 1991; Shavelson, 1981). Naturalistic inquiry 
was used in the data collection process, with no attempt to influence the composition of the groups or the 
data produced (Nunan, 1992). At the same time, the data were categorized in the tradition of discourse 
analysis (Nunan). In addition, the data analysis bears interpretive discussion, often associated with 
interaction analysis (Nunan). The design is exploratory-quantitative-statistical (Grotjahn, 1987), and falls 
under the non-interventionist, structured "measuring" category, according to van Lier (1988).  
This study addressed the following questions: (a) Which types of repair moves occur in text and voice 
chats; and (b) What are the differences, if any, in the repair moves in text chats and the repair moves in 
voice chats when time is held constant? This investigation was justified by (a) previous research 
supporting the benefits of NNS-NNS interaction and the absence of parallel research in conversational 
chat rooms, and (b) questions surrounding the potential value, as measured by various repair moves, of 
Kevin Jepson Conversation -- and Negotiated Interaction...  
 
Language Learning & Technology 84 
both text and voice conversational chat rooms in providing opportunities for authentic target language 
interaction that is presumed to be conducive to second language development.  
METHOD 
The study was conducted in November 2002 by comparing repair moves performed by NNSs in five 5-
minute sessions of text chat interaction and, concurrently, in five 5-minute sessions of voice chat. Data 
were collected concurrently from the two environments. 
Participants 
The participants seemed to be NNSs of English at e-English,1 the world's largest private, online English 
language school, according to the company's Web site. The school ostensibly serves teenagers and adult 
learners and offers business, test preparation, industry-specific, travel, and general English courses. The 
number of participants in this study was set by the number of NNSs who actively participated in the 
random chat sessions sampled -- averaging six in the text chats and three in the voice chats. An active 
participant was defined as one who sent at least one message or spoke at least once during the 5 minutes. 
Although it was not possible to select sessions with the same number of participants, sessions occurring at 
the exact same time of day were selected in an attempt to control for possible shifts in energy levels, 
lifestyles, and other variables that might consequently affect participation.  
Participants were anonymous and used nicknames. They presumably logged in to the chat room willingly. 
Because of the inherent anonymity of the environment, participants rarely explicitly revealed personal 
background regarding gender, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, age, education, or native language. The 
gender of the participant was often identifiable due to the sound quality of the participant's voice; 
however, the participant's gender could not be verified simply by voice quality. Thus, the focus on 
physical and personal characteristics was largely absent from both text and voice chats, and aural cues 
were absent from the text chat as well. Anonymity and the electronic environment presented an 
opportunity for language, specifically chat room language, to be emphasized.  
The participants may have logged-in to the chat rooms for a multitude of reasons, including English 
language practice. All participants used English as the main language of communication. At the same 
time, many participants seemed to be bilingual or multilingual, and code switched frequently. In addition, 
participants seemed to belong to a group of people distinguished by multiple literacies, including varying 
degrees of reading, writing, and electronic literacies, and access to the Internet. There was session-to-
session variation in participants, that is, the set of participants who were active on a Saturday at 8:54 a.m. 
weren't the same set of participants active on a Monday at 9:51 a.m. Thus, there was no way to influence 
participant selection or to determine initial differences in participants. Certainly, the nature of the chat 
environment defied certain measures of research control due to some of the same factors that also made 
chat a unique opportunity for exploration. 
On the other hand, the environment inherently supported research control as well. For example, it could 
be argued that participant assignment was naturally random. Internal threats to validity posed by people 
issues, such as the Hawthorne effect (Mayo, 1933), the halo effect, or participant expectancy were 
minimized because participants did not know they were being observed (Hatch & Lazaraton, 1991; Smith, 
2003): I did not identify myself or participate (a "loitering" approach, which is acceptable chat room 
protocol). Participants were anonymous and their identities remained disguised in this research, thus 
meeting ethical guidelines set by the American Psychological Association (2002).2 
Equipment and Materials  
A personal desktop computer running Windows 98 on a local-area network, cable modem connection to 
the Internet was used to log-in to text chats at e-English. Simultaneously, a personal electronic notebook 
computer running Windows XP with a local-area network, cable modem connection to the Internet was 
Kevin Jepson Conversation -- and Negotiated Interaction...  
 
Language Learning & Technology 85 
used to log-in to voice chats at e-English. e-English makes five chat rooms available for each of the text 
and voice chats: Time to Meet, Re: English, Business, Hobbies, and Global Village. The name of the chat 
room seemed to have minimal, if any, effect on the data. Observations revealed that Hobbies and Global 
Village were rarely used, and that the chat conversation topics never seemed to be related to the name of 
the chat room. For example, participants seemed to introduce themselves, and then speak about their 
native countries and the languages they speak regardless of the name of the chat room. 
Text chats use e-English Java applet technology to facilitate instant messaging between participants. 
Voice chats use a proprietary Voice-over Internet Protocol (VoIP) telephony3 called HearMe, owned by 
PalTalk.4 Messages in the text sessions, which automatically appear on the computer screen, were copied 
and pasted into a Microsoft Word document and used as transcriptions for analysis. Due to the nature of 
the chat technology and the equipment used, it was not possible to observe if participants edited their own 
messages before they sent them. Therefore, some self-correction repair moves may not have been 
measurable (personal communication, LLT blind peer-review, October 19, 2004). Further research using 
equipment that records keystrokes might reveal information about additional, hidden self-correction 
moves by text-chat participants (LLT blind peer-review). Such research might help contribute to measures 
of self-correction and internal processing in the SLA field at large. Indeed, SLA research has not yet 
established what degree of self-correction occurs in face-to-face interaction as part of speakers' quiet or 
silent inner speech (Long & Robinson; 1998; Ohta, 2000). 
The voice sessions, for which transcripts were not automatically generated, were recorded live using 
Microsoft's digital Sound Recorder and then manually transcribed using word processing software. 
Because the participants most likely logged-in from different computer stations, it was impossible to 
control for environmental factors such as computer operating system, peripherals, including microphone 
and earphone, and Internet connection bandwidth. Variations in these environmental factors may have 
affected each participant's quantity and quality of participation. 
Procedures 
The study consisted of 10 groups (NNSs in 5 conversational text chat sessions and NNSs in 5 
conversational voice chat sessions), observed for 5 minutes during five different sessions on five different 
days. I signed up for an e-English user nickname (kjepson_kevin) and logged-in, without any unusual 
access or procedures. I observed the participants conversing in both the text and voice chats. I 
electronically copied and pasted the text messages regularly, as the technology only allowed for a 
maximum number of lines before the oldest messages disappeared from the screen. The messages were 
saved in a Microsoft Word document for later analysis.  
At the same time that I copied the messages from the text chat, I recorded the conversation in the voice 
chat room. The recorded digital audio file was then saved for transcription and analysis. I recorded at least 
5 minutes in order to provide a cushion against long periods of silence or disruption. After at least 5 
minutes of copying and recording, I logged-off of both the text and voice chats. Again, the environmental 
conditions were not controlled, save for consistent use by all participants of some form of computer with 
Internet access.  
Voice chat turn-taking was transcribed, revealing long periods of silence (pauses) between turns. Pauses 
sometimes lasted about one minute. VoIP technology has yet to be perfected, often resulting in lapses 
between the real-time utterances of interlocutors. I am unaware of previous research that has documented 
the length of pauses and the role of pauses in voice chats. For the present study, a pause of zero to six 
seconds between turns was established as a norm in voice chat conversation; all pauses beyond six 
seconds were noted. Care was taken to examine 5 minutes worth of actual oral data. Further research 
might illuminate conventions for pauses in voice chat, whether they are related to the technology or to 
language proficiency, and how they affect the social and cognitive factors of language development. 
Kevin Jepson Conversation -- and Negotiated Interaction...  
 
Language Learning & Technology 86 
ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION 
Measures of Repair Moves 
Repair moves were operationalized and counted according to two categories, Negotiation of Meaning 
(NOM) and Negative Feedback (NF) as shown in Table 1. 
Table 1. Codes and Operationalizations for Repair Moves in Text and Voice Chat Sessions 
  Negotiation of Meaning 
(NOM; Long, 1983) 
Negative Feedback 
(NF, Long, 1996) 
CR: clarification requests 
e.g., What do you mean by X? 
R: recasts (the interlocutor corrects the 
speaker's word or utterance by repeating 
it in its correct form) 
e.g., This city is beautiful in response to 
speaker's This city beautiful. 
EC: explicit correction (the interlocutor 
tells the speaker of his/her mistake)  
e.g., You should say, this city is beautiful. 
Interlocutors 
(responding to text or 
speech initiated by 
another speaker) 
CC: confirmation checks 
e.g., Did you mean/say X? 
Q: questions (the interlocutor asks a 
question in order to prompt the speaker to 
make a correction) 
e.g., Can you try that again? 
COMP C: comprehension checks 
e.g., Do you understand? 
I/F: incorporations (speaker repairs 
utterance based on interlocutor feedback; 
Lin & Hedgcock, 1996)  
e.g., in response to a correction, Sorry, 
this city is beautiful. 
SR/P: self-repetition or paraphrase 
e.g., Which / pli:s / uh, / pli:s /, uh which 
landmark can I visit 
Speakers 
(initiating text or 
speech) 
I: incorporations (speaker repairs 
utterance based on interlocutor cues; Lin 
& Hedgcock, 1996) 
e.g., in response to a clarification request, 
Yes, I mean X. 
SC: self-corrections (the speaker initiates 
adjustments to her or his own previous 
errors without assistance from the 
interlocutor)  
e.g., This has beeb, I mean been, great. 
After the data were collected (and transcribed from voice chats or copied from text chats), repair moves 
were coded with the acronyms shown in boldface type as in Table 1. The data were coded from the 
perspective that an interlocutor is the person making a repair move, and the speaker is the person making 
an utterance that triggers an interlocutor's repair move. In order to establish inter-coder agreement, two 
coders normed according to the preceding framework coded 20% of the data. First, the coders coded two 
half-sessions each of text and voice chat (four half-sections), discussing discrepancies as they coded. 
Then, the two coders independently coded another two half-sessions each of text and voice chat 
(Chaudron, 1988). Coders agreed on 89% of their coding, suggesting that the data were coded with strong 
consistency. 
Quantitative Methods 
The data analysis determined that both voice and text chats contain repair moves, namely clarification 
requests, confirmation checks, self-repetitions, incorporations, recasts, and explicit corrections. However, 
the data analysis showed no evidence of certain types of repair moves, namely comprehension checks, 
questions, and self-corrections. Quantitative methods were used to test null and alternative hypotheses: 
Kevin Jepson Conversation -- and Negotiated Interaction...  
 
Language Learning & Technology 87 
Null hypothesis: The observed distributions of frequencies of the repair moves in text chats and 
the repair moves in voice chats equals the expected distributions of frequencies when time is held 
constant.  
Alternative hypothesis: The observed distributions of frequencies of the repair moves in text 
chats and the repair moves in voice chats does not equal the expected distributions of frequencies 
when time is held constant. 
Significant differences in the number of repair moves were investigated with one-way chi-square (and 
Yates' correction for continuity) or Fisher's exact test (Shavelson, 1981; Siegel, 1956). (In instances where 
expected frequency levels fell below 10 in two-way chi-square designs, Fisher's exact test was used 
instead of chi-square, as suggested by Shavelson). All chi-square calculations showing significant 
differences (applicable in this data to df =1 only) were also calculated with phi (φ) for strength of 
association, which attempts to minimize the effect of sample size and degrees of freedom on the chi-
square statistic (Hatch & Lazaraton, 1991). 
Chi-square assumptions were met for this analysis because 
1) the repair move (dependent) and chat type (independent) variables were nominal; 
2) the repair moves were represented by frequency counts; 
3) each repair move was counted in only one level of a variable, so that the data were independent -- 
no entries were double-coded; and 
4) df = 1, so all expected frequencies will be greater than or equal to 10 (Hatch & Lazaraton, 1991; 
Shavelson, 1981). 
Because there was no previous empirical evidence for relationships or directionality of these counts of 
repair moves in conversational chat rooms, the null hypothesis of equal distribution was adopted. Because 
this is exploratory research, alpha was set at .05. When the observed chi-square was greater than the 
critical value, or when Fisher's exact probability was less than the set probability level of .05, the null 
hypothesis was rejected. Thus, it was assumed that the probability was less than 5% that the differences 
were due to chance (Shavelson, 1981).  
Each instance in each category for each participant was counted. The data were then analyzed from five 
different angles, in five steps: 
Step 1: significant differences in repair moves produced in text versus voice chat 
Step 2a: significant differences of NOM repair moves produced in text versus voice chat 
Step 2b: significant differences of NF repair moves produced in text versus voice chat 
Step 3: significant differences of NOM repair moves versus NF repair moves produced in 
combined chats 
Step 4: significant differences of clarification requests versus other types of NOM repair moves 
produced in combined chats 
Repair Moves in Text Versus Voice Chat 
In Step 1, all of the instances of repair moves that each participant produced in each 5-minute session for 
both types of chat room were totaled. This analysis produced an overall picture of repair moves (see Table 
2). 
Kevin Jepson Conversation -- and Negotiated Interaction...  
 
Language Learning & Technology 88 
Table 2. Step 1: Frequency of Participant Repair Moves in Text and Voice Chat Sessions 
 Text (5 sessions) Voice (5 sessions) Total (N) 
8 39 47 Repair Moves 
χ2 = 19.14 Reject null hypothesis φ =. 64 
Chi-square results (x2 = 19.14, p = .05) show that voice chat generated a number of repair moves that was 
significantly higher than the number in text chat. In addition, the phi coefficient (φ =. 64) shows that the 
association between the repair moves and chat type variables is strong. 
Negotiation of Meaning in Text Versus Voice Chat 
In Steps 2a and 2b, a close-up analysis of frequencies of NOM and NF repair moves was attempted. Table 
3 shows the contingency table for Step 2a: 
Table 3. Step 2a: Frequency of Participant Negotiation of Meaning Repair Moves in Text and Voice Chat 
Sessions 
 Text (5 sessions) Voice (5 sessions) Total (N) 
6 36 42 Negotiation of 
Meaning χ2 = 20.02 Reject null hypothesis φ = .69 
Chi-square results (χ2 = 20.02, p = .05) show that voice chat generated a number of negotiation of 
meaning repair moves that was significantly greater than the number in text chat. In addition, the phi 
coefficient (φ =. 69) shows that the association between the NOM repair moves and chat type is strong. 
Negative Feedback in Text Versus Voice Chat 
Table 4 shows the frequency of NF moves in text and voice chat, revealing that expected frequencies fell 
below ten. Because the chat sessions were classified on one dimension only (negative feedback), Fisher's 
exact test was not an appropriate test for significant differences. Furthermore, the cells could not be 
collapsed to accommodate the insufficient expected frequencies. Therefore, NF will be addressed further 
in qualitative analysis. 
Table 4. Step 2b: Frequency of Participant Negative Feedback Repair Moves in Text and Voice Chat 
Sessions 
 Text (5 sessions) Voice (5 sessions) Total (N) 
2 3 5 Negative Feedback 
FE = 2.5 does not meet assumptions for statistical analysis 
 
Negotiation of Meaning Versus Negative Feedback in Combined Chats 
Table 5 provides a wide-angle lens, showing both NOM and NF in text chats combined with voice chats 
and an analysis via one-way chi-square. Table 5 shows that NF types of repair moves were used 
significantly less frequently (χ2 = 27.58, p = .05) than NOM types of repair moves. 
Table 5. Step 3: Frequency of Total Participant Negotiation of Meaning Versus Negative Feedback 
Repair Moves 
  Negotiation of 
Meaning Negative Feedback Total (N) 
Text & Voice Chat 42 5 47 
χ2 obs = 27.58, χ2 crit = 3.84, p = .05 Reject null hypothesis φ = .77 
Kevin Jepson Conversation -- and Negotiated Interaction...  
 
Language Learning & Technology 89 
The phi coefficient (φ =. 77) shows there is a strong association between electronic chat and the type of 
repair moves used. 
Clarification Requests Versus other NOM Repair Moves 
Additionally, clarification requests were used more often than other negotiation of meaning repair move 
types in the chats, although the observed frequencies were not significantly different than the frequencies 
of other repair moves, as shown in Table 6: 
Table 6. Step 4: Frequency of Negotiation of Meaning Repair Move Types in Combined Chats 
 Clarification 
Requests 
Confirmation 
Checks 
Comprehension 
Checks 
Self-
Repetition Incorporations 
Total 
(N) 
Text & 
Voice Chat 18 9 0 8 7 42 
χ2 obs = 7.33, χ2 crit = 7.82, p = .05 Accept null hypothesis 
 
Qualitative Procedures 
Comprehension Checks, Questions, and Self-Correction 
To complement this discussion of statistical differences, it is interesting to examine the data from a 
qualitative perspective. As discussed earlier, clarification request, confirmation check, self-repetition, 
recast, explicit correction, and incorporation repair moves were found in the chats. Comprehension 
checks, questions, and self-correction repair moves were not used. Perhaps comprehension checks and 
questions are primarily pedagogical by nature (Long & Sato, 1983), and are thus scarce in NNS electronic 
conversation. Self-corrections may be rare because speakers do not notice their errors, and thus would not 
see the need to correct them. Additionally, self-correction is largely dependent on the social context, and 
it may be that NNS electronic chats are not fora conducive to self-correction (Kormos, 1999). Learners 
may not see the need for accuracy, for example, or may perceive self-correction as face threatening. 
Perhaps the same reasoning can explain why negative feedback repair moves were used significantly less 
than negotiation of meaning repair moves: Participants may simply feel uncomfortable giving negative 
feedback or they may be unable to provide negative feedback. 
Clarification Requests 
Clarification requests were the most prominent repair move in both chat types, a finding that is paralleled 
by NS-NNS face-to-face conversation research (Long & Sato, 1983). In this study, an exchange between 
"M.M." and "Helena" (Example 1) demonstrated how clarification requests followed by confirmation 
checks not only allow the interlocutor ("Helena") to check previous utterances, but also encourage the 
speaker ("M.M.") to elaborate on and sustain the conversation:  
Example 1 
  M.M. uh, Helena, Helena, if I go to Taiwan, which (place) /pli:s/, which /pli:siz/ can I visit 
Taiwan, Helena? 
  Helena I beg your pardon me, I didn't catch you … 
  M.M. I go to Taiwan, uh, wha uh what /pli:s/ can I visit? 
  Helena Oh, you mean, sightseeing? 
  M.M. Uh, what landmarks what landmarks … can I visit in Taiwan? 
Clarification requests have been found to be valuable in prompting speakers to modify their output 
(Lyster, 1998; Pica et al., 1989) and produce language that is more accurate (Linnell, 1995; Nobuyoshi & 
Kevin Jepson Conversation -- and Negotiated Interaction...  
 
Language Learning & Technology 90 
Ellis, 1993). Expanded research could reveal the reasons for the popularity, functionality, and 
effectiveness of clarification requests in both types of electronic conversations. 
Success of Repair in Voice Chats 
Speakers in voice chat seemed to repair their utterances more often than speakers in text chat, resulting in 
greater incorporation of negotiation of meaning repair moves. It seems, then, that the repair cycles were 
more often successfully completed in voice chat, with speakers more frequently repairing utterances 
based on their interlocutors' cues. When speakers repair their utterances, thus incorporating interlocutor 
repair moves and producing comprehensible, modified output, interlanguage development may be 
promoted (Wesche, 1994). For example, "Junko" successfully repaired a pronunciation error after "Moo-
soon's" clarification request in Example 2:  
Example 2 
  Moo-soon I'm sorry, you are what? You are /wIk/? 
  Junko Not /wIk/, but weak. 
One reason for the higher number of incorporation repair moves in voice chats may be the conversational 
pace, which is inherently slower than in text chats. Text chat messages were usually delivered within a 
period of seconds; voice chat participants sometimes waited up to about one minute between turns, thus 
perhaps allowing more time for incorporation repair moves. Additionally, there were always fewer 
participants in voice chats than in text chats, thus perhaps enabling voice chat participants to contribute 
more often. In other words, the odds for incorporation repair moves were greater in voice chats. Further 
research might reveal why voice chat creates longer pauses -- perhaps the voice chat technology did not 
always allow for instant delivery. Explanations as to why voice chat may draw fewer participants should 
also be pursued – perhaps the voice chat technology is harder to access and harder to use. 
Self-Repetition in Voice Chats 
Self-repetition was used fairly often in voice chats, but not at all in text chats. The absence of self-
repetition in text chats could be explained by the fact that text chat interlocutors can review one another's 
previous entries on the computer screen while they are chatting, thus reducing or eliminating the need for 
self-repetition. Additionally, the voice chat exchange between "M.M." and "Helena" provided above 
suggests that "M.M." used the self-repetition/ paraphrase repair move four times in four turns in an effort 
to repair a pronunciation-related breakdown (successfully, in the end). "M.M." repeatedly used the repair 
move, perhaps revealing that "M.M." was determined to make use of strategic competence, but also 
possibly because "M.M." has a limited range of strategies for repairing conversation breakdowns.  
Pronunciation Repair as a Benefit of Voice Chat 
A qualitative analysis also reveals that voice chats may be unique: Speakers used a significantly higher 
number of repair moves in voice chats, a finding corroborated by Sauro (2001), although Sauro did not 
count negotiation routines related to inaudibility or technical problems. This study also found evidence of 
pronunciation repair moves, though speakers seldom incorporated pronunciation repair. As would be 
expected, text chats did not engender pronunciation repair. Furthermore, pronunciation-related repair 
moves constituted the bulk of all of the repair work in voice chats, as shown in Table 7.  
Table 7. Frequency of Pronunciation-Related Repair Across Categories of Repair Moves 
 Clarification 
Requests 
Confirmation 
Checks 
Self-
Repetition 
Explicit 
Correction 
Pronunciation- Related (%) 33 32 52 56 
Kevin Jepson Conversation -- and Negotiated Interaction...  
 
Language Learning & Technology 91 
More than half of the self-repetition and explicit correction repair moves, and a third of the clarification 
requests and confirmation checks made across the 10 sessions were directed at pronunciation repair in the 
voice chats, suggesting that conversation breakdowns were often pronunciation-related. Further research 
into voice chat repair moves could potentially produce a wellspring of findings on pronunciation work 
and its impact on modified output. Further research might also address the relative importance and 
proportion of repair moves as compared to other conversational features, such as moves that sustain 
conversation. Finally, significant sociocultural themes, such as the use of humor and flirting in building 
the chat communities, were noted in the data. Further research based on sociocultural theory would likely 
unearth a plethora of data from conversational chat rooms with NNS participants. 
CONCLUSION 
The present study focused on an area not yet highlighted by language research: conversations among 
English L2 speakers in Internet text and voice chat rooms. This study reported on the types of repair 
moves that occurred in text and voice chats, noted significant differences, and qualitatively explored data 
patterns.  
Limitations  
A possible threat to internal validity was that participants were not randomly sampled. Because the 
participants were anonymous and seldom revealed personal profile data, participants could not be 
randomly sampled. For example, cultural differences in the acceptability of making repair moves could 
not be addressed, a variable which in turn may represent a threat to the external validity of the results. The 
threat was minimized, however, since the study observed random participants in five separate sessions. 
Nevertheless, the findings may not be generalizable to the population. 
Other variables may influence the number of repair moves as well. For example, participants operating at 
equal levels of proficiency may often have clearly understood one another due to other types of 
conversational features, such as choosing appropriate topics or discourse markers (van Lier & Matsuo, 
2000), thus eliminating the need for repair moves. Hence, the greater number of repair moves (including 
pronunciation-related moves) in the voice chat context may be a result of confounding variables, such as 
poor reception due to technological problems. Additionally, Long's (1983) perspective on negotiation of 
meaning as an indicator of successful conversation has been challenged by van Lier and Matsuo, who 
expressed negotiation of meaning as a series of repair moves that signal a failure in communication and 
only a speaker's subsequent attempt to address conversation problems. In fact, van Lier and Matsuo 
questioned the very value of repair moves as a primary indicator of language acquisition, saying that 
"…frequent repair indicates conversational trouble, and more conversational trouble can mean less 
conversational success…" (p. 267). 
Strengths 
This study contributes to the discussion of repair move interaction by discussing the benefits of 
conversational, synchronous chat between English L2 speakers, and seemed to be completely free from 
the effects of observer's paradox (Labov, 1972). The study examined qualities that naturally and uniquely 
occurred in the anonymous, synchronous chat room environment -- the focus on written and spoken 
language devoid of the gestures, expressions, and additional tools inherent to other environments, for 
example. Reliability was strengthened by observing numerous chat rooms with similar profiles, thus 
minimizing extraneous factors. By providing qualitative as well as quantitative data analyses, concurrent 
triangulation was employed to address weaknesses (or possible negative results) inherent to a singularly 
quantitative or qualitative approach (Creswell, 2003). 
Teachers and learners may want to consider the potential language learning opportunities created by 
repair negotiation between NNSs in text or voice chat room conversations. For example, chat room 
Kevin Jepson Conversation -- and Negotiated Interaction...  
 
Language Learning & Technology 92 
conversation is, for many, an easily accessible environment for language practice, especially for learners 
who do not live in target language-speaking areas (Blake, 2000; Doughty & Long, 2003). In addition, chat 
is often a free format in which to practice a language. Teachers may therefore want to direct learners to 
text and voice chat environments to provide out-of-class language and negotiation work. Although more 
research is needed, this study found that conversational chat rooms do facilitate repair moves, which are 
thought to be beneficial to second language development. Teachers may wish to systematically include 
out-of-class chat room practice as part of course syllabi. Learners might thus benefit from the kind of 
target language practice that may be more closely matched to their real-world needs. Furthermore, using 
simple and widely-available materials and equipment, learners may print chat logs or record chat 
interactions and then conduct further analysis in the classroom.  
Whereas many types of repair moves were found -- specifically, clarification requests, confirmation 
checks, self-repetitions, recasts, explicit corrections, and incorporation repair moves -- clarification 
requests were used most often. Participants used the repair moves of negative feedback significantly less 
frequently than negotiation of meaning repair moves. Therefore, it is possible that NNS conversational 
chat may not engender the type of repair move that is thought to force learners to focus on grammatical 
accuracy through their output. Further research on NNS conversations in chat rooms could expand on 
hypotheses related to grammar-oriented modified output. 
This study suggests that although text chat is the more widely available and most studied form of chat, 
voice chat offers an environment in which learners are more apt to negotiate for meaning. Voice chats in 
this study generated a number of repair moves, specifically negotiation of meaning-type repair moves, 
which was significantly higher than the number in text chat. Conversations in voice chat rooms would 
thus seem to benefit learners in the repair move aspects of language development, especially in 
pronunciation repair and in the incorporation of repair moves. Indeed, the data provided evidence that 
many of the repair moves were made in efforts to attend to pronunciation breakdowns in particular. 
Because of the inherent absence of non-verbal communication and the focus that current voice chat 
technology places on pronunciation, voice chat may be an optimal environment for pronunciation work. 
Additionally, with the increasing availability and affordability of online chat technology, including the 
growth of Internet protocol telephony, voice chats may become increasingly popular. Therefore, teachers 
and learners may wish to consider the voice chat environment not only to assess, discuss and practice 
phonology, but as a potentially rich venue for NNS conversations and language development. 
 
NOTES 
1. The names of the online English school, the school's course names, and all of the school's students, 
who were participants in this study, have been changed to protect the students' records and identities. 
2. Sections 4.07 and 8.03 of the APA Ethics Code Draft 7 state: 
4.07 Use of Confidential Information for Didactic or Other Purposes. Psychologists do not 
disclose in their writings, lectures, or other public media, confidential, personally identifiable 
information concerning their clients/patients, students, research participants, organizational 
clients, or other recipients of their services that they obtained during the course of their work, 
unless (1) they take reasonable steps to disguise the person or organization, (2) the person or 
organization has consented in writing, or (3) there is legal authorization for doing so. 
8.03 Informed Consent for Recording Voices and Images in Research. Psychologists obtain 
informed consent from research participants prior to recording their voices or images for data 
collection unless (1) the research consists solely of naturalistic observations in public places, and 
Kevin Jepson Conversation -- and Negotiated Interaction...  
 
Language Learning & Technology 93 
it is not anticipated that the recording will be used in a manner that could cause personal 
identification or harm. 
3. The voice chat technology used in this study is a type of Voice-over Internet Protocol (VoIP). With 
VoIP, phone connections are assigned to computer addresses, similar to the way in which network 
printers are assigned to computer addresses. Instead of using a VoIP telephone (as many VoIP users do), 
participants in this study used a VoIP-connected computer, a microphone, and speakers to participate in 
audio sessions. 
4. HearMe produced software enabling voice conferencing (VoIP) until October 2001 when the company 
ceased operations. In December 2001, New York-based Paltalk acquired assets of HearMe. PalTalk 
provides video conferencing, instant messaging, voice e-mail, and video e-mail over the Internet in 
addition to the HearMe VOIP conferencing technology. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Kevin Jepson specializes in ESL curriculum development, assessment, and technology-enhanced, situated 
learning. He is an ESL editor at CTB/McGraw Hill and has worked for the Monterey Institute of 
International Studies (MIIS), Heinle, and GlobalEnglish. He graduated with distinction from MIIS with 
an MA-TESOL and CALL Certificate in 2002. 
E-mail: kevin.jepson@sbcglobal.net 
 
REFERENCES 
American Psychological Association. (2002). Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct. 
Retrieved July 25, 2005, from http://www.apa.org/ethics/code2002.html 
Beauvois, M. H. (1992). Computer-assisted classroom discussion in the foreign language classroom: 
Conversation in slow motion. Foreign Language Annals, 25, 455-464. 
Blake, R. (2000). Computer-mediated communication: A window on L2 Spanish interlanguage. 
Language Learning & Technology, 4(1), 120-136. Retrieved November 14, 2004, from http://llt.msu.edu/ 
vol4num1/blake/ 
Bonk, C. J., & Kim, K. A. (1998). Extending sociocultural theory to adult learning. In M. C. Smith & T. 
Pourchot (Eds.), Adult learning and development: Perspectives from educational psychology (pp. 67-88). 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Chaudron, C. (1988). Second language classrooms: Research on teaching and learning. Cambridge, 
England: Cambridge University Press. 
Chen, J., Belkada, S., & Okamoto, T. (2004). How a Web-based course facilitates acquisition of English 
for academic purposes. Language Learning & Technology, 8(2), 33-49. Retrieved November 21, 2004, 
from http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num2/chen/ 
Creswell, J. W. (2003). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative and mixed methods approaches. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Doughty, C. J., & Long, M. H. (2003). Optimal psycholinguistic environments for distance foreign 
language learning. Language Learning & Technology, 7(3), 50-80. Retrieved October 10, 2004, from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num3/doughty/ 
Kevin Jepson Conversation -- and Negotiated Interaction...  
 
Language Learning & Technology 94 
Egbert, J., Chao, C., & Hanson-Smith, E. (1999). Computer-enhanced language learning environments: 
An overview. In J. Egbert & E. Hanson-Smith (Eds.), CALL environments: Research, practice, and 
critical issues (pp. 1-13). Alexandria, VA: TESOL.  
Ellis, N. (1995). Consciousness in second language acquisition: A review of field studies and laboratory 
experiments. Language Awareness, 4, 123-146. 
Ellis, R. (1999). Learning a second language through interaction. Philadelphia: John Benjamins. 
Ellis, R., Tanaka, Y., & Yamazaki, A. (1994). Classroom interaction, comprehension, and the acquisition 
of L2 word meanings. Language Learning, 44, 449-491. 
Gass, S. (1997). Input, interaction, and the second language learner. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Gass, S. M., & Selinker, L. (2001). Second language acquisition: An introductory course. Mahwah, NJ: 
Erlbaum. 
Grotjahn, R. (1987). On the methodological basis of introspective methods. In C. Faerch & G. Kasper 
(Eds.), Introspection in second language research (pp. 59-60). Clevedon, England: Multilingual Matters. 
Hall, J. K., & Verplaetse, L. S. (2000). Second and foreign language learning through classroom 
interaction. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Hatch, E., & Lazaraton, A. (1991). The research manual: Design and statistics for applied linguistics. 
Boston: Heinle. 
Herring, S. (1999). Coherence in CMC. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 4(4). Retrieved 
January 12, 2005, from http://jcmc.indiana.edu/vol4/issue4/herring.html 
Huff C., & King, R. (1988). An experiment in electronic collaboration. In J. D. Goodchilds (Chair) 
Interacting by computer: Effects on small group style and structure. Symposium conducted at the meeting 
of the American Psychological Association, Atlanta, GA. 
Iwashita, N. (2001). The effect of learner proficiency on interactional moves and modified output in 
nonnative-nonnative interaction in Japanese as a foreign language. System, 29, 267-287. 
Iwasaki, J., & Oliver, R. (2003). Chatline interaction and negative feedback. Australian Review of Applied 
Linguistics, 17, 60-73. 
Kelm, O. R. (1992). The use of synchronous computer networks in second language instruction: A 
preliminary report. Foreign Language Annals, 25, 441-545. 
Kelm, O. R. (1996). Applications of computer networking in foreign language education: Focusing on 
principles of second language acquisition. In M. Warschauer (Ed.), Telecollaboration in foreign language 
learning (pp. 19-28). Honolulu: Second Language Teaching and Curriculum Center, University of 
Hawai'i at Manoa. 
Kern, R. G. (1995). Restructuring classroom interaction with network computers: Effects on quantity and 
characteristics of language production. The Modern Language Journal, 79, 457-476. 
Kormos, J. (1999). The timing of self-repairs in second language speech production. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition, 22, 145-167. 
Labov, W. (1972). Sociolinguistic patterns. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press. 
Lantolf, J. (Ed.). (2000). Sociocultural theory and second language learning. Oxford, England: Oxford 
University Press.  
Lin, Y., & Hedgcock, J. (1996). Negative feedback incorporation among high-proficiency and low-
proficiency Chinese-speaking learners of Spanish. Language Learning, 46, 567-611. 
Kevin Jepson Conversation -- and Negotiated Interaction...  
 
Language Learning & Technology 95 
Linnell, J. (1995). Can negotiation provide a context for learning syntax in a second language? Working 
Papers in Educational Linguistics, 11, 83-103. 
Long, M. H. (1983). Linguistic and conversational adjustments to non-native speakers. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition, 5, 177-193. 
Long, M. H. (1996). The role of the linguistic environment in second language acquisition. In W. Ritchie 
& T. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of research on second language acquisition (pp. 413-469). New York: 
Academic Press. 
Long, M. H., & Robinson, P. (1998). Focus on form: Theory, research, and practice. In C. Doughty & J. 
Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in classroom SLA (pp. 15-41). Cambridge, England: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Long, M. H., & Sato, C. J. (1983). Classroom foreigner talk discourse: Forms and functions of teachers' 
questions. In H. W. Seliger & M. H. Long (Eds.), Classroom oriented research in second languages (pp. 
268-285). Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
Lyster, R. (1998). Negotiation of form, recasts, and explicit correction in relation to error types and 
learner repair in immersion classrooms. Language Learning, 48, 183-218. 
Mackey, A. (1999). Input, interaction and second language development: An empirical study of question 
formation in ESL. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 21, 557-587. 
Mayo, E. (1933). The human problems of an industrial civilization. New York: MacMillan. 
McGuire, T., Kiesler, S., & Siegel, J. (1987). Group and computer-mediated discussion effects in risk 
decision-making. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 917-930. 
Muniandy, A.V.A. (2002). Electronic-discourse (E-discourse): Spoken, written or a new hybrid? 
Prospect: An Australian Journal of TESOL, 17, 45-68. 
Nakahama, Y., Tyler, A., & van Lier, L. (2001). Negotiation of meaning in conversational and 
information gap activities: A comparative discourse analysis. TESOL Quarterly, 35, 377-404. 
Negretti, R. (1999). Web-based activities and SLA: A conversation analysis research approach. Language 
Learning & Technology, 3(1), 75-87. Retrieved October 22, 2002 from http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num1/ 
negretti/  
Nobuyoshi, J., & Ellis, R. (1993). Focused communication tasks. English Language Teaching Journal, 
47, 203-210. 
Nunan, D. (1992). Research methods in language learning. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Ohta, A. S. (2000). Rethinking recasts: A learner-centered examination of corrective feedback in the 
Japanese language classroom. In J. K. Hall & L. S. Verplaetse (Eds.), Second and foreign language 
learning through classroom interaction (pp. 47-71). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Ortega, L. (1997). Processes and outcomes in networked classroom interaction: Defining the research 
agenda for L2 computer-assisted classroom discussion. Language Learning & Technology, 1(1), 82-93. 
Retrieved October 22, 2002 from http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/ortega/ 
Ortega, L. (1999). Planning and focus on form in L2 oral performance. Studies in Second Language 
Acquisition, 21, 109-148. 
Payne, J. S., & Whitney, P. J. (2002). Developing L2 oral proficiency through sychronous CMC: Output, 
working memory, and interlanguage development. CALICO Journal, 20, 7-32. 
Kevin Jepson Conversation -- and Negotiated Interaction...  
 
Language Learning & Technology 96 
Pellettieri, J. (1996). Network-based computer interaction and the negotiation of meaning in the virtual 
foreign language classroom. Unpublished manuscript, University of California at Davis. 
Pellettieri, J. (2000). Negotiation in cyberspace: The role of chatting in the development of grammatical 
competence. In M. Warschauer & R. Kerns (Eds.), Network-based language teaching: Concepts and 
practice (pp. 59-86). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. 
Pica, T. (1994). Review article -- Research on negotiation: What does it reveal about second-language 
learning conditions, processes, and outcomes? Language Learning, 44, 493-527. 
Pica, T., Holliday, L., Lewis, N., & Morgenthaler, L. (1989). Comprehensible output as an outcome of 
linguistic demands on the learner. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 11, 63-90. 
Pica, T., Lincoln-Porter, F., Paninos, D., & Linnell, J. (1996). Language learner interaction: How does it 
address the input, output, and feedback needs of second language learners? TESOL Quarterly, 30, 59-84. 
Richards, J. C. (1998). Teaching in action: Case studies from second language classrooms. Alexandria, 
VA: TESOL. 
Rodriguez, J. (1998). Investigating CALL use. Unpublished manuscript, Iowa State University. 
Sauro, S. (2001). The success of task type in facilitating oral language production in online computer 
mediated collaborative projects. Unpublished master's thesis, Iowa State University, Ames. 
Sauro, S. (2004). Cyberdiscursive tug-of-war: Learner repositioning in a multimodal CMC environment. 
Working Papers in Educational Linguistics, 19, 55-72. 
Schultz, J. (1996). Computers and collaborative writing in the foreign language curriculum. Unpublished 
manuscript, University of California at Berkeley. 
Schwartz, J. (1980). The negotiation for meaning: Repair in conversations between second language 
learners of English. In D. Larsen-Freeman, (Ed.), Discourse analysis in second language research 
(pp.138-153). Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
Shavelson, R. J. (1981). Statistical reasoning for the behavioral sciences. Boston: Allyn and Bacon. 
Shehadeh, A. (1999). Non-native speakers' production of modified comprehensible output and second 
language learning. Language Learning, 49, 627-675. 
Shehadeh, A. (2001). Self- and other-initiated modified output during task-based interaction. TESOL 
Quarterly, 35, 433-454. 
Siegel, S. (1956). Non-parametric statistics for the behavioral sciences. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Smith, B. (2003). Computer-mediated negotiated interaction: An expanded model. The Modern Language 
Journal, 87, 38-54. 
Smith, B. (2004). Computer-mediated negotiated interaction and lexical acquisition. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition, 26, 365-398. 
Sotillo, S. (2000). Discourse functions and syntactic complexity in synchronous and asynchronous 
communication. Language Learning & Technology, 4(1), 82-119. Retrieved November 10, 2001, from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/sotillo/ 
Spada, N. (1997). Form-focused instruction and second language acquisition: A review of classroom and 
laboratory research. Language Teaching, 29, 1-15. 
Spolsky, B. (1989). Conditions for second language learning: Introduction to a general theory. Oxford, 
England: Oxford University Press. 
Kevin Jepson Conversation -- and Negotiated Interaction...  
 
Language Learning & Technology 97 
St. John, E., & Cash, D. (1995). Language learning via e-mail: Demonstrable success with German. In M. 
Warschauer (Ed.), Virtual connections: Online activities and projects for networking language learners 
(pp. 191-197). Honolulu: University of Hawai'i. 
Sullivan, N., & Pratt, E. (1996). A comparative study of two ESL writing environments: A computer-
assisted classroom and a traditional oral classroom. System, 29, 491-501. 
Swain, M. (1985). Communicative competence: Some roles of comprehensible input and comprehensible 
output in its development. In S. Gass & C. Madden (Eds.), Input in second language acquisition (pp. 235-
253). Rowley, MA.: Newbury House. 
Swain, M. (1995). Three functions of output in second language learning. In G. Cook & B. Seidlhofer 
(Eds.), Principle and practice in applied linguistics: Studies in honour of H.G. Widdowson (pp. 125-144). 
Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. 
Toyoda, E., & Harrison, R. (2002). Categorization of text chat communication between learners and 
native speakers of Japanese. Language Learning & Technology, 6(1), 82-99. Retrieved December 12, 
2004, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/TOYODA/ 
Tudini, V. (2003). Using native speakers in chat. Language Learning & Technology, 7(3), 141-159. 
Retrieved December 12, 2004, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num3/tudini/ 
Turbee, L. (1996). MOOing in a foreign language: How, why and who? Paper presented at the 
Information Technology Education Connection's International Virtual Conference/Exhibition on 
Schooling and the Information Superhighway. Retrieved September 22, 2002, from http://web.syr.edu/ 
~lmturbee/itechtm.html 
Turbee, L. (1999). Classroom practice: MOO, WOO, and more -- Language learning in virtual 
environments. In J. Egbert & E. Hanson-Smith (Eds.), CALL environments: Research, practice, and 
critical issues (pp. 346-361). Alexandria, VA: TESOL. 
Turkle, S. (1995). Life on the screen: Identity in the age of the Internet. New York: Simon & Schuster. 
van Lier, L. (1988). The classroom and the language learner. London: Longman. 
van Lier, L., & Matsuo, N. (2000). Varieties of conversational experience: Looking for learning 
opportunities. Applied Language Learning, 11, 265-287.  
Varonis, E. M., & Gass, S. (1985). Nonnative/nonnative conversations: A model for negotiation of 
meaning. Applied Linguistics, 6, 71-90. 
Warner, C. N. (2004). It's just a game, right? Types of play in foreign language CMC. Language Learning 
& Technology, 8(2), 69-87. Retrieved December 12, 2004 from http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num2/warner/ 
Warschauer, M. (1996). Comparing face-to-face and electronic discussion in the second language 
classroom. CALICO Journal, 13, 7-26.  
Warschauer, M. (2000). On-line learning in second language classrooms: An ethnographic study. In M. 
Warschauer & R. Kerns (Eds.), Network-based language teaching: Concepts and practice (pp. 41-58). 
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. 
Warschauer, M., & Kern, R. (Eds.). (2000). Network-based language teaching: Concepts and practice. 
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. 
Warschauer, M., & Lepeintre, S. (1997). Freire's dream or Foucault's nightmare: Teacher-student 
relations on an international computer network. In R. Debski, J. Gassin, & M. Smith (Eds.), Language 
learning through social computing (pp. 67-89). Parkville, Australia: Applied Linguistics Association of 
Australia. 
Kevin Jepson Conversation -- and Negotiated Interaction...  
 
Language Learning & Technology 98 
Werry, C. C. (1996). Linguistic and interactional features of Internet relay chat. In Herring, S. (Ed.), 
Computer-mediated communication: Linguistic, social, and cross-cultural perspectives (pp. 47-63). 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands: J. Benjamins. 
Wesche, M. (1994). Input and interaction in second language acquisition. In C. Gallaway & B. J. 
Richards (Eds.), Input and interaction in language acquisition (pp. 219-249). Cambridge, England: 
Cambridge University Press. 
