Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num1/editors.html 
January 2005, Volume 9, Number 1 
pp. 2-3 
 
Copyright © 2005, ISSN 1094-3501 2 
 
 
FROM THE SPECIAL ISSUE EDITORS 
The papers published in this issue of Language Learning and Technology are indicative 
of current research and exploratory intervention work dealing with the use of new 
technologies in language learning contexts involving children, teachers, and teacher 
education students. The range of papers represents diverse areas of interest within 
second and foreign language learning that is mediated by new technologies. These 
include new technologies as a language learning medium; sociocultural studies of new 
technology uses focusing on students' interactions with software interfaces and the 
social interactions occurring around the computer as students work; evaluative studies of 
ways of Internet use as a language learning resource; and students' new technology uses 
and purposes that are not usually associated with school-based language acquisition 
(e.g., gaming, text messaging, instant messaging, participating in fan-based Internet 
spaces). 
In the opening paper, "Child-to-Child Interaction and Corrective Feedback in a 
Computer Mediated L2 Class," Frank Morris reports findings from a study of corrective 
feedback on and subsequent repairs to written target language enacted during child-to-
child, computer-mediated interactions within a fifth-grade, elementary Spanish 
immersion class in a southeast region of the United States. This study focusses on a 
typical teaching-learning activity within the school computer lab where students were 
paired, but without being told who their partner was or where s/he was sitting in the 
classroom. Each pair used the discussion function of Blackboard, a Web-based 
commercial course management interface, to complete an off-line, hardcopy jigsaw task. 
Morris found that implicit, negotiated corrective feedback more often led to immediate 
target language error repair than did other types of feedback, such as explicit negative 
feedback.  
Carla Meskill focuses on computer-supported classroom discourse in her article, 
"Scaffolding the Learning of At-Risk English Language Learners with Computers." At 
the center of her study is a very experienced elementary school teacher who works with 
beginning-level English language learners from low-income homes, in a mid-size, post-
industrial city within the US. Meskill's analysis is grounded in the assumption that 
English is not a socially autonomous system, but is contingent on current and historical 
patterns of speaking and doing within socially defined contexts. The teacher explicitly 
recognizes the importance of not simply teaching her students to encode and decode, but 
how to recognize and navigate the "language of school" as well in order to help them 
effectively "participate in mainstream instructional activity." Meskill examines what she 
refers to as "triadic scaffolds," comprising teaching strategies, the computer's role in 
instructional scaffolding, and what is accomplished by students and their teacher within 
this teaching-learning context. Findings suggest that in this particular case, the target 
language interactions that occur between the students and their teacher while using 
computers may be just as important, if not more important, than the actual software-
based language learning resources they are using. 
The third paper, by Cameron Richards, addresses ICT-supported learning activities. It 
reflects the author's commitment to ensuring that children's computer uses in language 
learning classrooms are not approached by teachers as merely "add ons" to the 
 From the Special Issue Editors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 3 
 
 
curriculum. Richards reports on the trial, refinement and development within teacher 
education programs of what he calls, "information and communication technology-
supported learning activities." These activities are deliberately learner-centred, rather 
than computer-driven, and frame learning as a cycle of activity, analysis, reflection, and 
transformation. He calls for teacher educators to encourage their pre-service teaching 
students to see themselves as designers of "effective and integrated learning" and not as 
merely transmitters of information and skills. 
The issue concludes with Ravi Purushotma's account of the roles popular culture can 
play in supporting and enhancing foreign language learning. In "You're Not Studying, 
You're Just…" Purushotma argues that popular culture offers a rich range of readily-
modifiable texts that can provide valuable alternatives to traditional high school 
classroom approaches to foreign language learning dominated by textbooks and isolated 
lists of vocabulary words and grammatical structures. He makes his case by reference to  
The Sims. This simulation game, which is popular in many countries around the world, 
can be modified to create a bilingual environment that provides strong, contextualized 
learning support for the target language while maintaining much of the pleasure to be 
had from gaming. He concludes by discussing similar possible benefits to be had from 
modifying voice-activated games, music videos, internet browser software, and from 
loading language lessons to one's mobile phone for language learning on the go. 
Together, the four papers in this special issue trace important and useful terrain for 
subsequent research study. Purushomata's paper, in particular, points to important new 
areas of investigation. In assembling this issue we were struck by the absence of  
submissions reporting research into young people's language acquisition within 
informal, non-school contexts. A large and growing corpus of studies conducted outside 
the field of second language acquisition strongly suggests that children are using more 
sophisticated and complex digital technologies outside school settings than in their 
classrooms or kindergartens. Moreover, many of these studies address second language 
use and acquisition (cf., Marsh 2005). We recommend this corpus of studies to 
researchers working in the area of second and foreign language acquisition and strongly 
encourage the development of a similar focus within their research purview. 
As guest editors of this issue we extend particular thanks to our reviewers for their time 
and valuable feedback. We also want to acknowledge the work of Associate Editor Irene 
Thompson and Managing Editor Pamela DaGrossa in supporting and overseeing the 
production of this issue.  
Sincerely, 
Michele Knobel & Colin Lankshear 
Special Issue Editors 
REFERENCE 
Marsh, J. (Ed.) (2005). Popular culture, new media and digital literacy in early 
childhood. London: RoutledgeFalmer. 
 
