Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num1/review1/ 
January 2005, Volume 9, Number 1 
pp. 25-26 
 
Copyright © 2005, ISSN 1094-3501 25 
REVIEW OF INTERNET FOR ENGLISH TEACHING 
Internet for English Teaching  
Mark Warschauer, Heidi Shetzer, & Christine Meloni 
2000 
ISBN 0-939791-88-9 
178 + ix pp. 
Teachers of English to Speakers of Other Languages, Inc.  
700 South Washington Street, Suite 200 
Alexandria, Virginia 22314 USA 
http://www.tesol.org/ 
tesol@tesol.org 
 
Review by Shaofeng Li, University of South Florida 
Internet for English Teaching is an excellent resource book for the ESL teachers who are interested in 
using the Internet in their classroom or people who are enthusiastic about conducting research in this 
regard. It describes different aspects of the use of the Internet in teaching English and analyzes model 
programs across the world where the Internet is successfully employed to facilitate the improvement of 
the learner's English proficiency.  
The book is divided into eight chapters, each addressing one aspect of the topic in question. Ushering the 
reader into the concerned area, the first chapter, "Getting Started," presents features of the Internet and 
reasons why it should be introduced into the ESL classroom. The fact that computer-mediated 
communication (CMC) is asynchronous, synchronous, and based on hypermedia (or hypertext ) makes it 
possible and practicable to incorporate the Internet into language teaching. The authors list five reasons to 
use the Internet for English teaching: (a) it provides authentic language materials; (b) it enhances the 
student's level of literacy in conducting on-line communication; (c) it enables the student to interact with 
native and nonnative speakers for 24 hours on end; (d) it makes the learning process lively, dynamic, and 
interesting; (e) it gives both the student and the teacher the power to work efficiently.  
Chapter 2, "Resources for Teachers," describes the ways teachers can use the Internet to communicate 
with their peers, particularly through e-mail or e-mail lists. The chapter also analyzes the various on-line 
resources for the teacher to access such as sites, journals, and virtual libraries.  
The next three chapters examine the major skills areas that are, in the authors' words, "being reshaped by 
the Internet: communication and collaboration, reading and research, and writing and publishing" (p. 8). 
Chapter 3 discusses how communication and collaboration can take place at the intra-class level (within a 
single class), or at the supra-class level (across classes or beyond the boundary of the class). While the 
former is exemplified by teacher-student and student-student communication, the latter takes on forms 
like long-distance communication or interclass projects. Chapter 4, "Student Research," investigates the 
possible research skills to be used by the student and to be taught by the teacher. After briefly reviewing 
basic features of the major available search engines, the authors look at strategies for using Web searches 
in English teaching, and finally conclude the chapter by discussing the classroom activities and projects 
where the research skills are to be used. This chapter, in my view, is of special importance in that in the 
current world people are faced with such a vast amount of information that the basic skills described in 
this chapter are essential for locating, analyzing, evaluating, and synthesizing information. More 
importantly, these skills can be learned. In chapter 5, "Student Publishing," the reader is presented with  
Shaofeng Li Review of Internet for English Teaching 
 
Language Learning & Technology 26 
how and why students are supposed to publish their own work on the World Wide Web. This chapter is 
roughly separated into three sections. The first section is devoted to displaying the changing nature of 
writing in the Internet era as compared with traditional classroom writing. The second outlines a project-
based approach to Web publishing. In the third section, some sample Web-publishing projects are 
provided. The underlying tenet for the encouragement of student publishing projects is that it can 
"achieve the dual purposes of helping students become active masters of technology while sharing 
authentic texts with real audiences" (p. 66). 
Chapter 6 provides an overall picture of on-line distance education. It defines distance education, talks 
about available on-line courses for students and teachers, and finally mentions the pitfalls of distance 
education and how the quality of education can be affected. In chapter 7, the authors advance some basic 
principles teachers need to observe in integrating the Internet into English language courses. They suggest 
that these principles are pedagogical rather than technological in nature, so observing them is essential 
since they remain useful guides even if particular tools change. The principles are divided into three 
areas: learning goals, teaching guidelines, and planning tips. The chapter concludes with the description 
of ten sample Web projects. Chapter 8 is concerned with approaches to conduct research about on-line 
learning. The chapter opens with a description of five types of educational research, and then analyzes 
five specific areas of on-line language learning research: linguistic features, interaction, attitude, context, 
and language impact. Following chapter 8 is a supplement on how to make Web pages. 
The most praiseworthy aspect of this book is that it provides comprehensive guidelines for the effective 
integration of the Internet with English teaching. Every topic discussed in this book is clearly described, 
and the reader can find an inexhaustible stock of information, from basic principles to actual examples, 
from individual aspects to all-round application. It is also accessible to readers with diverse backgrounds: 
for laymen and professionals as well as experienced teachers and rookie educators. Furthermore, it 
abounds in hands-on examples, which are so critical for conducting research in education.  
Despite all the above virtues, I would like to point out a few minor concerns about the book. First, the fact 
that it provides so much Internet-based  information in each chapter, such as useful Web sites, is a double-
edged sword, because the Internet is so prone to change and so unpredictable that Web sites may come 
and go overnight. Therefore, while the book tries to keep pace with time, it is obviously hard to do so, 
especially where the Internet is concerned. Second, while it is good to be all-inclusive, it is difficult to 
provide an in-depth discussion of all aspects of the applicability of technology in second language 
education. This is most evident in chapter 8 where the research methodology in education is addressed. 
The five approaches are all mentioned, but none of them is discussed in detail, leaving non-expert readers 
confused as to what to make of the seemingly profound terminology as in the "etic versus emic" 
dichotomy.  
The flaws of the book are really minor in comparison with its virtues. In the opinion of this reviewer, this 
volume is a must-read for anyone interested in the application of technology, particularly the Internet, in 
foreign language teaching. It is definitely worth reading. 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Shaofeng Li is currently a PhD candidate in Second Language Acquisition and Instructional Technology 
at the University of South Florida. His research interests include the integration of technology into second 
language teaching and learning, Sociocultural Theory, bilingual education, and discourse analysis. He has 
published a number of academic articles and is author of several book chapters. 
E-mail: sli@mail.usf.edu 
