Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num2/editors.html 
May 2005, Volume 9, Number 2 
p. 1-2 
 
Copyright © 2005, ISSN 1094-3501 1 
 
 
FROM THE EDITORS 
Welcome to Volume 9, Number 2, a regular issue of Language Learning & Technology. 
In this issue, we bring you five articles. 
In "Communication Topics and Strategies in E-mail Consultation: Comparison Between 
American and International University Students," Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas reports on a 
study that found quantitative and qualitative differences with regard to communication 
topics and communication strategies in e-mail messages sent by American and 
international students enrolled in a teacher-preparation.  
In "Rapport-Building Through CALL in Teaching Chinese as a Foreign Language: An 
Exploratory Study," Wenying Jiang and Guy Ramsey report on an exploratory study that 
draws on data obtained from the utilization of CALL in learning Chinese as a foreign 
language. Their study suggests that scaffolding in the form of rapport-fostering 
questions can help extend learner-teacher interaction beyond the face-to-face traditional 
classroom. 
In "Missed Communication in Online Communication: Tensions in a German-American 
Telecollaboration," Paige Ware examines tensions that arise when students' attempts at 
online communication result in missed opportunities for engaging with their online 
partners. Through discourse analysis of online transcripts and extensive interview and 
survey data, she documents three main contextual tensions arising from the different 
socially and culturally situated attitudes, beliefs, and expectations that informed students' 
communicative choices in the online discourse.  
In "Expanding Academic Vocabulary with an Interactive On-Line Database," Marlise 
Horst, Tom Cobb, and Ioana Nicolae used a set of existing and specially designed on-
line computer tools intended to foster vocabulary retention by engaging learners in deep 
processing. Pre- and post-treatment performance on tests of knowledge of words 
targeted for learning were compared to establish gains, and regression analyses 
investigated connections between the use of specific computer tools and learning gains.  
In "Integrating Corpus Consultation in Language Studies," Angela Chambers presents 
evidence from several publications and from her own study, which suggests that corpus 
consultation as a language-learning activity has many positive features, particularly in 
language-learning environments that stress learner autonomy and discovery learning. At 
the same time, she lists problems associated with the integration of corpus consultation 
into a complete language learning environment. 
Our "On the Net" column deals with the timely topic of "Vocabulary Support for 
Independent Online Reading." In it, Jean LeLoup and Robert Ponterio examine several 
sites that can help students read on their own, such as Ultralingua.net, which turns every 
word into a link which opens a pop-up list of dictionary definitions for that word when 
the reader clicks on the word, and WordChamp, which provides essentially the same 
capabilities when the mouse moves over a word. LeLoup and Ponterio suggest that in 
addition to introducing students to such online vocabulary helpers, teachers also provide 
their students with instruction in the use of appropriate reading strategies. 
In his column "Ajax and Firefox: New Web Applications and Browsers," Robert 
Godwin-Jones revisits the topic of Web technologies, since some alternative browsers  
 
 From the Editors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 2 
 
 
are gaining significant market share, and both Apple and Microsoft are releasing OS 
upgrades which portend some interesting changes in Web development. Of particular 
interest for language professionals may be new developments in the area of Web 
browser based applications. 
Klaus Brandl reviews Moodle (http://www.Moodle.com). The acronym stands for 
Modular Object-Oriented Dynamic Learning Environment. Moodle is a template-
based open-source authoring system which is available free of charge and requires no 
licensing fee. According to the reviewer, Moodle provides a variety of excellent tools 
that can be used to enhance conventional classroom instruction.  
We thank you for your continued support of LLT and invite you take out a free 
subcription if you have not already done so. 
Sincerely, 
Irene Thompson and Dorothy Chun 
Editors 
Pamela DaGrossa 
Managing Editor 
 
