Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num3/editors/ 
September 2005, Volume 9, Number 3 
p. 1 
 
Copyright © 2005, ISSN 1094-3501 1 
 
 
FROM THE EDITORS 
Welcome to the third issue of 2005. LLT is entering its 9th year of publication and 
continues to receive increasing numbers of submissions and experience a growing 
readership. In 2004, we received a record number of 100 submissions from 26 countries, 
and registered readers residing in over 145 countries. If you are not already subscribed, 
please take a moment to fill out your free subscription.  
This is a special issue on Technology and Oral Language Development. We thank David 
Nunan, our Guest Editor, for the six excellent articles in this issue. Please see the From 
the Special Issue Editor column for a description of the content of the issue. 
We are pleased that our faithful column editors, Jean LeLoup, Robert Ponterio, and 
Robert Godwin-Jones have again brought us two exciting columns related to special 
issue topic. In "On the Net," LeLoup and Ponterio examine two Web sites that provide 
comprehensible input for English language learners and also provide for subsequent 
two-way exchanges that allow learners to practice their oral output. In "Emerging 
Technologies," Godwin-Jones describes some new network options for oral language 
practice, specifically, Skype, a software product that allows a personal computer to act 
like a telephone, and podcasting, which refers to the automatic downloading of MP3 
audio files to a computer or MP3 player, allowing language learners to download and 
listen to podcasts in the target language. 
In addition, this issue includes three reviews. Corinne Bossé reviews SEER (Spanish 
English Education Resources), a software that offers bilingual language learning 
resources for English-Spanish translation. Luciana Diniz provides a comparative review 
of three corpus linguistics programs that are all available at not charge over the Internet. 
Finally, Richard Robin reviews some of the best Russian language instructional Web 
sites. 
Please note the Call for Papers for an upcoming special issue on Technology and 
Reading Comprehension, to be guest edited by Marlise Horst. 
Lastly, we are currently undergoing two staff changes. With this issue, Rafael Salaberry 
will be stepping down as Reviews Editor. We thank him for his support of the journal 
during the past 3 years. We welcome Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas of American University 
who will take over as the Reviews Editor, beginning with the January 2006 issue. Sigrun 
has been a faithful reviewer and contributor, and we are happy to have her join our team. 
It is with great regret that we announce that Pamela DaGrossa, our Managing Editor for 
the past 6 1/2 years, will be leaving the journal effective August 31, 2005, having 
accepted a teaching position at Windward Community College, on the windward side of 
O‘ahu, Hawai‘i. Pamela has done an outstanding job of running the journal's day-to-day 
operations and has left an indelible mark on the journal. Her invaluable service to 
Language Learning and Technology is truly appreciated. We wish her the very best in 
her new position. 
Sincerely, 
Irene Thompson and Dorothy Chun 
Editors 
  
