Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num2/review1/ 
May 2005, Volume 9, Number 2 
pp. 16-23 
 
Copyright © 2005, ISSN 1094-3501 16 
ARE YOU READY TO "MOODLE"? 
Klaus Brandl 
University of Washington 
INTRODUCTION 
With the rapidly increasing popularity of the Internet in recent years, the delivery of learning programs 
has gradually shifted from local desktop to online-based applications. While the XML programming 
environment has evolved as the new standard for the Internet, building customized learning programs 
requires the use of authoring systems such as Macromedia Director, Authorware, Dreamweaver, Flash, 
and Microsoft Frontpage (for a detailed review see Godwin-Jones, 2003), which places high demands on 
design, programming skills, and time. An alternative to using such applications is the deployment of 
course or learning management systems. One such system that has been gradually gaining worldwide 
popularity is known as Moodle (http://www.moodle.com). 
What is Moodle? 
Moodle is a course management system for online learning. The acronym MOODLE stands for Modular 
Object-Oriented Dynamic Learning Environment. Among its many users, however, Moodle has already 
become a term of its own synonymous with a software package designed to help educators create quality 
online instruction. It was the brainchild of Martin Dougiamas (http://dougiamas.com), a former WebCT 
administrator with postgraduate degrees in Computer Science and Education. The design of Moodle is 
based on socio-constructivist pedagogy. This means its goal is to provide a set of tools that support an 
inquiry- and discovery-based approach to online learning. Furthermore, it purports to create an 
environment that allows for collaborative interaction among students as a standalone or in addition to 
conventional classroom instruction. 
One of the advantages of Moodle is that it has been developed as an OpenSource software project. It is 
entirely supported by a team of programmers and by the user community. This also means that Moodle is 
available free of charge under the terms of the General Public License (GNU) and has no licensing cost 
attached. As such, it is accessible to anybody in contrast to commercial software such as Blackboard 
(http://www.blackboard.com) and WebCT (http://www.webct.com), whose licensing fees have 
skyrocketed in recent years. 
Deployment and Technical Background 
Moodle runs without modification on Unix, Linux, Windows, Mac OS X, NetWare, and any other system 
that supports PHP (HTML-embedded scripting language), including most Web host providers. Data is 
stored in a single database: MySQL and PostgreSQL are best supported, but it can also be used with 
Oracle, IBM DB2, Microsoft SQL Server, Borland Interbase, Informix, Visual Foxpro, SAP DB, SQLite, 
Sybase, Microsoft Access, ADO, and generic ODBC database access, since it uses ADOdb 
(http://www.adodb.sourceforge.net). 
MOODLE AND LANGUAGE LEARNING  
Since the development of communicative skills in language learning requires social interaction between 
the teacher and the students and among the students themselves, the use of computers has for a long time 
been regarded only as a support tool with regard to certain skill areas. Rapid advances in technology (e.g., 
fast Internet connections, ample storage capacities, increase in bandwidth) and more compatible cross-
platform applications now make the implementation of synchronous and asynchronous learning tasks, in 
oral and written modes, feasible from a pragmatic point of view (see Cziko & Park, 2003, for a review of 
computer-mediated audio communication [SCMAC] software). Furthermore, a growing body of research 
Klaus Brandl Are You Ready to "Moodle"? 
 
Language Learning & Technology 17 
is gradually emerging that provides concrete suggestions on how to exploit instructional online tools 
effectively or how to integrate the Internet for different language learning goals (Brandl, 2002; González-
Lloret, 2003). As a courseware package and learning system, Moodle has great potential for supporting 
conventional classroom instruction, for example, to do additional work outside of class, to become the 
delivery system for blended (or hybrid) course formats, or even to be used as a standalone e-learning 
platform. 
In the following section, I will provide an overview of Moodle features and point out those that are in 
particular useful for language learning. In addition, I will present some sample learning tasks and describe 
their implementation within a Moodle environment. 
Layout and Organization 
Moodle is a template-based system to which content must be is added. This makes Moodle's interface 
very intuitive and allows for easy navigation. The whole page is presented in a "flat view" format. It is 
laid out in small blocks and organized around sections following a topic or weekly outline. As Robb 
(2004) describes it, this is different from other systems that  often make use of "Chinese boxes" with 
content inside folders at various levels. Each section has its own tools such as lessons, quizzes, 
assignments, and forums which are all linked to a built-in gradebook (see section on assessment below). 
All blocks on a page can be individually arranged, and the elements within each section can be easily 
moved around or be hidden. Figure 1 shows an example of a course setup in the topic format. 
 
Figure 1. Sample of a course setup in the topic format 
Course Management 
Moodle is a teacher's dream in terms of course management features that it offers. Access to nearly all 
lesson assignments can be made time- or password-restricted, however, only quizzes can be password 
restricted at this point. Moodle also keeps automatic log reports of each student work (see Figure 2 for an 
example). This means that the teacher knows not only when students have completed or uploaded an 
assignment, but also how much time they spent on an assigned task or quiz. The teacher can also set 
deadlines or timeframes when assignments must be completed, and restrict access to learning tasks once 
Klaus Brandl Are You Ready to "Moodle"? 
 
Language Learning & Technology 18 
the deadline has passed. Students can look up their grades themselves. Teachers have also the option to 
download student grades in Excel format. Students can look up the assignments on a calendar by moving 
the cursor over a given day which will list all the assignments for that day. The calendar is optional and 
can be displayed on the front page. 
 
Figure 2. Sample log report of students' work 
Content and Resources 
Moodle allows for the integration of a wide range of resources. These include any kind of text-based or 
html-formatted documents, multimedia resources such as graphics, video or audio (e.g., MP3 files), 
SCORMs (Goodwin-Jones, 2004), PowerPoint, Half-Baked exercises 
(http://www.halfbakedsoftware.com), or Flash-based applications. Lesson tasks within Moodle can be 
linked to any resources that are uploaded to one's server or that are available on the Internet. The students' 
exploration of any of the content-based resources can be easily assessed by using any of the Moodle-
based evaluation and feedback tools (see Example 1).  
Moodle is quite powerful in content creation due to its built-in HTML editor. The degree of expertise 
required is essentially the same as for any word processor. More sophisticated presentations such as 
animations or text-specific feedback provisions need to be created by using outside multimedia authoring 
programs. 
Moodle also has a built-in glossary module. This allows teachers, individually or in cooperation with 
their students, to create their own text-, course-, or site-specific dictionaries. In this way, texts integrated 
within Moodle, especially authentic texts or resources, can be tailored to a particular level of language 
proficiency and thus be made more easily accessible to learners. 
Assessment and Testing Strategies 
Moodle allows for a wide range of assessment strategies. The quiz module includes the following 
response types: fill-ins, multiple-choice, multi-choice (more than one answer can be selected), true-false, 
matching, short-answer (exact matching). All types are supported with automatic tallying and scoring, 
based on teacher or student-determined rating scales. The essay module allows open-ended questions 
with built-in comment boxes for instructors to provide feedback. Particularly noteworthy is the workshop 
Klaus Brandl Are You Ready to "Moodle"? 
 
Language Learning & Technology 19 
module, which is designed on the basis of peer assessment. All of these assessment types can be made 
time and password restricted, and can be set to allow for limited or multiple retakes.  
Learning Management 
Moodle is also a learning management system (LMS). LMSs differ from exclusive course management 
systems because they allow to present information to learners in small units, assess what they have 
learned, and based on the quality of their achievement branch out into additional review of material or 
move to the next level. In other words, the lesson module allows to design lessons that closely control the 
learning path guiding learners step-by-step, and allowing for advancement only if sufficient mastery has 
been achieved. 
Figure 3 below demonstrates an example of the lesson module used in a beginning Spanish class at the 
University of Washington. Students are asked what their life was like in the last decade. They have the 
option to respond with true (cierto) or false (falso) to the following statement: "Me acostaba y me 
levantaba más temprano que ahora. [I used to wake up and get up much earlier than now]." A "false" 
response takes them to a card and asks a new question: "Por qué te acuestas y te levantas más temprano 
hoy día? [Why do you wake up and get up earlier these days?]" (see Figure 3a). A "true" response takes 
the learner to a card that says "Es lógico. Los jovenes se acuestan y se levantan temprano [It's logical. 
Young people wake up and get up early]" (see Figure 3b). 
 
Figure 3. Example of the lesson module used in a Spanish class 
  
Figure 3a. Example of a card following a "false" 
response 
Figure 3b. Example of a card following a "true" 
response 
 
 
Klaus Brandl Are You Ready to "Moodle"? 
 
Language Learning & Technology 20 
Student-Based and Cooperative Learning 
Moodle's design is grounded in a socio-constructivist theory of learning. Learning tasks or projects can be 
designed so as to allow for cooperation between the instructor and students or among students by using 
different formats of social interaction. Students can be divided into subgroups, interact with each other 
synchronously in chat rooms, or engage in asynchronous discussions in Wikis1 and forums (see Example 
2). The Wiki module in Moodle enables students to compose or work together on a text while online. Old 
versions are never deleted and can be restored. Forums can also be arranged in different ways. For 
example, they can be set so that only the teacher or any of the students can post content to a forum or start 
a new discussion topic (thread). Other options exist that let the teacher either restrict or allow for further 
discussions and replies within a thread. 
Feedback 
Students who participate in e-learning environments often complain about the lack of feedback that is 
available in conventional classroom settings (Brandl, 2004). In Moodle, almost all modules are designed 
to allow teachers or course participants to provide feedback in qualitative or quantitative form. For 
example, both the journal and assignment module give the instructor the option to provide their comments 
in a feedback box (see Figure 4). The assignment module, which is designed so that students can upload 
their assignments in any file format to the server, also allows the instructor to upload comments about the 
student's work in form of text- or audio-based (e.g., MP3) files. Feedback can be teacher-restricted or 
made accessible to all participants in both forums. 
 
Figure 4. Example of a feedback box 
Additional Modules 
Numerous additional features and modules facilitate course management and the learning process. For 
example, Moodle has several built-in standardized questionnaires that allow teachers to collect qualitative 
and quantitative feedback on students' learning experiences. A questionnaire module allows teachers to 
create their own questionnaires.  
SAMPLE LEARNING TASKS CREATED WITH MOODLE TOOLS  
The following section presents several examples of learning tasks. Example 1 demonstrates the 
integration of the quiz module with an authentic Internet-based cultural resource used in a second-quarter 
German class at the University of Washington, Seattle. Examples 2 and 3 represent examples of 
asynchronous and cooperative learning tasks that can be used in any intermediate language class. The 
latter two examples, in particular, demonstrate how Moodle allows for the implementation of a socio-
constructivist approach to language learning. 
Klaus Brandl Are You Ready to "Moodle"? 
 
Language Learning & Technology 21 
Example 1 
 Theme/context: Der Blaue Reiter (name of a group of German artists) 
 Task: exploring cultural information 
 Skills: interpretive (reading) and presentational (writing) 
 Level/language: low intermediate/German 
 Modules: journal module, resource module 
In this learning task, the students are asked to explore a member of the "Der Blaue Reiter" group of their 
choice. In particular, they are asked to collect detailed information about the writer's life from a Web-
based resource and write about it in English in the journal module (see Figure 5). 
 
Figure 5. Sample of a journal module learning task based on an Internet resource 
Example 2 
 Theme/context: Use of media 
 Task: establishing the sequence of a picture story in four acts 
 Skills: interpretive (reading) and presentational (writing) 
 Level/language: low intermediate (level may vary dependent on the complexity of picture story and 
the target language) 
 Modules: lesson module, forum module, quiz module 
The goal of this learning task is to find the correct sequence of a picture story (see Figure 6). Students are 
divided into groups of four. Each group is asked to describe one component (picture) of the story. The 
lesson consists of the following steps:  
1) Students access pictures through the lesson module. Each student can look up only one picture, whose 
access is password protected.  
2) Working individually, students describe one picture and post their answers to the forum.  
3) As soon as a description of each of the four pictures of the story has been posted, students are asked 
to read the picture descriptions in the forum and establish the correct sequence of pictures.  
4) Students take a multiple choice quiz to check their answers. 
Klaus Brandl Are You Ready to "Moodle"? 
 
Language Learning & Technology 22 
 
Figure 6. Sample of an asynchronous learning task -- describing a picture story 
Example 3 
 Theme/context: Family 
 Task: Finding out commonalities 
 Skills: interpretive (listening) and presentational (speaking) 
 Level/language: low intermediate 
 Modules: Assignment module, forum module 
In this task, students are asked to find commonalities about their family structures.  
1) Students are asked to briefly describe their families based on questions such as how many brothers 
and sisters they have, how old they are, what they do, what their names are. To do this, students 
record their answers with Audacity (http://audacity.sourceforge.net/), an open-source recorder, save 
their answers as MP3 files, and upload them through the assignment module. 
2) Working in groups, students listen to each others' descriptions.  
3) Students report their findings to the teacher through the essay module. 
CONCLUSION  
In the beginning, I asked what Moodle is. I would like to conclude by commenting on what Moodle is not. 
It is not a panacea for language learning. It is a course management and delivery system. As such, Moodle 
has great potential to create a successful e-learning experience by providing a plethora of excellent tools 
that can be used to enhance conventional classroom instruction, in hybrid courses, or any distance 
learning arrangements. In whatever form of instruction Moodle is used, the design of the learning tasks 
must be grounded in theories of second language acquisition. 
To find out additional information about Moodle, how to download and install it, go to the official 
Moodle site at http://moodle.org. 
NOTE 
1. Moodle's wiki is based on ErfurtWiki, which is an implementation of the WikiWikiWeb hypertext 
system. It allows simple collaborative editing and creation of Web pages. 
Klaus Brandl Are You Ready to "Moodle"? 
 
Language Learning & Technology 23 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Klaus Brandl, Ph.D. is an applied linguist and a specialist in foreign language pedagogy. He is a faculty 
member in the Department of Scandinavian Studies, and holds adjunct positions in the Language 
Learning Center, the Teacher Education Program (TEP), the Spanish Language Program and Department 
of Germanics. His specialties include language teaching methodology, teacher training, technology, and 
language learning.  
E-mail: brandl@u.washington.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Brandl, K. (2002). Integrating Internet-based reading materials into the foreign language teaching 
curriculum: From teacher- to student-centered approaches. Language Learning & Technology, 6(3), 87-
107. Retrieved March 20, 2005, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num3/brandl/ 
Brandl, K. (2004). A comparison of two different formats of Spanish 110. Unpublished manuscript, 
University of Washington. 
Cziko, G. A., & Park, S. (2003). Internet audio communication for second language learning: A 
comparative review of six programs. Language Learning & Technology, 7(1), 15-27. Retrieved March 
20, 2005, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num1/review1/ 
González-Lloret, M. (2003). Designing task-based CALL to promote interaction: En Busca de 
Esmeraldas. Language Learning & Technology, 7(1), 86-104. Retrieved March 20, 2005, from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num1/gonzalez/ 
Godwin-Jones, B. (2003). Tools for distance education: Towards convergence and integration. Language 
Learning & Technology, 7(3), 18-22. Retrieved March 20, 2005, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num3/ 
emerging/ 
Godwin-Jones, B. (2004). Learning objects: Scorn or SCORM? Language Learning & Technology, 8(2), 
7-12. Retrieved March 20, 2005, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num2/emerging/ 
Robb, T. (2004). Moodle: A virtual learning environment for the rest of us. TESL-EJ, 8(2), 1-8. 
