Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num1/meskill/ 
January 2005, Volume 9, Number 1 
pp. 46-59 
 
Copyright © 2005, ISSN 1094-3501 46 
TRIADIC SCAFFOLDS: TOOLS FOR TEACHING ENGLISH 
LANGUAGE LEARNERS WITH COMPUTERS1 
Carla Meskill 
State University of New York at Albany 
ABSTRACT 
Active communication with others is key to human learning. This straightforward premise 
currently undergirds much theory and research in student learning in general, and in second 
language and literacy learning in particular. Both of these academic areas have long 
acknowledged communication's central role in successful learning with the exact intricacies of 
instructional conversations and the forms these take having been the focus of close analysis 
(Cazden, 1988; Gee, 2001; Nystrand, Gamoran, Kachur, & Prendergast, 1997; Tharp & 
Galimore, 1991; van Lier, 2000). In this examination of computer-supported classroom discourse, 
specific forms of instructional conversation employed by a veteran elementary teacher of 
beginning-level English language learners (ELLs) are examined. The focal teacher orchestrates 
instructional conversations around computers with children whose immediate needs are to learn 
the English language, specifically the "language of school" and the concomitant social 
complexities implied in order to participate in mainstream instructional activity. With these goals 
shaping language and literacy activity, their ESOL (English for speakers of other languages) 
teacher makes use of the computer to capture, motivate, and anchor learner attention to, and 
render comprehensible the target language they hear and see on and around the computer screen. 
The anatomy of the activity she orchestrates around the computer and the language she uses to 
support it -- labeled here as triadic scaffolds -- are the focus of analysis. Forms and functions of 
triadic discourse (teacher, learner, computer) are examined for their potential unique role in 
second language and literacy instruction.  
 
INTRODUCTION 
Computer technology is being widely used in classrooms as a means of supporting instruction. 
Concurrently, much attention in the education research community has focused on instructional 
technologies generally and more particularly on the critical role of contexts of use; that is, the situational 
features and verbal instructional dynamics that can accompany computer use (Garner & Gillingham, 
1996; Kumpulainen, 1996; Lankshear & Snyder, 2000; Meskill, Mossop, & Bates, 1999; Wegerif & 
Mercer, 1996). This analysis examines the communicative dynamics of an experienced English for 
speakers of other languages (ESOL) teacher working with her students around computers. My interest 
here is to present particular patterns of instructional discourse that are at once (a) making distinct 
referential use of the physical features of the computer and (b) accomplishing second language and 
literacy activity in ways that make good pedagogical sense. In this case, the guiding notion of good 
pedagogical sense is rooted in what Gee (2000) points to as critical elements of effective literacy 
instruction: a "judicious mixture" of (a) learner involvement in their language and literacy learning 
("immersion in a community of practice"); and (b) instructional language ("overt focusing and 
scaffolding…[to] focus learners on the most fruitful sorts of patterns in their experience") that supports 
learner acquisition of a community's practices (p. 5-6). This analysis of instructional conversations around 
computers is an attempt to closely detail and explicate such mixtures in action. 
 
Carla Meskill Triadic Scaffolds: Tools for Teaching English Language... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 47 
The Language of School 
The number of children in U.S. schools for whom English is their second language is nearing five million 
and growing. While ELLs are expected to master the English language, they are also expected to 
learnacademic content in the very language they are in the process of learning. In short, their instructional 
needs are multiple and complex. Language is, after all, essential to virtually all aspects of daily life. It is 
key to improving one's lot and imagining different worlds. Likewise, schools are brimming with 
language: lectures, directions, advice, admonitions, facts, fantasies, and dissings. It would be difficult to 
disagree with the notion that something as critical and pervasive as language should be featured and so 
treated in schools. Yet the trend has traditionally been for language to be treated as a given, a prerequisite 
-- not as essential to all learning (Schleppegrell, 2001; Short & Sherris, 2004; Snow & Wong-Fillmore, 
2002). Moreover, "organizational structures in schools give or deny students access to an apprenticeship 
to the discourses of academic success" (Gebhard, 1999, p. 551). Nonetheless, children need language that 
provides access to the practices of their various communities (Lankshear & Knobel, 2003). 
A characteristic of at-risk learners -- both native and non-native speakers of English -- is that they may 
not be communicatively equipped to engage the everyday scripts of school-based activities, activities for 
which most middle class, "mainstream" students have been prepared since birth (Delpit, 1995; Gee, 1990, 
2000; Heath, 1983). Rather, children come to school versed in the experiences of their homes, their 
families, and their home culture -- cultures comprised of complex ways of knowing and communicating -- 
where what Bloom calls a "theory of mind" is firmly established as a foundation on which children's 
native communicative repertoire is formed at a young age through social interaction with others. This is 
accomplished through observing parents' and peers' ways of understanding, talking about, and being in 
the world (Bloom, 2001; Bruner, 1996). How a child's home and community understand and 
communicate about the world and how this is manifest in U.S. school culture can be quite dissimilar 
(Cazden, 1988; Heath, 1983; Michaels, 1981; Soto, 1997).  
Recent recognition that mastering language use is first and foremost a social process that involves humans 
relating to one another in effective and productive ways has taken precedence over older notions of 
language as a body of knowledge that can be broken down into discrete pieces and taught accordingly 
(Lantolf, 2001). When learning the first, or native language children actively learn the ways of knowing, 
talking about, and doing the world by working out the intentionalities of those around them. Learning a 
second language can be viewed as comprising similar processes. The human imperative to work out the 
intentionalities of others is central to a child's development of a theory of mind -- an essential 
understanding of the self in the world -- that accounts for the ways language connects with the immediate 
social context. With a foundational understanding of language learning as a social/contextual process that 
benefits from opportunities to interact with others (van Lier, 2000; Wilkinson & Silliman, 2000), 
language teaching professionals typically engage students in activities that make what learners see and 
hear in the target language salient, referenced, noticeable, and comprehensible, with understanding having 
relevant consequences: in short, an "authentic need to comprehend and act accordingly" (van Lier, 1996, 
p. 248) with immediately perceptible consequences (Asher, 1988).  
Correspondingly, instructional activity that has as its goal initiation into the world of school discourses -- 
those ways of talking that have become institutionally sanctioned or "normal" (Gee, 2000) -- must be 
crafted and guided in order to render what gets said and done salient and meaningful to learners. 
Consequently, the structure of a typical language learning activity might be as follows: A need to engage 
is established and a context is orchestrated that sets up a particular relationship between aspects of the 
physical or social environment and learners. The resulting activity -- where sight, touch, and speech unite 
-- becomes the locus of learning. Such structured activities make use of "enhanced input," language that 
has both clear visual referents and whose forms get noticed by students (Schmidt, 1995). Language 
teachers further enhance their aural input through salience-building intonation, prosody, and visual 
accompaniments of all kinds (gesture, object, facial expression). Such complexes of instructional 
Carla Meskill Triadic Scaffolds: Tools for Teaching English Language... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 48 
elements have been variously referred to as "affordances" (van Lier, 2000), "optimal samples" (Cook, 
2001), and "instructional conversations" (Tharp & Gallimore, 1991).  
Computers and Language Teaching/Learning 
Adding the computer into the instructional mix affords many opportunities for this sort of language 
learning activity. Learning what language sounds like, looks like, and means can be supported and 
enhanced through teacher and student talk about what they see on the computer screen (e.g., an instructor 
verbally directing a child's sizing and placement of an image). Thus, specific verbal instructional 
strategies known widely as teaching "scaffolds" can be facilitated by virtue of the physical properties of 
the computer. Wood, Bruner, & Ross's (1976) definition of scaffolding is instructive in this regard. Their 
four-component definition of instructional scaffolds can be readily applied to what the presence of the 
computer accomplishes in the instructional conversation: a) what appears on the screen can be viewed as 
reducing the size of the task so the child can complete it; b) what appears on the screen and what changes 
to it are possible can be viewed as keeping the child's attention in the moment; c) what appears on the 
screen can facilitate making salient relevant features; and d) what the teacher says and does in reaction to 
what appears on the screen can be viewed as modeling ways to accomplish. Each of these four key 
characteristics of scaffolding involves more than the language used per se. Each involves strategic 
instructional moves that, as a complex whole, are at the heart of the craft of teaching. The presence of the 
computer potentially amplifies such moves. Indeed, recent research on computer-supported learning 
contexts indicates that these interactional routines can provide the kinds of stimulation and anchoring of 
language so central to the language learning process (Cummins & Sayers, 1997; Esling, 1991; Meskill, 
Mossop, & Bates, 1999; Meskill & Mossop, 2000a; Newman, 1997).  
Second language and literacy learning contexts that promote and sustain the social construction and 
negotiation of meaning-making are widely considered as optimal (e.g., August & Hakuta, 1998; Snow, 
1992). In light of such optimal contexts, Meskill, Mossop, and Bates (1999, 2000b) propose specific 
physical features of computers that are especially supportive of joint meaning-making and instructional 
conversations. Features such as publicness, instability, anchored referents, and the anarchic nature of 
computers can be viewed as enabling acquisition-oriented activity when skilled language professionals 
take instructional advantage of them.2 A language educator can make use of the visual representations of 
a word or picture on the computer screen (a public, anchored referent), to communicatively reinforce 
word, phrase, and sentence-level meaning. Further, she can direct learners to manipulate what they see on 
the screen (publicness, anchored referents, instability) thereby reinforcing the aural/visual aspects of the 
language she is teaching. If a student wishes to exercise her own volition by changing what is on the 
screen independent of the teacher's directives (anarchy), this also becomes a rich venue for immediate, 
referenced target language learning. From this perspective, computer screens can serve to anchor attention 
to forms and functions in immediate, highly tangible, and communicatively authentic ways. 
The following analysis focuses on the computer-supported instructional scaffolding of an ESOL teaching 
professional as she uses computers to teach beginning-level English language learners the language and 
literacy they need to participate in the everyday academic activities of their school. Special focus of these 
instructional sequences is given to the interplay between the teacher's utterances, the features of the 
machine, children's responses, and what these together accomplish instructionally. 
CONTEXT 
"Mrs. M" has taught English to non-native speakers in the same mid-size, post-industrial city school 
district for over 30 years; the majority of that tenure has been as the sole elementary ESOL specialist in 
the district. As such, she has traveled between the district's elementary schools to teach groups of mostly 
low socioeconomic status (SES) English language learners (ELLs). Over the years, this role has come to 
include serving as the main liaison between schools and ELL families as well as the wider immigrant 
Carla Meskill Triadic Scaffolds: Tools for Teaching English Language... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 49 
community. She regularly sees that children receive the medical and social services support they need; 
this can mean "pounding on doors. Making sure kids get to the dentist even when I've got to drive them. 
That they've got a winter coat to wear to school" (interview with Mrs. M).  
Mrs. M's main objective during her 30 years as an ESOL professional has been to do everything in her 
power to ensure that her English language learners are equipped with the linguistic and cultural skills they 
need to actively participate and succeed in school. She sadly describes how the ELL children she has 
worked with over the years have been subjected to gross misunderstanding, racial abuses, and all out 
anger on the part of their classroom teachers and other school personnel. This is mainly due, she observes, 
to school personnel perceptions that ELLs' lack of responsiveness is "rude and disrespectful when these 
kids aren't understanding or that they don't know how to respond." To these ends, she works intensively 
with her students on basic oral and written literacy, content area language and accompanying concepts, 
and the appropriate verbal and non-verbal ways of "doing school" that will gain them access to the 
academic/school discourse that surrounds them. This is her stated way of combating the negative 
reactions her students tend to experience: She immediately teaches them comprehension and 
responsiveness techniques they need to appear cooperative, to fit in. She accomplishes her multiple 
instructional goals through modeling, guidance, and investment-building that are profoundly respectful 
and caring.  
Each elementary school in the district uses the ESOL "pullout" approach to ELL instruction. Children 
leave their regular classrooms to come to Mrs. M's room daily for 45-minutes of intensive ESOL 
instruction. The remainder of their day they spend in the mainstream classroom from which they are 
"pulled out" and where they receive little or no linguistic/instructional support. Mrs. M's class sessions are 
held in a small private room. The room is bright and cheerful with posters on the wall. There is a table 
where the teacher plus 4-8 students can work together. Two computers line the wall to the side of the 
worktable. As soon as the children enter the room, Mrs. M engages them in level-appropriate 
conversation about their clothes, the weather, their health, the class they just came from, their family, and 
the like. After these informal yet always instructional conversations, Mrs. M's sessions typically consist of 
group table work that focuses and prepares students to successfully engage in subsequent language and 
literacy activities that she orchestrates around the computers. Like most language instructors, Mrs. M 
makes use of software not designed specifically for ELLs. Instead, she uses native-speaker software that 
aligns with the theme of the class's current work and that can be used in ways that support learners 
practicing target language around the machines through interaction with their teacher and peers. She uses 
content-rich games, simulations, and productivity tools to complement her instruction. Sample themes of 
these activities are the alphabet, colors, animals, shapes, geography, and food. These topics steer focal 
academic vocabulary and each activity consistently integrates the five language skills: listening, speaking, 
reading, writing, and pronunciation. 
Data Collection and Analysis 
Mrs. M's sessions with two groups of ELLs were audio recorded with field notes made of non-verbal 
components of the activity over the course of 3 months. In addition to a 1 1/2 hour culminating interview, 
all informal conversation with Mrs. M before, during, and after class sessions was also recorded. 
Transcripts of Mrs. M's classes and her comments about them were successively coded on a number of 
emerging dimensions. Through processes of review, revision of codes, and re-review, labels were 
assigned to verbal and non-verbal actions on Mrs. M's part that formed part of the triadic scaffolds seen as 
predominating her work with ELL children around the computers. The construct triadic scaffold grew out 
of observing a preponderance of similar verbal routines around the computer coupled with the fact that 
these routines appeared to most accurately characterize Mrs. M's approach to exploiting computers for 
their overall attention-getting and maintaining quality as well as the continuous opportunities they afford 
for language and literacy learning. Descriptions of these verbal strategies and what these were intended to 
accomplish were checked against interview data with Mrs. M as were the labels for the roles played by 
Carla Meskill Triadic Scaffolds: Tools for Teaching English Language... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 50 
the computer. These data collection and analysis activities comprise an attempt to capture the special 
computer-supported techniques this one very experienced teacher employs to coax and support children's 
English language and literacy learning.  
Triadic Scaffolds  
Data consist of transcripts of classroom interaction and interviews with the participating teacher. Three 
coders, one of whom was the author and all of whom were language-teaching professionals, examined, 
discussed, and independently coded classroom and interview transcripts. Coders initially employed 
Meskill, Mossop, and Bates' (1999) unique features of electronic texts (publicness, anchored referents, 
instability, and anarchy) in their attempts to make sense of the role of the computer in these instructional 
conversations. In addition, commonly favored second language teaching strategies (modeling, echoing, 
recasting, and the like) also served to guide analysis. Through discussion and negotiation of, and 
ultimately agreement on, terminology, select classroom data came to be coded by a set of (a) teaching 
strategies (both verbal and nonverbal, global and local); (b) the role of the computer in the instructional 
scaffold; and (c) what these combined (teacher + computer features) strategies appear to accomplish and 
what the teacher reports them as accomplishing. Due to their tripartite nature, these verbal instructional 
strategies came to be characterized as triadic scaffolds -- three dimensions of an utterance that at once 
aims to teach language, is fashioned to be instructional, and references the computer in a 
sociolinguistically and instructional way. 
Triadic scaffolds are thus comprised of and were coded as follows: 
1) S - a teacher verbal strategy  
2) C - contribution of the computer 
3) A - what the strategy accomplishes 
Those instances of strategies reported effective by the teacher -- those that appeared to accomplish her 
aims -- are clusters of verbal routines (including gesture) that clearly connect with learner investment in 
language and literacy learning with the computer. Two excerpts containing triadic scaffolds -- one from 
each of the two pull-out classes observed -- are explicated below. The first involves two second graders 
and the use of an alphabet game to reinforce pronunciation, vocabulary, spelling, and listening. The 
second involves three fourth graders and the use of an animal game to reinforce vocabulary, 
pronunciation, spelling, and listening. In both cases, the aim is less what the design of the computer 
software might dictate, and more the thematic focus and conversational opportunities for language and 
literacy work that its use affords. Illustrative triadic scaffolds are in bold with their components explicated 
in boxed, bolded text. 
Carla Meskill Triadic Scaffolds: Tools for Teaching English Language... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 51 
Four second-graders are transitioning from table-work to computer-work. They have been 
preparing for the computer time by reviewing the English alphabet and sound-letter 
correspondence. They work in pairs with an application called Alphabet Express, software 
designed for beginning readers whose native language is English. In the following, the pair of 
boys, Joe and Sam, work under Mrs. M’s guidance. Mrs. M’s stated instructional aim here is to 
teach listening, speaking, vocabulary, reading, and pronunciation simultaneously through talk 
and activity around the computer screen. 
 
Figure 1. Triadic scaffold: second graders  
Carla Meskill Triadic Scaffolds: Tools for Teaching English Language... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 52 
Two trios (one girls, one boys) are working at the computers using The Animal Game, a colorful 
software application designed for native speakers of English to learn the names and families of 
animals. Cathy, Fiona, and Rachel work together under Mrs. M’s guidance.  
In this brief excerpt, Rachel is watching the others, waiting her turn. Learners had previously 
reviewed animal names and their pronunciation during table work. Again, Mrs. M’s stated aim is 
to work on listening, speaking, vocabulary, and reading simultaneously in an authentic context. 
The trios have been taking turns playing an identification game. The computer used by one trio is 
not playing sound. 
 
Figure 2. Triadic scaffolds: six mixed ability, mixed (2 second, 4 first) grade ELLs 
Highlighted and labeled instances of triadic scaffolds in Figures 1 and 2 are typical of the routines Mrs. M 
uses to teach language and literacy skills to beginning-level ELLs as they are use the computer. In these 
two cases, children are newcomers and as such speak and understand very little English. It is important to 
note that as they advance, so too will the complexity of the language Mrs. M uses in these scaffolds. 
Typical teacher verbal strategies with these beginning-level learners such as directing, questioning, 
echoing, and focusing accomplish language learning goals; the computer serves to physically support and 
motivate attention while at the same time providing referents for the language in use. In all cases, talk and 
Carla Meskill Triadic Scaffolds: Tools for Teaching English Language... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 53 
action are immediately perceived (public), situationally cued (anchored), and subject to both the 
machine's instability and to learners' individual or collective volition (anarchy). Children's responses to 
these scaffolds are continually evidenced in their attentiveness to the activity at hand, their continual non-
verbal responses to the verbal scaffolds (pointing, moving the mouse, nodding, keying, smiling, etc.), as 
well as their verbal responses which, for beginning level language learners are both an accomplishment 
and a clear indication of successful progress in acquiring the language. Moreover, Mrs. M reports that she 
hears her students using the language that they learn while using the computer in other school contexts: 
"They use what they learn with me on the computers all the time. I hear them. Their teachers hear them. 
It's great." 
In the first sample triadic scaffold above (Figure 1), Mrs. M uses the verbal strategy of directing ("What's 
this? Do you remember? Ohh the what? Sam, what is it called?") with the accomplishments of getting the 
children situated to use the computers, the sociolinguistic accomplishment of learners responding to aural 
directives and questions in English that are representative of school talk, and focus on the sound /m/ in 
mouse. The computer serves to provide an immediate, visual, anchored referent and thereby anchors the 
children's attention on what the teacher is saying, what they ought to be doing, and the literacy material 
they see on the computer screen. In the second triadic scaffold, Mrs. M uses an echoing strategy to 
reinforce the language these children need to acquire ("It's his turn"). The children learn the basic 
language of turn taking, making requests, giving and responding to directives ("The train"), and, almost 
incidentally, the pronunciation and spelling rules of the words on the screen. In this instance, the 
computer motivates and anchors the children's attention to these interactions while guiding them to affect 
the right outcome on the computer screen. She comments, "They get so involved with what I say and 
what they're doing on the screen that their comprehending becomes really easy for even the most basic 
beginners. They get it so quickly so I see them saying the same things I say within a couple of days." 
With the older students in the second excerpt (Figure 2), the instability of the machine (it will not play 
sound, but may offer other options) focuses learners on attending to the language of problem solving 
being modeled by their teacher: "You really can't play without sound. You know what we'll play another 
game." This is high level language that Mrs. M is making accessible by virtue of the instability of the 
machine and their collective actions in response to that instability. Likewise, in the final triadic scaffold, 
Mrs. M provides the aural component for the learners' decision-making process while focusing the girls' 
attention on the information on the screen and the procedures required by the animal game. We can 
observe Mrs. M again using the language of directing to model and reinforce the language of school with 
the computer anchoring and motivating the children's language and literacy learning. The children 
consequently learn the language of goal setting and problem solving as modeled by Mrs. M and made 
possible by the instability and unpredictable nature of the machine and, again almost incidentally, the 
names and pronunciation of jungle animals. 
In spite of the often "directed" feel to this teacher's talk, these interactions are eminently social in nature 
with children fully involved and responsive. The children's careful attending to what gets said and done is 
clearly evident; their acquisition of the language that gets used and scaffolded is likewise apparent. This is 
in contrast to the rest of their day in the mainstream classroom where there is little support for 
comprehension nor opportunity to participate. In Mrs. M's class learners actively participate in the 
conversation by moving the cursor around the screen and clicking the mouse as a form of response while 
Mrs. M models and forces meaning out of language that is directly related to sight, action, and the 
immediate social milieu. Each bit of talk is anchored to what is seen on the screen and to the social 
process of manipulating it and moving forward. She reports, "I am amazed at what I, whatever 
vocabulary, whatever activity I do with them, how it could be reinforced so easily now." 
The forward movement evident in the activity requires collective collaboration in order to not stall. What 
is seen, said, and done to keep things moving along is, therefore, consistently relevant and salient -- 
precisely what the language acquisition process thrives on. The children moreover enjoy a certain degree 
Carla Meskill Triadic Scaffolds: Tools for Teaching English Language... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 54 
of control over the interactions as they are the ones holding the mouse, controlling the keyboard, and 
thereby directing the action. Opportunities for action are inherent when learners have physical/decisional 
control over what appears and happens on computer screens. With the language routines they learn in 
order to participate successfully in this kind of cooperative work, moreover, they are equipped to access 
the academic discourse that makes up the bulk of their school day as well as participate where they may 
not have before.  
Skilled language teaching professionals consistently use what anchors they have available to exploit the 
aural-visual-action interface. This type of scaffolding -- scaffolding that is particular to second language 
and literacy instructional activity -- has characteristics that mark it as unique from the traditional sense of 
the term. Scaffolding in the Wood, Bruner, and Ross (1976) sense describes verbal moves on the part of 
an instructor that, while initially controlled by her, gradually guides responsibility over to the learner. In 
second language and literacy instruction, scaffolding has a three-fold purpose. Language teachers not only 
scaffold learning in the traditional sense of cueing, supporting, and sustaining thought, but employ the 
added dimension of tailoring learner attention to both the forms of talk and accompanying visual referents 
to which that language corresponds in the immediate physical and social environment. Such calculated 
instruction requires continual use of an internal syllabus for each individual learner so that scaffolds can 
be implemented to give "support to the edge of a child's competence" (Gaskins et al., 1997, p. 45). In the 
case of children who also need to learn the language of school, a dimension of scaffolding becomes the 
modeling of school discourse and how it enjoins the ways school gets done. As composites, then, the 
triadic scaffolds used by Mrs. M reflect Gee's judicious mixture in that (a) learners are directly mentored 
into a community of practice; (b) their learning is overtly scaffolded by a skilled mentor; and (c) learners' 
attention is deliberately focused on "fruitful patterns" (the English language they need to learn). 
DISCUSSION 
While Lemke (1995) sees a monologic, controlling tendency in technology, he paradoxically also sees 
technology as a means of breaking old patterns of social reproduction. For, as new technologies become 
more widely available, the univocal transmission of voice through one teacher, or one school 
administration will become less sustainable. However much the presence of technology may imply 
equilibrium, the issue of traditional modes of social reproduction in schools that appears to be going on in 
these classroom conversations must also be addressed. If we turn to the broader context of these children's 
learning and the social/pedagogical imperatives expressed by the teacher, we can see that her aim is to 
strengthen her students' voices and participation and thereby avert what might otherwise end up being an 
"ESL ghetto" (Valdés, 2004). Her aims are continually informed by immediate practical matters of 
survival for these children in a context where understanding the language of school is socioacademically 
crucial. Mrs. M is consequently ever watchful of the tenuous relationship between children's development 
of school-based language and literacy and their development of a theory of mind in their second language 
so that they have less risk of joining the ranks labeled "left behind": "These kids need to feel like they can 
do school, that they can participate like everyone else. I try to help them with that, with the English they 
need." 
Some have suggested that having children use computers as tools for learning increases motivation in 
children who are less likely to be motivated by school (Burns, Griffin, & Snow, 1999; Sharp, et al., 1995). 
Mrs. M's ELLs are no exception. Indeed, she reported several anecdotes where children who otherwise 
"removed" themselves from the school community by keeping their heads down on their desks, crying, 
acting out, and behaving in ways that revealed strong disconnections with school, became highly 
motivated and animated when the computer was turned on. 
I became most excited when we had this little boy John … John was unreachable. He was just, he 
was a first grader, very little bit of English. I couldn't get John to color. I couldn't get him to even 
Carla Meskill Triadic Scaffolds: Tools for Teaching English Language... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 55 
get excited about using markers. Nothing turned John on. He had his head down on the desk most 
of the day -- in his regular classroom and with me. And I was surprised by that, because I had 
other first graders and we did lots of little fun projects and the other six year olds were joining in, 
but not John. Then finally we put him next to the computer and Well! He sat up! I couldn't 
believe it. He had a smile on his face, and he started, I mean his eyes were bright! And I thought 
my god look at this kid, he wanted to interact, he wanted to do something. That was a real turning 
point. John wanted to type his name, this is a kid I couldn't get a pencil in his hand, he was so 
lethargic, wouldn't hold a pencil. And here he's typing his name. It was amazing to me. 
 Such incidents parallel those of Elliot & Hall (1997) who found that explicit modeling of self-regulating 
behaviors around computer tasks contributed to better performance of at-risk preschoolers. Indeed the 
kinds of ongoing scaffolding provided by Mrs. M and those explicitly modeled and encouraged in the 
Elliot and Hall study are quite similar; both make use of the special features of the computer to anchor 
and support such strategies. Through this kind of activity, children learn to respond appropriately to oral 
directives and suggestions, to understand the language and rules of turn taking, and to follow the steps of 
solving a problem. In both cases, the computer context served to capture and maintain learner attention in 
ways unlikely to occur offline. The kinds of verbal routines that are used to regulate and model 
regulation, what Wootton (1997) terms forms of "successive guidance," constitute the major material that 
initiates children into the discourse communities in which, if they are to be successful in school, they 
must fully participate (Gee, 1990). Technologies represent potential contexts where active participation of 
learners, in conjunction with caring teachers, can be orchestrated and orchestrated well (Heath, 1990; 
Johnson, 1991; Meskill, Mossop, & Bates, 1999, 2000a; Palumbo & Bermudez, 1994). 
Studies of learning with and around computers consistently point to a teacher's planning, orchestration, 
and moment-by-moment support of learning as being critical to successful instructional activity. Nowhere 
is this more the case than with non-native English speaking children from diverse backgrounds for whom 
the social norms and accompanying discourses of school are new and challenging. This experienced 
instructor exploits the machines in her classroom to stimulate children's enthusiasm for learning while 
exploiting the computers' special language and literacy affordances in ways that model, guide, and initiate 
learners into ways of doing school. Mrs. M's talk is dense with triadic scaffolds. Cross referencing what 
appears on the screen with her comments and directives is continual. On a moment-by-moment basis, we 
can observe her capitalizing on the physicality of the computer to orchestrate language and literacy 
learning. She exploits the computer for its capacity to draw and maintain learner focus, stimulate 
problem-solving, anchor discourse, and encourage learner-directed talk and action. 
CONCLUSION 
Oftentimes a lack of understanding on the part of educators concerning English language learners places 
their education in jeopardy. A key conceptual obstacle to understanding these students' needs is the folk 
assumptions that the language and complexities of "doing school" are inherently obvious. This folk model 
can spell disaster for those whose cultural/familial backgrounds do not mirror nor prepare children for 
these complexities. "The verbal abilities that children who fail in school lack are not just some general set 
of such abilities, but rather specific verbal abilities tied to specific school-based practices and school-
based genres of oral and written language" (Gee, 2001, p. 724). Indeed, such cross-cultural situations can 
become exacerbated when unequal power relations are also at work (e.g., child-adult, parent-teacher; see 
Darder, 1991; Schleppegrell, 2001; Scollon & Scollon, 2001). In school, those in power, teachers, use talk 
that reflects an "implicit model of literate discourse" that too often neither considers nor accommodates 
learners who have yet to be initiated into this specific genre of communication (Cazden, 1988, p. 14). 
Deconstructing the obvious is the ESOL specialist's first line strategy: Undertaking careful analysis of 
what children need to know in a given context. Her second is to orchestrate instructional activity that 
apprentices her students to learning language that can help them navigate and participate.  
Carla Meskill Triadic Scaffolds: Tools for Teaching English Language... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 56 
This seasoned teacher's instruction with computers and ELLs employs specific strategies that exploit the 
physical features of the medium to assist children in learning the language that will help them navigate 
these contexts. She uses the public feature to anchor language and attention to language. She makes use of 
the unstable feature to model problem solving and the language through which it can take place, and the 
anarchic feature to encourage learner volition and autonomy. For Mrs. M's ELLs, these instructional 
sequences are just the beginning of their guided immersion into the world of the cognitive academic 
language they must master to participate in the mainstream, a process that risks derailing if the 
foundational language of doing school is not first mastered and used to access institutional streams of 
meaning. At first blush, what Mrs. M does with her learners may look like social reproduction of 
mainstream discourse structures, and indeed to some extent it is. However, equipped with the language 
that gains them access to, and acceptance at school, these children may be better poised to claim their 
identities and participate in the (re)shaping of schools than were they not so equipped. As active 
participants they are positioned to construct their contexts of being and learning, a process that benefits 
from inclusion as opposed to exclusion.  
Technology represents no magic bullet for the problems of schooling. Indeed, empirical studies of 
programs of excellence for ELL children continue to point to excellent teachers as the prevailing 
influence on school success (Burns, Griffin, & Snow, 1999) and that exemplary uses of technologies with 
elementary students are typically driven by constructivist models of teaching and learning (Becker, 2000; 
Berg, Benz, Lasley, & Raisch, 1998). This examination of Mrs. M's teaching reaffirms the critical role of 
caring, thoughtful educators in meeting the widely varying needs of ever-changing populations of school 
age children while illustrating ways that computers can be thoughtfully integrated into language and 
literacy instruction. Delineated strategies and routines for giving and guiding the voice of at-risk English 
Language Learners as they use computers can serve as a basis for future empirical work on computer-
supported learning dynamics as well as points for modeling and discussion in professional development 
in computer-assisted language learning (CALL). 
NOTES 
1. This project was supported in part by the National Center on English Learning and Achievement 
(CELA). The Center is supported by the U.S. Department of Education's Office of Educational 
Research and Improvement (Award #R305A60005). Partial support was also provided by The 
Language Advocacy Project, University at Albany, a language and literacy training project funded 
through the Office for English Language Acquisition (OELA), U.S. Department of Education (Award 
#T195A970024-99). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily 
represent the views of the Department. An earlier version of this paper was presented at the American 
Educational Research Association Conference 2001, Seattle, WA. 
2. The following is from Meskill, Mossop, & Bates, 1999: 
a. PUBLICNESS: The feature of publicness is defined as public nature of electronic texts that prompts, 
supports, and facilitates rich discourse on the part of learners and their teachers. 
b. INSTABILITY: Electronic texts are unstable. Information appears, disappears, and changes. 
Relational structures of information is often invisible. This lack of predictability provokes the kind of 
thinking and conjecture reflected in critical thinking and the literacy/acquisition oriented discourse that 
accompanies it. 
c. ANCHORED REFERENTS: Electronic texts provide immediate concrete referents to which talk can 
be anchored. This is most frequently manifest in learners and teachers pointing with their fingers or 
with the cursor (mouse) to something on the screen that illustrates (anchors) their talk and thus both 
meshes aural and visual, and form-meaning correspondances. 
d. ANARCHY: This feature directly contrasts with traditional linear/hierarchical forms of 
representation characteristic of the print medium, especially school-based print. This feature is defined 
Carla Meskill Triadic Scaffolds: Tools for Teaching English Language... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 57 
as learners exercising volition and control over the order and direction of their interaction with 
electronic texts. Evidence is discourse and action that reveals learners interacting with information in an 
anarchic, rather than preset, linear fashion. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Carla Meskill is Associate Professor, Department of Educational Theory and Practice. Her research 
interests include the communicative dynamics and consequent language and literacy learning that the uses 
of technologies can provoke and sustain. 
E-mail: cmeskill@uamail.albany.edu 
REFERENCES 
Asher, J. (1988). Learning another language through actions: The complete teacher's guidebook. Los 
Gatos, CA: Sky Oaks Productions. 
August, D., & Hakuta, K. (1998). Educating language-minority children. Washington, DC: National 
Academy Press. 
Becker, H. (2000). Findings from the teaching, learning and computing survey: Is Larry Cuban right? 
Education Policy Analysis Archives, 8(51). Retrieved May 20, 2004, from http://epaa.asu.edu/epaa/v8n51/ 
Berg, S., Benz, C., Lasley, T., & Raisch, C. (1998). Exemplary technology use in elementary classrooms. 
Journal of Research on Computing in Education, 31(2),111-122. 
Bloom, D. (2001). How children learn the meanings of words. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Bruner, J. (1996) The culture of education. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Burns, M., Griffin, P., & Snow, C. (1999). Starting out right: A guide to promoting children's reading 
success. The National Research Council. Washington, DC: National Academy Press. 
Cazden, C. (1988). Classroom discourse: The language of teaching and learning. Portsmouth, NH: 
Heinemann. 
Cook, V. (2001). Second language learning and teaching. New York: Arnold. 
Cummins, J., & Sayers, D. (1997). Brave new schools: Challenging cultural illiteracy. New York: St. 
Martin's Press. 
Darder, A. (1991). Culture and power in the classroom. Westport, CT: Bergin & Garvey. 
Delpit, L. (1995). Other people's children: Cultural conflict in the classroom. New York: The New Press. 
Elliot, A., & Hall, N. (1997). The impact of self-regulatory teaching strategies on "at-risk" preschoolers' 
mathematical learning in a computer-mediated environment. Journal of Computing in Childhood 
Education, 8(2), 187-198. 
Esling, J. (1991). Researching the effects of networking: Evaluating the spoken and written discourse 
generated by working with CALL. In P. Dunkel (Ed.), Computer-assisted language learning and testing: 
Research issues and practices (pp. 111-131). New York: Newbury House.  
Garner, R., & Gillingham, M. (1996). Internet communication in six classrooms: Conversations across 
time, space, and culture. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Carla Meskill Triadic Scaffolds: Tools for Teaching English Language... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 58 
Gaskins, I., Rauch, S., Gensemer, E., Cunicelli, E., O'Hara, C., Six, L., & Scott, T. (1997). Scaffolding 
the development of intelligence among children who are delayed in learning to read. In K. Hogan & M. 
Pressley (Eds.), Scaffolding student learning: Instructional approaches and issues (pp. 43-73). Cambridge, 
MA: Brookline Press. 
Gebhard, M. (1999). Debates in SLA studies: Redefining classroom SLA as an institutional phenomenon. 
TESOL Quarterly, 33(3), 544-557. 
Gee, J. (1990). Social linguistics and literacies: Ideology in discourses. Bristol, PA: Taylor & Francis. 
Gee, J. (2000). Discourse and sociocultural studies in reading. In M. L. Kamil, P. B. Mosenthal, P. D. 
Pearson, & R. Barr (Eds.), Handbook of reading research: Volume III (pp. 195-207). Mahwah, NJ: 
Erlbaum. Retrieved November 9, 2001, from http://www.readingonline.org/articles/ 
art_index.asp?HREF=handbook/gee/ 
Gee, J. (2001). Reading as situated language: A sociocognitive perspective. Journal of Adolescent and 
Adult Literacy, 44(1), 714-725. 
Heath, S. (1983). Ways with words. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Heath, S. (1990). The fourth vision: Literate language at work. In A. Lundsford, H. Moglen, & J. Slevin 
(Eds.), The right to literacy (pp. 289-306). New York: The Modern Language Association of America. 
Johnson, D. (1991). Second language and content learning with computers: Research in the role of social 
factors. In P. Dunkel (Ed.), Computer-assisted language learning and testing: Research issues and 
practices (pp. 61-83). New York: Newbury House.  
Kumpulainen, K. (1996). The nature of peer interaction in the social context created by the use of word 
processors. Learning and Instruction, 6(3), 243-261. 
Lankshear, C., & Knobel, M. (2003). New literacies: Changing knowledge and classroom learning. 
Philadelphia: Open University Press. 
Lankshear, C., & Snyder, I. (2000). Teachers and techno-literacy: Managing literacy, technology and 
learning in schools. London: Allen & Unwin. 
Lantolf, J. (2001). Introducing sociocultural theory. In J. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory ands 
language learning (pp. 1-26). New York: Oxford University Press. 
Lemke, J. (1995). Textual politics: Discourse and social Dynamics. Bristol, PA: Taylor & Francis. 
Meskill, C., Mossop, J., & Bates, R. (2000a). Electronic texts in ESOL classrooms. TESOL Quarterly, 
34(3), 585-592. 
Meskill, C., Mossop, J., & Bates, R. (2000b). Bilingualism, cognitive flexibility, and electronic texts. 
Bilingual Research Journal, 23(2/3), 235-246. 
Meskill, C., Mossop, J., & Bates, R. (1999). Electronic texts and learners of English as a second 
language environments. Albany, NY: National Research Center of English Learning and Achievement. 
http://cela.albany.edu/esl/index.html 
Michaels, S. (1981). "Sharing time": Children's narrative styles and differential access to literacy. 
Language in Society, 10(4), 423-442. 
Newman, D. (1997). Functional environments for microcomputers in education. In M. Cole, Y. 
Engestrom, & O. Vasquez (Eds.), Mind, culture, and activity: Seminal papers from the Laboratory of 
Comparative Human Cognition (pp. 279-291). NY: Cambridge University Press. 
Carla Meskill Triadic Scaffolds: Tools for Teaching English Language... 
 
Language Learning & Technology 59 
Nystrand, M., with A. Gamoran, R. Kachur, & C. Prendergast. (1997). Opening dialogue: Understanding 
the dynamics of language and learning in the English classroom. New York: Teachers College Press. 
Palumbo, D., & Bermudez, A. (1994). Using hypermedia to assist language minority learners in achieving 
academic success. Computers in the Schools, 10(1/2), 171-188. 
Schleppegrell, M. (2001) Linguistic features of the language of schooling. Linguistics and Education, 
12(4), 431-459.  
Schmidt, R. (1995). Consciousness and foreign language learning: A tutorial on the role of attention and 
awareness in learning. In R. Schmidt (Ed.), Attention and awareness in foreign language learning 
(Technical Report 9; pp. 1-63). Honolulu: University of Hawai'i. 
Sharp, D., Bransford, J., Goldman, S., Risko, V., Kinzer, C., & Vye, N. (1995). Dynamic visual support 
for story comprehension and mental model building by young, at-risk children. Educational Technology 
Research and Development, 43(4), 25-42. 
Scollon, R., & Scollon, S. (2001). Intercultural communication: A discourse approach. Malden, MA: 
Blackwell. 
Short, D., & Sherris, A. (2004). Teacher views and practices on the integration of language and content. 
Paper presented at the 2004 Conference of the American Association of Applied Linguistics (AAAL) 
Seattle, OR. 
Snow, C. (1992). Perspectives on second-language development: Implications for bilingual education. 
Educational Researcher, 21(2), 16-19. 
Snow, C., & Wong-Fillmore, L. (2002). What teachers need to know about language. Washington, DC: 
Center for Applied Linguistics. 
Soto, L. (1997). Language, culture, and power: Bilingual families and the struggle for quality education. 
Albany: State University of New York Press. 
Tharp, R., & Gallimore, R. (1991). The instructional conversation: Teaching and learning as social 
activity. Washington, DC: Center for Applied Linguistics. 
Valdés, G. (2004). The failure to educate immigrant children. In O. Ana (Ed.), Tongue-tied: The lives of 
multilingual children in public education (pp. 111-117). New York: Rowman & Littlefield.  
van Lier, L. (1996). Interaction in the language curriculum: Awareness, autonomy, and authenticity. 
London: Longman.  
van Lier, L (2000). From input to affordance: Social-interactive learning from an ecological perspective. 
In J. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 245-259). New York: Oxford 
University Press.  
Wegerif, R., & Mercer, N. (1996). Computers and reasoning through talk in the classroom. Language and 
Education, 10(1), 47-64. 
Wilkinson, L., & Silliman, E. (2000). Classroom language and literacy learning. In Kamil, Mosenthal, 
Peason, & Barr (Eds.), Handbook of reading research: Volume III (pp. x-x). Mawah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates. Retrieved January 2, 2004, from http://www.readingonline.org/articles/handbook/ 
wilkinson/ 
Wood, D., Bruner, J., & Ross, G. (1976). The role of tutoring in problem solving. Journal of Child 
Psychology and Psychiatry, 17(2), 89-100. 
Wootton, A. (1997). Interaction and the development of mind. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
