Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num2/editors/ 
January 2006, Volume 10, Number 2 
p. 1 
 
Copyright © 2006, ISSN 1094-3501 1 
 
 
FROM THE EDITORS  
Welcome to Volume 10, Number 2 of Language Learning & Technology, a special issue 
on electronic literacy. We are very grateful to Carla Meskill who has done an 
outstanding job of guest editing this issue, under the expert guidance of Associate Editor 
Rick Kern. Please see the From the Special Issue Editor column for a description of the 
content of this special issue. 
In "On the Net," Jean LeLoup and Robert Ponterio critically examine Wikipedia, a 
multilingual, open source encyclopedia and provide excellent advice about using it 
judiciously in the EFL classroom. In the "Emerging Technologies" column, Bob 
Godwin-Jones provides yet another brilliant piece "Tag Clouds in the Blogosphere: 
Electronic Literacy and Social Networking," in which he discusses new social 
networking phenomena on the Web, such as community tagging, shared bookmarking, 
and blogs, and how they have created convergences between L2 consumers and creators. 
This issue includes two book reviews related to electronic literacy superbly edited by 
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas. Bethany Gray reviews Literate Lives in the Information Age: 
Narratives of Literacy from the United States, a thought-provoking array of 
"technological literacy autobiographies," edited by Cynthia Selfe and Gail Hawisher. 
Donald Weasenforth reviews Literacy in the New Media Age by Gunther Kress, an 
engaging examination of how the conceptualization of textuality is changing in today’s 
views of literacy. Finally, Tiffany Shao reviews textbooks with accompanying CDs for 
Beginning and Intermediate Chinese. 
Please note the Call for Papers for an upcoming special issue on Technology and 
Learning to Write. 
If you are not already subscribed, please take a moment to fill out your free subscription. 
Lastly, we are pleased to announce a new feature: the Related Work link at the bottom of 
the page takes you to a list of relevant dissertations in the field of language learning and 
technology since the year 2000.  We wish to thank Evelyn Reder Wade for her 
exceptional work in compiling this list. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Irene Thompson and Dorothy Chun 
Editors 
 
 
 
