Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num3/net/ 
September 2006, Volume 10, Number 3 
pp. 3-7 
 
Copyright © 2006, ISSN 1094-3501 3 
ON THE NET 
Foreign Language Teachers' Greatest Hits 
Jean W. LeLoup 
SUNY Cortland 
Robert Ponterio 
SUNY Cortland 
INTRODUCTION 
The World Wide Web is very much a part of many people’s everyday lives now, whether it be for 
personal or professional reasons. The Foreign Language Teaching Forum (FLTEACH) was inaugurated 
in February of 1994 to provide a forum where foreign language (FL) educators could engage in collegial 
dialog about work issues on a regular basis. A great deal of sharing occurs on this forum, and the 
subscribership is very generous with its knowledge, expertise, and experience. 
On February 21, 2005, and again on June 1, 2006, the moderators of FLTEACH—also the authors of this 
column—issued a request to the membership of FLTEACH. Our request:  
We think it would be interesting to ask FLTEACHers to share their absolute, number one, top of 
the line, favorite and most useful web site for you as a language teacher. If you have trouble 
deciding which is best, let us know which ones come in a close second or third. We're interested 
in seeing what kinds of categories of web sites are most useful for FL teachers these days, so if 
there are a few different types that help you in your work, that provide great authentic materials 
that you work with, or serve an important purpose that we haven't thought of, we would love to 
hear about it. 
We were interested in gathering the addresses or URLs of what the subscribers/contributors considered to 
be their "top web sites." In other words, what sites were indispensable to these FL professionals; what 
sites did they use regularly? This information could obviously be of use and benefit to others.  
From this quick survey request, we received some 60+ submissions, and several were duplicates. We will 
not attempt to replicate the entire list here, but we would like to mention a few sites of varying categories 
with a brief explanation and/or description of them. In this way, we hope to give the reader a jump start in 
the exploration of what FL teachers (at least those on FLTEACH) find to be the "greatest hits" of the web. 
GOOGLE 
Web address: http://www.google.com/ 
 
Google, including international versions, wins hands-down for the number of recommendations. It is truly 
flattening the world (Friedman, 2005). Google most likely needs no explanation, but this search engine 
has an advanced search feature that is worth noting and especially FL friendly. You can request results in 
more than 30 languages! Other advanced feature requests include file format, date, numeric range, 
domain, and synonyms to name a few.  
LeLoup and Ponterio Foreign Language Teachers' Greatest Hits 
 
Language Learning & Technology 4 
Below is an example of how one FLTEACHer uses the advanced search options on Google:  
My favorite website is Google.com--Advanced Search. You can click on Google in various 
languages to verify words, grammatical constructions, cultural items, etc. For example, if you 
want to know if  "Que pena que...." is followed by the subjunctive in Portuguese, simply go to 
Advanced Search, choose Portuguese from the language menu, set the hits to "100" and type 
"Que pena que" in the box "exact phrase". You will then come up with a whole series of 
sentences with "Que pena que..." and you can quickly see different verbs that complete this 
thought.  
James May  
February 22, 2005 
 
For the classroom teacher, Google image searches are a great source of authentic cultural materials 
incuding works of art, foreign buildings, street scenes, and people engaged in all sorts of routine practices 
of daily life. With so much now available online, it sometimes seems like you can google anything. Just 
don't forget that web page authors can make mistakes.  
LeLoup and Ponterio Foreign Language Teachers' Greatest Hits 
 
Language Learning & Technology 5 
EMBASSY OF SPAIN PUBLICATIONS 
The Embassy of Spain has two sites that received high accolades.  One is the online magazine Materiales, 
available in digital format since May 1997: http://www.sgci.mec.es/usa/materiales/ 
 
This magazine is a teaching resource based on the national standards for FL learning (Standards, 1999). 
The lesson units all deal with Spanish culture in some way and are elaborated at the elementary, 
intermediate, or advanced level. Each issue of Materiales has several lessons at different levels. 
The second publication of the Embassy of Spain is the online magazine Tecla. This resource has been 
available since September 1994: http://www.sgci.mec.es/uk/Pub/tecla.html 
 
Tecla is published every Friday of the academic year in the United Kingdom. A typical issue contains two 
to three authentic texts about Spanish culture, along with comprehension and production activities. 
Answer keys, where appropriate, are also provided. 
QUIA.COM 
Web address: http://quia.com/ 
 
Quia is a site where teachers can create materials tailored to their own curriculum, including a wide 
variety of online activities, quizzes, and other assessment tools. Templates are provided for both activity 
and quiz creation. Grading tools are also available. Originally, Quia provided all these services for free. 
While it is now charging a nominal yearly fee, teachers who use it think it is well worth the cost and 
sometimes can even get their school district to subsidize the subscription. 
I’m sure someone else has surely already mentioned Quia?  I’ve used it for as long as I've been a 
member of FLTEACH, 7 years.  Even when I couldn't get my students to the lab after the fire, I 
was able to use the quizzes I could create on Quia by printing them out.  
Mary Ann Freeman  
LeLoup and Ponterio Foreign Language Teachers' Greatest Hits 
 
Language Learning & Technology 6 
June 13, 2006 
LE GRAND DICTIONNAIRE 
Web address: http://www.granddictionnaire.com/ 
 
 
Dictionaries are clearly an essential tool in the FL classroom, and not just for students. Keeping up with 
new vocabulary or tracking down a word that just isn't in one of the hard copy or electronic dictionaries in 
the classroom would be much more difficult without access to up-to-date online tools. The grand 
dictionnaire terminologique by the Office Québecoise de la Langue Française is a great online dictionary 
for a quick search for an equivalent term in French or English. 
 
I sure use www.granddictionnaire.com a lot, to look up French words I don't know. For example, 
someone today wanted to know how to say "kickball"....and it's there ("le kickball" by the way.) 
Way better than the Langenscheidt dictionaries in my classroom. 
Deb Blaz, FLTEACHer 
February 21, 2005 
Paper dictionaries, both bilingual and monolingual, still have their place, as do some of the excellent 
electronic dictionaries such as the Petit Robert, the Petit Larousse, the Grand Dictionnaire Hachette-
Oxford, or the Grand Robert & Collins électronique, that offer a variety of interesting features and 
examples of usage.  
DEVELOPING EDUCATIONAL STANDARDS 
Web address: http://www.edstandards.org/Standards.html 
 
As well as being classroom teachers, many members of FLTEACH are involved in FL teacher education. 
As such, they need to be up-to-date on the national FL standards as well as state standards for Languages 
Other Than English (LOTE). Because we have a mobile society and our students will quite possibly go to 
teach in another geographic region, it behooves FL methods instructors to have access to the FL standards 
of all states, not merely the one in which they teach. This site provides links to all state education 
LeLoup and Ponterio Foreign Language Teachers' Greatest Hits 
 
Language Learning & Technology 7 
departments as well as state educational standards for core subjects. Yes, foreign language is finally 
considered a core subject – at least at the national level!   
After [eBay and Google], the SED [State Education Department] website, and, of course, 
FLTEACH, I think the Educational Standards site is the one I often start with. 
Bill Heller  
Mon, 21 Feb 2005 
FOREIGN LANGUAGE AND SPECIAL NEEDS 
Web address: http://www.specialeducationalneeds.com/ 
 
In a special reference category, the MS Word document provided at: 
http://www.specialeducationalneeds.com/mfl/biblio.doc 
is perhaps the most complete bibliography of online and print references dealing with modern foreign 
languages and special educational needs. This impressive work contains nearly 1400 references, many 
online and some in languages other than English. A table of contents directs the reader to references on a 
particular special needs area.  
It can be an effective tool, I've found, when responding to those who still argue that foreign 
language learning is, or should be, the preserve of an academic élite. 
David Wilson (author of the site) 
Harton School, South Shields, UK 
CONCLUSION 
Many other sites were submitted that are not mentioned above. Many contained multimedia formats, links 
to radio and TV programs for listening comprehension, and PowerPoint presentations in various 
languages put together by dedicated FL educators who are generous with their expertise and time. Still 
others were generic sites providing assistance in creating rubrics, lesson plans, and assessment tools for 
educators in general. Each and every web user surely has a list of "greatest hits." We hope the sites 
mentioned above will give the reader a jumpstart to either some new places or some new uses of familiar 
ground. 
 
REFERENCES 
Friedman, T. L. (2005). The world is flat: A brief history of the twenty-first century. New York, NY: 
Farrar, Straus and Giroux.  
Standards for foreign language learning in the 21st century. (1999). Lawrence, KS:  Allen Press, Inc. 
