Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num2/lee/ 
May 2006, Volume 10, Number 2 
pp. 93-113 
 
Copyright © 2006, ISSN 1094-3501 93 
EXPLORING THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ELECTRONIC 
LITERACY AND HERITAGE LANGUAGE MAINTENANCE 
Jin Sook Lee 
University of California, Santa Barbara 
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper focuses on the electronic literacy practices of two Korean-American heritage language learners 
who manage Korean weblogs. Online users deliberately alter standard forms of written language and play 
with symbols, characters, and words to economize typing effort, mimic oral language, or convey qualities 
of their linguistic identity such as gender, age, and emotional states. However, little is known about the 
impact of computer-mediated nonstandard language use on heritage learners’ linguistic development. 
Through in-depth case studies of two siblings, the study examines the linguistic and pragmatic practices of 
these learners online and the perceived effects of non-standard forms of computer-mediated language on 
their heritage language development and maintenance. The data show that electronic literacy practices 
provide authentic opportunities to use the language and support the development of a social network of 
Korean speakers, which results in greater sociopsychological attachment to the Korean language and 
culture. The informants report that the deviant language forms found in e-texts enable them to engage in 
online interactions without the pressures of having to spell the words correctly. However, they express 
frustrations in not being able to distinguish between correct and non-standard forms of the language, which 
appear to be affecting their offline language use. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The potential of computers and technology to assist individuals in their efforts to maintain and develop proficiency 
in their heritage language is powerful. According to Wallraff (2000), "the Internet is capable of helping immigrants 
everywhere to remain proficient in their first language and also to stay current with what is going on back home" (p. 
61). Although a growing number of studies have examined how technology can be used to record and preserve 
indigenous languages for revitalization efforts (Buszard-Welcher, 2001; Warschauer, 2000; Villa, 2002), little 
attention has been given to the effects of electronic literacy and online communication on heritage language learners. 
This study focuses on Korean electronic literacy practices in a popular Korean weblog and the effects of such 
practices on the language maintenance efforts of two Korean-American heritage language speakers. 
THE KOREAN CONTEXT 
The Republic of Korea has one of the fastest-growing cybercommunities in the world. According to the Korea 
Network Information Center, over 63% of the entire South Korean population are Internet users, and 95% of 
individuals in the 6-29 age bracket report using it on a daily basis. Internet sites that enable users to create "personal 
spaces" to share and document their changing lives and keep connected with people they know are immensely 
popular among Koreans. A case in point is "Cyworld," an upgraded blog that features chatting, commentaries, 
pictures, music, a guest book, avatars and links to other homepages prompting users to network with their friends, 
family, and colleagues. As of August 2005, there are over 11 million Cyworld registered users. 
Participation in online forums such as Cyworld engages its members in a social process of learning through shared 
practices, internally constructed membership, and the formation of personal and group identities (Holmes & 
Jin Sook Lee Electronic literacy and heritage language maintenance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 94 
Myerhoff, 1999). Members are involved in a community of practice, where a group of people who come together 
around a joint enterprise develop common beliefs, values, and ways of doing things, which all influence the ways in 
which members communicate with one another (Eckert, 2000; Wenger, 1998). 
New forms of expression are constantly being negotiated and shared among online users, making it difficult to keep 
current with the changing face of electronic text. Computer-mediated communication is unique in that, despite its 
similarities to oral speech, it invites substantial deregulation effects on communication, which can foster the use of 
creative, non-standard language play (Sproull & Kiesler, 1986). Studies have documented non-standard1 uses of 
language in online interactions (a) to mark certain individual characteristics such as provincial dialects, social class, 
gender, age, and/or personality traits, (b) to economize typing efforts, and/or (c) to mimic spoken language (Barnes, 
2003; Herring, 2001; Song, 2002; Sproull & Kiesler, 1986). For example, Su (2004) found an emergent mock 
Taiwanese accent among Internet users as a form of language play to jointly construct "a young, lively, congenial, 
and witty presence" (p. 61). Androutsopoulos (2000) also revealed that non-standard orthography in online fan 
media texts was representative of spoken language and purely graphemic modifications, which are used to serve as 
contextualization cues and cues of subcultural positioning.  
Although all natural languages inevitably change over time, drastic deviances from standard language ranging from 
non-standard orthography and incorrect grammar to unfamiliar lexical items and symbols have brought forth great 
concern about the preservation of standard orthography, grammar, and pragmatic uses of the Korean language 
(Choi, 2003; Kim, 2005; Park, 1989). Educators across grade levels in Korea are reporting that students display 
electronic textual features in their school work: they have difficulty with spelling and with the proper word spacing 
used to delineate word boundaries due to non-standard ways of Internet language use, which flout conventional 
norms of literacy practices (Ahn, 2000; Choi, 2003; Kim, 2005; Noh, 2000). For young children and Korean as 
foreign/second language learners who have not fully acquired literacy in the language, exposure to electronic texts 
may have adverse effects on their language development. However, Meskill, Mossop, and Bates (1999) state that 
"children in the age of electronic text are developing unique skills and strategies for inventing novel forms of 
understanding these texts that are quite often independent of formal instructional ('school') literacy training" (p. 4), 
thus, highlighting the positive ways in which the development of electronic texts can benefit students’ cognitive 
flexibility and skills.  
CHARACTERISTICS OF KOREAN INTERNET LANGUAGE 
Hangul, the South Korean national alphabet, was developed over five centuries ago and is the only alphabet 
completely native to East Asia (Lee & Ramsey, 2000). There are 24 basic Hangul letters: 14 consonants (ㄱ = k, 
ㄴ= n, ㄷ = t,ㄹ = l,ㅁ = m,ㅂ = p,ㅅ= s,ㅇ = ø or –ng, ㅈ = c, ㅊ = ch,ㅋ = kh, ㅌ = th,ㅍ= ph,ㅎ = h); 10 vowels 
(ㅏ = a, ㅑ = ya, ㅓ = e, ㅕ = ye, ㅗ = o, ㅛ = yo, ㅜ = wu, ㅠ = yu,ㅡ = u,ㅣ= i); and 16 additional complex 
symbols which include 5 consonants (ㄲ = kk, ㄸ = tt, ㅃ = pp, ㅆ = ss, ㅉ = cc) and 11 vowels (ㅐ = ay, ㅒ = 
yay,ㅔ = ey,ㅖ = yey, ㅘ = wa,ㅙ = way,ㅚ= oy, ㅝ = we, ㅞ = wey, ㅟ = wi,ㅢ = uy). Hangul orthography groups 
these basic letters into syllables to create words, as shown in (1).2 The consonants written on the bottom of the 
syllable, such as ‘ㅁ’ in (1b), are called patchim.  
(1) a. ㄴ +ㅏ   ㅁ+ㅜ = 나무   
   n  + a     m+wu = namwu 
  'tree'  
   
Jin Sook Lee Electronic literacy and heritage language maintenance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 95 
b. ㅂ +ㅗ+ ㅁ = 봄  
  p  + o + m  = pom 
'spring'  
Korean is structurally different from English in a number of ways. First of all, the basic syntactic structure is 
Subject-Object-Verb rather than Subject-Verb-Object as in English. Secondly, Korean is an agglutinative language, 
which means that grammatical particles are attached to the end of nouns to indicate its function in the sentence, as 
well as to the end of verbs to indicate speech levels (i.e., honorifics), mood, and tense, as shown in (2). Moreover, 
modern Korean writing requires spacing between words, unlike traditional Korean writing systems, and particles are 
considered to be part of the word. For example, agi-ka in (2a) would be one word and the space would follow -ka. 
However, spacing causes much confusion among language learners, because it is not always clear whether a 
particular syllable is a particle or a separate word (see Sohn (1999) for further discussion on spacing). 
(2) a. agi-ka   kwiyep-ta. 
baby-[SUBJ marker] cute (descriptive verb)-[present, plain form]  
'The baby is cute.' 
b. agi-lul   cal     tolpo-ass-eyo. 
Baby-[OBJ marker]  well   look after-[past, polite form]. 
'The baby was well taken care of.' 
In the case of phonology, Korean also differs from English in that there are no labio-dental sounds (e.g., f or v), no 
interdental sounds (e.g., th), and no voicing distinctions as in p and b. Instead, Korean differentiates between the 
obstruents with a three-way contrast between lax sounds, reinforced sounds, and aspirated sounds (e.g., tal 'moon,' 
ttal 'daughter,' and thal 'mask,' respectively). Also, Korean consonants in syllable-final (coda) position are not 
released in articulation. For example, aph ‘front’ is pronounced [ap] with a complete closure. Because Korean 
consonants are not pronounced with a release in the final position, the distinctions between stops, fricatives, and 
affricates are neutralized. For example, in oral speech, patchims such as ㅅ ,ㅈ,ㅊ, and ㄷ are all phonetically 
pronounced as a  [t]. Furthermore, adjacent sounds can undergo assimilation. For instance, when a stop sound likeㄱ 
occurs before a nasal sound like ㅁ as in 국물 (kwuk-mwul 'broth'), the stop becomes nasalized and is pronounced 
kwung-mul. These examples show the difficulties that morphophonemic orthography causes due to the discrepancies 
between the way the syllables are spelled following the invariable phonemic shape of each morpheme and the way 
in which they are pronounced, which often does not reflect the actual spelling of the word (for further explanation 
on the linguistic structure of Korean, please refer to Lee & Ramsey (2000) and Sohn (1999)). 
The Korean Language Research Institute, in addition to a handful of independent scholars, has analyzed 
characteristics of Korean Internet language (Ahn, 2000; Kim & Ra, 2003; Lee, 2004; Noh, 2000; Song, 2002). They 
discovered many forms that were unique to online language use. In particular, they found that non-standard 
orthography was used as a means to condense the time and effort of typing and to mark individual and collective 
identity within online groups. Some of the more common characteristics have been described by Kim and Ra (2003), 
Noh (2000), and Song (2002) as follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
Jin Sook Lee Electronic literacy and heritage language maintenance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 96 
Table 1. Common features of Korean Online Language Use 
 
Features Prototypical Examples Explanations  
Contraction of 
phonemes 
Contraction after omission of the middle vowels: 
설   = 서울                 
 sel   = se wul  
'Seoul'  
Contraction by deleting syllables:  
즐겜   = 즐거운 게임 
cul keym  = cul ke wun key im  
'fun game' 
Contraction is the most 
common form.  Shortening 
the word or expression saves 
time in writing and typing 
online. 
Omissions Omission of consonant cluster in the first syllable: 
갈까    =  가까 
Galkka   = gakka 
'Shall we go?' 
Weak sounds are omitted 
between phonemes for 
economy in typing. 
Addition of extra consonant in the last letter:  
궁금해용  = 궁금해요 
 kwung kum hay yong =   kwung kum hay yo  'I’m 
curious' 
Consonant clusters are added 
to the end syllable to express 
special characteristics of oral 
speech, such as personality 
markers or to soften 
expression. 
The nasalized sound of o 
expresses a sense of 
cuteness.  
그래염  = 그래요 
ku lay yem   = ku lay yo  
'I agree' 
Adding a nasalized ㅁ gives 
the feeling of softness and 
mildness. 
Addition 
그런데   = 그런데여 
gurunde  = gurendeyeh 
'but' 
 Syllables are elongated in 
some cases to represent a 
more feminine style by 
adding a vowel to the last 
syllable 
Phonological 
Approximation 
  
추카   = 축하 
chwu kha    =      chwuk ha 
'congratulation/celebration' 
Online users write the words 
as they would pronounce 
them orally without adhering 
to its morphophonemic 
orthography. 
New Lexical 
Additions 
  
허걱!  
he kek  
(onomatopoeia expressing surprise)  
New lexical items that are 
used to represent certain 
emotions or styles unique to 
online users. 
Jin Sook Lee Electronic literacy and heritage language maintenance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 97 
Emoticons ㅜ.ㅜ, ㅠ.ㅠ, T_T, !_! = crying face 
 ( -.-)(-.-)(-.- )             = looking around 
Emoticons bring softness and 
pleasantness to computer 
mediated communication that 
can easily become rigid. 
Also, they assist in 
expressing feelings that 
words alone can seldom 
describe.  
Morphological 
Creativity 
  
Mixing with words of foreign origin: 
송방            = 노래방 
song pang     = no lay pang  
'karaoke'  
Use of numerals: 
8282            = 빨리빨리 
phal I phal I   = ppal li ppal li  
'hurry' 
Distortion of Basic (C+V+C): Syllable Forms 
ㄱㅅㄱㅅ     = 감사 감사 
kam sa kam sa  
'thank you' 
Numbers and foreign words 
and symbols are used as a 
form of language play, but 
also as a means to economize 
typing. Such forms have 
become conventionalized 
among online users from 
particular groups. 
HERITAGE LANGUAGE MAINTENANCE AND THE INTERNET 
In the case of Korean-American heritage language speakers, who are experiencing one of the fastest heritage 
language attrition rates (Au & Oh, In press; Lopez, 1996), the Internet provides many possibilities for learners to 
gain exposure to the language and maintain ties with Korean speakers. Meskill et al. (1999) describe electronic texts 
as "an environment that invites free form creativity, experimentation, bricolage, and discovery; a place where 
intuitiveness, risk taking, working through ambiguities and the like, engage" (p. 4). Such a context is likely to 
provide a fertile ground for language learning to happen. The social constructivist paradigm (Lantolf, 2000; Lantolf 
& Appel, 1994; Vygotsky, 1978), which places social interaction at the core of second language learning, provides a 
foundation for understanding how electronic literacy practices within online communities can contribute to language 
maintenance and development. Learning is most effectively achieved within a community of practice, where there 
are "networks of people who engage in similar activities and learn from each other in the process" (Warschauer, 
2003, p. 120). That is, learners become active agents engaged in co-constructing their own learning by observing, 
imitating, experimenting, modeling, and providing and receiving feedback from one another. 
With computers, the learning environment extends beyond concrete boundaries to connect with others in the world, 
allowing learners to communicate directly with native speakers for a genuine purpose (Kern, 1995). In other words, 
links provided by technology provide learners with the opportunities to interact and negotiate meaning through 
authentic tasks with the culture of the target language and the practices of the community (Egbert, Chao, & Hanson-
Smith, 1999; Kung, 2002). Recently, many scholars have turned to social network theory to understand the 
mechanisms of language maintenance (De Bot & Stoessel, 2002; King, 2000; Wei, 2000). This model posits that the 
more visible and vital the community of speakers, the more likely for individuals to want to become members of 
such a social network. Vibrant social networks of speakers offer access to more opportunities to use the language for 
Jin Sook Lee Electronic literacy and heritage language maintenance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 98 
meaningful communication. Technology and online communities provide an alternative way to find and create 
social networks that can elevate the vitality of a group.  
The seminal work of Miller and Slater (2000), which examined the role of the Internet in the lives of Trinidadians 
and diasporic Trinidadians, identified "the internet as a place to hang around that constituted a most obvious natural 
affinity to Trini-ness" (p. 89). The Internet allows for what Miller and Slater (2000) call the expansion of realization 
(i.e., a means of enacting new representations of one’s identity and culture) and expansive potential (i.e., the 
possibilities of expanding connections that allow one to picture a novel image of what one could be). In other words, 
the Internet helps communities to come closer to a realization of who they really are and provides the means to 
reestablish local communities, which have been hindered by physical distance. Furthermore, the Internet serves as 
an effective medium for students’ cultural exploration and expression. Warschauer (2000) found that interacting in 
cyberspace provided, for example, Hawaiian students with an opportunity to explore and strengthen their sense of 
individual and collective Hawaiian identity.  
According to Villa (2002), computers cannot become a surrogate for one generation of minority language speakers 
passing that version to subsequent generations. The teaching of a language and its intergenerational transmission 
depends on individuals’ dedication and will both transmit and learn the heritage tongue (Warschauer, 2000). 
Computers can only support language maintenance and teaching efforts by providing access to authentic materials 
and opportunities to practice the language for authentic purposes.  
METHODOLOGY 
Procedures 
As part of a larger study examining the influences of popular culture and the Internet on heritage language 
maintenance, I met two informants, who reported being active participants in what was one of the most popular 
websites in Korea at the time, http://www.cyworld.com. Interested in how these individuals were interacting with 
the unique features of online Korean electronic text, I contacted the siblings to inquire about their willingness to 
participate in a series of interviews regarding how and why they participate in Cyworld and what effects their 
involvement had on their heritage language maintenance and development. Both informants agreed to participate in 
this exploratory study and also consented to my use of screen shots of their Cyworld pages for research and 
publication purposes.  
With technological advancements making it easier for researchers to examine the lives of others, Scollon and Levine 
(2004) raise questions about the rights of academic researchers in relationship to and in negotiation with research 
participants and stress the importance of heightened sensitivity to protect the interests and rights of those being 
studied. Various precautions were taken in this study to protect the participants’ privacy and anonymity. No 
identifiable images and names of the informants were used, and all excerpts of the collected data were sent to the 
participants for their review and consent. Furthermore, as I was explaining the procedures and the rights of the 
informants as participants in the study, I specifically inquired about their feelings toward using their language 
practices in Cyworld as public research data. Both informants stated that they felt comfortable sharing the 
information with others, because the content of their postings was about aspects of their life that they did not deem 
to be private. The format of Cyworld allows strangers to visit their sites, view the contents of their sites, and leave 
messages for them requesting the establishment of a friendship link, unless the authors of the weblogs restrict access 
to those within their closest personal circles. In spite of the protection mechanism that prevents unauthorized 
strangers from viewing their content, the informants still viewed the content as public information. They stated that 
they would not post personal information that they do not want to share with others on this venue, because it is not 
an anonymous forum. The majority of their postings had to do with factual information about daily events. 
Jin Sook Lee Electronic literacy and heritage language maintenance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 99 
Over three months, I interviewed each informant about their linguistic biographies, their online practices, their 
proficiency in Korean, and their perceptions of the effects of Korean electronic text on their heritage language 
learning process. The interviews were conducted over three sessions which lasted approximately two hours each. 
The informants also gave permission to log onto their sites to observe their activities in Cyworld, where I retrieved 
screen shots of their activities. Each retrieval was emailed back to the informants to ask for confirmation that it 
could be used for research purposes. The informants were consulted throughout the analytic and writing processes to 
check for accuracy in my interpretation and representation of their views. The interviews were conducted in English, 
although each of the informants incorporated some Korean into their speech to explain their language use. 
Approximately thirty screen shots were recorded for analysis.  
Both informants described and demonstrated how they use their personal Cyworld blogs (see Figure 1). The 
informants explained that the most attractive features of this site were its user friendliness, the fact that the services 
were free of charge, and the vast number of members connected in Cyworld. On the left of the screen in Figure 1, a 
menu of the weblog organized by topics such as diary, friends, family, etc., appears, and, on the right, there is a tab 
menu that organizes the site by function such as photo album, discussion board, profile, guest book, and so forth. 
Pictures and favorite music are also easily incorporated to personalize the site.  
 
Figure 1. Sample screenshot of Cyworld  
The interviews were transcribed and the Korean responses were translated into English. Using an inductive thematic 
analysis approach (Strauss & Corbin, 1998), the data were reviewed for conceptual themes that depict the nature of 
Jin Sook Lee Electronic literacy and heritage language maintenance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 100 
the informants’ comments. The case studies of two heritage language participants of Cyworld will be presented in 
three sections: (a) motivations for online participation; (b) the linguistic and pragmatic conventions of Korean online 
literacy practices among friends; and (c) the effects of such participation on heritage language learners’ language 
development and the learners’ perceptions of proficiency. 
Informant Descriptions 
Jendy3 
Jendy is a 23-year-old female undergraduate student in her senior year at a university in California. Currently, she 
resides in an area where there is a small, but growing Korean population. The majority of her friends at school are 
other Korean-American students. She was born in Seattle, but grew up in Saipan, a U.S. territory, until she was 15 
years old. In Saipan, she attended an international school where the medium of instruction was in English. English 
was also the language of the wider society. However, her social network of friends mainly consisted of other 
Koreans who had recently immigrated from Korea. Jendy reports that in Saipan, Korean was used for most social 
purposes and English was only used in class and other school-related activities. She learned how to read and write in 
Korean from being exposed to the Korean alphabet through the books that her parents would bring back from their 
frequent trips to Korea. At 15, she moved with her sisters to a small community in central California where she had 
minimal contact with other Koreans. She soon became much more comfortable and fluent in English and the 
dominant language among her siblings and peers was English during her high school years.  
For academic purposes, Jendy states that she is much more proficient in English because she has never received 
formal education in Korean. She explained that she cannot write academic reports or essays in Korean and has 
difficulty reading technical books and classical literature, but has no problem reading or writing informal and 
personal messages or letters. Jendy first started using the Internet two years ago to create personal sites for social 
networking purposes. She originally learned about another site that had similar features from a friend in Korea; 
however, when that particular site started to charge their users about a year and a half ago, she transferred over to 
Cyworld. She logs on daily to see who has visited her site and to go to her friends’ and families’ sites to view their 
current postings. 
I had several opportunities to converse with her in Korean. As a native speaker of Korean, I assessed her 
pronunciation and intonation patterns to be near native-like. She was also familiar with popular phrases and 
vocabulary currently used among Korean young adults and was conversationally very fluent. However, she had 
some difficulty with proper usage of honorifics and did not use any formal academic language in Korean during our 
interactions. Her oral proficiency showed sufficient structural accuracy and vocabulary which would enable her to 
participate effectively in most conversational situations. She also demonstrated native-like proficiency in English, 
although she had a distinct accent, which she claims is the product of the English she learned in Saipan. Assuming 
that she would be more fluent in English as is typically the case of heritage language learners, I initiated the 
conversation in English. Once we became more comfortable with one another, she started to code-switch, 
interweaving Korean phrases and words as she was responding to my interview questions. I also had the opportunity 
to observe her typing comments onto her blog and to hear her read aloud excerpts from her blog. Her typing and 
reading skills in Korean were very fluent, and it was evident that she has had much practice in both skills.  
Lizzy 
Lizzy is a 19-year-old sophomore at a small college in central California, where there are hardly any other Koreans. 
She mainly associates with other Asian Americans at her school. She was born in Seattle, but moved to Saipan when 
she was two years old. She grew up with two older sisters, who were proficient in English by the time she started to 
produce her first words. In contrast to her older sisters, who were only exposed to Korean before they started school, 
Lizzy heard both Korean and English in the home; however, Korean was the main language of communication 
Jin Sook Lee Electronic literacy and heritage language maintenance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 101 
between her parents and the children. When Lizzy started school, there were many Korean children who were 
English-dominant speakers in Saipan. Although she was conversationally proficient in Korean, she stated that 
outside of the home, she used English. Her mother taught her the Korean alphabet by teaching her to read the 
Korean Bible when she was 9 years old. Since then, she has had no other form of instruction to develop her Korean 
proficiency.  
She moved with her sisters to a small town in central California when she was in junior high school. Soon, her 
sisters began to use more English, and the only source of Korean input was from her parents, who traveled back and 
forth from Saipan. She feels that her Korean proficiency started to deteriorate at that point. She explains: 
Basically, to tell you the truth, I’m more comfortable in English than in Korean, because since I came to 
college, there are no Koreans around me that I can talk to or they all speak English, so it’s harder for me to 
be exposed to Korean … basically I’m one of the Koreans who’s considered to be good in Korean. (L) 
In order to help Lizzy regain her fluency in Korean, her parents require her to speak in Korean to them. She realizes 
that her Korean proficiency needs to be further developed, and says: 
I’ve always wanted to improve my Korean, but I’ve never thought about taking a Korean class, because my 
school doesn’t offer Korean or any other Asian language except for Japanese. Also, I think that I can do it 
by myself by doing the same routine like talking to my parents, reading the Bible in Korean, reading books 
that I’ve read in English in Korean. If I make an effort, I can do it by myself. (L) 
For Lizzy, maintaining Korean was a matter of the degree of effort she puts into the process. She describes her oral 
fluency in Korean to be "okay". She has been going to Korea every summer since she started college, and states: 
But every year, it seems like I’ve been getting worse and worse. Whenever I go [back to Korea], my friends 
tell me, your Korean got worse. (L)  
She commented that her friends in Korea told her during her last visit that she sounded like she was literally 
translating from English when she spoke Korean. She claims to be least proficient in her writing skills, especially in 
terms of spelling, word spacing, and grammar.  
Lizzy’s sisters first introduced her to the world of online Korean through Cyworld a year and a half ago so that they 
could communicate with her on a regular basis. Currently, one sister lives in Korea and the other sister attends 
college 150 miles away from where she lives. She reports her participation to be irregular, but frequent: 
In some weeks, I’m really into it, the next three weeks I’m like school, school, school. I use it [cyworld] a 
lot even through I don’t upload new messages. I go and read what every one else is up to. You want to 
catch up with your friends, see what they’re doing. (L) 
During our conversations, Lizzy communicated mainly in English and appeared to be very comfortable expressing 
herself in English. In contrast to Jendy, who stated that code-switching was the most comfortable way to express 
herself, there were only a few instances when Lizzy code-switched, stating that it has always been very difficult for 
her to go back and forth between Korean and English. According to the siblings, Jendy possesses greater proficiency 
in Korean than Lizzy. Jendy describes her sister’s proficiency in the following way: "My sister, she’s not really good 
at it. She speaks it but sometimes she speaks like a mom’s style. She sounds like an ajumma ('older married 
woman'), you know, how Korean Americans sound exactly like their mothers (laugh)." From my interactions with 
Lizzy, it was evident that she possessed enough proficiency in Korean to be able to converse in simple informal 
situations, but appeared much more comfortable speaking in English than in Korean. Her reading aloud skills and 
Jin Sook Lee Electronic literacy and heritage language maintenance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 102 
typing skills in Korean were not as fluent as Jendy’s. She was slow and careful in her typing and often had to 
backspace to retype what she had written. 
The following sections will present the results of the content analysis of the interview data. The data will be 
organized into why and how Cyworld is used for the purposes of heritage language maintenance and learning; 
heritage language learners’ perspectives on the linguistic and pragmatic conventions of Korean electronic literacy 
practices; and the perceived effects of electronic literacy on heritage language maintenance. 
Motivations for Online Participation 
In light of Warschauer’s (2000) argument that one possible role of technology may be to increase the will of 
individuals to develop and maintain their heritage language proficiency, participation in Cyworld appears to have 
provided the incentive and the opportunities to keep both Jendy and Lizzy connected with the language. Both 
informants were situated in an environment where there were limited opportunities to interact in Korean. They were 
also mindful of how the lack of a vibrant community of Korean speakers was a determining factor in their shift to 
English. However, through Cyworld, they state that they were able to create and broaden their social network of 
Korean speakers in an easily accessible way:  
I found my elementary friends that I knew when I was 6 in Korea, and so I guess that is the advantage … 
connecting with all these people, even people that you don’t know, people you know you can find. I got to 
know new people … they would come to my page … people would come randomly, see my page and then 
ask to be my friend. (J) 
Jendy’s Korean social network grew from 5-6 friends to 40 close acquaintances, of whom one third are monolingual 
Korean speakers. In contrast, Lizzy, who was not as comfortable and literate in Korean, limited her interactions to 
her siblings and her friends who have returned to Korea. By interacting with those people that are close to her and 
know her well, it seems that Lizzy created a safe place where she could experiment with language without being 
"judged" about her abilities, intelligence, or character. Through Cyworld, her social circle of Korean speakers 
increased from 2-3 to 15-20. 
Jendy saw the online forum as the ideal opportunity to experiment with language. As an adult, it may be somewhat 
face threatening to openly admit lack of knowledge about something that one is expected to know. The wide range 
of creativity accommodated by electronic literacy seems to alleviate the pressure for these two individuals to 
produce the correct forms of the language. They expressed that they could make errors and still save face: 
In one way, it’s a practical means of connecting with people, learning vocabulary, but on another level, it’s 
more psychological. It’s an awesome tool to try out language without being accountable, or seeming like 
you’re illiterate, or… it gives me the freedom to do it because you won’t be embarrassed whether it’s right 
or wrong … like most of the Korean-American group, they don’t speak Korean because they have a funny 
accent. Most of the time, it’s because they’re embarrassed, they don’t like to be exposed … but through the 
internet, it gives you the freedom not to be embarrassed or have the pride, you know it helps, I think. (J) 
They would be like hmmm … what is that one? I would say it’s my way of doing things, then I take it as a 
laugh and never use it again. But I would never admit that it was wrong. It really helps you protect your 
자존심 (caconsim 'pride'), you don’t have to admit that you’re wrong. (L) 
Cyworld also provided a rich forum to keep connected with popular Korean culture, including popular expressions, 
current fashion trends, as well as links to popular movies, television shows, celebrity news, and popular music. Both 
Lizzy and Jendy mentioned that Korean pop culture is becoming widely known not only among Korean Americans, 
but among other Asian groups as well. They claimed that they felt obliged to keep up with current news, because 
they were seen as the 'experts' on Korean-related topics in their local communities: 
Jin Sook Lee Electronic literacy and heritage language maintenance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 103 
Also I tend to go looking into more the things about Korean actors and actresses. A lot of Chinese here are 
so interested in Korean and Korean singers and actresses, so they ask me about them all the time so I have 
to keep up with the current stuff. I feel obligated to look into it and know about it. (L) 
So anything that you would be interested in there would be someone that would be interested too in 
Cyworld, you can kind of communicate like 주고 받고 (cwuko patko 'give and take') …. My friends 
always ask me about Korean music and celebrities and it’s easy enough in Cyworld to read about the latest 
scoop on things. (J) 
Sites such as Cyworld provide individuals with a personal space to exchange information about their lives and a 
forum to explore one’s connections to the language and culture. Lizzy and Jendy seem to have control over what 
information they access, the connections they make, and the language they use. The degree to which they engage 
and attach themselves to the language and culture appears to be a function of how central "Koreanness" is positioned 
as a marker of their identity. According to them, Lizzy and Jendy’s decision to participate in Cyworld was in part to 
be able to closely identify as Korean and also to gain the sociopsychological support from members of the social 
network that keep their connection to their "Koreanness" alive.  
On the other hand, participation in Cyworld seems to carry a social stigma among Korean-American peers. Jendy 
and Lizzy report that other Korean Americans view "Cy-ing" (the act of using Cyworld) as "Fobby" behavior, and 
so they are categorized by their peers as FOBS. FOB is an acronym that stands for "Fresh Off the Boat," and in the 
social circles of young Korean Americans, it refers to displaying qualities that align one with being native Korean 
(e.g., speaking Korean, engaging in Korean-related activities such as watching Korean TV or using Korean-based 
Internet sites, and dressing in ways that are in style in Korea): 
… the more Korean you are in the group, people refer to you as a FOB. Before coming to college, there 
were barely any Koreans where I lived, so I spoke English all the time and it became more comfortable to 
speak in English, but when I got to college, they would label me as a FOB instantly because of the way I 
dressed and because my Korean was still better than the others. And so I started identifying myself more as 
a FOB and started hanging around other FOBS and now I feel like I’m learning more Korean than English 
and Korean has become more comfortable, because I’m interacting all the time in Korean. I feel like I’m 
better in Korean now than before. (J)  
I think because of society, it’s really hard for second generation to be cultured. Then they will be 
categorized as a FOB. You’re doing this [using cyworld], you’re such a FOB and we don’t wanna be 
categorized as a FOB. What my sister and I, what we have in common is like we have separate 
personalities, but we keep up with the Koreanness or keep up with all the traditional things, we don’t care I 
mean if people say you’re such a FOB. I don’t care saying I’m cultured, but I get annoyed … but it’s not 
that I care but when I talk to other people, they really got the most pain out of being called FOB. (L) 
It was evident from their responses that overtly displaying characteristics and actions connected to "Fobby 
Koreanness" is not favorably viewed by their other Korean peers at school. Jendy seems to have made a decision to 
position herself as a FOB, because without Korean, she states that she sees herself as not having any cultural 
affiliation. Lizzy, on the other hand, could not take such a strong position, because she did not fully align herself 
with the Korean community due to her lack of proficiency in Korean. Moreover, Lizzy is situated in a social context 
and physical space where venues to align herself with the Korean community are rare, and thus, the need to express 
her Koreanness may not have been as great as Jendy’s. Although Lizzy states that she does not care what others 
think, it was obvious that the negativity attached to the label caused her and her peers much pain. It seems quite 
possible that such social stigma, in addition to other social and personal constraints such as lack of Korean 
proficiency or interest, can hinder other heritage language learners from wanting to actively participate in Cyworld 
or other Korean-based sites. 
Jin Sook Lee Electronic literacy and heritage language maintenance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 104 
HERITAGE LANGUAGE LEARNERS' ELECTRONIC LITERACY PRACTICES IN KOREAN 
The informants reported that they use Internet language to express their personality and their emotions. By playing 
with the sentence endings and using emoticons as well as abbreviations, the writing process online has become more 
efficient for them. The flexibility of language forms found in electronic literacy practices opens opportunities for 
learners to experiment with language forms to creatively express themselves. Jaffe (2000) emphasizes the 
importance of considering the "creative use of nonstandard orthography in the affirmation of subcultural identity" 
(p. 499).  
(3) Lizzy (10/20/04)  
 
 언냐4~~~5 guess what~~~                                                 
 ennya 
 'Older Sister~~~~ guess what~~~' 
 
 나 싸이 복귀해쪄 .. ㅋㅋ ㅡ_ㅡ;;6                                
 na ssai pokkwihayccye 
 'I started using Cyworld again' 
 
 지금 주희만나러 보스턴 쪽에 와있어~                      
 cikum cwughuy mannale posuthen ccokey waisse 
 'I’m in Boston now to visit Juhee' 
 
 i even met joe, 완혁오빠                                                  
           wanhyuk oppa 
 'I even met joe, older brother Whanhyuk’ 
 
it feels really good to see my old friends 
 
언니는 잘지내구  이쪄??^^7                                                     
 enninun calcinaykwu iccye 
 'Hope all is well, sister' 
Lizzy starts the message in (3) by shortening, 언니야 (enniya 'big sister') to 언냐 (ennya), which she claims was 
done to sound cute and feminine. She continues to use this tone by playing with the ending of the next sentence. 
Instead of using the standard spelling of 했어 (haysse 'to do'), she used the form 해쪄 (hayccye) as a phonological 
approximation of a young child’s speech to sound cute (similar examples were found in Lee, 2004; Kim & Ra, 2003; 
Noh, 2000). The same strategy is repeated in the last line as well (e.g., 이쪄). Lizzy states that she would "be out of 
place and weird if you don’t use Internet language because then you are not categorized as cool." She recalled that 
when she used to write 하 하하 (ha ha ha), her friends told her it was not cool and to useㅋㅋㅋ (k k k) instead. 
Jendy further elaborates: 
You can kind of tell what kind of people they are by what kind of internet language they use. Although I 
use internet language, I wouldn’t go way into the extremes I couldn’t do 오파 (opha 'older brother'), for ,오 
빠 (oppa). 하이루 (hailwu 'hi') is kind of out of date, elementary school kids and junior high kids still use 
it. It sounds really gay. (J) 
Jendy is much more articulate in her electronic text, where her sentences read fluently as if she were speaking orally. 
Her message in (4) also shows how she plays with the sentence endings such as 사야쥐 (sayacwi 'want to buy') for 
사야지 (sayaci) to convey a tone of "cuteness" (Noh, 2000). She also uses phonological approximations of the 
conjunction 두 (dwu 'and') for 도 and 마니 마니(mani mani 'many many') for 많이 많이 (manhi manhi) as well as 
Jin Sook Lee Electronic literacy and heritage language maintenance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 105 
contractions of 넘 (num 'very, too') for 너무 (nemwu) and셤(syem 'test') for 시험 (si hem), which are commonly 
found features in the electronic texts produced by native Korean speakers. 
(4) Jendy (10/24/04) 
 
 아직두  안시들구 넘  이뿐꽃…                     
 aciktwu ansitulkwu nem ippwun kkoch 
 'The pretty flower that hasn’t wilted yet…' 
 
 that I bought for myself. 캬 캬 캬 캬                 
                                              kya kya kya kya 
 'that I bought for myself. (laugh)' 
 
 셤  끝나구  자네랑 파머스 마켓 가서          
 syem kkuthnakwu caneylang phamesu makheys kase 
 'After the test, let’s go to the farmer’s market.' 
 
 더 마니  마니  사야쥐                                                 
 te manimani sayacwi 
 'I want to buy many many more [flowers].' 
These examples were instances of deliberate deviations from the standard forms that conform to the writing norms 
of the online users in their groups. However, in other instances, the informants admitted to having difficulty 
deciphering which words were spelled correctly because the phonetic approximation of the spelling is so similar to 
the way they pronounce the words. For example, Jendy describes an error she found on her sister’s site, which she 
claims was unintentional. 
차를 붇는다 (chalul pwutnunta 'to pour tea’ intended but used the word for ‘swell up’, which sounds the 
same phonetically), she didn’t do it on purpose, she didn’t know, there was no reason to spell it like this, it 
doesn’t add any effect of shortening it in any way. Also, it doesn’t make sense because this word means to 
swell up, to pour sounds similar but should be spelled, 붓는다 (pwusnunta 'to pour'). (J) 
In describing her experiences with the Korean electronic text, Jendy goes on to say 
I can tell that it is wrong. I can tell, but I’m used to it. Korean Americans who aren’t used to it write 
awkwardly … that is kind of different from internet writing. Internet writing is different, but I think there 
are rules to it … you try to make it short and simple or make it sound a certain way … cute, feminine, 
tough, older. Korean-American writing when it is wrong, when you just try reading it , it sounds awkward 
like for 하구나 (hakwuna 'it is like') some Korean Americans would write it 하고나 (hakona), which 
doesn’t sound as natural. (J) 
Lizzy had a much more difficult time distinguishing between intentional Internet language use and errors. The 
examples shown in (5) are some instances where Lizzy thought she was using the proper spelling (as shown on the 
left side of the arrow), but were unintentional errors: 
(5) a. 좋운 남자    좋은 남자  
  cohwun namca   cohun namca 
  'Good man' 
 
Jin Sook Lee Electronic literacy and heritage language maintenance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 106 
 b. 내가 않 이뿌면    내가 안 이쁘면  
  naeka anh ippwuayen naeka an ippumyen 
  'if I am not pretty' 
In examples (5a) and (5b), replacing the ㅡ (e) with ㅜ (wu) in 좋은 and 이쁘면 did not shorten the word or add any 
stylistic effects. English speakers have a very difficult time differentiating between the ㅡ and ㅜ sounds in Korean. 
Continued use of incorrect orthography raises concern from a language developmental perspective, in that the 
learner may not acquire a complete understanding of the spelling conventions if electronic texts are the only forms 
of literacy exposure (Gonzalez-Bueno, 1998; Noh, 2000). There needs to be some mechanism in place such as 
formal instruction that assists learners in understanding the differences between socioculturally acceptable uses of 
the language online and standard literacy practices offline. Example (5b) is also an instance of a form that native 
speakers would not use online. It is an unintentional error made by Lizzy, which is an assessment based on the fact 
that the use of the more complicated form of 않 (anh 'not') for 안 (an) did not shorten the word or add any stylistic 
effects since ㅎ is silent.  
Although the informants claim that there is much liberty in writing styles and ways of spelling, there seem to be 
rules that distinguish intentional deviations from unintentional errors within electronic literacy practices. Similar to 
the characteristics of electronic literacies in English (Barnes, 2003; Herring, 2003; Murray, 1991; Gains, 1999; 
Song, 2002; Sproull & Keisler, 1986), deviations from standard forms in Korean electronic literacy practices are 
also motivated by one or all of the following: to truncate or abbreviate for economic purposes of typing, to produce 
conversational stylistic effects, and/or to mark one’s membership by sharing in a secret code agreed upon within the 
smaller community of users.  
There were also many instances where both English and Korean were used. Lizzy had many more postings that were 
completely in English in comparison to Jendy who hardly had any. When I inquired about when they used English 
and/or Korean, Jendy stated that it depended on the effect she is trying to produce and with whom she is 
corresponding. When she wants to represent herself online as a Korean American, she states that she uses both 
Korean and English. However, for Lizzy, English use was compensatory rather than an expression of textual 
stylistics:  
If I can’t write it in Korean, it’s so obvious that I write it in English, I think I wrote nearly everything in 
English. The title and little summary part, I write in Korean, but everyone would reply in Korean so I write 
back in Korean. It really depends what environment I’m in. (L) 
As bilingual speakers, both Jendy and Lizzy strategically used their linguistic skills in the two languages not only to 
carve out a unique identity for themselves online, but also as a means of participating in Cyworld. The learners were 
aware of the norms and structures of electronic literacy practices and, within the boundaries of expectations, 
managed to find various ways to experiment with their language use as they develop their Korean proficiency.  
EFFECTS OF HERITAGE ON LANGUAGE MAINTENANCE 
When the informants were asked to reflect on how their participation in Cyworld had affected their heritage 
language maintenance process, they both commented that their participation in Cyworld led to ample opportunities 
to practice Korean, which resulted in improved proficiency. They acknowledged improvements in their writing 
abilities in terms of vocabulary acquisition and syntax as well as dexterity in their typing skills in both Korean and 
English. The informants’ comments underscore the fact that being able to type in two languages is an important 
bilingual skill in our technological age. It requires cognitive flexibility and dexterity to automatically reposition the 
fingers on the keyboard as one code-mixes from English to Korean and vice versa.  
Jin Sook Lee Electronic literacy and heritage language maintenance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 107 
Secondly, frequent engagement in electronic literacy practices also appears to have improved the informants’ oral 
proficiency. Jendy states: 
By practicing and reading the phonetic ways that people write online, like the way I speak Korean has 
changed a little. People could always tell that I became so much better in Korean now. Like in fluency and 
like even understanding jokes, subtle jokes, I would see it a lot online and so I would be able to notice it 
and laugh and they would be like, you understand that? (laugh) …. You learn the flow of language when 
you read the internet Korean. I think that is better because that is important when you are speaking Korean. 
Nowadays speaking and that kind of thing is more important than being grammatically correct …. (J). 
The features of orality commonly found in electronic texts seem to have assisted Jendy in developing more native-
like pronunciation and fluency in her flow of speech. Jendy reported that other Korean speakers have told her that 
her oral speech has become much more fluent and natural since she started engaging in electronic literacy practices. 
Gonzalez-Bueno (1998) similarly found that students who took advantage of the opportunity afforded by the 
electronic medium developed conversation-like language, which was difficult to develop in class because of shyness 
or fear of making mistakes. Although the validity of Jendy’s claim must be empirically tested, her report offers 
insights into the broad effects of electronic literacy on overall language development.  
Thirdly, the informants’ willingness to participate online was driven by the lowered inhibition they felt about 
exercising their literacy skills online. What they observed were forms of electronic text that deviated from the 
standard forms used by native speakers of Korean. They reported that it gave them courage to participate as a non-
native speaker and the space to make errors without being branded as an illiterate or incompetent Korean speaker. 
Both Jendy and Lizzy positioned themselves among their local friends to be very Korean and highly proficient in 
Korean, and, thus, exposing the limitations of their proficiency was a face threatening act for them. However, as the 
following quotes indicate, the non-standard ways of language use by other native speakers served as a front for them 
to appear as if they were intentionally deviating from the standard conventions as is commonly practiced online: 
I would feel more comfortable because they would think I’m writing using Internet Language. For 
example, I don’t know all the rules for proper spacing, but that’s okay because the internet people take it as 
typos (laugh) and so there is room to make errors and still seem smart  …  like I could pass as a native 
speaker. (J) 
Most of the time its easier for me to write online because there is no pressure of having to write the proper 
spelling, because then I’m not embarrassed in front of my friends who are better in Korean. It’s especially 
embarrassing when my friends that are younger than me correct me when I make a mistake. You feel more 
comfortable writing it because whenever you misspell something, you can say ooh it’s because it’s the 
internet or it’s a typo. (L)  
A learning strategy for the heritage learners online is to experiment with different ways of language use. They 
reported that they try out different expressions, words, and spellings, and then wait to see what the reaction is. If the 
reaction is negative or other users point out the inappropriateness of the usage, then it is not used again. On the other 
hand, if the other users appear to have understood the message, they continue to use the form.  
Fourthly, the connection to friends and family provided a comfortable environment to receive explicit instruction or 
feedback on one’s writing. Lizzy recollects her friend’s attempt to help her learn Korean through the Internet: 
I had this one friend in Korea. He was about 4 years older than me. I would write to him online and he 
would always correct me in every single error. Some were errors but some were intentional misspellings 
and he corrected both. At first it was like oh c’mon, it was like nothing … I just started to become more 
aware of what I was typing. I think it was because he knew I wasn’t exposed to Korean very much. He said 
Jin Sook Lee Electronic literacy and heritage language maintenance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 108 
you know it’s cool and funny to hear that [Lizzy’s Korean internet language] but when you’re older and 
you have kids, or when you’re older and you have to talk professionally, he said it’s just not very smart 
looking or intelligent so he started fixing me, grammar, nouns, verbs. (L) 
At first, Lizzy stated that she was somewhat embarrassed by the public correction of her language use, but now as 
she thinks back, the explicit and immediate feedback helped her become more aware of her language use and her 
need to improve her proficiency. She suggests that heritage language speakers should openly ask for help and 
feedback from members of the social network. Because being corrected in a public domain may be face threatening, 
she recommends the use of the messenger function, which can privately send messages to one individual. 
Finally, the process of using electronic literacy practices to interact with a social network of Korean speakers 
nurtured and sustained the feeling of being connected to a wider community of Koreans, as was similarly found in 
Miller and Slater’s (2000) study of diasporic Trinidadians. This was extremely important to both informants, 
because they were placed in a physical location that offered limited opportunities to use Korean. 
If the Internet wasn’t around, I wouldn’t be speaking Korean at all, and I would be categorized as those 
people who don’t speak Korean like half of my friends are categorized as twinkies …. It’s just fun to know 
that you can actually talk to other Koreans any time you want to. (L) 
… things like cyworld this is a way to connect to Korea and know what’s going on, so I think if I didn’t 
have the cyworld homepage or didn’t do something like this, I would become more and more 
Americanized. Further I go away from these things, I would become more Americanized. (J) 
The psychological connection and support from the wider online Korean community provided these informants with 
a strong sense of identity that was not available to them in their immediate surroundings. Their heightened sense of 
belonging to the Korean community was a main source of their willingness and desire to maintain and further 
develop their heritage language skills. This would not have been possible without the Internet for these two 
individuals. 
Despite the positive influences of electronic literacy on the heritage language maintenance process, the informants 
also mentioned the potential downsides of electronic literacy on their language maintenance efforts. First of all, they 
both admitted to having increased confusion about correct and standard forms of the language, because they 
commonly see variations in spellings of the same word or phrase. For example, Lizzy states: 
The 받침 (patchim) is so confusing, sometimes I can’t tell whether it is right or wrong and also, even the 
words that I knew, sometimes I get confused because I see it the wrong way so often on line and when I try 
to write a letter to my parents, I get confused. (L) 
Thus, heritage language learners may need additional support to help them distinguish between appropriate 
electronic text forms and standard forms of the Korean language. Support can come in several forms, such as 
explicit explanations of the ways in which certain words are used or spelled by the native speakers in the 
community, or by enrolling in language courses where the grammatical, lexical, and pragmatic explanations of 
language use are a part of the curriculum. The Internet can play a significant role in providing appropriate and 
effective contexts in which languages can be experimented with and practiced, which can facilitate the learning 
process. However, learners may further benefit from additional formal instruction that will help them understand the 
differences between online, playful language use and offline, formal literacy practices to be able to strategically 
utilize the linguistic and pragmatic norms of both online and offline communities.  
Another difficult issue that Jendy has faced was the lack of quality control of language use and accountability of 
information presented online:  
Jin Sook Lee Electronic literacy and heritage language maintenance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 109 
One worry I have is that for those Korean Americans that are not too familiar with the Korean culture, 
Cyworld is open to all different kinds of people and things, and if they see something that turns them off, 
they might think that all Koreans are like that and get turned off from finding out more about Korea and 
learning Korean, but this can happen offline as well. (J) 
Jendy’s concerns are real in light of the adverse effects that certain materials might have on emergent heritage 
language learners who lack the experience or knowledge to filter through the information. Jendy explained that her 
Korean-American peers are quick to pass judgment about Koreans and Korea, and often formed stereotypes that did 
not reflect the reality of the situation. Further research is needed to examine the scope and nature of the effects of 
information attained online on the formation of attitudes and beliefs of heritage language learners toward their 
heritage culture and language. Although we need to find ways to maximize the benefits of technology on the 
maintenance process of heritage language learners, we also need to be cognizant of the possible pitfalls and dangers 
of its use. 
CONCLUSION 
With the reality of our current information age, our conceptualization of communicative competence and language 
proficiency among heritage language learners will need to be extended to include knowledge of the forms and norms 
of electronic literacy practices. In the cases of the informants in this study, electronic literacy practices enabled them 
to create social networks with other Korean speakers, which allowed these heritage language learners to practice and 
use their Korean for authentic purposes. Perhaps more importantly, such practices provided a means to connect with 
and to express their cultural identity. The sociopsychological support found in such networks was a major factor in 
shaping their desire and will to develop and maintain their heritage languages. The flexibility and creative means of 
expression commonly found in electronic literacy practices also lowered their inhibition about writing in Korean. 
Therefore, the lack of perceived pressure to produce correct spelling and forms of Korean gave these learners the 
confidence and space to experiment with and engage in literacy practices. The take up of such opportunities not only 
reinforced their language skills, it also provided the motivation to continue using and developing their language 
skills. 
Opportunities to engage with other native speakers online on a regular basis provide an optimal language-learning 
environment from a sociocultural perspective. However, there are many individual and situational constraints that 
can shape the extent to which an individual can participate online in their heritage language. For example, 
proficiency in the language, willingness to invest in the time and effort to engage in online activities, and the initial 
knowledge of how, where, and with whom to engage online may be critical factors that govern whether one can 
participate in online communities. These factors are likely to play a significant role in the individual experiences of 
heritage language learners in their experiences interacting with electronic literacy. 
In conclusion, electronic communication holds significant promise for heritage language development and 
maintenance. Engagement with Korean-based Internet sites continuously provides a forum and a goal to engage in 
purposeful communication, which may lead to increased literacy proficiency and greater attachment to the heritage 
language and culture. This case study of these two individuals was a starting point in examining the meaning and 
function of electronic literacy from the perspective of heritage language learners. However, the scope of this study 
did not cover aspects of actual language development and how the use of electronic literacy shapes its trajectory. 
Longitudinal studies on the developmental process of heritage languages in relation to the learners’ involvement 
with electronic literacy are needed. Furthermore, future work needs to capture the diversity of heritage language 
learner experiences in developing and maintaining their heritage languages by attending to the personal, 
sociocultural, and political contexts and constraints that shape their interactions and motivations in engaging with 
electronic literacy through the Internet. 
 
Jin Sook Lee Electronic literacy and heritage language maintenance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 110 
NOTES 
1. "Standard" language refers to the prescribed forms and rules of pronunciation, grammar, lexicon, semantics, 
orthography, and language use that are taught in formal schooling.It is viewed as "educated" or "correct" speech by 
native speakers, and it is free from regional marking. "Non-standard" language refers to forms that deviate from the 
"standard" (Androutsopoulos, 2000). 
2. Romanization of the Korean syllables follow the Yale transcription system.  
3. The names of the informants are pseudonyms. 
4. Bold font is used to highlight the specific word or phrase under discussion for the reader’s convenience. 
5. “~~~” is used to represent an elongation of the final sound of the word, which adds an effect of cuteness. 
6. ㅋㅋ is used to represent the sound of laughter and the emoticon  ㅡ_ㅡ;; is used to symbolize a sweating face to 
mean that something took a lot of effort to get done. 
7. ^^ are the graphic representation for smiling eyes. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This study was supported by a Junior Faculty Research Incentive Grant from the University of California, Santa 
Barbara. I would like to thank the two anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments and the informants for 
sharing and making public their Cyworld experiences. Any errors in the article are solely the responsibility of the 
author. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Jin Sook Lee is an assistant professor in the Gevirtz Graduate School of Education at the University of California, 
Santa Barbara. Her research interests include sociocultural contexts of language learning, heritage language 
maintenance, and interlanguage pragmatics. She is currently studying how the Internet affects the linguistic 
development of heritage language learners. 
Email: jslee@education.ucsb.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Ahn, J. (2000). Discourse analysis in the language on the network. The Sociolinguistic Journal of Korea, 8(2), 139-
168. 
Androutsopoulos, J. (2000). Non-standard spellings in media texts: The case of German Fanzines. Journal of 
Sociolinguistics, 4(4), 514-533. 
Jin Sook Lee Electronic literacy and heritage language maintenance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 111 
Au, T. K., & Oh. J. S. (In press). Korean as a heritage language. In P. Li (Ed.), Handbook of East Asian 
psycholinguistics, part III: Korean psycholinguistics . London: Cambridge University Press. 
Barnes, S. (2003). Computer-mediated communication across the Internet. Boston: Allyn and Bacon. 
Buszard-Welcher, L. (2001). Can the Web help save my language? In L. Hinton & K. Hale (Eds.), The green book 
of language revitalization in practice (pp. 331-348). San Diego: Academic Press. 
Choi, H. (2003). Literacy practices in the digital age. Dong-A Newspaper. Retrieved February 24, 2005 from 
http://www.donga.com/docs/magazine/shin/2003/11/07/200311070500002/200311070500002_1.html 
Cyworld rides on Korean wave to tap Asia. (2005). Korea Times. Retrieved August 10, 2005 from 
http://www.times.Hankooki.com/1 page/exclusive/2004ll/kt200411251845266357.   
De Bot, K., & Stoessel, S. (2002). Introduction: Language change and social networks. International Journal of 
Sociology of Language, 153 , 1-7.  
Eckert, P. (2000). Linguistic variation as social practice: The linguistic construction of identity in Belton High. 
Oxford: Blackwell. 
Egbert, J., Chao, C.-C., & Hanson-Smith, E. (1999). Computer-enhanced language learning environments: An 
overview. In J. Egbert & E. Hanson-Smith (Eds.), CALL environments: Research, practice and critical issues (pp. 1-
13). Alexandria, VA: TESOL. 
Gains, J. (1999). Electronic mail-A new style of communication or just a new medium. English for Specific 
Purposes, 18(1), 81-101. 
Gonzalez-Bueno, M. (1998). The effect of electronic mail on Spanish L2 discourse. Language Learning & 
Technology, 1(2), 55-70. 
Herring, S. (2001). Computer-mediated discourse. In D. Tannen, D. Schiffrin, & H. Hamilton (Eds.), Handbook of 
discourse analysis (pp. 612-634). Oxford: Blackwell. 
Holmes, J., & Myerhoff, M. (1999). The community of practice: Theories and methodologies in language and 
gender research. Language in Society, 28(2), 173-183. 
Jaffe, A. (2000). Introduction: Non-standard orthography and non-standard speech. Journal of Sociolinguistics, 4(4), 
497-513. 
Kern, R. (1995). Restructuring classroom interaction with networked computers: Effects on quantity and 
characteristics of language production. Modern Language Journal, 79(4), 457-476. 
Kim, J. (2005, January 10). Dangers of Internet language destruction. Korea Times, p. C11. 
Kim, Y. & Ra, D. (2003). Constructing an Internet chatting dictionary for mapping chatting language to standard 
language. In C. Chung (Eds.), Lecture notes in computer science (pp. 662-667). Heidelberg, Berlin: Springer-
Verlag. 
King, K. (2000). Language ideologies and heritage language education. International Journal of Bilingual 
Education and Bilingualism, 3 (3), 167–184. 
Jin Sook Lee Electronic literacy and heritage language maintenance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 112 
Kung, S.-C. (2002). A framework for successful key-pal programs in language learning. CALL-EJ Online, 3(2). 
Retrieved August 15, 2005 from http://www.clec.ritsumei.ac.jp/english/callejonline/6-2/SCKung.htm.  
Lantolf, J. (Ed.). (2000). Sociocultural theory and second language learning. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Lantolf, J., & Appel, G. (1994). Vygotskian approaches to second language research. Westport, CN: Ablex 
Publishing. 
Lee, J. (2004). A study on the new communication paradigm through the chat language code. Studies in Visual 
Design, 15, 157-166. 
Lee, I., & Ramsey, S. (2000). The Korean language. New York: State University of New York Press. 
Lopez, D. (1996). Language: Diversity and assimilation. In R. Waldinger & M. Bozorgmehr (Eds.), Ethnic Los 
Angeles (pp. 139-163). New York: Russell Sage Foundation. 
Meskill, C., Mossop, J., &. Bates, R. (1999). Bilingualism, cognitive flexibility and electronic literacy. Bilingual 
Research Journal, 23(2/3), 113-124. 
Miller, D., & Slater, D. (2000). The Internet: An ethnographic approach. Oxford: Berg. 
Murray, D. (1991). Conversation for action: The computer terminal as medium of communication. Philadelphia: PA: 
John Benjamins. 
Noh, H. (2000). A study on chatting expression in Korean. The Sociolinguistic Journal of Korea, 8(2), 107-137 
Park, N. (1989). Language purism in Korea today. In B. Jernudd & M. Shapiro (Eds.), The Politics of Language 
Purism (pp. 113-139). Berlin: Mouton De Gruyter.  
Scollon, R., & Levine, P. (2004). Multimodal discourse analysis as the confluence of discourse and technology. In P. 
Levine & R. Scollon (Eds.), Discourse and technology: Multimodal discourse analysis (pp.1-6). Washington, DC: 
Georgetown University Press. 
Sohn, H. (1999). The Korean Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Song, K. (2002). Emergent features of interactive electronic discourse: The Internet relay chat in Korean and 
English. The Journal of Studies in Language, 18(2), 113-140. 
Sproull, L., & Kiesler, S. (1986). Reducing social context cues: Electronic mail in organizational communications. 
Management Science, 32(11), 1492-1512. 
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Su, H. (2004). Mock Taiwanese-accented Mandarin in the Internet community in Taiwan: The interaction between 
technology, linguistic practice, and language ideologies. In P. Levine & R. Scollon (Eds.), Discourse and 
technology: Multimodal discourse analysis (pp.59-70). Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press. 
Villa, D. (2002). Integrating technology into minority language preservation and teaching efforts: An inside job. 
Language Learning and Technology. Vol.6/2:92-101. 
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge. MA: MIT Press. 
Jin Sook Lee Electronic literacy and heritage language maintenance 
 
Language Learning & Technology 113 
Wallraff, B. (2000, November). What global language? The Atlantic Monthly, pp. 52-66. 
Warschauer, M. (2000). Language, identity, and the Internet. In B. Kolko, L. Nakamura, & G. Rodman (Eds.), Race 
in Cyberspace (pp. 151-170). New York: Routledge. 
Warschauer, M. (2003). Technology and social inclusion: Rethinking the digital divide. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Wei, L. (2000). Towards a critical evaluation of language maintenance and shift. Sociolinguistica, 14, 142-147. 
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning and identity. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
 
 
 
