Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num1/news/ 
January 2006, Volume 10, Number 1 
pp. 17-20 
 
Copyright © 2006, ISBN 1094-3501 17 
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS 
Sponsors 
University of Hawai`i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR) 
Co-Sponsor 
Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL) 
 
University of Hawai'i National Foreign Language Resource 
Center (NFLRC)  
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials 
development projects and conducts Summer Institutes for language professionals among its many 
activities. 
CALICO 2006 IN HAWAI‘I! 
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) is proud to be hosting 
the 2006 Computer Assisted Language Instruction Consortium (CALICO) Annual Symposium on May 
16-20 in Honolulu. CALICO 2006 will feature uses of cutting edge technologies in foreign language 
teaching and learning with a focus on collaboration. Workshops, presentations, and courseware showcase 
demonstrations will all present information of vital importance to anyone interested in the field of 
computer-assisted language learning. This year’s theme, appropriately, will be "Online Learning: Come 
Ride The Wave."  For more information about CALICO and its annual Symposium, visit 
http://www.calico.org/ 
“CONVERSATION ANALYSIS & LANGUAGE LEARNING” SEMINAR (AUGUST 7-11, 2006)  
Conversation Analysis (CA) is increasingly adopted to examine second language interactions as sites for 
and evidence of L2 learning as a discursive practice. The purpose of the seminar is to further advance this 
ongoing effort.  Topics will include: interactional competence as resource and under construction, 
interaction & cognition, interaction & grammar, interaction & learning, and membership categorization & 
social identity. 
The seminar does NOT offer an introduction to CA. Rather, it addresses itself to researchers with a 
background in CA whose work focuses on, or includes, CA as an approach to L2 learning. We hope to 
welcome veteran CA analysts as well as graduate students with relevant training.  The maximum number 
of accepted participants will be 20. 
Our invited seminar leaders will be Gabriele Pallotti (University of Modena and Reggio Emilia) & 
Johannes Wagner (University of Southern Denmark). 
For more information or the online application form (deadline - April 30, 2006), visit our seminar 
website:  http://nflrc.hawaii.edu/prodev/si06c/  
NEW NFLRC PUBLICATIONS 
Las voces de las mujeres de Xelajú by Tess Lane 
Women’s voices are infrequently heard in the male-dominated, Spanish-speaking world. Yet, the women 
interviewed in this DVD have much to share regarding their values and choices. 
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  18 
Students of intermediate to advanced Spanish improve listening comprehension while they learn about 
Guatemalan culture by watching twenty Guatemalan women each answer the same seven questions. The 
repetition reinforces vocabulary and grammatical structures in a meaningful context. As students compare 
the women's answers and formulate their own responses, they develop critical thinking and writing skills. 
Students can work independently, in groups, or as a class. View a sample clip at the Voces Website 
(http://nflrc.hawaii.edu/voces). 
Song and music in language learning by Tim Murphey 
Tim Murphey returned to Hawai‘i in September to videotape the sixth in his series of popular teaching 
technique presentations. With this taping, NFLRC is instituting a new format for Tim Murphey 
presentations. This latest presentation will soon be available through our Website as part of a four-
presentation collection on DVD.  
ONLINE JOURNALS SOLICIT SUBMISSIONS 
Reading in a Foreign Language is a refereed online journal, jointly sponsored by the University of 
Hawai‘i NFLRC and the Department of Second Language Studies. RFL serves as an excellent source for 
the latest developments in the field, both theoretical and pedagogic, including improving standards for 
foreign language reading. For more information on submission guidelines, visit the RFL Web site. 
 Language Learning & Technology is a refereed online journal, jointly sponsored by the University of 
Hawai‘i NFLRC and the Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research 
(CLEAR). LLT focuses on issues related to technology and language education. For more information on 
submission guidelines, visit the LLT Web site. 
 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education 
and Research (CLEAR)  
CLEAR's mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States. 
Projects focus on materials development, professional development training, and foreign language 
research. 
CONFERENCES 
CLEAR exhibits at local and national conferences year-round. We hope to see you at ACTFL, CALICO, 
MiWLA, Central States, and other conferences. 
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
Summer Workshops  
Each summer, CLEAR hosts professional development workshops for foreign language teachers.  
For more information on future summer workshops, go to 
http://clear.msu.edu/training/index.html.  Three workshops are slated for summer 2006: 
o DEVELOPING ONLINE LANGUAGE MATERIALS More 
o TOWARD FRIENDLY ASSESSMENT IN THE FOREIGN LANGUAGE 
CLASSROOM More  
o LANGUAGE PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT FOR LESS COMMONLY TAUGHT 
LANGUAGES More  
 
Onsite Workshops  
 
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  19 
CLEAR offers foreign language teachers at K-13+ institutions around the country the opportunity to host 
a CLEAR workshop. These 1-3 day workshops are led by CLEAR's professional development staff 
members. For more information, visit http://clear.msu.edu/training/onsite/about.html. 
 
MATERIALS DEVELOPMENT 
Coming Soon! • Introductory Business German (CD-ROM) 
• French Pronunciation and Phonetics (CD-ROM) 
Products  
• NEW!  Language Learning Materials for Russian: A Content-Based Course Pack (learning 
modules) 
• NEW!  Facilitating Connections to International Business: A Guide for Foreign Language 
Educators (guide) 
• NEW!  MIMEA: Multimedia Interactive Modules for Education and Assessment (German, 
Chinese, Arabic, Vietnamese, Korean; online video clips and activities) 
• SMILE (tool for creating interactive online exercises) 
• The Internet Sourcebook for Business Korean (Web links)  
• The Internet Sourcebook for Business Japanese (Web links)  
• The Internet Sourcebook for Business French (Web links) 
• The Internet Sourcebook for Business German (Web links) 
• The Internet Sourcebook for Business Spanish (Web links) 
• Business Language Packets for High School Classrooms (French, German, & Spanish; PDF files) 
• Modules for Assessing Socio-Cultural Competence: German (CD-ROM) 
• Modules for Assessing Socio-Cultural Competence: Russian (CD-ROM) 
• Business Chinese (CD-ROM) 
• Pronunciación y Fonética (CD-ROM) 
• African Language Small Group Instruction Guide (guide and video) 
• Thai Small Group Instruction Guide (guide) 
• Hindi Small Group Instruction Guide (guide)  
• Foreign Languages: Doors to Opportunity (video and discussion guide) 
• Test Development (workbook and video) 
Newsletter 
CLEAR News is a biyearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. 
Contact the CLEAR office to join the mailing list, or check it out on the Web at 
http://clear.msu.edu/newsletter/. We welcome your submissions! 
 
The Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL)  
The Center for Applied Linguistics is a private, nonprofit organization that promotes and improves the 
teaching and learning of languages, identifies and solves problems related to language and culture, and 
serves as a resource for information about language and culture. CAL carries out a wide range of 
activities in the fields of English as a second language, foreign languages, cultural education, and 
linguistics.  
Featured Resources: 
• The Center for Adult English Language Acquisition (CAELA)  
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  20 
CAELA was established in 2004 with funding from the Office of Vocational and Adult Education 
(OVAE), U.S. Department of Education and its primary mission is to assist states that have emerging 
ESL populations. CAELA staff will help states build their capacity to promote the English language 
learning and academic achievement of adults learning English. Resources available on its Web site 
include tools for teaching adult English language learners, a new series of briefs; and, a newsletter, 
CAELA Currents, which includes subscription information. 
• The Cultural Orientation Resource (COR) Center  
The (COR) Center continues to provide materials that inform refugee service providers about refugee 
cultures and help newcomers understand fundamental aspects of life in the U.S. Culture Profiles 
provide short introductions to the cultural background of refugee populations. The latest Culture 
Profiles include Liberians, The Hmong, and Muslim Refugees. Also, a new edition of Welcome to the 
United States: A Guidebook for Refugees is now available as well as the Welcome to the United 
States: Refugee Guide to Resettlement Orientation Video, which reinforces key points from the 
guidebook. 
• Pre-K-12 School Services 
CAL provides professional development, offers program evaluation, conducts research, disseminates 
information, and provides technical assistance in areas related to language and language learning.  
 
CAL collaborates with other language education organizations, including: 
• Improving Foreign Languages Instruction Project of the Northeast and Island Regional 
Laboratory at Brown University 
• The National Capital Language Resource Center 
• National K-12 Foreign Language Resource Center  
• National Network for Early Language Learning 
 
Recent Publications: 
• Literacy and Language Diversity in the United States, 2nd Edition 
• Creating Access: Language and Academic Programs for Secondary School Newcomers  
• Language by Video: An Overview of Foreign Language Instructional Videos for Children  
• What’s Different About Teaching Reading to Students Learning English?  
 
