Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num1/emerging/ 
January, 2006, Volume 10, Number 1 
pp. 9-16 
 
Copyright © 2006, ISSN 1094-3501 9 
EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES 
Going to the MALL: Mobile Assisted Language Learning 
George M. Chinnery 
University of Maryland Baltimore County 
 
Introduction 
In August 2004, Duke University provided free iPods to its entire freshman class (Belanger, 2005). The 
next month, a Korean education firm offered free downloadable college entrance exam lectures to 
students who purchased an iRiver personal multimedia player (Kim, 2004). That October, a financial 
trading firm in Chicago was reportedly assessing the hand-eye coordination of traders’ using GameBoys 
(Logan, 2004). Yet while such innovative applications abound, the use of technology in education and 
training is far from new, a fact as true in language classrooms as it is in medical schools.   
Practically since their availability, a succession of audiovisual recording devices (e.g., reel-to-reel, VCRs, 
PCs) has been used to capture language samples, and myriad playback and broadcast devices (e.g., 
phonographs, radios, televisions) have provided access to authentic speech samples. The espousal of 
audiolingual theory in the 1950s brought the widespread use of the language laboratory in educational 
settings (Salaberry, 2001). Influenced by behaviorism, the lab was progressively replaced in the 1960s by 
drill-based computer-assisted instruction, which decades later was itself surpassed by a more intelligent, 
interactive and multimedia computer-assisted language learning. The popular acceptance of the Internet in 
the 1990s advanced the development of computer-mediated communications.  
As technologies continue to evolve, so does their propensity to shrink in size. "Other technologies that 
hold the capacity for language learning include PDAs, multimedia cellular phones, MP3 players, DVD 
players, and digital dictionaries" (Zhao, 2005, p. 447). Such portable media—referred to in popular and 
scholarly literature as mobile, wireless, handheld or nomadic—are now social staples. Mobile learning, or 
m-learning, is a burgeoning subdivision of the e-learning movement, further evidenced by European 
initiatives such as m-learning and Mobilearn. In this paper, applied fusions of m-learning and language 
learning follow, after which their benefits and challenges are reviewed. 
MALL Applications  
As in other technology-enhanced language learning milieu, mobile learning environments might be face-
to-face, distance, or online; further, they may be self-paced or calendar-based. Copaert (2004) emphasizes 
the importance of developing the language learning environment before deciding on the role of mobile 
technologies and further emphasizes focusing on the learner ahead of the technology. Salaberry (2001) 
also argues against "technology-driven pedagogy," suggesting that despite their revolutionary status, it is 
not clear that any modern technology (e.g., television, radio, the PC) has offered the same pedagogical 
benefits as traditional second language instruction. Beatty (2003) offers a further caveat that "teachers 
need to be concerned about investing time and money in unproven technology" (p. 72).  
Stipulations aside, technologies, mobile or otherwise, can be instrumental in language instruction. 
Ultimately, though, they are not in and of themselves instructors; rather, they are instructional tools. And 
the effective use of any tool in language learning requires the thoughtful application of second language 
pedagogy. Imaginative examples of such applications—using cell phones, personal digital assistants, and 
portable digital audio players—are illustrated next.  
 
 
George Chinnery Emerging Technologies: Going to the MALL 
 
Language Learning & Technology 10 
Cell Phones 
Since their inception, the dimensions of cell phones have waned as much as their abilities have waxed. 
Common features of these devices now include Internet access, voice-messaging, SMS text-messaging, 
cameras, and even video-recording. In language learning, all of these features enable communicative 
language practice, access to authentic content, and task completion. Though research of such uses is 
scarce, it is not non-existent.  
The use of telephones in distance language learning is not unique to m-learning. Twarog and Pereszlenyi-
Pinter (1988) used telephones to provide distant language learners with feedback and assistance. In 1996, 
instructors at Brigham Young University-Hawaii taught a distance-learning English course from Hawaii 
to Tonga via telephone and computer (Green, Collier, & Evans, 2001). And Dickey (2001) utilized 
teleconferencing to teach an English conversation course in South Korea.  
One of the first projects using mobile phones in language learning was developed by the Stanford 
Learning Lab, which explored their use in language learning (Brown, 2001). Specifically, they developed 
Spanish study programs utilizing both voice and email with mobile phones. These programs included 
vocabulary practice, quizzes, word and phrase translations, and access to live talking tutors. Their results 
indicated that mobile phones were effective for quiz delivery if delivered in small chunks; they also 
indicated that automated voice vocabulary lessons and quizzes had great potential. Their tiny screen sizes 
were deemed "unsuitable for learning new content but effective for review and practice" (Thornton & 
Houser, 2002, p. 236). Live tutoring was also effective, but poor audio quality was judged to potentially 
affect comprehension adversely. 
Thornton and Houser (2002; 2003; 2005) also developed several innovative projects using mobile phones 
to teach English at a Japanese university. One focused on providing vocabulary instruction by SMS. 
Three times a day, they emailed short mini-lessons to students, sent in discrete chunks so as to be easily 
readable on the tiny screens. Lessons defined five words per week, recycled previous vocabulary, and 
used the words in various contexts, including episodic stories. Students were tested biweekly and 
compared to groups that received identical lessons via the Web and on paper. The authors then explored 
usability and learning issues. The results indicated that the SMS students learned over twice the number 
of vocabulary words as the Web students, and that SMS students improved their scores by nearly twice as 
much as students who had received their lessons on paper. Students’ attitudes were also measured. The 
vast majority preferred the SMS instruction, wished to continue such lessons, and believed it to be a 
valuable teaching method. The authors theorized that their lessons had been effective due to their having 
been delivered as push media, which promote frequent rehearsal and spaced study, and utilized recycled 
vocabulary.    
Levy and Kennedy (2005) created a similar program for Italian learners in Australia, sending vocabulary 
words and idioms, definitions, and example sentences via SMS in a spaced and scheduled pattern of 
delivery, and requesting feedback in the form of quizzes and follow up questions.  
Another program by  and Houser (2003) utilized a classroom polling system, EduCALL (inspired by 
EduClick), to survey students during class in order to determine vocabulary retention. Poll questions were 
projected, students used their cell phones to surf to the polling software and make their selections, and the 
tabulations were projected as bar graphs. In this way, students and teachers alike received immediate 
feedback.  
Kiernan and Aizawa (2004) set out to study whether or not mobile phones were useful language learning 
tools and to explore their use in task-based learning. They argued that second language acquisition is best 
promoted through the utilization of tasks, which require learners to close some sort of gap, thereby 
focusing the learner on meaning. In the traditional classroom, however, such activities are easily defeated 
by the close proximity of students. The use of mobile technologies would be one way to separate learners. 
George Chinnery Emerging Technologies: Going to the MALL 
 
Language Learning & Technology 11 
In their study, upper and lower level Japanese university students were placed into three groups: PC email 
users, mobile phone email users, and mobile phone speaking users (due to cost, this latter group became 
face-to-face speaking users). Then they were given a pre-test, three narrative tasks, three invitation tasks, 
and a repeated post-test. While all the face-to-face speaking users completed these tasks in the time 
provided, only two pairs of PC email users and one pair of mobile phone email users completed the tasks. 
The face-to-face speaking users had significantly faster performances, and the mobile phone email users 
had the slowest; however, the latter were not significantly slower than the PC email users. These 
differences were attributed to relative speed of typing versus speaking, and the relative speed of typing on 
mobile thumb pads versus keyboards. An interesting side-note was that the fastest mobile phone email 
user had told the entire story in only a single text-message. In general, fewer words were used by mobile 
phone email users, yet they were able to communicate effectively. While the upper-level students' 
performance improved significantly on the post-test, this was likely due to a change in the post-test 
format for this group (since the pre-test required written translations, but the post–test consisted of 
multiple choice questions). 
Several other free and commercial mobile language learning programs have recently become available: 
the BBC World Service’s Learning English section offers English lessons via SMS in Francophone West 
Africa and China (Godwin-Jones, 2005); BBC Wales has similarly offered Welsh lessons since 2003 
(Andrews, 2003); and an EU-funded initiative known simply as 'm-learning' provides English lessons 
directed towards non-English speaking young adults. The goal of such programs is to engage new kinds 
of learners (e.g., young, disabled) in a time and place of their preference (Godwin-Jones, 2005; Kadyte, 
2004; Kukulska-Hulme, 2005). Norbrook and Scott (2003) suggest that portability and immediacy, rather 
than localization, are the essential motivating factors in mobile language learning. Further, lessons are 
provided in bite-sized format, a fact appealing to busy students (McNicol, 2004). Lessons are typically 
delivered several times a week or even daily, include translations, and provide options for further context-
based applications.  
One of the newest technologies with potential application in language learning is moblogging, an 
amalgam of mobile and weblogging. Mielo (2005) further defines moblogging as using a cell phone or 
PDA "in the field" to post words and/or pictures to a website (p. 29). Blogs themselves are a recent trend 
in language teaching. They provide opportunities for language creation (i.e., journaling) and collaborative 
activities. Moblogs offer the potential to expound these benefits by removing time and place boundaries 
and adding authentic and personal visual content.  
While the applications of cell phones have typically been pedagogic in nature, they have also been used 
for practical or administrative matters, such as simplified and flexible student-teacher communications 
(e.g., course updates and reminders) and referrals to related websites and other up-to-date instructional 
resources (Dias, 2002, Summer/Fall; Levy & Kennedy, 2005).  
PDAs 
Personal digital assistants (PDAs) are more often associated with m-learning than cell phones.  Their use 
has been integrated into various disciplines within high schools, universities, and medical schools 
(Carlson, 2002). In language learning, one of its primary functions has been as translator. Software 
programs such as MobiLearn allege to turn PDAs into 'talking phrasebooks.'  
In evaluating the gains of Chinese learners of English using handheld translators, Myers (2000) made 
numerous observations: the learners repeatedly practiced saying unfamiliar words typed into the machine; 
they took written notes about new words and phrases learned from the machine; they typed full words 
into the machine and quickly learned to recognize word stems; they were shown words in context 
according to the lexical approach; they soon preferred to look up words and phrases from the English side 
of the translator rather than the Chinese side, indicating an attempt to function in the foreign language; 
George Chinnery Emerging Technologies: Going to the MALL 
 
Language Learning & Technology 12 
and they quickly improved their spelling. Despite these benefits, the author promotes the use of a 
contextual translator only in cases where the target language is similar to the native language.    
More elaborate language learning software programs have also been developed for PDAs and the like. 
Garcia Cabrere (2002) evaluated a business Spanish course developed for smart-phones, encompassing 
video clips, exercises, and a glossary. Students were reported to be highly motivated and impressed—
particularly by the video and multimedia functions—but expressed difficulty in using pointers and virtual 
keyboards for data entry.  
Thornton and Houser (2003) developed an English idiom website, including definitions, illustrative 
videos and animations, and multiple-choice quizzes, specifically for mobile technologies. In their study, 
students accessed these web pages using either PDAs or mobile web and video phones, and then 
evaluated their usability. Scores were generally positive—and similar—for both media, but PDA users 
rated their video quality higher than the mobile phone users, likely due to larger screen size and higher 
resolution. All students expressed difficulty with the listening tasks, though the authors note that neither 
headphones nor earphones were used in the study, and that none of the actors or writers were native 
English speakers.   
Several foreign language courses at the University of Wisconsin, Madison, have also used wireless 
handheld computers for various classroom activities (Samuels, 2003). An instructor of Norwegian 
developed web-based grammar and vocabulary exercises to be accessed with the handhelds, allowing her 
to integrate technology activities into the class without having to move to the program’s language lab. 
Minor problems were reported, including trouble resizing pictures to fit in the small screen and sporadic 
difficulties with network connections. A French class used the handheld devices for various small group 
and whole class online chatting. A Latin class used them to access ancient poems, both in text and audio. 
Difficulties included slow processing time and font limitations.   
PDAs offer numerous other uses, including Internet and wireless access, and therefore file-sharing 
between teachers and students and amongst students themselves. Data is also easily backed up on 
personal computers. Further, at present, a standard feature of these devices is handwriting recognition. 
Despite such functionality, Beatty (2003) believes that the future success of PDAs depends in part on 
their ability to accommodate voice recognition.  
iPods 
Digital audio files (e.g., MP3s) provide high-quality sound in a compressed format. The portable media 
players developed to listen to them are also rather compact. Most renowned amongst them is Apple’s 
iPod, the latest version of which not only provides audio functionality but also video. Arguably as popular 
as the iPod itself are its add-ons (e.g., microphones, speakers) and downloadable software, including 
language learning programs. iLingo, for example, is a downloadable language translation software, or an 
electronic phrasebook.  
Several other applications of the iPod in language learning have been explored. In the fall of 2004, Duke 
University provided all incoming freshmen with free 20 gigabyte iPods equipped with voice recorders. 
Amongst the pilot courses utilizing the players were several language courses, which utilized both their 
listening and recording capabilities. Students in a Spanish class used iPods to respond to verbal quizzes, 
submit audio assignments, record audio journals, and receive oral feedback from their instructor.  A 
Turkish class used them to listen to authentic materials such as news, songs, and poems, and to the 
instructor’s vocabulary and translations (Belanger, 2005). 
Apple Computer itself has taken to promoting the iPod’s educational uses. Available on iPod in the 
Classroom are lesson plans for the language classroom, as well as success stories. A middle school in 
Nebraska, for example, is reported to have been using iPods to record speech samples for self and teacher 
assessment of English language learners.  
George Chinnery Emerging Technologies: Going to the MALL 
 
Language Learning & Technology 13 
Students taking distance-learning German and Spanish courses through the United Kingdom’s Open 
University are similarly using digital voice recorders and mini-camcorders to record interviews with other 
students and locals and to create audiovisual tours (Kukulska-Hulme, 2005). While the goal has been to 
ultimately upload their works to websites for sharing with other students, web space limitations have 
made this difficult. An additional problem has been that students were provided with these devices at the 
start of the course, leaving inadequate time to learn to properly use them.  
The iPod has also spawned a new form of media known as podcasting, a portmanteau which combines 
iPod and broadcasting. While the aforementioned blogs are traditionally text-based, audio blogs or 
podcasts, are essentially downloadable broadcasts with RSS (really simple syndication) feeds which allow 
listeners to subscribe. Subscribers to such podcasts automatically receive updates. Once downloaded, 
audio content can be transferred to a media player. Still in its nascency, podcasting is already widely 
utilized in language learning, both to access authentic content and to record it. Myriad subscriptions are 
available to English and other language learners. Lessons in Shona—Zimbabwe’s main language—for 
example, are available for download (Winter, 2005). Englishcaster provides a list of podcasts specifically 
created for English language learners. Voice of America’ Special English programs have also been made 
available via podcast. And EFL instructor Graham Stanley (2005) has created a podcast itself on the use 
of podcasts for EFL teachers.  
Benefits and Challenges  
Mobile technologies clearly offer numerous practical uses in language learning. In many cases, they are 
readily available. In Japan, for instance, cell phone ownership has been reported to be nearly universal 
amongst college-aged individuals (Dias, 2002, Spring; Thornton and Houser, 2005). In a recent study of 
students in higher education in the United States (Kvavik, 2005), 82% owned cell phones. In the same 
study, however, less than 12% owned PDAs. Even in cases where they must be acquired, mobile 
technologies are typically less expensive than standard equipment, such as PCs. The portability of mobile 
media is another benefit. They can be just as easily utilized outside of the classroom as they can in it; 
learners can study or practice manageable chunks of information in any place on their own time, thereby 
taking advantage of their convenience. Ultimately, what these benefits indicate is the potential MALL has 
in expanding social inclusion in language learning.    
Notwithstanding its benefits, MALL also poses related challenges. For instance, inherent in the portability 
of mobile media are reduced screen sizes, limited audiovisual quality, virtual keyboarding and one-finger 
data entry, and limited power. Further, their availability can be limited. While cell phone ownership may 
be almost universal for college-aged individuals,  this is not true for other populations or media. The costs 
to educational institutions of purchasing them en masse could be staggering. Nevertheless, Gilgen (2004) 
has demonstrated the possibilities of developing mobile labs for schools with limited funding. Other 
potential drawbacks include limited nonverbal communications, limited message lengths, a lack of 
cultural context, and potentially limited social interaction. While mobile technologies are advancing, their 
output is quickly moving from verbal to visual, a clear disadvantage for language learning (Colpaert, 
2004). Connection problems are also a concern: web-based language learners might choose to limit their 
online connection times, or they may not have access at all. Still, as a result of this issue, Trifanova, 
Knapp, Ronchetti, and Gamper (2004) are developing a program which allows learners of web-based 
German and Italian courses to hoard online content—a process similar to planned caching—so that it can 
be used during periods of disconnection. 
Conclusion 
Yamaguchi (2005) recapitulates: "A computer is better than a mobile phone for handling various types of 
information such as visual, sound, and textual information, but mobile phone is superior to a computer in 
portability. And some students don’t have their own computer" (p. 57). So, while m-learning in general 
George Chinnery Emerging Technologies: Going to the MALL 
 
Language Learning & Technology 14 
and MALL in particular have clear challenges and limitations, the paucity of applications and formal 
research will indubitably proliferate. Colpaert (2004) observes that in the history of CALL, periods of 
professional development have been followed by periods of amateur development—coincident with 
periods of hype—by teachers and researchers, and further portends that "if this prevails, the mobile hype 
will burst out as soon as tools become available allowing teachers and researchers to develop their own 
mobile applications and tools" (p. 262). Still, humankind is not likely in the immediate future to reach the 
state of Salmon’s (2003) Planet Nomadic, where "terrestrial universities and corporate training facilities 
have disappeared" (p. 141) and wearable devices "help to pace the learners…through their courses" (p. 
142). But it does seem quickly headed for a world where m-learning is a fashionable channel for language 
study. 
 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
George M. Chinnery is an English instructor at the University of Maryland Baltimore County and the Carlos 
Rosario International School in Washington, DC. He has been teaching since 1998, when he served as a 
Peace Corps volunteer in Romania. He possesses an MA in TESOL and is currently pursuing a PhD in 
Language, Literacy and Culture at UMBC. 
Email: george@chinnery.us 
 
REFERENCES 
Andrews, R. (2003, February 25). Lrn Welsh by txt msg. BBC News World Edition. Retrieved June 25, 
2005, from http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/wales/2798701.stm    
Beatty, K. (2003). Teaching and researching computer-assisted language learning. Essex, England: 
Pearson Education Limited. 
Belanger, Y. (2005, June). Duke University iPod first year experience final evaluation report. Retrieved 
June 24, 2005, from http://cit.duke.edu/pdf/ipod_initiative_04_05.pdf 
Brown, E. (Ed.) (2001, January 8). Mobile learning explorations at the Stanford Learning Lab. Speaking 
of Computers, 55. Stanford, CA: Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University. Retrieved 
July 24, 2005, from http://sll.stanford.edu/projects/tomprof/newtomprof/postings/289.html 
Carlson, S. (2002, October 11). Are personal digital assistants the next must-have tool? [Electronic 
version]. The Chronicle of Higher Education, 49(7), A33. 
Colpaert, J. (2004). From courseware to coursewear? Computer Assisted Language Learning, 17(3-4), 
261-266. 
Dias, J. (2002, Spring). Cell phones in the classroom: Boon or bane? [Part 1]. C@lling Japan: The 
Newsletter of the JALT-CALL Special Interest Group, 10(2), 16-22. 
Dias, J. (2002, Summer/Fall). Cell phones in the classroom: Boon or bane? [Part 2]. C@lling Japan: The 
Newsletter of the JALT-CALL Special Interest Group, 10(3), 8-13. 
Dickey, R.J. (2001). Make it a conference call: An English conversation course by telephone in South 
Korea. In L.E. Henrichsen (Ed.), Distance-learning programs (pp. 51-60). Alexandria, VA: Teachers of 
English to Speakers of Other Languages, Inc.  
Garcia Cabrere, J.C. (2002). Tele-enREDando.com: A multimedia WEB-CALL software for mobile 
phones. International Journal of English Studies, 2(1), 167-178.  
George Chinnery Emerging Technologies: Going to the MALL 
 
Language Learning & Technology 15 
Gilgen, R.G. (2004, April 22). Creating a mobile language learning environment. PowerPoint 
presentation presented at the Educause Midwest Regional Conference, Chicago, IL. Retrieved June 30, 
2005, from http://www.educause.edu/librarydetailpage/666?id=mwr0406 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2005, January). Messaging, gaming, peer-to-peer sharing: Language learning 
strategies and tools for the millennial generation. Language Learning & Technology, 9(1), 17-22. 
Retrieved June 25, 2005, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num1/emerging/default.html 
Green, B.A., Collier, K.J., & Evans, N. (2001). Teaching tomorrow’s class today: English by telephone 
and computer from Hawaii to Tonga. In L.E. Henrichsen (Ed.), Distance-learning programs (pp. 71-82). 
Alexandria, VA: Teachers of English to Speakers of Other Languages, Inc.  
Kadyte, V. (2004). Learning can happen anywhere: A mobile system for language learning. In J. Attewell 
& C. Savill-Smith (Eds.), Learning with mobile devices (pp. 73-78). London: Learning and Skills 
Development Agency. Retrieved June 20, 2005, from http://www.lsda.org.uk/pubs/   
Kiernan, P.J., & Aizawa, K. (2004). Cell phones in task based learning: Are cell phones useful language 
learning tools? ReCALL, 16(1), 71-84.  
Kim, T-G. (2004, September 17). Mobile learning attracts high school students. The Korea Times.  
Retrieved June 25, 2005, from 
http://times.hankooki.com/lpage/tech/200409/kt2004091718000412350.htm 
Kukulska-Hulme, A. (2005, May 12). The mobile language learner—now and in the future. Fran Vision 
till Praktik. Language Learning Symposium conducted at Umea University in Sweden. Retrieved July 28, 
2005, from http://www2.humlab.umu.se/symposium2005/program.htm 
Kvavik, R.B. (2005). Convenience, communication, and control: How students use technology. In D.G. 
Oblinger, & J.L. Oblinger (Eds.), Educating the net generation (pp. 7.1-7.20). Boulder, CO: Educause. 
Retrieved July 28, 2005, from http://www.educause.edu/educatingthenetgen 
Levy, M., & Kennedy, C. (2005). Learning Italian via mobile SMS. In A. Kukulska-Hulme & J. Traxler 
(Eds.), Mobile Learning: A Handbook for Educators and Trainers. London: Taylor and Francis. 
Logan, T. (2004, October 10). Gaming helps traders score big-time. BBC News World Edition. Retrieved 
June 25, 2005, from http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/technology/3723922.stm  
McNicol, T. (2004, April 5). Language learning on the move. Japan Media Review. Retrieved June 25, 
2005, from http://ojr.org/japan/wireless/1080854640.php  
Mielo, G. (2005, January). The medium is the moblog. ETC: A Review of General Semantics, 62(1), 28-
35. 
Myers, M.J. (2000). Voice recognition software and a hand-held translation machine for second-language 
learning. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 13(1), 29-41. 
Norbrook, H., & Scott, P. (2003). Motivation in mobile modern foreign language learning. In J. Attewell, 
G. Da Bormida, M. Sharples, & C. Savill-Smith (Eds.), MLEARN 2003: Learning with mobile devices 
(pp.50-51). London: Learning and Skills Development Agency. Retrieved June 20, 2005, from 
http://www.lsda.org.uk/files/pdf/1421.pdf  
Salaberry, M.R. (2001). The use of technology for second language learning and teaching: A 
retrospective. The Modern Language Journal, 85(i), 39-56. 
Salmon, G. (2003). E-moderating: The key to teaching and learning online (2nd Ed.). London: Taylor and 
Francis Books, Ltd.  
George Chinnery Emerging Technologies: Going to the MALL 
 
Language Learning & Technology 16 
Samuels, J. (2003, August 15). Wireless and handheld devices for language learning. Proceedings of the 
19th Annual Conference on Distance Teaching and Learning, Madison, WI. Retrieved July 24, 2005, from 
http://www.uwex.edu/disted/conference/Resource_library/proceedings/03_50.pdf 
Stanley, G. (2005, June 19). An Introduction to podcasting for EFL/ESL teachers. Podcast posted on 
BLOG-EFL website. Retrieved June 26, 2005, from http://blog-efl.blogspot.com/ 
Thornton, P., & Houser, C. (2002). M-learning in transit. In P. Lewis (Ed.), The changing face of CALL 
(pp. 229-243). Lisse, The Netherlands: Swets and Zeitlinger.    
Thornton, P., & Houser, C. (2003). Using mobile web and video phones in English language teaching: 
Projects with Japanese college students. In B. Morrison, C. Green, & G. Motteram (Eds.), Directions in 
CALL: Experience, experiments & evaluation (pp. 207-224). Hong Kong: English Language Centre, 
Hong Kong Polytechnic University. 
Thornton, P., & Houser, C. (2005). Using mobile phones in English Education in Japan. Journal of 
Computer Assisted Learning, 21, 217-228. 
Trifanova, A., Knapp, J., Ronchetti, M., & Gamper, J. (2004, January). Mobile ELDIT: Challenges in the 
transitions from an e-learning to an m-learning system. Trento, Italy: University of Trento. Retrieved July 
24, 2005, from http://eprints.biblio.unitn.it/archive/00000532/01/paper4911.pdf 
Twarog, L., & Pereszlenyi-Pinter, M. (1988). Telephone-assisted language study and Ohio University: A 
report. The Modern Language Journal, 72, 426-434.   
Winter, J. (2005, May 26). Podcasting for Zimbabwe. BBC News World Edition. Retrieved June 25, 2005, 
from http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/4566815.stm 
Yamaguchi, T. (2005, August 2-4). Vocabulary learning with a mobile phone. Program of the 10th 
Anniversary Conference of Pan-Pacific Association of Applied Linguistics, Edinburgh, UK. Retrieved 
August 4, 2005, from http://www.paaljapan.org/2005Program.pdf 
Zhao, Y. (2005). The future of research in technology and second language education.  In Y. Zhao (Ed.), 
Research in technology and second language learning: Developments and directions (pp. 445-457). 
Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing, Inc. 
 
