 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  15 
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS 
Sponsors 
University of Hawai`i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR) 
Co-Sponsor 
Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL) 
 
University of Hawai'i National Foreign Language Resource 
Center (NFLRC)  
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials 
development projects and conducts Summer Institutes for language professionals among its many 
activities. 
2007 PRAGMATICS & LANGUAGE LEARNING CONFERENCE 
The NFLRC is pleased to be organizing and co-sponsoring the 17th International Conference on 
Pragmatics and Language Learning (PLL) on March 26-28, 2007 in Honolulu, Hawai‘i. The University of 
Hawai‘i National Resource Center for East Asia (NRCEA) and the Department of Second Language 
Studies (SLS) also serve as co-sponsors of the event. The conference will address a broad range of topics 
in pragmatics, discourse, interaction, and sociolinguistics in their relation to second and foreign language 
learning, education, and use, approached from a variety of theoretical and methodological perspectives.  
Highlights will include plenary talks by Junko Mori (University of Wisconsin-Madison) and Steven 
Talmy (University of British Columbia) and two invited colloquia. We are currently accepting online 
proposal submissions for paper and poster sessions – deadline September 30, 2006. For more information 
about the conference, visit http://nflrc.hawaii.edu/prodev/pll 
NEW NFLRC PUBLICATIONS 
Pragmatics and Language Learning conference proceedings, volume 11 edited by Kathleen Bardovi-
Harlig, César Félix-Brasdefer, & Alwiya S. Omar 
This volume features cutting-edge theoretical and empirical research on pragmatics and language learning 
among a wide-variety of learners in diverse learning contexts from a variety of language backgrounds 
(English, German, Japanese, Persian, and Spanish) and target languages (English, German, Japanese, 
Kiswahili, and Spanish). This collection of papers from researchers around the world includes critical 
appraisals on the role of formulas in interlanguage pragmatics and speech-act research from a 
conversation-analytic perspective. Empirical studies examine learner data using innovative methods of 
analysis and investigate issues in pragmatic development and the instruction of pragmatics. 
Perspectives on teaching connected speech to second language speakers edited by J. D. Brown & Kimi 
Kondo-Brown 
This book is a collection of fourteen articles on connected speech of interest to teachers, researchers, and 
materials developers in both ESL/EFL (ten chapters focus on connected speech in English) and Japanese 
(four chapters focus on Japanese connected speech). The fourteen chapters are divided up into five 
sections:  
• What do we know so far about teaching connected speech?  
• Does connected speech instruction work?  
• How should connected speech be taught in English?  
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  16 
• How should connected speech be taught in Japanese?  
• How should connected speech be tested? 
Check out these and our other publications at http://nflrc.hawaii.edu/ 
ONLINE JOURNALS SOLICIT SUBMISSIONS 
Reading in a Foreign Language is a refereed online journal, jointly sponsored by the University of 
Hawai`i NFLRC and the Department of Second Language Studies. RFL serves as an excellent source for 
the latest developments in the field, both theoretical and pedagogic, including improving standards for 
foreign language reading. For more information on submission guidelines, visit the RFL Web site. 
Language Learning & Technology is a refereed online journal, jointly sponsored by the University of 
Hawai`i NFLRC and the Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research 
(CLEAR). LLT focuses on issues related to technology and language education. For more information on 
submission guidelines, visit the LLT Web site. 
 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education 
and Research (CLEAR)  
CLEAR's mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States.  
Projects focus on materials development, professional development training, and foreign language 
research. 
CELBRATING TEN YEARS! 
CLEAR celebrated its tenth anniversary in August and was awarded continued funding for a fourth 
funding cycle, until 2010.  We are proud of our ten years of service to the language education community 
and look forward to continued outreach and exciting new projects. 
NEW WEBSITE 
To coincide with our tenth anniversary, CLEAR launched a new website in August.  Please visit the new 
site at http://clear.msu.edu and learn more about our new products and upcoming projects for the new 
funding cycle. 
MATERIALS DEVELOPMENT 
Coming Soon! • Hausa Online 
• Introductory Business German (CD-ROM) 
• French Pronunciation and Phonetics (CD-ROM) 
Selected Products  
• NEW!  Vietnamese Small Group Instruction Guide 
• NEW!  Language Learning Materials for Russian: A Content-Based Course Pack (online learning 
modules) 
• Now free! Business Chinese (CD-ROM) 
• MIMEA: Multimedia Interactive Modules for Education and Assessment (German, Chinese, 
Arabic, Vietnamese, Korean; online video clips and activities) 
• SMILE (tool for creating interactive online exercises) 
• Facilitating Connections to International Business: A Guide for Foreign Language Educators 
(guide) 
• African Language Small Group Instruction Guide (guide and video) 
• Thai Small Group Instruction Guide (guide) 
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  17 
• Hindi Small Group Instruction Guide (guide)  
• Modules for Assessing Socio-Cultural Competence: German (CD-ROM) 
• Modules for Assessing Socio-Cultural Competence: Russian (CD-ROM) 
• Pronunciación y Fonética (CD-ROM) 
• Foreign Languages: Doors to Opportunity (video and discussion guide) 
• Test Development (workbook and video) 
 
CONFERENCES 
CLEAR exhibits at local and national conferences year-round. We hope to see you at ACTFL, CALICO, 
MiWLA, NCOLCTL, Central States, and other conferences. 
NEWSLETTER 
CLEAR News is a biyearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. 
Contact the CLEAR office to join the mailing list or check it out on the Web at 
http://clear.msu.edu/newsletter/. We welcome your submissions! 
 
The Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL)  
The Center for Applied Linguistics is a private, nonprofit organization that promotes and improves the 
teaching and learning of languages, identifies and solves problems related to language and culture, and 
serves as a resource for information about language and culture. CAL carries out a wide range of 
activities in the fields of English as a second language, foreign languages, cultural education, and 
linguistics.  
Featured Resources: 
• The Center for Adult English Language Acquisition (CAELA)  
CAELA was established in 2004 with funding from the Office of Vocational and Adult Education 
(OVAE), U.S. Department of Education, and its primary mission is to assist states that have emerging 
ESL populations. Resources available on its Web site include tools for teaching adult English 
language learners, a new series of briefs; and a newsletter, CAELA Currents, which includes 
subscription information. 
• The Cultural Orientation Resource (COR) Center  
The (COR) Center continues to provide materials that inform refugee service providers about refugee 
cultures and help newcomers understand fundamental aspects of life in the U.S. Culture Profiles 
provide short introductions to the cultural background of refugee populations. The Cultural 
Orientation for Refugees: A Handbook for U.S. Trainers is a new guide that provides information, 
lesson plans, and training resources for U.S. cultural orientation. 
• CAL Services 
CAL provides a variety of professional development and technical assistance services related to 
language education and assessment needs.  
 
Recent Publications: 
• Literacy and Language Diversity in the United States, 2nd Edition 
• Creating Access: Language and Academic Programs for Secondary School Newcomers  
• Language by Video: An Overview of Foreign Language Instructional Videos for Children  
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  18 
• What’s Different About Teaching Reading to Students Learning English?  
 
Visit CAL’s redesigned Web site to learn more about our projects, resources, and services. 
 
