Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num3/review3/ 
September 2006, Volume 10, Number 3 
pp. 44-48 
 
Copyright © 2006, ISSN 1094-3501 44 
REVIEW OF THE INTERNET AND YOUNG LEARNERS 
The Internet and Young Learners  
Gordon Lewis  
2004 
ISBN 0194421821 
US $23.95 (paperback) 
140 pp.  
Oxford University Press 
Oxford, UK  
 
Review by Cameron Richards, University of Western Australia 
The introduction of The Internet and Young Learners suggests an aim of "putting the EFL teacher in a 
position to kill two birds with one stone" (p. 5) - that is, linking language teaching to young learners' 
interest in the Internet.  "Young learners" are conceived as students of English between the ages of 7 and 
15 (between 8 and 13 on the back cover).  The Internet is mainly equated with assumed basic word 
processing and web navigation skills, although many children today already have many more 
sophisticated Information and Communication Technology (ICT) skills. The language learning examples 
of the book chiefly focus on how the Internet provides authentic language resources. How well then does 
the book achieve its main aim in terms of EFL teachers interested in using the Internet to engage young 
learners?  
The book is organized into four main sections of learning activities, which can be both separately and 
convergently reviewed as efforts to introduce the Internet to young learners, and also to exemplify 
learning activity approaches and ideas. A brief initial First Steps section focuses on basic word processing 
skills leading up to a review of provided webpage links. In contrast, the Web Search Activities in section 
three are twice as expansive as any other section, suggesting that these activities are more central to the 
purpose of the book than the focus on Communication and Web Creation activities in the second and 
fourth sections, respectively. Additionally, three short sections at the end of the book comprise the use of 
electronic portfolios, the Internet as teachers' resource, and useful Internet addresses. 
The short Communication section focuses on the power of an authentic online audience to motivate young 
learners in writing activities. An initial activity, Getting to Know You, asks students to respond to the 
teacher's introductory email message and request to "know more about you". Most of the other activities 
in this section revolve around writing emails to other learners in a foreign partner school. These online 
partnerships will need to be organized by the teacher, and the Useful Internet Addresses section points to 
sites such as the Global Schoolhouse as sources for lists of potential partner schools. The pretexts 
provided for these language interactions are typically topics the author assumes to be of interest to young 
learners (e.g., Houses Around the World, Pocket Money, A Look in My Fridge), or more interactive 
activities, such as a Cumulative Story, where email partners from either the same class or a partner school 
take turns building a story together.  The author justifies his restricted focus on email communications by 
referring to "safety reasons" (p. 7). But many young learners today are proficient in interacting via 
Internet communications (both asynchronous and synchronous), including blogs, wikis, RSS feeds, 
messaging, and various kinds of web-forums. Also, moderated synchronous chat forums designated for 
effective educational purposes (e.g., EFL MOOs) can be set up in a reasonably safe context. 
Cameron Richards Review of The Internet and Young Learners 
 
Language Learning & Technology 45 
With its introductory focus, the book might have discussed further some of these other Internet 
communication possibilities.  
Section three, Web Search Activities, develops the main focus of the book. Many of the activities in this 
section are built around authentic Internet information resources, such as currency converters, weather 
sites, local tourist offices, and travel information.  In terms of activity ideas linked to language learning 
tasks, the section provides a range of ideas which many teachers might find useful. For instance, activity 
3.6, World Travel, outlines how learners might decide on an interesting travel destination as a focus for 
researching online timetables and information about their choices. However, as typified by activity 3.16, 
Rivers, learners are simply asked to choose a particular river and to find their own information about the 
topic – and this could be accomplished online as well as offline. A couple of activities in this section 
provide a specific website link or resource for students to search, but often only as a general background 
resource. For instance, in activity 3.15, My Local Habitat, the URL 
http://www.enchantedlearning.com/biomes is provided for learners to explore different animal habitats. 
Some activities are linked to either useful worksheets in the appendix or general links in the Useful 
Internet Addresses section. However, in contrast to, for example, the well-known Webquest model, none 
of the worksheets (except 1.7, What’s in a Website, which asks learners to find and review a website) 
require completion using Internet resources and might equally well be completed using school library 
books.  
Similar to section two, the Web Creation activity section provides a general outline of activities which 
engage learners in writing and, in some instances, producing drawings or digital photos, which could be 
uploaded to the Web.  However, most of these activities could just as easily be done on paper. For 
instance, activity 4.10, Switchzoo, invites learners to write about imaginary animals. After doing this on 
paper or in a word-processing program, learners are then asked to post their product to a class, or 
personal, website to be developed separately. Likewise, activity 4.11, Online Cookbook, asks students to 
write recipes, followed by instructions for the last step of the procedure:  
7. After class, scan the recipes or format them in html and link the individual recipes to a central 
recipe homepage. This homepage can be local or on the internet (p. 99).   
Unfortunately, the author provides no further instructions on how to design websites, neither for students 
nor for teachers. Instead, students are referred to several links in the appendix, which relate to free web-
hosting services (such as www.geocities.com) and a link to the online tutorial site Webmonkey. While 
activity 4.6, King or Queen for the Week, does offer the advice "if you are having trouble creating a 
website, make a PowerPoint presentation instead" (p. 92), no further advice is provided about PowerPoint 
- perhaps with an assumption that many young learners in schools around the world today already use 
PowerPoint for hyper-linked multimedia projects.  
Useful Internet Addresses are provided at the end of the book. An initial section includes general 
educational links, while a second Content section organizes links around headings related to some of the 
earlier activities (e.g., Animals, Birthdays, Natural World, Sports). However, these websites are not 
directly connected to any of the activities in the book. The other two short sections that follow at the end 
of the book, Electronic Portfolios and The Internet as a Teacher Resource, are useful introductions but 
are also not linked to any activities, nor are these sections discussed in relation to any practical examples 
or their potential to link to the earlier activities. Just as the activity sections of the book might have been 
linked to some sample Internet resources, so too might these sections have been developed in terms of 
both activities and practical examples. Electronic portfolios in particular are becoming a widely used tool 
of ICT-focused learning, assessment, and profiling by teachers. Therefore, novice, or less technologically 
proficient, teachers might benefit from more concrete advice and examples.   
Teachers interested in harnessing the Internet for young learners in their EFL classrooms may be initially 
reassured by the book’s extensive prescriptive lesson-planning format (level, age, time, aims, materials, in 
Cameron Richards Review of The Internet and Young Learners 
 
Language Learning & Technology 46 
class, and even variations) for activities for different language learning levels (beginner, intermediate, 
advanced) and the general section headings (Communication, Web Creation, and Web Search).  However, 
a closer reading gives the impression that both Internet novices and Internet savvy teachers may struggle 
in practice to use the book as a guide to exploit the promise of the Internet for their young learners in their 
classrooms. One reasons is that while the formats are quite detailed (see Figure 1 for an example image 
from the book), the activities themselves tend to be expressed as general ideas, outlines, or directions. 
This is especially the case when learners are supposed to use the Internet in activities. While the apparent 
audience for the book is Internet novice teachers, these in particular would benefit from sample activities 
which are more explicitly developed in structure and Internet application. On the other hand, more 
internet savvy or ICT literate teachers would perhaps be interested in general or overview strategies at the 
outset of each of the four main activity sections for linking language learning tasks to different uses of the 
Internet to engage learners. 
 
Figure 1.  The activity format used in The Internet and Young Learners 
Cameron Richards Review of The Internet and Young Learners 
 
Language Learning & Technology 47 
The book appears to be so intent on outlining a series of task categories and a basic lesson-planning 
format, often seen in current teaching materials (cf. for example, TESOL’s New Ways Series), that 
considerations of whether even the timing of the activities is realistic have not been given a great priority. 
This is despite a qualifying clause at the outset that timing suggestions are "minimum times" (p. 25). As 
the book is part of the wider series Resource Books for Teachers, it is perhaps likely that there was a 
requirement to fit it into a similar format. 
A related issue is that the prescribed aim of every activity in the book as reflected in its description and 
level is a language aim (sometimes grammatical, but mostly vocabulary or topic focused; for example, 
3.16, Rivers, links to both the vocabulary of geography and animals on one hand, and to learning about 
simple past tense on the other) when the focus should be on connecting and developing activities in terms 
of  Internet uses by young learners. Similarly, the activities resemble task ideas from a face-to-face 
communicative language classroom. As useful as many of these ideas are, the connections made between 
language learning and The Internet and Young Learners (or the stated aim of killing two birds with one 
stone) tend to remain implicit in this book and are not developed as much as they could have been.  
For many EFL teachers, it might have been more useful to outline a range of different types of ICT-
focused learning activities which particularly lend themselves to a variety of language learning objectives, 
topics, and skills. For instance, the Web Search Activities section might have included more specific 
examples of the use of pair or group work when designing tasks for learners to access different kinds of 
authentic resources on the Internet. It may also have been effective to focus on both an overview and 
specific examples of types of activity ideas which lend themselves to, or might be adapted to, a language 
learning context (cf. a more balanced format in Braun, 2001). As it is, there is no mention of well-known 
activity models such as Webquests (http://webquest.sdsu.edu/), nor the range of tele-collaborative 
learning task types as, for instance, outlined in Gralla (1999) and Grabe and Grabe (2005). Best practice 
models of ICT integration in learning are typically conceived as task or project work (e.g., Jonassen, 
Howland, Moore, & Marra, 2003). The approach in this book is perhaps more the other way round; i.e., 
conventional lesson-planning linked to ideas to be developed or clarified further. 
In relation to their general or extra-curricular interests and interacting with friends, many young learners 
are quite at home with ICTs and find the new possibilities of multimedia and Internet communication 
exciting. The Internet (and ICTs more generally) offers significant possibilities for teachers to engage 
young learners because of its facility for personalization, immediacy, and various notions of interactivity 
– especially through the connection of both verbal and visual literacies (Mayer, 2001; Kress, 2003). As 
reflected by the lesson format adopted and the generally non-visual emphasis of the overall design of the 
book, the conception and development of The Internet and Young Learners might have aimed a little 
more at engaging learners with the sense of excitement about the Internet felt by many young (and also 
older) learners. This could have been achieved by extending the focus on multimedia related learning task 
activities (i.e. the use of simple graphics, animations, and even digital movies in language presentations or 
exchanges). Also, the topics and tools of various sections may have been extended to reflect the prior 
knowledge and typical interests of many young Internet users. In sum, The Internet and Young Learners 
will be mostly useful to an EFL teacher who has reasonably good Internet literacy and is prepared to 
"mine" activities for ideas which might be adapted. To do this, the teacher will need to be ready to 
explore for him/herself what young learners might find most interesting about different aspects of the 
Internet and multimedia, as many young learners today may know more about technology than their 
teachers. In this way, teachers may find the Internet a more powerful way of extending the language 
classroom than is perhaps assumed in the writing of this book.  
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Cameron Richards Review of The Internet and Young Learners 
 
Language Learning & Technology 48 
Cameron Richard is a Senior Lecturer in the Graduate School of Education at the University of Western 
Australia. He has researched and published widely about the practical as well as cultural and conceptual 
challenges and implications of effectively integrating ICTs in education. 
Email: cameron.richards@uwa.edu.au  
 
REFERENCES 
Braun, L. (2001). Introducing the internet to young learners: Ready-to-go activities and lesson plans. 
New York: Neal-Schuman Publishers. 
Grabe, M. & Grabe, C. (2005). Integrating technology for meaningful learning***2. Fifth Edition. 
Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin. 
Gralla, P. (1999). Online kids: A young surfer's guide to cyberspace with activities, Second Edition. San 
Francisco: Jossey Bass.  
Jonassen, D., Howland, J., Moore, J. & Marra, R. (2003). Learning to solve problems with technology: A 
constructivist perspective, Revised Edition. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education.  
Kress, G. (2003). Literacy in the new media age. London: Routledge.  
Mayer, R.E. (2001). Multimedia learning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 
 
 
