Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num1/review3/ 
January, 2006, Volume 10, Number 1 
pp. 30-37 
 
Copyright © 2006, ISSN 1094-3501 30 
REVIEW OF THREE SOFTWARE PROGRAMS 
DESIGNED TO IDENTIFY LEXICAL BUNDLES 
Title  KfNgram 1.2.03 N-Gram Phrase Extractor 
(Compleat Lexical Tutor 4.0) 
Wordsmith Tools 3 
Platform PC (download) PC (use on Web site) PC (download) 
Minimum 
hardware 
requirements 
No information provided Windows or Linux Windows 98, 2000, and 
XP  
Publisher  William H. Fletcher  
http://kwicfinder.com/kfNg
ram/kfNgramHelp.html 
Tom Cobb 
http://www.lextutor.ca/ 
Mike Scott  
http://www.lexically.net/w
ordsmith/index.html 
Support 
offered 
Brief manual provided on 
the software’s web site 
Directions provided on each 
screen. Contact: 
http://www.lextutor.ca/mailer  
Online manual provided 
on the website 
Target 
language 
English English and French English 
Target 
audience  
Beginning to advanced 
users 
Beginning to advanced users Beginning to advanced 
users 
Price Free Free License for a single user is 
currently around £50 
(approx. US$92 or €75); a 
license for up to 10 users 
is around £250 (US$460, 
€376) and for up to 50 
users around £500 
(US$919 ,€753). 
Review by Omer Ari, Georgia State University 
OVERVIEW 
Three software programs--N-Gram Phrase Extractor, kfNgram, and Wordsmith Tools--are reviewed in 
terms of their user-friendliness and efficiency for searching for lexical bundles, which are recurring 
chunks of words in text. User-friendliness is defined as the ease in operating the interface of the program; 
efficiency is defined as fulfilling the criteria by which word combinations qualify as lexical bundles, such 
as frequency and multi-text occurrence (Biber, Johansson, Leech, Conrad, & Finegan, 1999; Biber, 
Conrad, & Cortes, 2004).   
Of the three software programs, N-Gram Phrase Extractor is the most user-friendly program and could be 
used by language teachers and learners for information on raw frequency of lexical bundles. kfNgram has 
an easy-to-use main interface and could also be useful to language teachers and learners. kfNgram and 
Wordsmith Tools additionally provide information on raw frequency and are more efficient than N-Gram 
Phrase Extractor.  kfNgram and Wordsmith Tools could be used by researchers and others interested in 
multi-text occurrence as well as raw frequency information. Specific details are explained further below. 
Reviewed by Omer Ari Review of Three Software Programs Designed to Identify Lexical 
Bundles 
 
Language Learning & Technology 31 
BRIEF BACKGROUND ON LEXICAL BUNDLES 
Corpus investigations of natural language data have resulted in major changes in the way language is 
viewed. Using specially developed software, researchers have discovered frequently recurring multiword 
lexical chunks in texts or corpora (Biber et al., 1999; Cortes, 2004; Sinclair, 1991; Stubbs & Barth, 2003), 
indicating that language is more repetitive than has been assumed. What is more, these chunks have been 
shown to vary across registers, i.e., conversation, academic prose, newspapers, fiction, etc. (Pawley & 
Syder, 1983; Stubbs & Barth, 2003). Although findings regarding frequency and variation have gained 
consensus among researchers, defining what counts as a chunk has met with broad disagreement. As a 
result, the field has seen a plethora of labels for chunks, such as lexical bundles (Biber et al., 1999), 
prefabs or lexical phrases (Nattinger & DeCarrico, 1992), formulaic sequences (Schmitt & Carter, 2004), 
and sentence stems (Pawley & Syder, 1983). 
Biber and his colleagues (1999, 2004) postulated a set of defining criteria to identify register-bound 
lexical bundles. Accordingly, there are two fundamental criteria for a multi-word combination to be 
considered as a lexical bundle: (a) it must occur frequently in a register, and (b) it must occur in multiple 
texts in that register. Frequency cut-off points for both criteria have usually been determined based on the 
researchers' goals. For example, Biber et al. (1999) set out their register-based research with a very 
flexible cut-off point of ten in one million words. Biber, Conrad, & Cortes(2004), however, were more 
conservative in their search for lexical bundles, using the criteria of 40 in one million words. Cortes 
(2004), on the other hand, opted to set the cut-off point in her data at 20 in one million words. 
The second criterion of multi-text occurrence was intended by Biber et al. (1999) to avoid idiosyncratic 
uses of lexical bundles by individual speakers or writers in a given register. Multi-text occurrence thus 
assumes that a lexical bundle is shared by other members of the discourse community who communicate 
in that register. Working with small corpora may make it difficult to apply this criterion due to limited 
availability of different texts. This criterion has largely been ignored in the search for lexical bundles, 
mainly because raw frequencies satisfied researchers' purposes or because researchers did not have access 
to large corpora.  
DESCRIPTION OF SOFTWARE PROGRAMS AND COMPARATIVE EVALUATION 
The three software programs designed to help researchers and teachers search for lexical bundles that are 
reviewed here are: kfNgram, a free downloadable software program; N-Gram Phrase Extractor, part of the 
online corpus tool Compleat Lexical Tutor; and Wordsmith Tools, a downloadable software program 
available for purchase. The programs are reviewed for their efficiency and user-friendliness (see Table 1). 
To reiterate, software efficiency is defined as a program’s capability to identify lexical bundles in running 
text by frequency and multi-text occurrence; and user-friendliness is defined as the ease with which the 
program can be used by a user who may have little experience in using computers.  
 
Table 1. The Software Programs Rated for their Ability to Perform Various Tasks 
 kfNgram N-Gram Phrase 
Extractor 
Wordsmith Tools 
analyzing a long text + - + 
analyzing multiple texts + - + 
reporting frequency + + + 
determining multi-text occurrence + - + 
user-friendly + + - 
efficient (frequency and multi-text 
occurrence) 
+ - + 
Reviewed by Omer Ari Review of Three Software Programs Designed to Identify Lexical 
Bundles 
 
Language Learning & Technology 32 
 
kfNgram 
kfNgram is a user-friendly tool. After the user adds a text file into the input field, he or she has to select 
only the desired length of particular lexical bundles and the floor, the minimum frequency of occurrence, 
in the corpus or text. The search takes place on kfNgram’s single interface and does not require additional 
page viewing or operations. The status of the operation is reported in the output field on the main 
interface and the results are displayed in a new window for each file with frequency numbers aligned to 
the right. The following are screenshots of the software: Figure 1 shows the main interface; Figure 2 
shows an outcome window displaying 4-word lexical bundles occurring at least three times in a section of 
Alice's Adventures in Wonderland by Lewis Carroll (Carroll, 1994).  
 
Figure 1. The main interface of kfNgram 
Although a very effective tool in extracting repeating lexical bundles with frequency numbers, kfNgram’s 
functions are limited. To determine multi-text occurrences of a lexical bundle, the user/researcher has to 
enter the texts separately and compare lexical bundles across outcome windows for each text.  Therefore, 
determining multi-text occurrences requires entering the text in subtexts or a corpus in a number of 
sections. 
Reviewed by Omer Ari Review of Three Software Programs Designed to Identify Lexical 
Bundles 
 
Language Learning & Technology 33 
 
Figure 2. Output window displaying 4-word lexical bundles in the first half of Alice's Adventures in 
Wonderland using kfNgram 
N-Gram Phrase Extractor  
This software is available as as part of the website Compleat Lexical Tutor. N-Gram Phrase Extractor 
analyzes a given text - the shorter, the better, extracting recurring phrases and displaying the output in 
varying spans of co-text (usually 17-20 words) with the phrases centered and listed in alphabetical order. 
Information about how many times a phrase occurs in the text is reported to the left of the page with 
phrases listed alphabetically. There is no information about multi-text occurrences of phrases, however, or 
in how many different texts a phrase appears (see Figure 3). 
Reviewed by Omer Ari Review of Three Software Programs Designed to Identify Lexical 
Bundles 
 
Language Learning & Technology 34 
 
Figure 3. The output display of N-Gram Phrase Extractor for 4-word phrase size 
Since the software cannot process texts larger than 1MB, it may not be as useful for a researcher as it may 
be for a teacher interested in his/her students’ use of lexical bundles in their writing. The interface, 
however, merits more praise, for all that needs to be done is to paste a text into the input field or upload a 
plain text file, click the desired length of lexical bundles (i.e., 2, 3, 4, 5), and hit the submit button (see 
Figure 4). However, it is not possible to instruct the software to look for specific target lexical bundles in 
the text or text file. The program reports only those lexical bundles that recur in the text or file submitted 
by the user, which constitutes another limitation for N-Gram Phrase Extractor.  
 
Figure 4. The main interface of N-Gram Phrase Extractor 
Reviewed by Omer Ari Review of Three Software Programs Designed to Identify Lexical 
Bundles 
 
Language Learning & Technology 35 
Therefore, this software makes for a useful tool for teachers who are interested in the kinds of word 
combinations that repeat in single texts, most likely those of their students. Using this program, teachers 
can examine the extent and type of lexical bundles that their students are learning as reflected in their 
writings. This program also allows teachers to analyze the phrasal structure of class readings that their 
students engage with. Teachers can find out the lexical bundles that occur in the readings assigned to 
students, and they can make these lexical bundles noticeable to students using a variety of activities. 
Researchers who seek more detail (e.g., multi-text occurrence) in the analysis of lexical bundles should 
consider using either or both of the other programs examined in this review: kfNgram and Wordsmith 
Tools. 
Wordsmith Tools 
Among the software reviewed here, Wordsmith Tools is the most efficient in its search for lexical 
bundles. The program satisfies the two criteria for lexical bundles as outlined by Biber et al. (1999). 
Lexical bundles are reported in the output window in order of frequency, and to the far right of this output 
window users find information about the different texts from which the lexical bundles were extracted. In 
order to look for text files in this manner, the user needs to enter texts separately and give each an easily 
identifiable name, such as text 1. One advantage this program has over kfNgram is that users do not have 
to read through multiple output windows when searching for multi-text occurrences of lexical bundles; 
they can scroll up and down on only one screen that lists all lexical bundles according to frequency and 
text. Clicking on the text tab at the top of the page groups the lexical bundles into their source texts, thus 
allowing the user to compare and/or tally texts for the occurrence of a lexical bundle or lexical bundles in 
texts (see Figure 5).   
 
Figure 5. Display of 2-word clusters after cluster search in Wordsmith Tools 
Reviewed by Omer Ari Review of Three Software Programs Designed to Identify Lexical 
Bundles 
 
Language Learning & Technology 36 
The procedure to arrive at lexical bundles is not as easy in Wordsmith Tools as in kfNgram or N-Gram 
Phrase Extractor. This makes Wordsmith Tools less user-friendly than the other two programs. The 
procedure starts with the user inputting the text using the wordlist function—the program is a composite 
of three functions: concordance, keywords, and wordlist. After the addition of text, the user has to create 
or add to an index file of the text, which needs to be saved. The same index file then has to be opened 
from the wordlist window, resulting in the wordlist of the corpus with frequency order of words. In this 
window, the user has to click compute and cluster on the drop-down menu to extract the lexical bundles 
in the corpus. On the next, smaller window, the desired minimum frequency and lexical bundle size needs 
to be specified, upon which a new window with lexical bundles extracted will open. The lexical bundles 
are reported in frequency order. Although the program does not have a separate function for finding out 
multi-text occurrences, this information can be gathered by examining the text information to the right of 
the reported lexical bundles.  
CONCLUSION 
To summarize, kfNgram and N-Gram Phrase Extractor provide user-friendly and effective tools for 
teachers who are interested in the frequency of recurrent word combinations in their students’ writing. For 
researchers who are more interested in word combinations that are used by the discourse community of a 
specific register or registers, Wordsmith Tools and kfNgram are the best tools to use. Although a very 
efficient tool, Wordsmith Tools is less user-friendly due to its somewhat tedious interface and 
complicated operations. To satisfy multitext occurrences (one of the defining criteria for lexical bundles) 
text files have to be entered separately in Wordsmith Tools and kfNgram, except N-Gram Phrase 
Extractor, which works only with single text files. If this is not done, the software programs yield only 
raw frequency information about lexical bundles. Raw frequency information itself is not sufficient for a 
word combination to qualify as a lexical bundle. The second criterion of multi-text occurrence also has to 
be satisfied. 
Finally, the procedure to obtain multi-text occurrences, the second criterion for software efficiency, is 
quite laborious and time consuming in all programs except N-Gram Phrase Extractor, which provides 
only raw frequencies of lexical bundles. Users either have to view separate output windows and compare 
lexical bundles from one output window to the other as in kfNgram, or follow a very similar procedure 
and read through text file names for multi-occurrence of lexical bundles in the same window in 
Wordsmith Tools. Therefore, there is need for new software that reports the frequency of texts in which 
lexical bundles occur, in addition to raw frequencies of lexical bundles in an entire corpus. In their current 
format, however, these three software programs can be useful to obtain raw frequencies of lexical 
bundles. Teachers and language learners can benefit from raw frequency information using all three 
software programs reviewed here. Researchers and others who are interested in multi-text occurrence can 
benefit only from two of the software packages(i.e., Wordsmith Tools and kfNgram). 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Omer Ari is a doctoral student in Middle /Secondary Education and Instructional Technology (MSIT) at 
Georgia State University. His research interests include college reading, corpus linguistics, and second 
language acquisition.   
Email: ariomer@hotmail.com  
 
 
Reviewed by Omer Ari Review of Three Software Programs Designed to Identify Lexical 
Bundles 
 
Language Learning & Technology 37 
REFERENCES 
Biber, D., Conrad, S., & Cortes, V. (2004). If you look at...: Lexical bundles in university teaching and 
textbooks. Applied Linguistics, 25, 371-405.  
Biber, D., Johansson, S., Leech, G., Conrad, S., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman grammar of spoken and 
written English. London: Longman.  
Carroll, L. (1994). Alice's adventures in Wonderland. Retrieved April 29, 2005, from 
http://birrell.org/andrew/alice/Alice.pdf. 
Cortes, V. (2004). Lexical bundles in published and student disciplinary writing: Examples from history 
and biology. English for Specific Purposes, 23, 397-423.  
Nattinger, J. R., & DeCarrico, J. (1992). Lexical phrases and language teaching. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Pawley, A., & Syder, F. H. (1983). Two puzzles for linguistic theory. In J. C. Richards & R. W. Schmidt 
(Eds.), Language and communication (pp. 191-226). London: Longman. 
Schmitt, N., & Carter, R. (2004). Formulaic sequences in action: An introduction. In N. Schmitt (Ed.), 
Formulaic sequences: Acquisition, processing and use (pp. 1-22). Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Sinclair, J. (1991). Corpus, concordance, collocation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.  
Stubbs, M., & Barth, I. (2003). Using recurrent phrases as text-type discriminators: A quantitative method 
and some findings. Functions of Language, 10(1), 61-104. 
 
