Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num3/review1/ 
September 2006, Volume 10, Number 3 
pp. 19-26 
 
Copyright © 2006, ISSN 1094-3501 19 
REVIEW OF WORLD LINK INTRO – STUDENT BOOK AND VIDEO 
COURSE 
World Link Intro: Developing English Fluency 
 
Susan Stempleski 
Nancy Douglas 
James R. Morgan 
Andy Curtis 
 
2005 
Student Book:  ISBN 08384-0661-0  
US $ 20.95 
154 pp.   
Audio CDs:  ISBN  0-8384-4614-0    
US  $50.95 
Workbook:  ISBN  0-8384-2522-4      
US  $13.95 
 
Thomson Heinle 
Boston, MA 
 
 
World Link Intro: Developing English Fluency 
Video Course 
 
Susan Stempleski 
Nancy Douglas 
James R. Morgan 
Andy Curtis 
2005 
DVD:   ISBN 1-4130 -1073 – 3    
US $34.95 
Workbook:  ISBN 0-7593-9638-8   
US $21.95 
 
Thomson Heinle 
Boston, MA 
 
 
Review by Ruth Mendel, Michigan State University 
The World Link series is a four-level ESL series ranging from World Link Intro (reviewed here) at the low 
beginning level, to Level 3, high intermediate. The series stands out for its global perspective as well as 
its innovative courseware. It contains a Video Course, consisting of a DVD (or VHS) and Workbook, and 
a Textbook Course, which includes a Student Book, two audio CDs, a Workbook, and an accompanying 
web site. Both the World Link Video course and World Link Textbook course (henceforth referred to as 
WLV and WLT) are divided into twelve units covering the same topics, beginning with lessons on 
Greetings and Introductions and Countries and Nationalities, concluding with Jobs and Ambitions, and 
Ruth Mendel Review of World Link Intro 
 
Language Learning & Technology 20 
including such topics as Family, Food, Interesting Products, and Homes. Although the targeted 
grammatical structures are the same in both courses and the vocabulary overlaps, the content of each is 
quite different.  WLT’s listening activity in Unit 7 on Time, for example, involves schedules of a dinner 
party, exam, and movie; the corresponding video clip in WLV is a humorous account of Mike’s day. The 
different focus of each, within the same overarching theme, almost necessarily involves different 
vocabulary and different structures. Certainly, the divergence between the two enriches, rather than 
diminishes, the series in a way that a video course that dovetailed completely with the written one would 
not.  It does, however, also require more effort on the part of the teacher to determine which course to use, 
or how to integrate the two, especially since WLT and WLV are not cross-referencing. 
While the Student Book clearly identifies which CD tracks correspond to which textbook activities, 
neither the WLV Student Book nor the video reference each other. WLV’s introduction indicates only that 
both options are possible: WLV may be used "in conjunction with the World Link  textbooks, or as the 
basis of a stand-alone course" (p. iii). Yet, WLV does not include group or pair work, and thus, consonant 
with the series’ communicative approach in WLT (discussed below), would not appear suitable for 
exclusive use in a communicative classroom.  More specific guidelines about integrating the series into 
such a classroom would be helpful. More broadly, the series as a whole could benefit from more 
information in a preface or introduction that would highlight the book’s features and describe its 
approach.  The only general information about the series approach in WLT is on the Student Book’s back 
cover, and its website is flagged at the bottom of some text pages but not introduced specifically. 
Analogously, it would be helpful if the existence of the very useful video transcripts that follow the final 
unit of WLV was introduced, or otherwise noted, earlier.  
The global perspective of World Link is commendably realized through a variety of different features: 
characters of different nationalities featured in the City Living segments of WLV;  interviewees from 
around the world who speak in the Global Viewpoints segments; the cross-cultural content of many of the 
unit topics in WLT; and the short World Links inserts in the Student Book that report interesting 
worldwide facts. The series as a whole is dynamic and stimulating. In the video course, these qualities are 
evidenced by video clips which are entertaining, engaging, and relatively fast-paced, without the stilted 
and flat delivery that characterizes some non-authentic materials. The creativity and high-interest level in 
the textbook is reflected in the book’s visual appeal, contemporary orientation, and wide range of 
interesting activities in each unit. The drawbacks to both WLT and WLV relate to potential problems in 
how some of this creative content may translate to successful implementation by the learner. As there are 
clear distinctions between the two courses, and because WLV is presented as, optionally, a stand-alone 
course, this review discusses each course separately below.  
World Links Textbook Course (WLT)   
The 12 units of the Student Book are each divided into two lessons. Lesson A is sub-divided into section 
headings with the different skills, "links", that the sections target:  Vocabulary Link, Listening, Speaking, 
Pronunciation, Language Link, and Communication  (Language Link, which primarily addresses 
grammatical structures, could be more aptly named as the other links are surely language skills as well). 
Lesson B contains many of the same sections, except for a Reading and Writing link, instead of the 
Speaking and Pronunciation link (see Figure 1 for a Lesson B excerpt). As a result, there is a greater 
reliance on the accompanying CD in Lesson A. A review unit follows every three units and includes 
Storyboard, and See It and Say It sections geared to producing independent student conversation. 
Ruth Mendel Review of World Link Intro 
 
Language Learning & Technology 21 
 
Figure 1. Sample Student Book Writing and Communication activities (p. 113) 
The difficulty level of each unit varies within the links. The Speaking and Pronunciation links, which 
correspond to CD tracks, are basic listen-and-repeat exercises that conform more to an audiolingual than a 
communicative model. Lessons target stressed syllables, rising and falling intonation, possessives, 
contractions and reduced speech, among other subjects. As a result, these CD activities seem lacking in 
utility for classroom use where instructors could more profitably carry out such exercises themselves, if 
deemed useful, and thereby calibrate the exercise to the students’ performance – repeating words and 
phrases which students have difficulty pronouncing and moving on when mastery is demonstrated.  
Alternatively, grouped together at the end of each unit, these CD exercises could provide useful at-home 
reinforcement.  The Listening Link provides beginning level CD activities that are more suitable for 
Ruth Mendel Review of World Link Intro 
 
Language Learning & Technology 22 
classroom use, especially those that require holistic comprehension of a passage rather than ability to 
match the word that is heard to the written word.  Examples of such listening activities include 
comprehending what different people are doing, what they are eating, and what event they will attend 
(WLT, pp. 37, 40, 47, 7l). In rare instances, listening activities are confusing: In an activity on matching 
spoken information to a family picture, one speaker says, "That’s my grandmother," when, in fact, there is 
no grandmother in the corresponding picture. In another exercise where the student must circle the correct 
family tree, two would seem to be possible candidates (WLT, pp. 56, 69).  
At the other end of the continuum of difficulty level, the Reading Links contain passages that are 
stimulating and interesting, but also much more difficult for the targeted lower level learners. One 
passage consists of a web site that rates digital gadgets; another contains interviews with college students 
about who pays for a date; two cross-cultural passages describe international food festivals and the 
experience of living with a host family (WLT, pp. 23, 97, 53, 111). These varied readings necessarily 
introduce a great deal of new vocabulary, and, due to absent supplementary pre-reading or other activities, 
may be beyond the required proficiency level of the students. 
The communicative emphasis of the book is its chief strength. It is evidenced in an interactive framework 
of meaningful pair work and group activities that include charts for students to complete with one 
another, classmate interviews, find-the-difference activities, role-plays, and ask-and-answer boxes for 
personal reflections on the unit theme . Overall, the questions and discussion topics are engaging in tone, 
natural rather than artificial, and pointed enough to elicit concrete responses while open-ended enough to 
enable students to express their own views with their own language.  Students describe their favorite 
vacation places (p. 21),  interview each other about weekend plans (p. 79), tell each other about important 
holidays in their home countries (p. 80), and explore what jobs would best fit their classmates’ skills 
(p.133). 
The Student Book incorporates language that is rich in contractions, reduced speech, and informal 
expressions, and innovatively presents information through illustrations of, and activities based on, the 
real-life venues where students see, hear, and use it – student ID cards, résumés, web pages, bulletin 
board announcements, emails, voicemail messages, classified ads, business cards, and even post-it notes. 
Both of these features, realistic language and the actual contemporary settings in which students will 
encounter it, reduce the artificiality of classroom language learning and promote the key objective of the 
communicative classroom--enabling students to use the language they find inside the classroom outside of 
it (Brown, 2001, p. 42).  The book also integrates games within the units, which is a particular boon to 
teachers who must often look for such supplementary activities outside the textbook, and which has been 
noted to serve a communicative purpose in outcome-oriented use of language (Helgeson, 1987). These 
class activities, linked to the unit theme and clearly formatted, are easy for instructors to utilize and 
include both more familiar games (Twenty Questions and Two Truths and a Lie, for example) and creative 
new ones, such as a Trivial Pursuit styled Country and City game.   
The chief disadvantage of WLT is that the linguistic foundations given for these creative activities are not 
always adequate. Students are neither given enough exposure to the relevant language structures nor 
provided with enough opportunities to practice them. The information on vocabulary and structures is 
sometimes given disproportionately little attention on the page compared to visual information, 
particularly in the Vocabulary Link sections. Prompts and modeling often appear in very small "bubbles"; 
structures are often conveyed through small images of post-it notes, complete with thumbtack. As a 
result, the visuals in the book sometimes dwarf, rather than enhance, the linguistic information.  Overall, 
the linguistic information would benefit from being more prominently displayed and emphasized if 
students are expected to use it. There is also, at times, not enough context given to make vocabulary 
comprehensible. Inexpensive and expensive are repeatedly used, for example, without any attempt at 
transmitting the meaning that either a visual or corresponding CD track with a comparison could fairly 
easily provide.   
Ruth Mendel Review of World Link Intro 
 
Language Learning & Technology 23 
Other shortcomings of WLT are the Reading Links, which introduce a great deal of new vocabulary, yet 
do not provide pre-reading support or otherwise help students understand key terms. Finally, certain 
exercises, chart activities as well as others, require only one-word answers from students. A group work 
gift-exchange activity, for example, involves students writing down the name of a gift and telling their 
partner the name of different gifts they receive from classmates (WLT, p. 26). These activities would 
benefit from minor modifications that would still retain an open-ended approach, perhaps even simply 
prompts to answer in full sentences, geared to eliciting more than single-word answers. In general, the 
very strength of the book in containing so much rich and contemporary vocabulary is accompanied by the 
challenge of  providing adequate context so that vocabulary central to completing the activity is 
meaningful and understood by low-level learners.  
World Links Video Course (WLV) 
Each of the twelve video units in WLV contains two segments: City Living and Global Viewpoints.  The 
six characters who perform in all of the City Living vignettes are twenty-something friends from different 
countries living and working in New York City. The Global Viewpoints video clips contain prepared 
interviews about the unit topic, with people from around the world speaking grammatically and 
comprehensibly – although also often in the accents of their home countries.  As a result, the language 
used in these Global Viewpoints clips is commendably authentic and provides a concrete translation of the 
series’ global perspective. It transmits English as a rich international language, flavored with the many 
different accents of its speakers.   
 
Figure 2. Sample While You Watch activity, Video Course workbook (p. 60)   
Ruth Mendel Review of World Link Intro 
 
Language Learning & Technology 24 
The workbook contains Real English inserts that explain the nuances of such spoken expressions as kind 
of, gee, pretty big, excuse me?, yeah? and excellent!  The Global Viewpoints material is appropriately 
tailored to the beginning level and serves as a useful reinforcement of the language focus of each unit. 
The more difficult City Living clips are fast-paced sitcom style vignettes that contain brief, engaging, and 
often humorous narratives delivered in natural-sounding, unstilted language. These attributes elevate the 
City Living segments above the usual fare of instructional videos, which have been categorized as a genre 
as overly prescriptive and artificial (Garza, 1996). The humor in some vignettes serves to transmit the 
grammar point effectively but unobtrusively. In Unit 3, for example, the progressive tense is taught by 
having one character revel in her new cell phone and its "bells and whistles" by repeatedly (and 
excessively) calling her friend to ask, "What are you doing now?" (WLV Workbook, pp. 26, 31), in an 
authentic use of the present progressive tense. Unit 8 similarly teaches prepositions of time effectively – 
and with a light touch – by having friends arrive at a parade and gradually realize they have mistaken the 
date (WLV Workbook, pp. 58-63).   
In several other units, however, the very stylistic techniques that maximize high-interest levels may in 
fact impair comprehension for the targeted low-level learners.  Unit 7 discusses Mike’s "busy" day, which 
is anything but busy. The entire clip thus revolves around understanding the sarcastic use of the word 
busy when learners at this level are trying to master literal meaning.  The same unit introduces the term 
"friend" friend (WLV Workbook, p. 104, video transcript), even though understanding the nuances of 
"friend" friend implying a romantic attachment is difficult for an advanced learner, let alone one at a low-
beginning level. 
A narrative device used in other vignettes is to have a role-play within a role-play: the characters 
portrayed by the actors in WLV  themselves pretend to be different characters. Thus, in Unit 1, the 
characters pretend to be famous actors; in Unit 12, one friend pretend-interviews another friend for a job 
(WLV Workbook, pp. 4-5, 92-93).  In the first example, in particular, this double layer of identities may 
be excessively difficult for low-level learners to follow, both because no signal words are used to let the 
listener know this is a game, and because the actors swiftly change identities: "I’m Katie Couric," says 
one character, but then is told, "After you, J. Lo," referring to her previous impersonation as Jennifer 
Lopez (WLV Workbook, p. 100, video transcript). The confusion may be further compounded since many 
international students do not know who these "famous" people are. 
In another unit, the visual information is confusing: Roberto’s Family Picture (Unit 6) refers to a child’s 
drawing of her family used to teach unit vocabulary. An interesting twist, but it would be more helpful for 
a beginning learner if the images for grandfather, cousin, and uncle did not all resemble each other due to 
a child’s drawing ability, but instead had some verisimilitude to the generational differences in 
appearance that actually exist. The overall characteristic of these units of requiring reading beyond the 
text at least raises the question of whether an approach overly concerned with authenticity and learner 
appeal may in fact tax learner abilities at this level and result in less, rather than more, comprehension.   
WLV is well-designed in its division of each segment into Preview, Before You Watch, While You Watch 
and After You Watch sections with different activities for each. (See Figure 2 for a sample page of a While 
You Watch activity.) The provision of subtitles for the dialogues is also a pedagogically useful way of 
maximizing learners’ comprehension by enabling them to correlate aural input to written words (Garza, 
1996). Problematic, however, are certain While You Watch activities, which excessively take the viewers’ 
attention away from the screen, where their interest should be. In the very first unit of this low-beginning 
level, an activity involves putting six sentences in chronological order and also writing the six full 
sentences (WLV Workbook, p. 12).  Other While You Watch activities instruct students to check which 
statements are true and false and correct the false ones. Video in general is useful precisely because it 
provides a fuller communication framework than a listening tape (Garza, 1996; Lonergan, 1984) but that 
strength of the medium can only be realized if students watch the tape as  
Ruth Mendel Review of World Link Intro 
 
Language Learning & Technology 25 
[i]t is usually difficult for learners to undertake extensive writing – or reading – tasks while 
watching the screen. Viewing guides which are to be completed simultaneously with viewing the 
video sequence should therefore be so constructed that the reading and writing load for the 
learner is kept to a minimum (Lonergan, 1984, p. 11). 
In light of this caution against distracting activities concurrent with video watching, other While You 
Watch  activities involving only matching or circling the correct answer are more effective. 
CONCLUSION 
World Link Intro as a whole would profit from clearer guidelines about incorporating the series into the 
classroom. Exclusive use of the Video Course would not seem adequate because of the previously 
mentioned lack of group work, yet its refreshingly unstilted, stimulating clips would provide a welcome 
addition to the Student Book. However, since neither the Video Course nor the Student Book reference 
each other, using them together requires that a teacher think through how to integrate the two types of 
instructional materials and exercise selectivity in formulating an approach. Such selectivity is also 
required in integrating the CD into the classroom, as many of the tracks interwoven with unit activities are 
more suitable for at-home use. Clarification and augmentation may also be required in both courses – for 
vocabulary that needs meaningful contexts and activities that would  benefit from expanded prompts in 
WLT and vignettes that rely on subtle linguistic meanings in WLV. Of course, using any textbook involves 
selectivity, but the effort to do so is magnified when one is dealing with a series with so many 
components. Given the high-interest level and creativity of the series, it may be well worth the effort.  
Augmenting a dynamic creative series with more background information and omitting some parts of it 
that are not tailored to the level may ultimately prove more successful in a language classroom than 
searching for ways to enliven a level-appropriate, but not particularly stimulating, textbook. 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Ruth Mendel is an M.A. candidate and Teaching Assistant in the TESOL Program at Michigan State 
University.  She has taught ESL Reading and Writing at the English Language Center at Michigan State, 
as well as EAP Reading and Writing and Listening at the English Language Institute at the University of 
Michigan.  
E-mail: RuMendel@aol.com 
 
REFERENCES 
Brown, H.D. (2001).  Teaching by principles: An interactive approach to language pedagogy.  Second 
Edition. White Plains, NY: Addison Wesley Longman.  
Garza, T. (1996).  The message is the medium: Using video materials to facilitate foreign language 
performance. Texas Papers in Foreign Language Education, 2 (2), 1-18.  
Helgesen, M. (1987). Playing in English: Games and the L2 classroom in Japan. In S. Savignon and M. 
Berns (Eds.), Initiatives in communicative language teaching II (pp. 205-225).   Reading, MA: Addison-
Wesley.  
Lonergan, J. (1984). Video in language teaching. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Stempleski, S., Douglas, N., Morgan, J., & Curtis, A. (2005).  World link: Developing English fluency.  
Intro Student Book.  Boston, MA: Thomson Heinle.  
Ruth Mendel Review of World Link Intro 
 
Language Learning & Technology 26 
Stempleski, S., Douglas, N., Morgan, J., & Curtis, A. (2005).   World link: Developing English Fluency.  
Intro Video Course Workbook.  Boston, MA: Thomson Heinle.  
 
