Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num1/emerging/ 
January, 2006, Volume 10, Number 1 
pp. 3-8 
 
Copyright © 2006, ISSN 1094-3501 3 
ON THE NET 
Dante: Digital and on the Web  
Jean W. LeLoup 
SUNY Cortland 
Robert Ponterio 
SUNY Cortland 
INTRODUCTION 
Language programs have tended to shift away from the focus on the classical literary studies that 
dominated university language majors for so long. Opening up the profession to small "c" culture and 
language study for other purposes strengthens our programs. Literary studies, however, continue to be a 
major interest of many who are passionate about their language. Great works continue to draw new 
specialists into the field and serve to bring the history of a language, its people, and their culture to life. 
Literary works serve as examples of the power and beauty of language at its best. Helping to make such 
texts more accessible to learners, the Web can make use of hypertext and multimedia to provide context 
that is so often lacking for those without the general background knowledge that a good reader is assumed 
to possess.  
DIGITAL DANTE 
 
 
 
Digital Dante, a project supported by the Institute for Learning Technologies at Columbia University, is 
one example of an effort to treat classical texts with a modern perspective and make them available 
through communications technologies to a much wider audience. 
About the Project: This descriptive overview, found under the Resources heading 
(http://dante.ilt.columbia.edu/new/net/) explains the Digital Dante Project, identifying it as an online, 
multimedia Dante-related academic resource that presents traditional elements of scholarly research 
through new technological means, specifically digital technology.  The work treated is The Divine 
LeLoup and Ponterio Dante: Digital and on the Web 
 
Language Learning & Technology 4 
Comedy, and the main translation used for the project is that of Henry Wadsworth Longfellow. The 
project seeks to provide multimedia supplementary materials to those studying the original text, enabling 
readers to envision the poet’s meaning in an expanded and multi-dimensional way. By taking advantage 
of the technologies currently available, this project presents a 21st century illuminated manuscript of 
Dante’s masterpiece. Indeed, the project is described as a multimedia translation of Dante's text. Though 
the integration of multimedia is not extensive yet, at the time of this writing, the features of the site that 
are already in place are quite interesting for anyone studying Dante.  
About Dante: Includes a short biography and chronology of Dante’s life. This section also provides links 
to Web sites for Dante Studies and Medieval Studies.  
 
 
 
The Comedy: The project presents The Divine Comedy in its original form, along with translations by 
Longfellow and also by Allen Mandelbaum. One may chose to view the original with a translation by 
Longfellow, the original with a translation by Mandelbaum, or both translations together without the 
original text.   
 
LeLoup and Ponterio Dante: Digital and on the Web 
 
Language Learning & Technology 5 
This presentation of the translations, one above the other, allows for easy comparison with the original or 
between translations. The texts are annotated with hyperlinks to a text box at the bottom of the page. 
These notes contain comments about the wording, symbolism, related works, personages, historical notes, 
etc. This text box can be resized for easier access. 
 
 
 
There is a second column for annotations, but this does not appear to have any links at the time of this 
writing. We assume that this is intended for the multimedia annotations described in the project overview. 
This presentation of the Comedy is already a very powerful tool for studying the text. The implementation 
of HTML frames is a bit inconsistent in this section, causing windows to sometimes appear where they 
are not expected or new information to appear in frames where they do not seem to be intended. But this 
seems a minor problem.  
 In the Classroom: The General Resources section includes a set of resources for use in the Classroom. 
Study and research guides, lessons plans, as well as a sample syllabus for a class on Art in the Time of 
Dante are available here. 
 
LeLoup and Ponterio Dante: Digital and on the Web 
 
Language Learning & Technology 6 
There is some overlap between sections as the Web Resources and Maps are accessible from multiple 
locations in the site. The Web Resources are a lengthy index detailing all hyperlinks on the site.  
Bibliography: A rather extensive bibliography for Dante studies is offered. It includes scholarly works, 
translations, and references to selected films and videos.  
Image Collections: Here one finds images inspired by Dante’s work, reflecting historical and literary 
events. Other images are illustrative of artistic interpretation—both medieval and modern—of the action 
and description of The Divine Comedy. In addition, slides from the John Beall collection document, 
among other things, structures and architecture germane to the time (e.g., Dante’s house in Florence). 
These images are a rich source for interpretation and discussion of the work itself, as well as the social 
and historical background of the times. Maps by various artists give renditions of Dante’s inferno, 
purgatory, and paradise. The structures of these three places are also given.  
 
 
 
The Library: This section includes other works by Dante, links to works Dante read and consulted (e.g., 
the Aeneid), scholarly references, and some student papers on topics salient to the The Divine Comedy. 
LeLoup and Ponterio Dante: Digital and on the Web 
 
Language Learning & Technology 7 
 
 
DANTE ALIGHIERI ON THE WEB 
 
 
 
This site is another example of an effort to use technology in order to make classical texts available to the 
public and provide a context in which the works can be read and understood. This site, maintained by an 
individual rather than being an institutional project, offers information about the poet, Dante Alighieri, his 
life, works, and time period. It is a labor of love by Carlo Alberto Furia in the Computer Science 
Department at the Politecnico di Milano—which just goes to prove that interest in the humanities is 
everywhere. His home page has a running commentary about improvements and additions to his site as 
well as suggestions for optimization of browser settings for proper viewing of the pages.  
 
The sections on Why Dante?, His time, and His 
life offer a brief justification for the site and 
cursory background information on the poet and 
the history, society, and culture of his time. These 
explanations are hyperlinked to other sections of 
the site for further information, such as a Glossary 
of terms and a geographic map indicating places 
mentioned. 
LeLoup and Ponterio Dante: Digital and on the Web 
 
Language Learning & Technology 8 
The section on His work contains links to information about all of Dante’s works. His works in Italian as 
well as in Latin are included.  All of these texts are available in the Texts Download Area in the following 
formats: HTML, RFT, Text only, and PDF and LaTeX source. 
The Miscellaneous portion of the site contains FAQs, a section on Dante’s Events, information on 
Dante’s burial and the disposition of his corpse, a Quotations page where quotes are grouped by topic, an 
art gallery with illustrations of The Divine Comedy, and even a page commenting on the connection 
between Dante and the movie Hannibal, with references to the poet contained therein. In the Audioclips 
portion of this section, sound files are available to aid the reader in the proper pronunciation of the titles 
of the works. 
CONCLUSION 
These sites begin as sources of Dante's texts, but they use the power of the Web's multimedia and 
hypertext features to connect the reader to the background knowledge that contributes so much to the 
connection that the authors clearly feel with The Divine Comedy. By sharing this connection with other 
readers, they are not just teaching a text, they are communicating a passion.  
 
