Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num2/speced.html 
September 2006, Volume 10, Number 2 
pp. 2-3 
 
Copyright © 2006, ISSN 1094-3501 2 
 
 
FROM THE SPECIAL ISSUE EDITOR 
It is my pleasure to introduce this special issue of LLT on electronic literacy. The 
contributing authors take on the large and challenging questions that new forms of 
electronic communication provoke, as they examine how electronic texts are affecting 
second language learning and teaching. The four studies treat an array of non print-based 
ways of reading and knowing the world that contemporary learners bring to their 
language learning and tackle the important question of what this then means to 
contemporary language instruction, narrowly, and the nature of electronic literacy more 
broadly. Each of the four pieces takes a unique perspective and establishes important 
research terrain in electronic literacy and language education; at the same time, the 
authors’ perspectives blend around the concern for what new forms of communication 
imply for generating and understanding meaning in a highly media-oriented, networked 
world.  
In her investigation of cross-cultural relational power structures and their shaping of 
second language email message construction, Chi-Fen Chen presents a detailed case 
study of Taiwanese graduate student Ling, the development of her L2 pragmatic 
understanding, and, consequently, her ESL email literacy. Chen tracks the trajectory and 
influences of Ling’s experiential learning about appropriate forms of address for U.S. 
professors when communicating by email; something that she and many students like 
her are rarely taught as part of their English language curriculum. The author 
underscores the need to evaluate the linguistic and literacy demands of contemporary 
cross-cultural electronic communications and a culture’s "hidden rules" to 
instructionally accommodate the needs of language learners regarding electronic 
literacy. 
Mark Evan Nelson presents the cases of four English language learners and their 
processes of crafting self-presentations using multimedia resources. In an adjunct 
activity to their college composition courses, these four young women undertook and 
reflected on assembling multimodal resources to express their sense of multicultural 
identity. Evans frames his analyses of these processes using a multimodal literacy 
framework which directs our attention specifically to the interstices of meaning/identity 
representation that occur between images, text and images, audience and multimedia 
writers.  
In Playing the Text, Paul Gruba sets out to determine the actions learners of Japanese 
take when playing authentic, target-language video. Using a talk aloud protocol, Gruba 
queries learners as they watch recorded Japanese news broadcasts. He employs the lens 
of media 'play' in his categorization and analysis of students' viewing activity, 
emphasizing the need for, and utility of, taking a media literacy approach in language 
teaching and learning.  
Jin Sook Lee presents a thorough and fascinating look at the dynamic, evolving 
language of bilingual adolescents online. Korean heritage learners in the US, like many 
adolescent groups around the world, are generating their own hybrid language complete 
with conventions understood by in-group readers and writers. Lee probes the many 
social, ideological, and identity-forming impetuses behind the e-practices of two Korean 
heritage speakers and assesses the impact of these practices on their heritage and English 
language development. While explicating the complex, bilingual e-text genre knowledge 
these young women have both mastered and participate in developing, and the  
 From the Special Issue Editor 
 
Language Learning & Technology 3 
 
 
contribution of this activity to the maintenance and development of their languages, Lee 
also underscores the need for heritage learners to be instructed in the differences 
between standard and non-standard language forms. 
While taking a sociocultural approach, each study focuses on meaning-making from a 
slightly adjacent angle - Chen, the contextual; Nelson, the representational; Gruba, the 
activity; and Lee, the form. Each empirically examines the generation of meaning via 
electronic media and lays out the implications of this generation for language education. 
Each additionally underscores the need for these socially evolving literacy practices to 
not only be examined but problematized against the backdrop of formal discourse 
traditions and practices. As a whole, these studies open up new and exciting directions in 
the study of second language electronic literacy. 
I’d like to thank all of the many reviewers who contributed their time, care, and 
expertise to the genesis of this special issue. Special thanks to Editorial Assistant Hunter 
Hatfield, Associate Editor Rick Kern, and the LLT editors for their patience, support and 
stimulating interaction around the topic of electronic literacy. 
Carla Meskill 
Special Issue Editor 
 
