Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num3/shin/ 
September 2006, Volume 10, Number 3 
pp. 65-84 
 
Copyright © 2006, ISSN 1094-3501 65 
ESL STUDENTS' COMPUTER-MEDIATED COMMUNICATION 
PRACTICES: CONTEXT CONFIGURATION 
Dong-Shin Shin 
University of Massachusetts, Amherst 
 
ABSTRACT 
This paper examines how context is configured in ESL students’ language learning 
practices through computer-mediated communication (CMC). Specifically, I focus on how 
a group of ESL students jointly constructed the context of their CMC activities through 
interactional patterns and norms, and how configured affordances within the CMC 
environment mediated their learning experiences. After a brief review of relevant 
studies of CMC in the literature, I discuss ecological perspectives of language learning as 
a core construct of this study, to explain contextual fluidity in relation to learners’ agency 
in their learning. Next, I present an ethnographic study of how members of an ESL class 
constructed a community of social practices through synchronous CMC. The findings 
indicate that (a) the constructed interactional patterns and norms of the students’ CMC 
activities represented group dynamics among the participants, (b) the participants’ roles in 
joint construction of the activities reflected their language socialization experiences, and 
(c) the activities provided a way for spousal participants to assume academic identities, 
while becoming a social space for academic gatherings. This study highlights the fluidity 
of CMC language learning contexts; fluid contexts entail learners’ agency in dialogic 
engagements with the contextual elements of the learning environment as language 
socialization processes. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Research studies of computer-mediated communication (CMC) use in language education have addressed 
overall aspects of context in language learning and teaching, including technologies, linguistic features, 
pedagogy, curriculum, social materials, and social discourses on CMC (Belz, 2002, 2003; Belz & Müller-
Hartmann, 2003; Chun, 1994; Kern, 1995, 2000; Kinginger, Gourves-Hayward, & Simpson, 1999; 
Kramsch & Thorne, 2002; Meskill & Anthony, 2005; Meskill & Ranglova, 2000; Thorne, 2003; Ware, 
2005). These layers of context show that the occurrence of social interactions in language learning needs 
to be understood in relation not only to immediate situational contexts, but also to the broad cultural and 
social contexts shaping immediate situations. The conceptual complexity of context in language and 
literacy education can be captured by a definition that considers context as a relationship between a focal 
event and the field of action within which that event is embedded (Rex, Green, Dixon, & the Santa 
Barbara Classroom Discourse Group, 1998). As such, the conceptual complexity of context has been 
concerned with micro and macro dimensions of context since the beginning of CMC use in language 
learning and teaching practices (see Duranti & Goodwin, 1992; Gebhard, 2004; Holliday, 1994; Kramsch, 
1993 for the concept of context in language education).    
The CMC literature illustrates shifts of focus to different layers of context. Early on, research into uses of 
CMC in language learning and teaching looked at the linguistic context of CMC text to examine how 
language learners could improve certain communication functions and learn linguistic features through 
CMC activities (Blake, 2000; Chun, 1994; Kern, 1995; Ortega, 1997; Pellettieri, 2000; Smith, 2003; 
Sotillo, 2000; Toyoda & Harrison, 2002; Tudini, 2003; Warschauer, 1996). Later, the focus shifted to 
Dong-Shin Shin ESL Students' CMC Practices: Context Configuration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 66 
contextual elements outside the CMC text, demonstrated by studies of intercultural telecollaborative 
projects that addressed issues at the institutional and societal levels of two different countries (Lee, 2004). 
Researchers studied how long-distance collaborative CMC activities support language development and 
intercultural understanding, providing access to speakers of the target language (Belz, 2002; Belz & 
Müller-Hartmann, 2003; Kern, 2000; Kinginger, et al., 1999; Kramsch & Thorne, 2002; Meskill & 
Anthony, 2005;Meskill & Ranglova, 2000; Thorne, 2003). The aforementioned studies examined how 
online interactions shape or are shaped by contextual elements such as pedagogical, social, and logistical 
factors at two different institutions, and how social discourses of CMC in each university shaped their 
CMC activities. Specifically, they demonstrated how global, sociocultural aspects of long-distance 
collaborative CMC contexts—e.g., power relationships, history, and social discourses of CMC—shape 
intercultural CMC activities. 
Recently, studies of telecollaborative projects have examined how language learners jointly construct the 
contexts of their CMC activities, as part of their focus on tensions among intercultural communication 
partners (Belz, 2002, 2003; Kramsch & Thorne, 2002; O’Dowd, 2003; Ware, 2005; Ware & Kramsch, 
2005). The tensions result from social and institutional dimensions (Belz, 2002, 2003; Ware, 2005), 
different social discourses surrounding CMC genres and tools (Belz & Müller-Hartmann, 2003; Kramsch 
& Thorne, 2002; Ware, 2005), and sociocultural values regarding foreign language learning (Ware, 2005). 
This kind of jointly constructed interaction by learners can also be examined in the CMC practices of a 
single, locally situated classroom; this will contribute to addressing a need to bring current uses of CMC 
into various situations beyond the long-distance telecommunication projects of university-based language 
programs and encourage more language teachers to draw on CMC in their teaching practices. Studying 
CMC use in various settings helps to bring about an understanding of the complexity of its contexts in 
language learning and teaching. By exploring language learners’ construction of learning context in 
online interactions, one can see how participants jointly construct interactional patterns and norms 
through active dialogues with contextual elements that surround their learning at both micro and macro 
levels, and how their identities/subjectivities are impacted by the co-constructed interactional patterns and 
norms in their language socialization processes. Furthermore, this kind of study can also illustrate 
multiple dimensions of language learning, which highlights the fact that language learning is not only an 
issue of acquiring linguistic forms and functions, but also of developing a new self (Kramsch, 1993, 
2000).    
In this study, informed by Ware’s (2005) examination of a telecollaborative communication project 
between American college students and German students, I look into how a group of ESL students co-
constructed online interactions of synchronous CMC practices within the dynamics of their group, while 
engaging with contextual elements of their CMC activities. In particular, I examine how the students 
construed and configured the context of their online interactions by constructing online discourses. 
Through ecological perspectives of language learning (Kramsch, 2002; Leather & van Dam, 2003; van 
Lier, 2000, 2002), I explore the following questions:  
 
• What kinds of interactional patterns are a group of ESL students jointly constructing?  
• What kinds of interactional norms are the ESL students establishing within computer-mediated 
social interactions? 
• How do the ESL students utilize CMC activities for their linguistic, social, and academic goals?  
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK  
Ecological Perspectives of Second Language Learning  
The theoretical frameworks I use to explore the contexts of language learning practices are based on 
ecological perspectives. Social and educational ecology researchers (Bateson, 2000; Gibson, 1979) 
Dong-Shin Shin ESL Students' CMC Practices: Context Configuration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 67 
maintain that human learning occurs in an integrated entity involving cognitive, social, and environmental 
elements, and it is only through an integrative perspective that the full picture of human activity can be 
captured. In the field of second language acquisition, this integrative approach to language learning has 
been noted in recent studies (Kramsch, 2002; Leather & van Dam, 2003; van Lier, 2000, 2002) that 
explain the notion of unfixed context in language learning by focusing on the learner’s active role in 
configuring a "semiotic budget" from the learning situation. 
Regarding the concept of unfixed learning context, ecological perspectives of language learning 
emphasize learners’ diachronic and synchronic engagement with the contextual elements of a specific 
setting; this feature is associated with sociocultural theories, which argue that language learning is a 
situated social practice that occurs through social interactions at a specific time and place (Bakhtin, 1981; 
Lantolf, 2000a, 2000b; Vygotsky, 1978; Wertsch, 1991). The social practice of learning is tool-mediated 
and involves the use of cultural semiotic artifacts, based on the cultural and social norms of a discourse 
community. Uses of cultural artifacts influence or mediate individuals’ perceptual and conceptual 
boundaries, interests, worldviews, and patterns of thought. Thus, tool-mediated social practices of 
learning influence ways in which learners configure contextual elements of the learning environment. The 
configured "semiotic budgets" for learning tasks are representations of how learners engage with the 
learning environment diachronically and synchronically.  
Looking into learners’ agency in the construction of learning contexts, van Lier (2000) uses ecological 
metaphors such as affordances (Gibson, 1979) and emergence in language learning in lieu of input and 
output, to represent the relationship that learners make with the learning environment. The affordances 
consist of "demands and requirements, opportunities and limitations, rejections and invitations, and 
enablements and constraints" (van Lier, 2000, p. 253). Within the ecological perspectives of language 
learning, the learning environment is composed of "semiotic budgets" that are figured into affordances for 
learning. Learners create opportunities and constraints for learning through active dialogues with the 
learning environment reflective of learning and life experiences. 
Learners’ construction of their learning context is based on the affordances they make regarding learning 
activities that are intertwined with language socialization (Ochs, 1990; Schieffelin & Ochs, 1986; Willett, 
1995). Configuring affordances is a culturally and socially grounded meaning making process, which 
leads learners to explicitly and implicitly learn uses of language that are aligned with the norms, values, 
beliefs, and hierarchies of a social group—discourses of a shared social community—through interactions 
with people who have expertise in or mastery of the discourses. While constructing affordances for 
language learning tasks in socialization practices, language learners configure contextual elements 
dialogically, reflecting and appropriating social voices in meaning-making processes that draw on 
semiotic tools (Bakhtin, 1981). The practice of configuring affordances is a social practice in which the 
perspectives of self and other are exchanged in the roles that learners take on as private, public, and social 
selves. Through this kind of social practice, language learners identify themselves as members of a social 
group while simultaneously performing as individuals (Kramsch, 1985, 2000).  
The way language learners configure contexts occurs in joint construction among their communication 
partners. Joint construction occurs within group dynamics reflective of participants’ subject positions in 
their learning contexts. In jointly constructing learning contexts, not every learner participating in a 
computer-mediated communication activity is engaged in the same process of configuring contextual 
elements in the learning environment, in that each learner’s ways of interacting with the environment 
involve social and cultural practices that are developed in their own discourse communities. Ways of 
configuring context are varied among ESL learners who have not only different linguistic and cultural 
backgrounds, but also different ways of using the tools acquired in their primary discourse communities. 
The learners do not act upon the same activity system that the teacher has prepared for the learning task 
and, therefore, cannot achieve the same outcome planned before the activity. As such, in this study, the 
learners’ perceptions of and actions within the environment of synchronous chatting afford different 
Dong-Shin Shin ESL Students' CMC Practices: Context Configuration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 68 
learning experiences for individual learners because each student brings unique schooling, language 
learning, social, professional, and computer experiences from his or her own life trajectory into specific 
learning situations and reconfigures the contextual elements accordingly. The different affordances that 
each person obtains from the dynamic interplay of the cultural, environmental, historical, perceptual, and 
social dimensions of their learning processes lead to the emergence of various levels of goal achievement. 
The concept of affordances (van Lier, 2000, 2002) is connected to the notion that context is fluid and 
explains how learners as social agents configure contextual elements and construct the context of 
learning.  
RESEARCH METHOD 
Context 
This ethnographic case study was conducted in an intermediate adult ESL class with 16 students at a 
university in the northeastern United States. The class was affiliated with a university language program1 
serving primarily international graduate students, visiting scholars, and their spouses. This program was 
designed to help international students and scholars adjust to American life and to develop English 
proficiency by focusing on oral communication. The teacher (who was not the researcher) explained that 
the students, newcomers in the local university town, wanted more opportunities to socialize, 
opportunities not only to know one another better but also to help one another settle in the area2. The 
teacher also expressed his belief that informal social gatherings would allow students to "break the ice" in 
a large class and to strengthen social bonds among the students. 
However, the class faced problems in securing a place to meet comfortably and conveniently for an entire 
semester. While trying to find such a place, the teacher found that most of the students were comfortable 
communicating with family members and friends in their countries via e-mail, and that many of them had 
had online chatting experiences. He suggested that online chatting through a free instant messaging tool 
would help solve the problem of arranging a physical space for extracurricular social gatherings. The 
students liked the idea of getting together in a virtual space3. For CMC meetings, the participants used 
MSN Instant MessengerTM, a free CMC tool for those who subscribe to MSN or Hotmail. Figure 1 shows 
the design of the interface.  
 
Figure 1. MSN Instant Messenger interface 
Dong-Shin Shin ESL Students' CMC Practices: Context Configuration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 69 
The Participants 
All of the participants in the study were ESL students from northeast Asia, with the exception of a single 
student from Peru. All of them had received at least a bachelor's degree in their home countries and were 
affiliated with the local university as graduate students or visiting scholars, or were spouses who had 
accompanied their husbands. The teacher, Tom, was also a graduate student in the local university. Table 
1 shows relevant personal information about the participants.  
Table 1. Participants 
 
Name4 Age 
 
Computer 
skill 
English 
typing skill 
Gender Length 
of Stay 
Nationality Occupation 
 
Adam 30s Adv. Int. M 3 Mon. Japan Visiting scholar 
Amy 20s Int. Low F 3 Mon. China Spouse 
Ana 30s Low Low F 1 Y. Peru Spouse 
Chang 40s Int. Low M 6 Mon. China Visiting scholar 
Chuck 30s Adv. Int. M 1Mon. Korea Visiting scholar 
Jen 20s Int. Low F 4 Mon. China Spouse 
Jenny 20s Int. Int. F 2 Mon. Korea Spouse 
Julianne 20s Int. Low F 4 Mon. China Spouse 
Jun 20s Adv. Adv. M 4 Mon. Japan Graduate student 
Lee 40s Adv. Int. M 3 Mon. Korea Visiting scholar 
Lin 40s Low Low F 6 Mon. China Spouse 
Maria 30s Int. Low F 1Y. Korea Spouse 
Steven 20s Adv. Adv. M 3 Mon. China Graduate student 
Sue 30 s Low Low F 6 Mon. Korea Spouse 
Sun 20s Adv. Int. M 1Mon. Korea Visiting scholar 
Tom  30s Adv. Adv. M 30Y. U.S.A. Class teacher 
Vincent 20s Adv. Adv. M 4 Mon. China Graduate student 
 
This information is based on their responses to the survey (see Appendix) I conducted before their first 
chat meeting at the beginning of the semester5. In regards to Table 1, computer skill refers to how 
comfortable and confident the participants were in browsing the Web, e-mailing, and using software for 
creating documents. I distinguished computer skills from English typing skills, because the teacher 
informed me that there was a discrepancy between these two skills among the participants.  
All the visiting scholars majored in engineering or natural sciences and had come to the United States for 
a year of research. All the graduate student and visiting scholar participants were men, and all the spousal 
participants were women. The ESL student participants had close relationships with the teacher. He 
majored in Chinese, had a good command of the language, and taught EFL in Taiwan for three years. 
Procedure 
As an observer, I attended both CMC and face-to-face (FtF) class meetings without being involved in any 
of their activities. The participants held Web-based chat meetings once a week for about one and a half 
hours every Sunday night, logging on from their homes. In CMC meetings, I observed the teacher 
managing chat sessions without logging onto the chat program myself. The FtF meetings happened twice 
a week on Monday and Wednesday nights in a university classroom, with each class lasting two and a 
half hours. The setting was a university classroom with desks, a blackboard at the front, and a whiteboard 
on the side. The participants were seated in a circle, and I sat outside the circle observing and taking notes 
of their FtF class activities. Drawing on my role as an observer, I gathered data from both FtF meetings 
Dong-Shin Shin ESL Students' CMC Practices: Context Configuration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 70 
and Web-based chat meetings for a semester from September to December of 2003. The collected data 
include electronically saved chat meeting transcripts, field notes, recorded class interactions from the FtF 
class meetings, formal and informal interviews with participants, e-mail exchanges between the teacher 
and the ESL participants, and survey information that included the participants’ personal profiles. Even 
though the study focuses on the participants’ online CMC activities, I also collected data from their 
offline FtF class meetings, since the participants’ class conversations could not be easily divided into 
online and offline realms.  
I identified recursive patterns through triangulation of field notes, transcripts of recorded FtF class 
meetings, interview data, and electronically saved chat data. The analytical categories I used include 
constructed interactional patterns and norms, configured affordances regarding the CMC environment, 
and utilizations of CMC activities for linguistic, academic, and social goals. These analytical categories 
are based on interactional sociolinguistics (Goffman, 1959; Gumperz, 1982; Scollon & Scollon, 2001), 
and ecological perspectives of language learning and language socialization (Kramsch, 2002; Leather & 
van Dam, 2003; van Lier, 2000). 
FINDINGS 
Reconstruction of Interactional Patterns 
In the FtF meeting after their first chat meeting, the participants discussed the benefits and drawbacks of 
the chat session. They reported such constraints as fast turn formation, written text as a main mode of 
communication, and discontinuous communication with disrupted interactions (see also Negretti, 1999). 
The participants also reported opportunities/benefits such as being free from the need to go to a physical 
space, no need to worry about pronunciation, and the ability to review ways of speaking with the saved 
chat dialogues for their language learning. The student participants expressed their confusion and 
frustration (see also Werry, 1996), calling the discontinuity of interactions and the disruption of adjacent 
pairs in the large group chat interactions "crazy people’s talk." They mentioned that even though they had 
some experience using Web chat tools before their chat meeting, most of them were not familiar with the 
interactional features that a large group of participants generated. The class discussed ways to reduce 
confusion and frustration by focusing on the nature of synchronous CMC, in particular multiple strands of 
dialogue being generated too quickly and the tendency of strands to disrupt other strands; in the end, the 
class agreed to follow a pre-selected topic for each chat session. They decided to have a person who 
opens a chat room and manages entrance to the room to avoid the problem of multiple chat windows.6 
The students asked Tom to resume his teacher’s position and control entrance to the chat room. Before the 
CMC meetings began in September, the participants planned to meet informally without consideration of 
their roles as teacher and student. The affordances that they configured from the first CMC meeting led 
them to reframe their CMC activities. With all these changes, however, the students still wanted to have a 
whole class meeting, even after having faced the difficulties of CMC meetings in big groups. They did 
not like the idea of dividing the class into groups. 
The changes put Tom back into a "traditional" teacher role and reshaped the interactional structure of the 
CMC meetings, as can be seen in the following chat extract7 (October 5, 2003):  
1) Tom: So I thought a useful question for this topic would be the university ENVIRONMENT. 
2) Tom: Let me hear from everybody. 
3) Tom: What do you think about the people, the culture, the facilities here? 
4) Steven: cultrue is very different from ours  
5) Adam: Could you give me examples for the difference of way of thinking? 
6) Tom: Steven, could you help Adam with this? 
Dong-Shin Shin ESL Students' CMC Practices: Context Configuration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 71 
7) Tom: Chang, do you face cultural differences? 
8) Chang:  Yes. 
In turn 1, the teacher initiated the chat session with a question related to American university culture that 
he had e-mailed the class as their pre-selected topic before the chat session. After his comments, there 
was a long pause on the part of the students. Eventually, the teacher invited them back to the discussion 
by saying that he wanted to hear from every participant in turn 2. Once again, there was no response from 
the student participants—graduate students, visiting scholars, or spouses—and the teacher started to 
rephrase what he meant by the word environment in turn 3.  In turn 4, Steven responded to Tom’s 
question by drawing on one of the words Tom provided. The teacher allocated turns to specific students. 
For instance, Tom asked Steven to give an answer to Adam’s question in turn 6. But Steven could not 
answer Adam’s question quickly enough. To fill in the waiting time after turn 6, Tom invited Chang, one 
of the less active participants, to the chat discussion while asking him a display question reflective of his 
consideration of Chang’s English proficiency and typing skill in turn 7. Chang was one of the participants 
who showed a discrepancy between typing and computer skills.  
As seen above, the new chat format changed the dynamics of interactions among the participants, from 
casual gathering to formal teacher-centered class. When the participants planned their CMC activities, the 
affordances they had built were based on their previous experiences with synchronous CMC, leading 
them to think of informal social gatherings that resembled "a tea party" with multiple small conversations. 
Their informal chat changed into a formal class meeting within the dynamics of their group based on the 
reconfigured affordances of their CMC activities. That is, the participants discussed possible ways of 
reducing frustration and problems stemming from a lack of structure, and as teacher and students, took 
responsibility for changing their CMC activities. In doing so, the teacher's role changed more than the 
students', taking on responsibilities that included sending out a pre-selected topic for each meeting, and 
opening and managing chat rooms.  As a continuation of the teacher’s responsibility, Tom made an effort 
to help all the members to participate by inviting them to the discussion, and his control of turns-at-talk 
was strongest with the participants who could not participate in the chat sessions as actively as others 
because of their lack of typing skills and inexperience with written English. In addition, the teacher filled 
long waiting periods between turns-at-talk that resulted primarily from the participants’ slow typing skills 
and limited English proficiency in order to continue the chat discussion. The way the participants co-
constructed their online chat interactions was based on social roles that they played in the community of 
CMC practices.  
Interactional Norms 
In the same way that participants jointly built the context of their CMC interactional patterns, they also 
constructed their interactional norms within group dynamics. The most salient interactional norm in the 
ESL participants’ chat meetings was helping each other to save face in communication (see Belz & 
Kinginger, 2002, 2003; Kinginger, 2000; O’Dowd, 2003; Thorne, 2003; Ware, 2005 for the issue of face 
in CMC). In a process known as "face-work," speakers in conversations vacillate between positive face 
(e.g., politeness, respect) and negative face (e.g., pride, self-sufficiency) in order to maintain both 
independence and politeness. The concept of frame in face-work refers to schema (Goffman, 1959; 
Kramsch, 2000) that a speaker in communication events has regarding face. Communication participants 
do not develop their frame as individual idiosyncratic behaviors, but as enactments of their membership in 
a social group. Footing represents the participants’ stances regarding their frame in face-work  (Goffman, 
1959; Kramsch, 2000). Face-work often occurs in collaboration among members of a certain social group 
and is aligned with the group’s discourse styles. Participants in communication keep negotiating frames 
and footings to save each other’s face. The negotiation of frames and footings is projected to face-saving 
strategies that the participants have learned and acquired as members of a social group. The strategies that 
the speakers use in the negotiating process distinguish insiders of a discourse community from outsiders, 
Dong-Shin Shin ESL Students' CMC Practices: Context Configuration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 72 
informing different cultural backgrounds and discourse styles that are brought to the conversation 
(Goffman, 1959; Gumperz, 1982; Kramsch, 1985, 2000; Scollon & Scollon, 2001).   
In the online chat interactions of the ESL class, a couple of face-saving strategies occurred as 
collaborative work orchestrated by the teacher and the students together. One of the strategies identified 
was commiseration through sharing identical or similar experiences. One example of this kind of strategy 
was found in the teacher’s effort to save his students’ face. The teacher reported that the students were 
concerned with making mistakes in FtF discussions due to their lack of English skills and inexperience 
with speaking in English. He mentioned that he was also careful about allowing his adult ESL students to 
feel "embarrassed" in front of other classmates. The teacher’s efforts to support the students in saving 
face regularly guided their chat interactions, as seen in the following extract (October 5, 2003):    
1) LEE: I think it is very systematic and have lack of tolerence 
2) Chuck: i don't know much about here, because i am just here about 4 weeks. 
3) Lee: I dont find the proper adjective for TOLERENCE ... 
4) Tom: Only 4 weeks? 
5) LEE: Do you know what I mean ? 
6) Chuck: yes. i arrived in here four weeks ago 
7) Tom: It's a shame when Americans in a UNIVERSITY setting aren't tolerant (there's the 
adjective). 
8) LEE: YES ,  thanks. I'm a idiot..^^ 
9) LEE: an 
10) LEE: I mean it's just about some rules of CAMPUS life. 
11) Tom: No, don't say that.  My wife scolds me all the time when I say I'm an idiot about Chinese.  
It's not good for learning. 
Before this chat excerpt, the participants were talking about the university "environment." In turn 1, Lee 
was telling the class that the university campus rules were "very systematic" and had a "lack of 
tolerance." He wanted to use the word "tolerant" in his utterance, but he could not use the adjective form 
of the word in as timely a way as his productive vocabulary in turn 3. As a response to Lee’s asking for 
the word, the instructor gave him an example sentence with the use of the word "tolerant" in turn 7. By 
saying that he was "an idiot" and by showing his embarrassment with "raised eyebrows (^^)" in turn 8, 
Lee acted to save his own face.  Tom immediately helped Lee to do so by claiming to call himself "an 
idiot" while learning Chinese, in turn 11. Tom reported that he was implying that everybody experiences 
that kind of forgetful moment as part of the language learning process and, to help Lee keep his positive 
face, told him that there was no reason to feel like an idiot. On the other hand, Tom’s efforts to protect 
Lee’s face also allowed him to maintain his own positive face with his students, in that his comments in 
turn 11 helped him to be regarded as a considerate person.  
Another identified strategy for saving face was avoiding disagreements or confrontations in which 
communication partners could lose face. This strategy was found in interactions among the students. 
Face-work among the students influenced their discussions in such a way that the participants did not 
develop differences or disagreements further, in order to avoid possible confrontations and maintain 
harmonious relationships among themselves. The following chat extract8 (October 12, 2003) represents 
this: 
1) Steven: people here is very nice 
Dong-Shin Shin ESL Students' CMC Practices: Context Configuration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 73 
2) LEE: For me, they are very exclusive. 
3) Tom: Wow, very different opinions! 
4) Tom: Sun, are most of the people in your department helpful, or less than helpful? 
5) Sun: helpful  
6) Steven: It is a little difficult for me to be familiar with here. 
7) Sun: i have no problem except english and driving.... 
8) Jenny: ^^ 
9) Sun:   
10) Jenny: me too 
11) LEE: Even between members in the same LAB, they hardly talking each other. 
12) Tom: Ana, does your husband ever say anything about his colleagues? 
Before this interaction, the participants were talking about their graduate school experiences. Steven 
mentioned that people were "nice" in turn 1. When Lee said, "For me, they are very exclusive" in turn 2, 
the instructor stated in turn 3 his surprise in hearing two significantly different opinions and kept asking 
the other participants to share their experiences in the graduate school with each other (turns 4 and 12). In 
turn 5, when Sun revealed experiences similar to what Steven had mentioned, Steven (turn 6) commented 
on experiences that were different from what he had just commented on. He was saying that it was a little 
difficult for him to adjust to the States. According to him, he wanted to help Lee to not feel uncomfortable 
by being the only person among the chat participants having difficulties in an American graduate school. 
Following Steven’s remarks, Sun and Jenny expressed their difficulties speaking in English and driving in 
the States. They expressed their desire to provide Lee with emotional support and to make him feel less 
detached from the other participants. Nobody asked Lee further questions about his comments on 
marginalized experiences in graduate school. Lee voluntarily explained why he felt excluded in his lab in 
turn 11. Rather than trying to challenge or encourage Lee to reflect on his contributions to the "exclusive" 
relations that he had with the people in his department, Tom, the teacher, focused on experiences brought 
up by other participants, and then asked Ana to share her husband’s experiences with other participants in 
turn 12.  
The teacher also worked to avoid possible confrontations. The following week, when the participants had 
one more meeting about American graduate schools, Tom mentioned that having good relationships with 
other people in graduate school depended on "one’s personality." In an interview with Tom regarding 
why he had not asked Lee further questions about relationships with colleagues in his lab and why he 
had mentioned the importance of one’s personality in having good relationships with other people, he 
explained his reasoning:  
I tried to get them to look at things from a different angle, but I didn’t want to force them. 
I don’t want to make them uncomfortable or embarrassed during the discussion. You 
know, I’m in charge of the chat meetings as an instructor, and I’m concerned about how 
the students feel about the class discussion. (Interview, March, 6, 2004) 
As Tom mentioned, he primarily focused on the teacher’s role, concerned with his students’ sense of face 
while managing the chat discussions in a smooth way that kept the participants from feeling 
"embarrassed." His comments show how he suggested that the student participants reflect on their 
contributions to the relationships that they had built with others, in an effort to avoid direct challenge or 
disagreement and to help them save face. 
Dong-Shin Shin ESL Students' CMC Practices: Context Configuration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 74 
Utilization of the CMC Activity 
In sociocultural theory, learning is a process that entails not only internalization of the knowledge of the 
learning task, but also transforming and using the internalized knowledge for other purposes while in the 
process of development (Grossman, Smagorinsky, & Valencia, 1999; Vygotsky, 1978; Wertsch, 1991). 
This learning process emphasizes the learner’s active role in social practices that involve socially 
formulated, tool-mediated, goal-oriented actions. The ways in which the ESL students reconstructed and 
utilized the social practices of their CMC activities represented sociocultural perspectives of learning in 
that they used CMC practices for different purposes that reflected needs emanating from roles in their 
lives. In particular, their professional roles indicated how the participants drew on the CMC meetings.   
First, graduate students participated in CMC sessions to look for opportunities to practice their spoken 
English. Their main motivation came from the ability to practice English with other people without 
considering issues of standard or non-standard English. The graduate students were new to the university, 
and they expressed the need to improve their spoken English. For instance, when the participants had a 
chat meeting about their social lives, Steven explained aspects of his social life with other Chinese friends 
in relation to learning English, as seen in the following chat excerpt (October 12, 2003):  
[T]here are a lot of chinese in this university, it helps a lot to my life, but it is not good to 
my spoken English. i usually stay with chinese friends in my free time, we speak chinese 
all the time.  
As Steven commented on his non-academic life in the university town in relation to learning English, he 
wanted more chances to practice English. Like Steven, the other graduate student participants also 
mentioned the need to improve their spoken English. All of them attended the virtual meetings more than 
the FtF class meetings. In the interviews I conducted after the semester about how their CMC activities 
helped their social, linguistic, and academic lives and why they had attended more chat meetings than FtF 
meetings, they mentioned their busy graduate school schedules and the convenience of chat meetings in 
learning English. The following excerpt from an interview with Vincent represents the graduate students’ 
attitudes toward their CMC activities: 
I have to read and do assignment. I am busy. ... I can’t go to English class often … 
Chatting is easy. I just stay home and speak English with other people. (Interview, 
February 22, 2004) 
Vincent highlighted the use of CMC activities in providing him with opportunities for practicing English 
in a timely, convenient manner, one of the merits of chatting for busy graduate students. They used their 
CMC meetings as a place to improve their spoken English.   
Second, all the visiting scholars were from engineering and natural sciences programs and had received 
all of their schooling in their home countries before coming to the United States. They participated in the 
chat activities to improve their English and to know about American university culture. All the visiting 
scholars had to write and make presentations in English, which was a significant challenge to them, 
coming from linguistically and academically different discourse communities. They talked about 
presentation experiences in academic conferences and department seminars with other participants in 
CMC meetings. They also shared information about the cities they would visit for their conferences. 
After the semester, I held interviews with the visiting scholars and asked them in what ways their CMC 
activities were helpful to their lives in the US. The visiting scholar participants reported that the CMC 
activities helped them toward their academic and linguistic needs as explained above. The following 
excerpt from an interview with Lee illustrates how visiting scholars drew on the CMC meetings to adjust 
to a new environment, linguistically, socially, and academically: 
Dong-Shin Shin ESL Students' CMC Practices: Context Configuration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 75 
I need to improve my English to prepare myself better for the conferences I had to attend 
in the States. The chat meetings were helpful. I like to talk with the graduate students.  …  
I look at the chat transcript and review my English and try to improve my weak points of 
English. (Interview, February 20, 20049) 
Lee, a visiting scholar participant, made a deliberate effort to improve his English for his professional 
goals through CMC activities.  
Third, spousal participants joining in the chat activities showed two dissimilar trends in their use of CMC. 
Many of them stopped attending CMC meetings before the middle of the semester. In formal interviews 
and informal conversations I had with them, the spousal participants expressed difficulties participating in 
the chat meetings because they did not have much experience in reading and producing written English 
texts with computers. They also mentioned that they could not follow the speed of the graduate 
participants’ chatting, even though they were receiving support from the teacher by being invited to the 
chat dialogue. All the participants were given an oral test, were judged to be at the same level of English 
proficiency, and initially reported similar CMC experiences. But writing through the CMC tool revealed 
the issue of different levels of written English proficiency. Even though the participants were enthusiastic 
about the idea of joining the CMC activity, the activity was not appropriate for the spousal participants, 
whose ability to produce written English on a computer was not good enough for synchronous CMC. 
Around the middle of the semester, Sue, a member of a local social group10 that aimed to help 
international women in the town to build friendships and to learn about other cultures and foods, 
introduced the club to other spousal participants. Many of the spousal participants tried to participate in 
the chat meeting a few times and then turned their attention to the local social group. They started to find 
their niche for social gatherings, while hoping not only to make friends but also to improve their English. 
However, three of the spousal participants, who were planning to apply for the university graduate school, 
regularly participated in the class CMC activities for social gatherings until the end of the semester and 
showed progress in reading and typing in English. The three spousal participants—Julianne, Maria, and 
Jenny—drew on CMC meetings to support their plans for graduate school. For example, when the 
participants had a meeting about the topic of American graduate schools, they were actively engaged in 
the discussion, asking about the university’s graduate program application requirements and about 
graduate life; they showed increased vocabulary, more complicated sentence structure, and improved 
typing skill, as seen in the following chat extract11 (November, 16, 2003): 
1) Julianne says: I studied for managment as an ungraduate and worked as an accountant in a 
company forsome years in my country.So I plan to study for Master of Accountant 
2) Tom says: I think in Maria’s case, experience with ceramics—giving samples of your work—
would be very important and beneficial! 
3) Tom says: I think with international business, your accounting experience will be very valuable 
here. 
4) Julianne says: Can anybody give me some suggestions? 
5) Jun says: Based on my experience, you have to write an essay about yourself.  
6) Jenny says: My husband said the same thing 
7) Maria says: Portpolio is very important for me to enter 
8) Maria says: not essay  
Before this excerpt, the participants were talking about important features of American graduate studies 
and application requirements. Julianne stated her plan to study for a master’s degree while talking about 
her previous working experiences in turn 1. Tom stated his opinions in turns 2 and 3 about what could be 
Dong-Shin Shin ESL Students' CMC Practices: Context Configuration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 76 
important in Maria’s and Julianne’s graduate school applications. Julianne sought more information about 
the application requirements in turn 4. Jun told Julianne that she had to write a personal essay to apply to 
the graduate school in turn 5. Jenny agreed with Jun’s comments in turn 6, but Maria said that her 
portfolio would be more important in her application to the graduate school than her personal statement, 
letting the other participants know that application requirements are varied based on the areas of study 
(turns 7 and 8). The spousal participants were not only getting help from the other participants but were 
also helping each other to get specific information about their graduate school applications. In my 
interviews, all three of them mentioned that they would apply to the graduate school and needed to know 
about American graduate programs and application processes, and that they needed to learn how to type 
and read well in English. When I interviewed Julianne about how the CMC activity was helpful to her life 
in the United States, and how she could overcome the barriers of written English and stay to the end of 
the semester, she stated the following:  
I have to type English for chatting. ... It’s good to my master study. I know I have to read 
and type English for my master study. (February 25, 2004) 
The three spousal participants considered requirements for CMC meetings such as typing and reading 
written English texts on computers as preparation for their graduate studies. They also perceived the CMC 
activities as a venue for addressing linguistic, social, and academic needs. The three spouse participants 
utilized CMC meetings in support of their plans for graduate school.    
DISCUSSION 
The way the participants restructured and utilized their CMC activities for their life goals demonstrates 
the complexity of understanding CMC uses in language education in relation to social, cultural, linguistic, 
material, and discursive contexts. Also, the findings show how the participants construed contextual 
elements and constructed the context of their learning based on active perceptions of and engagement 
with the environment of the learning activity. Their perceptions of contextual elements and actions in the 
learning task represent core tenets of ecological perspectives, which argue against static, essentialized 
views of learning (Kramsch & Lam, 2003; van Lier, 2000, 2002). Regarding language learners’ co-
construction of online interactions, studies of telecollaboration have demonstrated how online interactions 
have been jointly constructed by participants into successful communication with "high functionality," or 
unsuccessful communication with "low functionality" (Belz, 2003; Ware, 2005). Communications with 
either low or high functionality resulted from contextual tensions along institutional and social 
dimensions, attitudes toward telecollaboration, different genres of CMC, and social discourses regarding 
CMC tools.  
In the current study, the joint construction of online interactions was identified in the interactional 
patterns and norms the participants established through configuration of the context, based on construing 
contextual elements such as synchronous CMC environment, unfamiliar interactional features, big 
classes, and the importance of maintaining face. For example, the participants took action to reshape their 
CMC context to solve the unexpected interactional features and frustrations that arose. However, their 
reconstruction of the context was accomplished through Tom’s resumption of his teacher’s role. Even 
though the student participants themselves were active in restructuring their online social meetings for the 
context of the CMC activities, they wanted only the teacher to be able to invite others and control the 
entrance to the chat room. The teacher responded to the students’ requests, exceeding what they had 
requested by controlling not only entrance to the chat meetings but also turns-at-talk to make their CMC 
interactions "natural" in comparison with FtF interactions. The reconstructed context for their CMC 
activities afforded the participants traditional, teacher-directed classroom interactions. The way that the 
participants reconfigured the contextual elements of the synchronous text-based Web chat led them to 
accentuate their roles as teacher and students. Their co-construction of the context of the CMC activities 
was intertwined with the social roles they played as members of their discourse community. Namely, the 
Dong-Shin Shin ESL Students' CMC Practices: Context Configuration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 77 
participants’ joint actions in reconstructing the CMC activities were done based on what they perceived a 
teacher and students should do, reflecting their prior socialization experiences in language learning. 
Another way that the participants jointly constructed the context of the CMC activities was by saving one 
another’s face (Goffman, 1959; Kramsch, 1985), adhering to their FtF interactional norms. The 
participants’ collaborative efforts in saving their own and others’ face while sharing their living and 
studying experiences in the United States were partly due to the participants being adult language 
learners, who were not accustomed to making mistakes in public while making themselves understood to 
others (e.g., McDonald & McDonald, 1996). They often expressed "embarrassed" feelings about the 
mistakes they made coming from a lack of English skills required for synchronous communication, which 
led them to be more supportive of protecting each others’ face through such strategies as commiserating 
with same or similar experiences and avoiding disagreements. The participants’ shared strategies for 
saving face (Goffman, 1959; Kramsch, 1985, 2000) were meant to establish collegial and supportive 
environments that would reduce embarrassment in making mistakes in front of classmates. The 
participants’ negotiations of frame and footing in face-work were enactments of their membership of this 
social group, one that valued becoming a supportive participant who contributes to strengthening group 
harmony and saving others’ face in communicative events (see Scollon & Scollon, 200l; Sullivan, 2000; 
Yu & Wen 2003; Yum, 1997 for Asian students’ emphasis on group harmony and face in social 
interactions). In addition, the teacher, aware of the students’ frame and footing on face-work, reenacted 
their face saving strategies to protect not only his students’ face but also his own when the students were 
struggling to express themselves in English in class-wide discussions. As Tom mentioned in an interview 
regarding his teacher’s role (Interactional Norms, above), he placed priority in helping his students to 
save face and in managing smooth class discussions, rather than in critical reflection on or deeper 
thinking about co-constructing social relationships with others. This face-saving norm did not encourage 
the participants to develop their CMC meetings as a social space for critically reflecting on self and 
others.  
The participants’ learning experiences in online chatting demonstrate that language learning and language 
socialization are interwoven into the fabric of CMC practices. For example, the ways in which the 
participants utilized CMC activities and constructed their learning experiences correlated closely with 
their professional roles. The required typing skills and written English proficiency for synchronous CMC 
meetings were beyond the intermediate English proficiency level of many of the participants in this study. 
These requirements discouraged and prevented the spousal participants from joining the CMC meetings, 
even though the CMC tool helped the participants to solve the problem of securing physical classroom 
space for their social gatherings. However, to those spousal participants who planned to attend graduate 
school, use of a CMC tool had investment value, because they needed to acquire expertise in typing and 
reading English in order to study in an American graduate program. They persevered in their CMC 
activities and overcame gate-keeping barriers, unlike the other spousal participants who did not see any 
investment value regarding their CMC activities. The CMC activities these participants were engaged in 
widened the division among academic and non-academic participants, becoming a social space for 
academic gatherings, against their original hopes for strengthening social bonds among themselves.  As a 
cultural artifact, the CMC tool in this study privileged academic professionals who were more 
experienced working with computers and producing written English. Considering the relationship 
between (writing) technology and power (Kramsch, 2000), it is necessary to regard language learning 
through the CMC tool as a social practice that has discursive meanings for those who use the tool and 
develop its literacy.  
This study shows that learners shape their learning contexts as active social agents. The way they 
constructed affordances and configured the context for their CMC activities is interconnected with 
language socialization at a specific time and place. The process of constructing affordances is dialogic 
Dong-Shin Shin ESL Students' CMC Practices: Context Configuration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 78 
engagement between learners and contextual elements in a learning task (Kramsch, 2002; Leather & van 
Dam, 2003; van Lier, 2000, 2002).  
CONCLUSION 
Contributing to previous studies of CMC contexts, this study contends that one also needs to see the 
configured context co-constructed by language learners to fully capture the complexity of CMC practices, 
since the context for any learning activity is an interconnected relationship among contextual elements of 
the learning environment that learners configure for learning tasks. This perspective of context is 
anchored to ecological perspectives of language learning (Kramsch, 2002; Leather & van Dam, 2003; van 
Lier, 2000, 2002), which allow researchers and teachers to avoid rigid conceptions of learning and its 
contexts. Ecologically exploring the ways in which learning contexts are jointly configured within group 
dynamics by participants illustrates their identities/subjectivities regarding co-constructed norms, rules, 
and goals, as well as specific interests and concerns embedded in their language socialization processes 
through CMC. Ecological perspectives are not only concerned with participants' online lives, but 
their offline lives, too. Examining how language learners carry their interests and life stories over to 
online language learning spaces requires more research into how online and offline lives of participants 
are interconnected, while shaping affordances regarding their CMC activities (Lam, 2000, 2004; Leander 
& McKim, 2003; Ware, 2005). 
Additionally, expanding conceptions of context for CMC activities as language socialization practices 
entails an understanding of language learners’ complex lives, a complexity that comes from multiple 
social roles, providing the participants with different affordances for their CMC activities. In this vein, 
this study demonstrated how people are discursively placed in certain subject positions according to 
gender, profession, age, language, and class in their uses of CMC tools, especially when language 
educators use CMC tools in various social and educational settings outside higher educational institutions 
in which the participants are less homogeneous in terms of their social roles and positions. It suggests that 
studies of CMC uses in language education need to examine language acquisition and language 
socialization as inextricably intertwined entities.  
This study was conducted predominantly with Asian international students and scholars and their spouses 
in a US university language program. However, its findings suggest some points for language teachers to 
consider in planning CMC tool use in their teaching practices. First, individual learners’ subject positions 
regarding CMC tool use need to be considered in plans for integrating CMC activities into teaching 
practices, in addition to gauging students’ typing skills and differences between written and oral language 
proficiencies. Class size is also a critical factor in having productive CMC discussions. This point 
emerges from the observation that a large group of chat participants generated multiple strands of 
dialogue, creating confusion and frustration. It reflects the conclusions of other studies (Kitade, 2000; 
Kötter, 2003) of synchronous CMC suggesting that no more than five should be in any single 
synchronous virtual meeting at one time. Lastly, this study highlights how important the teacher’s role is 
in designing and delivering an appropriate pedagogy using CMC tools for any kind of learning activity 
(Kern, 2000; Kramsch & Thorne, 2002; Ware & Kramsch, 2005) in that it is crucial for language 
educators to thoroughly examine the appropriateness of a selected CMC tool for the purpose of an 
activity, as well as the opportunities and constraints in students’ uses of that tool for the planned learning 
task.  
 
 
 
Dong-Shin Shin ESL Students' CMC Practices: Context Configuration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 79 
APPENDIX 
Survey Questions for Chat Meeting 
 
First Name:     Last Name:  
Email Address:  
 
(Check One) 
Male     Female 
Graduate Student   Visiting Scholar   Other (specify) 
 
Age (e.g., 20s; 30s): 
 
Which country are you from? 
 
How long have you been in the States? 
 
What was/is your major in your undergraduate or graduate study? 
 
How comfortably do you use word processing programs, email, and web browsers? 
(Check one) Low   Intermediate   Advanced 
 
How well do you type in English? 
(Check one) Low   Intermediate   Advanced  
 
Have you ever used instant messengers?  
If so, which one(s)?  
 
NOTES 
1. The International Programs Office of the local university runs an ESL program, "American Culture and 
Language Program," which provides free ESL classes for international students, scholars, and their 
spouses. 
2. The language program administers a placement test before the semester starts. When the test is 
administered the students are also surveyed for personal information, language learning experiences, and 
their wishes for ESL classes. In the survey, the students’ foremost wish for the ESL class is having many 
social activities. 
Dong-Shin Shin ESL Students' CMC Practices: Context Configuration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 80 
3. This information about how the class came to have CMC meetings was revealed by the teacher when I 
interviewed him regarding their CMC activity. 
4. All the names in this paper are pseudonyms. 
5. I was informed of the CMC activity of this ESL class after the class designed their CMC activity.  But I 
was introduced to the class and got permission for my study from the students before the class had their 
first chat meeting and could observe all of their CMC meetings, which commenced two weeks after the 
semester started, and all FtF class meetings except for the first week of the semester. 
6. MSN Instant MessengerTM is a free Web chat tool allowing the participants to invite each other when 
they are logged on. When a participant invites other participants, a new interface window is generated.  
When the participants had their first chat meeting, some of them invited each other as soon as they were 
logged on; they then had to solve the problem of multiple chat windows. 
7. A total of 12 participants attended the October 5th chat meeting. The capitalized or misspelled words in 
the chat excerpt are copied verbatim from the original chat text. 
8. A total of 11 participants attended the October 12th chat meeting. The capitalized or misspelled words 
in the chat excerpt are copied verbatim from the original chat text. 
9. The excerpt from a recorded interview is translated from Korean to English by the researcher. 
10. The local community has a social organization for international women—"Round the World Women." 
Members of the organization meet twice a week to cook and to visit various places in the region. 
11. A total of 9 students attended the November 16th chat meeting. The capitalized or misspelled words in 
the chat excerpt are copied verbatim from the original chat text. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I am grateful for the insightful feedback of the anonymous LLT reviewers. I also appreciate the support of 
professors (Meg Gebhard, Jerri Willett, Sonia Nieto, and Theresa Austin) and colleagues at the University 
of Massachusetts, and the participants of this study. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Dong-Shin Shin is a doctoral candidate in the Language, Literacy, and Culture program of the School of 
Education at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst. Her research is in the areas of technology use in 
language learning and literacy development, second language acquisition, and language teacher 
education.  
E-mail: dongshin@educ.umass.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Bakhtin, M. M. (1981). Excerpts from discourse in the novel. In  M. Holquist (Ed.), The dialogic 
imagination: Four essays by M. M. Bakhtin. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press. 
Bateson, G. (2000). Steps to an ecology of mind: Collected essays in anthropology, psychiatry, evolution, 
and epistemology. Chicago, IL: University Of Chicago Press. 
Dong-Shin Shin ESL Students' CMC Practices: Context Configuration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 81 
Belz, J. A. (2002). Social dimensions of telecollaborative foreign language study. Language Learning & 
Technology, 6(1), 60-81. Retrieved July 28, 2006, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/BELZ/default.html. 
Belz, J. A. (2003). Linguistic perspectives on the development of intercultural competence in 
telecollaboration. Language Learning & Technology, 7(2), 68-117. Retrieved July 28, 2006, from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/belz/default.html 
Belz, J. A., & Kinginger, C. (2002). The cross-linguistic development of address form use in 
telecollaborative language learning: Two case studies. Canadian Modern Language Review/Revue 
canadienne des langues vivantes, 59(2), 189-214. 
Belz, J. A., & Kinginger, C. (2003). Discourse options and the development of pragmatic competence by 
classroom learners of German: The case of address forms. Language Learning, 53(4), 591-647. 
Belz, J. A., & Müller-Hartmann, A. (2003). Teachers as intercultural learners: Negotiating German-
American telecollaboration along the institutional fault line. Modern Language Journal, 87(1), 71-89.  
Blake, R. (2000). Computer mediated communication: A window on L2 Spanish interlanguage. Language 
Learning & Technology, 4(1), 120-136. Retrieved July 28, 2006, from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/blake/default.html 
Chun, D. (1994). Using computer networking to facilitate the acquisition of interactive competence. 
System, 22(1), 17-31.  
Duranti, A., & Goodwin, C. (1992). Rethinking context. New York: Cambridge University Press.  
Gebhard, M. (2004). Fast capitalism and second language acquisition. Modern Language Journal, 87(2), 
245–265. 
Gibson, J. J. (1979). An ecological approach to visual perception. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.  
Goffman, E. (1959). The presentation of self in everyday life. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.  
Grossman, P., Smagorinsky, P., & Valencia, S. (1999). Appropriating tools for teaching English: A 
theoretical framework for research on learning to teach. American Journal of Education, 108(1) 1-29. 
Gumperz, J. (1982). Discourse strategies. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Holliday, A. (1994). Appropriated methodology and social context. New York: Cambridge University 
Press.  
Kern, R. (1995). Restructuring classroom interaction with networked computers: Effects on quantity and 
characteristics of language production. The Modern Language Journal, 79(4), 457-476. Retrieved July 
28, 2006, from 
http://www.jstor.org/view/00267902/ap020557/02a00020/0?frame=noframe&userID=9455d2d1@amhers
t.edu/01cce440357b731034d3e4c10&dpi=3&config=jstor - http://www.jstor.org/view/00267902/ap02/ 
Kern, R. (2000).  Literacy and language teaching. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Kinginger, C., Gourves-Hayward, A., & Simpson, V. (1999). A tele-collaborative course on French-
American intercultural communication. French Review, 72(5), 853-866. 
Kinginger, C. (2000). Learning the pragmatics of solidarity in the networked foreign language classroom. 
In J. K. Hall & L. S. Verplaetse (Eds.), Second and foreign language learning through classroom 
interaction (pp. 23-46). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.  
Kitade, K. (2000). L2 learners’ discourse and SLA theories in CMC: Collaborative interaction in Internet 
chat. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 13(2), 143-166. 
Dong-Shin Shin ESL Students' CMC Practices: Context Configuration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 82 
Kötter, M. (2003). Negotiation of meaning and codeswitching in online tandems. Language Learning & 
Technology, 7(2), 145-172. Retrieved July 28, 2006, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/kotter/default.html 
Kramsch, C. (1985). Classroom interaction and discourse options. Studies in Second Language 
Acquisition, 7(2), 169-183. 
Kramsch, C. (1993). Context and culture in language teaching. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Kramsch, C. (2000). Language and Culture. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Kramsch, C. (Ed.). (2002). Language acquisition and language socialization: Ecological perspectives.  
New York, NY: Continuum International Publishing Group. 
Kramsch, C., & Lam, E. (2003). The ecology of an SLA community. In J. H. Leather & J. van Dam. 
(Eds.), Ecology of language acquisition (pp. 141-158). Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
Kramsch, C., & Thorne, S. (2002). Foreign language learning as a global communicative practice. In D. 
Block & D. Cameron (Eds.), Globalization and language teaching (pp. 83-100). London: Routledge.  
Lam, W. S. E. (2000). Second language literacy and the design of the self: A case study of a teenager 
writing on the Internet. TESOL Quarterly, 34(3), 457-482. 
Lam, W. S. E. (2004). Second language socialization in a bilingual chat room: Global and local 
considerations. Language Learning & Technology, 8(3), 44-65. Retrieved July 28, 2006, from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num3/lam/default.html 
Lantolf, J. (2000a). Introducing sociocultural theory. In J. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second 
language learning. New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 
Lantolf, J. (2000b). Second language learning as a mediated process. Language Learning, 33(2), 79-96. 
Leander, K., & McKim, K. (2003). Tracing the everyday ‘Sittings’ of adolescents on the Internet: A 
strategic adaptation of ethnography across online and offline spaces. Education, Communication & 
Information, 3(2), 211-240. 
Leather, J. H., & van Dam, J. (Eds.). (2003). Ecology of language acquisition. Boston, MA: Kluwer 
Academic Publishers. 
Lee, N. (2004). Learners’ perspectives on networked collaborative interaction with native speakers of 
Spanish in the US. Language Learning & Technology, 8(1), 83-100. Retrieved July 28, 2006, from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num1/lee/default.html 
McDonald, A., & McDonald, G. (1996). Intensive English programs newsletter, 1994-1996. Intensive 
English Programs Newsletter, 12-13.  
Meskill, C., & Anthony, N. (2005). Foreign language learning with CMC: Forms of online instructional 
discourse in a hybrid Russian Class. System, 33(1), 89-105. 
Meskill, C., & Ranglova, K. (2000). Curriculum innovation in TEFL: A study of technologies supporting 
socio-collaborative language learning in Bulgaria. In M. Warschauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Network-based 
language teaching: Concepts and practice (pp. 20-40). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University press.   
Negretti, R. (1999). Web-based activities and SLA: A conversation analysis research approach. Language 
Learning & Technology, 3(1), 75-87. Retrieved July 28, 2006, from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num1/negretti/index.html 
Ochs, E. (1990). Indexicality and socialization. In G. Herdt, R. Shweder, & J. Stigler. (Eds.), Cultural 
psychology: Essays on comparative human development (pp. 287-308). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Dong-Shin Shin ESL Students' CMC Practices: Context Configuration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 83 
O'Dowd, R. (2003). Understanding the "other side": Intercultural learning in a Spanish-English e-mail 
exchange. Language Learning & Technology, 7(2), 118-144. Retrieved July 28, 2006, from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/odowd/default.html 
Ortega, L. (1997). Processes and outcomes in networked classroom interaction: defining the research 
agenda for L2 computer-assisted classroom discussion. Language Learning & Technology, 1(1), 82-39. 
Retrieved July 28, 2006, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/ortega/default.html 
Pellettieri, J. (2000). Negotiation in cyberspace: The role of chatting in the development of grammatical 
competence. In M. Warschauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Network-based language teaching: Concepts and 
practice (pp. 59-86). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Rex, L., Green, J., Dixon, C., & the Santa Barbara Classroom Discourse Group. (1998). Critical issues: 
What counts when context counts?: The uncommon "common" language of literacy research. Journal of 
Literacy Research, 30(3), 407-433. 
Schieffelin, B., & Ochs, E. (1986). Language socialization. Annual Review of Anthropology, 15, 163-191.   
Scollon, R., & Scollon, S. (200l). Intercultural Communication: A discourse approach. Malden, MA: 
Blackwell Publishers. 
Smith, B. (2003). Computer-mediated negotiated interaction: An expanded model. The Modern Language 
Journal, 87(1), 38-57. 
Sotillo, S. (2000). Discourse functions and syntactic complexity in synchronous and asynchronous 
communication. Language Learning & Technology, 4(1), 82-119. Retrieved July 28, 2006, from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/sotillo/default.html 
Sullivan, P. (2000). Playfulness as mediation in communicative language teaching in a Vietnamese 
classroom. In J. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 115-131). New 
York, NY: Oxford University Press.  
Thorne, S. L. (2003). Artifacts and cultures-of-use in intercultural communication. Language learning 
and technology, 7(2), 38-67. Retrieved July 28, 2006, from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/thorne/default.html 
Toyoda, E., & Harrison, R. (2002). Categorization of text chat communication between learners and 
native speakers of Japanese. Language Learning & Technology, 6(1), 82-99. Retrieved July 28, 2006, 
from http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/TOYODA/default.html 
Tudini, V. (2003). Using native speakers in chat. Language Learning & Technology, 7(3), 141-159. 
Retrieved July 28, 2006, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num3/tudini/default.html 
van Lier, L. (2000). From input to affordances: Social interactive learning from an ecological perspective. 
In J. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 133-153). New York: Oxford 
University Press.  
van Lier, L. (2002). Ecology and Semiotics of Language Learning: A Sociocultural Perspective. Norwell, 
MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Ware, P. (2005). "Missed" communication in online communication: Tensions in a German-American 
telecollaboration. Language Learning & Technology, 9(2), 64-89. Retrieved July 28, 2006, from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num2/ware/default.html 
Ware, P., & Kramsch, C. (2005). Toward an intercultural stance: Teaching German and English through 
telecollaboration. Modern Language Journal, 89(2), 190-205. 
Dong-Shin Shin ESL Students' CMC Practices: Context Configuration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 84 
Warschauer, M. (1996). Comparing face-to-face and electronic discussion in the second language 
classroom. CALICO Journal, 13(2), 7-26. 
Warschauer, M. (1999). Electronic literacies: Language, culture, and power in online education. 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.  
Warschauer, M. (2000). On-line learning in second language classrooms: An ethnographic study. In M. 
Warschauer & R. Kern. (Eds.), Network-based language teaching: Concepts and practice (pp. 41-58). 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Werry, C. (1996). Linguistic and interactional features of Internet Relay Chat. In S. Herring (Ed.), 
Computer-mediated communication: Linguistic, social, and cross-cultural perspectives (pp. 47-63). 
Philadelphia: Benjamins.    
Wertsch, J. V. (1991). Voices of the mind: A sociocultural approach to mediated action. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.  
Willett, J. (1995). Becoming first graders in an L2: An ethnographic study of L2 socialization. TESOL 
Quarterly, 29(3), 473-503. 
Yu, T., & Wen, T. (2003). Crisis communication in Chinese culture. Asian Journal of Communication, 13 
(2), 50-65.  
Yum, J. O. (1997). The impact of Confucianism on intercultural relationships and communication 
patterns in East Asia. In L. A. Samover & R. E. Porter (Eds.), Intercultural Communication: A reader (8th 
ed., pp. 77-88). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.  
 
