Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num3/review2/ 
September 2006, Volume 10, Number 3 
pp. 27-35 
 
Copyright © 2006, ISSN 1094-3501 27 
REVIEW OF THE HEINLE PICTURE DICTIONARY – INTERACTIVE CD-
ROM 
Title The Heinle Picture Dictionary – Interactive CD-ROM 
Platform Windows® 98, ME, 2000, XP 
Mac OS® 9.1 or later, Mac OS X 
Minimum hardware requirements 
64 MB of RAM (128 recommended) 
400 MB available on hard disk space 
800 x 600, 16-bit color display (minimum) 
1024 x 768 recommended 
Sound Card 
Speakers or headphones 
Microphone 
CD-ROM Drive 
Software requirements QuickTime version 6.0 or later (included on the CD-ROM) 
Publisher 
Thomson Heinle 
The Thomson Corporation 
Website: http://elt.thomson.com 
Phone: (800) 423-0563  
Fax: (859) 647-5045 
Support offered 
(1) 16-page ‘Getting Started’ guide  
(2) Website: http://elt.thomson.com 
(3) E-mail: tl.support@thomson.com  
(4) Phone: (800) 423-0563 
Target language English 
Target audience  High Beginner or Intermediate, young or adult ESL learner 
Price US $46.67 (List Price) 
Publication Year 2005 
ISBN 0838444105 
Review by Walcir Cardoso, Concordia University 
Dictionary use is unquestionably one of the most popular strategies used by ESL learners to learn 
vocabulary (e.g., Schmitt, 1997). Despite being ostracized by many language teachers because of its 
inability to promote the use of context clues for guessing the meaning of unknown words (Folse, 2004), 
dictionary use has proven to be beneficial to L2 vocabulary acquisition (e.g., Hulstijn, Hollander & 
Greidanus, 1996), especially when combined with other learning strategies. Informed by current research 
on L2 vocabulary acquisition, as will be shown in the forthcoming discussion, Thomson Heinle 
introduces its Heinle Picture Dictionary – Interactive CD-ROM, which, unlike most dictionaries, presents 
vocabulary in oral and written contexts, organized by thematic units and specific topics. In addition, it 
attempts to promote learner independence by offering students a chance to engage in active learning via a 
variety of decision-making activities. The dictionary incorporates the four language skills under the 
assumption that to know a word involves much more than just knowing its meaning (Nation, 1990): 
reading (via "Words in Context" and "Reading" activities), listening (via the audio version of all words 
and texts in the dictionary and listening activities), writing (via "Dictation" and "Spelling"), and speaking 
(via "Recording"). Despite some of the shortcomings (e.g., the ineffective "Recording" activity), the 
Heinle Picture Dictionary – Interactive CD-ROM constitutes an outstanding tool to increase ESL 
students’ vocabulary, as has been recognized by its nomination for the 2006 Codie Awards, in the "Best 
Instructional Solution: English Language Acquisition" category. 
Reviewed by Walcir Cardoso Review of The Heinle Picture Dictionary 
 
Language Learning & Technology 28 
The Picture Dictionary – Interactive CD-ROM is targeted at both young and adult ESL learners from 
proficiency levels that range from high-beginner to intermediate. It consists of 16 thematic units (e.g., 
Basic Words, School, Family – see Figure 1), each divided into interrelated topics that focus on everyday 
themes, such as the weather, restaurants, health, and housing. The number of topics in each unit varies 
from three to eleven, with an average of 40 new lexical items per topic (well within Nation’s (1990) 
recommendation for learning vocabulary via word lists: "well over 30 […] per hour" (p. 126)), for a total 
of over 4,000 words on the CD, or approximately 250 words per unit. There is no logical sequence in the 
organization of the units: the levels of word difficulty (e.g., based on frequency, morphological 
complexity) and syntactic complexity (e.g., the use of longer, subordinate sentences) are relatively similar 
across the 16 units, allowing users to select the appropriate topic based exclusively on their vocabulary 
needs, not their knowledge of English morphology or syntax.  
Once the CD-ROM is loaded and installed on a computer, the user can create a shortcut on the Desktop. 
To start using the Dictionary, the user clicks on the shortcut after which s/he is asked to register with a 
user name and password. This process assigns the user a unique account and personal files that are stored 
on the computer’s hard drive and allows teachers to monitor students’ progress. After registration and 
subsequent login, the user is prompted with the Picture Dictionary’s main interface: a list of all the 
thematic units, as illustrated in Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1. Thematic units and topics in Heinle’s Picture Dictionary – Interactive CD-ROM 
By clicking on one of the units in Figure 1, the user is prompted with a series of topics, as illustrated in 
the menu options under the "People" unit. Figure 2 illustrates a sample interface for a sub-topic, 
"Documents," under the "Explore" tab of the "People" unit. For illustration, in Figure 2, all the tools 
Reviewed by Walcir Cardoso Review of The Heinle Picture Dictionary 
 
Language Learning & Technology 29 
available in the "Explore" tab are displayed: "Words in Context", "Word Partnership", "Dictionary" and 
"Recording," which constitute independent windows that can be moved around within the CD-ROM 
interface. To explore words within the main picture in the background, in this case an assortment of 
different types of documents and the relevant vocabulary associated with that environment, the user clicks 
on the white circle near an image (e.g., the image for "a driver’s license" in Figure 2). The word and its 
respective image (repeated from the main background) then appear in the box below the main picture. To 
hear the word pronounced (in North American English), the user clicks on the speaker icon to the left of 
the word. 
 
Figure 2. A sample topic and available tools 
The Words in Context tool allows the user to encounter words in context via written texts and their 
spoken counterparts. The recording of the text (short passages specifically written for the CD in slightly 
simplified language – see "Words in Context" in Figure 2) can be paused, slowed down, speeded up just 
like on a standard CD player. Through the Word Partnerships tool, a list of relevant words is shown with 
a set of potential collocations or "partners" (see Figure 2) that need to be matched. If the choice between a 
given word and its collocate (or word partner) is correct (e.g., "apply for" is matched with "a green card"), 
a voice will read the complete collocation. If, on the other hand, the choice is incorrect (e.g., "apply for" 
is matched with "your name"), nothing will happen, indicating that the attempt was not successful.  
Reviewed by Walcir Cardoso Review of The Heinle Picture Dictionary 
 
Language Learning & Technology 30 
The Dictionary is the most important feature on the CD-ROM and is the tool that learners use to navigate 
the Picture Dictionary and locate words or collocations within their cover topics or thematic units. To use 
the Dictionary, students type in a word or collocation into one of the four search options: (1) within the 
entire dictionary (All Words), which allows users to search beyond the boundaries of the topic, as 
illustrated in Figure 2 for the collocation "mow the lawn"; (2) within the topic being studied (Current 
Topic); (3) within the words that have previously been accessed by the user (My Words), which allows 
the user to revisit and thus retrieve vocabulary already studied; and finally, (4) within the words searched 
or studied that same day (Today’s Words). When a given word or collocation is selected, the program 
shows a smaller version of the image and a sound icon beside the word in the lower part of the Dictionary 
window, as illustrated for the collocation "a driver’s license" in Figure 2. The user can then hear the 
words’ pronunciation by clicking on the respective icon, or go to the topic in which the original word 
appears by clicking on the Go button. 
With the Recording tool, the user may record words, sentences or passages and play back the recording 
for a pronunciation check or merely to practice the pronunciation of new words (see the discussion of this 
feature below). 
Each topic (e.g., "Documents" in Figure 2) is comprised of a set of six activities, which can be accessed 
via the tab in the upper right hand corner of the topic window, suitably named Flashcards, Matching, 
Spelling, Word Search, Reading, and Dictation, reminiscent of many traditional vocabulary activities. 
These activities, or games, constitute an important component of the Dictionary, since they promote the 
retrieval and reuse of the vocabulary to which learners have been exposed in that particular topic (e.g., 
involving documents). The Activities interface and a brief description of each of these types of activities 
are illustrated in Figure 3 and Table 1, respectively. 
 
Figure 3. A sample topic and its six accompanying activities  
Reviewed by Walcir Cardoso Review of The Heinle Picture Dictionary 
 
Language Learning & Technology 31 
Table 1. Activities in the Heinle Picture Dictionary’s CD-ROM 
Activity Description 
Flashcards An activity inspired by the concept of vocabulary notebooks, a learning strategy 
considered to have a positive effect in (deliberate) vocabulary learning (e.g., Schmitt & 
Schmitt, 1995; Folse, 2004). It recalls, recycles and organizes word knowledge (e.g., in 
semantic networks), and can be used as a learner-centered assessment tool. In the 
activity, the user is shown a card-like window with two display options for a given 
word: (1) its picture or (2) its orthographic form and corresponding pronunciation. The 
user can decide which of the two options should appear first as well as whether the 
words should be arranged randomly to avoid the effect of memorization. Words can be 
removed from the list (e.g., if they have already been learned) or added to the list (e.g., 
if the learner realizes that s/he needs further exposure to the word). 
Matching A matching game. The player clicks on a box which reveals a word or a picture. The 
user must then find the matching word or picture that is hidden behind another box on 
the grid. As words and pictures are paired, the game gradually exposes a background 
that is similar to the one used in the Explore window. This activity relies on 
memorizing strategies. 
Spelling This is a variant of the hangman game, except that in the Dictionary the man is 
replaced by a car. In the game, the player is challenged to guess the letters of the word 
shown in a given picture by clicking on the appropriate letters. If the selected letter is 
correct, the letter is added to its corresponding position in the word; every incorrect 
guess, on the other hand, removes a piece of the car. If the word is not guessed within 
seven tries, the car falls apart and the correct word is displayed. In this activity, the 
user has the option of listening to the pronunciation of the word at any time. 
Word Search In this word search game, the user is shown a list of words that need to be found 
among a jumble of letters in a grid. Optionally, the picture for each item is also 
available to the user by clicking on the desired word.  
Reading  A revised version of the cloze test in which the learner completes the blanks of a text 
(the same one as used in "Words in Context"). There are two levels of difficulty: Level 
1, in which the words missing are provided on a list, and Level 2, in which the words 
have to be typed in by the user. After completion, the Dictionary provides feedback by 
indicating the number of correct and incorrect words. 
Dictation An updated version of the traditional dictation activity. The user is shown a text 
window with icons similar to those in a standard CD player. The user listens to the text 
(the same one as used in "Words in Context") and types in the passage. The recording 
can be played, paused, or stopped like on a CD player, and slowed down or 
speeded up to change the rate at which the sound is played.. At the end of the 
activity, the user can print the text entered (for example, to hand it in as a homework 
assignment), save it (in which case it is saved as a text document in the Picture 
Dictionary’s directory on the computer’s hard drive, under the "Dictation" sub-
directory), or simply reset the application to start the dictation over. 
 
The Picture Dictionary also contains a teacher class management tool that allows instructors to manage 
groups of students using the CD-ROM. A teacher can create and edit students’ accounts, create classes, 
and view and print students’ progress reports containing the topics consulted, the words accessed with the 
respective dates and times of access, the type of activity performed (e.g., Dictation, Explore), and the 
progress within each activity (see Figure 4). The instructor can also view and print a list containing all the 
words and collocations accessed by the students, as illustrated in Figure 5. The information is available to 
both the teacher and the student. 
Reviewed by Walcir Cardoso Review of The Heinle Picture Dictionary 
 
Language Learning & Technology 32 
 
Figure 4. Student Progress Report – teacher’s view 
 
 
Figure 5. List of Words Explored – teacher’s view  
Reviewed by Walcir Cardoso Review of The Heinle Picture Dictionary 
 
Language Learning & Technology 33 
The Heinle Picture Dictionary provides a number of supplementary options. These include the paper 
version of the Picture Dictionary, a comprehensive Lesson Planner for teachers with 114 fully developed 
lesson plans, and an Activity Bank CD-ROM, which contains reproducible activity masters that can be 
customized for classroom use. However, these supplements were not the focus of the present review. 
In general, the Heinle Picture Dictionary – Interactive CD-ROM provides students and teachers with 
valuable tools to assist in the learning and teaching of vocabulary. The thematic units and activities seem 
to have been carefully selected to accommodate a variety of topics associated with the North American 
life style and designed according to current research on vocabulary acquisition. One of the important and 
most innovative aspects is the inclusion of Word Partnerships and Words in Context, two tools reflecting 
the hypothesis that words are better learned in context and with the collocates with which they are 
naturally associated and occur most frequently (e.g., Taylor, 1983; Nation, 1990).  
In addition, the Picture Dictionary includes a variety of activities that encourage extensive and varied 
exposure to words being learned, as suggested by Nation (1990) and Coady (1993). Learners have a 
number of opportunities to retrieve and recycle new words via their written, oral, and visual 
representations in activities such as Explore (in which words are visually presented within a larger context 
– see Figure 2), Words in Context, Word Partnerships, Dictionary, and the six activities Flashcards, 
Word Search, Matching, Reading, Spelling, and Dictation, all of which involve different degrees of 
memorizing strategies. In these activities, learners engage in recycling words via reading, listening and, to 
a lesser extent, via speaking and writing, thus providing varied opportunities for learning to take place. 
Such an approach reflects Nation’s (1990; 2001) and Thornbury’s (2002) view that systematic repetition 
of new words is more likely to trigger their storage in long-term memory.  
Another positive aspect of the Picture Dictionary is its promotion of learner autonomy, which has been 
shown to be an important predictor of successful vocabulary learning (Oxford, 1990; Sokmen, 1997). In 
most of the activities, learners are involved in decision-making tasks, such as deciding how often a word 
should be revisited (e.g., in Flashcards, students may remove or add words to the activity), the type of 
vocabulary exposure (i.e., visual, orthographic, and/or oral), and where to go within the different topics in 
the dictionary (via the "Dictionary" tool that displays the entire inventory of more than 4,000 words). The 
Picture Dictionary also allows students to monitor their learning by keeping track of all the words 
consulted on a given day or in general. For feedback purposes, this information (including data from 
Dictation activities) is shared with teachers, a feature that can also be explored for research purposes (e.g., 
to find out whether the students’ involvement in the use of the Picture Dictionary has an effect on their 
acquisition of vocabulary). 
One of the most important features of a picture-based dictionary is the quality of its images. In general, 
the images in the Dictionary are of good quality and typically depict items in a recognizable fashion (but 
see a critique of this feature below) via the use of real life photos (see Figure 2 above for a sample of 
these), and both color and black-and-white drawings. It is not clear what criteria were adopted for the 
selection of one type of image over the other, but a considerable amount of the images are color drawings, 
as illustrated by the image for the collocation "mow the lawn" in Figure 2. 
The interface of the Picture Dictionary is in line with the current view on web design that regards the 
interface as an element of content, not merely a conduit to content (e.g., Rokeby, 1997). It is elegantly 
designed and provides easy navigation to all the tools and activities available to the user. The only 
incongruity (for PC users) might be the Mac-style location of the "close" box at the top left side of the 
windows, and the fact that a click on the higher or lower area of the scroll bar does not display the 
subsequent page, as is standard in computer applications; instead, the words corresponding to that 
particular section of the dictionary are displayed. Finally, the Picture Dictionary provides one of the most 
visually appealing and easy to use "Help" functions. By clicking on the "Help" icon (sometimes 
represented by a question mark) of any window or application, the reader is directed to a replication of 
Reviewed by Walcir Cardoso Review of The Heinle Picture Dictionary 
 
Language Learning & Technology 34 
that window or application, with callouts that clearly indicate the function of each menu, button or icon 
illustrated. 
However, the Heinle Picture Dictionary –Interactive CD-ROM also has some shortcomings that could be 
addressed in its future incarnations. First and foremost, the Recording feature is not well conceived. The 
quality of the recording is low and, more importantly, it does not provide any objective feedback to the 
learner. Research has shown that the feedback provided by the visualization of speech (e.g., via 
waveforms, spectral and pitch analyses) can be quite beneficial to learning L2 pronunciation (Hardison, 
2004) in that it allows learners to compare a visual image of their language production with that of a 
native speaker model. If knowing a word involves knowing how it is pronounced, more importance 
should be given to this feature that characterizes word knowledge.  
A point perceived as a shortcoming might be the fact that the Picture Dictionary provides neither 
definitions (as is the case in traditional dictionaries) nor translations of words or collocations. This is 
particularly important in cases of words whose pictures are not indicative of their meanings (e.g., "vault", 
"take a break", "plains"). Even though these two features would extend beyond what is expected of a 
picture dictionary, it would be beneficial to the learner to be provided with additional (in this case, more 
conventional) learning strategies. The more techniques or strategies a learner uses to learn new 
vocabulary, including translations and reading word definitions, the more likely it is for learning to take 
place (e.g., Gairns & Redman, 1986; Thornbury, 2002). In addition, research shows that the use of 
bilingual dictionaries (usually frowned upon by many language teachers) does seem to have a positive 
effect on vocabulary acquisition (e.g., Prince, 1995; Folse, 2004). One of the limitations of incorporating 
bilingual or multilingual glosses into the dictionary, however, is that it would require different versions of 
the CD based on the learners’ first language, as is the case with traditional (i.e., non-picture based) 
dictionaries.  
Finally, some of the minor problems encountered are the following: (1) the pronunciation of certain 
vowel-initial words does not sound natural when they are preceded by the determiner "an"– these words 
are sometimes pronounced on the CD with an epenthetic glottal stop [?], a sound that is usually perceived 
as pause by native English speakers (e.g., "an ?igloo", "an ?ice-pack"), and thus the pronunciation sounds 
unnatural; (2) the word "urban area" is misspelled as "urbarea" in the Dictionary application; (3) the Word 
Partnerships application does not recognize some correct collocations in both the text and its oral 
reproduction (e.g., "drive a bus", "a science-fiction book"), a fact that could have a negative effect in 
vocabulary acquisition as learners will interpret these collocations as incorrect; (4) the "Help" function for 
Recording explains that to stop a recording, users should click on the "stop" button when, in fact, they 
should re-click on the "record" button. Obviously, some of these limitations can be overcome via the 
teacher’s intervention (e.g., telling students that "drive a bus" is an appropriate collocation in English). 
Despite these limitations, the Heinle Picture Dictionary –Interactive CD-ROM is an excellent tool to 
assist in the teaching and learning of vocabulary in a computer-assisted environment. It provides the 
learner with a wide range of learning opportunities in a setting that is varied, challenging (but not 
threatening), fun, and visually appealing. If the features encountered in the Picture Dictionary –
Interactive CD-ROM are an indication of where learner dictionary design is heading, what an exciting 
time to be a language learner or teacher! 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Walcir Cardoso (Ph.D., McGill University) is an Assistant Professor at the TESL Centre of the 
Department of Education at Concordia University. His main research interest is to explore how insights 
from phonology can be applied to the teaching of second language pronunciation in traditional and 
computer-assisted classroom environments. 
Reviewed by Walcir Cardoso Review of The Heinle Picture Dictionary 
 
Language Learning & Technology 35 
E-mail: walcir@education.concordia.ca  
 
REFERENCES 
Coady, J. (1993). Research on ESL/EFL vocabulary acquisition: Putting it in context. In T. Huckin & M. 
Haynes & J. Coady (Eds.), Second language reading and vocabulary learning (pp. 3-23). Norwood, NJ: 
Ablex. 
Folse, K. (2004). Vocabulary myths: Applying second language research to classroom teaching. Ann 
Arbor: The University of Michigan Press. 
Gairns, R. & Redman, M. (1986). Working with words. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Hardison  D. (2004). Generalization of computer-assisted prosody training: Quantitative and qualitative 
findings. Language Learning & Technology, 8(1), 34-52. 
Hulstijn, J. H., Hollander, M., & Greidanus, T. (1996). Incidental vocabulary learning by advanced 
foreign language students: The influence of marginal glosses, dictionary use, and reoccurrence of 
unknown words. The Modern Language Review, 80, 327-339. 
Nation, I. S. P. (1990). Teaching and learning vocabulary. Boston, MA: Heinle & Heinle. 
Nation, I. S. P. (2001). Learning vocabulary in another language. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Oxford, R. L. (1990). Language learning strategies: What every teacher should know. Boston, MA: 
Heinle & Heinle. 
Prince, P. (1995). Second language vocabulary learning: The role of context versus translations as a 
function of proficiency. Modern Language Journal, 80(4), 478-493. 
Rokeby, D. (1997). The construction of experience: Interface as content. In C. Dodsworth (Ed.), Digital 
illusion: Entertaining the future with high technology (pp.  27-48). Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley.  
Schmitt, N. & Schmitt, D. (1995). Vocabulary notebooks: Theoretical underpinnings and practical 
suggestions. ELT Journal, 49(2), 133-43. 
Schmitt, N. (1997). Vocabulary learning strategies. In N. Schmitt and M. McCarthy (Eds.), Vocabulary: 
Description, acquisition and pedagogy (pp. 199-227). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Sokmen, A. (1997). Current trends in teaching second language vocabulary. In N. Schmitt and M. 
McCarthy (Eds.), Vocabulary: Description, acquisition and pedagogy (pp. 237-257). Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Taylor, C. V. (1983). Vocabulary for education in English. World Language English, 2(2), 100-104. 
Thornbury, S. (2002). How to teach vocabulary. Essex: Longman. 
 
