Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num1/vandergriff/
January 2006, Volume 10, Number 1
pp. 110-138
Copyright © 2006, ISSN 1094-3501 110
NEGOTIATING COMMON GROUND IN COMPUTER-MEDIATED
VERSUS FACE-TO-FACE DISCUSSIONS
Ilona Vandergriff
San Francisco State University
ABSTRACT
To explore the impact of the communication medium on building common ground, this article
presents research comparing learner use of reception strategies in traditional face-to-face (FTF)
and in synchronous computer-mediated communication (CMC). Reception strategies, such as
reprises, hypothesis testing and forward inferencing provide evidence of comprehension and thus
serve to establish common ground among participants. A number of factors, including
communicative purpose or medium are hypothesized to affect the use of such strategies (Clark &
Brennan, 1991).  In the data analysis, I 1) identify specific types of reception strategies, 2)
compare their relative frequencies by communication medium,  by task, and by learner and 3)
describe how these reception strategies function in the discussions. The findings of the
quantitative analysis show that the medium alone seems to have little impact on grounding as
indicated by use of reception strategies. The qualitative analysis provides evidence that
participants adapted the strategies to the goals of the communicative interaction as they used them
primarily to negotiate and update common ground on their collaborative activity rather than to
compensate for L2 deficiencies.
INTRODUCTION
This article presents the major findings of a study which considers the impact of the communication
medium on grounding, defined here as the collaborative effort of two or more communicators to establish
common ground, i.e., shared information or beliefs (Clark & Brennan 1991; Clark & Carlson, 1982; Clark
& Marshall, 1981). To this end, learner use of reception strategies in traditional face-to-face (FTF)
situations and in text-based synchronous computer-mediated communication (CMC)are compared.
Reception thus subsumes both listening in FTF and reading chat messages in CMC. The specific
reception strategies under consideration, including general reprise, specific reprise, hypothesis testing,
and forward inferencing, provide positive or negative evidence of comprehension and thus serve to
establish common ground among discourse participants. The term “reception” will be used in a way that
may seem at odds with the lay meaning of the term, which typically denotes linguistic input in opposition
to production or linguistic output. In FTF and CMC discussions, however, where language use is
interactive, reception is never passive. Rather, listeners/message recipients play an active role in building
and advancing common ground by collaborating with speakers/message senders (e.g., by indicating their
current level of understanding). The study takes a multidisciplinary approach to the comparative analysis,
drawing on theoretical constructs from listening strategy instruction, sociocultural theory, and
communication studies.
BACKGROUND AND GOALS
Negotiating for meaning
Amidst widespread agreement that L2 interaction may be useful for the development of communicative
competence, theoretical perspectives differ on how interaction fosters learning. Interactionist approaches
in Second Language Acquisition (SLA) have investigated the relationship between interaction and
modified input (Gass, 1997; Gass & Varonis, 1989; 1994; Krashen, 1985; Long, 1980; 1989; 1991; 1996;
Ilona Vandergriff Negotiating Common Ground in Computer-Mediated Versus
Face-to-Face Discussions
Language Learning & Technology 111
Long & Sato, 1984; Pica, 1983; 1993; 1994; Pica & Doughty, 1985; Pica, Lincoln-Porter, Paninos, &
Linnell, 1996; Schmidt, 1990; 1993), and between interaction and output modifications (Ellis, 1999; Ellis
& He, 1999; Loschky, 1994; Lyster, 1998a; 1998b; Lyster & Ranta, 1997; Swain, 1985; 1993; 1995a;
1995b; 2000; Swain & Lapkin, 1995). From the input perspective, interaction first and foremost provides
opportunities for comprehension, which enables learners to link the L2 forms to the meanings they
encode. However, input itself is not sufficient to promote language learning. According to the Interaction
Hypothesis (Long, 1985; 1996) interactive negotiation of meaning facilitates comprehension and the
development of L2. As learners resolve their miscommunication, they negotiate meaning with strategies
like confirmation checks or requests for clarification. Such negotiation occurs "when learners and their
interlocutors anticipate, perceive, or experience difficulties in message comprehensibility" (Pica, 1994, p.
495).
In highlighting learner roles as participants in social interaction, the sociocultural perspective can provide
greater clarity on some aspects of negotiation. Acquisition-based approaches emphasize learner
deficiency and view negotiation moves as evidence of not-yet-comprehensible input. From the
sociocultural perspective, by contrast, these strategies are bids for help in the co-construction of
discourse. As such, they are only one way in which participants use language to mediate between one
anotherin collaborative talk or joint activity (Donato, 2000). All learner talk, including negotiation, can be
described as a joint activity that learners pursue with the goal of completing a task (Brooks & Donato,
1994; Frawley & Lantolf, 1984; Leont’ev, 1979; Platt & Brooks, 1994; Wertsch, 1979).
In meaningful peer interaction, learners can help each other reach higher levels of performance than they
would if they worked in isolation (Vygotsky, 1978). Learners who are at a higher level help those that are
less proficient by creating a Zone of Proximal Development (ZPD) which can be defined as "the distance
between the actual developmental level as determined by independent problem solving and the level of
potential development as determined through problem solving . . . in collaboration with more capable
peers" (Vygotsky, 1978, p. 86). The ZPD will only emerge if the learners assist each other through
collaborative scaffolding, a process which enables them to do what they would not be able to do without
assistance, such as complete a task, solve problems, and attain control over L2 forms and meanings.
In the past decade, a number of studies have explored L2 interaction and negotiation in online
environments. The findings demonstrate, among other things, that CMC promotes negotiation (Blake,
2000; Lee, 2001; 2002; Pelletieri, 2000; Smith, 2003).  More generally, different facets of CMC discourse
quality have also been explored (Chun, 1994; Erben, 1999; Kern, 1995; Lamy & Goodfellow, 1999;
Negretti, 1999; Payne & Whitney, 2002; Smith, 2003; Sotillo, 2000; Tudini, 2003). The CMC
environment was found to affect the communicative interaction between language learners, allowing them
to play a greater role in managing the discourse. In her 1994 study, Chun found that students performed a
wider range of speech acts, including negotiation, in their online communication than in the conventional
teacher-centered classroom. Smith (2003) also reports increased strategy use. He found that "learners use
a wide variety of communication strategies during task-based CMC and that the CMC environment
shapes this use" (p. 29). Overall, research into CMC attests to the richness of the new medium, its
potential to promote strategy use in general and the use of negotiation strategies in particular. Because the
interactional structures in CMC resemble FTF discourse, CMC competence may be transferable to spoken
interaction (Chun, 1994).
Based on psycholinguistic approaches these studies have explored online discourse with a focus on what
goes on inside the individual learner’s head. Others have advocated a view of online discourse as a
collaborative activity, with a number of social-cognitive studies investigating long-distance collaborations
between learners of different cultural backgrounds. Such analyses have shown that the quality of online
discourse, as well as student motivation, are significantly affected by a range of factors including
language proficiency, institutional setting, keyboarding skills (see Belz, 2001, 2002; Kinginger, Gourves-
Hayward, & Simpson, 1999; Lee, 2004; Warschauer, 2000). The approach taken in this study is different
Ilona Vandergriff Negotiating Common Ground in Computer-Mediated Versus
Face-to-Face Discussions
Language Learning & Technology 112
from the previous CMC research drawn on both Interaction Hypothesis and Sociocultural Theory. I adopt
Clark’s theory of language use with its key concept of "common ground," defined as the information
discourse participants share, including "mutual knowledge, mutual beliefs, and mutual assumptions"
(Clark & Brennan, 1991, p. 127), because it bridges cognitive and social approaches to language use and
allows the analyst to switch between the view of language as used by an individual learner and the view
of language as a joint activity, co-created by two or more discourse participants.
Grounding
By ensuring comprehension, negotiation strategies constitute one of the ways in which interlocutors
establish and update common ground. Clark and Brennan explore this process of grounding in their 1991
article. Their research provides convenient analytical tools for a comparative look at L2 negotiation
across communication media.
From their vantage point, much like from the sociocultural perspective, language use is but one example
of joint action, defined as an action that is carried out by two or more persons "acting in coordination with
each other" (Clark, 1996, Preface). Clark (1996) posits "that people try to ground what they do together"
(p. 221) in communication and in other forms of joint action such as playing a duet, shaking hands, or
playing chess. For conversations to function, contributors must not only be understood, they must also
establish understanding before they proceed. As speakers move through discourse they keep track of their
common ground and update it moment-by-moment. Common ground is thus viewed as a dynamic
concept. As interlocutors move through the joint action of communicating with each other they come to
share more and more information. In this way, common ground accumulates (Clark & Brennan, 1991).
In spite of differences between the theoretical frameworks, I propose a multidisciplinary approach to
comparing grounding across media. To be sure, sociocultural research is ultimately interested in human
development and learning, whereas Clark and Brennan’s research seeks to account for human
communication, yet in contrast to acquisition-based approaches, which focus on language learning as an
individual process, their approach, like sociocultural approaches, views language use in terms of cognitive
and social processes. In both frameworks, language is used as a tool to complete a shared task. From a
sociocultural perspective, participants use language to mediate and assist each other in the creation of the
Zone of Proximal Development while Clark’s theory emphasizes the role of language as a tool in
grounding joint action. I hope to show that central aspects of Clark’s theoretical framework such as the
concept of grounding, its phases, and impact of communication media and goals on grounding can be
applied to the second-language context in order to shed light on how learners negotiate common ground
in computer-mediated versus face-to-face discussions.
Clark’s concept of grounding includes what has been labeled 'negotiation of meaning' in the SLA context
but it is conceived much more broadly. He argues that interlocutors do not only signal lack of
comprehension in instances of miscommunication. In principle, they strive to ground every utterance and
seek negative or positive evidence of understanding for every utterance. For FTF, signals providing
positive evidence include continuers such as backchanneling (e.g., "uh huh") (Schegloff, 1982), an
appropriate next turn, as well as nonverbal evidence of "continued attention" (Clark & Brennan, 1991, p.
133) such as a gaze. In this way, the concept of grounding shifts the focus away from miscommunication
and learner deficiency that is at the core of acquisition-based negotiation research to highlighting its
crucial role in interactive talk where participants work together to co-construct discourse.
According to Clark and Brennan (1991), each contribution contains two phases:
Presentation phase: A presents utterance u for B to consider. He does so on the assumption that, if
B gives evidence e or stronger, he can believe that she understands what he means by u.
Acceptance phase: B accepts utterance u by giving e that she believes she understands what A
means by u. She does so on the assumption that, once A registers that evidence, he will also
Ilona Vandergriff Negotiating Common Ground in Computer-Mediated Versus
Face-to-Face Discussions
Language Learning & Technology 113
believe that she understands. (p. 130)
Any time A presents some utterance u, the interlocutor perceives himself in one of four states for all or
part of the utterance u. These four states are situated along the spectrum of not hearing the utterance to
understanding what the speaker meant by the utterance for purposes of the communication (Clark &
Brennan, 1991).
State 0: B didn’t notice that A uttered any u.
State 1: B noticed that A uttered some u (but wasn’t in State 2).
State 2: B correctly heard u (but wasn’t in State 3).
State 3: B understood what A meant by u. (p. 130)
Finding herself in State 2, B may use a grounding strategy such as hypothesis testing, which constitutes
the presentation phase of an embedded contribution. Only after speaker A confirms the hypothesis, which
is the acceptance phase of the embedded contribution, can the larger contribution be brought to a close.
Clark’s model theorizes how the communication medium and goals may affect grounding. While there is
a need for grounding in all communicative contexts, different communicative purposes will change
grounding requirements. If the goal of the communication requires that content be understood verbatim,
for example, grounding techniques will differ from those used in a context where understanding the gist
satisfies the communicative purpose.
The model also accounts for the impact of different communication media, such as FTF or CMC on
language use in a way that acknowledges the co-construction of discourse. Their analysis of medium
impact rests on the central principle of "least collaborative effort":
"The principle of least collaborative effort: In conversation, the participants try to minimize their
collaborative effort – the work that both do from the initiation of each contribution to its mutual
acceptance" (Clark and Brennan, 1991, p. 135).
Given the cost of reception strategies, many of which require an extra turn, interlocutors will use other
grounding techniques that are less costly, such as a successful next turn wherever communicative
purposes permit. Moreover, the availability of grounding strategies or, in Clark’s terminology, techniques
varies by medium. In exclusively text-based communication, for example, nodding in agreement is not
available. Therefore, Clark and Brennan posit that communication partners "ground with those techniques
available in a medium that lead to the least collaborative effort" (p. 140). In CMC, for example, it is more
difficult than in face-to-face communication to time an acknowledgment such as “okay”. More generally,
in multi-party CMC, messages sent upon completion may show up out of context. If that is the case, the
recipient has to find an appropriate linguistic context for the message in order to interpret it. Other CMC
characteristics may also make it more costly for participants to understand a contribution in the CMC
environment compared to the FTF situation. Clark and Brennan assert that visual and aural contextual
clues such as facial expressions or prosody, which often help with understanding, are lacking in text-
based media. "The costs [of understanding] can be compounded when contextual clues are missing" (p.
143). On the other hand, text-based CMC is reviewable allowing participants to scroll up to re-read prior
messages. CMC users thus have more time to process the input but reviewing older messages impedes the
full focusing attention on currently incoming messages.1 In sum, the different media and their associated
constraints are hypothesized to impact the collaborative effort that speaker and listener, sender and
recipient, expend on establishing and advancing common ground. Clark and Brennan argue that "once we
assume that people need to ground what they say and that they trade off on the costs of grounding, we can
account for some of the differences in language use across media" (p. 146). As costs and availability of
grounding strategies vary in different media, the theory predicts that language users will prefer different
grounding techniques in CMC versus FTF.
Ilona Vandergriff Negotiating Common Ground in Computer-Mediated Versus
Face-to-Face Discussions
Language Learning & Technology 114
Grounding Techniques or Strategies
Among the grounding techniques studied in the L2 context, the listening strategies identified for face-to-
face interaction (Ross & Rost, 1991; Vandergrift, 1997) offer a useful typology that can serve as the basis
for comparison of specific grounding techniques across media. Interactive listening as defined by
Vandergrift in his 1997 study of learner talk is a process in which "the listener plays an active role in
cooperation with the interlocutor to fulfill the goal(s) of the interaction" (p. 494). Parallel to Vandergrift’s
interactive listening strategies, reception strategies are defined as utterances the listener/recipient
produces to signal either lack of comprehension or current state of understanding in CMC or FTF.
Building on Ross and Rost (1991), Vandergrift identified a number of strategies such as global reprise,
specific reprise, hypothesis testing, and forward inferencing, which have been adapted to the purposes of
this study. Table 1 provides a summary.
Table 1. Reception Strategies
Reception
Strategy
Definition Examples
Global reprise Listener/recipient asks for outright
repetition, rephrasing or simplification of a
preceding utterance.
Excuse me?2
Specific reprise Listener/recipient asks a question referring
to a specific word, term or fragment that was
not understood in a previous utterance.
Peter went where?
Hypothesis testing Listener/recipient asks a question about facts
in a preceding utterance to verify that s/he
has understood
Peter went to the park?
Forward inference Listener/recipient overtly indicates her
current state of understanding by asking a
question using given (presented) information
[If Peter went to the park]
why didn’t he pick up some
milk on the way back?
Whereas reprises provide negative evidence of understanding and are, as such, narrowly focused on
resolving perceived miscommunication, hypothesis testing and forward inferences provide positive
evidence of understanding as they seek to confirm the recipient’s present understanding.
To sum up, all communication is described as joint action where speaker/sender and listener/recipient
work collaboratively to ensure that what has been said (or typed) has been understood. While
interlocutors will always establish and build common ground as they pursue the goals of their interaction,
different media have different constraints and therefore affect the use of grounding techniques (Clark &
Brennan, 1991). Listening strategies such as reprises, hypothesis testing, and forward inferencing
(Vandergrift, 1997), viewed here as a subset of grounding tools (Clark & Brennan, 1991)3, are not only
used to signal lack of understanding by providing negative evidence of understanding, as in acquisition-
based approaches. Rather, participants usually aim for a higher criterion by seeking positive evidence that
utterances have indeed been understood. Only then, will a contribution be considered complete.
Methodology
Research Questions
In order to compare grounding across media, four reception strategies (global reprise, specific reprise,
hypothesis testing, and forward inferencing) were identified in the two data sets (CMC and FTF),
comprising small group discussions on two similar concensus building tasks (Task 1 and Task 2). The
subsequent analysis was guided by the following research questions:
Ilona Vandergriff Negotiating Common Ground in Computer-Mediated Versus
Face-to-Face Discussions
Language Learning & Technology 115
1. Do the frequencies of specific reception strategy types differ across media (CMC and FTF), by task
(Task 1 and Task 2), and by individual learner?
2. How do the different reception strategies function in the context of the task-based discussions?
Participants
Eighteen students of advanced German participated in this study.  The ten men and eight women were
enrolled in subsequent semesters in one of two advanced German courses for students with at least two
full years of university-level German. The general approach can be described as communicative language
teaching. The courses were taught at the same level and were not sequenced. No student enrolled in both
courses. Course work included films, readings of short literary and nonliterary texts, in-class discussions
and essay writing. For the study, mixed-gender groups of three learners each worked on two similar
consensus-building tasks.
Research Design
The quantitative and qualitative analysis compares the use of reception strategies in FTF and CMC. To
this end, the investigators chose a research design with the intention of isolating the effect of
communication media and minimizing the effect of other variables.
One of the investigators4 was the instructor for both courses. In the two classes, a total of nine groups of
three took part in the two days of activities under investigation. However, only those groups that were
represented in full on both days were examined for the study leaving a total of six groups of three
participants each for the analysis. In the research design, it was essential to keep group membership
identical for both sessions to allow for comparison across media and rule out a potential influence of
group dynamics on the results.
Two consensus-building tasks were chosen as a means to ensure that students interacted with each other,
as they require greater interaction among participants than open-ended tasks (Pica, Kanagy & Falodun,
1993) They can be considered comparable in many ways including the level of difficulty and task type.
Both required each group to arrive at a collective opinion concerning a moral dilemma (see Appendix A
for worksheets).
Each group completed one of the tasks in the face-to-face setting and the other in the electronic classroom
(CMC) on two consecutive class days, using InterChange®, the real-time discussion capabilities of the
Daedalus Integrated Writing Environment, a program containing modules to help students in the writing
process. Unlike some other chat programs, InterChange® does not display messages as they are typed.
Instead, each message is keyed into a window that only the writer can see. When the student is satisfied
with the message, s/he hits “send” and the message appears on the screens of the other group members.
Participants signed on to the chat program using their own names.
Table 2. Groups and Tasks
Groups TASK 1 “Krokodilfluss”
(KF)
TASK 2 “Luftschutzkeller”
(LSK)
Sarah/Tim/Paul
Tom/Sam/Dana
Rick/Julia/Bob
FTF CMC
Susan/Liz/Frank
Isabel/Vivian/Jim
Patrick/Mary/Bill
CMC FTF
In this study's crossover design, the data were balanced between the two scenarios so that both tasks,
Ilona Vandergriff Negotiating Common Ground in Computer-Mediated Versus
Face-to-Face Discussions
Language Learning & Technology 116
though only completed once by each group, were carried out in both media and sequences. Half of the
groups (Groups 1, 2, and 3) completed Task 1 (KF) in the FTF setting and Task 2 (LSK) in CMC on
consecutive class days; the other half (Groups 4, 5, and 6) did the reverse.  They completed Task 1 in the
computer-mediated classroom and Task 2 in the face-to-face setting.  Table 2 illustrates this crossover
design.
Procedure
Before coming to class, participants were given a handout with one of the two short moral dilemma texts
(see Appendix A). They were asked to prepare their own personal response prior to class and to refrain
from discussing their response with other students before the discussion began.  The response involved a
personal evaluation of the characters in the text and, as such, had no "right" answer.  The in-class
assignment was to negotiate a group consensus solution to the problem.  Groups of three students worked
together under a 30-minute time limit, discussing their positions either face-to-face or in the chatroom.
For both scenarios, an organizational worksheet helped students keep track of individual and group
opinions. After completing both tasks, students were asked about their perceptions of the two group
discussions in a follow-up questionnaire (see Appendix B).5
Data Coding and Analysis
In a first round the two primary investigators (Coders 1 and 2) coded contributions into communicative
units or "c-units," independent utterances providing referential or pragmatic meaning.6 To check for
intercoder reliability, the data were subsequently coded by two independent coders (Coders 3 and 4) into
c-units. There was strong agreement between coders. Cohen’s Kappa is at .80 or above for both sets of
data (see Appendix D, Tables 5 and 6). Coders 1 and 2 coded each c-unit on five variables, i.e., global
reprise, specific reprise, hypothesis testing, forward inferencing or "none of the above," subsequently
compared codes, and resolved discrepancies. Thus all utterances have been double-coded. In addition,
Coders 3 and 4 coded the c-units into the five variables. Considering all cases by medium (but regardless
of group) shows strong general agreement. Cohen’s Kappa is above .75 (see Appendix D, Tables 7 and
8). Cohen’s Kappa could not be calculated for the separate groups because missing codes created
asymmetric tables.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The analysis identifies various types of reception strategies (Table 1) in both sets of data, compares the
type frequencies across media (CMC and FTF), by task (Task 1 and Task 2), and by individual speaker
and describes how the interactive reception strategies attested in the data function in their specific
contexts.
Reception strategies: Types and frequencies
Overall, the reception strategies included in the comparative analysis occur at remarkably similar rates in
both environments.  Calculated as a proportion of all c-units, reception strategies occur at a rate of 7.2%
in CMC as compared to 5.7% in FTF.
The breakdown into different types of reception strategies yields fairly similar frequency rates in CMC
and FTF (see Appendix D, Table 9). For hypothesis testing the rates are exactly the same in both
communication media. For global reprises, specific reprises, and forwarding inferencing the observed
differences do not reach statistical significance. Whereas Clark and Brennan’s (1991) model assumes a
differential effect of the medium on grounding techniques the data sets show neither quantitative nor
qualitative differences when reception strategies are calculated as a percentage of overall production. In
view of the absolute numbers, however, a somewhat different picture emerges. As Clark’s model would
predict, learners did indeed use fewer reception strategies in CMC (an average of 10 per discussion in
CMC compared to 22 in FTF) but the amount of overall language production also differed substantially.7
Ilona Vandergriff Negotiating Common Ground in Computer-Mediated Versus
Face-to-Face Discussions
Language Learning & Technology 117
Since all CMC takes more effort than FTF language production the medium’s impact is not restricted to
specific communication strategies. Instead, CMC reduces the amount of language production overall.
Figure 1. Reception strategies by communication medium
When calculating strategy use as a percentage of overall production, the data clearly show that CMC and
FTF are very similar with respect to fostering the use of reception strategies. CMC users do not seem to
have any more or less difficulty negotiating common ground with their interlocutors than listeners in FTF.
The findings thus support previous studies of CMC (e.g. Blake, 2000; Chun, 1994; Lee, 2001, 2002;
Pelletieri, 2000; Smith, 2003), which found CMC effective with respect to fostering negotiation among
learners.  The interactional structures found in both data sets do indeed resemble each other as suggested
in earlier studies (e.g., Chun, 1994). However, the contrastive approach taken here also demonstrates that
the online environment does not necessarily foster the use of communication strategies any more than the
conventional classroom.8
By Task
The differences between the two tasks, chosen in the research design for their similarities, seem to have a
slight effect on the rate of reception strategies.  Compare Figure 2.
In their discussion of Task 1 (KF) students used more reception strategies overall (at the rate of 7.6% per
total c-units) than in their discussion on Task 2 (LSK) where reception strategies made up only 5.3% of
all c-units but the difference is not statistically significant (p=0.3) (see Appendix D, Table 10).9 Again, as
in the analysis by communication medium, the percentages displayed in Figure 2 conceal the differences
found with respect to overall language production. Each group produced more than twice as many c-units
in their discussion of Task 1 (M=229 c-units) than Task 2 (M=157 c-units). Task 1 asks students to rank
five characters individually, whereas Task 2 is a "survival" situation in which groups must only agree on
two characters of six to be excluded from the life-saving bomb shelter. For Task 1 each step in the
consensus building process may necessitate renegotiation of the other rankings as group members seek
consensus on the relative virtue of the characters. In their questionnaire responses, some students
commented on differences between the tasks. Mary, for example, deemed Task 1 "more complicated
because there were many ethical, moral and, once again, gender related issues." Moreover, she seems to
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
3.0%
3.5%
Global Reprise Specific Reprise Hypothesis Test Forward Inference
strategy types
ra
te
s 
a
s 
p
ro
p
o
rt
io
n
 o
f 
a
ll
 c
-u
n
it
s
computer (CMC)
face-to-face (FTF)
Ilona Vandergriff Negotiating Common Ground in Computer-Mediated Versus
Face-to-Face Discussions
Language Learning & Technology 118
imply that Task 1 generated a lot of discussion because the groups were mixed with respect to gender.
She writes: "I believe women tend to sympathize more with Renate." Another participant simply stated
that he "liked the [Task 1] KF exercise better in itself." A third student also found Task 1 (KF) more
productive than Task 2 (LSK) because a wider range of opinions at the outset required more discussion:
"In the LSK-problem we all almost agreed from the beginning – therefore it was easy to come to a
conclusion = less discussion." When calculated as a percentage of overall language production, however,
the perceived differences between the tasks have little effect on grounding as indicated by reception
strategies use. After all, overall collective purposes of group members were very much the same for both
tasks, namely to arrive at consensus. With different communication goals we would expect grounding to
change (Clark, 1996).
Figure 2. Reception strategies by consensus task
By individual learner
While the data yield no significant differences in reception strategies rates by medium or by task, the
general trend of the participants’ strategy use as a group may conceal differences across media for
individual speakers.  The following table shows reception strategies by individual participant and
medium/task.
The participants are listed in groups of three. Some learners show differences in the use of reception
strategies across media/tasks while others do not. The data thus do not yield any correlation between
individual learner characteristics, strategy use and medium/task.
The analysis of individual rates reveals a weakness of the research design.  For individual participants,
task and medium are not independent variables because each participant completed each task in one
medium only. Therefore the data conceal whether it was the task and/or the communication medium that
had a differential effect on reception rates across data sets. Future comparative studies may wish to
address this problem in their research design.
Given the limitations of the data, the analysis of individual rates cannot fully explain the observed
0.0%
0.5%
1.0%
1.5%
2.0%
2.5%
3.0%
3.5%
Global Reprise Specific Reprise Hypothesis Test Forward Inference
strategy types
ra
te
s 
a
s 
p
ro
p
o
rt
io
n
 o
f 
a
ll
 c
-u
n
it
s
Task 1 (KF)
Task 2 (LSK)
Ilona Vandergriff Negotiating Common Ground in Computer-Mediated Versus
Face-to-Face Discussions
Language Learning & Technology 119
differences but it can help identify contributing factors. In exploring what might motivate an individual
learner to employ reception strategies at substantially higher rates in one medium compared to the other I
focus here on Tom’s data. Tom uses reception strategies at a rate of 15% (of all c-units) in the FTF.  By
contrast, only 2.44% of his CMC c-units are reception strategies. Clearly, many factors may play a role
here but his questionnaire data point to a possible explanation. He complains about the keyboarding skills
of his partner(s) stating that a collaborator had "typing problems." The slow pace of his partner(s) may
have caused him some frustration and, ultimately, may be the cause of his lack of engagement. Socio-
cognitive studies in language learning have shown that student expectation, computer skills, and group
dynamics can affect outcomes (Belz, 2001, 2002; Kinginger, et al., 1999; Lee, 2004; Warschauer, 2000).
The data I collected on individual learners are insufficient to explore this line of analysis further. To be
sure, this is a rich area for future research.
Table 3. Reception Strategy Use by Learner and by Medium/Task
Learner CMC/LSK CMC/KF FTF/LSK FTF/KF
Sarah 5.56% 3.77%
Tim 7.69% 4.41%
Paul 16.67% 1.67%
Tom 2.44% 15.00%
Sam 0.00% 10.59%
Dana 5.00% 4.55%
Rick 4.76% 14.79%
Julia 5.41% 6.73%
Bob 6.90% 13.39%
Susan 5.88% 4.50%
Liz 9.52% 4.04%
Frank 12.90% 7.69%
Isabel 12.77% 4.00%
Vivian 15.79% 14.44%
Jim 2.78% 0.00%
Patrick 2.04% 3.97%
Mary 16.36% 6.19%
Bill 9.76% 7.14%
Reception strategy types and their function in context
The analysis of reception strategies in context will take the typology of reception strategies from Table 1
as a starting point and summarize the specific functions associated with each of the reception strategy
types in Table 4.
 A closer look at the function of the reception strategies in the context of the discussion helps to
illuminate the quantitative results. In my analysis, I will show how L2 learners adapted general reception
strategies to the tasks. By and large, reception strategies are not employed in the data to compensate for
lack of comprehension.10 Rather, the function of the reception strategies is directly related to the goal of
the task-based communication as grounding changes with communicative purpose. The goals of
communication in the present study required recording the original individual position of the three group
members, as well as keeping track of the evolving consensus. These individual rankings represented the
discourse record, which, together with presuppositions on strategies, institutional scripts, and personal
characteristics of other participants, made up the initial common ground. As they began their discussion,
participants updated their common ground to the current state of joint activity. As the groups proceeded,
participants continued to update their common ground to the current state of joint activity. Pursuing the
Ilona Vandergriff Negotiating Common Ground in Computer-Mediated Versus
Face-to-Face Discussions
Language Learning & Technology 120
goal of a group consensus, learners used global reprises (e.g. "Could you re-type your lists?"), specific
reprises (e.g. "Who is your number three?"), hypothesis testing (e.g. "Iwan number one?"), and forward
inferencing tokens (e.g. "How come?") to obtain, confirm, or verify understanding of the status of their
collaborative activity.
Table 4. Reception Strategies and Their Functions in the Data
Reception
strategies
Definition Acceptance:
positive/
negative
evidence
Example Function in
consensus-building
discussions
CMC
Could you retype
your lists11
FTF
global
reprise
Listener/recipient
asks for outright
repetition, rephrasing
or simplification of
an utterance in the
preceding discourse
negative
evidence
What do you
have as the
worst?
Obtain information
on status of
lists/rankings;
Information
exchange
CMC
Who is your
number three?
FTF
specific
reprise
Listener/recipient
asks a question
referring to a
specific word or
fragment in the
preceding discourse
negative
evidence
What do you
have for Sinbad?
Obtain information
on status of
lists/rankings;
Information
exchange
CMC
Bookkeeper, his
wife, activist,
biochemistry
[=biochemist]?
FTF
hypothesis
testing
a) Listener/recipient
uses questions about
facts in the
preceding discourse
to verify that he or
she has understood
b) Listener
completes speaker’s
utterance with
question intonation
to verify that he or
she has understood.12
positive
evidence
Iwan number one
Verify status of
lists/rankings;
Information
exchange;
Challenge the
speaker to justify or
explain his/her
reasoning
CMC
Ron, she makes
terrible decisions
but is she the
worst?
FTF
forward
inferencing
Listener/recipient
overtly indicates her
current state of
understanding of the
discussion by asking
a question using
established (given)
information
positive
evidence
How come?
Accept presentation
and challenge the
speaker to justify or
explain his/her
reasoning
All types of reception strategies occurred in all phases of the discussion. What is more, the same type of
reception strategy served different grounding needs in different contexts. Compare the following tokens
of hypothesis testing. Both are from the same group, occur in the same FTF transcript, and are very
similar in form but they function differently in their respective contexts.
Ilona Vandergriff Negotiating Common Ground in Computer-Mediated Versus
Face-to-Face Discussions
Language Learning & Technology 121
Example 1 (FTF). Schleggi.
1 Julia: … und Schleggi hat ne zwei. … and Schleggi has a two.
2 Rick: Schleggi ist eine zwei?13 Schleggi is a two?
3 Bob: Ja Yes.
4 Rick: Oh Gott! Oh God!
5 Julia: Was machen wir damit? What are we gonna do with that?
Example 2 (FTF). Sinbad.
1 Julia: … und [Sinbad eine vier] … and [Sinbad a four]
2 Rick:  …und [Sinbad eine] eine vier? … and [Sinbad a] a four?
3
4
5
Julia: Ja. Weil Peter hat gar nichts für
diese Liebe getan, das stimmt.
Yes. Because Peter didn’t do anything
for this love, that’s true.
6
7
8
Rick: Und Peter könnte äh Sinbad
fragen die Flüsse, äh, zu
überqueren.
And Peter could uh ask Sinbad to uh
cross the river.
9
10
Julia: Ja stimmt. Dann muss er Sinbad
fragen.
Yes, true. Then he must ask Sinbad.
Example 1 illustrates hypothesis testing in the initial information exchange as group members record
individual rankings. Rick indicates his understanding. Later on in the same discussion (Example 2) Rick
employs hypothesis testing again but now the group is negotiating toward consensus. Julia takes the
hypothesis testing token as a challenge and justifies her suggestion. Examples 1 and 2 demonstrate that
Rick uses the same reception strategy to serve different grounding needs. The differences in the function
between these two tokens of hypothesis testing only emerge in context. Julia’s response shows that she
understands what is required to build common ground in each context.
By the same token the pragmatic ambiguity inherent in reception strategies appears to cause a
misunderstanding in the following exchange, cited as Example 3.  The context is that Tim just sent a
message indicating that he thought the group had reached consensus.
Example 3. (CMC).  Medical student.14
1
2
3
4
5
Paul: Medizin ist mehr wichtig als die
Studentin. Wir können nicht sagen,
dass die Student unbedingt sex mit
dem Professor haben wurde.
The medicine [=medical student, i.e.
the activist] is more important than the
student. We can’t be sure that the
student would have sex with the
professor.
6
7
Tim: Buchhälter, seine Frau, Studentin,
Aktivist, oder?
Bookkeeper, his wife, student, activist,
right?
8
9
10
Sarah: Wenn wir die Studentin nicht
haben wie sool die Menchheit neu
grunden werden?
If we don’t have the student how
should the human race get started
again.
11
12
Paul: Buchhälter, seine Frau, Aktivist,
Bio-Chemie?
Bookkeeper, his wife, activist,
biochemistry [=biochemist]?
13
14
Tim: Du hast deine Meinung wieder
geändert!
You have changed your mind again!
Following Paul’s hypothesis testing, Tim challenges Paul on having changed his mind. Paul’s reception
strategy is taken by the interlocutor as an opinion (‘Meinung’) rather than a hypothesis even though it
ends with a question mark. This points to the pragmatic ambiguity of Paul’s elliptical message, which
consists of a list only. Is he checking on the current status of the consensus (‘Did I understand correctly
that the group has arrived at a, b, c?’) or presenting his ranking to his interlocutors (‘I have arrived at a, b,
Ilona Vandergriff Negotiating Common Ground in Computer-Mediated Versus
Face-to-Face Discussions
Language Learning & Technology 122
c. Do you agree with me?’)? If he is checking on the status of the joint activity, he is hypothesis testing,
i.e., he is in Stage 2 of the acceptance phase. If, on the other hand, his interlocutor is correct that he is
presenting an opinion for others to accept Paul is in the presentation phase of a new contribution.
In sum, the data cited above show that reception strategies can serve different functions and that the
context does not always disambiguate between them as illustrated by the interlocutor’s reactions in
Example 3.
(Re-)Grounding
In the data sets, reception strategies are used mainly to build and advance common ground on the
lists/rankings of characters. Why do participants return to previously grounded information in order to
“re-ground” it? Why do they seek to establish or verify information that they previously considered
shared information or common ground? I will explore possible motivations for this apparent “re-
grounding”, including changing collective purposes, the triadic constellation of the group, and finally the
nature of the task.
From a sociocultural perspective each of the students’ tasks can be described as a joint activity that is
mediated in two ways, through language and through the external representation of the worksheet, which
asks them to record the group members’ original positions and the evolving and/or final consensus.
However, this tool is not a direct external representation like the chessboard where no mediation through
language is necessary if both players can see the board. In the present study, each participant had to use
language as an interpersonal tool in order to create the external mediation tool, namely entering the
list/ranking information on the worksheet. When language is required as a tool to mediate task completion
participants engaged in grounding on two levels. Participants were grounding in communication on the
level of the verbal record, while, on another level, participants had to manage the task and make sure that
all participants are "one the same page." All joint actions, even those that do not require language use,
such as waltzing, or playing chess require grounding (Clark & Brennan, 1991).
In order to produce the external representation of the evolving common ground, participants had to
understand how grounding criteria changed in the process of the discussion. In the final stages of the
discussion, comprehending what the interlocutor meant by an utterance was no longer sufficient for
advancing common ground (Clark & Brennan, 1991). Compare Examples 1 and 2 which illustrate how
hypothesis testing was used in the different phases of the discussion to meet different grounding criteria.
In the final phase of the discussion the hypothesis testing token in Example 2 serves as a bid for
consensus on the group list. What appears to be “re-grounding” is grounding previously shared
information for a new collective purpose to manage the task and/or to make a bid for group consensus.
Example 4 – (FTF). Number five.
1 Rick: Sinbad ist Nummer fünf. Sinbad is number five.
2 Julia: Und äh Iwan? And uh Iwan?
3 Rick: Iwan? Nummer eins. Iwan? Number one.
4 Julia: Und Schleggi? And Schleggi?
5 Rick: Und Schleggi ist Nummer vier And Schleggi is number four.
6
7
Julia: Und dann mach’n wir noch (...) And then we’ll do (…)
8 Bob: Was hast du für Sinbad? What do you have for Sinbad?
9 Rick: Nummer fünf. Number five.
Grounding of previously shared information can also be due, in part, to the triadic constellation. Two
interlocutors may feel that a contribution has been sufficiently grounded for current purposes. As they
proceed the third group member notices that he or she does not share this information and will use a
reception strategy to indicate his or her current level of understanding. In both data sets a number of
Ilona Vandergriff Negotiating Common Ground in Computer-Mediated Versus
Face-to-Face Discussions
Language Learning & Technology 123
reception strategies do not directly follow the presentation phase of the contribution they refer back to.  In
Example 4 several turns intervene between presentation (Line 1) and reception strategy (Line 8).
In Example 4, Rick and Julia build common ground on Sinbad’s rank. Her felicitous next turn in line 2
(Und äh Iwan? ‘And uh Iwan?’) indicates that she is in State 3, that is, she believes she understands what
Rick meant by the utterance. After five intervening turns Bob indicates that he does not share this
common ground and asks Rick for Sinbad’s status. It is not clear whether he heard but did not
comprehend Rick’s contribution in line 1 (State 1) or whether he did not even notice that Rick said
something about Sinbad (State 0). Due to the constellation as a three-way discussion, Rick ends up
grounding his contribution separately with each interlocutor. In both data sets, participants regularly use
reception strategies to ground information the other two group members previously grounded.
Another reason for “re-grounding” previously shared information is related to the nature of the tasks. As
participants communicate, more and more common ground is established. Communication and other
"collective actions are built on common ground and its accumulation" (Clark & Brennan, 1991, p. 127).
In some contexts, accumulation can denote the process of enlarging common ground by adding on to it.
In my data sets, however, building common ground at the task level necessitates negotiation and
modification of contributions that were sufficiently grounded for preliminary purposes but have to be "re-
grounded" later to complete the joint action of coming to consensus. Since the tasks require participants to
decide on relative rather than absolute virtue shifting the position of one character affects the entire
system, much like moving one piece in a chess game impacts the relative position of each piece on the
board. In Task 1 a group decision to move one character to the top of the list, for example, is likely to
affect the status of the other characters, that may be moved down as a result. The following exchange
illustrates how common ground is updated.
Example 5. (CMC). Number two.
1
2
Vivian: Ist #2 Peter? Kann ich das
dahinschreiben?
Is Peter #2? Can I write that down?
3
4
Isabel: OK . Peter Nummer 2. Schleggi
5.
Ok. Peter number 2. Schleggi 5.
5 Isabel: Sinbad 4? Sinbad 4?
6
7
8
9
Jim: Meine meinug ist die folgene: 1.
Ivan 2 Renate 3 Peter 4 Sinbad 5
Scleggi --Ich hab' keinen Gedult
mehr.
My opinion is the following: 1 Iwan 2
Renate 3 Peter 4 Sinbad 5 Schleggi – I
have no more patience.
10
11
12
13
Vivian: Mann!!!! Sind wir alle
einig? Ivan, Peter, Renate,
Sinbad, Schleggi? Ja oder nein?
Come on! Are we all in agreement?
Iwan, Peter, Renate, Sinbad, Schleggi?
Yes or no?
In conclusion, participants frequently return to the ranking/list information they previously established as
shared information. What appears to be "re-grounding" is actually grounding by different grounding
criteria, for different purposes, and/or between different participants.
Interpersonal Factors
In spite of the effort to isolate the communication medium and control for as many variables as possible
such as group membership and task type, countless other factors beyond the researcher’s control can
affect the data in multiple ways. While individual learner characteristics are likely to play a role in
reception strategy use, they cannot account for the differences found across media when viewed as static
factors. The interaction among triads rather than dyads may have influenced individual participants' use of
reception strategies. In arguing for or against inclusion of a specific character, for example, one
Ilona Vandergriff Negotiating Common Ground in Computer-Mediated Versus
Face-to-Face Discussions
Language Learning & Technology 124
participant had to defend his or her position against two. To be sure, the task requirements put
interlocutors in an uncomfortable position. Consensus-building tasks, by their very nature, force speakers
to either threaten the interlocutor's face by arguing for one's own position or to lose face by yielding to
others. One learner, whose data was not included in the data sets, commented on the challenge of
defending an opinion against the challenges of two interlocutors. "Aside from language difficulties I
experience anyway, I felt like I really could not ‘stand by’ my opinion because I was the ‘odd man out.’ I
didn’t exactly feel like I was being ganged up on but I felt like the other people didn’t even want to
consider my opinion." Along the same lines, one participant noted the impact of group make-up on her
discursive behavior. She described her FTF interaction in her questionnaire data: "… I believe I may have
fallen into a gender-related situation. My discussion partners were two men and perhaps I was
unconsciously intimidated. Hmmm!" It is not clear from this comment whether any specific aspects of her
interlocutors’ discursive behavior intimidated the female learner and what role, if any, the medium
played. Given her comments, however, it appears that she may have lost interest in defending her
position, obviating the need for reception strategies. Previous research on CMC has shown that learners’
computer skills have affected the quality of online interaction (Lee, 2004).
In light of communication theory that addresses how relationships and perceptions of relationships affect
the communication process, these findings are not surprising. Since interlocutors co-construct discourse in
a specific group and a specific context, group and context are not constants but have to be viewed as
factors which influence the individual listener/recipient. Carrier (1991) suggested that research on L2
listening should investigate how interpersonal relationships affect comprehension.  Her interdisciplinary
research review includes communications studies, which point to evidence that "uncertainty about the
relationship in an interaction may affect comprehension as well as the other aspects of the communication
process" (p. 71).  While "all contributions eventually get completed" (Clark, 1996, p. 229), a range of
factors along cognitive, psychological, affective, sociopsychological, and sociocultural dimensions are
likely to play a role in the individual’s selection of grounding strategy. For example, when Sam jokes
“Jetzt mussen (sic) wir ein T-shirt fuer jeder (sic) Mensch (sic) machen ,wo es sehr klar darauf steht,
welcher (sic) Nummer sie sind.”  (‘Now we need a t-shirt for every person that states clearly which
number they are.’) his interlocutors Tom and Dana may laugh and joke along with him or get annoyed. As
successful next turns, each of these possible responses would convey that Tom and/or Dana have
understood his utterance. In addition, these grounding strategies would reveal their construal of Sam’s
utterance based on their perceptions of the common ground and the current state of the joint activity,
which include, among other things, assumptions and perceptions of institutional scripts and interpersonal
relationships. Whereas Clark and Brennan’s (1991) communication model accounts for grounding in
communication and other joint activities, identifies possible effects of communication media and goals on
grounding needs and costs, and describes a range of grounding strategies, an approach that explores
empirically how learners use communication strategies in the social setting can identify how they choose
from the range of grounding options.
CONCLUSION
This study compared the use of reception strategies among advanced L2 learners in synchronous CMC
and FTF in order to ascertain how the communication medium affects grounding.  The data sets yielded
no significant difference between the frequency rates of reception strategies (global reprise, specific
reprise, hypothesis testing, and forward inferencing) across media. Analyzing the data by task
demonstrated that learners used reception strategies at a slightly higher rate in their discussion on Task 1
(KF) but the differences were not statistically significant. The qualitative analysis shows that reception
strategies, by and large, did not function to compensate for target language deficiencies. Instead they were
a way for participants to negotiate their common ground as they collaborated on building consensus. As
such, the reception strategies may be viewed as bids for help to manage and control the task.
Ilona Vandergriff Negotiating Common Ground in Computer-Mediated Versus
Face-to-Face Discussions
Language Learning & Technology 125
The comparison of the data sets confirms previous research that attests to CMC as a rich medium insofar
as CMC promotes the use of reception strategies for L2 learners as a group much like FTF in consensus-
building discussions. The results demonstrate that learners overall are just as likely in CMC as in FTF to
build and advance common ground and will use the reception strategies under consideration at similar
rates of frequency. In providing hard evidence of the similarities and differences of CMC and FTF
discourse, research on the impact of the communication media makes an important contribution to the
body of research on interlanguage discourse and communication technology. Specifically, side-by-side
analyses of electronic and FTF discourse offer a fruitful direction for further research into specific L2
discourse features (cf. also Lee, 2002). By the same token, the present study illustrates the limitations of
the approach. Individual variation in the use of strategies, for example, was noted but the analysis cannot
fully explain why some individual participants show such different reception rates across data sets while
others do not. Researchers in SLA, representing a wide range of areas of investigation from
telecollaboration (Belz, 2001) to phonology (Moyer, 2004), have argued for a research orientation that
emphasizes the sociocultural, affective, institutional, and psychological dimensions, which are
hypothesized to affect the individual learner in the social setting. It seems such an approach with its
explanatory tools could build on the findings of the present study.
In sum, the findings underscore the usefulness of CMC for the L2 classroom. Even though learners
produced fewer tokens in CMC the quality of their L2 interaction, as indicated by their use of reception
strategies, was comparable to that found in the FTF setting.  However, instructors are advised not to
overrate the potential benefits of CMC but to view the communication medium as only one variable in the
complex interaction of language learners.
APPENDIX A
Student worksheets for the Task 1 (“Alligator River”) and Task 2 (“Bombshelter”)15 (translated from the
original German)
Appendix A1
Alligator River
Once upon a time there was a woman named Abigail who was in love with a man named
Gregory. Gregory lived on the shore of a river. Abigail lived on the opposite shore of the river.
The river which separated the two lovers was teeming with man-eating alligators.  Abigail
wanted to cross the river to be with Gregory.  Unfortunately, the bridge had been washed out.  So
she went to ask Sinbad, the captain of the only river boat, to take her across.  He said he would
be glad to if she would consent to go to bed with him preceding the voyage.  She promptly
refused and went to see a friend named Ivan to explain her plight.  Ivan did not want to be
involved at all and offered no advice or help.  Abigail felt that she had no alternative but to
accept Sinbad’s terms.  Sinbad fulfilled his promise to Abigail and delivered her into the arms of
Gregory.
When she told Gregory about her amorous escapade in order to cross the river, Gregory
cast her aside with disdain.  Heartsick and dejected, Abigail turned to Slug with her tale of woe.
Slug, feeling compassion for Abigail, sought out Gregory and brutally beat him up.  Abigail was
overjoyed at the sight of Gregory getting his due.  As the sun sets on the horizon, we hear
Abigail laughing at Gregory.*
Step 1 – personal position (preparation)
Ilona Vandergriff Negotiating Common Ground in Computer-Mediated Versus
Face-to-Face Discussions
Language Learning & Technology 126
Rank the characters in this story (Abigail, Gregory, Sinbad, Ivan, Slug) according to their
character.  Write a short note explaining your rankings.
Who is the least  reprehensible/offensive/nasty? (= 1)
Who is the most  reprehensible/offensive/nasty? (= 5)
Person ranking Explanation
1.
2.
3
4.
5.
Step 2 – Consensus (class discussion)
Discuss your rankings of the story’s characters (Abigail, Gregory, Sinbad, Ivan, Slug) with your
partners. You have 30 minutes to negotiate a ranking list of these people on which you have all
agreed.
Who is the least  reprehensible/offensive/nasty? (= 1)
Who is the most  reprehensible/offensive/nasty? (= 5)
You may use the following table to make notes:
Rankings partner A Rankings of partner  B Group consensus
1.
2.
3
4.
5.
Ilona Vandergriff Negotiating Common Ground in Computer-Mediated Versus
Face-to-Face Discussions
Language Learning & Technology 127
Appendix A2
The Bomb Shelter Problem
Your group is part of a government program that runs a number of field research stations far from
civilization. The Third World War has just broken out, and bombs are falling everywhere. Major cities
around the world are being destroyed. All over the world, people are rushing to the bomb shelters. You
have received a call from one of your research stations: they desperately need your help.
Six people have come to the station in search of shelter. There is only enough space, food, air and water
in the station’s bomb shelter for four people, who, according to experts, could only survive for three
months on these provisions. They can see that it would be hard to remain rational and calm if they should
have to choose by themselves which four people should survive, so they have called you, their
supervisors. Your group must decide who is allowed into the bomb shelter. The director of the research
station will follow your orders.
You also need to get to your own shelter quickly, so you have very little time—only 30 minutes—to
evaluate the sketchy information available on the six candidates.
Important: the four people you choose could end up being the only surviving humans on earth. They alone
would have to start a new human race.
You have exactly 30 minutes. Keep in mind: if your group does not reach a decision within 30 minutes
there could be more than two people who die, since a deadly struggle among the six could ensue.
Here is the only information that you have on the six people:
1. accountant (male); 31 yrs. old
2. his wife; 37 years old, 6 months pregnant
3. young radical activist (Nation of Islam); medical student in his second year
4. Biochemistry professor (male); 55 yrs. old
5. college student (female); 21 yrs. old
6. policeman with a pistol (he has to keep the pistol); 40 yrs. old
You have no information on the ethnic or racial characteristics of the candidates.*
Step 1 – personal position (preparation)
Make a list of your personal preferences. Write short notes explaining your selections.
Who should be allowed into the bomb shelter? Why?
Ilona Vandergriff Negotiating Common Ground in Computer-Mediated Versus
Face-to-Face Discussions
Language Learning & Technology 128
Person Explanation
Which 2 people should not be allowed into the bomb shelter? Why?
Person Explanation
Step 2 – Consensus (classroom discussion)
Discuss with your partners which 4 people should be allowed into the shelter. You have only 30
minutes to arrive at a common list, on which you can all agree.
You may use the following table to make notes:
Partner A Partner  B Group consensus
not allowed into the shelter:
Ilona Vandergriff Negotiating Common Ground in Computer-Mediated Versus
Face-to-Face Discussions
Language Learning & Technology 129
Partner A Partner  B Group consensus
APPENDIX B
Student Questionnaire
Name: _______________________       Date: _______________
(Note: All responses will be kept confidential and reported anonymously.)
Follow-up Questionnaire: “Krokodilfluss” & “Luftschutzkeller”
Please reflect on your experiences with the two dilemma exercises by anwering the questions below.
1. If you were not present for one of the discussions, which one was it? _______________
2.  Face-to-Face Discussion (small group)
a.  Which situation did you discuss in the face-to-face (regular classroom) format?
(please circle one): “Krokodilfluss” “Luftschutzkeller”
b. I felt I had plenty of opportunities to participate in the face-to-face discussion.
(please circle one)
not at all very much
1 2 3 4 5
c. I found the face-to-face discussion interesting and engaging.
not at all very much
1 2 3 4 5
d. My small group reached consensus in the face-to-face discussion.
(please circle one) no yes
e. I felt that the face-to-face discussion was successful as a language practice/learning
experience.
not at all very much
1 2 3 4 5
Ilona Vandergriff Negotiating Common Ground in Computer-Mediated Versus
Face-to-Face Discussions
Language Learning & Technology 130
f. Additional comments. Please comment on any of your above answers that might need
further clarification:
2.  Computer-networked Discussion
a.  Which situation did you discuss in the computer-networked (Daedalus Interchange)
format?
(please circle one): “Krokodilfluss” “Luftschutzkeller”
b. I felt I had plenty of opportunities to participate in the computer discussion.
(please circle one)
not at all very much
1 2 3 4 5
c. I found the computer discussion interesting and engaging.
not at all very much
1 2 3 4 5
d. My group reached consensus in the computer discussion.
(please circle one) no yes
e. I felt that the computer discussion was successful as a language practice/learning
experience.
not at all very much
1 2 3 4 5
f. Additional comments. Please comment on any of your above answers that might need
further clarification:
3. Comparison of discussion formats
a. I felt that my group’s discussion of {Luftschutzkeller / Krokodilfluss / neither} was the
most productive.
please circle one
b. I think that the difference (if any) between the two discussions for my group was largely
due to  {1) the stories themselves  2) difference in format (computer vs. face-to-face) 3) other
}
                                                               please circle one
Ilona Vandergriff Negotiating Common Ground in Computer-Mediated Versus
Face-to-Face Discussions
Language Learning & Technology 131
c. Additional comments. Please comment on any of your above answers that might need
further clarification:
4. Language Background
a. How many semesters of German have you studied at the university level?   ______
b. Have you been to any German-speaking countries? __________
When? ________________
For how long? _______________
5. Follow-up information (optional)
May we contact you in the coming weeks/months to speak with you some more about this
experience, should further questions arise? (circle one)  yes / no
If yes, please let us know how we can contact you:
Name: ______________________________________________
Address: ______________________________________________
(valid for what dates?)
Phone: ______________________________________________
(valid for what dates?)
e-mail: ______________________________________________
________________________________________________ ______________
Signature Date
Thank you very much for your time!!
APPENDIX C
Coding Conventions
[ ] = overlapping speech (w/previous speaker)
, = hesitation, w/end-of-phrase intonation
. = falling intonation, as in end of statement
? = rising intonation, as in a question
APPENDIX D
Ilona Vandergriff Negotiating Common Ground in Computer-Mediated Versus
Face-to-Face Discussions
Language Learning & Technology 132
Appendix D1.
Intercoder Reliability
Table 5. Cohen’s Kappa for C-units in CMC
Coder 1 & 2* Coder 3 Coder 4
Coder 1 & 2* .80 .93
Coder 3 .94
Coder 4
Table 6. Cohen’s Kappa for C-units in FTF
Coder 1 & 2* Coder 3 Coder 4
Coder 1 & 2* .85 .85
Coder 3 1.0
Coder 4
Table 7. Cohen’s Kappa for Reception Strategies in CMC
Coder 1 & 2* Coder 2 Coder 4
Coder 1 & 2* .78 .76
Coder 3 .95
Coder 4
Table 8. Cohen’s Kappa for Reception Strategies in FTF
Coder 1 & 2* Coder 3 Coder 4
Coder 1 & 2* .79 .78
Coder 3 .77
Coder 4
* Coder 1 & 2 represent the consensus coding by the two main investigators
Appendix D2.
Probability Values
Table 9. Reception Strategy Type by Communication Medium
CMC FTF p<0.05
all reception strategy
types
7.2% 5.7% 0.5
global reprise 0.9% 0.5% 0.4
specific reprise 0.6% 0.7% 0.9
hypothesis testing 2.6% 2.6% 1.0
forward inferencing 3.0% 1.9% 0.2
Ilona Vandergriff Negotiating Common Ground in Computer-Mediated Versus
Face-to-Face Discussions
Language Learning & Technology 133
Table 10. Reception Strategy Type by Task
Task 1 (KF) Task 2 (LSK) p<0.05
all reception strategy
types
7.6% 5.6% 0.5
global reprise 1.1% 0.3% 0.05*
specific reprise 0.8% 0.5% 0.6
hypothesis testing 3.0% 2.2% 0.5
forward inferencing 2.8% 2.2% 0.5
NOTES
1. Taking conversation as "the base setting" (Clark 1996, p. 8-9), Clark & Brennan also submit that
"listening is generally easy, and reading harder" (1991, p. 143), a psycholinguistic view which is
counterintuitive when applied to L2. In sociocultural approaches, language is viewed as an interpersonal
or an intrapersonal mediation tool.
2. Not actual examples from the corpus.
3. Clark and Brennan (1991) include a "relevant next turn" (p.132) as a grounding strategy. It has no
separate form and is the presentation phase of the next presentation. Vandergrift (1997) has no equivalent
in his typology.
4. I am grateful to my fellow investigator Lynne Frame (University of California, Berkeley) for her
enthusiastic collaboration in the early phases of the study, i.e., the data collection, transciption, coding,
and preliminary analysis. David Barry and Kimberly Mueller (San Francisco State University) also helped
with the coding.
5. The face-to-face discussions were transcribed from audiotapes. Additional videotaping served to back
up the data. Videotapes were not analyzed for proxemics or kinesics. Several students commented to
investigators in person that the videotaping made them feel uncomfortable. One student comments in the
questionnaire on being videotaped: "I really liked the computer discussion better than being videotaped. -
Felt less nervous & self-conscious." Another writes: "It was an interesting challenge having to think so
fast in German on camera."
6. The baseline measure is defined as the "c-unit" (Böhlke, 2003; Crookes, 1990; Duff, 1986). The
concept of "sentence" is not well suited to spoken syntax because people do not typically speak in
complete well-formed sentences. Even native speaker speech is full of false starts, repetitions, ellipses,
etc. The c-units, by contrast, fit the data of interactive talk where utterances may consist of a single word
only, such as  'yes', a phrase, e.g. 'me too', a clause or a multi-clausal unit. It is often impossible to define
these utterances by looking at one utterance only. In fact, they often emerge only in consideration of
previous discourse. Moreover, these units had to have a pragmatic discourse function in the context in
order to be coded as utterances. For instance, a tag question such as "ja? 'yes?' was counted as a separate
syntactic-pragmatic unit from the preceding utterance since it functions as a comprehension check, much
like "Do you know what I mean?".
7. The number of c-units per discussion in CMC (M=116) was much lower than in FTF (M=270).
8. For small groups working on tasks requiring interaction, the decentralizing effect of CMC (e.g., Chun,
1994) is likely to be negligible.
Ilona Vandergriff Negotiating Common Ground in Computer-Mediated Versus
Face-to-Face Discussions
Language Learning & Technology 134
9. The difference in rates for global reprise use across tasks approaches significance (0.051 at p<0.05).
10. The CMC set contains only two tokens of reception strategies which provide clear evidence of
miscommunication.
11. Co-constructed turns occur in FTF only.
12. The examples are intended for quick reference only but are potentially ambiguous in the absence of
context.
13. Examples from the data are provided here with surrounding context. Reception strategies are bold-
faced.
14. CMC discourse will be cited exactly as it appears in the data.
15. Adapted from Simon, Howe & Kirschenbaum (1972).
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Ilona Vandergriff (Ph.D., University of California, Berkeley) is Associate Professor of German at San
Francisco State University where she coordinates the German Program. Her research interests focus on
first and second language use, discourse analysis, pragmatics and teaching with technology.
Email: vdgriff@sfsu.edu
REFERENCES
Belz, J.A. (2001). Institutional and individual dimensions of transatlantic group work in network-based
language teaching.  ReCALL, 13(2), 213-231.
Belz, J. A. (2002). Social dimensions of telecollaborative foreign language study. Language Learning &
Technology, 6(1), 60-81. Retrieved April 2, 2005 from http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/belz/
Blake, R. (2000). Computer mediated communication: A window on L2 Spanish interlanguage. Language
Learning and Technology, 4(1), 120-136. Retrieved April 2, 2005 from
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/blake/
Böhlke, O. (2003). A comparison of student participation levels by group size and language stages during
chatroom and face-to-face discussions in German. Calico, 2(1), 67-87.
Brooks, F. & Donato, R. (1994).Vygotskyan approaches to understanding foreign language learner
discourse during communicative tasks. Hispania, 77(2), 262-274.
Carrier, K. (1991). The social environment of second language listening: Does status play a role in
comprehension? Modern Language Journal, 83(1), 65-79.
Chun, D. (1994). Using computer networking to facilitate the acquisition of interactive competence.
System, 22(1), 17-31.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Clark, H. H. & Brennan, S. E. (1991). Grounding in communication. In L. B. Resnick, J., M. Levine, & S.
D. Teasley, (Eds.), Perspectives in socially shared cognition (pp. 127-150). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Clark, H. H. & Carlson, T. B. (1982). Hearers and speech acts. Language, 58(2), 332-373.
Ilona Vandergriff Negotiating Common Ground in Computer-Mediated Versus
Face-to-Face Discussions
Language Learning & Technology 135
Clark, H. H. & Marshall, C. R. (1981). Definite reference and mutual knowledge. In I. A. Sag, (Ed.).
Elements of discourse understanding. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Crookes, G.  (1990). The utterance, and other basic units for Second Language discourse analysis.
Applied Linguistics, 11(2), 183-199.
Donato, R. (2000). Sociocultural contributions to understanding the foreign and second language
Classroom. In J. Lantolf, (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 27-50). Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Duff, P.  (1986). Another look at interlanguage talk: Taking task to task." In R. R. Day, (Ed.),  Talking to
learn: Conversation in second language acquisition (pp. 147-181).  Rowley, Mass.:  Newbury House.
Ellis, R. (1999). Theoretical perspectives on interaction and language learning. In R. Ellis, (Ed.), Learning
a second language through interaction (pp. 3-31). Amsterdam: John Benjamnis.
Ellis, R. & He, X. (1999). The roles of modified input and output in the incidental acquisition of word
meaning. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 21, 285-301.
Erben, T. (1999) Constructing learning in a virtual immersion bath: LOTE teacher education through
audiographics. In R. Debski, & M. Levy, (Eds.), Worldcall: Global perspectives on computer-assisted
language learning (pp. 229-248). Lisse, Netherlands. Swets and Zeitlinger.
Frawley, W. & Lantolf, J.P. (1984). Second language discourse: A Vygotskyan perspective. Applied
Linguistics, 6, 19-44.
Gass, S. M. (1997). Input, interaction, and the second language learner. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Gass, S. M. & Varonis, E. (1989) Incorporated repairs in nonnative discourse. In Eisenstein, M. (Ed). The
dynamic interlanguage (pp. 71-86). New York, NY: Plenum.
Gass, S. M.  & Varonis, E. (1994). Input, interaction and second language production. Studies in Second
Language Acquisition, 16(3), 283-302.
Kern, R. G. (1995). Restructuring classroom interaction with networked computers: effects on quantity
and characteristics of language production. Modern Language Journal, 79(4), 457-476.
Kinginger, C., Gourves-Hayward, A. & Simpson, V. 1999. A tele-collaborative course on French /
American intercultural communication." French Review, 72(5), 853-866.
Krashen, S. (1985). The input hypothesis: Issues and implications. London: Longman.
Lamy, M.- N. & Goodfellow, R. (1999) Reflective conversation’ in the virtual language classroom.
Language  Learning and Technology, 2(2), 43-61. Retrieved June 4, 2005 from
http://llt.msu.edu/vol2num2/article2/index.html
Lee, L. (2001). Online interaction: Negotiation of meaning and strategies among learners of Spanish.
ReCALL, 13(2), 232-244.
Lee, L. (2002) Synchronous online exchanges: A study of modification devices on non-native discourse.
System, 30(3), 275-288.
Lee, L. (2004) Learners' perspectives on networked collaborative interaction with native speakers of
Spanish in the US.” Language Learning & Technology, 8(1), 83-100. Retrieved June 4, 2005 from
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num1/lee
Leont’ev, A. N. (1979) The problem of activity in psychology. In J. V.  Wertsch, (Ed.), The concept of
activity in Soviet psychology (pp.37-71). Armonk, N.Y.: M.E. Sharpe.
Ilona Vandergriff Negotiating Common Ground in Computer-Mediated Versus
Face-to-Face Discussions
Language Learning & Technology 136
Long, M. H. (1980). Input, interaction and second language acquisition. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation,
University of California at Los Angeles.
Long, M. H. (1985). Input and second language acquisition theory. In S. Gass, & C. Madden (eds.), Input
and second language acquisition (pp. 377-93). Rowley, Mass.: Newbury House. 
Long, M. H. (1989). Task, group, and task-group interactions. University of Hawai’i Working papers in
ESL, 8(2), 1-26.
Long, M. H. (1991). Focus on form: A design feature in language teaching methodology. In K. de Bot, R.
Ginsberg, & C. Kramsch, (Eds.). Foreign language research in cross-cultural perspective, pp. 39-52.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Long, M. H. (1996). The role of the linguistic environment in second language acquisition. In W. C.
Ritchie, & T. K. Bahtia, (Eds.), Handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 413-68). New York:
Academic Press. 
Long, M. H. & Sato, C. J. (1984). Methodological issues in interlanguage studies: An interactionist
perspective. In A. Davis, C. Criper, & A. Howatt, (Eds.), Interlanguage, pp. 253-279. Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press.
Loschky, L. (1994). Comprehensible input and second language acquisition. Studies in Second Language
Acquisition, 16(3), 303-323.
Lyster, R. (1998a). Recasts, repetition, and ambiguity in L2 classroom discourse. Studies in Second
Language Acquisition, 20(1), 51-81.
Lyster, R. (1998b). Negotiation of form, recasts, and explicit correction in relation to error types and
learner repair in immersion classrooms. Language Learning, 48(2), 183-281.
Lyster, R. & Ranta, L. (1997). Corrective feedback and learner uptake. Studies in Second Language
Acquisition, 19(1), 37-66.
Moyer, A. (2004). Age, accent and experience in Second Language Acquisition. Philadelphia, PA:
Multilingual Matters.
Negretti, R. (1999). Web-based activities and SLA: A conversation analysis research approach. Language
Learning and Technology, 3(1), 75-87. Retrieved June 4, 2005 from http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num1/negretti/
Payne, J.S. & Whitney, P.J. (2002). Developing L2 oral proficiency through synchronous CMC: output,
working memory and interlanguage development. CALICO Journal, 20(1), 7-32.
Pellettieri, J. (2000). Negotiation in cyberspace. The role of 'chatting' in the development of grammatical
competence. In M. Warschauer & R. Kern, (Eds.), Network-based language teaching: Concepts and
practice (pp. 59-86). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Pica, T. (1983). Adult acquisition of English as a second language under different conditions of exposure.
Language Learning, 33(4), 465-497.
Pica, T. (1993). Communication with second language learningers: What does it reveal about the social
and linguistic process of second language learning. In J. E. Alatis, (Ed.), GURT 1992: language,
communication, and social meaning (pp. 435-464). Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press.
Pica, T. (1994). Research on negotiation: What does it reveal about second-language learning conditions,
process, and outcomes? Language Learning, 44(3), 493-527.
Pica, T. & Doughty, C. (1985). Input and interaction in the communication language classroom: A
comparison of teacher-fronted and group activities. In S.M. Gass & C. G. Madden, (Eds.), Input and
second language acquisition (pp. 115-132). New York: Newbury House.
Ilona Vandergriff Negotiating Common Ground in Computer-Mediated Versus
Face-to-Face Discussions
Language Learning & Technology 137
Pica, T., Kanagy, R. & Falodun, J. (1993). Choosing and using communication tasks for second language
instruction. In G. Crookes and S. M. Gass, (Eds.), Tasks and language learning (pp. 9-34). Philadelphia,
PA: Multilingual Matters.
Pica, T., Lincoln-Porter, F., Paninos, D. & Linnell, J. (1996) Language learners’ interaction: How does it
address the input, output, and feedback needs of L2 learners? TESOL Quarterly, 30(1), 59-84.
Platt, E. & Brooks, F. (1994). The “acquisition-rich” environment revisited. Modern Language Journal,
78, 497-511.
Ross, M. and Rost, S. (1991). Learner use of strategies in interaction: Typology and teachability.
Language Learning, 41(2), 235-273.
Schegloff, E.A. (1982). Discourse as an interactional achievement: some uses of ‘uh huh’ and other things
that come between sentences. In D. Tannen, (Ed.), Analyzing discourse: text and talk (pp. 71-93).
Washington D. C.; Georgetown University Press.
Schmidt, R. (1990). The role of consciousness in second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 11(2),
129-158.
Schmidt, R. (1993). Awareness and second language acquisition. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics,
13, 206-226.
Simon, S.B., Howe, L. H., & Kirschenbaum, H. (1972). Values Clarification. A Handbook of Practical
Strategies for Teachers and Students. New York, NY: Hart.
Smith, B. (2003). The use of communication strategies in computer-mediated communication. System,
31(1), 29-53.
Sotillo, S. (2000). Discourse functions and syntactic complexity in synchronous and asynchronous
communication. Language  Learning and Technology, 4(1), 82-119. Retrieved September 16, 2004, from
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/sotillo/default.html
Swain, M. (1985). Communicative competence: Some roles of comprehensible input and comprehensible
output in its development. In S. M. Gass & C. Madden, (Eds.) Input in second language acquisition, pp.
235-253. Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Swain, M. (1993) The output hypothesis: Just speaking and writing aren’t enough. The Canadian Modern
Language Review, 50 (1), 158-164.
Swain, M. (1995a). Collaborative dialogue: Its contribution to second language learning. Annual
conference for the American Association for Applied Linguistics, Long Beach, CA.
Swain, M. (1995b) Three functions of output in second language learning. In G. Cook & G. Seidhofer,
(Eds.), Principles and practice in applied linguistics: Studies in honor of H. G. Widdowson  (pp. 125-
144). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Swain, M. (2000). The output hypothesis and beyond: Mediating acquisition through collaborative
dialogue. In J. P. Lantolf, (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 97-114). Oxford:
OUP.
Swain, M. & Lapkin, S. (1995). Problems in output and the cognitive processes they generate: A step
towards second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 16 (3), 371-391.
Tudini, E. (2003). Conversational elements of online chatting: speaking practice for distance language
learners? Apprentissage des Langues et Systèmes d’Information et de Communication, 6(2), 83-99.
Retrieved September 16, 2004 from http://alsic.u-strasbg.fr/Num11/tudini/alsic_n11-pra1v2.htm
Vandergrift, L. (1997). The Cinderella of communication strategies: Reception strategies in iteractive
Ilona Vandergriff Negotiating Common Ground in Computer-Mediated Versus
Face-to-Face Discussions
Language Learning & Technology 138
listening. The Modern Language Journal, 81(4), 494-505.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press. 
Warschauer, M. (2000). Online learning in second language classrooms: An ethnographic study. In M.
Warschauer & R. Kern, (Eds.), Network-based language teaching: Concepts and practice (pp. 41-58).
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Wertsch, J. V. (1979). The concept of activity in Soviet psychology. Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe.
                                                 
