Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num2/emerging/ 
May 2006, Volume 10, Number 2 
pp. 8-15 
 
Copyright © 2006, ISSN 1094-3501 8 
EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES 
Tag Clouds in the Blogosphere: Electronic Literacy and Social Networking 
Robert Godwin-Jones 
Virginia Comonwealth University 
Electronic literacy today is a moving target. How and why we read and write online are evolving at the 
fast pace of Internet time. One of the most striking developments in the past few years has been how new 
social networking phenomena on the Web like community tagging, shared bookmarking, and blogs have 
created convergences between consumers and creators, between reading and writing, between public and 
private spaces. Blogs invite us to write responses to items we have read, to move from observer to 
participant. Shared tagging invites us to analyze texts and sum up their distinctiveness in keywords. 
Writing online may involve coding or scripting, as we try to add distinctiveness in formatting or 
interactive functionality to our texts, blurring the lines between writing and programming. Web browsing 
and reading must be supplemented by abilities in sorting, navigation, and critical thinking. Integration of 
other media into texts complicates further the notion of literacy. We will examine in this column some of 
the ways in which these developments are reflected in new tools, services, and approaches to finding, 
creating, and transforming texts on the Web, and what this might mean for language learning.  
Discovery: Tagging and the Semantic Web  
One of the challenges we face in using the Web, whether as language learners or instructors, is in finding 
the resources appropriate to our needs. We know there is a wealth of information and opportunity on the 
Web, authentic texts in all languages, on-line communities of learners and practitioners, wonderfully 
inviting Web sites spotlighting cultural practices, vibrant exchanges of views on all subjects under the 
sun, and all manner of opportunities for reading and writing – if only we could find them. New methods 
of finding and identifying Web resources involve fundamental skills of analysis, contextualization, and 
conceptualization, not to mention reading and writing themselves. You can't "tag" a Web resource without 
being able to extract salient points the author makes, considering how to summarize in keywords what's 
important, and placing that text in the context of others.  
Of course, the traditional and most-widely used means of finding texts, or other Web resources, is to 
perform a search, most often using Google. With the vastness of the Web today (one report indicates 
Google indexes over 8 billion Web pages) and the proliferation of junk, googling can be a hit or miss 
proposition. An alternative to searching is browsing by classification, as in the original Yahoo model. 
This is an area in which librarians and professional organizations have contributed mightily by evaluating, 
collecting and annotating categories of texts and resources. A site/service such as Merlot offers expert-
based reviewing and ranking of Web sites, including excellent collections of language learning sites. 
Communities of practice such as Webheads also contribute. On the other hand, many sites that purport to 
be site collectors are simply commercial endeavors or just place-holders for advertising. As such sites 
proliferate, students more than ever need skills in critical thinking to be able to sift and evaluate.  
One of the proposed solutions to the chaos of the Web, going back to a suggestion from Tim Berners-Lee, 
the creator of the World Wide Web, is the implementation of what has been called the Semantic Web, a 
system in which meaningful information about Web texts can be extracted automatically from Web pages 
and collected by intelligent "agents". Agents are computer programs launched from a server which 
function autonomously over a period of time, similar to the crawling programs used by search engines to 
discover and catalog Web pages. By adding meaning to information, the Semantic Web holds the promise 
of powerful opportunities for creating educational content through combining resources from many 
sources, using human or machine means, to build a variety of customized learning resources.  
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Tag Clouds in the Blogosphere 
 
Language Learning & Technology 9 
The challenge of the fulfillment of this vision is its reliance on 1) the inclusion of meta-data and 2) an 
established set of ontologies which explain terms and relations in a given subject area. The ontologies 
allow agents to make sense of the resource's meta-data. Creating such ontologies is not an easy process, 
nor one on which consensus is likely to be easy to reach. A recent development that might be of help is 
the creation of a Web ontology language, OWL, a markup language for publishing and sharing ontologies 
on the Web. The second technical requirement for the Semantic Web is wide-spread use of meta-data -- 
this has been a tough sell to Web authors. Although meta-data systems such as the Dublin Core and IMS-
LOM have been in place for some time, they are by no means universally used (even by search engines). 
The meta-data specification most often associated with the Semantic Web is RDF (Resource Framework 
Discovery). RDF describes resources in XML and is meant to be used in situations in which the 
information needs to be processed by applications, rather than to be displayed to people. The recently 
proposed RDF/A specification streamlines considerably the creation of RDF by allowing it to be directly 
embedded into the HTML of a page (added as a simple tag attribute) rather than contained in a separate 
file or in the page header.  
The promise of the Semantic Web is evident in the experimental "semantic browser", Magpie, an add-on 
to Internet Explorer or Mozilla/Firefox, which associates words and phrases in a Web text with available 
ontologies and keeps track of key terms in dynamically created "collectors". The unique feature of 
Magpie is that it does not require manually annotated texts but searches and collects based on keywords 
in the appropriate ontology. Another alternative browser, Conzilla, is a "concept browser" which presents 
information in the form of context maps. W3C's Amaya is an experimental browser that leverages the 
combination of ontologies and RDF; it makes use of a W3C project called Annotea, which features shared 
annotations stored on a central server. An implementation of the kind of text mining and collecting 
envisioned by the Semantic Web can be seen in the daily news analysis (Europe Media Monitor) available 
from the Joint Research Centre of the EU. It searches out articles written in a variety of languages in a 
given subject area, extracts and stores references to places, people, and organizations and generates a 
geographical map (highlighting mentioned locations) and a set of commented links. As more keywords 
are used in different news clusters, the system learns over time which entities are associated with one 
another.  
While the Semantic Web has been mostly of scholarly interest and not widely discussed outside of 
academic and techie circles, another effort to create order out of chaos on the Web has proven to be 
explosively popular. Community tagging is a bottom-up, grass-roots phenomenon, in which users classify 
resources with searchable keywords. The tags are free-form labels chosen by the user, not selected from a 
controlled vocabulary. The first wide-spread use was on flickr, a site which offers photo-sharing services. 
Users of flickr are able to add their own tags to any photo. Users can also aggregate pictures into 
photosets, create public or private groups, and easily add flickr-stored photos to a blog. In the past two 
years there have been a number of sites and services which make use of this kind of open tagging system. 
Some of the better-known are del.icio.us, a bookmarking service, Technorati, a blog cataloging site, and 
digg, a gathering place for tech fans. These sites create clickable "tag clouds" for resources, groupings of 
tags arranged alphabetically, with the most used or popular keywords highlighted through being shown in 
a larger font. Figure 1 below shows the most popular tags on flickr from the middle of March, 2006.  
One should note that the tags represented here are all in English, but on some sites (particularly on 
Technorati) other languages are also used. There are tagging sites which cater to other languages such as 
French (BlogMarks) and Japanese (Livemark). Many such sites make use of RSS (Really Simple 
Syndication) to notify interested users of changes and new developments. In flickr, RSS feeds can be 
attached to individual tags, or to photos and discussions. In addition to RSS, flickr and other social 
networking sites typically offer functions such as search (for users and tags), comments (and comment 
trails), and APIs (application program interfaces) for posting to or from the tools, used especially in 
combination with blogs. An interesting use of RSS in combination with tagging is at the Flashcard 
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Tag Clouds in the Blogosphere 
 
Language Learning & Technology 10 
exchange, where, for example, one can view or subscribe to all flashcards posted for learning Spanish (or 
other languages).  
 
Figure 1. Tag cloud from flickr 
The tagging process is by no means simply technical – a way of categorizing resources – it also has a 
strong social dimension as users of the site find common interests and create on-line communities. It 
represents another example of the fuzziness separating consumers and creators on the Web today. A 
contribution to a tagging site, seen by other users, may cause additional tags or comments to be added, 
automatically building and updating and thus ultimately defining a resource. Instead of one person 
making a judgment about a blog entry, photo, or other resource, a consensual classification is created. In 
effect, a text or object identifies itself over time. This creation of "folksonomies", as they have been 
called, can be seen as a democratic implementation of the Semantic Web. The idea of users becoming 
creators is one of the key concepts behind what some refer to as Web 2.0. It also involves the kind of 
social networking and "collective filtering" that can be seen on sites such as amazon, ebay, or netflix, in 
which users' reviews and comments build a self-generating database of information. The emphasis is on 
the Web as a gathering place in which users both benefit and contribute. Of course, in the process a lot of 
reading and writing is being done in discussion forums. Feedback or comment forms are part of all social 
or community networking sites.  
Creating: Blogs and on-line writing  
Just as bookmarking through del.icio.us has moved from an individual and private to a shared, public 
process, blogs too move writing into the public domain, the blogosphere. Blogs by their nature and page 
structure encourage feedback and represent both a reading and a writing activity. In the best of cases, this 
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Tag Clouds in the Blogosphere 
 
Language Learning & Technology 11 
kind of online writing stimulates debate, furthers critical analysis, and encourages articulation of ideas 
and opinions. In form, most blogs look very similar, with new entries at the top of the page, followed by 
feedback and accompanied by links on the side of the page. Although all blogs are public, some tend to be 
outwardly directed and others more inward and introspective. There have been some interesting 
discussions of blogs by composition professionals, focusing on this private/public dichotomy. While 
language instructors may use blogs for reading/writing practice in the target language, most educational 
uses of blogs have involved course blogs in which the instructor leads a discussion on course-related 
topics. Blogs offer interesting opportunities for collaborative projects, debates, or interactive travel logs. 
They provide an opportunity for students to write in a public sphere (as compared to closed discussion 
forums) and in a more coherent and organized way than in chat or instant messaging. A major benefit of 
using blogs is to provide an environment in which students engage with the topic and with one another, 
developing skills of persuasion and argumentation.  
Blogs have experienced phenomenal growth in recent years. It has been estimated that some 70,00 new 
blogs are created every day (almost 1 a second). Technorati in February, 2006, was indexing 28 million 
blogs. There is now also an astonishing variety of blogging software and services, with most bloggers 
electing to have their blogs hosted rather than running their own server software. Popular blogging 
software such as Blogger, WordPress or Moveable Type make setting up and operating a blog not much 
more difficult than creating a PowerPoint presentation. Some blogging software specializes in particular 
uses, such as photo blogging (Buzznet), mobile blogging (Blogplanet), audio (Audioblog), video 
(vidblogs), or news (GrokSoup). A number of sites specialize in setting up blogs for educational use: 
Blogs2Teach, weblogs4schools, and edublogs. The eslblogs site offers free blogs for ESL students and 
instructors. Many blog enthusiasts use the Technorati site as a means to identify blogs of potential 
interest. Technorati recently added the capability of using tags to label not only individual blog posts, but 
also entire blogs.  
One of the interesting new developments in the blogosphere is the integration of blogs with other tools 
and services. Drupal combines a blog with a powerful content management system, used famously in the 
Howard Dean US presidential campaign. Elgg combines blogs, e-portfolios, and social networking, and 
also includes many other functions such as file repositories, community tags, and podcasting. Both 
services represent a new breed of open source, group software with the emphasis both on individualizing 
resources and on creating a welcoming social network. Both systems can be substantially customized and 
extended; Elgg, for example, can be integrated into moodle, the open source learning management system 
(LMS). Some instructors are finding that using a course blog offers a possible alternative to a traditional 
LMS such as Blackboard or WebCT. It is possible to create a more student-centered learning environment 
using blogs, particularly if students create blogs that they control and whose content they own. Student 
blogs can be linked to a course site (or blog), even to a conventional LMS. The difference, especially to 
LMS discussion forums, is that through their own blogs students connect not only with their school 
communities, but also with other communities (social, professional, family, hobbies), including ones 
which may be important for them after graduation. A student blog, in addition to serving as a social and 
educational tool, can also function nicely as a personal portfolio. It should be mentioned that Blackboard 
has promised to add blogs to its set of tools, and WebCT already has done so. However, the blogs in 
WebCT are still trapped within the proprietary system and do not include the essential blog feature of 
RSS feeds. There are several services recently established, WordPress MU (for multi-user) and Lyceum, 
with the express purpose of allowing creation of multiple individual blogs which can be easily grouped 
together.  
Delivery: Adding Value to Electronic Texts  
Blogs offer reading (and writing) practice in everyday, informal language. A different language register 
can be experienced through working with literary texts in electronic formats. Electronic texts abound on 
the Internet, although e-books, texts readable on small, portable devices, have failed to catch on in a big 
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Tag Clouds in the Blogosphere 
 
Language Learning & Technology 12 
way. There was a discussion recently on Slashdot about why that might be the case. The consensus 
response points to a variety of factors: 1) the practicality of books over e-books, 2) the absence of a good, 
portable, easily readable device for reading e-books, and 3) the scarcity of content in the format needed. 
What complicates the last issue is also the problem of digital rights management (DRM), restrictions on 
the use of the e-book that are built in to its delivery format. While e-books in different languages may be 
of interest to language learners, the key factor in using electronic texts in language learning is not their 
portability but the extent to which they are accompanied by comprehension aids or other add-ons. Static 
texts on a screen hold little if any benefit over print versions, although the availability of many texts in 
different languages can be a significant resource to language teachers and learners. Electronic texts add 
value if they incorporate features such as glosses, notes, multimedia annotations, or translations. 
Unfortunately, there are relatively few freely-available texts which add such comprehension help. This 
seems surprising, considering how relatively easy it has become to create an annotated text, as 
demonstrated by John Kundert-Gibbs in his on-line Chaucer edition. There are, of course, sites which 
fulfill this mission well, such as the Perseus Project, the Edda Project, or the Digital Dante Project. For 
more on the latter, see the extensive discussion in the LLT "On the Net" column in the January, 2006, 
issue.  
In fact, much can be done in terms of presenting texts to students for language learning. In addition to 
glosses (textual or graphical), audio clips can accompany a text, as well as links to external reference 
sources such as dictionaries or encyclopedias. Comprehension questions can be included to test students' 
understanding of what they have read. Indeed, adaptive electronic texts could be made which deliver the 
text differently depending on student responses, sending a student back for remediation, for example, if a 
set of questions is not answered correctly. There are tools which can create this kind of interactivity 
automatically through pull-down menus. CourseGenie transforms Word documents into interactive Web 
pages. The LessonBuilder by SoftChalk allows for pop-up annotations, in-line questions, and activities. 
These and similar tools make it easy to create interactive texts and also offer many formatting options, 
usually by including multiple style sheets or page templates from which to select.  
One of the other alternatives for creating interactive text pages is to encode the text in XML, then to use 
one of the variety of available tools to display it in a user-chosen manner in a Web browser, converted on 
the fly to HTML. This is, for instance, how the University of Virginia Library delivers its texts in 
different formats, including HTML, PDF and mobile device formats, from the same document. The texts 
are encoded in XML, using the guidelines of the TEI, the text encoding initiative. Other text collections, 
such as Oklahoma State's Electronic Publishing Center and The University of Texas's Dumble Survey, 
also use this approach. One of the essential tools in enabling these transformations in XSLT, Extensible 
Style Language Transformations, which is most often used to convert XML to HTML and other formats. 
In comparison to CSS (Cascading Style Sheets), XSLT is quite complex, but also very powerful. Google 
recently posted the source code for AJAXSLT, an implementation of XSLT in Javascript, used to create 
powerful server-client applications like Google Maps, Gmail, and Google Earth. XSLT could be used in 
language learning to parse a text, and through a Web service, search an on-line dictionary, automatically 
linking in definitions. This would allow authentic texts to be automatically glossed for student use. An 
experimental version of such an interface can be seen in an online version of a German fairy tale, in 
which a script seeks out glosses based on searching (in order): 1) a (local) story word list, 2) a (local) 
intermediate German-English glossary, and 3) an (online) German-English dictionary. The advantage of 
having glosses loaded locally in the browser memory (through the use of JavaScript) is to speed the look-
up process, as well as to allow for offline use. This site uses a traditional server-based CGI script, but 
could be done better (and run faster) in XSLT. Having texts in XML makes it much easier to add 
additional Web-based services, as well as to extract information automatically from the text that could be 
used in other ways.  
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Tag Clouds in the Blogosphere 
 
Language Learning & Technology 13 
In addition to building structural tags in a text using XML, it would be interesting to enable community 
tagging of texts as part of a language learning process. This might involve groups of students creating 
word groups or simply finding appropriate keywords to describe a text or parts of a text. This would offer 
options for collaborative projects, classes or groups together tagging a text or a collection of texts. Online 
forums or blogs could be used to discuss the results of the tagging, perhaps in the context of other 
views/interpretations of the text. In the vision of a future Semantic Web, one could easily see a role for 
language learning, as texts such as blog posts, newspaper clippings, journal entries, literary texts, are 
collected by agents, based either on community tags or hierarchical taxonomies (or both). This might 
involve identifying not only the kind and purpose of the text, but also its language level in terms of 
vocabulary and style, its intended audience and its popularity (or lack thereof). As a result students could 
work with different groupings of texts, including much more variety than is the case in the typical 
language textbook or reader, leading to the development of reading and writing skills in a variety of 
registers.  
The development of multiple literacies is needed in an environment in which there are no clear boundaries 
between text and other media. Digital media students today incorporate sound and moving images as 
much as they do text, and often feature non-linear browsing and interactivity. One of the key features of 
the evolving online world is that it offers an ever-shifting blend of individualization and community 
involvement. Working with online media is quite different in this respect from reading a book. One need 
only consider the experience of using a news-feed collector which accumulates RSS feeds from multiple 
sources. The subject may change from paragraph to paragraph and, depending on the student's interest 
level, the text feed might be scanned, the entire post might be read, or the student might go to the Web 
site to see the text in context, to read more, or to write a comment. There is a clear social dimension to 
electronic literacy; reading and writing on-line are often collaborative activities. As educators we not only 
need to facilitate literacy skills in this new environment, we also need to be creating language learning 
media or applications which mirror the kind of online world students experience -- student-centered with 
collaborative opportunities, allowing plenty of space for creative and reflective processes.  
 
RESOURCE LIST  
Literacy and reading on-line 
• Electronic Literacy By David Reinking  
• Beyond the Digital Divide? Investigations of Internet Access and Agency in a Mobile Era Special 
issue of Currents in Electronic Literacy  
• Exploring New Literacies in Online Peer-Learning Environments By Cynthia C. Choi and Hsiang-ju 
Ho  
• Reading Online Electronic Journal of the International Reading Association  
• 21st Century Literacies Good links on new literacies; also lessons  
• Beyond Classroom Boundaries: Constructivist Teaching with the Internet By Amelia E. El-Hindi  
• Constructing Our Identities through Online Images By Gail E. Hawisher  
• Digital Discussions: La Esperanza in the Shared Virtual Classroom By Judi Moreillon  
• Defining New Literacies in Curricular Practice By Ladislaus M. Semali  
• Graphic Novels for Multiple Literacies By Gretchen E. Schwarz  
• A Face-to-Face Graduate Class Goes Online: Challenges and Successes By Jan Turbill  
• Internet Project: Preparing Students for New Literacies in a Global Village By Donald J. Leu, Jr.  
• Learning on the Web: A Content Literacy Perspective By John E. McEneaney  
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Tag Clouds in the Blogosphere 
 
Language Learning & Technology 14 
The Semantic Web and Community Tagging 
• The Educational Semantic Web Special Issue of the Journal of Interactive Media in Education  
• del.icio.us Example of tagging (for shared bookmarks)  
• The Semantic Web In Breadth By Aaron Swartz  
• How the Semantic Web works From w3C  
• OWL (Web Ontology Language From W3C  
• Ontology Development 101: A Guide to Creating Your First Ontology By Natalya F. Noy and 
Deborah L. McGuinness  
• A Semantic Web Primer for Object-Oriented Software Developers From W3C  
• RDF/A Primer 1.0 From W3C  
• eLGGG Learning Landscape "Open source learning landscape platform"  
• Drupal Open source content management platform  
• Magpie Semantic browser  
• Conzilla A concept browser  
• CIPHER project For creating collaborative cultural heritage sites  
• Europe Media Monitor Collector of news articles  
• EMM NewsExplorer News collector in multiple languages  
• Annotea An Open RDF Infrastructure for Shared Web Annotations  
• digg Collaborative site collector  
• 'Tagging' gives Web a human meaning From news.com  
• Scoop Software for content management and annotating  
• flickr Popular photo-sharing site  
• RawSugar Tagging service  
• Rojo Tagging service  
• Tags & Folksonomies - What are they, and why should you care? From threadwatch  
• Folksonomy From wikipedia  
• Collaborative tagging From wikipedia  
• Consensus Web Filters From Kevin Kelly  
• reddit Web filter site  
• Web 2.0 needs Data 2.0 From tagschema.com  
• Tag Clouds From wikipedia  
• Flashcards in Spanish From the Flashcard Exchange  
• Tag mania sweeps the Web From InfoWorld  
• shadows Tagging service  
• Folksonomies - Cooperative Classification and Communication Through Shared Metadata By Adam 
Mathes  
• Social Bookmarking Tools (I): A General Review From D-Lib Magazine  
• What is Web 2.0 From O'Reilly  
• Webheads ESL Community of Practice  
 
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Tag Clouds in the Blogosphere 
 
Language Learning & Technology 15 
Blogs and on-line writing 
• Web Watch: Writing forthe Web By Susan Deysher  
• Bridging the Composition Divide: Blog Pedagogy and the Potential for Agonistic Classrooms By 
Janice Wendi Fernheimer and Thomas J. Nelson  
• The Digital Divide and its Discontents By Matthew Payne  
• Best of the Blogs From Deutsche Welle  
• edu.blogs Ewan McIntosh's blog (Scottish language teacher)  
• Blogs From Vance Stevens  
• Blogs 2 Teach UK service for teachers  
• Blogging Tools From the e-learning centre  
• Weblogs in Education  
• Blogs as Course Management Systems From The Electric Lyceum  
• eLGG and Moodle integration  
• WordPress MU Multi-user version of the popular blogging software  
Electronic Texts 
• Literature on the Web By Donna Neutze  
• eBooks - What's Holding You Back? Discussion on slashdot  
• Google AJAXSLT Google Ajax library for transforming text using XSL-T  
• Careo Campus Repository of Educational Objects  
• Creating Interactive Glosses and Sounds: Chaucer's The Canterbury Tales By John Kundert-Gibbs  
• Design And Evaluation Of The User Interface Of Foreign Language Multimedia Software: A 
Cognitive Approach By Jan Plass (in LLT)  
• XSL stylesheets for TEI XML For transforming TEI formatted text to pdf  
• The Linguist's Shoebox Tools for working with texts  
• What's the Big Deal about XML? By Bill Walker  
• Perseus Project Electronic classical texts  
• COHSE The Conceptual Open Hypermedia Project  
• Electronic Publishing Center Oklahoma State Library  
• Electronic Text Collections in Western European Literature From the University of Virginia  
 
