Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num1/arnoldducate/ 
January 2006, Volume 10, Number 1 
pp. 42-66 
 
Copyright © 2006, ISSN 1094-3501 42 
FUTURE FOREIGN LANGUAGE TEACHERS' SOCIAL AND 
COGNITIVE COLLABORATION IN AN ONLINE ENVIRONMENT 
Nike Arnold1 
University of Tennessee 
Lara Ducate 
University of South Carolina 
ABSTRACT 
Discussion boards provide an interactive venue where new and future language teachers can 
reflect, evaluate, solve problems or simply exchange ideas (e.g., Bonk, Hansen, Grabner-Hagen, 
Lazar, & Mirabelli, 1996; DeWert, Babinski, & Jones, 2003; Kumari, 2001; Pawan, Paulus, 
Yalcin, & Chang, 2003).  In addition, encouraging future teachers to learn with technology before 
teaching with it allows them to become comfortable using various computer applications. 
This article examines transcripts from a semester-long asynchronous discussion between foreign 
language methodology classes at two different universities. Social and cognitive presence in the 
discussions was analyzed using Garrison, Anderson, and Archer’s Framework of a Community of 
Inquiry (2001).  The results indicate that students engaged in a high degree of interactivity as well 
as all types of social and cognitive presence. These findings indicate that students not only 
progressed in their cognitive understanding of the pedagogical topics, but also employed social 
presence, the more dominant of the two, to aid their discussions.  The topics seemed to play an 
important role in the type of cognitive activity evident in the discussions. 
These results differ from those of studies which found that students did not engage in interactivity 
(Henri, 1995; Pena-Shaff & Nicholls, 2004) and others which noted low levels of social presence 
(Garrison, et  al. 2001; Meyer, 2003). 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Preparing future foreign language (FL) teachers for their careers is a complex process which requires 
reflection, opportunities to apply theory to real-life situations, and a network for the exchange of ideas 
and support. To promote this professional growth, a variety of tasks have been incorporated into teacher 
training courses and programs. The purpose of this study is to add to the growing body of research on 
ways to integrate technology in teacher education programs by examining discussion boards, a form of 
asynchronous computer-mediated communication (ACMC), and their potential to promote social 
interaction and cognitive growth among new and future teachers. 
There are two reasons why technology should be an integral part of teacher training. First, many computer 
applications, especially asynchronous computer-mediated communication (e.g., e-mail, electronic bulletin 
boards), promote interactive learning, which is central to the professional development of future and 
current educators. Electronic discussion boards provide an interactive venue where new and future 
teachers can reflect, evaluate, solve problems or simply exchange ideas (Bonk et al., 1996; DeWert et al., 
2003; Kumari, 2001; Liou, 2001; Mitchell, 2003; Pawan et al., 2003). Through such collective online 
discussions, future teachers experience the cognitive and social benefits of collaborating with their peers, 
which is the focus of this article. 
In addition to providing opportunities for dialogue, technology has become an integral part of learning 
and teaching. This was reflected in President Clinton’s America’s Technology Literacy Challenge (1996), 
Nike Arnold and Lara Ducate Future Foreign Language Teachers' Social and Cognitive 
Collaboration in an Online Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 43 
when he demanded that teachers receive the necessary training and support to use computers in their 
classrooms. When future teachers learn with technology before teaching with it, they are able to 
experience technology from the students’ point of view and thereby evaluate its uses and benefits from a 
user perspective. This is an important step in preparing teachers for the effective use of educational 
technology (Kassen & Higgins, 1997).  As a result, these teachers are more likely to incorporate 
technology into their own teaching (Lam, 2000).  
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Collaborative Learning 
Computer-mediated communication (CMC) is a widely used educational tool because it lends itself to 
instruction based on sociocultural principles.  It has been suggested by Vygotsky (1978) and explored by 
many researchers (Adair-Hauck & Donato, 1994; Aljaafreh & Lantolf, 1994; Anton & DiCamilla, 1998; 
Coughlin & Duff, 1996; Warschauer, 1997, 2000) that learning takes place in a social environment and is 
facilitated by dialogue.  During this exchange of ideas, each individual interlocutor is able to internalize 
the new jointly constructed knowledge.  Learning is therefore mediated by the context in which it takes 
place, the tools used to aid the learning process, such as dialogue, books, electronic messages, and Web 
pages, as well as by the participants involved in the learning process (Bonk & Cunningham, 1998).   
This collaborative learning process is often facilitated by scaffolding, when interlocutors provide prompts, 
hints, explanations, questions, and suggestions to assist each other in solving the current problems (Bonk 
& Cunningham, 1998; Donato, 1996).  Collaborative learning tasks encourage learner autonomy (Henri & 
Rigault, 1996), build teamwork, alter the role of teachers and students, allow students to scaffold, 
facilitate class discussion, and promote critical thinking (Bonk & King, 1998). When students scaffold 
each other, they can ultimately reach higher-level understandings of tasks or solve problems they would 
have been unable to solve alone.  When done through writing instead of speaking, as is the case in CMC, 
the writing process changes from an independently performed task to one that promotes use of the input 
and reflection of other students.   
Computer-mediated Communication 
CMC has been used in a wide variety of contexts to replace or supplement face-to-face communication.  
In schools, colleges and universities across the world, teachers have used electronic exchanges, e-mail, 
bulletin boards (ACMC) and real-time chats (synchronous CMC), in a variety of disciplines such as 
communication (e.g., Pena-Shaff & Nicholls, 2004), medicine (e.g., Koschmann, Kelson, Feltovich, & 
Barrows, 1996) and foreign languages (e.g., Abrams, 2001, 2003; Lee, 2002).  CMC has also been 
implemented in teacher training and education courses in a variety of ways, for example, to discuss 
teaching scenarios (Bonk et al., 1996), engage students in discussions with experts (Lomicka & Lord, 
2004),  reflect on teaching experiences and observations (Liou, 2001), collaborate and provide feedback 
on group projects  (Curtis & Lawson, 2001), and for group problem-solving (Kang, 1996). 
Why use ACMC? 
The fact that many educators see CMC as a valuable type of educational technology is partly due to 
certain inherent features of the medium, which affect and shape participants’ interaction. Especially 
ACMC, used in the current study, provides a time lag between reading a posting, formulating a reply, 
revising it, and finally sending it.  This lack of time pressure allows more time for reflection (Duffy, 
Dueber, & Hawley, 1996; Garrison, Anderson, & Archer, 2001; Meyer, 2003), which is often lacking in 
the dynamic and fast-paced discussions typical of classrooms.  Since ACMC is time and space 
independent, it is also a convenient way to connect people who otherwise would not be able to meet.  This 
has given educators the opportunity to expand their classrooms to include a virtual space, where their 
Nike Arnold and Lara Ducate Future Foreign Language Teachers' Social and Cognitive 
Collaboration in an Online Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 44 
students can meet experts (Kumari, 2001; Lomicka & Lord, 2004) or other students, as is the case for this 
study. 
Of course, ACMC also has certain disadvantages. But as Salaberry (2000) pointed out, an apparent 
drawback of technology can sometimes be used as a pedagogical advantage. The fact that ACMC does 
not provide participants with immediate feedback from their peers and/or teacher can be perceived as a 
disadvantage of ACMC. However, this encourages the interlocutors to compose clear, succinct messages 
to convey meaning (Koschmann et al., 1996; Meyer, 2003). As is the case for many written forms of 
expression, making a record of one’s thinking is more powerful and intentional than is usually possible in 
spoken communication (Wells & Chang-Wells, 1992).   
There have been many reports of successful implementations of ACMC, with different cognitive benefits. 
E-mail exchanges or discussion boards often include lively information exchanges (Kanuka & Anderson, 
1996; Pawan et al., 2003), which display in-depth processing (McKenzie & Murphy, 2000) and critical 
thinking (Liou, 2001; Newman, Johnson, Cochrane, & Webb, 1996; Newman, Webb, & Cochrane, 1995).  
Reading others’ comments, ideas and experiences also exposes students to multiple perspectives (DeWert 
et al., 2003; Mitchell, 2003) and helps to broaden students’ knowledge and deepen their understanding 
(Gunawardena, Lowe, & Anderson, 1997; Kanuka & Anderson, 1996; Mitchell, 2003). In addition, the 
opportunity to build on each other’s ideas (Pawan et al., 2003) and to learn from each other (Sengupta, 
2001) can result in the co-construction of knowledge (Kamhi-Stein, 2000; Pena-Shaff & Nicholls, 2004; 
Sengupta, 2001), as mentioned above in regard to collaborative learning and scaffolding.   
Apart from the cognitive benefits described above, students and teachers alike have witnessed the positive 
social impact ACMC can have. Asynchronous electronic exchanges seem to foster the building of a 
learning community, where participants offer each other support and praise (Cole, Raffier, Rogan, & 
Schleicher, 1998; McKenzie & Murphy, 2000; Sengupta, 2001). Although it has been argued that the lack 
of social context cues such as frowning, smiling or nodding makes ACMC a reduced register (Ferrara, 
Brunner, & Whittemore, 1991), these fewer social cues often lead to greater equality in participation than 
in the traditional classroom (Kang, 1996; Warschauer, 1997) further contributing to the social network of 
the ACMC community.   
This body of findings illustrates how "CMC creates the opportunity for a group of people to construct 
knowledge together, thus linking reflection and interaction" (Warschauer, 1997, p. 473). Therefore, it 
seems to be a good fit for promoting the type of student-centered learning that is central to the 
sociocultural theory of learning and teacher education. 
Inconclusive Research Findings 
While there have been many studies reporting on the cognitive and social benefits of ACMC, this 
research is far from conclusive. In fact, there are studies whose findings contradict the positive accounts 
of ACMC implementations just described. Some have reported that in ACMC participants rarely explain 
or elaborate on their own contributions or challenge an opinion (Curtis & Lawson, 2001; Kanuka & 
Anderson, 1996; Pawan et al., 2003). Sometimes ACMC discussions tend to consist of mostly 
independent messages making them "one-way" interactions (Pawan et al., 2003, p. 129). Consequently, 
this lack of interactivity hinders the co-construction of meaning (Henri, 1995), the negotiation of meaning 
(Kanuka & Anderson, 1996), or even advanced cognitive processes (Weasenforth, Biesenbach-Lucas, & 
Meloni, 2002). 
These inconsistent findings might be due to differences in how exactly ACMC was implemented, such as 
how it was integrated into a course, methods of assessment, task type, teacher involvement in the 
discussions, group composition and dynamics, and time allotted for the discussion. As Warschauer, 
Turbee, and Roberts (1996, p. 9) point out, "the appropriate and effective use of computer networks … is 
partly a technical issue, but primarily a pedagogical one.". This suggests that the decisions we as teachers 
Nike Arnold and Lara Ducate Future Foreign Language Teachers' Social and Cognitive 
Collaboration in an Online Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 45 
make about how to use ACMC (e.g., group size, task) play an important role in determining the outcomes 
of that activity. In addition, such inconsistent findings on the quality of learning through ACMC might be 
due to the different theories and frameworks researchers have used to analyze the transcripts of ACMC 
exchanges. 
Analyzing ACMC Discussions 
To analyze ACMC discussions, researchers have used various focuses and types of data.  When 
investigating ACMC, one important aspect is the participants’ perceptions of the value and benefits of 
such activities. For this purpose, researchers have used questionnaires (Mazzolini & Maddison, 2003), 
interviews (Lam, 2000; Macdonald, 2003) and think-aloud protocols (Schallert, Reed, & the D-Team, 
2003). To investigate the actual discussions, the readily available transcripts have often been used for 
analyses. Earlier research especially tended to focus on those aspects of online communication that were 
easily measured and quantifiable (Kern, Ware, & Warschauer, 2004), such as the number of postings, 
threads or logons, the length of entries, and patterns of turn taking. But these quantitative indicators 
provide an incomplete picture, since they do not account for the messages’ content. Already in 1992, 
Mason warned that this type of analysis is problematic because student activity might be mistaken for 
student learning. To overcome this flaw, there has been a shift in recent years to focus on the quality of 
production and learning. This has allowed researchers to investigate whether ACMC’s promise to 
promote effective learning remains  potential or is a reality. Such studies have included descriptive 
accounts of the discussions (Cole et al., 1998; Kamhi-Stein, 2000; Matsuda & Matsuda, 2001) or relied 
on content analysis frameworks based on current trends in education (e.g., critical thinking, 
collaborative/cooperative learning, learner-centered learning, co-construction of knowledge) (Kanuka & 
Anderson, 1996; Meyer, 2004; Newman et al., 1996; Newman et al., 1995; Pawan et al., 2003; Sengupta, 
2001). 
Theoretical Framework  
In order to select the most appropriate framework for this study, it was necessary to evaluate several 
analysis frameworks. As shown by Meyer (2004), who analyzed online discussions using four different 
frameworks (among them Bloom’s taxonomy (Bloom & Krathwohl, 1956) and Garrison et al.(2001)) and 
compared the results, there is not one best framework for analyzing ACMC. The choice of framework 
depends on the type of discussion and the learning objectives, since each framework focuses on a 
different aspect of student involvement in the discussion and how the student expresses his/her thought 
process in the postings.  
Because this study was concerned with examining higher-level thinking and social aspects of CMC, the 
frameworks that dealt with reflection and critical thinking were most relevant to the current analysis. 
Although various frameworks have been employed to investigate cognitive processes (e.g., Mitchell, 
2003; Sengupta, 2001; Weasenforth et al., 2002), the framework developed by Garrison et al. (2001) was 
used for this study because: (1) it is specifically designed to analyze online interactions, (2) it is the most 
widely used framework for ACMC analyses (Garrison et al., 2001; Meyer, 2004; Newman et al., 1996; 
Newman et al., 1995; Pawan et al., 2003),  and (3) it includes categories for analyzing social presence 
within the dialogue, a necessary component for negotiating meaning and co-constructing knowledge 
according to Garrison et al. (2001).   
METHODOLOGY 
Participants 
This study was conducted in the fall semester of 2003 with two graduate level courses, one taught at 
University One (U1) and the other at University Two (U2). Both were mandatory three-credit-hour 
classes on foreign language teaching methodology designed for incoming graduate teaching assistants 
Nike Arnold and Lara Ducate Future Foreign Language Teachers' Social and Cognitive 
Collaboration in an Online Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 46 
(TAs). With three hours a week of traditional instruction as well as online discussions, these classes 
extended from the classroom into an online environment. While the U1 course was specifically for 
German TAs, the class at U2 was offered through the foreign language department for future TAs in the 
French, German, and Spanish programs. 
At U1, five female graduate students participated in the discussions.  Since all of them were natives of 
Germany, they had to conduct the electronic discussions in a language other than their native language 
(i.e. English). All except for one student had just arrived from Germany and began teaching first semester 
German classes right away. 
From the U2 course, 18 students participated in this study, 5 males and 13 females. Three of them were 
undergraduate students, who had obtained special permission to receive undergraduate credit for the class. 
The other 15 participants were graduate students. The U2 students represented quite a heterogeneous 
group from the French program (5 students), German program (2 students) and Spanish program (12 
students). While most students were Americans, five were non-native speakers of English, their native 
languages being Portuguese, Russian and Spanish.  Before beginning their studies at U1 and U2, all 
international students passed the TOEFL test with scores of 250 and higher, well above the minimum 
requirements of 230 and 193 for U1 and U2 respectively, and passed an additional proficiency exam 
administered by their universities.  
The age of the participants was also very heterogeneous, from undergraduate students in their early 20s to 
non-traditional students in their 40s pursuing a second career path.  Unlike most of the U1 students, the 
U2 students were not teaching yet. Instead, they were assisting and observing other teachers.  However, 
several had previous teaching experience. 
Task 
Students engaged in five different online bulletin board discussions with the topics and assessment 
guidelines set by the teachers (see Appendix A for topics and Appendix B for the rubric). The goal of the 
discussions was to engage students in interactive reflection of class material and its practical applications 
as well as to provide a support network for the new and future teachers, where they could discuss their 
questions and concerns with other students also in the beginning of their teaching careers. The instructors 
provided the triggering questions but did not participate in the discussion in order to communicate to the 
students that the students and not the teachers were in control of the discussion with the freedom to take 
topics in any direction in which they were interested, and that they were responsible for the outcomes of 
the discussions.  
The topics were related to reading assignments and themes the two teachers had discussed in their classes 
and spanned a variety of teaching methodology topics ranging from theoretical to practical concerns. The 
first discussion was mainly for students to get to know each other and to discuss their opinions about the 
advantages and disadvantages of being a nonnative or native speaker as a FL teacher. This was not a topic 
students had read about or discussed in class. Several weeks later, after both classes had discussed 
theories of learning, they were asked to apply a learning theory (behaviorism, constructivism, 
socioconstructivism, etc.) to something they had learned (how to drive a car or dance the tango, etc.) and 
analyze it accordingly. The purpose of this topic was for the students to apply theory to a real life 
situation. To change the discussion from theory to practice, the third topic related to anxiety and 
motivation. The students reflected on past FL learning experiences and their levels of motivation and 
anxiety, possible reasons for their emotions, and what they could have done to change those feelings. 
Then they brainstormed ways to influence their students’ level of motivation and/or anxiety. The fourth 
topic – analyzing and introducing the textbook they use/will be using to teach – was a mixture of theory 
and practice. The U2 students, since they were not yet teaching, had to analyze a textbook based on future 
use, whereas the U1 students, who were, all except for one, already teaching, could comment on their 
textbook from experience. Finally, the last topic was mainly practical again. Students discussed culture, 
Nike Arnold and Lara Ducate Future Foreign Language Teachers' Social and Cognitive 
Collaboration in an Online Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 47 
how to incorporate it into a language class, how language and culture are related, and problems with 
teaching culture. Many students also used this last discussion as an opportunity to say goodbye to their 
group members. As explained above, there was a balance between practical and theoretical topics to give 
students a chance to explore and reflect on various aspects of teaching. The questions were designed to 
promote different cognitive behaviors, such as application (topic 2), synthesis (topic 5) and evaluation 
(topic 4). 
Before the first discussion, the teachers formed heterogeneous groups of four or five, based on factors 
such as age, gender, nationality, and language of study with at least one U1 student per group. Groups 
were changed after the second discussion due to personality conflicts within one group and to allow 
students to meet other members of each class. However, after this first rearranging, the groups remained 
the same for the rest of the semester and all contained at least one U1 student. 
Each discussion lasted five days and students’ contributions during all five discussions made up 15% of 
their final grade (see Appendix B for rubric). Students at both universities were assessed by the same 
grading rubric and were graded according to the following four criteria: 1) theoretical knowledge (to 
encourage them to bring in information from their readings and class discussion), 2) connecting theory to 
their experiences/opinions/comments, 3) interactivity (to persuade them to engage in a dialogue rather 
than monologues (Henri, 1995)) and 4) actively contributing to the discussion.  Students were graded 
directly after completion of the discussion to provide them with immediate feedback about their 
performance.  
Data Analysis 
The primary data were the discussion transcripts from each group, totaling 27 discussions. In addition, 
students completed a survey at the end of the semester, which included Likert-type questions, as well as 
several open-ended questions relating to students’ feelings about their CMC experience. 
These data were collected to address the following four research questions for this study: 
1) Do participants in electronic exchanges engage in monologues or dialogues? 
2) What types of social activity do students engage in? 
3) What types of cognitive activity do students engage in? 
4) Do the levels of social and cognitive activity differ between discussions?  
Since students often addressed several different topics in a single posting, the transcripts were first 
divided into speech segments, “the smallest unit of delivery, linked to a single theme, directed at the same 
interlocutor“ (Henri & Rigault, 1996, p. 62). During a training process using one group’s discussion, the 
coders established an interrater reliability of 92% for parsing speech segments. Then, using the Garrison 
et al. framework (2001), both researchers coded the social and cognitive speech segments in the same 
training transcript. From this analysis, they established an interrater reliability of 89% for the social and 
86% for cognitive categories. After achieving this interrater reliability, one of the researchers coded the 
transcripts of all five discussions for cognitive presence while the other researcher analyzed social 
presence.  
According to the Garrison et al. (2001) framework, learning in an online environment occurs through the 
interaction of the following elements: social presence, teaching presence, and cognitive presence (see 
Table 1).  Social presence includes three categories: 1) emotional expression, such as humor or sharing 
feelings about the educational experience, 2) open communication including anything to show awareness 
of the other participants, such as referring to others’ comments or quoting someone, and recognition of 
each other’s contributions, such as expressing agreement or complimenting, and 3) group cohesion, 
anything that reinforces the group dynamic and builds participation, such as greetings, addressing 
interlocutors by name, personal questions, and good-byes.  Although Garrison et al. (2001) acknowledged 
the importance of the social element in a CMC discussion, few studies have considered it during their 
Nike Arnold and Lara Ducate Future Foreign Language Teachers' Social and Cognitive 
Collaboration in an Online Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 48 
analyses, instead focusing mainly on the cognitive side of the discussion (Gunawardena et al., 1997; 
Kanuka & Anderson, 1996, Pawan, et al., 2003).   
In the case of this study, since the teachers did not comment on the discussion board, all of the teaching 
presence fell under the category of "instructional management," such as "setting the curriculum" and 
"designing the methods/assessment," and could not be coded within the discussions. Most of the teaching 
presence took place before the discussions began in the form of the guiding questions (triggers) and 
assessment guidelines. Therefore, the instructors had considerable indirect influence on the outcome of 
the discussions.  Although Garrison et al.’s framework and several studies (Gunawardena et al., 1997; 
Mazzolini & Maddison, 2003; Pawan et al. 2003; Weasenforth et al., 2002) suggest that teacher 
participation is an integral component of electronic discussions, we chose to examine how students 
constructed meaning and social dynamics without the teachers participating in the dialogue.  
The third component in the Garrison et al.’s (2001) framework is cognitive presence, including four steps 
progressing from lower- to higher-order thinking. The triggering event, recognizing a problem or 
expressing puzzlement, begins the dialogue. This leads to exploration, when participants brainstorm, 
make suggestions, and search for clarification of the problem. Step three is integration, when interlocutors 
begin to create solutions to the problem. Finally, students reach resolution when they are able to apply 
their new ideas and solutions. 
FINDINGS 
The survey responses were compiled and in the case of the 12 Likert-type responses, tallied by 
percentages, and the answers to the three free response questions were categorized by themes. The 
cognitive and social aspects of the discussions were analyzed using Garrison et al.’s framework of a 
community of inquiry (2001).  The frequencies from this analysis were then used for a chi-square analysis 
to test distribution and measure how the findings differed from the statistically expected values.  To 
account for quantitative differences in student production, the raw numbers were used to calculate density 
figures for each discussion. This measure, proposed by Rourke, Anderson, Garrison, and Archer (2001), 
reflects the number of occurrences of a specific social or cognitive event per 1,000 words.  To calculate 
density numbers, the number of observed events is divided by the discussion’s total number of words and 
then multiplied by 1,000.  
Survey - Social Results 
On the survey, many students reported that they felt a sense of community with the other students in their 
group (57%) and preferred having discussions with people from a different university (65%), which 
suggests that students benefited from linking universities. They were able to compare their graduate 
programs and commiserate on the expectations of new graduate students.  In the free responses, students 
commented that they enjoyed the "informal nature of the discussion board," that "it was done in such a 
relaxed and free situation," and “"that it might make communication easier." Another student responded 
that it was "very useful for sharing interesting ideas and suggestions for classroom activities."  
On a more negative side, one student commented that she would have preferred the discussion in person 
and another student remarked that she did not feel connected to the other group members, which she 
attributed to the reorganization of groups after discussion II. However, another student commented that 
she liked changing groups because it exposed her to even more different points of view. 
In general, the analysis of the discussions that follows supports the findings from the survey.  Most 
groups engaged in a high level of social activity, higher than cognitive activity, in fact. However, there 
were some groups that connected more than others on a social level, as reported in the survey, where 
some students reported feeling closer to their group members than others. 
 
Nike Arnold and Lara Ducate Future Foreign Language Teachers' Social and Cognitive 
Collaboration in an Online Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 49 
Table 1: Framework of a Community of Inquiry by Garrison, Anderson, and Archer (2001) 
Humor Emotional Expression 
= ability/confidence to express 
feelings related to educational 
experience 
Self-Disclosure 
= sharing of feelings/attitudes/experiences/interests 
Use of reply feature 
Quoting directly  
Directing a comment at an 
individual  
 
 
Mutual 
Awareness 
Referring explicitly to content 
of others’ messages 
Explicitly expressing 
appreciation/agreement 
Complimenting others 
 
 
 
 
Open Communication 
= reciprocal/respectful exchanges 
Recognition of 
each other’s 
Contributions 
Encouraging others 
So
ci
al
 P
re
se
nc
e 
Group Cohesion 
= activities that build/sustain a presence of group commitment; focused collaborative 
communication that builds participation/empathy 
Setting Curriculum, Designing 
Methods/Assessment 
Establishing Time Parameters 
Instructional Management 
= structural concerns 
Utilizing the Medium 
Creating Effective Group Consciousness 
Identifying Areas of (Dis)Agreement 
Building Understanding 
= concern with productive/valid 
knowledge acquisition Seeking to Reach Consensus/Understanding 
Assess Discourse Te
ac
hi
ng
 P
re
se
nc
e 
Direct Instruction 
Assess Efficacy of Educational Process 
Recognizing a Problem Triggering Event 
= state of dissonance/feeling of 
unease resulting from an 
experience 
 
Sense of Puzzlement 
 
Information Exchange 
  
Exploration 
= search for information/ 
knowledge/alternatives that 
might help make sense of the 
situation/ problem; search for 
clarification 
 
Discussion of Ambiguities 
 
Connecting Ideas 
Integration 
= integrating information into a 
concept/idea; looking for 
insights/ gaining some 
understanding of acquired 
information/knowledge 
 
Create Solution 
Vicariously Apply New Ideas 
Co
gn
iti
ve
 P
re
se
nc
e 
Resolution 
= application of idea/concept Critically Assess Solutions 
 
 
 
Nike Arnold and Lara Ducate Future Foreign Language Teachers' Social and Cognitive 
Collaboration in an Online Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 50 
Transcripts - Social Presence 
The transcripts of all five discussions were used for the qualitative analysis.  During the third discussion, 
students produced the most output with over 21,000 words while the first topic had the smallest 
production of less than 13,000 words. Each group of four to five students generated between nine and 
thirty messages for each topic, totaling between 1,500 and 5,900 words. The length of individual 
messages varied greatly, ranging from only two to over 560 words. 
Table 2:  Summary of Raw Numbers for the Categories of Social and Cognitive Presence 
DISCUSSION  
1 2 3 4 5 
SOCIAL 
  Emotional 
 
12 
 
15 
 
5 
 
6 
 
3 
  Open Communication 
       Mutual Awareness 
       Recognition of Others 
 
100 
26 
 
187 
34 
 
162 
44 
 
164 
24 
 
227 
80 
  Group Cohesion 140 120 122 159 184 
Total # of Social Events 278 356 333 353 494 
COGNITIVE 
  Trigger 
 
22 
 
31 
 
10 
 
21 
 
26 
  Exploration 121 76 103 183 106 
  Integration 43 104 105 51 103 
  Resolution 1 0 2 1 10 
Total # of Cognitive Events 187 211 220 256 245 
Total # of Words 12,948 17,810 21,149 17,157 19,588 
Ratio Social Events : Cognitive 
Events (in %) 
60 : 40 63 : 37 60 : 40 58 : 42 67 : 33 
 
 
Table 3: Summary of Density Numbers for the Categories of Social and Cognitive Presence 
DISCUSSION  
1 2 3 4 5 
SOCIAL DENSITY 
  Emotional  
21.47 
0.93 
19.99 
0.84 
15.75 
0.24 
20.57 
0.35 
25.22 
0.15 
  Open Communication 
       Mutual Awareness 
       Recognition of Others 
 
7.72 
2.01 
 
10.50 
1.91 
 
7.66 
2.08 
 
9.56 
1.40 
 
11.59 
4.08 
  Group Cohesion 10.81 6.74 5.77 9.27 9.39 
COGNITIVE DENSITY 
  Trigger 
14.44 
1.70 
11.84 
1.74 
10.40 
0.47 
14.92 
1.22 
12.51 
1.33 
  Exploration 9.35 4.27 4.87 10.67 5.41 
  Integration 3.32 5.84 4.96 2.97 5.26 
  Resolution 0.08 0 0.09 0.06 0.51 
 
In all 5 discussions, social activity outweighed cognitive events and accounted for 58% to 67% of total 
events (see Table 2 for raw numbers and percentages).  The neutral measure of density was also included 
in the analysis to account for the variations in length mentioned above.  Social density ranged from 15.75 
Nike Arnold and Lara Ducate Future Foreign Language Teachers' Social and Cognitive 
Collaboration in an Online Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 51 
in discussion III to 25.22 in the last discussion, which means that between 15.75 and 25.22 social events 
occurred on average per 1,000 words in these discussions (see Table 3 for density numbers). 
Emotional Expression 
In all five discussions, emotional expressions accounted for less than 5% of the social utterances with the 
emotional expression density ranging from 0.15 in the last discussion to 0.93 in the first. These numbers 
show that emotional expressions occurred very infrequently, on average less than one occurrence per 
1,000 words. During the first discussion where students were getting to know each other and the second 
discussion on learning theories, students contributed the most emotional expressions. A chi-square 
analysis (x2(12, N = 1814) = 62.88, p = .000) revealed that during these discussions, emotional expression 
occurred more frequently than statistically expected (discussion I: f = 12, fe = 6.3; discussion II: f = 15, fe 
= 8). 
In the second discussion, the higher number of emotional expressions was likely due to the fact that the 
students had initially misunderstood the question and thought it was referring to teaching methods instead 
of learning theories.  In contrast to the second discussion’s several references to the task, most of the 
emotional comments in the other discussions referred to how well they liked or disliked the topics.  When 
writing about textbooks, a student with a negative opinion about the discussion topic was able to change 
her perspective with the help of another student. 
"Well, speaking seriously, I feel that if I could have this discussion with other people from 
French, that it would be more advantageous.  I feel that, for this kind of discussion, groups should 
have been changed, so that people would be able to discuss textbooks with other people that will 
be teaching the same language." 
This student’s frustration with the textbook topic is refuted by another student, who has a different 
opinion about the value of the subject.  
"Let me tell you that I don’t think that discussing about a French book is going to be a waste of 
time for any of us. ( . . .) Briefly, the idea is that after this discussion we have a better 
understanding of our books so we can maximize their use by being selective and reflexive (taking 
in account the communicative teaching methodology that we’ve been studying)." 
The first student stood corrected and replied:  
"I have to start by saying thank you for clarifying to me the value of this discussion. (. . .) It’s 
always good to discuss the books we will be using as teachers, even if we’ll be teaching different 
languages." 
Although students did not often express their opinions and feelings about the topics, they had the 
opportunity to express frustration, receive support and feedback, and in at least one case, change from a 
negative to a positive attitude about the topic.  
Open Communication 
Open communication is divided into the categories of mutual awareness and recognition of others.  It is 
characterized by reciprocal and respectful exchanges, which help build a community and keep each other 
engaged in the task.  Students referred to previous postings, incorporated others’ comments into their own 
postings, built on each other’s postings, and directed questions at group members regarding previous 
postings, which indicates that they were engaged in dialogues instead of monologues.  With a range from 
7.66 (discussion III) to 11.59 (discussion V), the density numbers for mutual awareness show that this 
type of behavior took place quite regularly in the online discussions, but recognition of others was not as 
common (density: 1.40 – 4.08).  Below are examples of comments coded under open communication. 
Compliment – "What you wrote about the cultural aspect sounds pretty cool."  
Nike Arnold and Lara Ducate Future Foreign Language Teachers' Social and Cognitive 
Collaboration in an Online Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 52 
Adding to previous comment - "I have so many thoughts about all of the things you have 
discussed …hmmmmm…where to start?"  
Direct question – "I have a question for you as well.  How much do you think psychological 
factors play into a student seeming non-motivated?" 
Referring to previous posting – "Your example of schema and language learning is something I 
can relate to – having grown up speaking Spanish, taking French was bit easier for me than the 
other students in my class."  
The above examples reflect various ways in which students created a dialogue where participants felt 
listened to and were encouraged to participate.  
Group Cohesion 
The last category of social presence is group cohesion, consisting of utterances that contribute to building 
a supportive community learning environment and participation within the groups. This category occurred 
most frequently in the first discussion and was the second most frequent social indicator in discussions II-
IV, which is reflected in rather high density numbers: 5.77 to 10.81.  
Group cohesion is aimed at building a rapport with the group and includes introductions to themselves 
and to their postings, general questions, salutations, and goodbyes.  After the introductions during the first 
discussion, students had an idea of who everyone was and continued to build group cohesion in future 
posts as illustrated by the following examples. 
Salutation – "What’s up Tennessee!"  
Good-bye – "Talk to you later and have a good start in the new week." "Well, enjoy the weekend.  
Monday morning comes too early!"  
Direct questions for the group- "What’s it like for you guys?  Are you ever anxious?  What 
makes you feel motivated?  And what do you do to help your students with anxieties?"  
In some cases these utterances did not even refer to the task, such as when one group discussed their 
favorite music groups, but they helped group members to get to know each other and to feel comfortable 
writing with each other.   
According to both the survey results and the discussion analysis, emotional expression, open 
communication, and group cohesion appeared to contribute to students’ sense of belonging to a 
community, which in turn lowered their anxiety and helped them to feel at ease expressing themselves 
and asking questions. 
Survey – Cognitive Results 
Several items on the questionnaire were designed to investigate which cognitive benefits the participants 
experienced. The students’ responses indicate that the electronic discussions provided a cognitively 
unique environment.  Sixty-one percent of students agreed with the statement "I learned things in the 
discussions that I would not have figured out on my own or in class discussions", which indicates that 
most students felt that the interactive process of the electronic discussions promoted their learning. Many 
participants (82%) attributed this advantage to the fact that the discussions were conducted in a written 
mode and reported that the process of talking/writing through topics helped them to understand them 
better. 
The vast majority (96%) reported that their discussion partners’ contributions exposed them to new 
perspectives that they would not have considered on their own. As a result, they broadened their view and 
understanding of various issues. Another advantage was that the discussion board provided a forum where 
Nike Arnold and Lara Ducate Future Foreign Language Teachers' Social and Cognitive 
Collaboration in an Online Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 53 
students felt free to ask questions they would not have asked in class discussions, according to fifty-two 
percent. 
In their answers to the open-ended questions on the survey, several participants reiterated these beliefs 
about the cognitive benefits of online discussions. One student recalled that talking about the topic 
"clarified some things for me. When I read all the entries my ‘light-bulb’ came on frequently, not just as 
far as understanding the topic goes, but mostly because good ideas were brought up."  The remark of 
another student, who stated that "writing helped absorb ideas," illustrates the value of the written mode.  
Students also commented on their exposure to new ideas and different perspectives:  "It was very 
enriching to find out what other students thought about the topics who came from different backgrounds." 
And while not everybody was convinced that the discussion board enriched their knowledge of the topics, 
they still valued the discussions, as illustrated by this statement:  
"I honestly don’t believe the discussion board contributed to my understanding of the class 
material, but I did find it very useful for sharing interesting ideas and suggestions for classroom 
activities."   
Although this student claimed the discussions did not further her understanding of the issue, sharing ideas 
and suggestions still contributed to her growth as a teacher, which ultimately has cognitive benefits. 
Transcripts – Cognitive Presence 
Overall, social activity outweighed cognitive events and displayed a considerably higher density.  
Cognitive density ranged from only 10.40 in discussion III to 14.92 in discussion IV, compared with 
social density numbers of 20.0 or above for all discussions except for discussion III. 
As discussed earlier, Garrison and his colleagues (2001) defined four indicators of cognitive presence: 
trigger, exploration, integration and resolution.  In the first and fourth discussions, the most common 
indicator of cognitive presence was exploration for all groups, representing between 54% and 83% of 
cognitive activity in each group. For discussions II, III and V, exploration or integration occurred most 
frequently, depending on the group. Resolution was represented by the least amount of utterances in all of 
the discussions.  
Trigger 
A triggering event begins the dialogue or takes it into a new direction, often by asking questions.  In this 
study, the initial triggers, the topics for the electronic discussions, were provided by the two instructors.2 
However, the participants were encouraged to expand on the topics, which they did frequently, as this 
excerpt from the third discussion illustrates. 
"I totally agree with you on the issue of participation.  I have always had problems participating 
in class.  I remember (…) when I would see the dreaded outline of the course that stated (…): 
your participation grade will consist of 15% of your grade.  What does that really mean? 
(…)What qualifies participation?  Is it anything that you can think of to say?  Does it need to 
pertain to the class at hand?" 
The group had been discussing the relationship between a student’s personality and his/her level of 
participation when this student brought up the related issue of how to grade participation, thereby 
redirecting the discussion, an example of how students’ postings build on each other. 
Overall, students produced the fewest triggers in the third discussion (f = 10) and the most in discussion II 
(f = 31), a trend that is also reflected in the trigger density numbers, which ranged from 0.47 to 1.74.  In 
fact, a chi-square test for comparison   (x2 (12, N= 1089) = 149.998,  p = .000) revealed that the 
frequencies of triggers in discussions II and III are different from the statistically expected values. 
Triggers were more likely to occur in the second discussion and less likely in the third.  
Nike Arnold and Lara Ducate Future Foreign Language Teachers' Social and Cognitive 
Collaboration in an Online Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 54 
The low number of triggers for the second discussion is not surprising considering that the topic provided 
by the teachers to initiate the discussion contained several very specific questions, unlike the more 
broadly formulated topics of other discussions. In discussion III, the topic might also have contributed to 
the number of triggers, which was higher than statistically expected. It seems that students saw a 
connection between the topic and issues such as individual learner differences. In addition, sharing a 
personal memory of a learning experience often led others to ask off-task follow-up questions (e.g., Do 
you still play the guitar?), which were coded as triggers.   
Exploration 
A new trigger usually leads to a search for information to help make sense of the problem, which 
Garrison et al. (2001) labeled the exploration phase. At this stage, interlocutors typically engage in 
brainstorming, provide suggestions for consideration, or leap to conclusions. This type of cognitive 
activity is reflected in the following posting from discussion III: 
"For me, my foreign language experience has been different than yours, because when I first had 
to learn English I was living in an English speaking place (Canada).  Therefore, I can say that my 
intrinsic motivation to learn English was very strong." 
This student adds her personal narrative to the information exchange about the role of motivation and 
anxiety in FL learning. Comparing her own experience with that of a group mate, she builds on someone 
else’s contribution.  This type of interactivity occurred frequently at the exploration stage.  It is important 
to note, however, that she does not use it to support an opinion. Instead, she just offers it to the discussion 
forum for the others to consider. 
A comparison of the different discussions revealed that discussions I (f = 121; fe = 96) and IV (f = 183; fe 
= 131.4) included more explorations than statistically expected.  The exploration density numbers are also 
considerably higher for those discussions (9.35 and 10.67 respectively).  Again, the type of task can 
explain this increased level of explorations.  For the first discussion, students were asked to introduce 
themselves to their groups, which involves a high amount of information exchange. The same is true for 
the fourth discussion, which asked students to describe and evaluate the textbooks they are or will be 
using for teaching.  Since only one or two students in each group were familiar with the same textbook, 
they first had to provide their discussion partners with basic descriptive information. Discussions II (f = 
46; fe = 92.9) and V (f =106; fe = 125.8) yielded less explorations than statistically expected. This 
difference was especially drastic for the second discussion, where 92 explorations were statistically 
expected and only 46 produced. This low number of explorations is, however, accounted for by the high 
number of integrations in discussion II, to be discussed below. 
Integration 
At the integration phase, the information previously gathered at the exploration phase is integrated into a 
concept or idea to construct meanings or solutions to an issue. This can involve reference to a previous 
message with substantiated agreement or disagreement, building onto others’ ideas, developing a justified 
yet tentative hypothesis, and integrating information from other sources. This type of cognitive process is 
illustrated in this contribution:  
"What you mentioned about the presence of native speakers I think works for other people as 
well, for example when you have a person in your class that seems to know EVERYTHING! In 
my linguistics class we have a guy who seems much more advanced than everyone else, which at 
first I found a little intimidating."  
This student takes the comment of one of her group mates, that the presence of native speakers in a FL 
class can cause anxiety in non-native speakers, and expands on it. She proposes that anyone who is 
perceived as an expert can have this anxiety producing effect.   
Nike Arnold and Lara Ducate Future Foreign Language Teachers' Social and Cognitive 
Collaboration in an Online Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 55 
As mentioned above, creating a solution is also an indicator of this stage.  In the following excerpt, the 
author suggests how her teammate can overcome her reluctance to participate in class: 
"I see that what is bringing you pressure is the fact of being always the best.  Maybe you have to 
learn that the target is not to be the best but to do well enough and enjoy while learning." 
In this example, the integration reflects the shared inquiry space of the discussion board and is truly 
interactive:  the student reaches the integration stage based on someone else’s exploration.  However, 
there were also instances when integrations occurred in the private reflective world of the learner, 
possibly facilitated by the writing process, and manifested themselves in the discussion board.  The 
following example illustrates a student’s individual growth at the integration level.  After several 
paragraphs describing her own difficulties learning English, the student concludes:  
"So, from this experience, one thing I’ve always tried to do is show students as much respect as 
possible.  They are accepted even making mistakes." 
An analysis of the numbers shows that students engaged in more integration than statistically expected in 
discussions III (f =105; fe = 82) and especially II (f =104; fe = 67.5).  During the first (f = 43; fe = 69.7) and 
fourth discussions (f = 51; fe = 95.4), however, there was significantly less activity at the integration level. 
The difference was especially strong for the fourth discussion.  The integration density for these 
discussions mirror this trend and range from 2.97 for discussion IV to 5.84 for discussion II.  
The increased and decreased activity at the integration level might be due to the type of topic. Discussion 
IV, for example, focused on a textbook evaluation - a topic that does not necessarily lend itself towards 
the creation of solutions, whereas discussion II required students to integrate theory with previous 
learning experiences during their examination of learning theories.   
Resolution 
Finally, the new meaning or solution is applied, assessed, or defended in the resolution phase. Across all 
discussions, this type of cognitive activity was observed the least. For all groups combined, there were no 
incidents of resolutions in discussion II, one in discussions I and IV each, two in discussion III and ten in 
the last discussion, seven more than statistically expected.  Like the frequency numbers, the density 
numbers for this category are also very low.  In fact, they do not reach the 1.0 mark. 
The fact that most resolutions occurred in the last discussion can be attributed to the topic, which included 
an explicit question about possible solutions to the dilemma of teaching culture in language courses.  
While one would not expect a discussion’s resolution density to be nearly as high as the densities for 
other phases – after all, the integration and exploration phases build up to resolutions, where the 
discussion culminates – this study’s resolution densities are relatively low.  
Following is a contribution from the discussion about motivation and anxiety that was coded as a 
resolution: 
"I agree with you and I can tell from my own experience that working with song texts while the 
students listen to the songs and fill in some gaps is a great means of motivation.  It’s important to 
reach into the students’ world, what they’re interested in and what they are familiar with in order 
to get their attention.  Music makes up an essential part of many students’ interests."  
This student assesses the tentative solution provided by a group mate (i.e., to teach culture through the use 
of music) with her own experience and provides an additional reason why this technique should be 
successful.  Yet, students usually did not receive the essential feedback from their groups to confirm or 
reject their constructed meanings/solutions, which suggests that it was not necessarily the group that 
found and tested a solution but rather an individual, based on the input of the interlocutors from the 
Nike Arnold and Lara Ducate Future Foreign Language Teachers' Social and Cognitive 
Collaboration in an Online Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 56 
preceding three stages.  Nevertheless, in the discussion focusing on ways to teach culture, there was one 
instance when a student did evaluate a solution another group member had proposed earlier:  
"I really like Clara’s idea of the culture presentations. I think [it] is fun, vivid and [more] 
effective… than just read a passage that may be interesting for the textbook writers but not 
completely for the interests of… North American college students.  But what I will add to the 
presentation is kind of a follow-up: I will make the students think what they have learn[ed], make 
them tell me if they agree or disagree and… if that particular cultural aspect could be possible in 
their own culture." 
CONCLUSION 
The data analysis provided the following answers to the research questions of this study.   
Question 1: Do participants in electronic exchanges engage in monologues or dialogues?  
The high number of contributions categorized as mutual awareness and recognition of others shows that 
students did indeed engage in interactive discussions, not monologues. These findings seem to differ from 
those of Henri (1995), Pawan et al. (2003), and Pena-Shaff and Nicholls (2004) who found that their 
students focused on their own ideas rather than incorporating them into the ideas of their group members. 
In the Henri (1995) study, learners related more to the animateurs (whose function was to keep the 
exchanges flowing) and the experts than to each other and did not integrate each other’s comments into 
their own. It seems that due to the presence of the experts, the learners felt it was more important to attend 
to their comments than those of their peers. In the present study, the lack of teacher participation in the 
conversation prevented such behavior. Pawan et al. (2003) and Pena-Shaff and Nicholls (2004) both 
attributed their findings to low participation and lack of guidance in the discussions. Requiring our 
students to post three times during the week and providing them with specific questions and grading 
guidelines may have been significant factors in promoting dialogue. 
In addition to the above results, there have been many other studies that reinforce the findings of the 
current project. The students in the Kanuka and Anderson (1996) and Cole et al. (1998) analyses reported 
that they enjoyed the forum for the possibilities it provided to share and receive information, while 
students in other investigations (Bonk et al. 1998; Kamhi-Stein 2000; Mitchell 2003) were able to make 
connections between peers, experts, readings, and their own experiences while building on each other’s 
comments. And although Pawan et al. (2003) and Pena-Shaff and Nicholls (2004) found examples of 
serial monologues rather than reflective and critical dialogues, they also reported that their students 
shared and exchanged information while constructing postings based on previous ones. 
Question 2: What types of social activity do students engage in? 
The transcript analysis found examples of all categories of social presence as defined in the framework by 
Garrison et al. (2001).  It is interesting to note that social presence behaviors made up the majority of 
online activity.  This finding differs from those of other studies, which had lower levels of social presence 
(Garrison et al., 2001; Meyer, 2003).  In Meyer’s study, for example, social presence made up only 3% of 
overall activity.  We propose two hypotheses for these divergent results. Since teachers did not post 
during the discussions in the present study, students may have felt freer to engage in social activity and, 
since our grading rubric included categories for interactivity, students may have felt compelled to try to 
connect on a more personal level. 
Among the categories of social presence, emotional expressions had the fewest occurrences, likely due to 
the grading criteria used to evaluate the discussions. Students might have considered emotional 
expressions off-task and avoided them.  Weasenforth et al. (2002) also noted that their evaluation form 
was an effective way to communicate to the students their goals for the discussions and to affect students’ 
online behavior.  
Nike Arnold and Lara Ducate Future Foreign Language Teachers' Social and Cognitive 
Collaboration in an Online Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 57 
The considerable amounts of open communication and group cohesion in these discussions indicate that 
collaborative learning was taking place while a learning community was being formed. Classroom 
instruction and the online discussions led to the development of two separate, yet connected, learning 
communities, one defined by university boundaries and another, where students met peers from another 
university (and, in the case of U2 students, classmates as well). 
Question 3:  What types of cognitive activity do students engage in?   
We found evidence of all categories of cognitive presence in the transcripts.  Similar to other studies 
(Garrison et al., 2001; Meyer, 2003, 2004; Newman et al., 1996; Newman et al., 1995; Pawan et al., 
2003), exploration and integration were the most common. The category of resolution had the fewest 
occurrences, a result comparable to those of previous studies (Garrison et al., 2001; Meyer, 2003), yet 
contradicting Pawan and her colleagues (2003) who did not find any evidence of resolutions.  
Throughout the semester, students moved between their private world for reflection and the socially 
shared space of inquiry on the discussion board.  Especially at the exploration and integration levels 
students worked together to search for information and construct solutions.  This type of interactivity, 
however, was far less common at the resolution stage, which would have transferred an individual’s 
solution into the realm of shared knowledge, a finding similar to that of Pena-Shaff and Nicholls (2004), 
suggesting that students did not take full advantage of their shared space of inquiry. Overt teacher 
involvement in the discussions, and/or making students aware of the four cognitive stages in order to raise 
their meta-cognitive awareness, could encourage more resolutions (Pawan et al., 2003).  
The fact that students’ advanced cognitive activity often occurred in their private world raises an 
important question about online collaboration:  What, if any, cognitive advantages does ACMC offer? 
While truly interactive resolutions would have been more desirable, it is important to keep in mind that 
these individual resolutions were often based on collaborative integrations.  Individual students might not 
have been able to reach the resolution stage without the input of other students, which allowed them to 
work collaboratively towards the resolution stage.  Arguably, this would have been harder to achieve in 
the oral mode, which creates a sense of urgency.  But ACMC allows time for reflection, which is 
especially important to reach the integration and resolution stages (Garrison et al., 2001). These claims 
are also supported by the survey where most students agreed that the collaborative nature and written 
mode of the discussions enhanced their learning and provided them with time to reflect on their beliefs. 
Question 4: Do the levels of social and cognitive activity differ between discussions? 
A comparison between the discussions in the current study revealed that there were indeed differences in 
the quantity and quality of social and cognitive events. The topic seemed to be the major influence on the 
number of triggers, integrations and resolutions, a finding also supported by other studies (Hollingshead 
& McGrath; 1995, Garrison, Cleveland-Innes, & Fung, 2004; Pawan, et al., 2003; Pena-Shaff & Nicholls 
2004). Although resolutions occurred infrequently, the few resolutions that did occur took place in the last 
discussion, which specifically asked students to come up with a solution to a problem. This outcome 
concurs with the results of Newman et al. (1996), who claimed that the more cognitively advanced a 
discussion becomes, the greater the effect of the subject discussed.  Therefore a task specifically designed 
for resolutions should encourage such cognitive activity. It is important to note, however, that although 
one task was specifically formulated to encourage resolutions, not as many students reached this level of 
cognitive processing as we would have hoped. Two of the five groups showed only one instance of 
resolution each, while another group failed to reach this level altogether.  
The fact that students were able to reach the advanced stages of cognitive presence on their own, although 
on a limited scale, shows that overt teacher facilitation is not necessary to support advanced cognitive 
presence. Instead, a well-formulated task, which Garrison et al. (2001) included in their category of 
teaching presence, can stimulate resolutions.  However, teacher involvement and prompting might be 
Nike Arnold and Lara Ducate Future Foreign Language Teachers' Social and Cognitive 
Collaboration in an Online Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 58 
necessary for students to reach the resolution stage more frequently and collaboratively with feedback and 
input from other students.  
In summary, it can be said that this implementation of ACMC was successful for the following reasons: 
(1) students enjoyed the discussions (83%) and would enjoy participating in such a discussion again 
(65%)3, (2) they perceived them to be beneficial to their teacher training for both cognitive and social 
reasons, (3) they engaged in in-depth processing, 4) they used online discussions to form their own virtual 
learning communities, and (5) they reported that they are likely to use CMC in their own teaching (87%).   
Limitations and Future Research 
At this point, it is important to remember that this study’s analysis was limited to how students’ cognitive 
and social processes manifested themselves in writing. But as Schallert, Reed and the D-Team 
emphasized (2003), "students learn not only by posting comments in the discussion but also by reading 
other students’ and their teacher’s comments" (p. 109).  Therefore, this study captured only external 
cognitive and social behaviors without being able to consider hidden internal processes. 
Given the complex interactions between a variety of factors and the outcomes of CMC (e.g., Baym, 
1995), it is impossible to generalize from the findings of this study, which are unique to the context of this 
particular implementation of ACMC.  More research is needed to manipulate single variables (e.g., group 
size, participants’ personality) and investigate their effects on electronic interactions. For example, there 
could be a correlation between the degree of cognitive or social presence and an interlocutor’s teaching 
experience.  There might also be differences between native and non-native speakers’ levels of social and 
cognitive activity.  However, these questions were not within the scope of this study.    
In addition, studies on the interplay between social and cognitive presence in electronic discussions will 
answer questions about the specific roles of social presence in cognitive development, such as whether 
social presence and students’ enjoyment of online discussions sustain cognitive activity. The question of 
teacher participation in the actual discussion should also be addressed in later studies to measure whether 
teacher presence promotes resolutions or what other methods or tasks could be used to encourage students 
to work together to reach the resolution stage. 
 
APPENDIX A 
Student Handout with Guidelines and Topics for Online Discussions 
 
Format: 
To make the discussions more manageable, you will be divided into six groups of four students. 
 
Guidelines: 
The electronic discussions serve two purposes.  They allow you: (1) to use personal experiences to reflect 
on what you have read/learned in this course so that you will be better able to connect the issues with a 
real-life, personal experience.  This will help you understand and remember them better.  And (2) to be 
exposed to different points of view and gain a better understanding of the complexity of these issues by 
discussing the topics with your group members. 
 
It is not necessary to summarize all the information of the chapter but you are expected to demonstrate 
some theoretical knowledge of the issues.  Therefore, you should make an explicit connection between 
the theory covered in the readings and your own experiences learning a foreign language.  Keep in mind 
that this should be an exchange of ideas and opinions so be sure to respond to your group members’ 
postings.  There is no required length on the postings, however, you will be graded according to how well 
you integrate your own ideas and opinions with what you learned from the readings and how well you 
Nike Arnold and Lara Ducate Future Foreign Language Teachers' Social and Cognitive 
Collaboration in an Online Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 59 
demonstrate that you have read your other group members’ postings and integrate their comments into 
your responses. 
 
List of Topics & Dates: 
The topics listed here are not exhaustive so feel free to expand on them.   
 
 Topic #1, Sept. 2-5:                                                                                                                          
Get to know the members of your group.  Discuss the advantages/disadvantages and differences of 
native speakers and non-native speakers as foreign language teachers. 
For this discussion, you are not expected to make reference to our readings, just base your opinions on 
your own experiences and ideas. 
 
 Topic #2, Sept. 8-12: 
Reflect on one of your past learning experiences (i.e., how to drive a car, dance the tango).  Choose one 
of the learning theories we have discussed to describe, explain, and evaluate your learning process and 
experience. 
 
 Topic #3, Sept. 29-Oct. 3: 
Think about a present or past foreign language learning experiences.  Assess the extent to which you 
felt motivated or anxious while learning that language.  What specific factors made you feel that way?  
Is there anything you could have done to change the intensity of those feelings? What can you as a 
teacher do to influence your students’ level of motivation/anxiety? 
 
 Topic #4, Oct. 20-24: 
Introduce the textbook you are using/will use to your group members.  Discuss and evaluate its 
features and organization:  What is the theoretical basis of the book (this is usually explained by the 
authors in the introduction)? What types of activities are included (i.e., 
mechanical/meaningful/communicative drills vs. free techniques) and how are they weighted?  How 
are they sequenced?  How are the four skills integrated?  How does your textbook account for context?  
How is culture incorporated? etc. 
 
 Topic #5, Nov. 17-21: 
Current trends in foreign language pedagogy emphasize the importance of teaching culture.  Why do 
you think it is considered important to incorporate culture into a language class?  What is the 
relationship between language and culture?  How can culture be taught without sacrificing language 
instruction?  What are potential problems that teachers might encounter when they teach culture? 
 
 
Procedure: 
To get the discussion going, you have to post your first message by 8 am on the second day of the 
discussion period (which usually falls on a Tuesday, expect for topic #1).  You should post at least two 
more times after your first message. 
 
 
 
 
Nike Arnold and Lara Ducate Future Foreign Language Teachers' Social and Cognitive 
Collaboration in an Online Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 60 
APPENDIX B 
Grading Rubrics for Online Discussions 
Criteria  Max. 
Points 
To be awarded maximum points for 
this category you should… 
Theoretical Background Knowledge 10 Demonstrate a solid understanding of 
the theoretical issues associated with 
the topic. 
Connection between Theory and 
Topic 
10 Make an explicit connection between 
theory and your 
experience/opinion/comment. 
Interactivity 10 Explicitly respond to your group 
members’ postings and integrate them 
into your responses.  
 
Amount of Contributions 10 Be an active contributor to the 
discussion. 
 
Since the topic for the 1st discussion is more limited, it was graded differently. 
 
Criteria  Max. 
Points 
To be awarded maximum points for 
this category you should… 
Reasoning 10 Provide explicit support for your 
opinion. 
Establishing Rapport 10 Make a strong effort to get to know 
your group members. 
Interactivity 10 Explicitly respond to your group 
members’ postings and integrate them 
into your responses.  
 
Amount of Contributions 10 Be an active contributor to the 
discussion. 
 
APPENDIX C 
End-of-Semester Survey on Online Discussions 
Please circle the answer that best fits your opinion about the electronic discussion this semester: strongly 
agree, agree, neutral, disagree, strongly disagree. 
 
1.  I enjoyed the electronic discussions this semester. 
 
strongly agree   agree  neutral  disagree strongly disagree 
 
2.  I learned things in the discussions that I would not have figured out on my own or in class discussions. 
 
strongly agree   agree  neutral  disagree strongly disagree 
Nike Arnold and Lara Ducate Future Foreign Language Teachers' Social and Cognitive 
Collaboration in an Online Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 61 
 
3.  The electronic discussions gave me the opportunity to ask questions I would not have asked in class 
discussions. 
  
strongly agree   agree  neutral  disagree strongly disagree 
 
4.  I would enjoy participating in such a discussion again. 
  
strongly agree   agree  neutral  disagree strongly disagree 
 
5.  The process of talking/writing through topics helped me to understand them better. 
  
strongly agree   agree  neutral  disagree strongly disagree 
 
6.  Chatting with other students helped me to look at topics from perspectives I would not have 
considered on my own. 
  
strongly agree   agree  neutral  disagree strongly disagree 
 
7.  The forum of the electronic discussions provided less anxiety and a more relaxed environment than 
classroom discussions. 
  
strongly agree   agree  neutral  disagree strongly disagree 
 
8.  I would have liked this class better without the electronic discussions. 
  
strongly agree   agree  neutral  disagree strongly disagree 
 
9.  I would have preferred to chat only with people from my university. 
  
strongly agree   agree  neutral  disagree strongly disagree 
 
10.  I hope to keep in touch with one or more of my discussion partners. 
  
strongly agree   agree  neutral  disagree strongly disagree 
Nike Arnold and Lara Ducate Future Foreign Language Teachers' Social and Cognitive 
Collaboration in an Online Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 62 
 
11. I experienced a sense of community with the other students in my group. 
  
strongly agree   agree  neutral  disagree strongly disagree 
 
12.  This discussion gave me good ideas for teaching that I implemented this semester or plan to 
implement when I start teaching. 
  
strongly agree   agree  neutral  disagree strongly disagree 
 
13.  Please describe how you felt about the electronic discussion both from an affective and a cognitive 
perspective.  Did it help you to learn or understand the material more fully?  Did it lower your “affective 
filter” to make discussions more enjoyable? 
 
14.  What suggestions do you have for improving this exchange?   
 
15.  After having participated in this electronic exchange, would you be more or less inclined to 
implement computer-mediated communication into a class you would teach?  Why or why not? 
 
NOTES 
1. Authors are listed in alphabetical order and contributed equally to the manuscript. 
2. The triggers provided by the instructors were not included in the analysis. 
3. For the purposes of comparison, agree and strongly agree were combined in the percentages. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We would like to thank the students for their participation in this study and Cary Springer (Statistical 
Consulting Center, University of Tennessee, Knoxville) for her help with the data analysis.  In addition, 
we would like to extend our thanks to the anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments and 
suggestions in the preparation of this manuscript. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Nike Arnold is Assistant Professor of German at the University of Tennessee and directs the lower-
division German program.  Her research focuses on individual learner differences, computer-mediated 
communication and teacher training. 
E-Mail: mnarnold@utk.edu 
Nike Arnold and Lara Ducate Future Foreign Language Teachers' Social and Cognitive 
Collaboration in an Online Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 63 
Lara Ducate is Assistant Professor of German at the University of South Carolina and basic courses 
director of the lower-division German program.  Her research interests focus on teacher training, web 
logs, computer-mediated communication, and sociocultural theory. 
E-Mail: ducate@sc.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Abrams, Z. (2001). Computer-mediated communication and group journals: Expanding the repertoire of 
participant roles. System, 29, 489-503. 
Abrams, Z. (2003). The effect of synchronous and asynchronous CMC on oral performance in German. 
Modern Language Journal, 87(2), 157-167. 
Adair-Hauck, B. & Donato, R. (1994). Foreign language explanations within the zone of proximal 
development. The Canadian Modern Language Review, 50(3), 532-553. 
Aljaafreh, A. & Lantolf, J. (1994). Negative feedback as regulations and second language learning in the 
zone of proximal development. The Modern Language Journal, 78(4), 465-483. 
Anton, M. & DiCamilla, F. (1998). Socio-cognitive functions of L1 collaborative interaction in the L2 
classroom. The Canadian Modern Language Review, 54(3), 314-342.  
Baym, N. K. (1995). The emergence of community in computer-mediated communication. In S. G. Jones 
(Ed.), Cybersociety: Computer-mediated Communication and Community (pp. 138-163). Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage Publications. 
Bonk, C. & Cunningham, D. (1998). Searching for learner-centered, constructivist, and sociocultural 
components of collaborative educational learning tools. In C. Bonk & K. King (Eds.), Electronic 
collaborators: Learner-centered Technologies for Literacy, Apprenticeship, and Discourse (pp. 25-50). 
Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers. 
Bonk, C. & King, K. (1998). Computer conferencing and collaborative writing tools: Starting a dialogue 
about student dialogue. In C. Bonk & K. King (Eds.), Electronic Collaborators: Learner-centered 
Technologies for Literacy, Apprenticeship, and Discourse (pp. 3-24). Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates, Publishers.  
Bonk, C., Hansen, E., Grabner-Hagen, M., Lazar, S., & Mirabelli, C. (1996). Time to 'connect': 
Synchronous and asynchronous case-based dialogue among pre-service teachers. In T. Liao (Ed.), 
Advanced Educational Technology: Research Issues and Future Potential (pp. 289-314). Berlin: Springer 
Verlag. 
Bloom, B. S. and Krathwohl, D. R. (1956). Taxonomy of Educational Objectives: The 
Classification of Educational Goals. New York: Longmans, Green. 
Clinton, W. (1996).  America’s technology literacy challenge.  Retrieved July 2, 2004, from 
http://clinton4.nara.gov/WH/New/edtech/2pager.html 
Cole, R., Raffier, L. M., Rogan, P., & Schleicher, L. (1998). Interactive group journals: Learning as a 
dialogue among learners. TESOL Quarterly, 32(3), 556-568. 
Coughlin,  P. & Duff, P. (1996). Same task, different activities: analysis of SLA task from an activity 
theory perspective. In Lantolf, J. & Appel, G. (Eds.), Vygotskian Approaches to Second Language 
Research (pp. 173-193).  New Jersey: Ablex Publishing Corporation. 
Nike Arnold and Lara Ducate Future Foreign Language Teachers' Social and Cognitive 
Collaboration in an Online Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 64 
Curtis, D., & Lawson, M. (2001). Exploring collaborative online learning. JALN, 5(1), 21-34. Retrieved 
July 10, 2004, from http://www.aln.org/publications/jaln/v5n1/pdf/v5n1_curtis.pdf 
DeWert, M. H., Babinski, L. M., & Jones, B. D. (2003). Safe passages: Providing online support for 
beginning teachers. Journal of Teacher Education, 54(4), 311-320. 
Donato, R. (1996). Collective scaffolding in second language learning. In J. Lantolf & G. Appel (Eds.), 
Vygotskian Approaches to Second Language Research (pp. 33-56).  New Jersey: Ablex Publishing 
Corporation. 
Duffy, T., Dueber, B., & Hawley, C. (1996). Critical thinking in a distributed environment: A 
pedagogical base for the design of conferencing systems. In T. Liao (Ed.), Advanced educational 
technology: Research issues and future potential (pp. 51-78). Berlin: Springer Verlag. 
Ferrara, K., Brunner, H., & Whittemore, G. (1991). Interactive written discourse as an emergent register. 
Written Communication, 8(1), 8-34. 
Garrison, D. R., Cleveland-Innes, M., & Fung, T. (2004). Student role adjustment in online communities 
of inquiry: Model and instrument validation. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, 8(2), 61-74.  
Garrison, D. R., Anderson, T., & Archer, W. (2001). Critical thinking, cognitive presence and computer 
conferencing in distance education. American Journal of Distance Education, 15(1), 7-23. 
Gunawardena, C., Lowe, C., & Anderson, T. (1997). Analysis of a global online debate and the 
development of an interaction analysis model for examining social construction of knowledge in 
computer conferencing. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 17(4), 379-431. 
Henri, F. & Rigault, C. R. (1996). Collaborative distance learning and computer conferencing. In T. Liao 
(Ed.), Advanced Educational Technology: Research Issues and Future Potential (pp. 45-76). Berlin: 
Springer Verlag. 
Henri, F. (1995). Distance learning and computer-mediated communication: Interactive, quasi-interactive 
or monologue? In C. O’Malley (Ed.), Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (pp. 145-161). Berlin: 
Springer Verlag. 
Hollingshead, A. B., & McGrath, J. E. (1995). Computer-assisted groups: A critical review of the 
empirical research. In R. Guzzo & E. Salas & I. L. Goldstein (Eds.), Team Effectiveness and Decision 
Making in Organizations (pp. 46-78). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
Kamhi-Stein, L. D. (2000). Integrating computer-mediated communication tools into the practicum. In K. 
E. Johnson (Ed.), Teacher Education: Case studies in TESOL Practice Series (pp. 119-134). Alexandia, 
VA: TESOL. 
Kang, I. (1996). The use of computer-mediated communication: Electronic collaboration and 
interactivity. In T. Liao (Ed.), Advanced Educational Technology: Research Issues and Future Potential. 
Berlin: Springer Verlag. 
Kanuka, H., & Anderson, T. (1996). Online social interchange, discord and knowledge construction. 
Journal of Distance Education, 13(1), 57-74. Retrieved February 11, 2004, from 
http://cade.athabascau.ca/vol13.1/kanuka.html 
Kassen, M. A., & Higgins, C. J. (1997). Meeting the technology challenge: Introducing teachers to 
language-learning technology. In M. D. Bush & R. M. Terry (Eds.), Technology-enhanced Language 
Learning (pp. 263-286). Lincolnwood, Illinois: National Textbook Company. 
Kern, R. G., Ware, P., & Warschauer, M. (2004). Crossing frontiers: New directions in online pedagogy 
and research. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 24, 243-260. 
Nike Arnold and Lara Ducate Future Foreign Language Teachers' Social and Cognitive 
Collaboration in an Online Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 65 
Koschmann, T., Kelson, A. C., Feltovich, P. J., & Barrows, H. S. (1996). Computer-supported problem-
based learning: A principled approach to the use of computers in collaborative learning. In T. Koschmann 
(Ed.), CSCL: Theory and Practice of an Emerging Paradigm (pp. 83-124). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum. 
Kumari, D. S. (2001). Connecting graduate students to virtual guests through asynchronous discussions - 
Analysis of an experience. JALN, 5(2), 53-63. Retrieved March 13, 2004, from 
http://www.aln.org/publications/jaln/v5n2/pdf/v5n2_kumari.pdf 
Lam, Y. (2000). Technophilia vs. technophobia: A preliminary look at why second-language teachers do 
or do not use technology in their classrooms. Canadian Modern Language Review, 56(3), 389-420. 
Lee, L. (2002). Enhancing learners' communication skills through synchronous electronic interaction and 
task-based instruction. Foreign Language Annals, 35(1), 16-23. 
Liou, H. (2001). Reflective practice in a pre-service teacher education process for high school English 
teachers in Taiwan. System, 29(2), 197-208. 
Lomicka, L., & Lord, G. (2004). Going virtual: Inviting guests into the classroom. In L. Lomicka & J. 
Cooke-Plagwitz (Eds.), Teaching with Technology (Vol. 1, pp. 50-55). Boston: Thomson Heinle. 
Macdonald, J. (2003). Assessing online collaborative learning: process and product. Computers & 
Education, 40(4), 377-391. 
Mason, R. (1992). Evaluation methodologies for computer conferencing applications. In A. R. Kaye 
(Ed.), Collaborative Learning through Computer Conferencing. The Najaden Papers (pp. 105-116). New 
York: Springer Verlag. 
Matsuda, A., & Matsuda, P. K. (2001). Autonomy and collaboration in teacher education: Journal sharing 
among native and nonnative English-speaking teachers. CATESOL Journal, 13(1), 109-121. 
Mazzolini, M., & Maddison, S. (2003). Sage, guide or ghost? The effect of instructor intervention on 
student participation in online discussion forums. Computers & Education, 40(3), 237-253. 
McKenzie, W., & Murphy, D. (2000). "I hope this goes somewhere": Evaluation of an online discussion 
group. Australian Journal of Educational Technology, 16(3), 239-257. Retrieved March 5, 2004, from 
http://www.ascilite.org.au/ajet/ajet16/mckenzie.html 
Meyer, K. A. (2003). Face-to-face versus threaded discussions: The role of time and higher-order 
thinking. JALN, 7(3), 55-65. Retrieved February 19, 2004, from 
http://www.aln.org/publications/jaln/v7n3/pdf/v7n3_meyer.pdf 
Meyer, K. A. (2004). Evaluating online discussions: Four different frames of analysis. JALN, 8(2), 101-
114. Retrieved June 17, 2004, from http://www.aln.org/publications/jaln/v8n2/pdf/v8n2_meyer.pdf 
Mitchell, J. (2003). On-line writing: A link to learning in a teacher education program. Teaching and 
Teacher Education, 19(1), 127-143. 
Newman, D. R., Johnson, C., Cochrane, C., & Webb, B. (1996). An experiment in group learning 
technology: Evaluating critical thinking in face-to-face and computer-supported seminars. Interpersonal 
Computing and Technology: An Electronic Journal for the 21st Century, 4(1), 57-74. Retrieved June 17, 
2004, from http://www.helsinki.fi/science/optek/1996/n1/newman.txt 
Newman, D. R., Webb, B., & Cochrane, C. (1995). A content analysis method to measure critical 
thinking in face-to-face and computer supported group learning. Interpersonal Computing and 
Technology: An Electronic Journal for the 21st Century, 3(2), 56-77. Retrieved June 17, 2004, from 
http://www.helsinki.fi/science/optek/1995/n2/newman.txt 
Nike Arnold and Lara Ducate Future Foreign Language Teachers' Social and Cognitive 
Collaboration in an Online Environment 
 
Language Learning & Technology 66 
Pawan, F., Paulus, T. M., Yalcin, S., & Chang, C.-F. (2003). Online learning: Patterns of engagement and 
interaction among in-service teachers. Language Learning & Technology, 7(3), 119-140. Retrieved 
February 7, 2004, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num3/pawan/ 
Pena-Shaff, J. B., & Nicholls, C. (2004). Analyzing student interactions and meaning construction in 
computer bulletin board discussions. Computers & Education, 42(3), 243-265. 
Rourke, L., Anderson, T., Garrison, R. D., & Archer W. (2001). Assessing social presence in 
asynchronous text-based computer conferencing. Journal of Distance Education, 14(2). Retrieved 
February 25, 2005, from http://cade.athabascau.ca/vol14.2/rourke_et_al.html   
Salaberry, M. R. (2000). Pedagogical design of computer mediated communication tasks: Learning 
objectives and technological capabilities. Modern Language Journal, 84(1), 28-37. 
Schallert, D. L., Reed, J. H., & D-Team, t. (2003). Intellectual, motivational, textual, and cultural 
considerations in teaching and learning with computer-mediated discussion. Journal of Research on 
Technology in Education, 36(2), 103-118. 
Sengupta, S. (2001). Exchanging ideas with peers in network-based classrooms: An aid or a pain? 
Language Learning & Technology, 5(1), 103-134. Retrieved May 6, 2004, from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num1/sengupta/ 
Warschauer, M. (2000). Online learning in second language classrooms: an ethnographic study. In M. 
Warschauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Network-based Language Teaching: Concepts and Practice (pp.41-58). 
New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Warschauer, M. (1997). Computer-mediated collaborative learning: Theory and practice. Modern 
Language Journal, 81(4), 470-481. 
Warschauer, M., Turbee, L., & Roberts, B. (1996). Computer learning networks and student 
empowerment. System, 24(1), 1-14. 
Weasenforth, D., Biesenbach-Lucas, S., & Meloni, C. (2002). Realizing constructivist objectives through 
collaborative technologies: Threaded discussions. Language Learning & Technology, 6(3), 58-86. 
Retrieved June 18, 2004, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num3/weasenforth/ 
Wells, G., & Chang-Wells, G. L. (1992). Constructing Knowledge Together. Portsmouth, NH: 
Heinemann. 
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in Society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
 
 
