Language Learning & Technology
http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num2/gruba/
May 2006, Volume 10, Number 2
pp. 77-92
Copyright © 2006, ISSN 1094-3501 77
PLAYING THE VIDEOTEXT: A MEDIA LITERACY PERSPECTIVE ON
VIDEO-MEDIATED L2 LISTENING
Paul Gruba
University of Melbourne
ABSTRACT
Adopting a literacy perspective towards student interactions with digital media can extend and
develop views of second language (L2) listening comprehension. In this case study, variations in
play are grounded in a media literacy perspective as a way to frame student work with authentic
videotext. Twenty-two Australian students of Japanese watched three digitized news clips as they
talked aloud. Qualitative analysis of their immediately retrospective verbal reports showed that
learners do indeed play and replay the media texts as they, for example, perform, fool around, and
establish signposts. The article concludes with a discussion urging language teachers and
researchers to adopt media literacy perspectives in their use of electronic media.
INTRODUCTION
As we increasingly make use of materials that are non-linear, context-bound, recursive, and constructivist
(Kramsch, 1993), a key challenge in our work as educators is to help students navigate new media and
text types (Lankshear & Knobel, 2003). Investigating the ways students navigate and make sense of texts
is the basis for second language (L2) listening strategies research (e.g., Chamot, 1995; Goh, 2002;
Graham, 2003; Gruba, 2004; Vandergrift, 2003a, 2003b). Narrow development of such work, however,
may distance it from current trends in second language acquisition that emphasize computer-mediated
("electronic") L2 literacies that highlight authenticity, integrative approaches, social aspects, and media
texts (Kern & Schultz, 2005; Kramsch, A’Ness, & Lam, 2000). Here, I argue that a media literacy
perspective offers a basis to see interactions with videotexts as a form of play (Mackey, 2002) and brings
work in L2 listening strategies new perspectives, fresh insights, and greater relevance.
To develop this argument, I first review L2 video-mediated listening, central aspects of media literacy,
and a framework for play. Within a descriptive case study, I then use play as a central metaphor to
describe learner interactions with digitized videotexts. The study concludes with a discussion of the
implications of the results for teaching and research.
Differing conceptualizations of videotext interactions
To date, no single definition of video-mediated listening comprehension has become established; more
importantly, no widely accepted model of listening comprehension has been developed (Lynch, 1998;
Vandergrift, 2004). One key conceptual issue in defining the skill revolves around the role of visual
elements. Riley (1981) suggested that "listening with the eye" best described learner use of video. Willis
(1983) argued that "viewing comprehension" was the most accurate term. Tudor and Tuffs (1991) regard
video comprehension as a "skill in its own right" (p. 80).  Many prominent listening theorists, however,
minimize the role of visual elements in comprehension (Kellerman, 1992) Many prominent listening
theorists, however, minimize the role of visual elements in comprehension (Kellerman, 1992). Indeed,
most theorists define the skill as a "process of receiving, attending to, and assigning meaning to aural
stimuli" (Wolvin & Croakly, 1985, p. 74). In an important departure, Rubin (1995) embeds an awareness
of video to define the skill as "an active process in which listeners select and interpret information which
comes from auditory and visual cues in order to define what is going on and what the speakers are trying
Paul Gruba Playing the Videotext
Language Learning & Technology 78
to express" (p. 7).  Other researchers offer views that include "listening and viewing comprehension"
(Hoven, 1999), "video comprehension" (Coniam, 2000), or "DVD video comprehension" (Markham,
Peter, & McCarthy, 2003). If nothing else, researchers recognize there is a broad range of skills required
to make sense of video. In line with Kramsch and Andersen (1999, p. 34) perhaps it is best to see the
competent decoding of authentic digitized videotexts as part of "textual literacy." If we continue down
this path and follow Livingstone (2003, p. 7) so as to reject the ahistorical position that "real" literacy
refers to the acts of reading and writing, then videotext comprehension fits the definition of literacy as the
"interpretation of any and all mediated symbolic texts." By arriving at a literacy perspective towards
learning with electronic media, we open ourselves up to a wide range of possibilities (Table 1).
Table 1. Views of Literacy Related to CALL
Type Representative works
Computer literacy Corbel, 1997
Cyberliteracy Gurak, 2001
Electronic literacies Warschauer, 1999
ICT literacy (Information &
Communication Technology)
Educational Testing Service, 2005
Literacy online Tuman, 1996
Media literacy Kubey, 1997; Livingstone, 2003; Potter, 2004
Multiliteracies Cope and Kalantzis, 2000; Unsworth, 2001
New literacies Lankshear & Knobel, 2003
Silicon literacies Synder, 2002
Technoliteracy Lankshear and Synder, 2000; Luke, 1997
Visual literacy Curtis, 2004; Moore & Dwyer, 1994
Now aware of these diverse possibilities, an investigation of videotext interactions could focus on images
(visual literacy), on the role of technology in learning (computer literacy, technoliteracy), on educational
policy and practice (technoliteracy, multiliteracies, ICT literacy), or on the widespread social implications
of using online media (digital literacy, electronic literacies, cyberliteracy). By adopting a media literacy
perspective, however, we could maintain our focus on "textual literacy" as well as on an ability to move
across technologies, formats, and genres. Taking on this perspective would also land us in the midst of a
large, diverse, and contested form of literacy (Hobbs, 1998).
Key concepts in media literacy
Though definitions of media literacy have been widely debated (Christ & Potter, 1998), perhaps the most
commonly agreed view is that "media literacy is the ability to access, analyze, evaluate, and communicate
messages in a variety of forms" (Aufderheide, 1993, p. xx). Further, it is usually agreed that "a media
literate person . . . can decode, evaluate, analyze, and produce both print and electronic media"
(Aufderheide, 1997, p. 79). Livingstone (2003, pp. 6-14) explains these concepts. Issues of access touch
on the digital divide and, as such, bring in an awareness of political and social processes. An ability to
analyze lies at the heart of textual decoding, pleasure, and intellectual stimulation. Evaluation involves
judgment and engages critical thinking. The knowledge of content creation provides students with
insights into precisely how messages communicate effectively.
Media literacy scholars have also generally agreed that (a) media both are constructed and construct
reality; (b) texts carry commercial, ideological, and political implications; (c) formats each have unique
aesthetics, codes, and conventions; and (d) receivers negotiate meaning (Aufderheide, 1997, p. 80). Potter
(2004) develops a theory of media literacy with an emphasis on cognitive approaches. The ability to
effectively negotiate meaning, according to Potter, depends on the breadth and depth of knowledge
Paul Gruba Playing the Videotext
Language Learning & Technology 79
structures. At the lower levels of proficiency, weaker structures are small, superficial, poorly organized
and, as such, impose limits on the interpretation of meaning (Kintsch, 1998). Visual media may foster
macrostructure development by illustrating abstract concepts in a concrete way, assisting in the
construction of mental models and thus "may offer some benefits to learners with lesser skills, abilities, or
prior knowledge" (Wetzel, Radtke & Stern, 1994, p. 62). So how do literacy specialists conceptualize
learner negotiations of meaning and the construction of knowledge structures?
Playing the (video)text
In Literacies Across Media, Mackey (2002) reports on a longitudinal investigation of learner interactions
with a variety of texts. Over an eighteen-month period in the late 1990s, Mackey audio- and video-taped
Canadian Grade 5 and Grade 8 student (10 and 13 year olds) responses to novels, picture books, short
stories, video-based and digitized movies, computer games, electronic books, an encyclopedia, and a
picture book on a CD ROM. At times, Mackey introduced novel media, formats, and texts that were new
to the participants. As some of the 20 original participants left the study, more were recruited. Transcripts
of semi-structured discussions and textual encounters as well as student diaries formed the core data set.
Early in the study Mackey signals her frustration with how to define engagement with contemporary
texts. After describing the rich modalities of interaction that are offered by electronic media, Mackey
(2002) disappointedly points out that "we still very often call it reading" (p. 3). Near the conclusion to her
study, she abandons attempts to stretch the word read and adopts play as a "generic verb for text
processing activities":
The prismatic, multi-faceted qualities of the concept of playing mean that we are already familiar
with the idea of this verb shifting meanings as it acquires new subjects and objects and fits into
new sentences. Such a protean verb meets the specialized needs of a study that sets out to explore
what is common and what is distinctive about the ways in which we approach different kinds of
text and media. (Mackey, 2002, p. 188)
Mackey proposes a nascent framework for "playing the text" across a range of media (Table 2).
Table 2. Aspects of Play Based on Mackey (2002)
Aspects of playing Key concepts
Pretending or imagining Shifting into the as if world to distinguish between fiction and non-fiction
Performing Associating information from different parts of the text and assembling a
useful working repertoire to make sense of setting and context
Engaging with the rules of
the game
Accepting and working the rules and conventions in some way or other
Strategizing Imagining ‘how to’ do something ‘enables the performance of the story
as an engageable if not necessarily believable world?'
Orchestrating Managing attention and automatic behaviors to maximize complexity;
often unrecognised; no longer attending directly and consciously to every
single element at once
Interpreting At the end of the reading, checking any loose ends and sorting out an
interpretation that allows for balance and pattern as well as specific plot
tidiness
Fooling around Exploring ideas without commitment
Not working Trying things out, working through our feelings about an idea in an arena
where the results are often unimportant
Mackey (2002)  provides a link between media literacy perspectives and video-mediated L2 listening
comprehension strategies. With that possibility in mind, I began to review previous work (Gruba, 2004)
Paul Gruba Playing the Videotext
Language Learning & Technology 80
that I had done with L2 learners of Japanese attending to videotext. This time, I decided to approach the
dataset not as listening comprehension research but rather using the frame of "playful media literacy."
Rationale and research questions
Three research questions guide this investigation of L2 student interactions with videotexts:
1) What aspects of Mackey’s (2002) play appear during L2 learner interactions with videotexts?
2) Are other aspects of play present in L2 learner interactions that extend Mackey’s framework?
3) When reflecting, do L2 students note a sense of play as they recall attempts to make sense of the
videotexts?
METHODOLOGY
Aspects of the present study have been discussed elsewhere (Gruba, 1999, 2004). Here, rather than use a
listening perspective based on reading theory (Pressley & Afflerbach, 1995), my perspective is grounded
in media literacy theory (Potter, 2004) with a view of textual interactions as play (Mackey, 2002).
Site of the investigation
This study was situated in the Japanese department of a large Australian research university. In the
beginning levels, the focus of instruction is on the acquisition of Japanese syntax and vocabulary and the
rote learning of three Japanese syllabaries (hiragana, katakana, and kanji). At the more advanced levels,
cultural sensitivity and production skills are emphasized.
Computers are used by beginning and lower intermediate students to practice Japanese syllabaries and
grammar. Students at the upper intermediate and advanced levels utilize computers to interact with native
speakers through online chat groups, video conferencing, and website construction. Digitized Japanese
television news broadcasts (NHK Japan) are a mainstay of computer-based listening instruction.
Materials
Born out of the word to see in Latin, video is perhaps best understood as a "whole message unit" that
"communicates through orchestration and compounding within symbol systems and multiple-symbol-
system episodes" (Salomon, 1979, p. 52) through the combination of dynamic visual and audio elements
in close temporal sequence (Wetzel et al., 1994, p. 40). Of note, however, the way news broadcasts are
constructed often results in visual and verbal mismatches that may cause their content to be poorly
understood and/or retained (Graddol, 1994; Gunter, 1987). Using criteria found in Joiner (1990), I
selected three short news clips out of 90 minutes of recorded satellite broadcasts.
Authentic Japanese news broadcasts contain an extensive amount of superimposed (non-diegetic) and
embedded (diegetic) written print in three formats:
1) Headline (HD): On-screen print, in large white font at the centre bottom of a shot, is overlaid on
images to highlight the main topic.
2) Caption (CPT): On-screen print, in small white font, is overlaid on images to detail names of people
and locations.
3) Embedded (EMB): Readable print and symbols that occur within scenes that include traffic signs,
books, advertising posters, product names, and logos.
To map each videotext, a series of three-column tables were created that each consisted of (a) a screen
shot captured at two-second intervals, (b) a transcription of the spoken Japanese, and (c) an English
translation. (Table 3 provides an example; full maps of the videotexts are available in Gruba, 1999).
Paul Gruba Playing the Videotext
Language Learning & Technology 81
Table 3. Example Map of a Videotext (Segment M2, Videotext 2)
Segment: Image M2
(From seconds 2-4 of
Videotext 2)
Japanese (romanji) with literal
translation
English translation
…centa de atsumeta gomi no naka
…
(center in being collected rubbish of
inside)
… in the inside of a rubbish
collection site …
HD: Gomi no naka kara yon hyaku
man en
(HD: Rubbish in middle from four
hundred thousand yen)
Four million yen found in
the middle of a rubbish site
Participants
In the pilot study, four L2 learners of Japanese ranging from beginning to bilingual proficiency
participated. The purpose of the original pilot study was to check the appropriateness of the news clips,
refine data collection techniques, and create a preliminary framework of learner interactions (Gruba,
1999).
In the main study, 18 volunteer students from an upper-intermediate class participated. This level was
chosen because participants at lower proficiency levels find it difficult to provide insights due to high
cognitive processing demands; conversely, learners at the higher proficiency levels find verbalization
difficult because their comprehension tends to be fairly automatic and unconscious (Ericsson & Simon,
1984/1993). The Australian participants had a range of profiles: although most were students in their early
20s, one student was 41 years old; 15 of the 18 students were female, and three were non-native speakers
of English.
Data collection
In each session, participants were prompted to talk aloud as much as possible in accord with current
practices for immediately retrospective verbal reports (Cohen, 1994; Ericsson & Simon, 1984/1993; Kim,
2002; Pressley & Afflerbach, 1995). Before the start of each audio-taped session, each participant
attended to a trial videotext and was trained to manipulate the computer controls.
Sessions were completed in two stages for each of the three videotexts. In Stage One, participants
verbalized throughout a single ‘front-to-back’ move through a videotext. That is, they were instructed to
stop a clip whenever they wished but could only go forward to the end. Participants concluded Stage One
for a videotext by providing a summary of their understanding.
At the start of Stage Two, participants were given a set of tasks and were allowed to stop, move, or replay
a videotext as they completed their answers. Task design was based on categories proposed by Dunkel,
Henning, and Chaudron (1993). The first category, orientation, is intended to highlight relationships,
stated or implied settings of events, and the topic of the text. Details of simple lexical meanings or single
propositions form a second category. A third category, main ideas, covers principal propositions.
Implications derived from textual elements that draw upon a listener's background knowledge and
inferences form a fourth category.
Paul Gruba Playing the Videotext
Language Learning & Technology 82
Table 4. Example Short Answer Questions (Tasks for Stage Two, Videotext Two)
Task (Short answer question) Focal goal
Briefly, what is the news story about? Main
What happened? Orientation
What time did it happen? Detail
Where did it happen? Detail
How often do the club members meet? Detail
What did the witness say? Orientation
How did it happen? Implication
How will the investigation proceed? Implication
Each participant attended to three videotexts and completed each set of tasks. Once finished, they
reflected on their interactions during a post-session, semi-structured interview (Fontana & Frey, 1994;
Gillham, 2005).
Table 5. Sample of Semi-Structured Post-Session Interview Questions
Questions
Did you find these clips interesting?
What do you think of learning Japanese through videoclips? What’s the best thing? The worst?
Of these three clips, which one did you find most difficult? Easiest? Why?
How do you think seeing images affects your overall understanding?
What do you think of this ‘think aloud’ process?
In a review of audiotapes, I eliminated six of the 18 participants from further study because they talked
very little. I was able to align each transcribed comment to a specific segment of a clip using the printed
videotext maps as a guide.
Data analysis
In line with Miles and Huberman (1994), I decided to create an analytical matrix that would be efficient
yet allow for breath (comments on all videotexts by several participants) and depth (multiple perspectives
on a single incident). Accordingly, I transcribed the entire set of recordings for the three most articulate
participants; for the other nine students, I set down only the comments related to the second videotext and
their post-session interviews. My subsequent analysis was built upon established qualitative research
guidelines (Richards, 2005; Flick, 2002). After constraining Mackey’s full set of aspects of play to a more
manageable set, I used a provisional set of codes to begin analyzing the data (Table 6).
Table 6: Preliminary Analysis Codes Based on Mackey (2002)
Aspects of play Code Central characteristics
Performing PRF Information taken from different parts of the text to make sense of setting
and context
Orchestrating ORC Automatic, unconscious behaviors; no longer attending directly and
consciously to every single element at once
Interpreting INT Macrostructure development is elaborated
Fooling around FOL Explore ideas without commitment
Not working NWK Within a zone of reduced consequences, a chance to try out ideas, work
through feelings, and not expect a direct utility
Paul Gruba Playing the Videotext
Language Learning & Technology 83
In actual practice, the initial set of seemingly tidy codes soon became unwieldy. Unlike my previous
experiences of working with a relatively precise set of "constructively responsive" comprehension
activities (Pressley & Afflerbach 1995), I found that working with Mackey’s set of aspects required that I
continually sharpen boundaries amongst key concepts. For example, differences between performing and
interpreting were difficult to ascertain as they both describe pathways to the construction of knowledge
structures? During analysis, I differentiated the activities by focusing either on a learner's pursuit of ideas
(performing) or a learner's pause to reflect on what was learned from a specific engagement (interpreting).
Further conceptual difficulties arose between fooling around and not working. Here, I differentiated them
by concentrating on the notion of risk rather than ‘not making a commitment.’
RESULTS
Not surprisingly, perhaps because the concept of play is so broadly conceived by Mackey (2002), each
variant that I had selected from her framework was present in the dataset. Performing came through as a
central aspect of play. Working effectively with the digital media, learners were able to move quickly
across the electronic texts from one scene to another to build comprehension. Other prominent aspects of
play included orchestrating, interpreting, and fooling around (Table 7).
Table 7. Examples of Play Based on Initial Categories Established by Mackey (2002)
Aspect Representative comment
Performing “Oh, okay! Righty-o! We have a car! That’s good actually, I knew that they
had a car involved because of the first—the very first heading had a car in it.
And now I can figure out why they were first showing pictures of trees and
so on.” (Abby)
Orchestrating “Well I guess — I mean I still understand what’s going on so I don’t — I’m
not conscious of having to do anything to make myself understand it better or
anything.” (Catherine)
Interpreting “Uhm ... the ... so the money was found in the garbage which was actually
raised from the conveyor belt at this center and I’m not actually sure what
that center is in English so I can’t say and judging from the building even I
don’t know what kind of building — what kind of place it was …” (Brenda)
Fooling around “I just picked up words like ‘kabu’ and ‘taiho’ and I didn’t understand the
pictures what all these people were doing around here but it showed a bit of a
road and maybe that was the curving road and a lot of that was kind of
guesswork from, you know, sort of practical stuff.” (Sandra)
In essence, much of the early stages of analysis confirmed the viability of Mackey's concepts. At this
point, it is worth noting her wide-open literacy perspective on textual engagement allowed for a much less
precise analysis of the transcripts than what is afforded in the work of Pressly and Afflerbach (1995).
Having said that, however, the playful conceptualization of learner activities fostered insights into learner
behaviors. Two new categories of play emerged during my continued analysis (Table 8).
Table 8: Codes for Emergent Categories of Play
Aspects of play Code Central characteristics
Without advance
preparation
WAP No pre-teaching of vocabulary, culture, or context causes frustration
Joyfulness JOY Engagement with the videotext excited students if they understood
elements or felt as if they were truly experiencing the culture
Paul Gruba Playing the Videotext
Language Learning & Technology 84
Playing without advance preparation
In this study, the students were not given an opportunity ahead of the sessions to gain from the pre-
teaching of vocabulary, cultural orientation, or the establishment of a wider context. Here the videotexts
were just played without warm-up activities. The lack of preparation caused some frustration, as noted by
Li-Ping, a Chinese native speaker learning Japanese:
“[If] …  you just play it to me I wouldn’t have any idea what’s going on whatsoever, I think. Just
by listening to it, it is very hard.”
The implication here, of course, is that pre-teaching is important. Students need to have some orientation
to the videotext, know some of the ground rules, and have time to become familiar with the challenging
symbolic environment.
Playing as joyfulness
In its purest form, play ignites feelings of joy, excitement, and liveliness. At some stage, successful L2
speakers come to realize that being understood, or understanding, is a sublime pleasure that often
encourages them to keep trying to master the other tongue. Li-Ping expresses how she really likes
interacting with the news clips:
It's much more fun than studying books, I’ll say, or just reading an article. Because uh . . . I mean
if you just study books, you can actually do it everywhere, right? But when you just study video
clips, you just get the feeling that you are in Japan and are part of the society and . . . it's more
lively, I like it.
Not all students, however, found joy in understanding. Many thought the tasks were burdensome,
somewhat tiring, or tedious. Because I sat through participant sessions for each of the three videotexts, I
had a clear sense of when the joy would leave the activity, and it would sour. On such occasions it struck
me that comprehension, or the pursuit of meaning, would not be so much a matter of language proficiency
but one of maintaining a positive attitude.
For those who found joy in understanding a second language, they reveled in the journey of the narrative.
Some pursued vocabulary items with the skill and patience of practiced hunters. They maintained forward
movement in the face of challenge and found thrill in the chase itself. They stayed on task regardless of
the difficulties that lay ahead, and it was this determination that made them more successful than those
who were easily dismayed. Pleasure and joy motivate playfulness.
Replay
In Stage Two of the verbal reporting sessions, participants were instructed to manipulate the videotexts
any way they wished. During these extended viewings, they completed a series of small comprehension
tasks (see Table 4). Three aspects of replay emerged in the analysis of repeated reviews of the videotexts.
Table 9. Codes for Emergent Categories of Replay
Aspects of replay Code Central characteristics
Recover from
comprehension
failure
RCF Review a section, often repeatedly in increasingly narrow
segments, to correct an earlier deficit in understanding
Stall decision
making
STL Put off deciding about the significance or place of an element in
the overall narrative
Establishing
signposts and
boundary lines
ESB Use both aural and visual elements to pinpoint particular areas that
require clarification
Paul Gruba Playing the Videotext
Language Learning & Technology 85
Replaying to recover from comprehension failure
At its simplest, to replay, means to repeat a text or activity. If we do this successfully, we ignore what we
have already learned and focus our attention on what we still need to know. We replay texts to examine
specific points and thus recover from a flawed initial understanding. Several learners commented on
aspects of recovery afforded by the digital media:
It helps you to improve your listening skill … I mean after you see a video clip if you don’t
understand it, you just replay it and replay it. (Li-Ping)
It's good to do on the computer and to be able to replay the same thing over and over again until
you understand it. (Sandra)
 Well, like I said, I just sort of listen to it once and then just go back and replay things and pause
especially on things like where they show kanji and things like that. (Sandra)
By looking at the clips I can pick up which problem I encounter and probably after listening a few
times I can refer back and say "Oh, now I understand this part." Previously I don’t understand it
and now I understand this. (Chin)
Oftentimes, learners would go over and over a particular word or phrase to spark a helpful association
either in the context of the videotext itself or from personal background knowledge. Replay was a
directed, goal-oriented activity often initiated to "hone in" on a very specific element. Replay contributes
to eventual success.
Replaying to stall the need to make a decision
On occasion, learners replayed segments to stall the eventual need to make a decision. Here, failure would
be first set in motion from the inability to set a clear goal. Or, perhaps, they would encounter something in
the videotext (e.g., a dialect that was difficult to understand) that would require more advanced skills to
understand.
I can't get it. I can't get any of it. I can't pick up any of the main nouns or verbs, but the story I
mean that's an idea. They found the car and it had the fencing, well the meshing either the mesh
which was protecting something or a fence I can't work out whether it was protecting … I can't
work out why all the people are walking around trying to find something. (Denise)
Subsequently, failure would develop when the learner was unable to pinpoint elements that were needed
to build a fuller understanding of the videotext. Clearly, they became frustrated as they were unable to
form a coherent view of events but they would not move on. They would simply repeat. During replays,
neither a focus on visual nor verbal elements would assist comprehension. In these instances, replay did
not contribute to success; rather, it was one way to delay the need to make a decision or face up to a
failure.
Replaying to establish signposts and boundary lines
A case study of Abby, perhaps the most proficient strategist of the group, illustrates how learners can use
tasks and visual elements to establish signposts and boundary lines. Overall, Abby's success with the
listening tasks is the result of being able to be both flexible yet remain focused. Although she adjusts her
strategies to fit new challenges, she remains clear about what needs to be accomplished before moving on.
When confronted by the difficulty of a videotext, for example, she markedly increased the length of
segmentation and the number of times she non-sequentially accessed scenes containing relevant
information. Despite this potentially confusing style of search, she rarely lost sight of immediate task
demands. In post-session comments, Abby explains how task focus and the ability to replay the digital
medium formed a powerful combination for her:
Paul Gruba Playing the Videotext
Language Learning & Technology 86
[The tasks were] fine because I could keep going back, back and forth through the video. I would
have had quite a bit of trouble answering them if I would not have been able to do that ... [The
tasks] picked up details that I hadn't particularly kept in my head ... They were sufficiently
narrowed down, sort of narrow so that you could say "I know exactly where that person said that"
and go on and find it then listen to it again and write it down.
In these comments, note that Abby meets task demands through use of the technology at hand: the
questions are "fine" because she is able to repeatedly replay the videotext until she is able to formulate an
answer. Without this capability, she admits the task would have been much more difficult if a non-
recursive medium was used as a mode of presentation.
Further, she points out how the tasks themselves highlighted aspects of detail that she may have well
missed. Abby utilized the tasks to narrow searches and make her replayed searches more efficient. She is
aware that visual elements do not necesarily correspond to aural elements. When they do not match, Abby
makes use of key visual elements to signpost that task-relevant information is at hand. Once the signposts
are established, they are then used as boundary markers to demarcate task-relevant sections that, in turn,
make her searches more efficient. With these she remains on-task.
Another aspect of Abby's success can be attributed to her ability to differentiate between the role of visual
elements as content (what they portray) and as signposts or boundary markers (their use in segmenting
videotext). For instances in which the visual and aural elements matched, Abby was able to link them to
achieve greater comprehension. At times elements did not match, however, Abby tended to ignore the
visual elements during the replays and focused her attention on the aural elements. Importantly, during
replay, elements in the aural track were used as key markers in the narrative. Visual elements took on the
role of signposts, or boundary markers, to assist in search efficiency.
Student Reflections
As they reflected after a session, what did students think about their own sense of play with the
videotexts? Importantly, many students were aware of the game of working with authentic media within
the context of the research study. A post-session comment by Catherine illustrates the point that she
would have selected videotexts differently if she would have been outside of the classroom:
And also my overall impression is that it is a very typical "throw away" news article … one of
those amusing little things that you have in the news that sort of fills up a nice thirty second gap
sort of thing. But you know it doesn’t matter if you don’t understand it that much.
Catherine's point reminds us of the fragile nature of authenticity. Once a media text moves from its
original purpose to a pedagogical one, it can lose luster. Nonetheless, many students remarked that that
allowed them to pretend they were in Japan. Transported to the as if world allows students to have fuller
experiences of the text (Mackey, 2002). Catherine articulates the feeling:
… this particular scene is a sort of full of very typical Japanese scenes like people sort of wearing
things that I am happy to see Japanese people wearing and stuff like that. And the sort of general
tone of the NHK broadcasts is such that I'm very familiar with it so that sort of sets me back into
Japan and so I'm like in a Japan frame as it starts so I think that brings up a lot of background
knowledge to start with like we are in Japan and so everything — we can pretend we are there
and then sort of go on from there.
Finally, as Sandra reflects, many students reported that the visual medium reduced anxiety, increased
motivation, and encouraged a connection with the culture:
I would have panicked just listening to it on a [audio]tape hearing all these hard words but then
seeing it there sort of — you know, you can relate to what they are talking about …
Paul Gruba Playing the Videotext
Language Learning & Technology 87
In summary, analysis of the qualitative data confirm the presence of Mackey's (2002) key categories of
play in L2 video-mediated listening. Other categories emerged that related specifically to playing
videotexts, particularly during repeated viewings of segments that were marked by the use of elements
such as signposts. In general, the use of a media literacy perspective operationalized through Mackey's
notion of play informs work on L2 listening strategies. Implications of the results are discussed in the
next section.
DISCUSSION
What does adopting a media literacy perspective, based in a sense of play, offer to the teaching and
research of L2 listening strategies? Alternatively, what does L2 listening theory offer literacy? Combined,
they offer us a way to extend our work with videotexts into the wider world of literacy studies. Discussion
of the implications of the study can inform teaching, assessment, and research.
Implications for L2 teaching
Adopting a media literacy perspective can inform the way we teach environments. In addition to a focus
on the content of videotext (that is, what it contains in terms of images, words, and sounds), a media
literate L2 instructor would also draw attention to aspects of videotext production (who made it for which
audience) and construction (why and how it generates meaning). Alongside listening skill development,
the media literacy skills of analysis, evaluation, and communication would be promoted.
Those of us familiar with teaching reading and writing are at an advantage. Our skills in deconstructing
printed texts, for example by showing how headlines signal topic and sentences make up paragraphs, can
be transferred to working with digitized videotexts. With this framing, telling students that visual
elements simply support aural comprehension would diminish an opportunity to encourage critical
thinking amongst our students; a better presentation would inform students that visual elements offer
potential opportunities for developing understanding in tandem with verbal elements. An ideal lesson
would draw student attention to verbal and visual elements that have a particularly significant cultural
meaning in context (Kramsch & Anderson, 1999). Extended discussion and activities would then draw
out analysis and evaluation of the social, historical, and political implications of key elements.
Pedagogical handbooks (e.g., Gruba, 2005; Potter, 2005; Silverblat, 2001) can be used to inform
classroom practices.
Explicit strategy instruction no doubt has a role in our classrooms (Vandergrift, 2003a; 2003b). As Buck
(1995) suggests, however, using our time in the classroom to motivate listening practice may be more
effective with our students than trying to explain cognitive processes. By introducing media literacy
concepts throughout our syllabus, we can encourage our students to play with videotexts and undertake a
journey of discovery. As they come to develop understanding in a supported environment, they arrive at a
place that is not overly inscribed with our own suggestions of what to do and how to do it.
As Mackey (2002, pp. 195-196), argues the most obvious place to consider the idea of playing the text is
in the language classroom. Announcing that "we are going to play with this text today," Mackey points
out, allows for opportunities to shift the boundaries of classroom discussions. The terms of engagement
with the videotexts are less restricted. In my role as a teacher, whether I mean to or not, I sometimes
imply that one meaning of the text is more correct than others. By introducing an element of play as I start
a lesson, I highlight the very flexibility that is needed when handling dynamic, polysemous media from
another culture. As Mackey observes, the idea of playing offers a sense of relative freedom for students.
Implications for CALL research
A change in perspective allows for a fresh look at data sets. Reinvigorated analysis leads to further
insights and possibilities. By re-examining a dataset, my research skills grew by experiencing first hand
how perspective influences the focus of interpretation and its results (Flick, 2002). Perhaps expected and
Paul Gruba Playing the Videotext
Language Learning & Technology 88
trivial at one level, nonetheless the experience highlights the potential conflict between cognitive and
literacy approaches to the study of L2 listening comprehension. Admittedly, cognitive views are more
developed and precise but they run the risk of being divorced from notions of ecologies of text now being
widely taken up in applied linguists (Kern & Schultz, 2005). Work by Potter (2004), particularly in
regards to task development, sheds light on ways to bridge the gaps between perspectives.
Situating L2 listening within a media literacy framework allows for the outcomes of research to be placed
in a much wider context. Nascent work in social semiotics, for instance, can be explored particularly in
the areas of genre, discourse, and modality (van Leeuwen, 2005); Machin and van Leeuwen (2003) show
ways to work across multi-national texts; and Piller (2003) shows how advertising can be a rich site of
language contact. Accessible sources of textual analysis techniques include work by Berger (1998), Hoey
(2001), McKee (2003), and Stokes (2003).
CONCLUSION
In this article, we have seen how adopting a ‘playful’ approach to making sense of L2 digitized videotext
can be informed by adopting a media literacy perspective. Perspective frames pedagogy. If we see
students as listeners, then we need to expand our definition of the construct (skills perspective?) and yet
stay in dialogue with concepts used in formal language assessment. If we see students' behaviors as
strategic, we must look for ways to guide, direct, and nurture their actions so that they grow into effective
users of these texts. Finally, if we take a media literacy view and see learner interactions as multi-layered
aspects of play, then we are in a frame of mind to promote students' intuitive and creative use of the
complex medium. Each of these perspectives varies slightly, yet differences in their primary
characteristics are significant: we see what we want to see, and from that view, we teach. Bringing in a
literacy perspective (or, indeed, literacies) to our classrooms opens up refreshing possibilities for teaching
and research with video-mediated L2 listening.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank the anonymous reviewers and editors for their kind, generous and patient assistance
throughout the production of this article. Many thanks also to members of the Listening Group in the
School of Languages at the University of Melbourne, led by Tim McNamara and Luke Harding, for a
series of stimulating discussions that continually motivated me to work on the ideas here.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Paul Gruba is a Senior Lecturer in the School of Languages, University of Melbourne. After studying
journalism in Alaska, Paul taught in Mali, Japan, the United States, and Australia before earning graduate
degrees in applied linguistics. His research interests include L2 listening, academic writing, and
educational software development.
E-mail:paulag@unimelb.edu.au
REFERENCES
Aufderheide, P. (Ed.) (1993). Media literacy: A report of the national leadership conference on media
literacy. Aspen, CO: Aspen Institute.
Paul Gruba Playing the Videotext
Language Learning & Technology 89
Aufderheide, P. (1997). Media literacy: From a report of the National Leadership Conference on Media
Literacy. In R. Kubey (Ed.), Media literacy in the information age (pp. 79-86). New Brunswick, NJ:
Transaction.
Berger, A. A. (1998). Media analysis techniques (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Buck, G. (1995). How to become a good listening teacher. In D. J. Mendelsohn & J. Rubin (Eds.), A
guide for the teaching of second language listening (pp. 113-131). San Diego: Dominie Press.
Chamot, A. U. (1995). Learning strategies and listening comprehension. In D. J. Mendelsohn & J. Rubin
(Eds.), A guide for the teaching of second language listening (pp. 13 – 30). San Diego: Dominie Press.
Christ, W. G. & Potter, W. J. (1998). Media literacy, media education, and the academy. Journal of
Communication, 48, 5-15.
Cohen, A. (1994). Verbal reports on learning strategies. In A. Cumming (Ed.), Alternatives in TESOL
research: Descriptive, interpretive, and ideological orientations. TESOL Quarterly, 28(4), 678-682.
Coniam, D. (2000).  The use of audio or video comprehension as an assessment instrument in the
certification of English language teachers: A case study. System, 29, 1-14.
Cope, B & Kalantzis, M. (Eds.) (2000). Multiliteracies: Literacy learning and the design of social futures.
South Yarra, VIC: Macmillan.
Corbel, C. (1997). Computer literacies: Working efficiently with electronic texts. Sydney: National Centre
for English Language Teaching and Research.
Curtis, D. P. (2004). The oldest literacy. Journal of Visual Literacy, 24(2), 121-128.
Dunkel, P., Henning, G., & Chaudron, C. (1993). The assessment of an L2 listening comprehension
construct: A tentative model for test specification and development. The Modern Language Journal,
77(2), 180-191.
Educational Testing Service (2005). ICT Literacy Assessment. Retrieved January 22, 2006, from
http://www.ets.org/ictliteracy/
Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. (1984/1993). Protocol analysis: Verbal reports as data. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Flick, U. (2002). An introduction to qualitative research. London; Sage.
Fontana, A., & Frey, J. H. (1994). Interviewing: The art of science. In N. Denzin & Y. Lincoln (Eds.),
Handbook of qualitative research (pp. 361 - 376). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Press.
Gillham, B. (2005). Research interviewing. London: Open University Press.
Goh, C. (2002). Exploring listening comprehension tactics and their interaction patterns. System, 30(2),
185-206.
Graddol, D. (1994). The visual accomplishment of factuality. In D. Graddol & O. Boyd-Barrett (Eds.),
Media texts: Authors and readers (pp. 136 - 157). Clevedon, England: Multilingual Matters.
Graham, S. (2003). Learner strategies and advanced level listening comprehension. Language Learning
Journal, 28, 64-69.
Gruba, P. (1999) The role of digital video media in second language listening comprehension.
Unpublished PhD thesis, Department of Linguistics and Applied Linguistics, University of Melbourne.
Retrieved March 31, 2006 from http://eprints.unimelb.edu.au/archive/00000244/
Paul Gruba Playing the Videotext
Language Learning & Technology 90
Gruba, P. (2004). Understanding digitized second language videotext. Computer Assisted Language
Learning, 17 (1), 51-82.
Gruba, P. (2005). Developing media literacy in the L2 classroom. Sydney: Macquarie University,
National Centre for English Teaching and Research.
Gunter, B. (1987). Poor reception: Misunderstanding and forgetting broadcast news. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Gurak, L. J. (2001). Cyberliteracy: Navigating the internet with awareness. New Haven: Yale University
Press.
Hobbs, R. (1998). The seven great debates in the media literacy movement. Journal of Communication,
48(1), 16-32.
Hoey, M. (2001). Textual interaction. London: Routledge.
Hoven, D. (1999). A model for listening and viewing comprehension in multimedia environments.
Language Learning & Technology, 31 (XX), 88-103. Retrieved April 3, 2006 from
http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num1/hoven/index.html.
Joiner, E. G. (1990). Choosing and using videotexts. Foreign Language Annals, 23, 53-64.
Kern, R. & Schultz, J. M. (2005). Beyond orality: Investigating literacy and the literary in second and
foreign language instruction. The Modern Language Journal, 89, 381-392.
Kramsch, C. (1993). Context and culture in language teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kramsch, C., A’Ness, F., Lam, W.S. E. (2000). Authenticity and authorship in the computer-mediated
acquisition of L2 literacy. Language Learning & Technology, 4(2), 78-104. Retrieved April 3, 2006 from
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num2/kramsch.
Kramsch, C., & Andersen, R. (1999). Teaching text and context through multimedia. Language Learning
& Technology, 2(2), 31-42. Retrieved April 3, 2006 from http://llt.msu.edu/vol2num2/article1.
Kellerman, S. (1992). 'I see what you mean': The role of kinesic behavior in listening and implications for
foreign and second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 13, 239-258.
Kim, J. (2002). Affective reactions to foreign language listening retrospective interviews with Korean
EFL students. Language Research, 38, 117– 151.
Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Kubey, R. (1997). Media literacy in the information age. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers.
Lankshear, C. & Knobel, M. (2003). New literacies: Changing knowledge and classroom learning.
Buckingham: Open University Press.
Lankshear, C. & Synder, I. (2000). Teachers and technoliteracy: Managing literacy, technology and
learning in schools. St. Leonards, NSW: Allen & Unwin.
Livingstone, S. (2003). The changing nature and uses of media literacy. London: Media@Ise, London
School of Economics.
Luke, C. (1997). Technological literacy. Melbourne: Adult Literacy Research Network, Language
Australia.
Lynch, T. (1998). Theoretical perspectives on listening. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 18, 3-19.
Paul Gruba Playing the Videotext
Language Learning & Technology 91
Machin, D. & van Leeuwen, T. (2003). Global schemas and local discourses in Cosmopolitan. Journal of
Sociolinguistics, 7(4), 493-512.
Mackey, M. (2002). Literacies across media: Playing the text. London: RoutledgeFalmer.
Markham, P., Peter, L., & McCarthy, T. (2001). The effects of native language vs. target language
captions on students’ DVD video comprehension. Foreign Language Annals, 34, 439-445.
McKee, A. (2003). Textual analysis: A beginner’s guide. London: Sage.
Meskill, C. (1996). Listening skills development through multimedia. Journal of Educational Multimedia
and Hypermedia, 5(2), 179-201.
Miles, M. B., & Huberman, A. M. (1994). Qualitative data analysis (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications.
Mishan, F. & Strunz, B. (2003). An application of XML to the creation of an interactive resource for
authentic language learning tasks. ReCALL, 15(2), 237-250.
Moore, D. M., & Dwyer, F. M. (Eds.). (1994). Visual literacy. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational
Technology Publications.
Piller, I. (2003). Advertising as a site of language contact. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 23, 170-
183.
Potter, W. J. (2005). Media literacy (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Potter, W. J. (2004). Theory of media literacy: A cognitive approach. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Pressley, M., & Afflerbach, P. (1995). Verbal protocols of reading: The nature of constructively
responsive reading. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Richards, L. (2005). Handling qualitative data. London: Sage.
Riley, P. (1981). Viewing comprehension: “l’oeil ecoute”. ELT Documents. Special issue: The teaching
of listening comprehension 1981.
Riley, P. (1981). Viewing comprehension: “l’oeil ecoute.” In The teaching of listening comprehension.
ELT Documents.
Rubin, J. (1995). An overview to A guide for the teaching of second language listening. In D. J.
Mendelsohn & J. Rubin (Eds.), A guide for the teaching of second language listening (pp. 7 - 11). San
Diego: Dominie Press.
Salomon, G. (1979). Interaction of media, cognition, and learning. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Silverblatt, A. (2001). Media literacy: Keys to interpreting media messages. (2nd ed.). Westport, CT:
Praeger.
Stokes, J. (2003). How to do media and cultural studies. London: Sage.
Synder, I. (2002). (Ed.) Silicon literacies. London: Routledge.
Tudor, I., & Tuffs, R. (1991). Formal and content schemata activation in L2 viewing comprehension.
RELC Journal, 22, 79-95.
Tuman, M. C. (1996). Literacy online. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 16, 26-45.
Unsworth, L. (2001). Teaching multiliteracies across the curriculum: Changing contexts of text and
image in classroom practice. Buckingham: Open University Press.
van Leeuwen, T. (2005). Introducing social semiotics. London: Routledge.
Paul Gruba Playing the Videotext
Language Learning & Technology 92
Vandergrift, L. (2003a). From prediction through reflection: Guiding students through the process of L2
listening. The Canadian Modern Language Review, 59, 425-440.
Vandergrift, L. (2003b). Orchestrating strategy use: Toward a model of the skilled second language
listener. Language Learning, 53(3), 463-496.
Vandergrift, L. (2004). Listening to learn or learning to listen? Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 24,
3-25.
Warschauer, M (1999). Electronic literacies. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Wetzel, C. D., Radtke, P. H., & Stern, H. W. (1994). Instructional effectiveness of video media. Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Willis, J. (1983). The role of the visual element in spoken discourse: Implications for the exploitation of
video in the EFL classroom. In J. McGovern (Ed.), Video applications in English language teaching (pp.
29-42). London: Permagon Press.
Wolvin, A. D., & Croakley, C. G. (1985). Listening (2nd ed.). Dubuque, IA: William C. Brown.
