 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  16 
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS 
Sponsors 
University of Hawai`i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR) 
Co-Sponsor 
Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL) 
 
University of Hawai'i National Foreign Language Resource 
Center (NFLRC)  
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials 
development projects and conducts Summer Institutes for language professionals among its many 
activities. 
CALICO 2006 IN HAWAI‘I! 
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) is proud to be hosting 
the 2006 Computer Assisted Language Instruction Consortium (CALICO) Annual Symposium on May 
16-20 in Honolulu. CALICO 2006 will feature uses of cutting edge technologies in foreign language 
teaching and learning with a focus on collaboration. Workshops, presentations, and courseware showcase 
demonstrations will all present information of vital importance to anyone interested in the field of 
computer-assisted language learning. This year’s theme, appropriately, will be "Online Learning: Come 
Ride The Wave."  For more information about CALICO and its annual Symposium, visit 
http://www.calico.org/ 
2007 PRAGMATICS & LANGUAGE LEARNING CONFERENCE 
The NFLRC is pleased to be organizing and sponsoring the 17th International Conference on Pragmatics 
and Language Learning (PLL) on March 26-28, 2007 in Honolulu, Hawai‘i. The University of Hawai‘i 
Center for Japanese Studies (CJS) and the Department of Second Language Studies (SLS) also serve as 
co-sponsors of the event. The conference will address a broad range of topics in pragmatics, discourse, 
interaction, and sociolinguistics in their relation to second and foreign language learning, education, and 
use, approached from a variety of theoretical and methodological perspectives.  Highlights include 
plenary talks by Junko Mori (University of Wisconsin-Madison) and Steven Talmy (University of British 
Columbia) and two invited colloquia.  We are currently accepting online proposal submissions for paper 
and poster sessions – deadline September 30, 2006.  For more information about the conference, visit 
http://nflrc.hawaii.edu/prodev/pll 
NEW NFLRC PUBLICATIONS 
Pingelapese Alphabet Book by Ryoko Hattori & Billie-Jean Manuel 
This simple and colorful Pingelapese word book grew out of the author's participation in the University of 
Hawai`i’s Language Documentation Project. The Project’s mission is to help safeguard minority 
languages for which basic literacy documents, such as grammars and dictionaries, are either inadequate or 
nonexistent. 
Manual for the Vietnamese elicited imitation test (manual plus 2 audio CDs) by Craig Chaudron, Hanh 
Ngyuen, & Matthew Prior 
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  17 
Research on second languages --especially English, Spanish, and Japanese-- demonstrates that elicited 
imitation can be a reliable and valid measure of general competence, while also possibly serving as an 
instrument for linguistically-oriented second language acquisition research. This test of Vietnamese 
consists of two parallel forms, each with forty-eight sentences of standard Northern Vietnamese. Even 
though these represent normal statements and expressions, some of them  may be difficult to recall in 
their entirety. Performance on the test is scored on a scale of accuracy for each item. 
Corpus linguistics for Korean language learning and teaching by Robert Bley-Vroman & HyunSook 
Ko (eds.) 
Dramatic advances in personal-computer technology have given language teachers access to vast 
quantities of machine-readable text, which can be analyzed with a view toward improving the basis of 
language instruction. Corpus linguistics provides analytic techniques and practical tools for studying 
language in use. This volume provides both an introductory framework for the use of corpus linguistics 
for language teaching and examples of its application for Korean teaching and learning. The collected 
papers cover topics in Korean syntax, lexicon, and discourse, and second language acquisition research, 
always with a focus on application in the classroom. An overview of Korean corpus linguistics tools and 
available Korean corpora are also included. [in Korean and English] 
TWO NEW NetWorks HAVE BEEN ADDED to the NFLRC collection of Web-accessible 
publications. Check out the entire collection of NetWorks. 
Reanalysis of discernment from a social constructivist perspective: Academic consultation sessions in 
Japanese universities by Haruko M. Cook 
Foreign language program evaluation: An annotated bibliography of resources for foreign language 
educators by Yukiko Watanabe, & John M. Norris 
ONLINE JOURNALS SOLICIT SUBMISSIONS 
Reading in a Foreign Language is a refereed online journal, jointly sponsored by the University of 
Hawai`i NFLRC and the Department of Second Language Studies. RFL serves as an excellent source for 
the latest developments in the field, both theoretical and pedagogic, including improving standards for 
foreign language reading. For more information on submission guidelines, visit the RFL Web site. 
Language Learning & Technology is a refereed online journal, jointly sponsored by the University of 
Hawai`i NFLRC and the Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research 
(CLEAR). LLT focuses on issues related to technology and language education. For more information on 
submission guidelines, visit the LLT Web site. 
 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education 
and Research (CLEAR)  
CLEAR's mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States. 
Projects focus on materials development, professional development training, and foreign language 
research. 
CONFERENCES 
CLEAR exhibits at local and national conferences year-round. We hope to see you at ACTFL, CALICO, 
MiWLA, NCOLCTL, Central States, and other conferences. 
World Languages Day 
CLEAR is a major sponsor and the primary organizer of World Languages Day, an annual event held on 
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  18 
MSU’s campus.  This year, more than 400 high school students, teachers and parents took part in this 
one-day conference on world languages and globalization.  To learn more, visit http://clear.msu.edu/wld . 
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
Summer Workshops  
Each summer, CLEAR hosts professional development workshops for foreign language teachers.  
For more information on future summer workshops, go to 
http://clear.msu.edu/training/index.html.  Three workshops are slated for summer 2006: 
o DEVELOPING ONLINE LANGUAGE MATERIALS More 
o TOWARD FRIENDLY ASSESSMENT IN THE FOREIGN LANGUAGE 
CLASSROOM More  
o LANGUAGE PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT FOR LESS COMMONLY TAUGHT 
LANGUAGES More  
 
Onsite Workshops  
CLEAR offers foreign language teachers at K-13+ institutions around the country the opportunity to host 
a CLEAR workshop. These 1-3 day workshops are led by CLEAR's professional development staff 
members. For more information, visit http://clear.msu.edu/training/onsite/about.html. 
MATERIALS DEVELOPMENT 
Coming Soon! • Vietnamese Small Group Instruction Guide 
• Introductory Business German (CD-ROM) 
• French Pronunciation and Phonetics (CD-ROM) 
Products  
• NEW!  Language Learning Materials for Russian: A Content-Based Course Pack (online learning 
modules) 
• Now free! Business Chinese (CD-ROM) 
• MIMEA: Multimedia Interactive Modules for Education and Assessment (German, Chinese, 
Arabic, Vietnamese, Korean; online video clips and activities) 
• SMILE (tool for creating interactive online exercises) 
• The Internet Sourcebook for Business Korean (Web links)  
• The Internet Sourcebook for Business Japanese (Web links)  
• The Internet Sourcebook for Business French (Web links) 
• The Internet Sourcebook for Business German (Web links) 
• The Internet Sourcebook for Business Spanish (Web links) 
• Business Language Packets for High School Classrooms (French, German, & Spanish; PDF files) 
• Facilitating Connections to International Business: A Guide for Foreign Language Educators 
(guide) 
• African Language Small Group Instruction Guide (guide and video) 
• Thai Small Group Instruction Guide (guide) 
• Hindi Small Group Instruction Guide (guide)  
• Modules for Assessing Socio-Cultural Competence: German (CD-ROM) 
• Modules for Assessing Socio-Cultural Competence: Russian (CD-ROM) 
• Pronunciación y Fonética (CD-ROM) 
• Foreign Languages: Doors to Opportunity (video and discussion guide) 
• Test Development (workbook and video) 
Newsletter 
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  19 
CLEAR News is a biyearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. 
Contact the CLEAR office to join the mailing list, or check it out on the Web at 
http://clear.msu.edu/newsletter/. We welcome your submissions! 
 
The Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL)  
The Center for Applied Linguistics is a private, nonprofit organization that promotes and improves the 
teaching and learning of languages, identifies and solves problems related to language and culture, and 
serves as a resource for information about language and culture. CAL carries out a wide range of 
activities in the fields of English as a second language, foreign languages, cultural education, and 
linguistics.  
Featured Resources: 
• The Center for Adult English Language Acquisition (CAELA)  
CAELA was established in 2004 with funding from the Office of Vocational and Adult Education 
(OVAE), U.S. Department of Education and its primary mission is to assist states that have emerging 
ESL populations. CAELA staff will help states build their capacity to promote the English language 
learning and academic achievement of adults learning English. Resources available on its Web site 
include tools for teaching adult English language learners, a new series of briefs; and, a newsletter, 
CAELA Currents, which includes subscription information. 
• The Cultural Orientation Resource (COR) Center  
The (COR) Center continues to provide materials that inform refugee service providers about refugee 
cultures and help newcomers understand fundamental aspects of life in the U.S. Culture Profiles 
provide short introductions to the cultural background of refugee populations. The latest Culture 
Profiles include Liberians, The Hmong, and Muslim Refugees. Also, a new edition of Welcome to the 
United States: A Guidebook for Refugees is now available as well as the Welcome to the United 
States: Refugee Guide to Resettlement Orientation Video, which reinforces key points from the 
guidebook. 
• Pre-K-12 School Services 
CAL provides professional development, offers program evaluation, conducts research, disseminates 
information, and provides technical assistance in areas related to language and language learning.  
 
CAL collaborates with other language education organizations, including: 
• Improving Foreign Languages Instruction Project of the Northeast and Island Regional 
Laboratory at Brown University 
• The National Capital Language Resource Center 
• National K-12 Foreign Language Resource Center  
• National Network for Early Language Learning 
 
Recent Publications: 
• Literacy and Language Diversity in the United States, 2nd Edition 
• Creating Access: Language and Academic Programs for Secondary School Newcomers  
• Language by Video: An Overview of Foreign Language Instructional Videos for Children  
• What’s Different About Teaching Reading to Students Learning English?  
 
