Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num2/net/ 
May, 2006, Volume 10, Number 2 
pp. 4-7 
 
Copyright © 2006, ISSN 1094-3501 4 
ON THE NET 
Wikipedia: A Multilingual Treasure Trove  
Jean W. LeLoup 
SUNY Cortland 
Robert Ponterio 
SUNY Cortland 
INTRODUCTION 
Encyclopedias are excellent sources of basic introductory information on historical and cultural topics for 
foreign language (FL) students. The articles in these reference works do not have the depth of more 
extensive works such as magazine articles, books, and even web sites addressing a topic, but such depth is 
generally not the best introduction to new concepts in a foreign language. Their brief overviews can serve 
as a better first exposure, quickly giving the student the main ideas that can later be filled in with more 
breadth and depth through additional reading as needed. In addition, the FL student will inevitably 
encounter many new concepts in the target language culture but have difficulty understanding the 
explanation, which is itself often full of additional new concepts and vocabulary. An electronic 
encyclopedia can present the advantage of hypertext links from these new expressions in one article to 
explanations and information in another article. This has always been a powerful feature of all 
encyclopedias dating at least back to Diderot's 18th century France, but the electronic format and 
hypertext makes jumping from one article to another much easier than flipping through pages.  
Electronic encyclopedias have long been available for many of the languages that we teach, produced by 
software companies (e.g., Encarta) or by the same people who make paper encyclopedias. The Internet, 
with its revolution in our ability to exchange information quickly, has lead to a fundamental change in the 
way software and other kinds of information can be produced, modified and distributed. The open source 
revolution has given us what has become one of the most popular encyclopedias in the world, and it is 
currently active in 108 languages (including Klingon). Thirty-seven of these different language editions 
have more than 10,000 articles at the current time.  
WIKIPEDIA 
 
 
Wikipedia (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Main_Page) is a highly 
successful, free, web-based, multilingual, open source 
encyclopedia. It is run by the non-profit Wikimedia foundation. 
Acording to co-founder Jimmy Wales in "Wikipedia is an 
encyclopedia", 8 March 2005, "Wikipedia is first and foremost 
an effort to create and distribute a free encyclopedia of the 
highest possible quality to every single person on the planet in 
their own language." 
How does this work? As in most electronic encyclopedias, one can browse articles or search for topics. 
Words and expressions within any article that are explained elsewhere in the encyclopedia are formatted 
as hypertext links to those other articles. But Wikipedia is different in the way it is written. Articles in 
traditional encyclopedias are written by experts with credentials. In Wikipedia, anyone can edit an article. 
LeLoup and Ponterio Wikipedia: A Multilingual Treasure Trove 
 
Language Learning & Technology 5 
Indeed, the Wikipedia slogan is "The free encyclopedia that anyone can edit at will." The asumption is 
that after many individuals have contributed their edits, an article will improve over time through a sort of 
evolutionary process. A history of edits remains available so readers can decide for themselves if they 
agree with changes. A series of tabs at the top of an article provides access to the tools for discussing, 
exploring, and even editing the article. 
 
The discussion tab is a place for users/readers to exchange ideas about the contents of the article. Under 
edit this page the reader can make corrections or additions. History gives the user access to previous 
versions of the article and includes explanations of the specific changes made and who made them. For a 
typical article, one finds many minor changes such as spelling corrections, stylistic changes, small factual 
corrections, but also some major changes, vandalism, and corrections reverting to a prior version of the 
article.  
 
 
Additional tools allow the reader to backtrack to other articles that 
link to the current one, yielding a sort of bi-directional hyperlink. 
One can also see recent changes in those linked pages as well as 
those in the current page. Multimedia files may be uploaded and 
included in an article if they do not have copyright issues. A 
printable version of the article is available. 
Complete information about how to cite the article in various citation styles is included along with a 
strong disclaimer warning readers that it may be inappropriate to cite an encyclopedia "as a source of any 
information." 
 
The recommendation in this note is very good advice about how to use and how not to misuse the 
encyclopedia. In fact, this disclaimer can lead to a good teachable moment, helping the student not just to 
find a piece of information but to better understand the difference between good and bad research.  
One advantage of a Wikipedia article over a Google search for the many web sites that might address a 
topic is that Wikipedia does have a review process through these multiple edits that is totally lacking in 
most web sites where only one author has editorial control. That does not mean that at any given moment, 
a fact mentioned in an article is correct, but it does mean that inaccuracies generally should tend to be 
corrected over time. On the other hand, anyone can add inaccurate information to an article at any time, 
making it unreliable. The same openness that makes Wikipedia powerful is also the cause of problems for 
which it has been criticized by encyclopedia publishers and Wikipedians alike.  
LeLoup and Ponterio Wikipedia: A Multilingual Treasure Trove 
 
Language Learning & Technology 6 
An additional problem that we have encountered is what appears to be an explosion of plagiarism by web 
page authors taking the text of their page from Wikipedia or from other pages. Thus, as students use the 
web for their research, they tend to encounter the same information from what they may believe are 
multiple sources, but that are in fact the same source. Teachers and students need to be aware of such 
problems to avoid the pitfalls of working online. This also leads us back to the basic flaw of using any 
encyclopedia, a tertiary source, in place of primary and secondary sources in research.  
OPEN SOURCE 
The model upon which Wikipedia is based is similar to the development of open source software. In this 
model, many individuals freely contribute some amount of work to a project, adding features and fixing 
bugs. The number of talented individuals making small contributions can lead to better software 
development than may be possible by a single company creating their product inhouse on a limited 
budget. Open source projects generally do have someone in charge to control who can participate or at 
least which modifications should be incorporated. In his book, The World is Flat: A Brief History of the 
Twenty-first Century, Thomas Friedman describes open source as one of the major "world flatteners", 
leading to free world-wide collaboration and competition (2005).  
Open source development is a community effort and Wikipedia is a community of volunteers who 
contribute to making it a successful endeavor. Many regular users keep a watch on particular articles that 
they wish to monitor for changes so they are notified whenever anyone contributes an edit. As one can 
imagine, articles on controversial topics tend to change frequently. 
 
 
 
 
Wikipedia's navigation menu includes links that are specifically related 
to building this community. 
LANGUAGE EDITIONS 
The main interest of Wikipedia for the FL teacher is its availability in so many languages. These are not 
translations, but actually separate projects or separate language communities of individuals contributing 
to and editing each version.  
The language versions of Wikipedia are divided into three groups based on their number of contributed 
articles. These are listed at the bottom of the main page. The first group includes those with the largest 
number of articles, over 100,000, putting them on a par with most traditional encyclopedias such as 
Britannica and Columbia or other electronic encyclopedias such as Encarta or Hachette. These major 
language editions include English, German, French, Polish, Japanese, Italian, Swedish, Dutch, 
Portuguese, and Spanish. 
The second group, having at least 10,000 articles, certainly a very respectable size, includes Arabic, 
Bulgarian, Catalan, Czech, Danish, Estonian, Esperanto, Persian, Galician, Hebrew, Croatian, Ido, 
Indonesian, Korean, Lithuanian, Hungarian, Malay, Norwegian, Romanian, Russian, Slovak, Slovenian, 
Serbian, Finnish, Turkish, Ukrainian, and Chinese. 
LeLoup and Ponterio Wikipedia: A Multilingual Treasure Trove 
 
Language Learning & Technology 7 
 
Links to all of the available Wikipedia language editions, including the third group of editions containing 
at least 1,000 articles and other language editions that may be just getting started, can be found on the 
Multilingual Coordination page (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Multilingual_coordination). The 
number of articles in any language is constantly growing, so this listing will be out of date as soon as it 
appears.  
PROBLEMS 
Wikipedia is criticized for a number of flaws inherent in the way it works 
(http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Criticism_of_Wikipedia). Clearly, the fact that something is stated in 
Wikipedia does not make it true. Students should be warned that facts need to be checked and that 
Wikipedia should not be used as a quotable source for research, but this is true of all encyclopedias. There 
is even disagreement about whether Wikipedia is any less accurate than other encyclopedias. But for the 
FL teacher, the issue is not whether or not this tool is better or worse than an expensive hard-cover 
reference work. This is a popular tool that is now being used extensively and that we can teach our 
students to use in the target language.  
CONCLUSION 
Used judiciously, Wikipedia can be a valuable source of information, discussion, and even controversy 
that can underpin language instruction and learning in the FL classroom. The dynamic and permeable 
nature of this open source example is akin to interlanguage (Selinker, 1972) in that it is ever-changing and 
moving along a continuum, ostensibly toward greater accuracy and increased knowledge availability. As 
with all technological innovations, it should be viewed as one more tool for use by FL instructors and 
learners to increase their exposure to a wide variety of topics of historical and cultural interest.  
 
REFERENCES 
Friedman, T. L. (2005). The world is flat: A brief history of the twenty-first century. New York, NY: 
Farrar, Straus and Giroux.  
Selinker, L. (1972). Interlanguage. IRAL, 10, 209-231. 
 
