Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num2/review2/ 
May 2006, Volume 10, Number 2 
pp. 25-28 
 
Copyright © 2006, ISSN 1094-3501 25 
REVIEW OF LITERACY IN THE NEW MEDIA AGE 
Literacy in the New Media Age 
Gunther Kress 
2003 
ISBN 0-415-25356-X 
US $31.95 (paperback); $105.00 (hardback) 
208 pp. 
Routledge 
New York, USA  
Review by Donald Weasenforth, Collin County Community College 
That much of the writing we encounter daily takes the form of digital text displayed on screens probably 
goes unnoticed by many.  In today’s world, "we take reading on-screen for granted, and … in the 
developed world most reading is probably already electronic" (Kasdorf, 2003, p. 465).  A fundamental 
revolution is that text is freed from the physical medium that conveys it, and this raises many questions 
about the definition of textuality, the processing of text, and the sociocultural effects of the shift to text 
liberated from print media. These are the types of questions Gunther Kress addresses in Literacy in the 
New Media Age (2003).  He identifies two main goals for his book, one of which is to provide a 
perspective on literacy of the past through "the search for the beginnings of answers to questions such as: 
…What is common about the making of representations and messages between then and now, and in the 
likely tomorrow?" (p. 8). Kress’s second goal is to provide "a conceptual framework and tools for 
thinking about a field that is in a profound state of transition" (p. 8).  Kress’s book delivers as promised 
on the first count, but it falls short of providing a coherent framework.   
The first three chapters of Literacy in the New Media Age address the reconcepualization of textuality as 
prompted by a growing reliance on images and electronic media; they also address ramifications of this 
reconcepualization for society.  Kress uses as a foundation for his discussion the observation of a shift 
from print media to computer screens. Against this backdrop, Kress raises two questions: (a) How will the 
nature of literacy change with use of digital texts, and (b) what will the sociocultural effects of this new 
literacy be?  The new media make it easy to incorporate multiple communication modes (image, audio, 
video), and these modes, Kress argues, are "governed by distinct logics [which] change not only the 
deeper meanings of textual forms but also the structures of ideas, of conceptual arrangements, and of the 
structures of our knowledge" (p. 16).  As Kress and others (cf. Kasdorf, 2003; Lynch & Horton, 2001) 
have noted, traditional text and electronic text can be used very differently; that is, they allow different 
types of reading.  Paper-based texts entail strict linear organization, explicitly manifested in part by page 
and chapter numbers.  A reader can more easily flip through a paper text and get a better sense of the 
spatial distribution of the content of the text.  An electronic text, in contrast, allows and invites random 
access through hypertext links as well as search and browse functions.  It is certainly conceivable that 
these various functionalities could yield different understandings and conceptualizations of the texts due 
to the more fluid processing available to readers.  The extent to which this occurs and the process by 
which it occurs are matters for research, for which Kress provides some foundation, albeit a limited one. 
As for the sociocultural implications of the growing dominance of image and screens, Kress points to the 
democratization of communication due to ubiquitous access to web-based tools.  The current proliferation 
of web pages, web logs, wikis, instant messaging, and podcasting provides ample evidence of this growth.  
The social effects of the growing preference for images and electronic text is a fascinating issue, but one
Donald Weasenforth Review of Literacy in the New Media Age 
 
Language Learning & Technology 26 
that deserves more than the superficial speculation Kress offers; this issue would have been better 
addressed in a different work, especially since discussing the evolving conceptualizations of textuality 
and providing an analytic framework to analyze these new textualities seem ambitious enough in scope.  
A discussion of the influences of various communication modes on epistemology is provided in Chapters 
4 and 5.  Kress concedes that "the old resources [e.g., principles of textual organization] colonized the 
new technology, but at the same time the affordances offered by the new technology reshaped the 
resources" (p. 83).  As throughout the rest of his book, Kress illustrates his point with text samples, but, 
curiously, he provides little discussion and few examples of electronic text, where one might expect to 
find the most interesting interactions of "old resources" and new technologies.  Also, it is important to 
note that not all resources have been changed by technologies’ affordances, a point not clearly made by 
Kress.  What we see daily (e.g., paper and electronic issues of newspapers, "printer-friendly" buttons on 
web pages, etc.) can be characterized as parallel systems, in which the old and new coexist.  Technology 
has brought about a greater use of images and serves as a new medium for conveyance, but the extent to 
which image and screen will replace text and paper remains to be seen.  At this point in time, Kress’s 
view seems somewhat overstated. 
Kress’s main point in these chapters, his prediction that these affordances will shape what we know and 
how we know, is well taken.  Unfortunately, Kress does not provide the most persuasive evidence, which 
again could be found in electronic texts.  For example, the abilities to link information through hypertext 
and to personalize the access and presentation of information with electronic text directly raise questions 
about how readers’ understanding might be shaped.  These and other capabilities of electronic text not 
only support the content of the texts, but also stimulate "the creation of more [information]…and…enrich 
that web of knowledge that is so rapidly enriching us" (Kasdorf, 2003, p. 3).  Technologies such as flow 
cues in dynamically served web pages—for which information is collected, organized, and published on 
the fly by software—determine what readers know by automatically selecting and organizing information 
for them.  Kress also overlooks assistive technologies (e.g., text-to-speech, magnification, and 
navigational features) that allow the manipulation of texts and images on screens so as to compensate for 
visual handicaps.  These technologies have obvious social ramifications which should be discussed. 
Chapters 6 and 7 are devoted to a discussion of genre—defined by Kress as "a response to…social 
givens" (p. 98) rather than a confluence of textual regularities—with some application to multimodal 
texts.  Kress occasionally overreaches in his interpretations of textual elements (e.g., his construal of the 
social contexts surrounding student texts in Chapter 7), and he does not clearly tie this discussion to the 
issues of the dominance of image and screen.  At times he also overstates his case, as when he asserts that 
"until twenty or thirty years ago, writing carried all the communicational load of a message, and needed to 
have grammatical and syntactic structures that were equal to the complexities of that which had to be 
represented in that single mode" (p. 117).  Among many examples that can be cited to the contrary are the 
botanical prints of the 18th and 19th centuries, clear examples of traditional texts in which images carry the 
bulk of the message (Baggett, 2006).  Such overstatement aside, his discussion of the specialization of 
modes (text versus image) is interesting and a useful basis for the proposed analytic framework since it 
underlies the design of texts and, consequently, readers’ processing of the texts.  His inclusion of image 
as a genre-defining characteristic is valid in that images do partially reflect the social purposes of a 
document.   
In Chapter 8, Kress redirects his discussion from a consideration of theoretical issues to identification of 
specific aspects of electronic text design which could become elements of a framework useful to analyses 
of literacy in "the new media age."  He also touches here on implications of digital design for redefining 
what it means to be literate.  His concepts of "blocks" of information and "entry" (p. 136) reflect the 
composition of many electronic documents and readers’ approaches to parsing such documents, concepts 
which have been discussed for some time by graphics/web designers (Berners-Lee & Fischetti, 1999; 
Lynch & Horton, 2001) but are nonetheless crucial to a theory of literacy of electronic media. 
Donald Weasenforth Review of Literacy in the New Media Age 
 
Language Learning & Technology 27 
This discussion is extended into Chapter 9 in a consideration of the specialized functions of image (i.e., to 
show) and text (i.e., to tell) and the directionality of reading paths. "Writing is used for that which writing 
does best—to provide, in fact, an account of events, and image is used for that which image does best, to 
depict the world that is at issue" (pp. 155-156).  Given these specialized functions of text and image, 
Kress advises that designers of (electronic) texts consider the "best fit" (p. 156) when using various 
media, using images to represent concepts more easily represented visually and using text to represent 
sequentially-based concepts.  Multimodality, Kress notes, also raises questions of directionality, that is 
how reading paths are determined by the layout of a document.  It is clear that there is not one path to 
reading a multimodal, on-screen text, as is true to some extent for traditional text-only documents, but 
what is most important is identifying document characteristics that promote certain paths (cf. Kasdorf’s 
2003 discussion of Flash animations and content flow cues).  Consistent with Kress’s discussion, Lynch 
and Horton (2001) note that "[u]sers of web documents…interact with [them] in novel ways that have no 
precedents in paper document design" (p. 17).  Users of a multimodal document first perceive the 
document as "large masses of shape and color [Kress’s "blocks"], with foreground elements contrasting 
against the background field.  Secondarily, they begin to pick out specific information, first from 
graphics…, and only then do they start parsing the harder medium of text and begin to read individual 
words and phrases" (p. 82).  Unfortunately, Kress’s discussion does not draw together these types of 
observations into a coherent analytic framework or theory of literacy "in the new media age." 
Kress’s last chapter mentions additional, somewhat disconnected, issues related to the proliferation of 
multimodal electronic documents.  Kress conjectures that a reader’s imagination is a matter of ordering 
elements in contrast to filling traditional text with meaning.  While there is some validity to this 
statement, readers do fill images with meaning also. Further, Kress points out that the notions of 
authorship and authority are redefined in electronic documents.  Finally, he notes that standards of 
reading proficiency need to be reconsidered given the differences in texts and how readers process them, 
but Kress does not go much beyond raising these issues, all of which deserve more investigation and 
discussion. 
Literacy in the New Media Age provides an engaging examination of how the conceptualization of 
textuality is changing as images seem to dominate text and as screens overtake paper as the most frequent 
means of distributing text.  Kress does an excellent job at discussing those theoretical issues that may 
eventually yield an analytic framework which we may use to analyze new media and evaluate what may 
become a new literacy.  As texts (and the media used to convey them) continue to evolve, and as theory 
and research continue to evolve, we can hope to see a coherent analytic framework emerge, a framework 
incorporating aspects of interactive electronic text design, graphic design, text and image processing, and 
sociocultural intentions latent in the new media. 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Donald Weasenforth is Professor of English as a Second Language at Collin County Community College 
in Plano, Texas, where he also serves as Chair of ESL, Developmental Reading, and Developmental 
Writing.  A primary focus of his instruction and research is the effective implementation of instructional 
technologies. 
Email: dweasenforth@ccccd.edu 
Donald Weasenforth Review of Literacy in the New Media Age 
 
Language Learning & Technology 28 
 
 
REFERENCES 
Baggett, W. N. (2006). Rare Prints Gallery. Retrieved March 3, 2006, from 
http://rareprintsgallery.com/merchant/merchant.mvc?Screen=SFNT 
Berners-Lee, T. & Fischetti, M. (1999). Weaving the Web: Origins and future of the World Wide Web. 
New York: HarperCollins. 
Kasdorf, W. E. (Ed.). (2003). The Columbia guide to digital publishing. New York: Columbia University 
Press. 
Kress, G. (2003). Literacy in the new media age. New York: Routledge. 
Lynch, P. J. & Horton, S. (2001). Web style guide. Second Edition. New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press. 
 
