Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num1/editors/ 
January 2006, Volume 10, Number 1 
pp. 1-2 
 
Copyright © 2006, ISSN 1094-3501 1 
 
 
A 10TH ANNIVERSARY NOTE  
The year 2006 marks the 10th anniversary of Language Learning & Technology. We 
want to take this opportunity to thank all of you who have made this anniversary 
possible. Your support has enabled us to compile a solid record of 23 issues, to go from 
two issues to three issues per year, and to grow in scope and diversity. Since 2003, 
Language Learning & Technology is indexed in the exclusive Institute for Scientific 
Information (ISI)'s Social Sciences Citation Index (SSCI), ISI Alerting Services, Social 
Scisearch, and Current Contents/Social and Behavioral Sciences. Our contributors now 
come from 26 countries and our readers from over 145 countries around the world. In 
2005, we received a record 118 submissions. 
As always, we wish to thank the National Foreign Language Resource Center of the 
University of Hawai‘i and the Center for Language Education And Research of 
Michigan State University for their continued financial support that allows Language 
Learning & Technology to remain free to our readers and free from advertisements.  
We thank our contributors who have provided us with the interesting, timely, and high-
quality content that makes Language Learning & Technology a leading publication in 
the field.  
We thank all our hard-working and dedicated reviewers who have taken the time to 
provide our authors with insightful and constructive comments. Their contribution 
makes it possible for Language Learning & Technology to bring high-quality research 
reports to our readers.  We acknowledge our 2005 reviewers in this issue.  
We are grateful to our Editorial Board for their continued support and guidance.  
We are commemorating our 10th anniversary with a new look and would like to thank 
Carol Wilson-Duffy, our webmaster at the Center for Language Education and Research 
of Michigan State University, as well as Min Mo and Stephen Fleming of the National 
Foreign Language Resource Center at the University of Hawaii. 
Happy New Year to all!  
FROM THE EDITORS 
This regular issue of Language Learning & Technology includes four articles. In the first 
article, “Future Foreign Language Teachers’ Social and Cognitive Collaboration in an 
Online Environment,” Arnold & Ducate examine transcripts from a semester-long 
asynchronous discussion between foreign language methodology classes at two different 
universities. Their findings indicate that students not only progressed in their cognitive 
understanding of the pedagogical topics but also employed social presence to aid their 
discussions.   
The second article “Discourse and Participation in ESL Face-To-Face and Written 
Electronic Conferences” by Fitze compares two types of conferences in terms of textual 
features and participation. His findings indicate that discourse in written electronic 
conferences displayed greater lexical range, and students in these conferences produced 
more discourse demonstrating interactive competence. 
 
 
 From the Editors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 2 
  
 
 
The third article “Internet Use of Polish by Polish Melburnians: Implications for 
Maintenance and Teaching” by Fitzgerald & Debski examines the use of the Polish 
language by Polish-Australians with modern communications technologies. Their study 
identifies several factors interacting with Internet use in the community language and 
makes recommendations for applications of modern technology in ethnic language 
schools and for home language maintenance. 
In the fourth article “Negotiating Common Ground in Computer-mediated Versus Face-
to-face Discussions,” Vandergriff compares learner use of reception strategies in 
traditional face-to-face and in synchronous computer-mediated communication. Her 
study showed that the medium alone had little impact on the use of reception strategies, 
and that participants adapted the strategies to the goals of the communicative interaction, 
as they used them primarily to negotiate and update common ground in their 
collaborative activity rather than to compensate for L2 deficiencies. 
Our regular editor of "Emerging Technologies," Godwin-Jones, is taking a much-
deserved break. In place of his regular contribution, we are pleased to present “Going to 
the MALL: Mobile Assisted Language Learning” by Chinnery who examines the 
practical advantages as well as challenges involved in the use of mobile technologies for 
language learning.  
In “On the Net,” Leloup and Ponterio describe the Digital Dante Project, an online, 
multimedia Dante-related academic resource that presents traditional elements of 
scholarly research through digital technology.  
We want to welcome Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas, our new Reviews Editor, who brings us 
four reviews. Evans reviews S. Fotos,  & C.M. Browne (eds.) (2004). New Perspectives 
on CALL for Second Language Classrooms, a practical handbook for teacher trainers, 
students, and professionals interested in exploring the foundations of successful 
technology-based teaching and learning. Horst & Cobb review the Oxford Dictionary of 
American English and its accompanying Genie CD-ROM software. Ari reviews N-Gram 
Phrase Extractor, kfNgram and Wordsmith Tools, software programs used to search for 
lexical bundles in a text, in terms of their user-friendliness and efficiency. Wahba 
reviews Mastering Arabic with two Audio CDs, a software package that aims at 
providing the novice learner with a general understanding of the overall structure of 
Arabic as well as the means for basic communication.  
If you are not already subscribed, please take a moment to fill out your free subscription.  
 
Sincerely, 
Irene Thompson and Dorothy Chun 
Editors  
 From the Editors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 3 
 
