Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num3/liaw/ 
September 2006, Volume 10, Number 3 
pp. 49-64 
 
Copyright © 2006, ISSN 1094-3501 49 
E-LEARNING AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF INTERCULTURAL 
COMPETENCE 
Meei-ling Liaw 
National Taichung University 
 
ABSTRACT 
This study presents findings on the efficacy of an online learning environment developed 
to foster EFL students’ intercultural competence via reading articles on topics of their own 
culture and communicating their responses with speakers of another culture. The project 
offered opportunities for EFL students to use their own societal and cultural practices as 
the focus for EFL learning. In addition, with the help of an e-forum, the learning 
environment allowed the students to exchange their views with speakers of the target 
language. Two e-referencing tools were made available in the system while students were 
reading and writing. The findings showed that all EFL participants were able to 
communicate fluently in the target language without much help from corpora-based e-
referencing tools provided in the system. The use of the online dictionary decreased 
drastically after the first two readings. The online concordancer, instead of being used for 
learning different kinds of cultural meaning on the levels of lexical, syntactic, and textual 
organization as originally intended, was used by the students to link to articles of similar 
topics for further explorations of culture and language learning opportunities. Despite 
some technical difficulties with the computers, the collaboration between the two groups 
of students was successful, as can be seen from the positive and complimentary comments 
from the participants. The students’ e-forum entries demonstrated four types of 
intercultural competences: (A) interest in knowing other people’s way of life and 
introducing one’s own culture to others, (B) ability to change perspective, (C) knowledge 
about one’s own and others’ culture for intercultural communication, and (D) knowledge 
about intercultural communication processes. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Teaching Culture in an EFL Classroom  
The teaching of culture is considered a very important part of language teaching, although how it should 
be done remains controversial. For many years, the transmission perspective with rote learning of factual 
knowledge of highbrow (e.g., literature and the arts) and lowbrow information (e.g., customs, habits, and 
folklore of everyday life) dominated the teaching of culture (Thanasoulas, 2001). Nonetheless, this 
approach was criticized for downplaying the meaning of culture because it "…virtually blindfold[ed] 
learners to the minute albeit significant aspects of their own as well as the target group’s identity that 
[were] not easily divined and appropriated" (Huebener, 1959, p. 177).  
To make up for the shortcomings of the factual transmission perspective in teaching culture, the cross-
cultural contrastive approach was then embraced by language teachers. Drawing upon cross-cultural 
psychology and anthropology, this approach embedded culture within an interpretive framework and 
advocated the connection between one’s own and the target country. Learners are usually directed to 
compare and contrast the similarities and differences between their own and the target cultures.  
Meei-Ling Liaw E-Learning and the Development of Intercultural Competence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 50 
The contrastive approach had its own share of criticism as well. Educators found that the approach might 
have run the risk of oversimplifying the richness and variety of a culture by reducing it to a few salient 
principles. It might have also misrepresented a culture or even fossilized stereotypes and hyper-sensitized 
language learners to cross-cultural differences (Guest, 2002). Overlooking individual variations was 
another problem of the contrastive approach. When students focused on finding the similar and different 
elements between their own and the other culture, they might have failed to notice the individual 
variations within each culture. Therefore, comparing and contrasting stereotypes of home and another 
culture did not demonstrate clearly enough the subtle differences within each (Ortuǲo, 1991).  
In the 1980s, the importance of culture in the foreign language curriculum was enhanced by the 
emergence of the communicative approach (Canale & Swain, 1980; Seelye, 1988). Based on the belief 
that communication is not only an exchange of information but also a value-laden activity, learners were 
encouraged to take on the role of the foreigners so that they might gain insight into the values and 
meanings of the foreign culture (Byram & Morgan, 1994). Then again, with the increased awareness of 
the variety and diversity of the target culture communities, researchers cautioned that within the 
communicative competence framework, learning a foreign language could become a kind of en-
culturalization where one acquired new cultural frames of reference and a new world view (Alptekin, 
2002; Widdowson, 1994). With its standardized native-speaker norm, communicative-competence-based 
teaching might confine the learners to a model that is unrealistic. In other words, the monolithic portrayal 
of native speakers’ language and culture could not reflect the reality of English as an international 
language, and thus it fell short in teaching English as such. 
The rejection of modeling after native speakers for cultural learning nudged the teaching of foreign 
culture into a new direction. Communication situations are currently seen as encounters between the 
learner’s culture and that of the other. More recently, the term "intercultural competence" has been used 
in books and articles dealing with the cultural dimension of foreign language education to indicate the 
goal towards which students who want to communicate "across different cultures" should work. The use 
of the term "intercultural" reflects the view that foreign language students need to gain insight both into 
their own culture and the foreign culture, as well as be aware of the meeting of cultures that often takes 
place in communication situations in the foreign language (Kramsch, 1993). Learners must first become 
familiar with what it means to be part of their own culture and by exploring their own culture (by 
discussing the values, expectations, traditions, customs, and rituals they unconsciously take part in) before 
they are ready to reflect upon the values, expectations, and traditions of others with a higher degree of 
intellectual objectivity (Straub, 1999). Foreign language teachers should help learners reorganize their 
own complex cultural microcosmos and offer learners opportunities to develop skills to investigate 
cultural complexity and to promote cultural curiosity (Abrams, 2002).  
An overview of the development of the teaching of culture in a foreign language classroom reveals 
several stages. They include the factual transmission method, the cross-cultural contrastive approach, the 
communicative competence-based teaching, and the intercultural competence perspective. As the ways in 
which foreign language educators deal with the teaching of culture evolve, the status of the language 
learner’s own culture begins to be recognized. It is becoming clearer that culture teaching should not 
ignore the role of the learner’s own culture. After all, the learner’s interpretation of the target culture is 
done through the lens of his/her own cultural background and knowledge. Culture learning is not merely 
learning the target culture, but gaining insights into how the culture of the target language interacts with 
one’s own cultural experience.  
Teaching Culture in the Information Age  
Culture teaching is obviously not a single-faceted or an easy task for foreign language educators. In the 
course of searching for appropriate approaches, foreign language teachers have been turning to 
Meei-Ling Liaw E-Learning and the Development of Intercultural Competence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 51 
information technology for help in delivering cultural lessons. In many ways, CALL and culture are 
inherently connected. Some researchers assert that it is impossible to separate cultural issues from 
devising a CALL program, for CALL is about language and language is a cultural issue par excellence 
(Cameron, 1998).  
Over the years, efforts have been made by CALL experts to explore the capability of computer 
technology in supporting the teaching of culture. Similar to the change of beliefs in how culture should be 
taught in the foreign language classroom, the exploration of computer technology for culture teaching has 
also gone through several phases. In the early stage, much computer-assisted language teaching software 
was developed with the functions of teaching not only language but also culture. Unfortunately, 
commercial CALL software design has produced software that incorporated many cultural inaccuracies 
and misrepresentations and thus contradicted the goal of providing learners with a culturally authentic 
CALL experience (Shaughnessy, 2003). Due to content and delivery isolation and the adaptation of 
software across languages, students were presented with an ethnocentric view of the world. Students 
could only learn vocabulary from one cultural reference point since the culturally generic software 
ignored the cultural differences associated with specific topics.  
To compensate for commercial software’s inability to live up to the expectations of providing assistance 
in the teaching of culture and to take advantage of the technological advancements, CALL for culture 
teaching then began to integrate the use of computer networks. Computer networks are seen as a channel 
for interactivity and authenticity and for developing language learners’ intercultural competence (Abrams, 
2002; Hager, 2005; Kramsch, 1993; Straub, 1999). Online interactive courseware has been developed to 
promote the cultural understanding of ESL/EFL learners. For example, Shawback and Terhune (2002) 
outlined a course that was developed using online interactive exercises and films to study language and 
culture. They claimed that the automated feedback functions allowed students to actively explore the 
cultural aspect of the films and enhance students’ confidence and motivation to study the language and 
culture. Another exemplary effort is an EU-funded, e-learning project which aims to exploit online 
technology to develop intercultural business and language skills for European managers in the 
construction industry (Rogerson-Revell, 2003). It advocates an integrated approach to language and 
culture training, describing how a "cultural syllabus" is designed to develop users’ understanding of key 
aspects of European work culture and practices alongside their professional language skills.  
E-projects that took advantage of the capacity provided by computer-mediated communication have been 
implemented to develop L2 learners’ intercultural competence as well (Warschauer & Kern, 2000). By 
using telecommunication tools, students of different cultures have been linked to develop target language 
and intercultural competence. To develop the Cultura Project, Furstenberg, Levet, English, and Maillet 
(2001) used two capacities of the World Wide Web: 1) to bring forward, juxtapose, and connect different 
and multiple types of materials on the same screen, and 2) to bring users in different cultures to engage in 
a discussion via a forum. The students at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge and the 
Institut National des TǪlǪcommunications in Every, France collaborated to observe, compare, and analyze 
parallel materials from their respective cultures. The Cultura demonstrates how networked 
communication can be used to develop foreign language students’ understanding of foreign cultural 
attitudes, concepts, beliefs, and ways of interacting and looking at the world. Despite possible problems 
associated with foreign language intercultural interactions mediated by Internet communication tools 
(Throne, 2003), characteristics of e-mail exchanges which helped to develop learners’ intercultural 
communicative competence have been identified (Liaw, 1998, 2001, 2003; O’Dowd, 2003). Both 
"alinguistic" and linguistic aspects of the development of intercultural competence in telecollaboration 
have been investigated to draw instructional implications (Belz, 2002, 2003). Scholars point out that as 
online language learning shifts in focus from single classrooms to long-distance collaboration projects, 
the focus of learning will also expand beyond language learning to an emphasis on intercultural 
competence, cultural learning, and cultural literacy (Kern, Ware, & Warschauer, 2004).  
Meei-Ling Liaw E-Learning and the Development of Intercultural Competence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 52 
A more recent development in applying computer technology to the teaching of language and culture has 
been its integration with corpus linguistics. Researchers believe that the uses of corpora are theoretically 
warranted and potentially are practically profitable to improve learners’ language competence and 
increase their knowledge of the culture (Aston, 2001). With the accessibility to text archives provided by 
computers and the Internet, it is now technically and economically feasible for many language teachers 
and learners to exploit the benefits that corpora and corpora-based activities can provide. Although corpus 
linguistics studies have been applied to language teaching, it is only recently that corpora have been used 
for exploring the cultural aspect of language learning. A frequently cited study in this area is the one 
conducted by Leech and Fallon (1992). They used KWIC (Key Word in Context) concordances of two 
corpora to investigate the senses in which words were being used in England and the United States. They 
then grouped the differences which were statistically significant into fifteen broad categories. The 
frequencies of concepts in these categories revealed differences between the two countries which were 
primarily cultural, not linguistic.  
Knowledge of the culturally connotative meaning of words is important for effective intercultural 
communication, and non-native learners need to acquire this sort of knowledge to avoid potential 
misunderstanding and social awkwardness. Target language corpora can be particularly valuable for 
understanding and conveying cultural connotations because corpora usually contain multiple examples 
that can facilitate inferences of cultural connotations. To help their students satisfactorily translate a 
particular word (i.e., clochemerlesques) in a French newspaper article in which particular socio-cultural 
connotations exist and for which no conventional reference tools would provide appropriate explanations, 
Bertaccini and Aston (2001) used a variety of CD-ROMs and Internet searches to form a target language 
corpus that students could explore for themselves. They concluded that ad hoc corpora can result in 
incidental, tangential discoveries for culture learning. Partington (2001) also asserts that teachers and 
learners can use small- to medium-size corpora to explore different kinds of cultural meaning on the 
levels of lexical, syntactic, and textual organization. 
In addition to target language corpora, language learner corpora have been proven to be useful for culture 
studies as well. For example, Ringbom (1998) explored how vocabulary frequencies revealed cross-
linguistic differences by contrasting seven western European learner corpora from the International 
Corpus of Learner English (ICLE) database with each other and with the LOCNESS native speaker 
(British and American) corpus of argumentative essays. It was found that the English of advanced 
learners from different countries with a relatively limited variation of cultural and educational background 
shared a number of features which made it different from native speaker language: advanced learner 
language was in some respects more, in others less, vague than native speaker language, and learners with 
a particular first language (L1) tended to use a particular word or phrase more or less frequently than both 
other learner groups and native speakers. In another study, Petch-Tyson (1998) examined the writing of 
EFL students from four different language and cultural backgrounds (French, Dutch, Swedish, and 
Finnish) to determine whether there were differences among the different language/cultural groups in the 
ways the participation of writer and reader were explicitly coded in the discourse. Concordances of the 
first person singular pronoun I were examined across the corpora. It was found that learner writers were 
much more overtly present within the discourse than the native speaker writers and the reasons could be 
culturally induced. 
The term "parallel corpora" or "equivalent corpora" (Partington, 2001) is generally used to designate a 
collection of texts in one language and of their translations into another. Corpora of this kind are generally 
aligned on a sentence-by-sentence or phrase-by-phrase basis and, for any textual string in the corpus, both 
the source sentence and its translation can be retrieved and displayed. Zanettin (2001) used a translation 
activity as an example to illustrate a variety of potential learning benefits which may accrue from the use 
of comparable corpora. He contends that using comparable corpora and concordancing software as aids in 
translation activities can help learners gain insights into the languages and cultures involved and develop 
Meei-Ling Liaw E-Learning and the Development of Intercultural Competence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 53 
their reading and writing skills. As learners exchange and debate their ideas and discoveries, they can 
exercise their search strategies. 
A review of the application of computer technology to teaching culture reveals that with its adaptability 
and advancement, computer software, computer networks, corpora and corpora-based tools (e.g., 
concordancing software), via different ways, can all play a role in assisting the development of learners’ 
intercultural competence. Although combining computers and corpora linguistics to foster students’ 
intercultural competence is still an evolving approach, it has demonstrated exciting results and certainly 
deserves further exploration.  
Rationale for the Design of the Project and Focus of the Study  
As previously mentioned, the conventional model of communicative language teaching, with its strict 
adherence to native speaker norms within the target language culture, seems inadequate in fostering 
intercultural competence. However, intercultural communicative competence must be developed to 
prepare learners to be both global and local speakers of English and to feel at home in both international 
and national cultures (Kramsch & Sullivan, 1996). Instructional materials and activities, therefore, may 
involve local and international contexts that are familiar and relevant to language learners’ lives. 
Instructional materials and activities may also include ample discourse samples pertaining to native and 
nonnative speaker interactions, as well as nonnative and nonnative speaker interactions. Discourse 
displaying exclusive native speaker use should be kept to a minimum (Widdowson, 1998). EFL educators 
need to consider the implications of the international status of English in terms of appropriate pedagogies 
and instructional materials that can help learners become successful bilingual and intercultural individuals 
who are able to function well in both local and international settings (Alptekin, 2002).  
In response to the concern of providing learners with opportunities to reflect upon and gain an 
understanding of their own culture, a project that attempted to nativize English and provide an alternative 
to the conventional view that English could only be taught within the target culture was launched. In the 
project, the reading materials were reports on the students’ own culture, so they were given the "home 
court advantage" while creating the "third space" (Kramsch, 1993), where their home culture and the 
target culture met. To take advantage of e-learning technology, the project also provided the students with 
opportunities to engage in intercultural communication via online discussion boards. The intercultural 
communication aimed at enhancing the students’ intercultural competence, which was defined as the 
ability that allows foreign language learners to "function as mediators between their home culture and the 
target culture and to use the target language as contact language with people who use this language as a 
first language" (Risager, 1998, p. 244). Furthermore, having the chance to express views on their own 
culture to peers of a difficult culture, the students were expected to be "compelled to better understand 
their own and their counterpart’s cultural views" and that this type of activity would "simultaneously 
challenge their sense of self and their cultural identity and worldview" (Hager, 2005, p. 279). In addition, 
the students had at their disposal an online dictionary and a domain-specific (i.e., Taiwanese culture) 
concordancer while reading and writing responses to articles on Taiwanese culture. 
The research focus of this study then is to investigate responses from the students toward the design of the 
project and in particular their intercultural competence as demonstrated in the discussions with their e-
pals in the US based on the reading of articles about their native culture. This study also explores the 
efficacy of using two corpora-based e-referencing tools for reading and writing English. How the 
availability of the tools affected the students’ English language learning and intercultural communication 
is examined as well.  
 
 
Meei-Ling Liaw E-Learning and the Development of Intercultural Competence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 54 
THE PROJECT 
In a nutshell, the design of this project attempted to foster the growth of tertiary level EFL students’ 
intercultural competence via English language development1. To reach this aim, this project experimented 
with three important innovations: (a) instead of reading articles about the target culture, the students of 
this project read articles about their native culture, (b) e-forums were employed for intercultural 
discussion, and (c) two online reference tools were available to assist the students with the reading of the 
articles.  
The selection of reading materials 
Articles in Sinorama were chosen for the project. Sinorama is a popular bilingual magazine which 
includes insightful reports on the lifestyles, society, economy, and cultures related to the people in 
Taiwan. The Sinorama articles written in English were provided to give students opportunities to read in 
English about their own culture, to have the kind of content information Taiwanese students were familiar 
with, and to employ language that was specific to the Taiwanese context, through which students were 
expected to sharpen their intercultural sensitivity. The four articles were Good-bye, Marian (word count: 
970, Flesch-Kincaid grade level: 8.4), The Flea Market Sociology (word count: 1,783, Flesch-Kincaid 
grade level: 8.3), Questions and Answers on Children’s Classical Studies (word count: 997, Flesch-
Kincaid grade level: 11.3), and Sketches of Dreams amidst Generational Change (word count: 2,426, 
Flesch-Kincaid grade level: 12.0) (Flesch, 1974). Synopses of the articles are in the Appendix. The 
lengths and readability levels of the articles increased incrementally due to informal feedback from 
students demanding more challenging readings. 
The system design 
A web-based reading and writing environment for EFL and culture learning was designed for the project. 
The environment contained four instructional units. Each unit included an article, five comprehension 
questions and five vocabulary questions, a response section, and a forum for cross-cultural discussions. 
For the reading of the Sinorama articles, two corpora-based e-referencing tools were provided: a 
Sinorama-based bilingual concordancer, TOTALrecall (Wu, Yeh, Chuang, Shei, & Chang, 2003)2 and an 
online dictionary. It was hoped that the linguistic and semantic support of the concordancer could assist 
learners to acquire new vocabulary (Zahar, Cobb, & Spada, 2001) and give them chances to exercise their 
ability to use contextual clues to read authentic texts (Cobb, 1999) on culture. As for the use of the online 
dictionary, it was to provide contextual inferences for lexical acquisition (Fraser, 1999). After reading 
each article, students were asked to answer the comprehension and vocabulary questions and then write 
responses to the instructor/researcher online. Online forums were for students to share their views about 
their reading with a class of thirty-two students at Sam Houston State University in Texas, U.S.A. The 
students at Sam Houston were prospective ESL/bilingual education teachers and their participation in the 
project was part of their course requirement.  
Besides the above independent, self-access instructional features, this web-based system also included 
personal account management and records. The account management and record-keeping are parts of the 
system design and were anticipated for research purposes as well. For account management, students used 
their own account numbers and passwords to log in. The personal records kept track of each student’s 
login and logout time, the words s/he looked up using the online dictionary and concordancer, the 
comprehension test scores, and written responses to the reading. In addition, the words that students 
looked up were automatically included in a vocabulary notebook for the student, so they could easily 
review the vocabulary words. The post-reading peer interaction and shared responses on the culturally 
relevant questions were recorded and made available both to students and the instructor/researcher. The 
URL of the website is: http://flld.thu.edu.tw/candle 
 
Meei-Ling Liaw E-Learning and the Development of Intercultural Competence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 55 
Implementing the system and data collection 
Although the construction and revision of the system is on-going, the system has been piloted with 
sixteen freshmen majoring in Foreign Languages and Literature at a private university in central Taiwan. 
After a brief orientation to the system, the students started to access the system independently. For the 
intercultural communication, each Taiwanese student was grouped with two peers in the United States 
with whom s/he exchanged views via a discussion board in the instructional unit, after reading each 
article. 
In the study, both quantitative and qualitative data were collected and analyzed. The students’ uses of the 
online instructional system, including the numbers of times they logged on and off the system, their 
comprehension and vocabulary quiz scores, and their use of e-referencing tools and the e-forum, were 
conveniently collected by the built-in account management system. The descriptive statistics was to yield 
quantitative information on the general efficacy of the system design; for example, the students’ 
preferences in using the different components of the e-learning environment, particularly the online 
dictionary, concordancer, and e-forum. Nevertheless, to achieve greater reliability and a better 
understanding of the issue, perceptual data was collected and analyzed qualitatively via semi-structured 
informal interviews (Denzin, 1989; Nunan, 1992) with participating EFL students and e-mail discussions 
with the instructor of the students at Sam Houston State University. As for the students’ intercultural 
discussion after reading each article, they were content-analyzed by using Byram’s (1997) model of 
intercultural communicative competence3 and the guidelines for assessment of intercultural experience 
(Byram, 2000). The reason for adopting Byram’s model was because of its wide acceptance by foreign 
language teachers and researchers as a representative guideline for classroom practices (Belz, 2003; 
O’Dowd, 2003). The intercultural discussion entries were read many times to find examples of the 
different categories in a classification system based on the modification of Byram’s assessment criteria 
(2000)4. The categories used for this study included: (A) interest in knowing other people’s way of life 
and introducing one’s own culture to others, (B) ability to change perspective, (C) knowledge about one’s 
own and others’ culture for intercultural communication, and (D) knowledge about intercultural 
communication processes. The number of examples in each category was calculated to understand the 
possible effects of this type of learning environment on the development of the various categories of 
intercultural competence. The categorization was done by this researcher and a graduate assistant. 
Discussions were held between the two raters until complete agreements were reached on the 
categorization.  
FINDINGS 
Quantitative data 
The management system record shows that the sixteen students logged onto the system a total of 605 
times, averaging 9.45 times per instructional unit, per student. While all of the students read and wrote 
responses to the articles, only three of them answered all the comprehension and vocabulary questions in 
all four units. For the first unit, all sixteen students answered both comprehension and vocabulary 
questions. For the second unit, eleven students answered comprehension questions whereas thirteen 
students answered the vocabulary questions. For the third unit, only six students answered both sets of 
questions. For the fourth unit, only four students did so. The use of e-referencing tools showed a similar 
drastic decrease in number and this decrease of uses of the e-referencing tools was the same for all 
participants. The students looked up e-referencing tools 716 times when reading the first article, 982 
times when reading the second article, one time when reading the third article, and 121 times when 
reading the fourth article. Among the uses, the students used the online dictionary when reading the 
articles most often (N=1,740). They also used the online concordancer when reading, but the frequency 
was a lot lower (N=74). Even though they could use the tools when writing, the numbers were quite low 
(online dictionary, N=52; concordancer, N=3). As for the use of the discussion board for intercultural 
Meei-Ling Liaw E-Learning and the Development of Intercultural Competence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 56 
communication, the students in the two universities posted and replied to a total of 371 entries (Taiwan 
students N=165; U.S. students N=206), averaging two entries per student for each article. Among the 
entries written by the Taiwanese students, most of the entries (N=121) were categorized as demonstrating 
"knowledge about another country and culture," thirty entries showed "interest in other people’s way of 
life," two entries revealed "ability to change perspectives," and four entries fell into the category of 
"knowledge about intercultural communication." While most entries demonstrated the characteristics of 
more than a single category, the researcher decided to list only the categorization which seemed to be 
more obvious than the others. 
Qualitative data 
The qualitative data of this study included interviews with students and e-mail discussions with Dr. Susan 
Bunn, the instructor at Sam Houston State University. The intercultural communication entries were also 
analyzed to ascertain the development of intercultural competence (or lack thereof) of the Taiwanese EFL 
learners within the framework of Byram’s model (1997). The semi-structured interview was informally 
conducted after the students finished all four instructional units and the discussions with Dr. Bunn were 
continuous throughout the entire semester via e-mail correspondence.  
End-of-project interview 
All of the participating students felt that the experience was very interesting and rewarding. Although 
they had prior experience using computers for learning and communication, it was the first time they used 
computers for reading and writing in English and they found it exciting. The part they liked the most was 
reading English articles on their own culture and having the chance to describe and explain their own 
culture to others. As one of the students stated, "English suddenly becomes familiar and close to me." 
Another part that they also liked a great deal was having reading-writing buddies in the US. One student 
exclaimed, "This is so different from high school English classes! We can use English for real purposes 
and not only pretending to talk to a foreigner!" However, there were problems with the intercultural 
communication due to technological difficulties. The students found it very frustrating when the system 
suddenly broke down and they could not get back to the discussion. Unfortunately, they found this 
happened "way too often." The different academic calendars in the two countries which made the 
corresponding period short also caused complaints. They felt that the duration of the communication was 
"unreasonably" short because their partners could only be on the project till Thanksgiving.   
In the interview, they were asked how they used the online dictionary and online bilingual concordancer. 
The students found the online dictionary "helpful but not very convenient." Almost all of them had 
pocket-size electronic dictionaries which they had been using and they did not find particular reasons to 
switch to the online dictionary provided in the system. The reasons why they used the online dictionary 
were to "give it a try" and to look up words that were not found in the pocket-size electronic dictionaries. 
In addition, after successfully communicating with their U.S. e-pals, they gained confidence in their own 
English writing ability. Getting help from e-referencing tools did not seem to be necessary anymore. 
As for the concordancer, they found it "interesting" and "informative." They liked it because it provided 
examples of the many contexts in which the vocabulary words were used, but they also found a way of 
utilizing the tool which was quite different from what the researcher/instructor had anticipated. Whereas 
the researcher/instructor planned to provide contextual supports for students at the lexical level (e.g., 
finding examples of uses of culturally-embedded words), the students used it for links to extensive 
reading materials. TOTALrecall, a domain specific e-referencing tool, provided not only sentences 
containing the vocabulary words but also links to other Sinorama articles from which the sentences had 
been taken. The students, therefore, after looking up one particular word, then linked to the various 
articles from which the example sentences containing the word were extracted. For instance, one student, 
who looked up the word "classical," ended up reading several articles on Chinese classical texts and 
children’s classical studies. However, the system only recorded the one time when the student looked up 
Meei-Ling Liaw E-Learning and the Development of Intercultural Competence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 57 
the word "classical" but did not track the student’s links to and reading of related articles. This interview 
finding helped to explain the small number of uses of the concordancer. Basically, according to the 
interview findings, the "concordancer" was used mainly as a portal to the reading of more articles on the 
same or similar topics.  
When asked what they got most out of participating in the project, the students answered "reading 
interesting articles" and "intercultural communication." They found the topics of the articles relevant to 
their experiences and at the same time they learned something new, too. The articles were considered 
suitable for intercultural communication since the students could relate to the issues and had their own 
views to share with their partners. Due to familiarity with the discussion topics, the EFL students found 
the intercultural communication exciting yet not intimidating. 
E-mail between the U.S. instructor and this researcher 
The content analysis of the e-mail correspondence with Dr. Susan Bunn mainly confirmed the enthusiasm 
and positive responses from the participating students at Sam Houston State University. The Sam 
Houston students also felt frustrated when computer problems occurred. Nevertheless, many of the e-mail 
messages were about how to get the Sam Houston students registered to the Web site and solve technical 
problems.  
Intercultural communication 
One more important aspect of the qualitative data analysis was the EFL students’ intercultural discussion 
entries. An analysis of the EFL students’ forum entries revealed examples of the four types of 
intercultural competence: (A) interest in knowing other people’s way of life and introducing one’s own 
culture to others, (B) ability to change perspective, (C) knowledge about one’s own and others’ culture for 
intercultural communication, and (D) knowledge about intercultural communication processes. The 
number of examples in each criterion was calculated. Table 1 provides examples of the entries in the four 
categories based on Byram's (2000) criteria. 
Most of the entries fell under the category of "knowledge about one’s own culture and others’ culture for 
intercultural communication" because the entries showed evidence that the students were aware of and 
learned important facts about living in Texas and that they could successfully communicate with their 
U.S. partners about the cultures in both countries and maintain the communication for a sustained period 
of time. In these entries, the participants used personal experiences and responses to the articles to 
describe and explain their own cultures. They also compared and contrasted the way they did things in the 
two cultures. The EFL participants enthusiastically described their high school teachers after reading the 
first article Good-bye, Marian, explained the reasons for Taiwanese people’s love for bargaining when 
exchanging views on Flea Market Sociology, defined what Chinese and Taiwanese classical studies were 
for their U.S. partners, and argued to clear their names as described in the article Sketches of Dreams 
amidst Generational Change. 
The second biggest category was an "interest in knowing other people’s way of life and introducing one’s 
own culture to others." These entries were usually the first or second entries that the EFL students wrote 
to their intercultural partners. In these entries, they expressed their excitement about the experience. 
Except for a couple of students who were worried that their English ability would not allow them to do a 
good job of communicating, most showed clear confidence that they would learn a great deal and gain 
friendship via the experience. 
 
 
 
Meei-Ling Liaw E-Learning and the Development of Intercultural Competence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 58 
Table 1. Examples of the Assessment of Intercultural Communication Entries 
Category Description Example from students’ writing 
A. Interest in 
knowing other 
people’s way of 
life and 
introducing 
one’s own 
culture to others 
- I am interested in other 
people’s experience of daily 
life, particularly those things 
not usually presented to 
outsiders through the media. 
- I am also interested in the 
daily experience of a variety 
of social groups within a 
society and not only the 
dominant culture. 
 
It is interesting to know different 
cultures about bargaining skills from 
this article. The author analyzed the 
bargaining skills of his customers and 
found out what he should do when his 
customers were bargaining with him. I 
seldom bargain with vendors because I 
don’t know how to do it. Besides, it is 
hard to lower the price. How about 
Americans? Is this phenomenon 
common in your country? –The Flea 
Market Sociology 
B. Ability to 
change 
perspective 
- I have realized that I can 
understand other cultures by 
seeing things from a different 
point of view and by looking 
at my culture from their 
perspective. 
When I read the article, I really hope 
Marian is my teacher. I think that will 
be great!! Marian teaches her students 
not only in curriculum but other 
things…And from that article and what 
you say I learn that I can’t judge a 
person by his look. –Good-bye, Marian 
 
Chinese think frugal is important. 
Frugal is a kind of traditional virtue in 
China. However, foreigners think that 
behavior which is stingy. Especially it 
often happens in the business shops in 
some countries. I think we can balance 
between ours and other countries. I 
agree what you said, there are different 
cultures from country to country. We 
should learn to tolerate and respect 
different cultures. -Flea Market 
Sociology 
C. Knowledge 
about one’s own 
and others’ 
culture for 
intercultural 
communication 
 
- I know some important facts 
about living in the other 
cultures and about the 
country, state and people 
- I know how to engage in 
conversation with people of 
the other culture and maintain 
a conversation. 
I can imagine that your home is very 
big! You said you have a cow, a goat, 
and some pigs. It’s cool! I think it’s 
hard to take care of animals. So how 
could you take care of them? In 
Taiwan, there is not enough space to 
have these animals. Taiwan is too 
small. Have you ever been to Taiwan? 
Where are you from? Everyone can 
learn lots of things from others, so do I. 
We can sure both grow culturally.  
D. Knowledge 
about the 
intercultural 
communication 
process 
- I know how to resolve 
misunderstandings which 
arise from people’s lack of 
awareness of the view point 
of another culture. 
"The strawberry set" (so soft they burst 
at the first pressure), "the back-to-the 
nest set") (happy to stay at home being 
taken care of by their parents), or "the 
buy-now-pay-later set" (deep in credit 
Meei-Ling Liaw E-Learning and the Development of Intercultural Competence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 59 
 - I know how to discover new 
information and new aspects 
of the other culture for 
myself. 
cared debt) are the product of this time. 
I can’t agree with it. I am just one, "the 
back-to-the-nest-set." I had part-time 
jobs in summer vacations. I do not have 
credit cards, either. As far as I know not 
everyone in this generation is so, at 
least I am not. I hope you know this. 
Maybe all we got to do is changing our 
attitudes. -Sketches of Dreams amidst 
Generational Change 
 
I was terribly sorry of my 
misunderstanding about you. I just only 
asked. Thank you for let me know it 
was just your reply to the story. –Flea 
Market Sociology 
 
The category "ability to change perspective" was the one with the least number of entries. Basically, the 
transpacific e-pals shared common views on most of the cultural issues in the articles, which left little 
room for the need to change perspectives. The very few times when misunderstandings arose from lack of 
cultural awareness, the students bridged the communication ruptures by way of more elaborate 
explanations or courtesy, demonstrating the knowledge of intercultural communication processes (i.e., 
Category D). 
CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION 
The purpose of the project was to foster EFL students’ intercultural competence by having them read 
articles on topics of their own culture and communicate their responses with speakers of another culture. 
The project offered a unique opportunity for EFL students to use their own societal and cultural practices 
as the focus for EFL learning. With the help of computer technology, it also allowed the students to state 
their positions on their own culture and cultural practices and to exchange their views with those held by 
speakers of the target language. The findings showed that all EFL participants were able to communicate 
fluently in the target language without much help from the corpora-based e-referencing tools provided in 
the system. The use of the online dictionary decreased drastically after the first two readings. 
Interestingly, the online concordancer, instead of being used for learning different kinds of cultural 
meaning on the levels of lexical, syntactic, and textual organization as originally intended (Partington, 
2001), was used by the students to link to articles on similar topics to explore further culture and language 
learning opportunities. Despite some difficulties caused by computer problems, the collaboration between 
the two groups of students was successful and this success can be seen from the positive and 
complimentary comments from members of both groups. The students’ e-forum entries also revealed 
different types of intercultural competences.      
Byram and Fleming define "intercultural speakers" as people who can "establish a relationship between 
their own and the other cultures, to mediate and explain differences – and ultimately to accept that 
difference and see the common humanity beneath it" (1998, p. 8). Intercultural language teaching should 
recognize that language and culture are intertwined and that by adopting an inquiring and reflective 
approach to language learning, students can be "intercultural speakers." For teaching intercultural 
competence, Kramsch (1996a, 1996b) suggests using summary as a way of having students, after reading 
a short story, express in their own words what they believe the story is about. She postulates that by 
openly comparing their summaries, the students can reflect on why their choices are different than or 
similar to those of others and realize how they have constructed meanings of the story according to their 
Meei-Ling Liaw E-Learning and the Development of Intercultural Competence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 60 
own life experiences, ethnicity, social and economic background, attitudes and beliefs. In this study, 
thanks to the interactive capacity of the e-forum, summary writing was expanded to include intercultural 
exchanges of summaries and reflections. In addition, the students played the role of "intercultural 
speakers" in the environment where cultures were compared and contrasted within both individual and 
holistic planes (Ortuǲo, 1991). Similar to the students in the Cultura project developed by Furstenberg et 
al. (2001), the EFL students in the present study did not learn the target culture as a checklist of 
knowledge. With the help of computer-mediated communication, the students took a journey of discovery 
and reflection where their understanding of the behaviors, beliefs, concepts, ways of interacting in their 
own and the other culture was exchanged, discussed, negotiated, and even refined. 
While the findings of the project further demonstrate the benefits of using computer technology for 
intercultural learning as many researchers have suggested (Belz, 2002, 2003; Furstenberg, et al., 2001; 
O’Dowd, 2003; Throne, 2003; Warschauer & Kern, 2000), technical problems remain an issue to be 
overcome and finding better matches between computer-assisted learning tools and pedagogical 
objectives is a topic that demands further investigation and exploration. Although problems such as lack 
of access to the Internet and online project system instability are sometimes inevitable, they should be 
controlled and minimized so the students won’t be too frustrated to enjoy the benefits of using the online 
learning system. This project experimented with several computer-assisted learning tools. The computer-
mediated communication component of the project has successfully given the participating students an 
environment for intercultural communication. Nonetheless, the findings that the students have exercised 
intercultural competence in Category C (i.e., knowledge about one’s own and others’ culture for 
intercultural communication) and Category A (i.e., interest in knowing other people’s way of life and 
introducing one’s own culture to others) more than in Category D (i.e., knowledge about intercultural 
communication processes) and Category B (i.e., ability to change perspective) may suggest that this type 
of learning environment is conducive to the development of knowledge and attitudes of intercultural 
competence, but not necessarily to the development of empathy and (meta)intercultural skills. 
When revising the e-learning environment for future uses, careful planning should be done to ensure that 
more types of intercultural competence can be fostered. The effectiveness of the e-referencing tools used 
in this environment might have been questionable as well. In some earlier studies, positive results were 
found using corpora and concordancing software as aids in translation activities that helped learners gain 
insights into the languages and cultures involved, and developed their reading and writing skills 
(Bertaccini & Aston, 2001; Zanettin, 2001). Others have concluded that teachers and learners could use 
small-to medium-sized corpora to explore different kinds of cultural meaning on the levels of lexical, 
syntactic, and textual organization (Partington, 2001). In this study, the concordancer, TOTALrecall, did 
not serve the purpose of providing the students with the learning of cultural meanings on lexical, 
syntactic, or even textual organization. Surprisingly, it was creatively used by the students for extensive 
reading on similar cultural topics. Since this was not expected by the researcher, how that had affected the 
students’ learning of culture and language was beyond the scope of this study. In future studies, such 
interesting developments should be taken into consideration. In addition, the use of TOTALrecall in the 
online learning system may need to be modified so students can search and form a target language corpus 
for themselves to explore cultural meanings. Although the students reported that they enjoyed reading the 
articles selected for the project, how the selection of reading materials affects students’ use or 
development of different types of intercultural competence, especially category B (i.e., ability to change 
perspective), would be an interesting point of future investigation as well. Finally, the focus of this study 
has been on the intercultural competence of EFL students; further analysis of their U.S. e-pals’ 
perspectives or a comparison between the views of the two groups might provide interesting additional 
information.   
 
Meei-Ling Liaw E-Learning and the Development of Intercultural Competence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 61 
APPENDIX 
Synopses of Sinorama Articles 
Good-bye, Marian 
The author of the article is a Taiwanese who immigrated to the United States and the article was about her 
experience of taking an English class in the US with a teacher called Marian. Because Marian was a large 
woman, the author first thought that Marian would be just one of the many overweight American people 
and could not be a good teacher. However, in her classes, Marian used many teaching methods that were 
new and exciting to the author. Eventually, the author was hooked on attending Marian’s class and 
learned that she should not have judged a person by his/her looks. Although she did not want to leave 
Marian’s class when the semester was over, Marian forced her to move on to a more advanced class. The 
author knew she would never forget Marian. 
The Flea Market Sociology 
A Chinese immigrant in New Zealand ran a stall at a flea market. From his daily observation of the people 
who came to the flea market, he discovered the different shopping behaviors of people from different 
ethnic groups. He especially compared the bargaining behaviors among the Chinese, Indians, and New 
Zealanders of Caucasian descent. Finally, he raised the question of why China and India, the world's two 
most populous nations, each with an ancient culture and people known for their formidable bargaining 
skills, were not among the world's most powerful economies. 
Questions and Answers on Children’s Classical Studies  
The article discusses the issues related to the increasing popularity of having young Taiwanese children 
study Chinese classics. It first defines children’s classical education and then explains the reasons for 
implementing it. Questions and answers regarding the benefits and concerns of teaching children classics 
are then listed. Finally, suggestions of ways parents can help their children study classics are given. 
Sketches of Dreams amidst Generational Change 
The political environment and economical situation in Taiwan have changed a great deal in the past few 
decades. The attitudes and outlook towards life of the young people in Taiwan have also gone through 
various phases. This article explores how the current "pluralistic and affluent" generation copes with the 
world they live in, their sense of values, and their dreams. The author ends the article with an optimistic 
note that generation gaps are not to be feared and young people should stretch out their arms to catch the 
dreams that belong to their own generation. 
 
NOTES 
1. This project is a sub-project of a national project, CANDLE: Corpora and NLP for Digital Learning of 
English, funded by the National Science Council of the Republic of China. 
2. The bilingual concordancer, TOTALrecall, is the product of another sub-project of CANDLE. 
3. Byram’s model (1997) can be summarized as the following: (a) attitudes of curiosity and openness, 
readiness to suspend disbelief about other cultures and belief about one’s own, (b) knowledge of social 
groups and their products and practices in one’s own and in one’s interlocutor’s country, and of the 
general process of societal and individual interaction, (c) skills of interpreting and relating: ability to 
interpret a document or event from another culture, to explain it and relate it to documents from one’s 
own, (d) skills of discovery and interaction: ability to acquire new knowledge of a culture and cultural 
practices and the ability to use knowledge, attitudes and skills under the constraints of real-time 
Meei-Ling Liaw E-Learning and the Development of Intercultural Competence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 62 
communication and interaction, and (e) critical cultural awareness/political education: an ability to 
evaluate critically and on the basis of explicit criteria perspectives, practices and products in one’s own 
and other cultures and countries. 
4. The criteria included: (a) an interest in other people’s experiences of daily life, (b) ability to change 
perspective, (c) ability to cope with living in a different culture, (d) knowledge about another country and 
culture, and (e) knowledge about intercultural communication. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The author would like to thank Dr. Susan Bunn and her students from Sam Houston State University in 
Texas, U.S.A. for taking part in the project. In addition, the implementation of the project would not have 
been possible without the generous funding from the National Science Council of the Executive Yuen, 
Republic of China. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Meei-Ling Liaw is professor and Chair of the Department of English at National Taichung University. 
She teaches Freshman English in the undergraduate program and TEFL Methodology and Second 
Language Acquisition in the Master’s program. Her research focuses on using computer technology to 
facilitate EFL teaching and learning, teaching EFL reading and writing, and teacher education. 
E-mail: meeilingliaw@gmail.com 
 
REFERENCES 
Aston, G. (Ed.) (2001). Learning with corpora. Houston, TX: Athelstan. 
Abrams, Z. I. (2002). Surfing to cross-cultural awareness: using Internet-mediated projects to explore 
cultural stereotypes. Foreign Language Annals, 35(2), 141-160. 
Alptekin, C. (2002). Toward intercultural communicative competence in ELT. ELT Journal, 56(1), 57-64. 
Belz, J. A. (2002). Social dimensions of telecollaborative language study. Language Learning & 
Technology, 6(1), 60-81. Retrieved on July 25, 2006, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/belz/ 
Belz, J. A. (2003). Linguistic perspectives on the development of intercultural competence in 
telecollaboration. Language Learning & Technology, 7(2), 68-117. Retrieved on July 25, 2006, from 
http://llt.msu.vol7num2/belz/ 
Bertaccini, F., & Aston, G. (2001). Going to the clochemerle: exploring cultural connotations through ad 
hoc corpora. In: G. Aston (Ed.), Learning with corpora (pp.198-219). Houston, TX: Athelstan. 
Byram, M. (2000). Assessing intercultural competence in language teaching, Sprogforum, 18(6), 8-13. 
Byram, M. (1997). Teaching and assessing intercultural communicative competence. Multilingual 
Matters: Sydney. 
Byram, M., & Fleming, M. (Eds.) (1998). Language Learning in Interculrural Perspective. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Meei-Ling Liaw E-Learning and the Development of Intercultural Competence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 63 
Byram, M., & Morgan, C. (1994). Teaching-and-learning language-and- culture. Clevedon: Multilingual 
Matters.  
Cameron, K. (1998). Culture and the language curriculum: An important issue? In L. Calvi & W. Geerts 
(Eds.), CALL, culture, and the language curriculum. London: Springer. 
Canale, M., & Swain, M. (1980). Theoretical bases of communicative approaches to second language 
teaching and testing. Applied Linguistics, 1(1), 1-47. 
Cobb, T. (1999). Applying constructivism: a test for the learner-as-scientist. Educational Technology 
Research & Development 47 (3), 15-31. 
Denzin, N.K. (1989). The Research Act. New Jersey: Prentice Hall. 
Fraser, C. (1999). Lexical processing strategy use and vocabulary learning through reading. Studies in 
Second Language Acquisition, 21 (2), 225-241. 
Flesch, R.F. (1974). The Art of Readable Writing: With the Flesch Readability Formula. New York: 
Harper & Row. 
Furstenberg, G., Levet, S., English, K., & Maillet, K. (2001). Giving a virtual voice to the silent language 
of culture: The Cultura Project. Language Learning & Technology, 5(1), 55-102. Retrieved on July 25, 
2006, http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num1/furstenberg/default.html 
Guest, M. (2002). A critical "checkbook" for culture teaching and learning. ELT Journal, 56(2), 154-161. 
Hager, M. (2005). Using German websites to teach culture in German courses, CALICO Journal, 22(2), 
269-284. 
Huebener, T. (1959). How to teach foreign languages effectively. New York: New York University Press. 
Kern, R., Ware, P., & Warschauer, M. (2004). Crossing frontiers: new directions in online pedagogy and 
research. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 24, 243-260.  
Kramsch, C. (1996a). Stylistic choice and cultural awareness. In L. Berdella & W. Delanoy (Eds.), 
Challenges for pedagogy: literary texts in the foreign language classroom. Tübingen: Gunter Narr. 
Kramsch, C. (1996b). The cultural component of language teaching. Language, Culture and Curriculum, 
2:83-92. 
Kramsch, C. (1993). Context and culture in language teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Kramsch, C., & Sullivan, P. (1996). Appropriate pedagogy. ELT Journal, 50(3), 199-212. 
Leech, G., & Fallon, R. (1992). Computer corpora - what do they tell us about culture? International 
Computer Archive of the Modern English Journal, 16: 29-50. 
Liaw, M. (1998). E-mail for English as a foreign language instruction, System, 26, 335-351.  
Liaw, M. (2001). E-mail writing as a cross-cultural learning experience, System, 29, 235-251. 
Liaw, M. (2003). Cross-cultural email correspondence for reflective EFL teacher education, TESL-EJ, 
6(4), March. Retrieved on July 25, 2006, from http://www-writing.berkeley.edu/TESL-EJ/ej24/a2.html 
Nunan, D. (1992). Research Methods in Language Learning, Cambridge University Press. 
O’Dowd, R. (2003). Understanding the "other side": intercultural learning in a Spanish-English e-mail 
exchange. Language Learning &Technology, 7(2), 118-144. Retrieved on July 25, 2006, from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/odowd 
Meei-Ling Liaw E-Learning and the Development of Intercultural Competence 
 
Language Learning & Technology 64 
Ortuǲo, M. M. (1991). Cross-cultural awareness in the foreign language class: the Kluckhohn model. The 
Modern Language Journal, 75, 449-459. 
Partington, A. (2001) Corpora-based description in teaching and learning. In G. Aston (Ed.), Learning 
with corpora (pp.46-62). Houston, TX: Athelstan. 
Petch-Tyson, S. (1998) Reader/writer visibility in EFL persuasive writing. In S. Granger (Ed.), Learner 
English on computer (pp.107-118). London & New York: Addison Wesley Longman. 
Ringbom H. (1998) Vocabulary frequencies in advanced learner English: a cross-linguistic approach. In 
S. Granger (Ed.), Learner English on computer (pp. 41-52). London & New York: Addison Wesley 
Longman.  
Risager, K. (1998). Language teaching and the process of European integration. In M. Byram & M. 
Fleming (Eds.), Language learning in intercultural perspective (pp. 242-254). Cambridge University 
Press.  
Rogerson-Revell, P. (2003) Developing a cultural syllabus for business language e-learning materials. 
ReCALL,15(2), p 155-169.  
Seelye, H. (1988). Teaching culture. Lincolnwood, IL: National Textbook Company. 
Shaughnessy, M. (2003) CALL, commercialism and culture: inherent software design conflicts and their 
results. ReCALL, 15(2), 251-268.  
Shawback, M. J., & Terhune, N. M. (2002). Online interactive courseware: using movies to promote 
cultural understanding in a CALL environment. ReCALL, 14(1), 85-95. 
Straub, H. (1999). Designing a cross-cultural course. English Forum, 37(3), July-September.  
Thanasoulas, D. (2001). The importance of teaching culture in the foreign language classroom. Radical 
Pedagogy, http://radicalpedagogy.icaap.org/content/issue3_3/7-thanasoulas.html. 
Thorne, S. L. (2003). Artifacts and cultures-of-use in intercultural communication. Language Learning & 
Technology, 7(2), 38-67. Retrieved on on July 25, 2006, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/thorne 
Warschauer, M., & Kern, R. (2000). Network-based language learning: theory and practice. Cambridge, 
England: Cambridge University Press. 
Widdowson, H. G. (1998). Context, community, and authentic language. TESOL Quarterly, 32(4), 705-
16. 
Widdowson, H. G. (1994). The ownership of English. TESOL Quarterly, 22(2), 377-88. 
Wu, J. C., Yeh, K. C., Chuang, T. C., Shei, W. C., & Chang, J. S. (2003). TOTALrecall: a bilingual 
concordancer for computer assisted translation and language learning. Proceedings of the 41st 
Association of Computational Linguistics Conference, Sappora, Japan, July 7-13.  
Zahar, R. Cobb, T. & Spada, N. (2001). Acquiring vocabulary through reading: effects of frequency and 
contextual richness. Canadian Modern Language Review, 15(4), 541- 572. 
Zanettin, F. (2001). Swimming in words: corpora, translation, and language learning. In G. Astin (Ed.), 
Learning with corpora (pp. 177-197). Houston, TX: Athelstan. 
