Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num1/review2/ 
February 2007, Volume 11, Number 1 
pp. 31-39 
 
Copyright © 2007, ISSN 1094-3501 31 
REVIEW OF BUSINESS CONNECTIONS ELEMENTARY – PRE-
INTERMEDIATE 
Title Business Connections – Lab Workstation Version 
Platform Windows 98, XP, 2000 with Service Pack 2 (or higher) 
NT 4.0 with Service Pack 5 (or higher) 
Non-English Windows 2000 systems require the Professional Edition 
Minimum hardware 
requirements 
Pentium II processor 400+ MHz 
64+ MB RAM (128 MB recommended) 
16-bit graphics card 
Monitor resolution of 800 x 600 or higher 
Sound card, microphone and speakers 
Floppy disc drive (for saving student data) 
10x CD-ROM drive 
Internet Explorer 5.0 or higher (5.5 or higher recommended) 
Macromedia’s Flash 5 (or higher) plug-in 
Shockwave 8 (or higher) plug-in 
Apple’s QuickTime 5 (or higher) plug-in 
Sun’s Java 1.4.1 (or higher) plug-in 
Adobe Acrobat Reader 4.0 (or higher) software 
Publisher Pearson Longman 
Website: http://www.longman.com/ae/multimedia/programs/index.htm  
Support offered (1) Website: http://www.longman.com/ae/multimedia/servsupport.htm 
(2) Email: http://www.longman.com/contactus.html 
(3) Phone: 1.877.202.4572 
Target language English 
Target audience Elementary – Pre-Intermediate 
Price $211.00 – CD-ROM 
$5030.00 – Network License 
ISBN 0-582-82569-5 
 
Review by Brooke Cashman, Georgetown University 
The back cover of Business Connections - Lab Workstation Version software promises a "multimedia 
course that teaches students to communicate effectively in business situations."  It goes on to add that 
"[b]y using authentic business language in real life business settings, this comprehensive course is ideal 
for learners who want to develop practical business English skills."  Teachers who elect to use Business 
Connections as a part of their Elementary level course can expect the product to fulfill this commitment.   
The material in Business Connections is divided into five modules with themes that closely relate to the 
business world, but also have wide applicability outside of it, namely, "Talking About Yourself and Your 
Company," "Giving and Getting Information," "Companies and Problems," "Phone Calls, Tasks, and 
Procedures," and "Meetings and Schedules."  Each module is then further divided into three sub-units, 
each of which relates to the general theme of the module and centers around a business situation (making 
fifteen units in all).  For example, the situations that learners encounter in Units 1 – 3 in Module 1, which 
is titled "Talking bout Yourself and Your Company," are "Meeting People," "Talking about Your Job," 
and "Talking about your Department."  Units 13 – 15 in Module 5, "Meetings and Schedules," are titled 
"Speaking in Meetings," "Checking a Schedule," and "Thanking and Saying 
Brooke Cashman Review of Business Connections 
 
Language Learning & Technology 32 
Goodbye."  By organizing the modules and units around communicative goals, in a manner that is 
consistent with communicative language teaching (Brown, 2001), the authors have created a product that 
is applicable to most learners at the target proficiency level (elementary – pre-intermediate), not only 
those in the business world.  While the interaction may take place in an office setting, even learners who 
do not envision themselves entering the business world could also benefit from learning how to 
accomplish all of these very practical communication tasks. 
Each of the fifteen units in Business Connections follows the same organizational pattern and consists of 
four sections which address the major language skills, although significantly more time and attention is 
focused on listening, speaking, and grammar practice than on reading and writing.  Section 1 of each unit 
begins with a short, one to two- minute video, and these videos are, decisively, the strength of the 
program.  The video clips create a cohesive feeling to the program, despite the diverse number of topics 
and language points, and exhibit a surprising and impressive level of authenticity.  The videos follow a 
team of employees at "World Premiere Solutions" in London as they prepare for an upcoming conference, 
and these clips introduce the theme of each unit. These videos do not meet Nunan's (1999) standard for 
authentic texts, which require that the media not be created explicitly for the purposes of language 
teaching, but instead be organically generated for the purpose of communication. However, this omission 
does not detract from their value, as the situations that the videos recreate are highly formulaic - such as 
introducing someone, presenting information about a company, checking a schedule - and it is hard to 
imagine that a spontaneous introduction would sound or function in an appreciably different manner than 
that presented in the video. The authors succeed, then, in creating conversations and dialogues that sound 
spontaneous, genuine and authentic. 
An additional benefit of the videos is the international and ethnic diversity of the actors, who provide a 
variety of native and non-native English speaker accents.  The cast includes a native speaking English 
man, an American woman, and an Indian-English woman, as well as non-native speaking Spanish, French 
and Japanese men, each of whom provides a different, yet highly comprehensible example of speech in 
English (see Figure 1 for a screen shot featuring many of the video's cast).  This variety of accents serves 
two important purposes.  First, it ensures that even though the fictional company is based in London, 
students of both British and American English can comfortably use the materials, given that both varieties 
of English are widely represented.  Second, it underscores the important point that there is no "right" way 
to speak English.  The non-native speakers provide the additional benefit of models of successful 
language learners, with the implicit message that one does not need to be a native-speaker to succeed in 
an English-speaking workplace (Friedenberg, Kennedy, Lomperis, Martin, & Westerfield, 2003). 
Unfortunately, the audio clips that begin Section 2 of each unit do not showcase this same level of 
authenticity.  The language and topics are of comparable quality. For example, in Module 1 "Talking 
About Yourself and Your Company," the topics include "Welcoming a Visitor," which discusses 
"Welcoming," "Asking Someone About Their Job," and "Finding Out More About a Team," – but they 
are delivered at a rate of speech that is exaggeratedly slow.  One can only guess that the authors thought 
this was necessary, given that the learners would have no visual cues aside from a static photograph, but 
the result is a sample of language that is sadly unrepresentative of how native speakers, or even proficient 
non-native speakers, would speak. 
Following the video and audio clips in Sections 1 and 2 of each unit is a "discovery" phase, in which 
learners are asked to inductively infer the rule behind a grammar feature that they heard in the previous 
listening passages.  Learners listen again to the video/audio and note where and how the speakers used the 
target grammar features, which range from "be statements and questions" in the first unit to present 
perfect simple in Unit 15.  Presenting the language first in an authentic context allows learners to use an 
inductive, top-down approach to grammar, which appeals to certain learning styles, and it is a very 
effective way to draw the students’ attention to the target grammar feature before the explanation (Snow, 
1996; van Patten, 2003).  Explicit grammar instruction is provided by "Victoria, the Grammar Coach."  A 
Brooke Cashman Review of Business Connections 
 
Language Learning & Technology 33 
short video of a woman explains a grammar feature while examples of the feature are automatically 
manipulated and highlighted on the screen (see Figure 2). 
 
 
Figure 1. A sample video screen, with a highly diverse cast 
The explanations, while precise, effective, and highly contextualized, are also quite brief.  In a 
representative example from Unit 6, "Describing Products," one of the grammar points addressed in this 
context is comparatives and superlatives.  Victoria begins the explanation by telling the learners: 
Hello again. Here is some grammar for comparing products. When you want to compare two 
products, you add -er to short adjectives and you put 'more' in front of long adjectives. For 
example:  
Brooke Cashman Review of Business Connections 
 
Language Learning & Technology 34 
'The PC500 is cheaper than the PC1000.'  
'The PC1000 is more expensive than the PC500.'  
When you have three or more products, you add -est to short adjectives and you put 'the most' in 
front of long adjectives. For example:  
'The PC500 is the most suitable of the three models.'  
'The PC1000 is the most efficient of the three models.'  
Look at the grammar explanation to learn more. 
 
 
Brooke Cashman Review of Business Connections 
 
Language Learning & Technology 35 
Figure 2.  A sample grammar explanation with "Victoria the Grammar Coach".    
While Victoria gives this explanation, students can also click on a "transcript" button and read along with 
what she is saying (Figure 2).  Next, they can click on three buttons which allow them to listen to and 
watch an explanation of a few related examples.  In this unit, the examples that appear on the screen are 
as follows: 
1. When you compare two products, use adjective + -er or ‘more’ + adjective. 
  The PC500 is cheaper than the PC 1000. 
  The PC1000 is more expensive than the PC500. 
2. When you compare three or more products use adjective + -est or ‘most’ + adjective. 
  The PC200 is the smallest of the three models. 
  The PC1000 is the most expensive of the three models. 
3. For adjectives of one syllable, and for adjectives of two syllables ending in –y, use -er or -est. 
  smallest 
  cheapest 
  earliest 
4. For adjectives of three or more syllables, use ‘more’ and ‘the most’. 
  It’s more | the most expensive. 
  It’s more | the most suitable. 
  It’s more | the most user-friendly. 
5. These adjectives are irregular. 
  good  better  the best 
  bad  worse  the worst 
  far  further  the furthest 
 
While precise and highly contextualized within the theme of the unit this explanation may leave some 
students wondering what to do with two syllable adjectives that don’t end in –y (is the technology more 
modern or moderner?) or why the must be added in the superlative form.  For this reason, the grammar 
explanations would likely serve better as a review for students who had already been introduced to the 
feature in class - or as an initial presentation to be followed up with further class discussion.  Even though 
the level of meta-language is appropriate for the proficiency level of the targeted learners, users will 
likely still have questions and possibly need more explanation or examples.  The program also offers a 
large number of more traditional grammar exercises, such as matching and fill-in-the-blank, where 
learners are asked to apply the rules, which allow for deductive, bottom-up processing as well. The 
sentences that the authors construct for examples and follow-up exercises for each grammar point relate 
closely to the theme of the unit, and as such, they continue to lend a sense of cohesion to each unit.   
Section 3 of each unit again addresses listening and speaking, but focuses on vocabulary building and 
what the authors call "Facts and Figures," namely, information that includes numbers, such as dates, 
years, ordinal numbers, telephone numbers, prices, email addresses, and percentages.  The vocabulary and 
"figure" items are well-chosen high-frequency items that are presented in a business context, such as a list 
of prices for items the team must order, telephone numbers of contacts and important dates for the 
conference being planned.  By choosing such high-frequency and practical items, learners will certainly 
be able to put their new knowledge directly to use.  However, the items are touched on only briefly, in 
that they are presented and followed by only one or two short exercises that don’t provide opportunity for 
much practice or reinforcement.  As such, these sections of the units would likely serve best as additional 
practice for a point already covered in class, or the teacher might want to supplement these activities with 
additional tasks in the classroom.  
The final section of each unit, Section 4, again begins with a listening exercise, which incorporates more 
vocabulary learning, and ends with a brief reading and writing activity.  The reading and writing activities 
Brooke Cashman Review of Business Connections 
 
Language Learning & Technology 36 
are the weak area of the program as a whole.  While the authors were effective in choosing authentic 
sources for reading texts, such as emails, job descriptions, and excerpts from company manuals, there is 
very little time devoted to each of the texts – often only three or four lower-order multiple choice 
questions, and typically no explanation of why any given answer is correct or incorrect.  Additionally, the 
reading passages tend to introduce elements that have not been covered in the lesson, so that there is a 
mismatch between grammar structures.  For example, in Unit 1, students learn to use to be in statements 
and in questions and short answers, but the reading task is an email giving directions to a hotel, which 
primarily uses imperatives.  The writing activities, like the reading passages, have highly authentic 
business contexts, such as taking down a telephone message, writing an email asking for product 
information, composing a CV/resume and a letter of thanks.  Unlike all of the other activities, however, 
the writing tasks cannot be completed within the confines of the Business Connections program itself.  
Students must either hand-write the tasks or close the program and type them in a separate word-
processing program.  Given that an Internet connection is listed as one of the requirements for running the 
program, I had hoped that students would have been able to type into the program and, for example, email 
it to the teacher.   
 
Figure 3. The Home screen. 
Speaking practice is integrated throughout each of the sections (minus the reading and writing sections) in 
all of the units.  In most cases, this takes the form of "Listen and Repeat" style exercises in which learners 
listen to a short phrase that illustrates a pronunciation item, vocabulary item, or expression from the 
Brooke Cashman Review of Business Connections 
 
Language Learning & Technology 37 
chapter, and then record themselves saying the phrase.  Learners can listen as many times as they would 
like to the model and can re-record and listen to their recordings as many times as they would like.  The 
program further provides "free" speaking tasks, in which learners are given a model, some information 
that is consistent with the theme of the chapter, and are asked to give a brief talk.  For example, in Unit 6, 
"Describing a Product," learners are asked to compare three different types of computers and recommend 
one to the supervisor to purchase.  The limitation of both of these types of exercises is that learners 
receive no feedback.  The program does not allow learners to capture the audio file and give it to the 
instructor for guidance, nor does the software provide feedback.  The "Listen and Repeat" sections could 
have included visual representation of the learner speech for users to match their language output against 
a model. Students, thus, have to self-evaluate their performance, but perhaps only learners who can hear 
and are aware of their mistakes will be able to correct them.  For this reason, these activities should be 
followed up with classroom or language lab tasks that allow the teacher to evaluate learners’ progress and 
provide guidance. 
Beyond the content of the Business Connections materials, a significant concern for any software program 
is the "user-friendly" factor.  Overall, this software program is transparent and simple to use, and even the 
targeted students and teachers who have never used learning software before should find it simple to 
navigate.  There are only two possible exceptions, both of which can be easily solved with prior 
knowledge.  The first is the home page of the program (not synonymous with the program menu), which 
is text heavy and does not make it immediately clear how to proceed to the program (see Figure 3).  With 
experimentation, I discovered that one has to click on "Course Outline," which will then allow users to 
proceed to the menu or to the first chapter, but this was initially confusing and would be especially 
confusing to elementary level learners who encounter it in a language lab and may not be able to read 
and/or understand all of the text.   
Once the user actually enters the program, however, he or she can easily navigate the program using the 
very clear arrows at the bottom of the screen, as well as the pull-down menu at the top (see Figure 4).  
There is also a "translation" button at the top of the screen, which allows learners to translate the 
procedural and navigational language into Spanish, French, German, Italian, Portuguese, Japanese, 
Korean, or Chinese, if they are confused about how to proceed in the program.  
The other problematic aspect of the program is the need for an "access file."   It is necessary to obtain an 
"access file" from the publisher, which must be installed on the computer before the program will run.  
This "access file" is not mentioned in the installation instructions, nor is it mentioned on the website for 
the CD-ROM, and the absence of any specific instruction could lead to confusion.  However, to the 
publisher’s credit, the e-support team and the sales representative were very responsive and helped to 
solve the problem immediately.  Anyone purchasing this product, then, can be well-assured that he or she 
can find technical support in the face of any technological hurdles. 
 
Brooke Cashman Review of Business Connections 
 
Language Learning & Technology 38 
 
Figure 4. Sample screen with navigation aids.  
Business Connections - Lab Workstation Version delivers a high-quality, interactive program that is based 
on authentic, practical business situations.  The strengths of the program are the videos, as well as the 
grammar and speaking practice, but instructors should plan on supplementing the reading and writing 
portions of the program with additional exercises that reinforce the target grammar structures and 
vocabulary, as well as provide a great deal of out-of-class support for items that are explained only briefly 
in the program, such as the grammar and vocabulary explanations.  Teachers and students who select 
Business Connections as part of their elementary – pre-intermediate course of study can expect that it will 
fulfill its promise to help learners develop practical business English skills.  
 
 
Brooke Cashman Review of Business Connections 
 
Language Learning & Technology 39 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Brooke Cashman is an instructor at Georgetown University’s Center for Language Education and 
Development, and she is involved in program and curriculum development for the English for Heritage 
Language Speakers Program.  She is a graduate of American University’s Masters International Program, 
and served as a teacher trainer with the US Peace Corps in the Republic of the Philippines.  
E-mail: bec26@georgetown.edu  
 
REFERENCES 
Brown, H. (2001). Teaching by principles: An interactive approach to language pedagogy (2nd Ed.). New 
York: Pearson Longman. 
Friedenberg, J., Kennedy, D., Lomperis, A., Martin, W., & Westerfield, K. (2003). Effective practice in 
workplace language training. Alexandria, VA: TESOL.  
Nunan, D. (1999). Second language teaching and learning. Boston: Heinle & Heinle. 
Snow, D. (1996). More than a native speaker. Alexandria, VA: TESOL.  
VanPatten, B. (2003). From input to output: A teacher’s guide to second language acquisition. Boston, 
MA: McGraw Hill. 
 
