Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num2/chanier 
June 2007, Volume 11, Number 2 
pp. 142-148 
 
Copyright © 2007, ISSN 1094-3501 142 
COMMENTARY: OPEN ACCESS TO RESEARCH AND THE 
INDIVIDUAL RESPONSIBILITY OF RESEARCHERS 
Thierry Chanier 
Laseldi, Université de Franche Comté 
 
Readers of Language Learning & Technology are undoubtedly aware of the debate raging through the 
international research community about open (i.e., free) access to research and knowledge. As readers of 
the journal, we may not feel very concerned with this debate, because when LLT was established in 1997 
(and ALSIC Journal in 1998) it seemed natural that articles should be freely accessible from every part of 
the network. But this perspective is misleading. First, it is important to recognize that LLT, Alsic, and 
2000 open access (OA) journals are the exception and not the rule among the 25,000 peer-reviewed 
journals. Secondly, like it or not, we are directly concerned individually as researchers at several levels.  
• As readers, we face potential restrictions in access to publications and data in our field as well as to 
tools that could support our research and teaching. 
• As authors we seek being published not only in journals that have good reputations but also that have 
a large audience so that our work can be cited. Citation is becoming an important feature of the 
research evaluation process of individuals as well as of institutions, and OA offers an impact 
advantage (OpCit, 2006). 
• As citizens, when our salary and research are paid for out of public funds, we are often responsible 
for giving free access to our work as requested by research agencies, provided we can actually use our 
Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) and not forfeit their use when signing publishers' copyrights 
agreements. 
We have the hardware and software solutions to guarantee open access. But social and economic models 
are well entrenched in the scientific publishing world. I would like to describe here, from a researcher’s 
standpoint, two ways to open access: the so called "green" and "gold" roads to OA (open archives and 
OA journals) and the obstacles that stand in the way.  
WHAT DOES OPEN ACCESS MEAN? 
In January 2001, when more than thirty thousand researchers from 200 countries signed the Public 
Library of Science petition to urge the creation of a public world library where research could be freely 
accessible, observers were skeptical. The scientific publishing field was dominated by large-scale 
commercial publishers that were proud to announce outstanding profits, extracted from a market they 
controlled with "core" journals and access based on a "pay-per-view" model. At the same time, academic 
libraries were overwhelmed by substantial increases in journal subscription costs. 
Less than three years after this symbolic gesture, broad discussion among actors of the scientific 
publishing world ensued. Public organizations in charge of funding and assessing research issued precise 
guidelines. 
The Bethesda and Berlin declarations (Bethesda, 2003; Berlin, 2003), signed respectively in June and 
October, 2003, by several national research institutions from North America, Asia, and Europe, gave a 
straightforward definition of an "open access contribution," which must satisfy two conditions.  
1) The author(s) and right holder(s) of such contributions grant(s) to all users a free, 
irrevocable, worldwide, right of access to, and a license to copy, use, distribute, transmit 
and display the work publicly and to make and distribute derivative works, in any digital 
medium for any responsible purpose, subject to proper attribution of authorship 
(community standards will continue to provide the mechanism for enforcement of proper 
Thierry Chanier Open Access to Research 
 
Language Learning & Technology 143 
attribution and responsible use of the published work, as they do now), as well as the right 
to make small numbers of printed copies for their personal use. 
2) A complete version of the work and all supplemental materials, including a copy of the 
permission as stated above, in an appropriate standard electronic format is deposited (and 
thus published) in at least one online repository using suitable technical standards (such as 
the Open Archive definitions) that is supported and maintained by an academic institution, 
scholarly society, government agency, or other well-established organization that seeks to 
enable open access, unrestricted distribution, interoperability, and long-term archiving. 
The reader will have noticed that the word "contribution" not only refers to publications but also to all 
source materials and data from which the original research findings are derived. This view strongly 
correlates with the argument made by the Research Councils in Humanities that, from a research 
methodological standpoint, we have a "special obligation to openness" since "sharing data strengthens our 
collective capacity to meet academic standards of openness by providing opportunities to further analyze, 
replicate, verify and refine research findings" (SSHRC, 2002), as did the pioneering work of the Perseus 
Project (1987 / 2007). Keeping in mind that all we are going to explain about open archives can be 
applied to publications as well as research data, we will limit our focus here to the former, taking into 
account its direct links with the burning question of individual scholarship evaluation (MLA, 2006)  
However interesting the definition of open access contribution may be, it does not address the temporal 
constraints that are part of the research process. Between the date of the first draft of a paper and the 
eventual publication of the final version, several years may pass—even more if we consider the "moving 
wall" (i.e., the time lapse some publishers impose before an article can become open access). The time 
scale in Humanities may be different from that in Science, Technology and Medicine (STM), but the 
difference comes not so much from the time researchers have to wait before accessing a finding published 
by another colleague as from the life cycle of the result (results may become outdated after six months in 
biological research, whereas in the humanities a life cycle of 5-10 years is common). In CALL, for 
example, Jung’s (2005) analysis showed that research orientations made significant moves within several 
years. 
THE PARADIGM OF OPEN ARCHIVES 
While public organizations issue statements on open access, academic librarians (among others) are ready 
to deploy online servers where researchers can deposit their work. The idea came from physicists, who 
created the first network called "open archives" in 1990. Researchers from the same discipline also 
invented the World Wide Web, with its protocol and language (HTML) oriented towards sharing 
publications. The current OA paradigm comprises four facets: 
• A network linked to the Internet where contributions can be deposited, described, saved and accessed. 
There exist two kinds of servers within the network: data repositories, where actual contributions are 
stored, and data harvesters, where (meta)information on these scientific deposit can be retrieved, 
searched, reorganized, etc. 
• A set of licenses that formulate the legal rights and duties between authors, readers and managers of 
the archives, guaranteeing permanent free access, non-profit use, and authorship acknowledgment. 
• A communication protocol named OAI, which permits a coherent description of metadata associated 
with contributions (cf. metadata information sold with the Current Contents database). 
• A standard free software package that assures inter-operability among the various kinds of servers 
and users' navigators. 
Such a paradigm introduces a fairly formal (but easy to use) framework. OAI compliance means using the 
Open Archive Initiative's metadata-tagging protocol to tag the critical information (author, title, date, etc.) 
Thierry Chanier Open Access to Research 
 
Language Learning & Technology 144 
in a uniform way. There is an official date of deposit, a unique permanent resource locator (no more 
invalid URLs!), and the author of the deposit is identified. A deposit is by no means an act of publication, 
but can and should be done during the process of publication. A researcher can deposit the first version of 
an article submitted to a journal (the "preprint" version) and/or the final peer-reviewed version (the one to 
be published by the journal).  All versions of the same work will appear as inter-related in the archive.  
There currently exist around 800 open archive repositories around the world (ROAR, 2007; OpenDOAR, 
2007). As an illustration in education and ICT (Information and Communication Technology), see 
Edutice (2007). Developing countries are also involved (Bangalore, 2006). The infrastructure and 
technologies are well-developed, stable, and easy to use (Eprints, 2007). 
Now that we have defined the framework, let’s now consider the current publication practices. 
THE EDITING AND PUBLISHING PROCESS 
Scientific publication in the humanities differs from that in STM in several ways, and there are important 
discrepancies across disciplines and fields. When considering CALL, we noted that the time-sensitivity 
brings us closer to STM. Similarly, when considering the type of publication, monographs, prominent in 
the humanities, are only marginally present in CALL, where journal articles are the focus of attention. 
Table 1 lists some features of five CALL journals. Their types of publishers are similar to those 
encountered in the humanities: academic/university press (Recall), commercial publisher (Call), learned 
society (Calico), auto-publishing from academics (LLT and Alsic). 
The editing/publication process is composed of three phases. 1) editing: work of the author when writing / 
revising the article (56% of the average cost of one article, see (Chanier, 2004) for details), and the 
reviewing process by researchers (11% of cost). 2) document / media processing: the final version of the 
document is transformed into several formats (Html, Xml, Pdf) and metadata are simultaneously 
generated (11% of cost). 3) release: library costs (22%, not including the subscription) ; with online 
versions it also means releasing the article on several websites where it could be accessed, searched, and 
cross-linked with other texts. 
In terms of labor and costs, the lion’s share of the editing/publishing process is in phases 1 and 3, work 
directly undertaken by academics. Publishing, as an act of communication within a knowledge 
community, is an essential component of research.  The knowledge community (plus the community of 
practice with language teachers) around these five CALL journals can be readily circumscribed. These 
journals share similar selection processes, and their editorial boards and authors are comparable. 
Phase 2 represents only a very minor part of the overall process. From a professional publishing 
standpoint, the processing in this part (tools, programs, norms and standards) all come from the academic 
world, most of them from the W3C and its subgroups.  But managers of this phase (i.e., publishers) 
control the whole publication process and its outcomes. Let us examine some features of this situation, 
referring to Table 1. 
The cost of document / media processing during phase 2, even if it is a minor one compared to the overall 
picture, does exist. In the case of LLT and Alsic, it is supported by academic institutions (and 
complemented by volunteer work). In other words, the academic funding is used to offer open access to 
readers. The other three journals function on a pay-per-view basis. Calico and Recall have comparable 
subscription rates, which should not be far from the real costs. Taylor & Francis, an international 
commercial publisher, multiplies its subscriptions rates by three to five times, in order to make a 
substantial profit. Multiplying rates by three is a common practice of commercial publishers in the 
humanities. The situation is even worse in some countries, where large amounts of money are spent by 
research agencies to "support" publications (India, China, Brazil, Spain, Italy, etc., but not so much in US, 
UK and Australia). In Canada, the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada spends 2 
Thierry Chanier Open Access to Research 
 
Language Learning & Technology 145 
million dollars to support 161 journals. In France, the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 
(CNRS) spends the equivalent of 80 full-time technicians to support 193 journals, practically all of them 
published by commercial companies. Hence research institutions pay several times the real cost of phase 
2 to these publishers … and readers have to pay another time to access the articles! 
Table 1. Overview of Publication Policies Among Five Peer-Reviewed CALL Journals 
 Alsic Calico Call LLT ReCall 
First issue 1998 1983 1988 1997 1989 
Subscription  
indiv./instit. free $50 / $85 $140 / $449 free $61 / $135 
Publisher/Country Alsic/France 
(academic) 
Calico 
/USA 
Taylor 
&Francis  
/UK 
LLT/USA 
(academic) 
Camb. Univ. 
Press/UK 
Controlled by 
learned society N/A Calico No N/A Eurocall 
Print version No Yes Yes No Yes 
Online version: 
price per paper, free  $10 $36  free $15 
Policy for open 
archive deposit N/A no mention* 
moving wall: 
18 months N/A 
yes, no 
moving wall 
Copyright kept by 
author Yes ?? No Yes No 
Prices are in US dollars. Subscription rates do not include postage. They include online access, sometimes with no 
print version (for institution). Prices to access individual articles without subscription do not include taxes. It is not 
clear whether online access to Call is included in the subscription price for individuals (several years ago it was not).  
* Calico has recently changed its web site. Free access used to be provided with a moving wall of 2-3 years. It is not 
clear whether that will still be true on the new site. 
Publishers' power extends to other critical issues. For example, publishers decide usage of authors' IPR. 
Whereas LLT and Alsic leave the copyright to the author, Taylor & Francis and Cambridge University 
Press retain exclusive copyright. Using this transfer of rights, they then decide the Open Archive policy. 
Cambridge University Press lets the author deposit at any time. Taylor & Francis imposes a moving wall 
of 18 months after the publication/release date.1 
ROADS TO OPEN ACCESS AND THE CURRENT SITUATION 
The golden road to open access opened at the end of the 1990s with the creation of not-for-profit 
publishers supported by academic consortia, such as SPARC (2007) (an international alliance of academic 
and research libraries). They invented a new economic model for supporting the cost of publication, 
namely the "charges-to-author" one. Even some commercial publishers like BioMed Central have adopted 
this model, in which the reader gets free access to journals after the author has paid for being published, 
with fees adjusted to real costs. Although the "charges-to-author" principle is well known in the fields of 
biology and medicine, large segments of academia remain unaware of it.  
As sociologists of science remind us, the research milieu is conservative. Researchers need to be aware of 
the cost of publication, the various scales of fees, and their corresponding impact on readers' access. Of 
course, given two journals of equal quality, it represents an extra decision for a researcher to wonder 
whether to submit her/his paper to a journal free for her/him (but with a fee for the reader) or to pay when 
being published in order to guarantee open access to readers. A growing number of research funding 
agencies around the world explicitly stress this choice in their contracts and let the researchers include the 
corresponding cost of publication in their research grants, giving a concrete reality to the motto 
Thierry Chanier Open Access to Research 
 
Language Learning & Technology 146 
"publication costs are research costs." This economic model opens new perspectives, but related changes 
will come slowly.  
The "green road" to open access also has to be considered seriously. Currently 15% of papers published 
each year are deposited in open archives (this percentage varies widely across disciplines). Extrapolations 
show that the goal of 100% may not be reached for many years. Studies have shown that researchers are 
ready to self-deposit when they are explicitly asked to do so. Thus, institutions and funders worldwide 
have begun adopting self-archiving policies (self-archiving mandates) for the projects and researchers 
they support (JULIET, 2006). 
CONCLUSION 
In this short tour around the scientific publication world, we have seen that free / open access to research 
findings has been officially acknowledged. But the traditional organization of scholarly publication runs 
against the objective of allowing the entire annual set of 2.5 million papers to be freely accessed. Thanks 
to recent academic initiatives, new models of scientific publication have emerged that offer direct open 
access to journals. They have gained support from various research agencies. This "gold" model for 
journals should be explored in every discipline, particularly in the Humanities, where large amounts of 
money are used to support publication. However, it will be a slow process. 
Open archives (the "green road") represent the most efficient way of providing full open access through 
authors’ self-deposits. New open archive services are under continuous development and will enhance 
research for the reader as well as for the author (Shadbolt, Brody, Carr, & Harnad, 2006). Already the 
researcher has the choice of depositing in institutional, disciplinary, or thematic repositories, all of which 
are being interconnected. Conforming to mandates issued from institutions and research agencies, the 
deposit has to provide the final version of the accepted paper. Access to the deposited article can at that 
time be set immediately as open access, or it can be set as closed access during any embargo period (6 to 
12 months, maximum), with only its metadata freely accessible web-wide until the embargo period is 
over. During any embargo period, however, a powerful new feature of most repositories (namely, the 
"Email Eprint Request" button) makes it possible for individual users to semi-automatically and almost-
instantaneously request an individual copy of the article by email, for individual use -- just as users had 
requested reprints by mail in paper days. 
A final caveat: authors are encouraged to fix their own copyright statements before signing any transfer to 
the publisher. This can be easily done when sending the final version of a paper to the publisher, either by 
including a license such as the Creative Commons (2007) or by depositing a copy of the paper in an open 
archive repository, which establishes a similar license. As more and more authors take such action, 
research agencies will be encouraged to explicitly support better copyright policies and invite publishers 
to rephrase their own licenses2. But there is no need to wait until this happens because open access is a 
property of individual works, and proper attribution of authorship is not a question of copyright law but of 
community standards. 
RECOMMENDED LINKS 
Resources related to open access and scientific publication are numerous. Here is a selection of 
recommended links from which to start.  
http://amsci-forum.amsci.org/archives/American-Scientist-Open-Access-Forum.html. The American 
Scientist Open Access Forum. The lively debate on open access was started in 1998 by Stephan Harnad. 
http://www.eprints.org. The web site of the Eprints project. Links to main projects concerning open 
access, for downloading the free Eprints software for repositories, and the corresponding worldwide 
community. 
Thierry Chanier Open Access to Research 
 
Language Learning & Technology 147 
http://www.wellcome.ac.uk/publications. Economic analysis of scientific research publishing. Report of 
SQW Ltd commissioned by the Wellcome Trust, January 2003. Wellcome Trust : London. The Wellcome 
Trust is an independent UK charity funding research to improve human and animal health. 
 
NOTES 
1. ROMEO (2007) is a web site which lists the OA policies of the vast majority of international scientific 
publishers, whatever types they are. More than 80% of them are "green" (they control 94% of the 
journals), which means that publishers say authors are free to deposit either preprint or post-print version 
of their papers in open archives. But, thinking back to the time issue, it makes a difference for the 
functioning of research, whether there is a moving wall or none. 
2. See Science Commons (2007) for example of how publishers' licenses should be. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Special thanks to Rick Kern for his support, advice, and proofreading. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Thierry Chanier is professor at the Université de Franche-Comté, France. His main domain of research 
over the 20 past years has been CALL. He is a member of the editorial board of several CALL journals, 
one of the co-creators of the Alsic journal, the initiator of another open access journal in Education and 
ICT, Sticef. He has been mandated by the French Minister of Education and Research to develop an open 
archive in this same field, Edutice. 
Email : thierry.chanier@univ-fcomte.fr 
Publications : http://edutice.archives-ouvertes.fr (Browse > By author > Chanier ) 
 
REFERENCES 
Alsic (2007). Web site of the open access journal "Apprentissage des Langues et Systèmes d'Information 
et de Communication". Université Marc Bloch: Strasbourg. http://alsic.org  
Bangalore (2006). "National Open Access Policy for Developing Countries". Workshop on Electronic 
Publishing and Open Access, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, 2-3 November. 
http://www.ncsi.iisc.ernet.in/OAworkshop2006/pdfs/NationalOAPolicyDCs.pdf. See also the "Useful 
Resources" page on open access worldwide resources. 
Berlin (2003). Berlin Declaration on Open Access to Knowledge in the Sciences and Humanities. October. 
http://oa.mpg.de/openaccess-berlin/berlindeclaration.html 
Bethesda (2003) Statement on Open Access Publishing. June 
http://www.earlham.edu/%7Epeters/fos/bethesda.htm  
CALICO (2007). Web site of the association "Computer Assisted Language Instruction Consortium" and 
the corresponding pay-per-view journal. Calico: San Marcos, TX http://www.calico.org  
Thierry Chanier Open Access to Research 
 
Language Learning & Technology 148 
CALL (2007). The web site of the pay-per-view journal "Computer Assisted Language Learning". 
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals/titles/09588221.asp.  
Chanier, T. (2004). Archives ouvertes et publication scientifique : Comment mettre en place l'accès libre 
aux résultats de la recherche?. Paris: L'Harmattan. [open access version: 
http://archivesic.ccsd.cnrs.fr/sic_00001103 ] 
Creative Commons (2007). Web site of the Creative Commons license for authors as individuals. 
http://creativecommons.org/license. See particularly the Creative Commons Attribution-Non-
Commercial-Share Alike 2.5 License. 
Edutice (2007). Open archives on Education and ICT. http://edutice.archives-ouvertes.fr  
Jung, U. (2005). "CALL: Past, present and future; A bibliometric approach". ReCALL, 17(1), 4-17. 
JULIET (2006). Research funders' open access policies. http://www.sherpa.ac.uk/juliet/. 
LLT (2007). Web site of the open access journal "Language Learning & Technology". East Lansing, MI: 
Michigan State University. http://llt.msu.edu  
MLA (2006). Report on Evaluating Scholarship for Tenure and Promotion of the Modern Language 
Association. December. http://www.mla.org/tenure_promotion  
Opcit (2006). The effect of open access and downloads ('hits') on citation impact: A bibliography of 
studies http://opcit.eprints.org/oacitation-biblio.html  
OpenDOAR (2007). The Directory of Open Access Repositories.  http://www.opendoar.org. For authors 
to choose where to deposit 
Perseus Project (1987 / 2007). Web site of the open access digital library of resources for the study of the 
humanities. http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/  
ReCALL (2007). Web site of the pay-per-view journal published from 2000 by Cambridge University 
Press. EuroCall Association: Limerick http://www.eurocall-languages.org/recall/  
ROAR (2007). Registry of Open Access Repositories. http://roar.eprints.org/. To register a new OA 
repository or observe the current progress. 
ROMEO (2007). Website on Publisher copyright policies & self-archiving 
http://www.sherpa.ac.uk/romeo.php  
Science Commons (2007). Web site of the Science Commons licenses for publishers and authors. 
http://sciencecommons.org/projects/publishing/  
See particularly "The OpenAccess-CreativeCommons 1.0 Addendum" license and "The OpenAccess-
Publish 1.0 Addendum" one. 
Shadbolt, N., Brody, T., Carr, L., & Harnad, S. (2006). "The Open Research Web: A Preview of the 
Optimal and the Inevitable". In N. Jacobs (Ed.). Open Access: Key Strategic, Technical and Economic 
Aspects. Chandos. [open access version: http://eprints.ecs.soton.ac.uk/12453/ ] 
SPARC (2007). The Scholarly Publishing and Academic Resources Coalition. http://www.arl.org/sparc/  
SSHRC (2002) Research Data Archiving Policy of the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council 
of Canada. http://www.sshrc.ca/web/about/policies/edata_e.asp. 
 
