Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num2/review2/ 
June 2007, Volume 11, Number 2 
pp. 27-30 
 
Copyright © 2007, ISSN 1094-3501 27 
REVIEW OF CALL DIMENSIONS: OPTIONS AND ISSUES IN 
COMPUTER-ASSISTED LANGUAGE LEARNING 
CALL Dimensions: Options and Issues in Computer-Assisted 
Language Learning 
 
Mike Levy and Glenn Stockwell 
 
2006 
ISBN 080585634X 
US $ 29.95 (paperback); US $89.95 (hardcover) 
310 pp.+xviii  
 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. 
Mahwah, New Jersey 
 
 
Review by Chen Xiaobin, South China University of Technology 
CALL Dimensions: Options and Issues in Computer-Assisted Language Learning is based on a detailed 
analysis of a corpus of Computer-Assisted Language Learning (CALL) works and papers. By creating a 
thesaurus of CALL descriptors, such as “design” and “evaluation”, which are termed identifiers (p. 255) 
in the book, the authors, Mike Levy and Glenn Stockwell, are able to describe each corpus article and 
identify its areas of study. The frequencies of the identifiers’ usage were then counted and the seven most 
frequently used identifiers (design, evaluation, computer-mediated communication (CMC), theory, 
research, practice, and technology) are used in the book as chapter titles, also called dimensions of CALL. 
This approach enables the authors to develop a presentation of the most-researched areas in CALL, based 
on published papers in the field. However, the field of CALL can never be perceived as a discipline 
consisting of separate constituent parts because of the multiple aspects that need to be taken into 
consideration when practicing or researching it. Therefore, discussing these identifiers, or dimensions, 
individually may be misleading for the formation of a complete picture of the field. For example, it is 
unrealistic to talk about CALL design (Chapter 2) without mentioning evaluation, CMC, second language 
acquisition (SLA) theory, or technology, because these are the factors that determine design choices and 
process. To cope with this problem, the last section of the book (Chapter 9, Integration, and Chapter 10, 
Emergent and Established CALL) is devoted to helping readers form a holistic and integrated 
understanding of the field.  
Organizationally, CALL Dimensions can be divided into three sections. Chapters 2 to 7 constitute the 
major part of the book and are the main focus of discussion. While discussing these dimensions, the 
authors use a clear description, discussion, conclusion structure for each chapter—the description section 
introduces the central concerns for each area, is followed by a discussion section that discusses issues 
related to their constraints and limitations, and concludes with a chapter summary. This makes the content 
of the book accessible to students or researchers who are new to CALL. Furthermore, the book draws its 
materials from a corpus of research articles and book chapters. This approach not only provides the book 
with a solid empirical foundation, but also with references that readers can consult when further
Chen Xiaobin Review of CALL Dimensions 
 
Language Learning & Technology 28 
 clarification or information is needed. As a whole, CALL Dimensions is designed and written to help the 
"language teacher, software designer, or researcher who wishes to use technology in second- or foreign-
language education to absorb and relate what has been achieved so far, and how to make sense of it" (p. 
xi). 
Chapter 1 introduces major areas of interest and growth in CALL. The authors stress that when seeking to 
implement CALL, researchers and practitioners should weigh not only the technological choices available 
to us and SLA theories that govern our conceptualization of CALL into consideration, but also evaluate 
the "critical factors derived from the nature of the learners and the learning context" (p. 6), such as the 
learners’ background, needs, goals, technological and institutional settings. 
Chapter 2 talks about CALL design. Designing CALL materials or tasks is usually the first obstacle that 
language teachers face when thinking about using CALL to enhance their students’ learning of a foreign 
language. However, as concluded in Kohn (2001), combating such an obstacle can be rewarding, despite 
the fact that the task of designing CALL materials is becoming more complex and more demanding with 
the development of new technologies and language learning theories. As a result, Chapter 2, Design, is 
given priority over other CALL dimensions; moreover, the topic gets the most hits in the corpus keyword 
search. Various CALL designs with respect to tasks, online courses and syllabi, language-learning areas 
and skills, tutors, and tools are described in detail, and their respective strengths and limitations are 
evaluated. General guidelines that may lead to enhanced CALL designs, such as knowing the strengths 
and limitations of existing CALL materials and knowing one’s prospective audience, are summarized at 
the end of the chapter for designers to follow. 
Students', teachers', or any other third-party's feedback to a CALL product are valuable sources of 
information for its design and improvement process. This information comes from various kinds of 
evaluations, which are introduced and discussed in detail in Chapter 3. The authors conclude that 
understanding CALL evaluation requires knowing not only what to evaluate (i.e., the object of 
evaluations and descriptions—such as a multimedia program on CD for teaching pronunciation, a Web 
site for learning English, a Web-based cross-cultural curricular initiative and an online teaching tool), but 
also how to evaluate them (i.e., the criteria and principles for evaluation instruments and frameworks that 
guide the evaluation process).  
CMC, one of the hotspots of CALL studies, has been defined as “communication that takes place between 
human beings via the instrumentality of computer” (Herring, 1996, p. 1). Its application in language 
learning and teaching is the main concern of Chapter 4, which describes the various modes of CMC, 
categorized as synchronous (chat, MOOs, conferencing) and asynchronous (E-mail/Short Message 
Service, Mailing Lists/Bulletin Board System). The discussion of their individual strengths and 
limitations concludes that CMC implementation decision making needs to be founded on knowledge of 
constraints and characteristics of the CMC tool itself, together with a pedagogical understanding of how 
the communication technology might be most effectively used for language learning. 
CALL designers, language teachers, and researchers tend to seek theoretical foundations for the decisions 
they make with respect to CALL materials' design and practice. Chapter 5, Theory, is devoted to the 
discussion of the theories that are most frequently used to inform, or justify, CALL activities, such as 
Long’s interaction account of language learning (Long, 1996), Vygotsky’s sociocultural theory 
(Vygotsky, 1978), and Leont’ev’s activity theory (Leont’ev, 1978). Examples of their application and the 
challenges CALL practitioners face are also provided in this chapter. For example, the interaction account 
of SLA, which focuses on learning interactions that involve two or more people, or a person and the 
computer, has been particularly well used as a theoretical base in CMC-based CALL, such as e-mail and 
chat. However, a recent development of the interactionist tradition focuses its interests on form, because 
meaningful input and opportunities for interaction do not on their own appear to be sufficient for the 
ultimate development of target-like language proficiency levels (Doughty & Williams, 1998). This 
Chen Xiaobin Review of CALL Dimensions 
 
Language Learning & Technology 29 
provides a challenge for the design of CMC activities whose major concern is how to facilitate language 
learning with a focus on meaning. 
Conducting research in CALL can be helpful for language teachers in refining pedagogical approaches, 
which in turn will shape language-learning tasks and promote learning outcomes. Chapter 6, Research, 
concentrates on six clearly identifiable research strands in CALL (general research, chat, intercultural 
language learning, reading and hypermedia, help design, and listening and vocabulary), whose approaches 
include survey research, comparative research, and experimental research. The chapter concludes with 
issues that CALL researchers need to be aware of when carrying out research, such as student attitudes 
and perceptions toward the learning environment, technology and tasks in different settings, and different 
theoretical models that may be used to analyze the same interaction data. 
Chapter 7, Practice, deals with practical applications of CALL, specifically the types of CALL that can 
be used in the teaching of different language skills—listening, reading, writing, and speaking—as well as 
language areas, such as grammar, vocabulary, and pronunciation. For example, when talking about 
utilizing CALL in teaching listening comprehension, the authors discuss how Jones’ (2003) learners are 
offered a great deal of control over how they listen to the materials (syntactically divided chunks of the 
passage, or the pronunciation of any one of the keywords that provide clues), and what annotations (visual 
or textual) they access. This is a feature only provided by computer technology and is impossible with 
traditional means. An essential factor in using technology to teach any language skill is that the 
technology should provide something that is not available through more traditional means. The discussion 
section provides readers with factors responsible for the complexity of CALL practice, such as language-
learning objectives, technological options and their pedagogical implications, students’ abilities, goals, 
and perceptions related to different types of CALL. As a result, Levy (2006) concludes that in order to 
make informed choices while practicing CALL, it is necessary for practitioners to "locate the optimal 
balance of approaches, resources and tools to meet the needs of particular learners in a particular learning 
context" (p. 1). 
A large part of CALL is driven by the development of new technologies. Chapter 8, Technology, provides 
an overview of some state-of-the-art technologies that are being used in language learning and teaching, 
including authoring software, learning management systems (LMSs), audio-and video-conferencing, 
artificial intelligence (AI) and intelligent systems, speech recognition and pronunciation training 
technologies, as well as mobile technologies. These synopses are followed by a discussion of how these 
new technological developments are shaping the ways we think about, select, and use technology in 
language learning. However, although there are many technological choices available for CALL 
practitioners, their implementation in the classroom should not be technology driven—our decision needs 
to satisfy the pedagogical needs of the activity at hand, rather than the current trends of technology. 
The authors conclude their book with a discussion of how to bring these dimensions together to provide a 
holistic picture of the field. Chapter 9, Integration, explains how to integrate CALL vertically into the 
education of technology outside the language class (e.g., in other courses within the institution, or at 
home), and horizontally into the wider technological infrastructure of the school or university (e.g., the 
preferred hardware and software, and the support and resources available). Chapter 10, Emergent and 
Established CALL, distinguishes two types of CALL that are related to technological development: 
established CALL, which utilizes accepted main-stream technologies, such as email and chat, and 
emergent CALL, which depends on emerging new technologies, such as Automated Speech Recognition 
and ICALL (Intelligent CALL). This distinction views CALL from a developmental perspective, 
confirming the vigorous evolving nature of the discipline. 
The greatest contribution of CALL Dimensions comes from its approach to CALL. The identification of 
the most researched areas in CALL helps to establish it as an independent field of inquiry—a solid 
discipline that has its own subjects for research—namely, the seven dimensions. Thus, Levy and 
Chen Xiaobin Review of CALL Dimensions 
 
Language Learning & Technology 30 
Stockwell answer the more basic question of what CALL is rather than what CALL can do (a more 
comprehensive answer to the latter question can be found in Ducate & Arnold, 2006). This approach 
creates limitations as well as advantages: although the selected dimensions are recognized as the essence 
of CALL, its topics are far from exhausted. This runs the risk of neglecting other, also important, aspects 
of CALL. For example, teachers and researchers have been using computers to assist in genre and 
discourse analysis of authentic or student-generated language production, and the results of such analyses 
can then be transformed into teaching pedagogies that guide students’ writing process. Topics of this kind 
are neglected in the book, but they might also be considered as important parts of CALL. 
In general, Levy and Stockwell have achieved the goal of providing language teachers, software 
designers, and researchers involved in CALL with an overview of "how to absorb and relate what has 
been achieved so far [in CALL], and how to make sense of it" (p. xi). The valuable references to related 
studies in each dimension provided in the book can also serve as good starting points for those who would 
like to carry out further research on CALL on any of the dimensions discussed. 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Chen Xiaobin is an M.A. student in Applied Linguistics at the South China University of Technology. His 
research interests are second language acquisition and computer-assisted language learning. 
E-mail: ch.xiaobin@mail.scut.edu.cn 
 
REFERENCES 
Doughty, C. J., & Williams, J. (1998). Focus on form in classroom second language acquisition. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Ducate, L., & Arnold, N. (Eds.). (2006). Calling on CALL: From theory and research to new directions in 
foreign language teaching. San Marcos, TX: CALICO. 
Herring, S. (Ed.). (1996). Computer-mediated communication: Linguistic, social and cross-cultural 
perspectives. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Jones, L. C. (2003). Supporting listening comprehension and vocabulary acquisition with multimedia 
annotations: The students’ voice. CALICO Journal, 21(1), 41-65. 
Kohn, K. (2001). Developing multimedia CALL: The Telos language partner approach. Computer 
Assisted Language Learning, 14(3-4), 251-267. 
Leont’ev, A. N. (1978). Activity, consciousness and personality. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
Levy, M. (2006). Effective use of CALL technologies: Finding the right balance. In R. Donaldson & M. 
Haggstrom (Eds.), Changing language education through CALL (pp. 1-18). Lisse, The Netherlands: 
Swets & Zeitlinger. 
Long, M. H. (1996). The role of the linguistic environment in second language acquisition. In W. C. 
Ritchie & T. K. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 413-468). San Diego: 
Academic Press. 
Vygotsky. L. S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
 
 
