Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num2/net/ 
June 2007, Volume 11, Number 2 
pp. 3-9 
 
Copyright © 2007, ISSN 1094-3501 3 
ON THE NET 
Introducing Standardized EFL/ESL Exams 
Jesús García Laborda 
Polytechnic University of Valencia, Spain 
INTRODUCTION 
In a few months students from almost every single country will be taking high-stakes tests such as the 
Test of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL), International English Testing System (IELTS), 
Business Language Testing Service (BULATS), and others in order to achieve a score that allows them to 
pursue their studies abroad. Students who want to pursue graduate studies in the United States will be 
able to choose from a number of tests to prove their proficiency level, but, up to now, the most important 
test has been the TOEFL. The TOEFL, like other exams1, has been progressively converted into a 
computer-based test (CBT), first, and into an Internet-based test (iBT) later. Most students today take a 
computer version of this test. The promptness of the rating system as compared to the traditional paper-
and-pencil format have helped to popularize the CBT and iBT versions of TOEFL. Many of the other 
high-stakes tests have followed or are following this change. Probably, the second most important high-
stakes exam is IELTS, whose computerized version is currently being used experimentally in several 
countries as a first stage of implementation. 
The degree of computerization varies according to the test. It runs from an implementation of the four 
skills (iBT TOEFL) to only the least communicative sections (BULATS), with some exams using a 
combination of human and computer interaction such as the Basic English Skill Test Plus (BEST Plus). 
The continuous evolution of the Internet and computer devices, exam takers’ better training, and the 
reduced costs of implementing computerized tests will eventually facilitate the transition from the current 
paper format to the electronic one. 
This paper will present the features, and a brief comparison, of some of the most well known high-stakes 
exams. Since some of these tests are not well known or are not easily accessible to the general 
practitioner, this paper will serve as a first approach to a field that will undoubtedly change significantly 
in the next five years.  
COMPUTER TEST DESIGN 
Computer tests have been operative for at least 20 years. However, although the potential of computer 
assisted language testing was foreseen from the mid-eighties, it has been necessary to develop the means 
to include audiovisual prompts in the tests. As with most general learning platforms, testing platforms 
have evolved significantly in the past ten years. Some of these changes have been reflected in this journal 
(Roever, 2001) but, overall, the greatest challenge is not preparing the test or producing a testing platform 
that can test faster and more efficiently than teachers do today, but rather, first, being able to develop 
specific items only designed for computers and, second, studying how the results and correction of online 
tests can lead to learning (Chapelle & Douglas, 2006). Figure 1 shows the interface of a low-stakes testing 
platform where the students can see corrections. The student can clearly see different codes according to 
the mistake produced and, if a list of color codes is provided, will be able to recognize the type of mistake 
that was made. Additionally, some testing platforms include comments from the raters but it is not clear 
whether these comments lead to language learning. 
Jesús García Laborda Introducing Standardized EFL/ESL Exams 
 
Language Learning & Technology 4 
 
Figure 1. Interface of the PLEVALEX low-stakes testing platform (García Laborda, 2006). 
The fact that it was necessary to state clearly if certain features are common or even necessary when 
designing computer interfaces for tests led Fulcher (2003) to provide a set of guidelines that most testing 
platforms follow. These guidelines relate to hardware/software configurations, navigation, page layout, 
toolbars and controls, text, text color, icons and graphics, multimedia, delivery systems, score retrieval, 
database storage, test rubrics, familiarity (and ergonomics) technology, and trialing. The guidelines are 
currently used by the designers of tests such as TOEFL or BULATS but very few (if any) studies have 
proven their validity. 
TYPES OF ONLINE OR COMPUTER-BASED TESTS ITEMS 
From a traditional perspective, computer-based tests are usually composed of multiple-choice questions. 
In the last few years, many low- and high-stakes tests have included different types of exercises that can 
be found in many e-learning platforms. For example, the long-standing DIALANG project (an adaptive 
low-stakes testing platform) includes a section where users can suggest new types of items. Today, 
however, while multiple-choice items have preference in high-stakes exams, low-stakes exams, like those 
distributed by many universities all over the world tend to include more free writing sections (Bernhardt, 
Rivera & Kamil, 2004). In relation to the interface organization, formats vary, although most tests follow 
the patterns described below: 
Multiple-choice items 
Traditionally set as a vertical list of questions with answers, today most exams present only one question 
Jesús García Laborda Introducing Standardized EFL/ESL Exams 
 
Language Learning & Technology 5 
at a time. This allows for both a bigger font size for questions and answers as well as larger displays of 
any media when they occur as prompts for a question. Multiple-choice tests tend to be adaptive. Adaptive 
tests are based on the results (right/wrong) for each test item and have the capacity to place students in the 
appropriate proficiency level by using an item bank (Meunier, 1994; Brown, 1997). Generally, this type 
of test tends to reduce the time necessary to take the test and facilitates correction and reporting. 
Writing 
Interfaces for writing usually show the retrieval device and provide a box to write in the answer. The key 
issue in these interfaces is whether this box should be large enough to let students see most of their test or 
whether simply scrolling up and down is an acceptable format for writing an essay comfortably (Figure 
2). 
 
 
Figure 2. Interface of the writing section in PLEVALEX low-stakes testing platform. 
 
 
Figure 3. Interface protodesign of the speaking section in the PLEVALEX low-stakes testing platform. 
Jesús García Laborda Introducing Standardized EFL/ESL Exams 
 
Language Learning & Technology 6 
Speaking 
Multimedia reproduction devices usually occupy most of the screen. The idea is that the conversation 
should be as natural as possible. A larger picture is supposed to produce in the viewer an effect of 
increased identification with the task. (Figure 3) 
Tests have tended to follow three types of format. Undoubtedly, these formats affect the students and the 
strategies used in the preparation for the test. The most significant difference is in the oral section. Some 
tests do not include a speaking section while others have integrated the oral section in the platform 
through semi-directed interviews and descriptions. Overall, there are four approaches:  
1. There is no speaking section. The test includes some listening tasks, but the student is not expected to 
speak. 
2. The platform is used for grammar, reading, and listening (and sometimes writing. There is an 
individually-administered speaking test administered by a human tester. 
3. The testing platform is used to provide input (in the case of BEST Plus, adaptive input), but there is a 
test administrator present while the test takes place. 
4. The speaking section is included in the computer test, and there is no test administrator specifically in 
charge of giving the speaking test (for example, the new iBT TOEFL). 
REVIEW OF HIGH STAKES TESTS 
Although recent literature has paid special attention to high-stakes tests (Stoynoff & Chapelle, 2005), very 
few journal publications have addressed the use of computers in high-stakes test deliveryAccording to 
some research, the difference between a paper-and-pencil test and a computer-based test is minimal 
(Breland, Lee, & Murak, 2005; Choi, Kim, & Boo, 2003). However, anecdotal evidence gathered from 
teachers at the Polytechnic University of Valencia suggests there are broad differences between students 
in their computer skills. Thus, there are probably some differences between the two ways of taking an 
exam.  
This paper looks at eight high-stakes tests in order to review their features. They are classified in the 
following fashion: tests that only include multiple-choice questions, tests that include writing and 
multiple-choice questions, and tests that include speaking questions. The tests reviewed are: BULATS, 
IELTS, TOEFL, ACT ESL placement test, BEST Plus, Computerized English Skills Assessment 
(CELSA), WebCAPE (Computerized Adaptive Placement Exam), and iBT TOEFL. It is important to 
mention that no discrimination has been made between online tests and other computer-based tests (on 
CD ROM or Intranet systems) because as technology progresses, it is expected that most of these and 
other tests will go online. 
Tests with no speaking section 
ACT ESL Placement test (originally a variation of the COMPASS testing system, http://www.act.org) 
is a computer adaptive testing system for mathematics, reading and writing, and ESL. The type of 
questions included in the test can be found at http://www.act.org/esl/sample.html. For ESL, it 
includes sections on language use, reading, and listening that can be used singly or in combination. 
Additionally, Compass has developed a new writing test called ESL e-Write that will go online very soon 
(http://www.act.org/compass/announce/preview.html). This test can be used to evaluate high 
school and university students.  
WebCAPE Computer-Adaptive Placement Exams (formerly ESL-Computerized Adaptive Placement 
Exam, https://www.softstudy.com/products/CAPE.cfm), developed by the Humanities Research 
Center, Brigham Young University, is a low-stakes exam usually used in commercial hiring. The test can 
be taken in ESL, Spanish, German, French, and Russian.  The 15-20 minute test includes language use, 
listening, and reading and can be tailored according to the needs of the testing institution. Until recently 
Jesús García Laborda Introducing Standardized EFL/ESL Exams 
 
Language Learning & Technology 7 
this test could be obtained from Brigham Young University but now is run by SoftStudy, Inc. A free 
version of WebCAPE is available at https://www.softstudy.com/products/trial.cfm. 
The Combined English Language skills assessment in a Reading Context (CELSA, 
http://www.assessment-testing.com/celsa.htm) is a 75-item multiple-choice cloze test. Most 
institutions use it along with other spoken language tests. CELSA is used to evaluate grammar and 
reading at the beginner, intermediate, and advanced levels. This test can be taken in either a traditional or 
computer-based format. A free trial is available upon request at http://www.assessment-
testing.com/ctademo.htm.  
Computerized tests followed by a personal interview 
BULATS (http://www.bulats.org/tests/computer_test.php) is a very flexible test for business 
Spanish, French, English, and German. Each delivery organization chooses the exact format, and results 
are given according to the ALTE (Association of Language Testers in Europe) Proficiency Levels 
(http://www.alte.org/can_do/index.php). The test uses the traditional adaptive system in which each 
question is presented according to the results of previous questions. A non-adaptive demonstration of this 
test is available at http://www.bulats.org/demo/index.php. The questions include listening 
comprehension, reading, and language use. Sometimes usability can be a little difficult because the test 
uses a system of arrows to proceed from one exercise to another, but, overall, it follows the format seen in 
the sections above. The test usually lasts about 60 minutes. 
Computer Based IELTS (CB IELTS, http://www.ielts.org/) is a new computer version of IELTS in which 
the listening, reading, and writing sections are administered on a computer. However, the speaking 
sections are still conducted face-to-face. For the time being, this version is only available in a limited 
number of locations worldwide. As in some of the tests above, the listening and reading sections are rated 
automatically while the writing section is rated by IELTS examiners in the same manner as the paper-
based version. Although IELTS has both a general and academic versions, at this moment the only 
available version of CB IELTS is the academic one.  
The testing platform is used to provide oral input 
Basic English Skills Test (BEST, http://www.cal.org/topics/ta/best.html) was originally designed to 
determine whether examinees were at the survival and pre-employment skill levels. BEST has since 
changed its form. The language use section of BEST Literacy is taken with pen and paper while the oral 
section of the BEST Plus test (http://www.cal.org/bestplus) is held in front of a test administrator who 
uses the computer as input for the test. The test takes from 5 to 20 minutes and “personal, community, 
and occupational domains [are] assessed using real-life communication tasks such as providing personal 
information, describing situations, and giving and supporting an opinion” (BESTPlus FAQ, 2007). The 
objective of the test is to determine whether the taker will be able to function in routine situations. In the 
computer adaptive version of the test, the computer is used as a prompt to provide input and set the items, 
and then the test administrator simply enters the item score in the computer and the computer selects the 
following appropriate question for the examinee's determined level.  
The speaking section is included in the computer test 
The Test of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL) assesses all four skills. Listening and reading, as 
well as language use, follow the traditional models of computer adaptive tests. The writing module has a 
double correction system: automatic computer-based and human. The Educational Testing Service claims 
a high degree of correspondence between the two versions (Chodorow & Burstein, 2004). Input is elicited 
by multimedia prompts such as interviews, descriptions, and questions or other types of items. The new 
test will soon be available worldwide.  
 
Jesús García Laborda Introducing Standardized EFL/ESL Exams 
 
Language Learning & Technology 8 
THE FUTURE OF ONLINE COMPUTER ASSISTED LANGUAGE TESTING 
In the future, most standardized tests will go online or be based on inter- or intranet technology. They will 
hopefully include speaking sections. In the short term, there are some issues with technical access, test 
items that are not tailored to the computer platform, and the unknown effects of computerized tests on 
language instruction that need to be addressed. 
• Security. Administering organizations should make sure that there will be no possibility of anyone 
breaking into the system and obtaining any specific version of any test. 
• Technical devices. These tests should be adaptable to any computer environment (Windows, Mac OS, 
Linux, etc.) and any type of devices (PDAs, laptops). 
• Technical capability. Even TOEFL has been reported as having technical problems in Shanghai 
(Guardian Unlimited, October 20, 2006). Networks need to be improved, and problems with 
electricity supply and Internet connection need to be solved in some instances. 
• Test features and design. It is necessary to design new types of items for computers, especially for 
Internet-based tests (Davies, 2003). 
• Test interpretations and washback. There are still very few studies of the effect of computer-based 
tests on how teachers change their instruction style according to the computer interfaces in 
standardized tests, and the results obtained in this type of exams (however, see Bailey, 1999). 
There are other long-term challenges related to online testing that will also need to be examined. 
• Communities of language learners. There are communities of test takers that could communicate test 
strategies and information among themselves. These communities, if culturally based, could help 
many test takers overcome a lack of knowledge of the Anglo-European culture that underlies most of 
these tests. 
• Language test preparation. Language test preparation should also aim at improving the students’ 
language skills; thus specific research on the impact of computer-based exams in language acquisition 
is still necessary. 
• Test enjoyment. This is a very new and almost unexplored issue. Egbert (2003) has suggested that 
CALL be defined as a "flow move" in which the student progresses with a feeling of enjoyment that 
goes beyond the moment to turn into a particular state of mind. It would be interesting to research 
whether students experience an agreeable feeling as they progress through a test, as suggested by 
Egbert for CALL in general. 
In final analysis, however, the benefits of online testing should overcome any of its drawbacks, as it can 
be faster, more efficient and less costly than traditional paper-and-pencil testing. Additionally, multimedia 
prompts can help make the test feel more “real.” Adaptive tests can facilitate the difficult task of rapid 
diagnosis, and self-correcting tests can accelerate the process of correction, feedback, and reporting. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper has attempted to show the generic types of test items and interfaces and to present a brief 
review of the most widely-used ESL computerized tests. It is a first step for those who wish to take a 
greater interest in online language testing. The coming years will surely bring many improvements in 
language testing that cannot yet be foreseen. 
 
NOTES 
1. Although some researchers make a distinction, in this paper I will use exam and test interchangeably. 
 
Jesús García Laborda Introducing Standardized EFL/ESL Exams 
 
Language Learning & Technology 9 
REFERENCES 
Bailey, K. M. (1999). Washback in Language Testing. ETS Monograph Series, MS-15 Retrieved May 21, 
2007, from www.ets.org/Media/Research/pdf/RM-99-04.pdf. 
Bernhardt, E. B, Rivera, R. J, & Kamil, M. L. (2004). The practicality and efficiency of web-based 
placement testing for college-level language programs. Foreign Language Annals, 37(3), 356-366. 
BEST Plus Frequently Asked Questions. (2007). Retrieved May 21, 2007, from 
http://www.cal.org/bestplus/faqs/gen_info.html. 
Brown, J.D. (1997). Computers in language testing: Present research and some future directions, 
Language Learning & Technology. 1(1), 44-59. 
Chodorow, M., & Burstein, J. (2004). Beyond essay length: Evaluating e-rater's performance on TOEFL 
essays, TOEFL Research Report No. RR-73, ETS RR-04-04). Princeton, NJ: ETS. Retrieved on January 
10, 2006, from http://www.ets.org/Media/Research/pdf/RR-04-04.pdf. 
Choi, I., Kim, K. S., & Boo, J. (2003). Comparability of a paper-based language test and a computer-
based language test. Language Testing, 20(3), 295-320.  
Chapelle, C. A., & Douglas, D. (2006). Assessing Language Through Technology. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.  
Davies, A. (2003). Three heresies of language testing research. Language Testing, 20(4), 355-368.  
Egbert, J. (2003). A study of flow in the foreign language classroom. Modern Language Journal, 87(4), 
499-518.  
Fulcher, G. (2003). Interface design in computer-based language testing. Language Testing, 20(4), 384-
408.  
García Laborda, J. (2006). PLEVALEX: A new platform for Oral Testing in Spanish. Eurocall Review, 9, 
4-7. Retrieved on January 10, 2006 from http://www.eurocall-
languages.org/news/newsletter/9/index.html  
Guardian Unlimited. (October 20, 2006). ETS denies technical problems with online Toefl. Retrieved 
January 10, 2007, from http://education.guardian.co.uk/tefl/story/0,,1929295,00.html. 
Meunier, L. E. (1994). Computer adaptive language tests (CALT) offer a great potential for functional 
testing. Yet why don't they? CALICO Journal, 11(4), 23-39.  
Roever, C. (2001). Web-based language testing. Language Learning & Technology, 5(2), 84-94. 
 
