Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num1/review3/ 
February 2007, Volume 11, Number 1 
pp. 40-44 
 
Copyright © 2007, ISSN 1094-3501 40 
REVIEW OF CALLING ON CALL: FROM THEORY AND RESEARCH TO 
NEW DIRECTIONS IN FOREIGN LANGUAGE TEACHING 
Calling on CALL: From Theory and Research to New Directions in 
Foreign Language Teaching 
 
Lara Ducate and Nike Arnold (Editors) 
 
2006 
ISBN 1085-2999  
351 pp.   
 
Computer Assisted Language Instruction Consortium (CALICO) 
San Marcos, Texas, USA 
 
 
Review by Laurie Miller, George Mason University 
Calling on CALL: From Theory and Research to New Directions in Foreign Language Teaching is an 
easy-to-read, informative review of the current state of computer assisted language learning (CALL) in 
foreign /second language instruction. The book will appeal to many different audiences. Seasoned 
language instructors will benefit from the broad reviews of current technology use in the field, as well as 
the concise summaries of language teaching methodologies of the last fifty years. Instructors who 
currently use technology will find research results to validate this use. Moreover, instructors who have not 
integrated technology into instruction will find discussions of technology use that do not goad them into 
using technology simply for the sake of using it. Instead, they are provided with accessible explanations 
grounded in current language acquisition theory and practice that describe ways to implement technology 
use. Pre-service foreign language/second language instructors will be exposed to theory and practices 
through clear, honest explanations and challenged to apply what they have studied by the Questions for 
Reflection sections found at the end of each chapter. Additionally, graduate students or instructors looking 
for research topics will find many informed suggestions at the end of the chapters.  
Because each chapter in the book shows the theoretical underpinnings of the particular aspect of CALL it 
discusses, the book serves as a strong reminder that technology use alone is not an effective tool for 
language instruction. To help instructors integrate theoretically sound technology use into their teaching, 
Calling on CALL presents thirteen chapters focused on various learning objectives, including 
foreign/second language reading, writing, pronunciation, and sociolinguistic competence. This 
organization provides readers with a clear idea as to why CALL can work, and how it can help lead 
foreign/second language instruction in new, pedagogically sound directions.  
The introduction and first three chapters present overviews of technology use and pedagogy.  Nike Arnold 
and Lara Ducate, the book’s editors, give an up-to-date overview of current technology use both in and 
out of the classroom in Chapter 1, CALL: Where Are We and Where Do We Go From Here? Their aim is 
to highlight the prevalence of computer use in modern life. The authors point out that many educators 
Lara Ducate and Nike Arnold Review of Calling on CALL 
 
Language Learning & Technology 41 
already use computers, both as administrative and classroom aids, but that predominately this use is 
teacher-centered. They believe that newer technologies, such as computer mediated communication, hold 
great promise to help shift language instruction toward a more student-centered, constructivist perspective 
that emphasizes higher order thinking. In Chapter 2, Situating CALL in the Broader Methodological 
Context of Foreign Language Teaching and Learning: Promises and Possibilities, Christopher Luke 
examines "some of the existing and potential connections between foreign language methodology and 
CALL" (p. 21). His overview of learning theories from behaviorism to social constructivism highlights 
their positive and negative aspects, especially in regard to how they have been manifested in CALL 
activities. He notes that new computer mediated communication (CMC) tools now popular among the 
younger generation –IM, chat, blogs, podcasts—offer their users multiple ways to interact with and 
process information with one another and with experts, facilitating a constructivist approach to language 
learning. CALL’s ability to collect, analyze, and disperse information in fast, systematized ways can 
present students with large quantities of authentic, comprehensible input and, in turn, encourage them to 
express themselves in their foreign/second language in such a way that they develop higher-level 
language skills related to cultural interaction, social relations, and cognitive strategies – all, according to 
Luke, an integral part of language instruction in the future.  
The book’s third chapter, Multiliteracy: Second Language Literacy in the Multimedia Environment, 
written by Margaret Gonglewski and Stayc DuBravac, challenges readers to consider a relatively new 
educational concept: mutiliteracy. A modern definition of literacy cannot focus solely on printed or 
written text (New London Group, 1996; Stevens, 2005); it must be extended to include the multifaceted 
nature of information transmission. Meaning is transmitted and processed simultaneously in multiple 
ways – visually, digitally, culturally, linguistically – and within these media, there can be a diversity of 
expression. For example, information can be transmitted visually through a still photo or video and 
accompanied by aural linguistic input in either Arabic or English, or both. Gonglewski and DuBravac 
present five goals for a mutiliteracy-oriented curriculum as well as examples of how CALL activities can 
be used to reach these goals. As they address each curricular goal, they explain how the CALL activity 
presented with it meets the goal and connects to the learning theories discussed in the first two chapters. 
Therefore, this chapter is one of the most significant chapters in the book as it shows how the learning 
theories that previously drove the creation of CALL activities are now being fused into a new learning 
theory, mutiliteracy, which, in turn, is driving new CALL curricula and design. 
Chapters 4 through 7 shift from a focus on theory to a focus on technology use in four specific skill areas: 
reading, listening, pronunciation, and writing. Chapter 4, CALL Technologies for L2 Reading, by Dorothy 
Chun, reports on research regarding how technology has been used to address issues facing L2 reading. 
Chun suggests that future CALL software and web-based programs that work to improve L2 reading 
should evolve from their current focus on lower-order, lexical level reading skills, to higher order reading 
skills, such as analysis, synthesis, and evaluation. In the fifth chapter, Listening Comprehension in 
Multimedia Environments, Linda Jones reviews second language acquisition (SLA) theory in relation to 
listening comprehension and multimedia. Jones emphasizes an interactionist perspective in listening: the 
construction of meaning based on students’ interactions with comprehensible input. Jones further explains 
that adding multimedia input to the interactionist theory leads to Mayer’s (2002) cognitive theory of 
multimedia, according to which learning is more likely to occur when students have simultaneous access 
to various modes of input with congruent meaning. Mary Grantham O’Brien discusses using CALL in 
chapter 6, Teaching Pronunciation and Intonation with Computer Technology. O’Brien lists the benefits 
of using computer assisted pronunciation training (CAPT), including the fact that students can take 
control of their own learning and often are more willing to take risks when working with a non-human 
interlocutor. O’Brien provides criteria for CAPT software evaluation and discusses five types of CAPT 
courseware. In the seventh chapter, Liam Murray and Triona Hourigan discuss Using Micropublishing to 
Facilitate Writing in the Foreign Language. The authors give practical examples of micropublishing tools 
Lara Ducate and Nike Arnold Review of Calling on CALL 
 
Language Learning & Technology 42 
used to facilitate L2 writing instruction: photo editing, PowerPoint, web page creation, blogs, and wikis 
and add four appendices that include lesson plans, web-based resources, and a rubric for grading web 
authoring and publishing. 
Chapters 8 through 10 show how cultural aspects of language acquisition and development can be taught 
with the aid of technology. All the chapters have specific examples of assignments and studies that can 
serve as templates for instructors wishing to use technology to teach culture or to conduct their own 
research on the topic. In chapter 8, From Theory to Practice: Intracultural CMC in the L2 Classroom, 
Zsuzsana Abrams looks at how CMC has been used in foreign language classes to encourage students not 
living in the culture of their target language to interact with each other in that target language. She 
reviews research that shows how students benefit from being active members of online communities. 
Shereasons this is the case because CMC provides learners with opportunities to use their developing 
language skills in a generative manner within a non-threatening context. Chapter 9 moves the discussion 
of CMC to that between students in two different cultures. In Understanding the Other: Intercultural 
Exchange and CMC, Lara Lomicka describes a telecollaborative intercultural project between students in 
France and the United States and notes pitfalls to avoid in intercultural CMC. Lomicka concludes that 
intercultural CMC is worth the effort as students engaged in such activity are not only using their target 
language for communication, but they are also using higher order thinking skills such as analysis and 
synthesis to negotiate and communicate their knowledge of culture. Chapter 10, Gaining Perspective on 
Culture through CALL, written by Sebastian Dubreil, does not provide new CALL applications as much 
as it cements the idea presented in the previous two chapters: to gain competence in a foreign language, 
students must learn the target language’s culture as well. Dubreil reviews the role of cultural instruction in 
foreign language teaching and claims that CALL activities make culture instruction easier for both 
students and instructors since CALL activities make the gathering, analysis, reflection, and synthesis of 
information easier and promote higher order thinking involved in culture learning.   
Chapter 11, Expanding CALL Beyond General Language Classes: The Case of Courses in Language for 
Specific Purposes, by Nike Arnold, provides a summary of CALL in language for specific purposes 
(LSP) classes, with emphasis on practical outcomes and non-traditional delivery of instruction of LSP 
courses being the wave of the future. Students at all levels of instruction now come to school with high 
expectations about how technology should be used for instruction. A blackboard and rows of chairs 
facing a lectern is not what they expect. Today’s college students assume their professors will use Smart 
Boards and present PowerPoint lectures rather than write on chalkboards (Young, 2006). Other students 
expect they can take their courses online and avoid the constraints of time and space that classroom-based 
instruction places on them (Duderstradt, 1997). In addition, the growing need for continuing education in 
all fields has created an ocean of students who not only need access to evolving knowledge within their 
particular domain but who want to access it in concise and targeted ways that fuse with their schedules 
(Drucker, 2000a,b; Alejandro, 2001). LSP courses have, for a long time, focused on students’ needs and 
concise, time-constrained delivery, often in non-traditional settings.  In this regard, this chapter is a 
guidepost for all foreign language instructors who want to use CALL to teach in new ways that address 
modern students and their needs.  
Chapter 12, Computer-Based Testing: Prospects for Innovative Assessment by Nathan Carr provides a 
balanced look at computer-based testing (CBT), including computer adaptive testing (CAT) and web-
based testing (WBT). Carr also provides guidelines for evaluating CBT and practical advice regarding the 
implementation of a CBT system. He notes not only the advantages of CBT –  more attractive, engaging 
testing, more authentic test tasks, more easily scored tests, and better test efficiency –, but also that CBT 
has not really changed tests, simply computerized them. Carr claims that CBT does have the potential to 
change the nature of language testing because computers can readily handle large amounts of data and 
more quickly adapt to response than pencil and paper tests.  
Lara Ducate and Nike Arnold Review of Calling on CALL 
 
Language Learning & Technology 43 
In the final chapter, chapter 13, Evaluating CALL Software, Philip Hubbard presents a CALL software 
evaluation process that can be used by individual instructors or a department looking for a deliberate set 
of criteria to use when choosing software for language instruction. He points out that any software 
evaluation process is comprised of three stages: selection (evaluation), implementation, and assessment. 
Since most people are primarily concerned with evaluating an application before purchasing or adopting 
it, the majority of the chapter is devoted to showing in detail how a methodological framework can be 
used to evaluate CALL software.  
In sum, Calling on CALL is a valuable addition to any foreign language or second language instructor’s 
library, whether he/she already has an interest in CALL or not. The review of the last 50 years of 
language acquisition and development theory provided in the first part of the book is concise and 
informative. Seasoned instructors will be brought up-to-date on current theories, and new, or pre-service, 
instructors will benefit from highlights of how theory can be applied in instruction. The chapters on 
technology use are broadly informative rather than narrowly focused on the minutia of a particular 
technology. In addition, the book encourages instructors who have not yet used technology in their 
teaching to consider the reality of technology in modern life and provides them with approaches to 
technology use that are solidly grounded in current pedagogy, practice, and research. Ducate and Arnold 
have gathered a collection of contributors who have not only gone through the process of integrating 
technology into their courses, but who are able to explain the benefits, drawbacks, and potential uses for 
technology in instruction in consistently organized and accessible chapters 
One weakness of the book is that is does not provide an alternative view of CALL, such as a when-not-to-
use CALL chapter. Such a chapter would be useful in that some types of learning require face-to-face 
human interaction (Lant, 2002). A chapter that outlines what type of material is best learned in a 
traditional classroom and what types can be learned using CALL would be helpful for all instructors, 
especially pre-service teachers. A second weakness is that not enough practical, detailed advice for 
implementing CALL is given (such as how to set up and use blogs, RSS-feeds, or podcasts), but this is a 
minor fault as the book sets out to be more a report on the state of CALL in foreign language instruction 
than a how-to manual. Overall, as a reference to learning theories and how they are incorporated in 
CALL, or as a supply of CALL activities that one might pursue to integrate into one’s instruction, this 
book is a practical, comprehensible resource.  
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Laurie Miller is the Instructional Technology Coordinator and an instructor at George Mason University’s 
English Language Institute in Fairfax, Virginia. Her academic interests include technology in education, 
discourse analysis, and pronunciation. 
Email: llmiller@gmu.edu 
Web: http://mason.gmu.edu/~llmiller 
 
REFERENCES 
Alejandro, J. (2001). Understanding professionals’ reasons for participating in continuing professional 
education. Adult Learning, 12 (1), 15. 
Drucker, P.F. (2000a). The Long View: Technology triggers changes in training. Training & 
Development, 54(12), 27. 
Lara Ducate and Nike Arnold Review of Calling on CALL 
 
Language Learning & Technology 44 
Drucker, P.F.  (2000b). Putting more now into knowledge: Demand for continuing education. Forbes, 165 
(11), 84.  
Duderstadt, J.J. (1997). The future of the university in an age of knowledge. Journal of Asynchronous 
Learning Networks, 1(2), 78-88. 
Lant, K. (2002). Flesh and bone: Information literacy, teaching, and the connected classroom. Retrieved 
November 6, 2006, from 
http://eric.ed.gov/ERICDocs/data/ericdocs2/content_storage_01/0000000b/80/0d/e8/c0.pdf.  
Mayer, R. E. (2002). Multimedia learning. The Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 41, 85-139 
New London Group. (1996). A pedagogy of multiliteracies: Designing social futures. Harvard 
Educational Review, 66 (1). Retrieved November 6, 2006, from 
http://wwwstatic.kern.org/filer/blogWrite44ManilaWebsite/paul/articles/A_Pedagogy_of_Multiliteracies_
Designing_Social_Futures.htm.      
Stevens, V. (2005). Multiliteracties for collaborative learning environments. TESL-EJ, 9 (2). Retrieved 
November 6, 2006, from http://tesl-ej.org/ej34/int.html.  
Young, J.R. (2006). Better technology in high school raises students’ expectations. The Chronicle of 
Higher Education, 53(5), A31.  
 
