Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num3/editors/ 
October 2007, Volume 11, Number 3 
p. 1 
 
Copyright © 2007, ISSN 1094-3501 1 
 
 
 
FROM THE EDITORS  
We hope you have had a productive and rejuvenating summer. Our journal received 49 
submissions this summer! This kept us all very busy. We are delighted to present 
Volume 11, Number 3 of Language Learning & Technology, which is a special issue on 
"Technology and Learning to Read," guest edited by Marlise Horst. Together with our 
former Associate Editor, Batia Laufer, Marlise has done a superb job of assembling five 
articles that report on the latest research in how technology can be helpful for 
vocabulary acquisition during the reading process and how it can facilitate interactive 
reading tasks. 
In addition to the five articles, this issue contains our regular columns, "Emerging 
Technologies" and "On the Net." In the "Emerging Technologies" column, Bob 
Godwin-Jones provides an excellent discussion of the new technologies available for 
accessing and experiencing electronic texts, which go beyond simply providing static 
Web pages and invite readers to participate actively by commenting, collaborating, and 
critiquing what they read. In the "On the Net column," Jean LeLoup and Robert 
Ponterio introduce the LiTgloss project being developed at the University of Buffalo, 
which seeks to enable language learners to access literary works in their original form 
by providing contextual information and lexical annotations. 
The issue also includes two reviews, compiled and edited by Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas. 
Justin Olmanson reviews the eSpindle Vocabulary and Spelling Program Online, a 
tool for spelling practice and vocabulary learning for L1 and L2 English language 
learners, ages 7 to adult. Catherine Caws reviews the CD-ROM Le Chandail de 
Hockey (The Hockey Sweater), which contains an animated film and components 
allowing learners to interact with a well known piece of French Canadian literature and 
to learn more about the story and its cultural contexts. 
If you are not already a subscriber, please take a few minutes to fill out the form for a 
free subscription to LLT. 
We wish you all the best for the new academic year! 
 
Sincerely, 
Dorothy Chun and Irene Thompson, 
Editors 
 
 
