Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num1/editors/ 
February 2007, Volume 11, Number 1 
p. 1 
 
 
Copyright © 2007, ISSN 1094-3501 1 
 
 
FROM THE EDITORS  
Welcome to our special issue on Technology and Listening Comprehension, a theme 
that runs throughout the articles, commentary, and columns of this issue. 
Special thanks go to Phil Hubbard for serving as guest editor and for the expertise, time 
and attention he devoted to producing this special issue. We acknowledge his 
contribution to bringing invaluable new ideas and perspectives to the journal.  
As always, we wish to thank the National Foreign Language Resource Center of the 
University of Hawai‘i and the Center for Language Education And Research of 
Michigan State University for their continued financial support that allows Language 
Learning & Technology to remain free to our readers and free from advertisements.  
We thank our contributors who have provided us with the interesting, timely, and high-
quality content that makes Language Learning & Technology a leading publication in 
the field. 
We thank all our hard-working and dedicated reviewers who have taken the time to 
provide our authors with insightful and constructive comments. Their contribution 
makes it possible for Language Learning & Technology to bring high-quality research 
reports to our readers. We acknowledge our 2006 reviewers in this issue.  
We are grateful to our Editorial Board for their continued support and guidance. Our 
special thanks go to those members who have recently been rotated off after many years 
of service: J.D. Brown, Carol Chapelle, Robert Debski, Jennifer Leeman, and David 
Novick. We are also pleased to welcome new Board members, Sigrun Biesenbach-
Lucas, Michele Knobel, Marcus Kötter, Marie-Noelle Lamy, and John Norris.  
Please note the Call for Papers for an upcoming special issue on Technology and 
Learning Grammar to be guest edited by Trude Heift. 
We ask all readers who have not done so to fill out our online free subscription form. 
We thank all of you for your continued support and hope you will find our 2007 issues 
interesting and informative. As always, we welcome your comments and suggestions.  
Happy New Year to all!  
 
Sincerely, 
Irene Thompson and Dorothy Chun 
Editors 
 
 
 
