Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num3/linchen/ 
October 2007, Volume 11, Number 3 
pp. 83-106 
 
Copyright © 2007, ISSN 1094-3501 83 
READING AUTHENTIC EFL TEXT USING VISUALIZATION AND 
ADVANCE ORGANIZERS IN A MULTIMEDIA LEARNING 
ENVIRONMENT 
Huifen Lin 
Tsuiping Chen 
Applied English Department 
Kun Shan University, Taiwan 
The purpose of this experimental study was to compare the effects of different types of 
computer-generated visuals (static versus animated) and advance organizers (descriptive 
versus question) in enhancing comprehension and retention of a content-based lesson for 
learning English as a Foreign Language (EFL). Additionally, the study investigated the 
interactive effect of students’ existing reading proficiency level and the above-mentioned 
treatments on their reading comprehension achievement. Students from two EFL reading 
sections (N = 115) were tested on their reading proficiency and then randomly assigned to 
one of four computer-based instructional modules—static visual alone, animation alone, 
animation plus descriptive advance organizer, and animation plus question advance 
organizer. Once having interacted with their respective instructional materials, students 
then took four criterion tests immediately afterward and again four weeks later. The results 
showed that the animation group outperformed the static visual group in one of the four 
tests, and that animation embedded with a question advance organizer had a marginal 
effect among the four treatments in facilitating the acquisition of L2 reading 
comprehension both for the immediate and the delayed posttests.  
INTRODUCTION 
Instructional materials designed and developed using multimedia have provided exciting potential 
learning opportunities thanks to advancement in information technology, making their pedagogical effects 
on learning and teaching worth examining. L1 reading comprehension takes place when a previous 
acquired schema stored in the long-term memory is retrieved to assist the processing and understanding of 
new unfamiliar information (Anderson & Pearson, 1984). The process of transforming incoming 
information/knowledge elements into schemata requires considerable cognitive mental effort. Native 
language speakers typically encounter difficulties in reading when they have gaps in their content 
knowledge. However, the problems faced by L1 readers can also be applied to L2 readers. Insufficient 
background knowledge hinders top-down processing of the new information, and limited language 
competence of second/foreign language learners makes the decoding process even more difficult. For 
ESL/EFL learners with low prior knowledge of a subject matter, instructional strategies need to be 
integrated into the course material. Instructional materials developed using multimedia are believed to be 
able to facilitate learners’ information processing, and to enhance effective cognitive encoding due to the 
multiple representations that trigger both verbal and visual modes of processing in human beings. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Theoretical Framework 
Dual-coding theory (Paivio 1971, 1978, 1990, 1991) provides theoretical justifications for the use of 
visuals in the instructional presentations.  According to the dual-coding theory, human memory is 
composed of two independent but interconnected coding systems. The visual system primarily deals with 
visual codes, such as images, pictures, concrete objects, or events; the other system, the verbal system, 
Huifen Lin and Tsuiping Chen Reading Authentic Texts Using Visualization 
 
Language Learning & Technology 84 
deals with non-visual codes such as words, speech, language, or semantic codes. Generally, each of the 
systems functions independently but most information processing requires connections and reinforcement 
between the two systems (Lai, 2000). Generally speaking, visuals are more likely to be processed in both 
verbal and visual systems, and hence the probability that they are retained in working memory and 
retrieved later from long-term memory is higher than when the presentation contains verbal information 
alone (Kobayashi, 1986).  
Mayer (1994) developed a generative theory of multimedia learning to provide design principles of 
multimedia instructional materials. The basic tenet of the generative theory of multimedia learning is that 
learners actively construct knowledge and are involved in a meaningful learning process. A meaningful 
process occurs when learners consciously select information from presented stimuli, organize information 
into coherent representations, and then make efforts to integrate new information with other information. 
The step of integration of information from two individual systems, i.e. verbal and visual, is especially 
critical. For a successful integration process to occur, both verbal and its corresponding visual information 
must be held in the working memory simultaneously.  
Advance Organizers and Meaningful Learning 
An advance organizer is defined as an instructional unit that is introduced in advance of direct instruction. 
It is generally presented at a higher level of abstraction and is intended to connect learners’ prior 
knowledge to what they will learn (Ausubel, 1963). According to Ausubel, for meaningful learning to 
occur, learners must possess a meaningful learning set and the material must be meaningful to them. The 
learning set refers to an existing cognitive structure that contains components to which the learner can 
connect substantive and relevant features of new information and thus draw various relationships between 
existing knowledge and newly acquired information. Kloster and Winne (1989) suggest that advance 
organizers may promote learning because they "…supply a learner with a new cognitive structure so that 
the new information can be connected to it…" and that advance organizers "…cue students to assemble 
links between new information and more abstract, general, and inconclusive information that the students 
already know…" (p. 9). An advance organizer is designed to give learners a general overview of the new 
material before the actual confrontation, and it creates a cognitive connection between established 
knowledge and new material in terms of the relevant concepts, therefore enhanceing the "familiarity and 
learn-ability of new material…"(Ausubel, 1963, p. 82). 
Research findings have provided evidence of the superior effects of various types of advance organizers 
used to facilitate reading comprehension. Evans (2003) investigated the effects of graphic organizers, one 
type of advance organizers for Japanese readers on expository texts in English and found that student-
generated graphic organizers help accommodate different learner styles, lead to meaningful learning, and 
enhance reading comprehension. In their study looking into how the use of a dynamic visual advance 
organizer can facilitate reading comprehension of L2 learners, Chun and Plass (1996) indicated that a 
dynamic visual advance organizer is effective on the macro level of processing while reading.  
Herron, York, Cole, and Linden (1998) study compared the effect of declarative versus interrogative 
advance organizers in facilitating learners’ comprehension of a foreign language video. The results 
indicated that the students’ listening comprehension of the foreign language video was greatly improved 
when advance organizers were used prior to the viewing of the video than not, although there were no 
significant differences in tests between the two advance organizer experimental groups. Using fifth 
graders as subjects, Hanley, Herron, and Cole (1995) compared two visual advance organizers and 
pictures, plus the teacher’s narrative, in the comprehension and retention of a written French passage. The 
result suggested that the video advance organizer was superior in enhancing the comprehension of the 
foreign text. Herron (1994) conducted an experiment to investigate the effectiveness of using a verbal 
advance organizer that outlined major scenes from the video. The advance organizer written on the 
blackboard was presented orally by the teacher, outlining major scenes from the video which both the 
Huifen Lin and Tsuiping Chen Reading Authentic Texts Using Visualization 
 
Language Learning & Technology 85 
control and the advance organizer groups watched in its entirety. The results suggested that an advance 
organizer was "…a more natural strategy than, for example providing students with a list of fifteen key 
vocabulary words extracted from the video" (p. 196). 
Instructional Visualizations  
Recent advances in instructional technology have made it possible to design instructional material that 
incorporates varied visualizations. Diagrams and images, typically presented as still or static in both print 
and computer-based environments, can now be animated or programmed to be dynamic to vividly present 
abstract concepts or phenomena that are invisible to human eyes (Hegarty, 2004; Rieber, 1996). However, 
visualization has a long history in instructional material and previous research has shown that simply 
adopting a new technology does not necessarily improve learning (Hegarty, 2004). Generally speaking, 
animated (dynamic) visualization is more likely than static visuals to present effectively motions or 
movements imperceptible to the human eye or changes in shapes or motions of objects (Caraballo, 1985; 
Rieber, 1996; Wong, 1994).  
Despite the overwhelming excitement for animated visualization, research studies have not been able to 
conclude that it is any more effective than static visualization. Szabo and Poohkay (1996) reviewed 20 
studies that investigated animation in the CBI environment and found that half of the studies show a 
significant effect in favor of animation (Alesandrini & Rigney, 1981; Kaiser, Proffitt, & Anderson, 1985; 
Rieber, 1989; Rieber, Boyce & Assad, 1990) while the other half showed no significant differences 
(Caraballo, 1985; King, 1975; Moore, Nawrocki, & Simutis, 1979; Reed, 1985; Rieber & Hannafin, 
1988). Visuals, such as pictures/static images or video, have gained popularity in foreign/second language 
teaching for purposes of teaching reading comprehension. Rieber (1996), after conducting a review of 
static versus animated visualization studies, indicates that animation has been used "…with the intent to 
impress rather than to teach…." (p. 77). He strongly suggests animation be used only when its attributes 
are congruent to the learning task. He also cautioned that complex animation may be confusing for novice 
learners without prior knowledge in the content area, i.e., they may not know how to attend to critical 
information delivered by the animation (Rieber, 1996; Reed, 1985).  
Omaggio (1979) investigated the effect of various types of visuals as context in the reading 
comprehension of a French text. The results suggested that providing visual contexts effectively enhanced 
the recall of factual knowledge. Students also demonstrated better performance in reading comprehension 
than their counterparts who received only the text. To place foreign-text reading in a comprehensible 
context, ESL/EFL teachers also utilized supplemental material such as news programs, TV programs, or 
videotapes. Di Carlo (1994) suggested that visuals and specifically, videotexts such as TV commercials, 
movies, and dramas can enhance language acquisition by providing students various discourse contexts 
and reducing the anxiety typically experienced in second/foreign language learning.  
A relatively large body of similar research has also been conducted with native speakers on different 
types of learning in a multimedia learning environment. Since the present study draws heavily on Mayer's 
generative theory of multimedia learning, a brief review of similar research conducted by Mayer and his 
colleagues is provided here. Mayer, Hegarty, Mayer and Campbell (2005) investigated the effect of 
annotated illustrations versus narrated animation in multimedia instruction on students’ retention and 
transfer test performance. Students either received a static diagram with explanatory text or animation 
with narration explaining the process of how lightning, a toilet tank, ocean waves and a car’s braking 
system work. The results indicated that students receiving static diagrams with text scored significantly 
higher than those receiving animation with narration on four of the eight tests. The study supported the 
idea that static illustration effectively reduce extraneous cognitive load possibly induced by animation and 
narration, and on the other hand promotes germane processing.  
In another study by Mautone and Mayer (2001), students received a short science lesson on how airplanes 
lift. Four lessons were prepared for the research. One lesson employed signals including a preview 
Huifen Lin and Tsuiping Chen Reading Authentic Texts Using Visualization 
 
Language Learning & Technology 86 
summary, section headings, and pointer words. The other three lessons included explanations presented as 
printed text, spoken text, and spoken text with corresponding animation, respectively. Results suggested 
that students receiving the lesson with signals performed significantly better in the problem-solving task 
than those who did not. Research on animation has looked into the effect of animated instruction with 
various types of strategies. Mayer and Moreno (1998) investigated the relative effectiveness of concurrent 
narration versus on-screen text when they were used to accompany computer-generated animation. 
Results indicated that learners identified factual knowledge better when explanations were presented via 
concurrent narration than by on-screen text. Learners also generated more solutions to problems when 
animated instruction was accompanied with spoken narration than with on-screen text. To sum up, 
previous studies on visualization have documented the related effectiveness of various types of 
visualizations and strategies used to accompanying them either with native or non-native speakers of 
English in different types of learning material and outcomes. However, the authors believe that few 
studies have compared the learning effects of static and animated visuals, as well as strategies embedded 
to foster learning from animation in a foreign language context. The only study that we can identify was 
Xiao and Jones’ (1995) study. When investigating potential ways to integrate animation in Computer-
Based Instruction (CBI) programs into a language learning environment, Xiao and Jones have suggested 
that animation be used to teach phonetics, action verbs, and cultural elements. 
STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM 
Built on cognitive psychology theories underpinning the use of multimedia to facilitate L2 learners’ 
reading comprehension, this study first examined the effect of cognitive strategies on language learners’ 
comprehension of authentic reading material. The strategies included a combination of advance 
organizers (questions versus descriptive statements) and visualizations (static versus dynamic). Since 
learners’ reading comprehension level might also affect the strategies that they will employ in the reading 
process, this study also investigated the relationship of the reading proficiency level and the proposed 
cognitive strategies on L2 learners’ reading comprehension.  
Specifically this study addressed the following research questions:  
1) What are the relative effects of different cognitive strategies combining advance organizers and 
visualizations on ESL/EFL learners’ reading comprehension of a multimedia-based authentic text?  
2) Can cognitive strategies, visuals embedded with advance organizers in a multimedia-based authentic 
text, compensate for low reading ability? 
METHODOLOGY 
The Participants 
The participants of the study were 115 sophomores (20 males and 95 females) drawn from two sections of 
an intermediate EFL reading course at a private technical/vocational university in Taiwan. The students 
were English majors for practical purposes with an age range of 19-24 (M =20.0; SD=1.25). At the time 
of the study, students had been learning English for approximately seven years since English is a required 
course from the seventh grade up in Taiwan. Participants in this study have not had the experience of 
studying or living in any English-speaking countries.  
Computer-Based Instructional Material  
The material used in the current study is a paper-based reading material developed by Dwyer and 
Lamberski (1977) that describes the parts of the human heart, the circulation of blood flow, and blood 
pressure. This text contains both general physiology knowledge that English native speakers typically 
learn in their high school as well as more complex concepts likely learnt in a college freshman biology 
class. The lesson consisted of 1,821 words split into 20 pages covering a range of learning tasks in 
Huifen Lin and Tsuiping Chen Reading Authentic Texts Using Visualization 
 
Language Learning & Technology 87 
increasing complexity. Each page is accompanied by a contextual visual of a simple line drawing. The 
material was further developed into a computer-based instructional format with static or animated visuals 
and advance organizers.  
To be consistent across all treatments, all instructional web pages were split into five sections with the 
title of each page on top and an image of the heart on the right to illustrate the corresponding text in the 
middle. Supplementary review links were placed on the left-hand side of the screen. At the bottom was a 
navigation bar that allowed students to go back or move forward.   
Treatments 
Four computer-based modules were developed respectively for the study. All modules contained identical 
instructional content. The description of each treatment material is described in the following.  
1. Static Visuals Alone (SV) 
Students in this group received the instructional material described above accompanied by 20 contextual 
static visuals. The visuals contained simple line drawings of the part of the human heart. See Figure 1 for 
a sample screenshot of this treatment.  
 
Figure 1. Screen shot of a page containing a static visual 
2. Animated Visuals Alone (AN) 
Students in this group received an instructional module that contained animated visuals on selected web 
pages according to a pilot study, which was conducted to determine the parts of the instruction material 
with which students had difficulties and where animation could be positioned to resolve these difficulties. 
Students in this group were asked to look at the heart image at the right and read the pertaining text in the 
middle. Students were encouraged to interact with the animated visuals and associate them with the text. 
The animation used in the study is of three major types: zoom in/out, motions, and focusing. The purpose 
of the animated visuals is to illustrate concepts and rules/procedures related to the instructional material 
that are hard to demonstrate using such static visuals. Students were allowed to review the animated 
Huifen Lin and Tsuiping Chen Reading Authentic Texts Using Visualization 
 
Language Learning & Technology 88 
visuals as many times as they wanted by clicking on the animation button. A sample screenshot of the 
animated instruction is presented in Figure 2.  
 
Figure 2. Screen shot of a page containing an animated visual 
3. Animated Visuals + Descriptive Advance Organizer (A+D) 
Participants in this group received treatment that contained animated instructional material that was 
exactly the same as those received by the Animation group (AN). However, descriptive advance 
organizers were placed prior to each frame. Each descriptive advance organizer consisted of a short 
statement and a supplemental static visual. The purpose of the embedded descriptive advance organizer 
was to cue learners to crucial concepts that they needed to pay particular attention to in the to-be-
encountered material. For a sample screenshot of a frame that contains a descriptive advance organizer, 
see Figure 3.  
4. Animated Visuals+ Question Advance Organizer (A+Q) 
Participants in this treatment received the same animated instructional material as the (AN) group. 
However, students in this group received advance organizers in the form of questions prior to each frame. 
The question advance organizer consisted of a question and a static visual, which was exactly the same as 
that received by the (A+D) group. This type of advance organizer asked a question concerning the main 
concepts in the upcoming material, followed by possible answer choices. Feedback as to the right answer 
of the question was provided in a pop-up window eight seconds after the appearance of the question. The 
purpose of the question advance organizer was to activate students’ prior knowledge and to encourage 
elaborate processing of the upcoming material. For a sample screenshot of the frame that contained a 
question advance organizer, see Figure 4.  
 
Huifen Lin and Tsuiping Chen Reading Authentic Texts Using Visualization 
 
Language Learning & Technology 89 
 
Figure 3. Screen shot of a page containing a descriptive advance organizer 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Screen shot of a page containing a question advance organizer 
Huifen Lin and Tsuiping Chen Reading Authentic Texts Using Visualization 
 
Language Learning & Technology 90 
Criterion Measures 
Four criterion measures were used to assess students’ understanding and retention of the content-based 
lesson. These four criterion tests measured different levels of reading comprehension of the instructional 
material, i.e., simple factual/declarative knowledge, concepts, rules/procedures, and comprehension. Each 
criterion test is composed of 20 items with each item worth one point. The maximum score for each test is 
20. Except for the drawing test, the terminology, identification, and comprehension tests consisted of 20 
multiple choice questions each. As for the drawing test, students were asked to draw a diagram of the 
human heart on a piece of paper provided. All the tests, except for the drawing test, were converted to an 
online format so that after students received their respective treatments, they could immediately take the 
tests. A detailed description of the criterion measures are provided below. Refer to the Appendix for the 
complete test questions.  
Drawing Test: (Cronbach’s alpha =0.83) 
The purpose of the drawing test was to measure students’ overall understanding of the content-based 
lesson, as well as their ability to reproduce the parts of the heart in their appropriate context. Each student 
was provided with a blank piece of paper on which 20 parts of the heart were to be drawn and then 
identified. Students’ drawing ability was not an important factor in the scoring since correct positioning 
of the 20 parts of the heart was the criterion of assessment. The scorers were two doctoral students with a 
major in instructional systems. The scorers were trained and given instruction on scoring procedures. The 
inter-rater reliability of the drawing test for this study was 0.90. 
Identification Test: (Cronbach’s alpha =0.81) 
The purpose of the identification test was to assess students’ ability to identify parts of the human heart. 
In this test, a diagram of the human heart with 20 numbered arrows was provided to students, who had to 
then choose the corresponding letter for a numbered arrow from four possible answer choices.  
Terminology Test: (Cronbach’s alpha =0.83) 
Students were assessed about their knowledge of specific terms of the human heart and their association 
with various functions of the human heart. For example, students were assessed whether or not they knew 
that "superior and inferior vena cavas" is the term for the parts of the human heart through which blood 
from the body enters the heart.   
Comprehension Test: (Cronbach’s alpha =0.77) 
This test consisted of more difficult comprehension questions that required students’ understanding of 
facts, rules/procedures, and simple concepts pertaining to this content-based lesson. Specifically, the test 
covered questions that asked about the function of the human heart in both the diastolic and systolic 
phases. In particular, given a description of how a part of the human heart was functioning, students 
needed to be able to understand a simultaneous functioning of another part(s) of the human heart. Position 
or status of relative parts while specific parts of the human heart are operating needed to be fully 
comprehended by the students for them to score high on the test.  
Total Score: (Cronbach’s alpha =0.92) 
Scores from above four tests were added up and a grand total was attained; the total score was used to 
examine students’ overall understanding of the instructional material.  
Procedure 
The procedures were divided into two stages. In the first stage, the instructor provided students with 
readings in which the content was relevant to the material used in the study. The readings were simplified 
in terms of the level of difficulty in vocabulary and content. The purpose was to provide students with 
Huifen Lin and Tsuiping Chen Reading Authentic Texts Using Visualization 
 
Language Learning & Technology 91 
general background knowledge related to the human heart before they were exposed to the experimental 
material originally developed for English native speakers at the college level. The use of material at a 
reduced difficulty prior to the experiment was also intended to decrease the level of frustration for 
students because, generally speaking, students in this EFL context do not possess advanced physiology 
knowledge unless they are majors in this discipline. A glossary listing important professional words with 
their Chinese translation was provided to students, and they were encouraged to remember the list to 
facilitate the understanding of the pre-experimental material.  
The second stage of the experiment was conducted in a multimedia language lab during normally 
scheduled class hours. Prior to receiving respective treatment, students were tested on their English 
reading comprehension via taking a sub-test on TOEFL in their intact reading class. Upon completion of 
the reading test, students were seated in a multimedia language lab in which each treatment was installed 
and the introduction page was displayed. Students, randomly assigned to each treatment, then received the 
respective treatment material and completed the four criterion measures. Students took the same criterion 
measures again four weeks later after the experiment. During the four-week period, students had no 
access to the treatment material or the answers to the tests nor were they informed beforehand that the 
same tests would be given the second time four weeks later. 
RESULTS 
Reading Comprehension Test 
The reading comprehension test was a subtest of an institutional TOEFL and consisted of 37 multiple 
choice questions assessing students’ understanding of five reading passages in different lengths. The 
maximum score for the reading test is 37. Table 1 summarizes the means and standard deviations of the 
reading comprehension test scores achieved by the four treatment groups.  
Table 1. Means and Standard Deviations of Reading Comprehension Test Score 
 (SV) (AN) (A+D) (A+Q) 
Mean 20.10 19.07 20.31 20.00 
SD 1.34 1.22 1.87 1.67 
Minimum 11 11 14 10 
Maximum 29 30 28 37 
Participants were further divided into low and high Reading Proficiency Levels (RPL) based on the mean 
reading score of the sample (M =19.87, SD=1.39). As a result, 65 students were classified into low RPL 
and 50 students into high RPL. The distribution of participants in each treatment in terms of reading 
proficiency level is summarized in Table 2.  
Table 2. Number (n) of Subjects Based on RPL for Each Treatment Group 
Level (SV) (AN) (A+D) (A+Q) TOTAL 
LOW 13 18 16 18 65 
HIGH 16 11 13 10 50 
TOTAL 29 29 29 28 115 
Main Effect of Treatments 
A two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted on the four immediate criterion tests. The 
results suggested that there was no interaction between the treatment group and the level of reading 
comprehension on each of the criterion tests. However, the main effects of the treatments were observed 
in each of the criterion tests. Table 3 summarizes the means and standard deviations of each immediate 
criterion test among the groups for the main effect of treatments on these groups. As indicated, the (A+Q) 
Huifen Lin and Tsuiping Chen Reading Authentic Texts Using Visualization 
 
Language Learning & Technology 92 
group outperformed the other three groups in all of the tests. The (SV) group scored the lowest in all 
except the terminology tests. For treatments in which the advance organizers were embedded, the 
question advance organizer seemed to be more effective than the descriptive advance organizer in 
facilitating the students’ performance on the tests.  
Table 3. Main Effects of Treatment on Each Immediate Criterion Test 
Tests (SV)(n=29) (AN)(n=29) (A+D)(n=29) (A+Q)(n=28) F value 
Drawing 14.67 (1.80) 16.03 (.44) 17.09 (.62) 18.15 (1.69) 6.501*** 
Identification 17.16 (1.15) 18.63 (.32) 18.34 (.03) 19.13 (.82) 4.592** 
Terminology 10.31 (.79) 10.98 (.12) 10.14 (.95) 13.02 (1.92) 3.481* 
Comprehension 8.00 (1.37) 8.98 (.40) 9.57 (.19) 11.00 (1.63) 4.612** 
Total 50.14 (5.11) 54.61 (.64) 55.14 (.11) 61.31 (6.06) 6.686*** 
Note: Value in parenthesis indicated standard deviation. * p<.05. **p<.01. *** p<.001. 
Tukey post-hoc tests were used to investigate the differences found in a significant main effect for 
treatment. The significance level and the mean difference of treatment groups are shown in Table 4.  
Table 4. Tukey HSD Post-hoc Tests of Treatment Effect on Each Immediate Test 
Tests Pair-wise Comparisons 
(A)       (B) 
Mean Difference 
(B-A) 
P value 
Drawing  (SV)  
 
(A+D) 
(A+Q) 
2.31 
3.28 
.028* 
.001** 
Identification (SV)  (A+Q)     1.83 .006** 
Terminology (A+D)  (A+Q) 2.68 .039* 
Comprehension (SV)  (A+Q)  2.72 .007* 
Total (SV)  
(AN)  
(A+Q) 
(A+Q) 
10.13 
6.58 
.001** 
.045* 
* p<.05. **p<.01. *** p<.001. 
Another two-way analysis of variance was conducted on the four delayed criterion posttests. Again, no 
interaction between the treatment group and RPL was observed on all of the criterion posttests. However, 
the main effects of the treatments were observed in three of the criterion tests and the total score as shown 
in Table 5.   
Table 5. Main Effects of Treatment on Each Delayed Criterion Posttest 
Tests (SV) (n=29) (AN)( n=29) (A+D)(n=29) (A+Q)(n=28) F value 
Drawing 7.20 (3.17) 8.65 (1.72) 12.18 (1.80) 13.57 (3.20) 12.039*** 
Identification 11.75 (2.43) 13.91 (.27) 14.14 (.04) 17.02 (2.84) 8.36*** 
Terminology 7.30 (.90) 8.04 (.16) 7.87 (.32) 9.61 (1.42) 2.331 
Comprehension 6.41 (1.17) 7.76 (.17) 7.51 (.07) 8.69 (1.11) 2.882* 
Total 32.68 (7.75) 38.76 (1.67) 41.71 (1.27) 48.88 (8.44) 8.565*** 
Note: Value in parenthesis indicated standard deviation. * p<.05. **p<.01. *** p<.001. 
Tukey post hoc tests were used to investigate the differences found in a significant main effect for 
treatment and the results were shown in Table 6.  
 
 
Table 6. Tukey HSD Post-hoc Tests of Treatment Effect on Each Delayed Posttest 
Huifen Lin and Tsuiping Chen Reading Authentic Texts Using Visualization 
 
Language Learning & Technology 93 
Tests Pair-wise Comparisons 
(A)           (B) 
Mean Difference 
(B-A) 
P value 
Drawing  (SV)  
 
(AN) 
 
(A+D) 
(A+Q)     
(A+D) 
(A+Q) 
4.79 
6.01 
3.66 
4.88 
.001** 
.000*** 
.015* 
.001** 
Identification (SV)  
(AN)  
(A+Q)     
(A+Q) 
4.86 
3.06 
.000** 
.022* 
Comprehension (SV) (A+Q) 2.16 .030* 
Total (SV)  
 
(AN) 
(A+D) 
(A+Q) 
(A+Q) 
8.38 
14.98 
9.98 
.049* 
.000*** 
.013* 
 p<.05. **p<.01. *** p<.001. 
Table 7 provides a summary of the main effects of treatment on both immediate and delayed posttests. As 
indicated, the (A+Q) group performed significantly better than the (SV) group in three of the tests and the 
total score but not in the terminology test, both for the immediate and delayed tests. One major interest of 
the study was to determine the relative effectiveness of question and descriptive advance organizers. 
Table 7 shows that the (A+Q) group only significantly outperformed (A+D) in the immediate terminology 
test. Regarding the effect of animation compared to static visuals alone, to our disappointment, (AN) did 
not perform significantly better in any of the tests than the (SV) group, consistently for immediate and 
delayed tests. However, the provision of advance organizers of either type to accompany animation did 
have a marginal effect compared to not having provided it at all, as students in (A+D) and (A+Q) groups 
both scored higher in delayed drawing test than students in the (AN) group. Students in the (A+Q) group 
also scored higher in the delayed identification test than the (AN) group. Descriptive types of advance 
organizers only showed a marginal effect compared to static visuals alone as the (A+D) group 
outperformed the (SV) group only on the immediate and delayed drawing tests and scored higher in total 
score in the delayed test.  
Table 7. Summary of Treatment Effect on Immediate/Delayed Criterion Posttests 
Criterion tests Immediate Delayed 
Drawing (AQ)>(SV), (AD)>(SV) (AQ)>(SV),(AD)>(SV),(AD)>(AN),(AQ)>(AN) 
Identification (AQ)>(SV) (AQ)>(SV),(AQ)>(AN) 
Terminology (AQ)>(AD)  
Comprehension (AQ)>(SV) (AQ)>(SV) 
Total (AQ)>(SV),(AQ)>(AN) (AQ)>(SV), (AD)>(SV),(AQ)>(AN) 
Main effects of RPL 
The main effects of the reading proficiency level were observed in two of the immediate criterion tests, 
i.e., terminology and comprehension tests, and the total test score. As indicated in Table 8, high RPL 
students significantly outperformed low RPL students in terminology and comprehension tests. High RPL 
students also have a significantly higher total score. 
The main effect of RPL was observed in three of the delayed criterion tests, drawing, identification, and 
terminology tests, and the total score. As indicated in Table 9, high RPL students outperformed low RPL 
students at a statistically significant level in all but the comprehension test; in addition, high RPL students 
also had a significantly higher total score.   
 
Table 8. Main Effects of Reading Proficiency Level on Each Immediate Criterion Test 
Huifen Lin and Tsuiping Chen Reading Authentic Texts Using Visualization 
 
Language Learning & Technology 94 
RPL Low High F value P value 
Drawing 16.00 (.47) 17.08 (.61) 4.233 .072 
Identification 18.00 (.31) 18.70 (.40) 4.121 .075 
Terminology 10.18 (.91) 12.28 (1.19) 8.642 .004** 
Comprehension 8.75 (.63) 10.19 (.82) 5.996 .016* 
Total 52.93 (2.31) 58.25 (3.01) 8.868 .004** 
Note: Value in parenthesis indicates standard deviation; *p<.05; ** p<.01 
Table 9. Main Effect of Reading Proficiency Level on Each Delayed Criterion Test 
RPL Low High F value P value 
Drawing 9.58 (.79) 11.40 (1.30) 4.411 .038* 
Identification 13.26 (.92) 15.38 (1.20) 7.918 .006** 
Terminology 7.37 (.82) 9.26 (1.07) 8.406 .005** 
Comprehension 7.33 (.25) 7.91 (.33) 1.116 .293 
Total 37.72 (2.72) 43.97 (3.53) 7.285 .008** 
Note: Value in parenthesis indicates standard deviation;* p<.05; ** p<.01 
DISCUSSION 
The main purpose of the present study was to examine the effectiveness of different cognitive strategies 
employing a combination of visuals and advance organizers in facilitating EFL/ESL learners’ reading 
comprehension of authentic material. The underlying theoretical assumption was that comprehension may 
be facilitated by inclusion of varied types of visuals that assist in the selection, organization, and 
integration of information, and that advance organizers provide a cognitive structure that enables existing 
schemas to be connected and integrated with new ones. The present study also examined the role that 
learners’ reading proficiency may play in learning from authentic material presented in a multimedia 
learning environment and its interactive effect with the proposed cognitive strategies on students’ 
learning. A discussion of findings pertaining to each research question is described in the following.  
Research Question 1. What are the relative effects of different cognitive strategies combing advance 
organizers and visualizations on ESL/EFL learners’ reading comprehension of a multimedia-based 
authentic text? 
The results of this study regarding the treatment effect can be summarized as (1) Animation embedded 
with a question advance organizer (A+Q) is more effective than static visuals alone (SV). Students 
assigned to (A+Q) performed better on all immediate and delayed criterion subtests as well as a higher 
total score than those assigned to the (SV) group except the immediate terminology test for which (SV) is 
superior to (A+D). (2) Animated visuals were found to be equally effective as static visuals. This study did 
not support the use of animation in facilitating reading comprehension of authentic material. Students 
receiving (AN) treatment did not perform significantly better in any of the criterion posttests than those 
who received (SV) treatment, indicating that animation alone did not have an effect in assisting with the 
understanding of the material as expected. This finding was valuable. While advances in technology have 
made dynamic presentations of visuals easy and possible, the cost associated with the development of 
animation must be evaluated against its effectiveness. (3) A question advance organizer is only 
marginally more effective than a descriptive advance organizer. Students assigned to (A+Q) 
outperformed those in (A+D) only in immediate terminology test, indicating the qualitative features of 
learning that these two types of advance organizer can induce may be of little difference and therefore 
failed in resulting in significant improvement of comprehension. (4) Provision of advance organizers of 
either type to accompany animation did have a marginal effect compared to not providing them at all. 
The results indicated that students in (A+D) and (A+Q) groups both scored higher on the delayed drawing 
Huifen Lin and Tsuiping Chen Reading Authentic Texts Using Visualization 
 
Language Learning & Technology 95 
test than students in the (AN) group. Students in (A+Q) group also scored higher on the delayed the 
identification test than the (AN) group.  
In sum, this study found no superior effect of animation in assisting with the comprehension of authentic 
reading material. Static visuals/pictures are equally effective in assisting learners’ comprehension of the 
material. Nevertheless, the most important finding of this study was that, with the addition of a question 
advance organizer, animation was a more effective cognitive strategy to enhance reading comprehension 
of authentic material. The finding suggests that animation alone is no better than static pictures; however, 
when complementing the animation with a question advance organizer, or in the case of the delayed 
drawing test a descriptive advance organizer, its effect was noticeable. Students receiving animation plus 
question advance organizer significantly outperformed the static visual alone (SV) group in all of the 
immediate criterion posttests (except terminology test) and all three delayed criterion posttests. It was 
plausible that the question advance organizer embedded in the animation assisted students in focusing on 
critical information represented by the animation. Previous researchers indicated that learners, when 
presented with the animated instruction, were not able to "…effectively attend to the animation" or were 
"…distracted by the combination of visual and verbal information presented to them" (Rieber, 1990, p. 
81). Owens & Dwyer (2005) also found that learners failed to focus on critical aspects of the animation 
that depicted important concepts. They were not able to effectively interact with the animation and fully 
benefit from it. Wilson and Dwyer (2001) suggested in their study that learners be given sufficient and 
appropriate prompts that help them focus on essential and critical aspects of the information.  
The present study echoes previous studies in that certain pedagogical strategies needed to be used to 
complement animation for students to benefit from its robust representation. Different types of questions 
or questioning strategies can be used to engage learners in deeper cognitive information processing and 
therefore enhance their learning. The effects of questions or questioning strategies lie in the fact that the 
"… explicitness of the questions and … relationship to instruction…focus [the] learner process on 
question-specific information" (Osman & Hannafin, 1994, p. 5).  
Research Question 2. Can cognitive strategies, i.e. visuals with advance organizers embedded in a 
multimedia-based authentic text compensate for low reading ability? 
One purpose of this study was to investigate the relationship between ESL/EFL learners’ reading 
comprehension level and different cognitive strategies used to enhance their reading comprehension of 
authentic material. Specifically, the researchers wished to explore whether the employment of the 
cognitive strategies would close the gap in comprehension between the two groups. The researchers 
hypothesized that the students’ reading comprehension level would have an effect on how they make use 
of the cognitive strategies and consequently affect reading comprehension of the authentic material.  The 
results did not support the above mentioned hypothesis. Students with different levels of reading 
comprehension did not score differently depending on the cognitive strategies employed in the authentic 
material. Students with a higher RPL, regardless of what cognitive strategy they received, scored 
consistently higher in criterion tests than those with a lower RPL, except on the drawing and 
identification immediate posttests and on the delayed comprehension posttest. As mentioned earlier, the 
finding that higher RPL students scored higher in the more difficult and complex immediate criterion 
posttest than their lower RPL counterparts is not surprising. However, it is interesting that lower RPL 
students performed equally well as those with a higher RPL on a lower level of immediate reading 
comprehension questions. However, the study also found that there were no significant differences on the 
delayed comprehension posttest between the two groups. Kloster & Winne (1989) in their study 
investigating the effects of different types of organizers on students’ learning from text indicated that 
advance organizers "….influence qualitative features of learning…" (p. 9). Studies also showed that 
advance organizers are more effective in facilitating retention of conceptual knowledge rather than factual 
details and may actually impede the recall of specific details (Mayer, 1980; Mayer & Bromage, 1980).  
Huifen Lin and Tsuiping Chen Reading Authentic Texts Using Visualization 
 
Language Learning & Technology 96 
Inconsistent findings also existed regarding the effect of advance organizers for lower and higher ability 
learners. Mayer’s studies (1979, 1980) found positive effects of advance organizers for inexperienced 
learners while Derry (1984) found that high-ability learners benefit from advance organizers. Kloster & 
Winne (1989) actually indicated in their study that how students relate the new information in a text to an 
advance organizer determines the effectiveness of an advance organizer. Students’ achievement improves 
if they were able to link the information in the text to the advance organizers. Their study suggested that 
previous studies that found no effect of advance organizers might be due to learners’ "… ineffective use 
of the advance organizers rather than to characteristics of the organizers themselves" (p.14). The current 
research has failed to provide evidence that dynamic visuals and advance organizers can be used to 
scaffold students with lower RPL in comprehending more complex authentic material although these 
strategies might be effective on their achievement in the basic reading measures or on a long-term 
comprehension measure. 
CONCLUSION 
The major findings of the study can be summarized as follows. First, dynamic visualization used to 
complement verbal information contained in the authentic material was no more effective than static 
visuals. Rieber (1996) proposed that animation could be used to provide the illusion of movement 
(motion) and the path of travel (trajectory). Consequently, the learning tasks or content should depend on 
the understanding of the changes of an object over time or the direction towards which the object is 
moving. Greater learning gains would be expected if the learning task involved the understanding of 
concepts that concern motion and trajectory and if the animated visuals are integrated to enhance learning. 
The instructional material in this study was selected deliberately to provide justification for the use of 
animated visuals. However, students assigned to the (AN) group did not significantly outperform those 
not receiving animation.  
Research so far conducted to compare the effects of static and dynamic/animated visualization on 
students’ learning has been mixed and mostly discouraging. In spite of the overwhelming excitement 
about animated visualization, research studies have not been able to conclude that it is any more effective 
than static visualization. The present study reinforces previous research findings and provides evidence 
that static visuals and dynamic visuals as represented via animation are equally effective in facilitating 
reading comprehension in an ESL/EFL context.  
Secondly, for animation to be effective, a question advance organizer may be used to prepare learners’ 
cognitive structure for new and unfamiliar schema. It is generally agreed that learners have in their 
possession various degrees of meta-cognitive resources that enable them to engage in the lesson content 
with varying degrees of depth (Osman & Hannafin, 1994). Research has indicated that questions help to 
activate prior knowledge and integrate it with new knowledge and the application of that knowledge 
(Adams & Bruce, 1980; Anderson & Biddle, 1975; Anderson & Pearson, 1984; Mayer, 1984; Osman & 
Hannafin, 1994). This study further reinforces the instructional effect of using questions as an advance 
organizer in facilitating students’ learning.  
Third, when the purpose is to complement animation, the question advance organizer is only marginally 
more effective than the descriptive advance organizer. This finding was based on the evidence that the 
(A+Q) group only outperformed the (A+D) group in one of the criterion posttests, i.e., the terminology 
test. It is plausible that the level/depth of information processing induced by both kinds of advance 
organizers is approximately similar. In this study, the question advance organizer is used as a cue to 
activate students’ existing schema; however, since no overt responses were required of students to the 
questions, students may be rendered as passive learners as were those who received a descriptive advance 
organizer. Both types of advance organizers cued learners to important information but were not 
significantly different with regard to increasing the depth of information that they called upon.  
Huifen Lin and Tsuiping Chen Reading Authentic Texts Using Visualization 
 
Language Learning & Technology 97 
LIMITATIONS OF THE STUDY 
There has been very little empirical research on the instructional value of various kinds of visualization 
with accompanying strategies in enhancing the understanding of subject matter knowledge in an 
ESL/EFL context. We recommend further research duplicating our treatments with different learning 
materials, participants, and perhaps in different learning environments. The conclusions we have drawn 
are limited by the background of the participants, nature of the learning tasks, and assessment tools.  
The experimental lessons consisted of a general physiology lesson related to the human heart 
accompanied by simple static visuals, animations, and animations plus different advance organizers. It is 
possible that due to the nature of the learning tasks, the amount of time that is required for the students to 
complete the treatment lessons were not comparable. In other words, as one of the reviewers has 
enquired, time-on-task might have been an issue in this study. Students assigned to the more interactive 
lesson, i.e. animation plus question advance organizer had more exposure to the materials as compared to 
the less interactive lesson, i.e. static visuals only condition. Therefore, the authors were cautious in 
making the conclusion that the obtained results were due to the advance organizers and visualizations 
used but not due to the differences in the amount of time spent by students in learning the lesson. It was 
arguable that the time-on-task might have been a confounding variable that would interrelate with the 
major treatment effect to affect learning achievement. However, some media require more time to 
deliver/present instructional material by their nature. Smyth (1985) pointed out that student-engaged 
learning time was a "necessary" but not sufficient mediating process in classroom research on learning. 
He argued that while allocated time was useful in interpreting learning results, it was the amount of time 
during which a student was actively engaged with the subject matter that was most crucial and that 
directly contributed to learning. Rothkopf (1970) also emphasized that "… in most instructional 
situations, what is learned depends largely on the activities of the student…." (p. 325). Anderson (1970) 
also noted that "… the activities that the student engages in when confronted with instructional tasks are 
of crucial importance in determining what he will learn…." (p. 349).   
Whether the additional amount of time needed to learn the designated material would warrant additional 
learning gains is open to question, not to mention the cost required to develop enriched learning materials 
such as the animated visuals used in this study. The authors suggest that more research is needed to 
explore the relationship between effectiveness and efficiency in a technology-enhanced learning 
environment.    
 
Huifen Lin and Tsuiping Chen Reading Authentic Texts Using Visualization 
 
Language Learning & Technology 98 
APPENDIX 
DRAWING TEST 
Directions: Draw a simple line picture of a heart and place the corresponding number of the 20 identified 
parts, where they would be located on the heart.   
1. Superior Vena Cava  
2. Aorta  
3. Tricuspid Valve  
4. Pulmonary Veins  
5. Septum  
6. Epicardium  
7. Aortic Valve  
8. Pulmonary valve  
9. Inferior Vena Cava  
10. Pulmonary Artery  
 
IDENTIFICATION TEST 
Directions: Circle the answer on the answer sheet  you feel best identifies the part of the heart indicated 
by the numbered arrows.  
 
 
21. Arrow number one (1) points to the  
A.Septum 
B. Aorta 
C. Pulmonary Artery 
D. Pulmonary Vein 
E. None of These  
22. Arrow number two (2) points to the  
A.Superior Vena Cava 
B.Inferior Vena Cava 
C.Pulmonary Artery 
D.Tricuspid Valve 
E.Aorta 
11.  Myocardium  
12.  Endocardium  
13.  Mitral Valve  
14.  Right auricle  
15.  Right ventricle  
16.  Left auricle  
17.  Left ventricle  
18.  Apex  
19.  Tendons  
20.  Pericardium 
Huifen Lin and Tsuiping Chen Reading Authentic Texts Using Visualization 
 
Language Learning & Technology 99 
23. Arrow number three (3) points to the  
A.Right Ventricle 
B.Right Auricle 
C.Left Ventricle 
D.Left Auricle 
E.Heart Muscle 
24. Arrow number four (4) points to the  
A.Pulmonary Valve 
B.Pulmonary Vein 
C.Aortic Valve 
D.Tricuspid Valve 
E.Mitral Valve 
25. Arrow number five (5) points to the  
A.Aorta 
B.Pulmonary Artery 
C.Superior Vena Cava 
D.Inferior Vena Cava 
E.Pulmonary Vein 
26. Arrow number six (6) points to the 
A.Aortic Valve 
B.Pulmonary Valve 
C.Mitral Valve 
D.Tricuspid Valve 
E.Semi-Lunar Valve 
27. Arrow number seven (7) points to the  
A.Left Ventricle 
B.Right Ventricle 
C.Right Auricle 
D.Left Auricle 
E.Vascular Space 
28. Arrow number eight (8) points to the  
A.Myocardium 
B.Ectoderm 
C.Pericardium 
D.Endocardium 
E.Epicardium 
 
29. Arrow number nine (9) points to the 
A.Endocardium 
B.Myocardium 
C.Pericardium 
D.Ectoderm 
E.Septum 
30. Arrow number ten (10) points to the  
A.Endocardium 
B.Pericardium 
C.Septum 
D.Myocardium 
E.Aortic Base 
31. Arrow number eleven (11) points to the  
A.Epicardium 
B.Pericardium 
C.Endocardium 
D.Myocardium 
E.None of These 
32. Arrow number twelve (12) points to the  
A.Pericardium 
B.Myocardium 
C.Endocardium 
D.Endoderm 
E.Apex 
33. Arrow number thirteen (13) points to the  
A.Pericardium 
B.Endocardium 
C.Ectocardium 
D.Endoderm 
E.Myocardium 
34. Arrow number fourteen (14) points to the  
A.Right Ventricle 
B.Left Ventricle 
C.Left Auricle 
D.Right Auricle 
E.Apex  
 
35. Arrow number fifteen (15) points to the 
A.Pulmonary Veins 
B.Tendons 
C.Aortas 
D.Pericardium 
E.None of These 
36. Arrow number sixteen (16) points to the  
A.Venic Valve 
B.Pulmonary Valve 
C.Tricuspid Valve 
D.Mitral Valve 
E.Aortic Valve 
Huifen Lin and Tsuiping Chen Reading Authentic Texts Using Visualization 
 
Language Learning & Technology 100 
37. Arrow number seventeen (17) points to the  
A.Superior Vena Cava 
B.Tricuspid Valve 
C.Aortic Valve 
D.Pulmonary Valve 
E.Mitral Valve 
38. Arrow number eighteen (18) points to the  
A.Right Auricle 
B.Right Ventricle 
C.Left Auricle 
D.Left Ventricle 
E.Semi-lunar Chamber 
39. Arrow number nineteen (19) points to the  
A.Inferior Vena Cava 
B.Superior Vena Cava 
C.Aortas 
D.Pulmonary Veins 
E. Pulmonary Arteries 
40. Arrow number twenty (20) points to the 
A.Inferior Vena Cava 
B.Aorta 
C.Pulmonary Artery 
D.Septum 
E.Superior Vena Cava 
TERMINOLOGY TEST 
Directions: Circle the answer on the answer sheet you feel best completes the sentence. 
41. _____ is(are) the thickest walled chamber(s) 
of the heart. 
A.Auricles 
B.Myocardium 
C.Ventricles 
D.Pericardium 
E.Endocardium 
42. The contraction of the heart occurs during the 
______ phase. 
A.Systolic 
B.Sympathetic 
C.Diastolic 
D.Parasympathetic 
E.Sympatric 
43. Lowest blood pressure in the arteries occurs 
during the _____ phase. 
A.Sympatric 
B.Sympathetic 
C.Diastolic 
D.Systolic 
E.Parasympathetic 
44. Blood from the right ventricle goes to the 
lungs through the _____. 
A.Tricuspid Valve 
B.Aortic Artery 
C.Pulmonary Artery 
D.Pulmonary Veins 
E.Superior Vena Cava 
45. The ______ is(are) the strongest section(s) of 
the heart. 
A.Left Ventricle 
B.Aorta 
C.Septum 
D.Right Ventricle 
E.Tendons 
46. When blood returns to the heart from the 
lungs, it enters the _____. 
A.Left Auricle 
B.Pulmonary Valve 
C.Left Ventricle 
D.Right Ventricle 
E.Pulmonary Artery 
47. Vessels that allow the blood to flow from the 
heart are called the _____. 
A.Veins 
B.Arteries 
C.Apex 
D.Tendons 
E.Valves 
48. Blood passes from the left ventricle out the 
aortic valve to the ______. 
A.Lungs 
B.Body 
C.Aorta 
D.Pulmonary Artery 
E.Left Auricle 
Huifen Lin and Tsuiping Chen Reading Authentic Texts Using Visualization 
 
Language Learning & Technology 101 
49. The chamber of the heart which pumps 
oxygenated blood to all parts of the body is the 
_____. 
A.Right Auricle 
B.Left Auricle 
C.Aorta 
D.Left Ventricle 
E.Right Ventricle 
50. The _____ is another name for the part of the 
heart called the heart muscle. 
A.Apex 
B.Epicardium 
C.Endocardium 
D.Myocardium 
E.Septum 
51. ______ is(are) the part(s) of the heart which 
controls its contraction and relaxation. 
A.Myocardium 
B.Endocardium 
C.Ventricles 
D.Auricles 
E.Septum 
52. The _____ is the name given to the inside 
lining of the heart wall. 
A.Epicardium 
B.Endocardium 
C.Pericardium 
D.Myocardium 
E.Septum 
53. Blood from the body enters the heart through 
the ______. 
A.Aortic Artery 
B.Pulmonary Veins 
C.Pulmonary Artery 
D.Superior and Inferior Vena Cavas 
E.Superior Vena Cava Only,  
 
54. The membrane which borders on the inside 
lining of the pericardium and is connected to the 
heart muscle is called the _______. 
A.Extoxim 
B.Epicardium 
C.Endocardium 
D.Myocardium 
E.Ectocardium 
55. The _______ allow(s) blood to travel in one 
direction only. 
A.Septum 
B.Valves 
C.Arteries 
D.Veins 
E.Tendons 
56. The _______ is the common opening between 
the right auricle and the right ventricle. 
A.Mitral Valve 
B.Tricuspid Valve 
C.Septic Valve 
D.Pulmonary Valve 
E.Aortic Valve 
57. The _______ is the triangular flapped valve 
between the left auricle and the left ventricle. 
A.Aortic Valve 
B.Pulmonary Valve 
C.Septic Valve 
D.Tricuspid Valve 
E.Mitral Valve 
58. The semi-lunar valves are located at the 
entrance to the ______. 
A.Pulmonary Veins 
B.Superior and Inferior Vena cavas 
C.Pulmonary and Aortic Arteries 
D.Mitral and Tricuspid Valves 
E.ventricles 
59. The outside covering of the heart is called the 
______. 
A.Endocardium 
B.Epicardium 
C.Pericardium 
D.Myocardium 
E.None of These 
60. Immediately before entering the aorta, blood 
must pass through the ______. 
A.Left Ventricle 
B.Mitral Valve 
C.Lungs 
D.Superior Vena Cava 
E.Aortic Valve
 
 
Huifen Lin and Tsuiping Chen Reading Authentic Texts Using Visualization 
 
Language Learning & Technology 102 
COMPREHENSION TEST 
Directions: Circle the answer on the answer sheet  you feel best answers the question.
61. Which valve is most like the tricuspid in function?  
A.Pulmonary 
B.Aortic 
C.Mitral 
D.Superior Vena Cava 
62. When blood is being forced out the right ventricle, 
in which position is the tricuspid valve?  
A.Beginning to open 
B.Beginning to close 
C.Open 
D.Closed 
63. When the blood is being forced out the aorta, it is 
also being forced out of the. 
A.Pulmonary Veins 
B.Pulmonary Arteries 
C.Superior Vena Cava 
D.Cardiac Artery 
64. The contraction impulse in the heart starts in  
A.The Right Auricle 
B.Both ventricles simultaneously 
C.Both Auricles Simultaneously 
D.The Arteries 
65. In the diastolic phase the ventricles are 
A.Contracting, full of blood  
B.Contracting, partially full of blood 
C.Relaxing, full of blood 
D.Relaxing, partially full of blood 
66. During the first contraction of the systolic phase, in 
what position will the mitral valve be?  
A.Begging to open 
B.Open 
C.Beginning to close 
D.Closed 
67. During the second contraction of the systolic phase, 
blood is being forced away from the heart through the  
A.Pulmonary and Aortic Arteries 
B.Superior and Inferior Vena Cavas 
C.Tricuspid and Mitral Valves 
D.Pulmonary Veins 
 
68. When blood is entering through the vena cavas, it is 
also entering through the  
A.Mitral Valve 
B.Pulmonary Veins 
C.Pulmonary Artery 
D.Aorta 
69. When the heart contracts, the  
A.Auricles & Ventricles contract simultaneously 
B.Ventricles contract first, then the auricles 
C.Right side contracts first, then the left side 
D.Auricles contract first, then the ventricles 
70. While blood from the body is entering the superior 
vena cava, blood from the body is also entering through 
the  
A.Pulmonary Veins 
B.Aorta 
C.Inferior Vena Cava 
D.Pulmonary Artery 
71. When the blood leaves the heart through the 
pulmonary artery, it is also simultaneously leaving the 
heart through the  
A.Tricuspid Valve 
B.Pulmonary veins 
C.Aorta 
D.Pulmonary Valve 
72. When the pressure in the right ventricle is superior 
to that in the pulmonary artery, in what position is the 
tricuspid valve?  
A.Closed 
B.Open 
C.Beginning to Close 
D.Confined by pressure from the right auricle 
73. When the ventricles contract, blood is forced out the 
A.Superior and Inferior Vena Cavas  
B.Pulmonary veins 
C.Tricuspid and Mitral Valves 
D.Pulmonary and Aortic Valves 
74. Blood leaving the heart through the aorta had left the 
heart previously through the  
A.Vena cavas 
B.Pulmonary veins 
C.Pulmonary artery 
D.Tricuspid and Mitral Valves 
Huifen Lin and Tsuiping Chen Reading Authentic Texts Using Visualization 
 
Language Learning & Technology 103 
 
75. When the blood in the aorta is exerting a superior 
pressure on the aortic valve, what is the position of the 
mitral valve?  
A.Closed 
B.Open 
C.Beginning to open 
D.Confined by pressure from the right ventricle 
76. When the tricuspid and mitral valves are forced shut, 
in what position is the pulmonary valve?  
A.Closed 
B.Beginning to open 
C.Open 
D.Beginning to close 
77. During the second contraction of the systolic phase, 
in what position is the aortic valve?  
A.Fully open 
B.Partially open 
C.Partially closed 
D.Fully closed 
78. Blood is being forced out the auricles 
simultaneously as blood is  
A.Entering only the vena cavas 
B.Being forced out the pulmonary and aortic valves 
C.Passing through the tricuspid & mitral valves 
D.Being forced out through the pulmonary artery 
79. If the aortic valve is completely open, the  
A.Second contraction of the systolic phase is occurring 
B.Diastolic phase is occurring 
C.Tricuspid & mitral valves are completely open 
D.Blood is rushing into the right & left ventricles 
80. When the heart relaxes, the  
A.Auricles relax first, then the ventricles 
B.Right side relaxes first, then the left side 
C.Left side relaxes first, then the right side 
D.Ventricles relax first, then the auricle
 
 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Huifen Lin is an associate professor in the Applied English Department, Kun Shan University, Taiwan. 
She got her Ph.D. in Instructional Systems from The Pennsylvania State University in 2006. Her research 
has been focused on the effect of visualizations and enhancement strategies on EFL learners’ 
achievement.  
Email: hf5612@mail.ksu.edu.tw 
 
Tsuiping Chen is a Ph.D. student in the English Department in National Kaohsiung Normal University. 
Her research has been focused on EFL/ESL pragmatics and concordances. 
Email: tsuiping0925@gmail.com 
 
REFERENCES 
Adams, M., & Bruce, B. (1980). Background knowledge and reading comprehension (Version Tech. Rep. 
No.13). Urbana-Champaign, IL: University of Illinois, Center for the Study of Reading. 
Alesandrini, K. L., & Rigney, J. (1981). Pictorial presentation and review strategies in science learning. 
Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 18, 465-474. 
Anderson, R. C. (1970). Control of student mediating processes during verbal learning and instruction. 
Review of Educational Research, 40, 349-370. 
Anderson, R. C., & Biddle, W. B. (1975). On asking people questions about what they are reading. In G. 
Bower (Ed.), Psychology of learning and motivation, Vol. 9 (pp. 89-132). New York: Academic Press. 
Huifen Lin and Tsuiping Chen Reading Authentic Texts Using Visualization 
 
Language Learning & Technology 104 
Anderson, R. C., & Pearson, P. D. (1984). A schema-theoretic view of basic processes in reading 
comprehension. In P. D. Pearson (Ed.), Handbook of reading research (pp. 255-291). New York: 
Longman. 
Ausubel, D. P. (1963). The psychology of meaningful verbal learning: An introduction to school learning. 
New York: Grune & Stratton. 
Caraballo, A. (1985). An experimental study to investigate the effects of computer animation on the 
understanding and retention of selected levels of learning outcomes. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, 
The Pennsylvania State University, State College, PA.  
Chun, D., & Plass, J. (1996). Effects of multimedia annotations on vocabulary acquisition. The Modern 
Language Journal, 80(2), 183-198. 
Derry, S. J. (1984). Effects of an organizer on memory for prose. Journal of Educational Psychology, 75, 
98-107.  
Di Carlo, A. (1994). Comprehensible input through the practical application of video-texts in second 
language acquisition. Italica, 71(4), 465-483. 
Dwyer, F. M., & Lamberski, R. (1977). The human heart: Parts of the heart, circulation of blood and 
cycle of blood pressure. State College, PA: Learning Services. 
Evans, S. (2003). Graphic organizers for Japanese readers of expository texts. English. Language 
Research Bulletin, 18, 1-17. 
Hanley, J. E. B., Herron, C., & Cole, S. P. (1995). Using video as an advance organizer to a written 
passage in the ELES classroom. The Modern Language Journal, 79 (1), 57-66.  
Hegarty, M. (2004). Dynamic visualizations and learning: Getting to difficult questions. Learning and 
Instruction, 14, 343-351. 
Herron, C. (1994). An investigation of the effectiveness of using an advance organizer to introduce video 
in the foreign language classroom. The Modern Language Journal, 78(2), 190-198. 
Herron, C., York, H., Cole, S.P., & Linden, P. (1998). A comparison study of student retention of foreign 
language video: Declarative versus interrogative advance organizer. The Modern Language Journal, 
82(2), 237-247.  
Kaiser, M. K., Proffitt, D. R., & Anderson, K. (1985). Judgments of natural and anomalous trajectories in 
the presence and absence of motion. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and 
Cognition, 11, 795-803. 
King, W. A. (1975). A comparison of three combinations of text and graphics for concept learning. San 
Diego, CA: Navy Personnel Research and Development Center. 
Kloster, A. M., & Winne, P. H. (1989). Effects of different types of organizers on students’ learning from 
text. Journal of Educational Psychology, 81(1), 9-15.  
Kobayashi, S. (1986). Theoretical issues concerning superiority of pictures over words and sentences in 
memory. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 63, 783-792. 
Lai, S. L. (2000). Influence of audio-visual presentations on learning abstract concepts. International 
Journal of Instructional Media, 27(2), 199-206. 
Mautone, P. D., & Mayer, R. E. (2001). Signaling as a cognitive guide in multimedia learning. Journal of 
Educational Psychology, 93(2), 377-389.  
Huifen Lin and Tsuiping Chen Reading Authentic Texts Using Visualization 
 
Language Learning & Technology 105 
Mayer, R. E. (1979). Twenty years of research on advance organizers: Assimilation theory is still the best 
predictor of results. Instructional Science, 8, 133-167.  
Mayer, R. E. (1980). Elaboration techniques that increase the meaningfulness of technical text: An 
experimental test of the learning strategy hypothesis. Journal of Educational Psychology, 72, 770-784.  
Mayer, R. E. (1984). Aids to prose comprehension. Educational Psychologist, 19, 30-42. 
Mayer, R. E. (1994). Visual aids to knowledge construction: Building mental representations from 
pictures and words. In W. Schnotz & R. W. Kulhavy (Eds.), Comprehension of graphics (pp. 125-138). 
Amsterdam: North-Holland. 
Mayer, R. E., & Bromage, B. K. (1980). Different recall protocols for technical texts due to advance 
organizers. Journal of Educational Psychology, 72, 209-225.  
Mayer, R. E., & Moreno, R. (1998). A split-attention effect in multimedia learning: Evidence for dual 
processing systems in working memory. Journal of Educational Psychology, 90(2), 312-320.  
Mayer, R. E., Hegarty, M., Mayer, S., & Campbell, J. (2005). When static media promote active learning: 
Annotated illustrations versus narrated animations in multimedia instruction. Journal of Experimental 
psychology, 11(4), 256-265.  
Moore, M., Naworcki, L., & Simutis, Z. (1979). The instructional effectiveness of three levels of graphics 
displays for computer-assisted instruction. Arlington, VA: Army Research Institute for the Behavior and 
Social Sciences. 
Omaggio, A.C. (1979). Pictures and second language comprehension: Do they help? Foreign Language 
Annals, 12, 107-116. 
Osman, M. E., & Hannafin, M. J. (1994). Effects of advance questioning and prior knowledge on science 
learning. Journal of Education Research, 88(1), 5-13. 
Owens, R., & Dwyer, F. M. (2005). The effect of varied cueing strategies on complementing animated 
visual imagery in facilitating achievement of different educational objectives. International Journal of 
Instructional Media, 32(4), 373-384. 
Paivio, A. (1971). Imagery and verbal processes. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston. 
Paivio, A. (1978). A dual coding approach to perception and cognition. In J. Pick, H. L. Pick, & E. 
Saltzman (Eds.), Modes of perceiving and processing information (pp. 39-51). NJ: Hillsdale, Erlbaum. 
Paivio, A. (1990). Mental representations: A dual coding approach. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Paivio, A. (1991). Dual coding theory: Retrospect and current status. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 
45, 255-287. 
Reed, S. K. (1985). Effects of computer graphics on improving estimates to algebra word problems. 
Journal of Educational Psychology, 77(3), 285-298. 
Rieber, L. P., & Hannafin, M. J. (1988). The effects of textual and animated orienting activities and 
practice on learning from computer-based instruction. Computers in the Schools, 5, 77-89. 
Rieber, L. P. (1989). The effects of computer animated elaboration strategies and practice on factual and 
application learning in an elementary science lesson. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 5(4), 
431-444. 
Rieber, L. P. (1990). Animation in computer-based instruction. Educational Technology, Research and 
Development, 38(1), 77-86.  
Huifen Lin and Tsuiping Chen Reading Authentic Texts Using Visualization 
 
Language Learning & Technology 106 
Rieber,L. P. (1996). Animation as feedback in a computer-based simulation: Representation matters. 
Educational Technology, Research and Development, 44(1), 5-22.  
Rieber, L. P., Boyce, M. J., & Assad, C. (1990). The effects of computer animation on adult learning and 
retrieval tasks. Journal of Computer-based Instruction, 17(2), 46-52. 
Rothkopf, E. Z. (1970). The concept of mathemagenic activities. Review of Educational Research, 40(3), 
325-336. 
Smyth, W. J. (1985). A context for the study of time and instruction, In C.W. Fisher & D. C. Berliner 
(Eds.), Perspectives on instructional time (pp. 3-27). New York: Longman, Inc. 
Szabo, M., & Poohkay, B. (1996). An experimental study of animation, mathematics achievement, and 
attitude toward computer-assisted instruction. Journal of Research on Computing in Education, 28(3), 
390-402. 
Wilson, F., & Dwyer, F. M. (2001). Effect of time and level of visual enhancements in facilitating student 
achievement of different educational objectives. International Journal of Instructional Media, 28(2), 159-
167. 
Wong, A. Y. K. (1994). The use of animation in computer-assisted instruction. Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation, Carleton University. 
Xiao, X., & Jones, M. G. (1995). Computer animation for EFL learning environments. Paper presented at 
the annual conference of the International Visual Literacy Association, Chicago, IL. 
 
 
