Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num3/call.html 
October 2007, Volume 11, Number 3 
p. 156 
 
Copyright © 2007, ISSN 1094-3501 156 
 
Call for Papers for Special Issue of LLT 
 
Theme: Technology and Learning Pronunciation 
 
Guest Editor: Debra M. Hardison 
 
Technological advances have provided a range of tools to assist learners in the development of 
pronunciation skills in a variety of target languages. These tools include commercially available computer 
systems, web-based systems, and various software programs ranging from those requiring some 
specialized knowledge to ones suitable for the non-specialist. Research to date has suggested that 
computer-based visual displays of some areas of speech production such as pitch are user-friendly and 
valuable sources of feedback in the learning process. Increasingly, more individuals are able to avail 
themselves of computer-based tools to practice the sounds of a new language that may not exist in their 
immediate environment. As these technological innovations have appeared, questions have arisen as to 
their efficacy in promoting pronunciation skill development, and the ability to transfer this skill to the 
discourse level of speech in the natural language environment. The latter concern follows the recent 
developments in the broader field of language learning toward recognition of the need for learners to 
understand and utilize language in its naturally occurring contexts. This special issue of Language 
Learning & Technology seeks to provide a variety of perspectives on technology-supported pronunciation 
learning at the segmental, suprasegmental, and discourse levels in a variety of contexts. 
 
Possible submissions include but are not limited to studies of the following: 
 
• suprasegmental and/or segmental aspects of speech including rhythm and intonation, specific 
segmental challenges, measures of accent, etc. 
• effectiveness of various technological tools in the improvement of L2 pronunciation such as 
commercially available products, automatic speech recognition systems, web-based tools, or other 
software options 
• contribution of voice chat to improvement in pronunciation 
• relationship between speech production and perception 
• pronunciation learning in the larger discourse context 
• technology-assisted pronunciation instruction for specific populations, e.g., international teaching 
assistants 
• effective ways of integrating technology in various types of curricula 
• learner-technology interface, i.e., ease of use, quality of feedback, etc. 
• transfer of skills from focused computer-based activities to natural language use. 
 
 
Please send an email of intent with a 250-word abstract by December 31, 2007, to llt-editors@hawaii.edu  
 
