 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  18 
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS 
Sponsors 
University of Hawai`i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR) 
Co-Sponsor 
Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL) 
 
University of Hawai'i National Foreign Language Resource 
Center (NFLRC)  
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials 
development projects and conducts Summer Institutes for language professionals among its many 
activities. 
2ND INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON TASK-BASED LANGUAGE TEACHING 
The NFLRC is pleased to be a co-sponsor and on the organizing committee of the 2nd International 
Conference on Task-based Language Teaching to be held on September 20-22, 2007 in Honolulu, 
Hawai‘i. The theme of the 2007 conference is "TBLT: Putting Principles to Work." Plenary speakers will 
include Kris Van Den Branden (Katholieke Universiteit Lueven), Peter Robinson (Aoyama Gakuin 
University), Peter Skehan (Chinese University of Hong Kong), and Virginia Samuda (Lancaster 
University). We look forward to bringing together both researchers and educators from around the world 
to learn from one another’s innovations in task-based language teaching.  For more information, visit the 
TBLT 2007 website. 
NEW NFLRC PUBLICATIONS 
NFLRC ADDS A THIRD ONLINE JOURNAL 
Language Documentation & Conservation (LD&C) publishes its inaugural issue in June 2007. LD&C 
becomes the only journal, electronic or otherwise, exclusively dedicated to serving the needs of linguists 
and language activists engaged in the essential work of documenting the world's languages. While no 
reliable data exist concerning the level of such documentation, a plausible estimate is that fewer than 10% 
are well-documented, meaning that they have comprehensive grammars, extensive dictionaries, and 
abundant texts in a variety of genres and media. The remaining 90% are, to varying degrees, 
underdocumented, or, for all intents and purposes, undocumented. Moreover, the languages of the world 
are now faced with an extinction crisis, the magnitude of which may well prove to be very large. 
Consequently, there is an evident and urgent need to document the many under/undocumented languages 
of the world, and, where appropriate, to assist in their preservation.  
Check out this new journal and our many other publications. 
OUR ONLINE JOURNALS SOLICIT SUBMISSIONS 
Language Learning & Technology is a refereed online journal, jointly sponsored by the University of 
Hawai`i NFLRC and the Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research 
(CLEAR). LLT focuses on issues related to technology and language education. For more information on 
submission guidelines, visit the LLT submissions page. 
Language Documentation & Conservation is a fully refereed, open-access journal sponsored by NFLRC 
and published exclusively in electronic form by the University of Hawai‘i Press. LD&C publishes papers 
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  19 
on all topics related to language documentation and conservation. For more information on submission 
guidelines, visit the LD&C submissions page. 
Reading in a Foreign Language is a refereed online journal, jointly sponsored by the University of 
Hawai`i NFLRC and the Department of Second Language Studies. RFL serves as an excellent source for 
the latest developments in the field, both theoretical and pedagogic, including improving standards for 
foreign language reading. For more information on submission guidelines, , visit the RFL submissions 
page. 
 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education 
and Research (CLEAR)  
CLEAR's mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States.  
Projects focus on materials development, professional development training, and foreign language 
research. 
SUMMER WORKSHOPS 
CLEAR is offering six opportunities for professional development this summer, on a wide variety of 
topics.  Each workshop is three full days, and there are discounts for those attending multiple workshops.   
• Conducting Action Research in the Foreign Language Classroom 
• Integrating Technology and Assessment for Language Learning & Teaching 
• Focus on Form in the Second Language Classroom 
• Keeping Teacher and Student Talk in the Target Language 
• Making the Most of Video in the Foreign Language Classroom 
• Language Teaching and Technology 
Full descriptions, dates, pricing information, and workshop applications are available here. 
MATERIALS DEVELOPMENT 
Selected Free Products  
• NEW!  CLEAR’s Rich Internet Applications initiative has been ongoing since August 2006.  RIA 
is a research and development lab where our programmers are working on free tools that 
language teachers can use to create online language teaching materials – or have their students 
create activities themselves! 
o NEW!  Mashups (combine media elements to create a new resource for language 
teaching) 
o NEW!  Viewpoint (record or upload videos to link from other sites or embed inside your 
own web pages) 
o NEW!  Conversations (record prompts for students to do virtual interviews and 
conversations) 
o SMILE (tool for creating interactive online exercises) 
• Now in Russian! MIMEA: Multimedia Interactive Modules for Education and Assessment 
(German, Chinese, Arabic, Vietnamese, Korean, Russian; online video clips and activities) 
• Business Chinese (CD-ROM) 
• Language Learning Materials for Russian: A Content-Based Course Pack (online learning 
modules) 
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  20 
• Hausa Online (virtual language resource page of multimedia language learning material for 
intermediate to advanced-level Hausa language learners) 
• Facilitating Connections to International Business: A Guide for Foreign Language Educators 
(guide) 
• African Language Small Group Instruction Guide (guide and video) 
• Thai Small Group Instruction Guide (guide) 
• Vietnamese Small Group Instruction Guide (guide) 
• Hindi Small Group Instruction Guide (guide)  
• Modules for Assessing Socio-Cultural Competence: German (CD-ROM) 
• Modules for Assessing Socio-Cultural Competence: Russian (CD-ROM) 
 
Coming Soon! • French Pronunciation and Phonetics (CD-ROM) 
• Introductory Business German (CD-ROM) 
 
CONFERENCES 
CLEAR exhibits at local and national conferences year-round. We hope to see you at ACTFL, CALICO, 
MiWLA, NCOLCTL, Central States, and other conferences. 
NEWSLETTER 
CLEAR News is a biyearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. Contact 
the CLEAR office to join the mailing list or check it out on the Web at http://clear.msu.edu/newsletter/. 
We welcome your submissions! 
 
The Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL)  
The Center for Applied Linguistics is a private, nonprofit organization that promotes and improves the 
teaching and learning of languages, identifies and solves problems related to language and culture, and 
serves as a resource for information about language and culture. CAL carries out a wide range of 
activities in the fields of English as a second language, foreign languages, cultural education, and 
linguistics.  
Featured Resources: 
• CREATE (Center for Research on the Educational Achievement and Teaching of English Language 
Learners) 
CREATE is conducting a program of research designed to address specific challenges in the 
education of English language learners in the middle grades (Grades 4-8). Working under a contract 
awarded to the University of Houston from the U.S. Department of Education, Institute of Education 
Sciences, CAL is involved in two broad areas of research: Project QuEST (Quality English and 
Science Teaching) and the study, Impact of the SIOP Model on Middle School Science and Language 
Learning. 
Coming Events 
Upcoming activities include Webcast seminars -- a series of online hour-long seminars hosted by 
CREATE investigators and other prominent researchers in the field -- and a conference scheduled 
for October 1-2, 2007 in Chicago. 
Join CREATE’s List 
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  21 
To keep current on CREATE activities sign up to receive an electronic newsletter and periodic 
announcements. To join, visit www.cal.org/create/join/ and fill out the online form. 
• Spotlight on Language Series 
In support of the Discover Languages campaign led by ACTFL, CAL has developed a regular Web 
series to provide information about specific languages. These language spotlights are introductory in 
nature and are intended to encourage readers to explore these languages and CAL’s work with them 
in more detail. Different languages will be highlighted periodically.  
• Project SAILL (Success through Academic Interventions in Language & Literacy) 
With funds from the U.S. Department of Education, via a subcontract from the University of 
Houston, CAL supports the development, implementation, and evaluation of research-based models 
for two major approaches to the education of English language learners—structured English 
immersion and transitional bilingual education—to determine the impact of the different program 
models on the performance of Spanish-speaking English language learners in Grades K–3. The work 
at CAL is part of a broader effort involving the University of Houston, the University of Texas at 
Austin, Harvard University, and the University of Miami. 
• CAL Services 
CAL provides a variety of professional development and technical assistance services related to 
language education and assessment needs.  
 
Recent Publications: 
• An Insider’s Guide to SIOP Coaching 
• Realizing the Vision of Two-Way Immersion: Fostering Effective Programs and Classrooms 
• What’s Different About Teaching Reading to Students Learning English?  
 
Visit CAL’s redesigned Web site to learn more about our projects, resources, and services. 
 
