Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num2/biesenbachlucas/ 
June 2007, Volume 11, Number 2 
pp. 59-81 
 
Copyright © 2007, ISSN 1094-3501 59 
STUDENTS WRITING EMAILS TO FACULTY: AN EXAMINATION OF 
E-POLITENESS AMONG NATIVE AND NON-NATIVE SPEAKERS OF 
ENGLISH 
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas 
Georgetown University 
This study combines interlanguage pragmatics and speech act research with computer-
mediated communication and examines how native and non-native speakers of English 
formulate low- and high-imposition requests to faculty. While some research claims that 
email, due to absence of non-verbal cues, encourages informal language, other research 
has claimed the opposite. However, email technology also allows writers to plan and 
revise messages before sending them, thus affording the opportunity to edit not only for 
grammar and mechanics, but also for pragmatic clarity and politeness.  
The study examines email requests sent by native and non-native English speaking 
graduate students to faculty at a major American university over a period of several 
semesters and applies Blum-Kulka, House, and Kasper’s (1989) speech act analysis 
framework – quantitatively to distinguish levels of directness, i.e. pragmatic clarity; and 
qualitatively to compare syntactic and lexical politeness devices, the request perspectives, 
and the specific linguistic request realization patterns preferred by native and non-native 
speakers. Results show that far more requests are realized through direct strategies as well 
as hints than conventionally indirect strategies typically found in comparative speech act 
studies. Politeness conventions in email, a text-only medium with little guidance in the 
academic institutional hierarchy, appear to be a work in progress, and native speakers 
demonstrate greater resources in creating e-polite messages to their professors than non-
native speakers. A possible avenue for pedagogical intervention with regard to instruction 
in and acquisition of politeness routines in hierarchically upward email communication is 
presented. 
INTRODUCTION 
As email is becoming an accepted means of communication between university students and their 
professors, reports of faculty disturbed by the frequency of their students’ email messages as well as the 
content and linguistic form of these messages abound. Complaints range from unreasonable requests in 
which students ask faculty to read drafts of students’ papers, copy notes for students who missed classes, 
or provide students with information that is already available on the class syllabus, to inappropriate 
salutations, abbreviations, spelling and grammar errors, and impolite tone (see Glater, 2006, and Inside 
Higher Ed, 2006, for discussions of such complaints, and Hartford & Bardovi-Harlig, 1996, for an early 
examination of the impressions left by student emails on faculty). Few such complaints have been raised 
about students abusing their professors’ phone lines or voice mail. Professors, as well as researchers, 
attribute this perceived inappropriate use of email by students in communications with them as stemming 
from "eras[ed] boundaries that traditionally kept students at a healthy distance" (Glater, 2006, para. 3), a 
generally laxer attitude among the younger generation toward stylistics (Baron, 2002), and an influence of 
modern technology (e.g., instant messaging) characteristics on other forms of writing (Baron, 1984; 
Halliday, 1990). Cameron (2003) speculates that communication in general is increasingly characterized 
by a "preference for directness over indirectness" (p. 29), and a "preference for a way of [interacting] that 
signals egalitarian social relationships" (p. 30). Another explanation is the absence of social context cues 
in computer-mediated communication (CMC), which "mask[s] … status differences between 
participants" (Baron, 1984, p. 130): students may be temporarily "unaware" of whom they are addressing, 
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas Students Writing Emails to Faculty 
 
Language Learning & Technology 60 
perhaps due to genuine naïveté, resulting in language that lacks status congruence (Herring, 2002; Sproull 
& Kiessler, 1986, 1991).  
However, it might also be the case that students are simply uncertain about email etiquette due to lack of 
experience and because typically it is not explicitly taught. Email writers’ ambivalence and uncertainty 
about how to encode communicative intent in this text-only medium tend to surface especially in 
hierarchical relationships, such as between students and faculty, and in situations involving impositions 
on the addressee. Appropriate models for emails from students to faculty are lacking (since students 
usually do not share their emails to their professors with one another), and feedback on the impression a 
student’s email leaves on its recipient is not usually provided explicitly (Chen, 2006; but see Brenner, 
2006, for how feedback is often given in the corporate world); thus, students may model their own 
messages after those they receive (Crystal, 2001), mostly from equals. As a result, crafting an appropriate 
and effective email message to an authority figure takes a lot of guesswork.  
Students’ uncertainty is further exacerbated as different professors have different reactions to student 
emails. Some are more accepting: "[C]ommunication just wants to be free" (Inside Higher Ed, 2006, para. 
32; Y. Li, 2000); some include specific guidelines in their syllabi regarding email etiquette, as the 
following example shows: 
[W]hen you send an e-mail message to me this term, I will expect you to have 'proofed' it 
(1) for spelling, (2) for grammatical accuracy, (3) for use of vocabulary, and (4) for 
composition. If your message does not pass my 'test' in all four respects, it will be returned 
to you with a message stating, 'This message is inappropriate for review. Please revise 
it…' (Inside Higher Ed, 2006, para. 27). 
That students, even non-native speakers of English, are nevertheless aware of stylistic differences 
required in email communication with authority figures as opposed to peers and act upon their awareness 
is supported by several researchers (Chen, 2006; Danet, 2001; Herring, 2002). In most student-faculty 
email interaction, students know the professor to whom they are writing, and "if users are not anonymous, 
differential status [as in that of students and faculty] may attach to [email messages], and communication 
will not necessarily be egalitarian and non-hierarchical" (Herring, 2002, p. 137, emphasis added). 
Similarly, Danet (2001) has observed that "the relative status of addressor and addressee [influences] 
linguistic choice: messages addressed upward tend to be more formal, more polite, and more conforming 
with conventional norms" (p. 65). Furthermore, the asynchronous nature of email might in fact promote 
appropriately polite messages because writers can take time to construct and revise messages in efforts to 
"employ visual anonymity strategically [and] to optimize their self-presentation" (Duthler, 2006, para. 
16). 
If students can, in principle, be expected to have the ability and means to write status-congruent email 
messages to faculty, one can also expect that such messages might be characterized by features that 
reflect greater formality, what might be termed e-politeness in the email medium. More specifically, 
students’ email requests of faculty might exhibit indirectness rather than directness, as well as lexical and 
syntactic strategies to mitigate requestive force. Some previous studies, however, have conflated various 
request types (e.g. Chen, 2006; Hartford & Bardovi-Harlig, 1996), thus ignoring the fact that different 
requests may imply different levels of imposition on the faculty member (Biesenbach-Lucas, 2006a). 
Issues of e-politeness might be more noticeable if the imposition on the faculty recipient is greater. As a 
result, the present study examines if request strategies in student-professor emails vary with increasing 
imposition of the request, and if such email requests are mitigated – and thus rendered more e-polite – 
through syntactic and lexical devices, as well as request perspective. A significant focus of the study is on 
how the request strategies of native speaker (NS) and non-native speaker (NNS) students differ. The 
following questions guided the research: 
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas Students Writing Emails to Faculty 
 
Language Learning & Technology 61 
• Do students’ emails to professors promote more direct or indirect request strategies? Does directness 
level vary with increasing imposition of request? And, is there evidence of politeness features that 
mitigate students’ email requests?  
• Do request strategies and politeness features of NSs’ and NNSs’ emails differ? 
• Is there a preferred linguistic realization by NSs and NNSs speakers for different request types? 
Answers to such questions can shed light on the growing body of research on (1) institutional email 
practice and the complex interplay between demands for politeness conventions and adaptation to an 
increasingly CMC-dominated interaction environment, and (2) interlanguage pragmatics and CMC, and 
the need for pedagogical intervention with regard to instruction on and acquisition of e-politeness.  
PREVIOUS RESEARCH 
Socialization into Email Writing Practices: Hitting a Moving Target 
As an asynchronous medium, email presents users in all interactional domains with questions as to what 
is acceptable to do via email (i.e., what speech acts are acceptable to perform in this medium). While just 
a few years ago it would have been a serious gaffe in etiquette to respond to a job announcement via 
email and to send one’s cover letter as the message and the résumé as an attachment, such practices have 
become customary. Similarly, in the academic domain, where most student-professor interaction occurs 
during office hours, in class, before and after class, and perhaps on the phone, email has become a viable 
alternative means of communication, providing the convenience of obtaining clarification, feedback, and 
permission almost instantly when students need it. Email consultation with faculty can be seen as a recent 
variation of gate-keeping encounters. Therefore, the question of which topics and communication 
purposes are appropriate to address with faculty, and in which way, is an essential one. 
Studies investigating the communication purposes for which students use email with their professors have 
found similar facilitative and academic functions: building a relationship, getting information/advice 
about course materials and quizzes, addressing late work and missed classes, challenging grades, showing 
interest in and understanding of course material, and "get[ting] on the instructor’s good side" (Martin, 
Myers, & Mottet, 1999, p. 160; Collins, 1998; Marbach-Ad & Sokolove, 2001; Payne, 1997; Poling, 
1994). A difference between NSs’ and NNSs’ email interaction with faculty is the presence of phatic 
communication in NNSs’ messages, not "intended to carry real information but … used to maintain … 
relationships" (Bloch, 2002, p. 124). Biesenbach-Lucas (2005) found that NNSs’ email messages often 
consisted of adding one phatic expression after another, which buried and "detract[ed] from the 
substantive part of the email message" (p. 37). Similarly, asking for help via email and thus coming 
across as a "needy [and] problem-plagued" student (Gee, 2002, p. 168) may be less acceptable in U.S. 
academic culture where individual effort and initiative are valued (Bardovi-Harlig & Hartford, 1990; 
Biesenbach-Lucas & Weasenforth, 2000).  
Communication styles and conventions are typically shared in speech communities and learned by new 
apprentices over a course of years. However, email, as a relatively recent development, is not yet 
governed by clear conventions and expectations. Typically, students must behave and use language in 
status-congruent, or status-appropriate, ways (Bardovi-Harlig & Hartford, 1990, 1993); that is, students 
must do the sorts of things students are expected to do and must use language that properly acknowledges 
their own lower institutional status and faculty’s higher institutional status. For example, issuing 
directives, setting expectations, or determining whether or not work is sufficient are not examples of 
status-congruent language functions for students (Boxer, 2002a). In face-to-face encounters, traditional 
power routines tend to be exercised (Drake, Yuthas, & Dillard, 2000), but such routines may manifest 
themselves in different ways in email communication to authority figures, especially when the bulk of 
students’ email experience to date has been among peers and equals.  
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas Students Writing Emails to Faculty 
 
Language Learning & Technology 62 
Email use in academia is still a language-using situation with less clearly defined constraints, despite the 
fact that many of today’s students have grown up with email and other CMC technology (Malley, 2006). 
Socialization into acceptable email interaction is subtle and without much guidance. Books on email 
netiquette (e.g., Flynn & Flynn, 1998; Hale & Scanlon, 1999) provide little help to students who are 
looking for advice on composing email messages to their professors, with whom they are in a hierarchical 
relationship. Unless students are exposed to recent books primarily targeting writing for English as a 
Second Language (ESL) that explicitly address email use in academia (e.g., Swales & Feak, 2000), or 
unless ESL teachers incorporate email composition into their syllabi, students are left to their own devices 
in trying to craft a message that is effective as well as status-congruent and polite. Guidelines on 
professors’ syllabi also more often reflect professors’ individual expectations and preferences rather than 
generally agreed-upon conventions for institutional email communication (Inside Higher Education, 
2006; The New York Times, 2006). As a result, crafting an email message that professors will consider 
appropriate, status-congruent, and polite is like aiming at "a moving target" (Baron, 1998, p. 142). Even 
though writers can "take time to compose and edit their messages [to be more] formal, and linguistically 
complex" (Herring, 2002, p. 115), students can never be quite certain what impression their message may 
leave, and are not able to follow uniform "standards of appropriateness set by those [with greater 
institutional power] in order to communicate successfully" (Chen, 2006, p. 36).  
Studies of the characteristics of email language in a variety of sender-recipient constellations (Baron, 
2002, 2003; Crystal, 2001; Herring, 1996, 2002) have, not surprisingly then, found evidence for a wide 
range of linguistic and stylistic features, and have repeatedly placed email on a continuum from looking 
more like speech (i.e., less formal) (Baron, 2003) to looking more like writing (i.e., more formal) (Davis 
& Brewer, 1997). The assumption is that either the absence of social context cues causes email writers to 
neglect social protocol and formalities (Sproull & Kiessler, 1986), or conversely it may lead to an 
increase in formality (Spears & Lea, 1992) and "more socially desirable levels of interaction … and the 
creation of polite speech" (Duthler, 2006, para. 16, 18). While there is a perception among university 
students that email in general is characterized by more casual language, truncated syntax, abbreviations, 
and symbols (in fact, my own students have always told me that email is "so much more casual"), 
evidence from actual email messages sent from students to faculty suggests that there is in fact a range of 
email realizations (Biesenbach-Lucas, 2006a, 2006b), but that students in general write more formal 
emails to professors (Biesenbach-Lucas, 2006b; Bou-Franch & Lorenzo-Dus, 2005; Chen, 2006). These 
observations also support Duthler’s (2006) findings of politeness evidence in (elicited) student-faculty 
email production. An important question then is how the email medium affects the language that (NS and 
NNS) students use in their interaction with professors, and particularly how students navigate the choppy 
waters of face-threatening acts in email, such as requests, to convey an appropriate sense of e-politeness 
with varying levels of impositions. Is pedagogical intervention necessary, and what form might it take? 
Research on Request Speech Acts in Email 
Linguistic competence alone is not sufficient for communicative competence. Speakers of a language 
must also master sociopragmatic and sociolinguistic norms to achieve communicative purposes 
appropriately. Speech act research has focused on differences between NSs and NNSs of English 
performing a variety of speech acts: requests (Blum-Kulka, 1991; Blum-Kulka & House, 1989), apologies 
(Cohen & Olshtain, 1993), complaints (Murphy & Neu, 1996), compliments and compliment responses 
(Billmeyer, 1990), and refusals (Beebe, Takahashi, & Uliss-Weltz, 1990). In the majority of request 
speech act studies, language data have been obtained primarily through elicitation in discourse completion 
tasks (DCTs), but have rarely been based on naturally-occurring requests (Beebe & Cummings, 1996; 
Bou-Franch & Lorenzo-Dus, 2005). In contrast, the available studies on email requests have been based 
on actual email messages and thus authentic speech act production. However, due to privacy and ethical 
concerns, these studies have tended to examine only a small number of messages sent to the researchers 
themselves (Biesenbach-Lucas, 2006a; Hartford & Bardovi-Harlig, 1996; Warschauer, 1999).  
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas Students Writing Emails to Faculty 
 
Language Learning & Technology 63 
Assessing the effect of email requests sent by NSs and NNSs to two faculty recipients, Hartford and 
Bardovi-Harlig (1996) found that NNSs’ requests differed from those of NSs in the use of mitigation (i.e., 
politeness features) as well as extra-linguistic aspects, such as emphasis on personal needs and 
unreasonable time frames rather than institutional demands. A similar inappropriate concern for student-
oriented reasons and personal details was observed by Chen (2006) in her case study of a Taiwanese 
graduate student’s email messages to her professors, and by Biesenbach-Lucas and Weasenforth (2001) in 
a study of the impressions students’ email messages left on faculty readers (although these faculty readers 
were not the intended recipients of the messages).  
While research on politeness has looked toward Brown and Levinson’s (1978, 1987) pioneering work on 
speakers’ positive and negative face wants, much of the research on requests has used the well-known 
Cross-Cultural Speech Act Realization Project (CCSARP) coding framework developed by Blum-Kulka, 
House and Kasper (1989), as it allows a more thorough analysis of politeness devices at the syntactic and 
lexical level. The CCSARP framework analyzes requests in terms of (a) direct and indirect strategies 
realized by particular linguistic structures (e.g., imperatives are direct while could/would you 
constructions are indirect) (Table 2), (b) request modification realized by lexical items and syntactic 
elements (Table 3), and (c) request perspective (from hearer’s or speaker’s viewpoint) (Table 6) that serve 
to mitigate the force of the request and thus assure compliance through greater politeness. In continuation 
with this tradition, the few available studies on email requests have also applied this framework (cf., 
however, Duthler’s (2006) application of Brown & Levinson’s (1978, 1987) model of politeness to 
elicited voicemail and email requests), and the following picture of email use from students to professors 
has emerged. 
Chen’s (2001) study of American and Taiwanese graduate students’ email requests (appointment, 
recommendation, special consideration) of faculty whom students either knew or did not know revealed 
that both groups of students preferred query preparatory (e.g., can you) and want statements (e.g., I 
want/would like to) to realize their requests, but they differed in amount of lexico-syntactic politeness 
features (e.g., use of past tense, please, possibly, I was wondering if), rendering the NSs’ requests more 
indirect and polite. In a longitudinal case study of one Taiwanese student, Chen (2006) observed that the 
student’s ability to make requests of her professors via email improved over time: the student’s requests 
changed from primarily want statements to query preparatory strategies and showed evidence of greater 
politeness through lexico-syntactic modification. What makes Chen’s study intriguing is the fact that it 
provides insight into a NNS’s motivation for selecting direct over indirect forms: the student felt that in 
order to have the professor attend to her email requests, she needed to make them "sound important and 
urgent" (p. 44), but she was unaware that an unmitigated request might be perceived as "coercive" (p. 44) 
and thus impolite.  
In Biesenbach-Lucas’s (2002, 2004), Biesenbach-Lucas and Weasenforth’s (2000), and Weasenforth and 
Biesenbach-Lucas’s (2001) application of the CCSARP framework to NSs’ and NNSs’ email requests of 
faculty, the differences in request strategies chosen by NSs and NNSs were comparatively small, with 
both groups preferring similarly direct or indirect strategies for request realization; however, NNSs tended 
to use more direct requests than NSs, similar to Chen’s (2006) graduate student. NSs also used more 
syntactic modification than NNSs while NNSs used more lexical modification, particularly please 
(Biesenbach-Lucas, 2004). NNSs were also found to add more supportive moves (e.g., reasons, 
apologies) to their email requests than NSs, possibly due to a lack of linguistic flexibility that would 
allow them to craftily select lexicon-syntactic modifiers (Weasenforth & Biesenbach-Lucas, 2001), or due 
to a transfer of speech act norms governing their native language use (Beebe, Takahashi, & Uliss-Weltz, 
1990; Kasper, 1992).  
In her recent application of two versions of the CCSARP coding framework to students’ email requests, 
Biesenbach-Lucas (2006a) investigated how the inconsistent assignment of request strategies to 
directness/indirectness levels observed in request studies can affect findings and conclusions regarding 
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas Students Writing Emails to Faculty 
 
Language Learning & Technology 64 
the preferred strategies of any linguistic group (NSs or NNSs). The study found not only that whether or 
not direct or indirect request strategies are used may have much more to do with how requests are coded 
than with NS or NNS status, addressee, level of imposition, or medium, but also that naturalistic email 
data yield request realizations that have not previously been accounted for in the CCSARP framework 
and thus precipitate a need for revision of the original framework.  
In one version of the CCSARP framework, Biesenbach-Lucas (2006a) coded want statements (e.g., I 
want/would like to) and need statements (e.g., I need …) as direct request strategies, following the original 
CCSARP categories (Blum-Kulka, House, & Kasper, 1989); and in the other analysis, she coded want 
statements as an indirect strategy (see Iwai & Rinnert, 2001; Kim & Bresnahan, 1994; Rinnert & 
Kobayashi, 1999; and Trosborg, 1995, for such coding assignment), and need statements as hints (see 
Iwai & Rinnert, 2001; Rinnert & Kobayashi, 1999; Rose, 1996; Weizman, 1993, for such coding 
assignment). When the original CCSARP framework was used to code students’ email requests, low 
imposition requests for appointment and mid-level imposition requests for feedback were realized through 
direct strategies, but high imposition requests for extension of due date through more indirect strategies. 
However, when the above adaptations of the CCSARP framework to code the email requests were used, 
all requests were realized through predominantly indirect forms.  
Biesenbach-Lucas (2006a) suggests that "rather than looking at broad directness levels and categories, it 
might be more constructive to examine specific [email] request realizations to uncover not only aspects of 
directness, but also of politeness" (p. 97). Her examination of NSs’ and NNSs’ use of lexico-syntactic 
modification shows that few such modifiers (Table 3) were used in frequently-occurring request patterns, 
but that combinations of syntactic politeness devices were used by NSs in high imposition requests. In 
contrast, NNSs did not show evidence of similar linguistic and contextual sensitivity as their politeness 
modification was restricted to the past tense, possibly/maybe, and please. A surprising finding was that 
"NSs’ request realizations [were] not overly adorned with [politeness] modification" (p. 100), suggesting 
"that in the email medium, a minimum amount of … modification may be considered sufficient for 
realizing students’ requests of faculty … perhaps in an attempt at message economy and clarity" (p. 101).  
Features Contributing to Politeness in Requests 
Language use in face-threatening acts such as requests, especially to higher-ups, requires a certain degree 
of politeness if the requester wants to assure compliance from the person he or she is asking. In request 
research, lack of politeness has been associated with direct strategies (e.g., imperatives), with the presence 
of intensifiers (e.g., right now, asap, terribly + adjective) and aggravating moves (e.g., threats, criticism, 
emphasis on urgency), and with the concomitant lack of mitigating features (Blum-Kulka, 1987); 
conversely, politeness is attributed to indirect strategies (Brown & Levinson, 1978) and to the presence of 
devices that soften the impact of requestive force, such as syntactic and lexical modifiers, as well as non-
hearer oriented request perspective (e.g., can I/we as opposed to can you) (Blum-Kulka, House & Kasper, 
1989). Counterintuitively, lack of politeness has also been associated with the most indirect request 
strategies, hints (as in it’s cold in here, which represent the second most polite form in Brown & 
Levinson’s (1978, 1987) politeness theory), because "they testify to a lack of [a speaker’s] concern for 
pragmatic clarity" (Blum-Kulka, 1987, p. 144). Fraser and Nolen (1981) argued over two decades ago that 
"no sentence [and by extension, email] is inherently polite or impolite… It is not the expressions 
themselves but the conditions under which they are used that determines the judgment of politeness" (p. 
96). In addition, direct requests are typically perceived as more polite "if politeness features are added 
[and] if they are considered appropriate for a given situation depending on role expectations as well as 
rights and obligations of interaction participants" (Biesenbach-Lucas, 2006a, p. 85). 
Research on requests had uncovered that NSs and NNSs differ in their use of politeness features. Blum-
Kulka and Levenston (1987) observed that when NNSs used lexical and syntactic devices in ways that 
deviated from NS norms, they often "achieve[d] different pragmatic effects from those intended" (p. 163) 
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas Students Writing Emails to Faculty 
 
Language Learning & Technology 65 
because, for example, they tended to use please in a way that marked the utterance as having requestive 
force rather than as a politeness marker. With respect to students’ email requests, NNSs have also been 
found to use please over other modification devices, presumably both in an attempt at appearing polite 
when other linguistic means are lacking and at urging the professor’s response (Biesenbach-Lucas & 
Weasenforth, 2000; Chen, 2006). Biesenbach-Lucas (2006a) found that all students tended to use 
comparatively little modification in email requests to faculty, pointing to a potentially intriguing effect 
that the email medium may have on use of lexical and syntactic modification as politeness features: these 
features are kept to a minimum perhaps in order to avoid message ambiguity. 
METHODS 
Data, Participants, and Variables 
The data in the present study represent a subset of a larger data corpus consisting of student email 
messages that contain a variety of requests made of faculty. Important points to consider for the email 
interaction data examined here are the following: first, the power dimension across messages is stable – 
the professor (the email recipient) is in position of relative authority over the student (the email sender) by 
virtue of their institutional relationship; and second, the social distance dimension is also relatively stable 
and can be characterized as low since students and professors typically have frequent and regular 
interactions in the institutional context. What varies is the imposition of students’ email requests on the 
professor. Three types of request were identified as occurring with great frequency in the overall data 
corpus of student email messages to faculty: requests for face-to-face appointments with the professor, 
requests for feedback on work in progress sent in an attachment, and requests for extension of the due 
date for submission of an assignment. Table 1 shows that the imposition of students’ requests of faculty, 
as determined by a survey among university students, can be said to vary along two dimensions: across 
request types (horizontally), and within requests types (vertically). The request types and subset examined 
in the present study are indicated in the shaded cells of Table 1, together with the number of NS and NNS 
messages in each of the three request type data sets.   
Table 1. Overall Data Corpus, and Data Set Examined in Present Study. 
                      Increasing Imposition  
Requests for 
appointment 
Requests for  
Feedback 
Requests for 
extension of due date 
Appointment later 
in week/next week   
NSs – 188 
NNSs – 72 
Feedback on 
attached draft/work 
in progress 
NSs – 128 
NNSs – 59 
Before due date 
 
NSs – 66 
NNSs – 20 
Appointment same 
day 
Feedback on 
attached revised 
work 
After due date, without 
attaching work 
 
 
 
 
Increasing 
Imposition 
Canceling 
appointment and 
rescheduling 
Feedback on more 
than one attachment 
After due date, with 
late work attached 
 
Overall, 533 email messages (382 NS messages; 151 NNS messages) containing the targeted request 
types were analyzed in the present study. They were collected, together with the other student email 
messages in the larger data corpus, over the course of six semesters and had been sent to one faculty 
recipient. In accordance with the university’s Internal Review Board requirements, students completed 
informed consent forms, which allowed the researcher to store and analyze their messages, and 
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas Students Writing Emails to Faculty 
 
Language Learning & Technology 66 
permission forms, which allowed the researcher to quote messages or parts of messages without revealing 
identifying information other than NS and NNS of English status. 
The students whose email messages were examined in the present study were NSs of English and NNSs 
of English from Asian backgrounds (Korea, Japan, Taiwan, Thailand); all were enrolled in graduate level 
TESOL courses at a major American university. The NNSs had had English instruction in their native 
countries, and some of them additionally in the US, but they were not taking ESL courses while they were 
enrolled in their TESOL degree program. As a result, their proficiency can be identified as low-advanced. 
All students were familiar with email technology, although not necessarily within an academic context. 
This might be one of the reasons why some NS and NNS students who were enrolled in the semesters 
during which the email messages were collected did not send any email messages to the particular faculty 
recipient, possibly underscoring the ambivalence that comes with new channels of communication. 
The professor to whom the email messages were sent was a female in her early forties with extensive 
teaching experience in ESL and teacher training. She indicated to students that email was an acceptable 
means of communication through inclusion of her email address on her course syllabi, and she was 
familiar with a variety of CMC technologies. While approachable and friendly, her communication style 
tended to be more formal than informal with her students, and she did not encourage first-name use with 
students, following the standards set by full-time faculty in her teaching unit. 
The predictor variables examined in the present study were the imposition of students’ email requests on 
the professor, and NS/NNS status; the criterion variables examined were the request strategies in the 
students’ email messages, the amount and type of lexical and syntactic modification, and the request 
perspective to enhance politeness.  
Analysis Procedures 
Analysis of the email requests followed the original CCSARP framework developed by Blum-Kulka, 
House, and Kasper (1989). The analysis was limited to request head acts; therefore, the first step involved 
identifying the exact sentence in each message that contained a request for appointment, for feedback, or 
for extension of a due date. Since the email messages present authentic data not previously coded 
according to the CCSARP framework, a number of coding challenges emerged. These ranged from 
identifying a request head act in messages when the linguistic realizations included structures that had no 
previous equivalent in the CCSARP framework (see Biesenbach-Lucas, 2006a, for other coding 
challenges). For example, explicit requests were often absent, but they were replaced by other moves 
(e.g., (1)-(2)), which might need to be identified as new request strategies. 
(1) assurance getter:  I wanted to make sure that I’m on the right track. 
(2) gratitude:   I appreciate your taking a look. 
Similarly, some of the categories identified in the CCSARP taxonomy (e.g., (3)-(4)) were found to have 
no tokens in the email data (the asterisks indicate possible forms that did not occur in the students’ 
emails). 
(3) suggestory formulae: *How about giving me feedback? 
(4) obligation statements: *You must/should give me an extension. 
The request head acts were then categorized into request strategies representing one of three directness 
levels identified in CCSARP: direct, conventionally indirect, and non-conventionally indirect (hints). 
Table 2 presents the directness levels and the request strategies coded under each, with examples from the 
request types under investigation. The directness levels correspond to the degree of pragmatic clarity with 
which the requests are encoded, from least to most ambiguous. 
Table 2. Coding Categories in Present Study. 
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas Students Writing Emails to Faculty 
 
Language Learning & Technology 67 
CCSARP 
Directness Levels 
 
Request Strategies 
 
Examples 
Imperatives 
 
Please extend the due date. 
Elliptic constructions 
 
Any comments? 
Performatives  
 
I feel I have to ask for an extension for a week. 
Direct questions 
 
When do you have time? 
Want statements  
 
I want to set up a meeting with you. 
I would like your suggestions.  
Need statements 
 
I will need an extension. 
Direct 
Expectation statements I hope you’ll give me the weekend to finish typing 
my work. 
Conventionally 
indirect 
Query preparatory 
(ability, willingness, 
permission) 
Could I meet with you next Tuesday? 
Would you mind to take a look and give me some 
suggestion? 
Hints  Strong hints/mild hints Attached is a draft of my grammar lesson plan. 
I’m having a very difficult time in figuring out how 
to put these lesson materials together. 
 
Within each request head act, syntactic and lexical devices that added to a mitigating effect on the 
imposition of the request and contributed to perceived politeness were identified. They are presented in 
Table 3. 
Table 3. Syntactic and Lexical Modifiers in Present Study 
Syntactic modifiers past tense 
progressive aspect 
embedding 
Lexical modifiers please  
downtoners: possibly, maybe, perhaps  
understaters: just, a little, a minute 
subjectivizers: I was wondering, I think/feel, I wanted to know 
consultative devices: do you think, is there a chance  
hedges: some, any, somehow 
 
In addition to modification, the present analysis also examined the request perspective taken by the 
students in each request (i.e., who was mentioned in the emails as having to perform the primary action 
entailed in the request). Four perspectives are possible, and are associated with an effect on perceived 
politeness (Blum-Kulka, House, & Kasper, 1989); they are listed from least to most polite in (5)-(8). 
(5) you (hearer)-perspective: Could you please give me some feedback …? 
(6) we (speaker/hearer)-perspective: Can we please meet to go over …? 
(7) I (speaker)-perspective: I was wondering if I could have an extension on … 
(8) Impersonal perspective: Is it possible to meet tomorrow afternoon? 
Frequency of occurrence, modification, and speaker perspective for each request type were established 
and converted to percentages to compare the proportion of direct, indirect, and non-conventionally 
indirect strategies, the amount of modification, and the perspective from which requests tended to be 
formed for the three request types and for both groups of students.  
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas Students Writing Emails to Faculty 
 
Language Learning & Technology 68 
RESULTS 
Directness Levels in Students’ Email Messages Across Request Types 
Figure 1 shows that for lower imposition requests (i.e., appointment and feedback), NSs resorted largely 
to direct strategies. For the lowest imposition request (appointment), NSs used almost as many indirect as 
direct strategies, but for slightly higher imposition requests (feedback), they used far more direct than 
indirect strategies.  
Only in the situation of the highest imposition (extension) did NSs use more conventionally indirect 
requests, as well as a substantial number of hints (e.g., I’m having a hard time finishing this paper), which 
allowed them to avoid asking the uncomfortable question. For feedback requests, NSs also used more 
hints than conventionally indirect forms (e.g., attached is a draft of my … assignment). These students 
apparently assume that the context speaks for itself: when they attach a draft to their email message, they 
are sending it because they want the professor to read it and provide some feedback. By the same token, 
for the faculty recipient, familiarity with the situation and with course requirements will not make such 
hints difficult to interpret. Hints have not often been found in request studies relying on elicitation 
through DCTs (Beebe & Cummings, 1996; Hartford & Bardovi-Harlig, 1992), presumably because the 
task in DCTs is to write a request and because there are no social consequences of using more direct 
request forms (Biesenbach-Lucas & Weasenforth, 2002a). 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
%
ReqAppt ReqFeedb ReqExt
direct
conv ind
hint
 
Key: ReqAppt = requests for appointment; ReqFeedb = requests for feedback; ReqExt = requests for extension 
Figure 1. Directness levels by request type for NSsFigure 2 shows that, in general, there is a similar 
pattern in request strategies for NNSs. They used more direct request strategies for the lower imposition 
requests (appointment and feedback), but unlike the NSs, they used far fewer direct requests for 
requesting feedback than for requesting appointment. A possible reason might be that using email for 
requesting feedback may not be considered appropriate by NNSs, especially when the requested feedback 
is for an unfinished piece of work. Similarly to the NSs, NNSs used mostly conventionally indirect 
request strategies for requesting an extension, but they used far fewer hints, perhaps because they do not 
know how to produce situation-appropriate hints. 
 
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas Students Writing Emails to Faculty 
 
Language Learning & Technology 69 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
%
ReqAppt ReqFeedb ReqExt
direct
conv ind
hint
 
Figure 2. Directness levels by request type for NNSs 
Politeness Features in Students' Email Requests 
Syntactic modifiers 
The following predominant syntactic modification devices were found: 
Past tense  I was wondering  instead of I am wondering;  
Could you   instead of Can you;  
I would like   instead of I want/like; 
Progressive aspect  I was wondering  instead of I wonder;  
I’m hoping   instead of I hope; 
Embedding   I would appreciate it if you could…; 
Do you think I am on the right track? 
The totals in Table 4 indicate that both NSs and NNSs modified at least half their email requests by 
adding syntactic politeness devices (shown in the last row). However, there is a marked difference 
between NSs and NNSs in their use of such syntactic devices for appointment requests, while they used 
syntactic modification overall to a similar extent in requests for feedback and extension.  
Table 4. Syntactic Politeness Modifiers Across Request Types. 
 Req Appointment Req Feedback Req Extension 
 NS NNS NS NNS NS NNS 
Past tense 80.9% 45.2% 25.9% 35.2% 32.2% 33.3% 
Progressive  15.3% 9.5% 3.1% 3.7% 12.9% 0% 
Embedding  27.5% 30.9% 29% 18.5% 54.8% 23.8% 
Total 85.5% 59.2% 51.9% 44.4% 58.1% 57.1% 
Note: (1) % indicates the percentage of messages within each request type that contained the type of 
modification indicated; percentages add up to more than 100% since syntactic devices are not mutually 
exclusive but can occur together. (2) The total includes all emails with syntactic modifications. 
NSs used the past tense as a politeness device predominantly with requests for appointment, and the past 
tense use was also the preferred syntactic modifier for most NSs (85.5%). NNSs also preferred past tense 
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas Students Writing Emails to Faculty 
 
Language Learning & Technology 70 
as a politeness device, but they used the other syntactic devices almost as much. NSs tended to prefer 
embedded forms twice as much as the other syntactic modifiers in requests for extension, the request with 
the greatest imposition. Thus, NSs not only used indirect strategies for this type of request, but also found 
ways to make these requests more polite, indicating the apparently perceived greater imposition 
represented by that request. Interestingly though, the lowest imposition requests for appointment were 
most often mitigated through synctactic modifiers by both NSs and NNSs. This shows an interesting 
balancing act between direct strategies (which were used the most with appointment and feedback 
requests) and concomitant syntactic politeness devices; thus, the impact of the direct strategy is softened 
through syntactic modifiers, and NNSs appear to be similarly aware of this as NSs.  
Lexical modifiers 
Table 5 shows the percentage of email messages with lexical politeness devices. Perhaps the most 
intriguing finding is that presence of lexical modifiers does not linearly increase with increased 
imposition level; the highest imposition is only minimally modified through lexical politeness devices by 
both NSs and NNSs. Apparently, both groups relied more on the use of syntactic rather than lexical 
means to soften requestive force and enhance politeness. The lack of increase in lexical modifiers may be 
explained by the fact that the request strategies preferred for requesting extension were indirect strategies, 
which students may have felt were sufficiently polite precisely because of the nature of their indirectness. 
Table 5. Lexical Politeness Modifiers Across Request Types 
 Req Appointment Req Feedback Req Extension 
 NS NNS NS NNS NS NNS 
please 2.3% 4.7% 17.9% 25.4% 0% 14.3% 
Downtoners  16.8% 14.3% 15.3% 1.7% 6.4% 19% 
Understaters 8.4% 2.4% 3.8% 0% 3.2% 0% 
Subjectivizers 15.3% 11.9% 3.8% 5.1% 19.3% 0% 
Consultative 
devices 
2.3% 2.4% 1.5% 0% 0% 0% 
Hedges 13.7% 19% 20.6% 20.3% 0% 0% 
Total  
58.8% 
 
57.1% 
 
49.6% 
 
73.8% 
 
6.9% 
 
16.7% 
Note: (1) % indicates the percentage of messages within each request type that contained the type of 
modification indicated; percentages add up to more than 100% since syntactic devices are not mutually 
exclusive but can occur together. (2) The total includes all emails with lexical modifiers. 
While Table 4 had shown that NSs were the ones who tended to use more syntactic politeness devices 
than NNSs for all request types, Table 5 shows that it is the NNSs who used more lexical modifiers than 
NSs for two of the request types (feedback and extension), and it is the requests for feedback that NNSs 
modified the most lexically. Again, this might be an indication that NNSs feel uncomfortable submitting 
writing that is not a finished piece of work but a work in progress for review to their professor. It may not 
be acceptable for NNSs to do so in their native countries, as anecdotal reports from students suggest. 
An examination of specific lexical politeness devices reveals that please was the preferred lexical 
modifier for NNSs, especially with feedback and extension requests. Interestingly, please was not used 
the most frequently in the highest imposition request (extension), but in the mid-level imposition request 
(feedback), again apparently indicating that NNSs do not feel comfortable sending a draft for review. 
However, feedback requests are also the request type where NSs used please the most, and unlike NNSs, 
NSs do not use please at all with the highest imposition request (extension), suggesting that NNSs might 
use please indiscriminately as an illocutionary force indicator (i.e., a device to mark the sentence as a 
request) rather than a mitigating politeness device (see Blum-Kulka & Levenston, 1987, for a similar 
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas Students Writing Emails to Faculty 
 
Language Learning & Technology 71 
conclusion). Perhaps NSs’ syntactic modifications (especially embedding) as well as indirect strategies 
make lexical politeness devices unnecessary when clarity in a text-only medium is at stake. 
Just as please was preferred by NNSs, subjectivizers were preferred by the NSs in the present study. 
These were forms (e.g., I was wondering, I wonder, I’m hoping, etc.) were found in about 1 out of 6 email 
messages. It is interesting that NSs appear to use subjectivizers especially for those type of requests 
(appointment and extension) where the focus is not solely on the professor performing the requested 
action, but where the student also has to do his or her part (e.g., the student has to go to the office for the 
appointment, the student has to furnish the assignment at some point, etc.). 
Request perspective 
The perspective the requester takes to make his or her request can also affect the perceived politeness of 
the request (Blum-Kulka, House, & Kasper, 1989). However, requests and the actions they refer to are 
characterized by certain normal speaker-hearer constellations. In other words, while students are sending 
email requests for different services to their professors, these services may not always require the sole 
action of the professor (the hearer perspective). The person who will typically have to perform the 
primary action entailed in the request differs depending on request type, as summarized in Table 6. 
Table 6. Task Expectations and Perspectives in the Three Request Types 
Request for 
appointment 
we 
speaker/hearer 
Professor makes time for appointment; student needs to go 
to office 
Request for feedback you 
hearer  
Professor needs to provide feedback; student waits 
Request for extension I 
speaker  
Professor grants extension; student needs to complete and 
submit work 
Requests for appointment assume a "we" perspective: action is required from both student and professor 
to make the appointment happen, as the professor makes time for the appointment and the student needs 
to go to the professor’s office. In contrast, requests for feedback are the only one of the three request 
types that clearly assume a "you" perspective: the professor performs the primary action of providing 
feedback while the student waits. Finally, requests for extension can be said to presuppose an "I" 
perspective: while the professor grants the extension, it is still the student who needs to complete and 
submit the work. 
Table 7 presents how these perspectives were translated into actual requests. The category "impersonal" 
was added as impersonal constructions (agent avoiders) were also used to express the requests in this 
study. 
Both NSs and NNSs formed the majority of their requests from the expected perspective, except in the 
case of appointment requests, in which students chose to express their requests from their own (i.e., the 
"I") perspective (e.g., (9)-(10), thus deflecting the focus of the request from the professor. 
 (9)   I would like to make an appointment to meet with you this week. 
 (10) Could I meet with you sometime this week? 
However, it is also evident that NNSs, more so than NSs, tended to form their requests from the "you" 
perspective (hearer/addressee perspective) in all request types (e.g., (11)-(13)). 
(11) Could you give me some time on Tuesday, May 2nd? 
(12) Can you please look at this? 
(13) Could you extend the deadline? 
In contrast, NSs also used impersonal forms to request an extension (e.g., (14)), which NNSs did not do at 
all.  
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas Students Writing Emails to Faculty 
 
Language Learning & Technology 72 
(14) Would it be possible to get this paper to you by Monday? 
 
Table 7. Use of Perspectives in Requests. 
  NSs NNSs 
we 11.9% 7.1% 
you 17.5% 31% 
I 61.1% 57.1% 
 
Requests for 
Appointment 
impersonal 9.5% 4.8% 
We 0% 0% 
You 60.6% 65.8% 
I 31.9% 34.2% 
 
Requests for 
Feedback 
impersonal 7.5% 0% 
We 0% 0% 
You 10% 37.5% 
I 50% 62.5% 
 
Requests for 
Extension 
impersonal 40% 0% 
 
In fact, NNSs used impersonal forms only with the lowest imposition request for appointment and may 
not realize that requests are often formed impersonally, especially in business writing. Forms such as 
advice greatly appreciated and is it possible to turn in my paper on Monday are in fact associated with 
more formal (e.g., letter) writing. It is interesting that NSs used norms related to written language as a 
resource to convey e-politeness; thus, email clearly does not always look like speech, despite claims to the 
contrary (Baron, 2003). The email medium appears to have an interesting effect here on language, 
especially in a context where the email writer addresses a recipient of higher institutional status. 
Preferred Linguistic Realizations in Students’ Email Requests 
The most frequently chosen request forms provide further evidence that NSs are developing e-politeness 
strategies in their messages to professors.The syntactic patterns in appointment requests show that while 
NNSs may use the same request strategies as NSs, the actual realizations differ, as the examples in Table 
8 suggest. The differences are subtle, but might affect how the request is perceived when judged in terms 
of politeness. While NNSs primarily used the contracted form I’d and the hearer perspective could you, 
NSs did not use contractions and used the speaker perspective could I in addition to embedding.  
Table 8. Preferred Linguistic Realizations for Appointment Requests 
 NSs NNSs 
direct I would like to meet with you/set up 
an appointment with you …. 
I’d like to meet [with] you/talk to 
you/see you/visit your office …. 
 
 
indirect Could I meet with you /make an 
appointment to see/meet with you …. 
I was wondering if I could make an 
appointment with you/come by and 
see you … 
Could you give me some time …. 
hints N/A N/A 
 
Similar differences between NSs and NNSs in preferred linguistic realizations were found for feedback 
requests (Table 9). While NSs used embedded constructions and non-contracted I would, NNSs used non-
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas Students Writing Emails to Faculty 
 
Language Learning & Technology 73 
embedded imperatives and simple present tense constructions. Further, NSs used a variety of synonyms 
for "feedback" and phrasal verbs (e.g., take a look, look over), which did not occur in the linguistic 
repertoire of NNSs. The language used for indicating an attachment (as in the hints) also shows 
differences in lexical items and aspect (e.g., attached vs. sending), all of which are subtle differences that 
do not surface in a quantitative examination of request strategies, but can potentially influence perception 
of the requests by faculty. 
Table 9. Preferred Linguistic Realizations for Feedback Requests 
 NSs NNSs 
Direct [Please] let me know what you think/ 
if you have any 
comments/suggestions/ if…. 
I would appreciate any comments/ 
feedback/input/suggestions. 
Any feedback would be appreciated. 
Thanks for taking a look. 
Please take a look/ send me some 
feedback/ give me comments. 
 
I appreciate your comment. 
 
Indirect Could you please take a look/ look 
over [attachment] (and give/ help/ 
guide me with some feedback)? 
Could you look at [attachment]/ give 
some/any comment(s)/advice? 
Hints Attached is …. 
I’ve attached …. 
Here is …. 
I’m sending …. 
Finally, requests for extension show that NSs preferred embedded syntactic patterns phrased from the 
point of view of the speaker, or as an impersonal request. NNSs added occasional lexical politeness 
devices (e.g., downtoners), but they generally did not use embedding, and they used a more direct hearer 
perspective, thus aggravating requestive force rather than mitigating it in this high imposition request 
(Table 10). 
Table 10.Preferred Linguistic Realizations for Extension Requests 
 NSs NNSs 
direct N/A N/A 
indirect Would it be a problem if I turned it 
[assignment] in on …. 
I was wondering if it would be 
possible for me to submit/turn in …. 
[If possible], could you give more 
time/extend the deadline …. 
hints I’m having a difficult time …. 
I cannot complete …. 
I’m having doubts …. 
I’ve been unable to complete …. 
It’s impossible for me to send 
[assignment] … 
CONCLUSION 
Another Look at the Research Questions 
What light did the present study shed on the research questions asked at the outset of the present study? 
• Do students’ emails to professors promote more direct or indirect request strategies? Does 
directness level vary with increasing imposition of request? And is there evidence of politeness 
features that mitigate students’ email requests?  
The findings of the present study suggest that students selected more direct strategies for the lower 
imposition requests, but not for the highest imposition request. This suggests that students, NSs and 
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas Students Writing Emails to Faculty 
 
Language Learning & Technology 74 
NNSs, do possess awareness of situational factors and do not consider all email requests of faculty equal. 
In other words, the nature of the email medium and its characteristic lack of face-to-face clues do not 
obviate differentiation among different request goals. Another possible explanation might also be found 
in the concept of a standard situation (House, 1989), where the roles and obligations of participants in an 
interaction are clearly defined. With regard to email requests for appointment, feedback, and extension, 
this notion might apply as follows. Email requests for appointment could be considered the most standard 
situation: professors are expected to hold office hours and meet with students. Email requests for 
feedback might contain standard and non-standard elements: professors are expected to give feedback on 
students’ work, but the "in-progress" feedback facilitated through email technology remains at present at 
the discretion of individual professors (Glater, 2006; Inside Higher Ed, 2006). In contrast, professors are 
under no obligation to grant a request for extension as it is the student who is transgressing the course 
policy. Students’ pragmatic awareness of different contextual factors is already an important first step for 
successful pedagogical intervention. 
There also tended to be more politeness devices with direct request strategies (in the case of appointment 
and feedback requests), and comparatively fewer politeness devices with indirect request strategies. 
Apparently, the email medium did not make politeness features unnecessary; it is the request strategy that 
may have a greater impact in email as to whether or not and to what extent requests are modified 
syntactically and/or lexically, in attempts at preserving brevity and clarity. 
• Do request strategies and politeness features of NSs’ and NNSs’ emails differ? And, is there a 
preferred linguistic realization by NSs and NNSs for different request types? 
When students’ email messages are quantitatively examined from the point of view of broad request 
strategies, it was found that both NSs and NNSs tended to use the same general strategies. Differences 
between the two groups did not clearly surface until a more qualitative analysis was conducted. Despite 
similar strategies, NSs and NNSs realized these strategies differently and preferred different types of 
politeness devices, pointing toward a mix of lack of linguistic flexibility and idiomatic expressions, 
unawareness of letter conventions transferable to email, and inability to select appropriate lexical 
modification among NNSs. While some researchers (Duthler, 2006; Herring, 2002) have claimed that 
email, due to its asynchronicity and reduced context clues and its resulting "elevated control over message 
production and delivery" (Duthler, 2006, para. 5) does promote more polite language, the present study 
implies, however, that students can plan, compose, revise, and edit toward an appropriate and polite email 
message only if they have flexible linguistic means at their disposal and know which linguistic structures 
and politeness devices to use. Even if NNSs have sufficient time to revise and edit their messages, but can 
retrieve only one learned structure to formulate requests indiscriminately (e.g., could you, which was 
found to be NNSs’ most frequently used request strategy for all three types of requests), then any 
additional time they might have for message production is not going to help them. Pedagogical 
intervention could help make these students more aware of which request realizations tend to be more 
common, as well as pragmatically acceptable, with different request goals and addressees. Consequently, 
the present study has shown that NSs are demonstrating a developing awareness of e-politeness in 
institutional emails despite the lack of available models, whereas NNSs might run the risk of not being 
perceived as appropriately e-polite. 
The Email Medium and Students’ Language Use  
With much of today’s interaction between students and professors occurring in cyberspace, it is worth 
asking what effect the email medium will, in the long run, have on students’ language use, or, how 
students’ face-to-face language use in the academic domain might affect their email use with their 
professors. This is a particularly important question to ask, because students entering universities in the 
near and distant future will have grown up with much more exposure and use of CMC in numerous 
formats than their counterparts who entered universities only five or ten years ago, as did the students in 
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas Students Writing Emails to Faculty 
 
Language Learning & Technology 75 
the present study. Two paths of development seem possible: email in student-professor interaction might 
become less like speech and more formal, or email might become more like speech and less formal.  
One the one hand, student emails might become less speech-like and more e-polite due to contextual 
features of institutional discourse. When students address their professor, via email or face-to-face, they 
are addressing a higher-up, and while some requests closely resemble standard situations, others are non-
standard situations with increased levels of imposition which need to be acknowledged. By the same 
token, in university courses in which face-to-face components remain integrated with distance 
components (e.g., email, discussion boards, etc.), the institutional hierarchy is kept more visible, likely 
pushing students toward more status-congruence and greater e-politeness. 
On the other hand, emails from students to professors might take on more speech-like, less formal 
features, especially with length of contact, such as when students have been taking several classes with 
the same professor. While the outward institutional hierarchy does not change, with each semester student 
and professor learn more about each other and achieve greater familiarity. Chen (2006) reports that her 
subject "learned to use conversational language … with a few professors she was more familiar with" (p. 
41). Similarly, Walther (1994) discovered that email users were influenced by their own expectations of 
whether the online interaction was a "one-shot" occurrence (p. 491) or was projected to extend over a 
longer period of time. Another potential reason for a more speech-like character of students’ email 
language might be the fact that email is developing into a dominant form of contact among people, not 
only in academia but also in all other walks of life, and with that certain standards of formality and 
politeness might dissipate (see Baron, 1984, for predictions of the influence of new computer mediated 
technology).  
Pedagogical Intervention 
A number of researchers agree that pedagogical intervention with regard to instruction in and acquisition 
of appropriate speech act performance is helpful for NNSs of English (Bardovi-Harlig, 2001; House, 
2003; Kasper, 2001). Without instruction, these speakers’ language production tends to diverge from NS 
norms, which often results in negative assessments of their personalities and even cultural groups (Boxer, 
2002b). While existing studies have examined language learners’ speech act performance after instruction 
on elicited tasks (such as role plays and DCTs), few have examined speakers’ authentic language 
production after pragmatics instruction. It should come as no surprise then that teaching the writing of 
appropriate and polite email messages in academic contexts has not yet been investigated. However, the 
existing studies suggest that NNSs could benefit from explicit email instruction as well as activities that 
involve discovery and raising of meta-pragmatic awareness.  
Until now, few ESL books include sections on email communication (exceptions include Swales & Feak, 
2000, and Mackey, 2005), but they tend to focus more on overall email etiquette than specific speech act 
production. As a result, pedagogical intervention with respect to appropriate student-professor email 
interaction rests, at present, with individual teachers and teacher-made materials. Tasks could be 
structured along the following lines when students learn to write an email message to a professor to 
request, for example, feedback on an assignment:  
1) In a warm-up, students examine actual requests examples – some appropriate, some not – and discuss 
the reasons for pragmatic success and failure in an initial consciousness-raising task, comparable to 
Rose’s (1999) use of pragmatic failure anecdotes. 
2) Students read several email messages and examine the layout of the messages on paper and on the 
screen. The messages they read differ in terms of imposition (e.g., requesting feedback on one 
attachment is less imposing than requesting feedback on more than one). 
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas Students Writing Emails to Faculty 
 
Language Learning & Technology 76 
3) Students dissect each email message into its components and uncover the standard elements (e.g., 
subject line, salutation, mention of attachment, request, expression of gratitude, student’s name), 
comparable to DuFon’s (2003) frame analysis approach. 
4) Students focus on the actual request language and how it differs depending on the degree of 
imposition, akin to House’s (2003) phase-specific speech acts and a meta-pragmatic and meta-
linguistic focus-on-form approach recommended by Kasper (2001). 
5) Finally, students practice writing email requests for feedback, first in more controlled fill-in-the-
speech-act activities on worksheets (cf. Judd, 1999, for such cloze-type tasks in conversations), and 
eventually on their own in the computer lab, where they send actual email messages to their 
professor. 
The same approach can then be used for other email requests and emails with different purposes. This 
lesson approach has been used successfully in classes of advanced level ESL students preparing for 
American university courses (Biesenbach-Lucas & Weasenforth, 2002b).1 
Limitations and Suggestions for Further Research 
In an attempt to describe and analyze the email use of NSs and NNSs to faculty and to uncover 
similarities and differences between them, and due to limitations of data collection, other potentially 
intriguing factors remain unexamined. In order to look at comparable groups of students, only email 
messages from students in the same degree program were examined, and the NNSs came from Asian 
language backgrounds. In addition, only messages sent to one faculty member could be collected due to 
ethical reasons. Future studies might look at a broader spectrum of students, including graduate students 
from a variety of academic fields of study, NNSs from a variety of language backgrounds, as well as 
undergraduate students whose computer experience most likely began at a much earlier age than that of 
graduate students. If possible, studies could be undertaken longitudinally in the way that Chen (2006) 
carried out her case study to gain insights into how NS and NNS students might change and adapt their 
email writing practices to their professors over the course of several semesters. If ethical hurdles can be 
overcome, it would be worthwhile to examine email messages sent to different faculty members to 
investigate how faculty gender, age, and field might influence students’ email messages. 
In addition, the analysis of requests could include analysis of supportive moves (i.e., standard email 
elements) in addition to the request head acts and politeness devices examined here (Biesenbach-Lucas 
(2006a). A more complete picture of e-politeness could emerge if the presence or absence of greetings 
and signatures, as well as the nature of the "virtual 'envelope'" (Danet, 2001, p. 53), are examined. 
Further, the CCSARP coding categories might need to be re-examined to accommodate request 
realizations found in naturalistic email communication. Also, in order to triangulate the descriptions of e-
politeness aspects focused on in the present study, research should survey university faculty for their 
impressions of various email messages, following Hartford and Bardovi-Harlig’s (1996) and Biesenbach-
Lucas and Weasenforth’s (2001) leads to corroborate insights into what contributes to e-politeness (or 
lack thereof) in institutional discourse.  
Lastly, research should focus on pedagogical intervention and investigate what type of instruction 
(explicit, implicit, awareness-raising) is effective in helping language learners compose polite and 
effective email messages to professors. Factors such as proficiency level, amount of input and practice, 
length of exposure in the target culture and academic environment, and pragmatic transfer could be 
controlled to determine optimal intervention. Perhaps, as email becomes as commonplace as the 
telephone, institutional standards will become more solidified and ESL teaching materials aimed at an 
academic audience will include email communication as a regular course component. As a result, 
professors may eventually no longer write email etiquette rules into their syllabi.  
 
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas Students Writing Emails to Faculty 
 
Language Learning & Technology 77 
NOTES 
1. Sample teaching materials may be requested by emailing the author at biesenbs@georgetown.edu. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I would like to thank the three anonymous reviewers, as well as the Managing Editor and Copy Editor at 
LLT, for their helpful comments on an earlier version of this paper. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas is a member of the faculty at the Center for Language Education and 
Development at Georgetown University. She has taught ESL and TESOL Teacher Training courses for 
over 20 years and has conducted research on how technology, specifically e-mail, affects language use 
and pragmatic differences between native and non-native speakers of English in student-professor 
interaction. She has also investigated the effectiveness and usefulness of asynchronous discussion board 
interaction in higher education. She is the Local Chair of the 2008 AAAL Convention, to be held in 
Washington, D.C. 
Email:  biesenbs@georgetown.edu  
 
REFERENCES 
Bardovi-Harlig, K. (2001). Evaluating the empirical evidence: Grounds for instruction in pragmatics? In 
K. R. Rose & G. Kasper (Eds.), Pragmatics in language teaching (pp. 13-32). Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Bardovi-Harlig, K., & Hartford, B. (1990). Congruence in native and nonnative conversations: Status 
balance in the academic advising session. Language Learning, 40(4), 467-501. 
Bardovi-Harlig, K., & Hartford, B. (1993). Learning the rules of academic talk: A longitudinal study of 
pragmatic development. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 15, 279-304. 
Baron, N. S. (1984). Computer-mediated communication as a force in language change. Visible 
Language, 18(2), 118-141. 
Baron, N. S. (1998). Letters by phone or speech by other means: The linguistics of email. Language and 
Communication, 18, 133-170. 
Baron, N. S. (2002). Who sets e-mail style? Prescriptivism, coping strategies, and democratizing 
communication access. The Information Society, 18, 403-413. 
Baron, N. S. (2003). Why email looks like speech: Proofreading, pedagogy and public face. In J. 
Aitchison & D. M. Lewis (Eds.), New media language (pp. 85-94). New York: Routledge. 
Beebe, L. M., & Cummings, M. C. (1996). Natural speech act data versus written questionnaire data: 
How data collection method affects speech act performance. In S. M. Gass & J. Neu (Eds.), Speech acts 
across cultures (pp. 65-86). New York: Mouton de Gruyter. 
Beebe, L. M., Takahashi, T., & Uliss-Weltz, R. (1990). Pragmatic transfer in ESL refusals. In R. 
Scarcella, E. Andersen, & S. D. Krashen (Eds.), On the development of communicative competence in a 
second language (pp. 55-73). New York: Newbury House. 
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas Students Writing Emails to Faculty 
 
Language Learning & Technology 78 
Biesenbach-Lucas, S. (2002). How’s tomorrow? Pragmatic features of student requests for appointments. 
Paper presented at the Annual Convention of the American Association of Applied Linguistics (AAAL), 
Salt Lake City, UT. 
Biesenbach-Lucas, S. (2004). Speech acts in email: A new look at pragmatic competence. Paper presented 
at the Annual Convention of the American Association of Applied Linguistics, Portland, OR. 
Biesenbach-Lucas, S. (2005). Communication topics and strategies in email consultation: Comparison 
between American and international university students. Language Learning & Technology, 9(2), 24-46. 
Biesenbach-Lucas, S. (2006a). Making requests in email: Do cyber-consultations entail directness? 
Toward conventions in a new medium. In K. Bardovi-Harlig, J. C. Félix-Brasdefer, & A. Omar (Eds.), 
Pragmatics and language learning (pp. 81-108). Honolulu, HI: Second Language Teaching and 
Curriculum Center, University of Hawai’i. 
Biesenbach-Lucas, S. (2006b). New technology in traditional contexts. Unpublished manuscript, 
Georgetown University.  
Biesenbach-Lucas, S., & Weasenforth, D. (2000). "Please help me": L1/L2 variations in solicitations in 
electronic conferences. Paper presented at the 20th Annual Second Language Research Forum (SLRF), 
Madison, WI. 
Biesenbach-Lucas, S., & Weasenforth, D. (2001). Institutional discourse in the real world: Professors’ 
judgments of student requests. Paper presented at the Georgetown Roundtable of Languages and 
Linguistics, Washington, DC. 
Biesenbach-Lucas, S., & Weasenforth, D. (2002a). Virtual office hours: Negotiation strategies in 
electronic conferencing. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 15(2), 147-165.  
Biesenbach-Lucas, S., & Weasenforth, D. (2002b). A strategic approach to improving “pragmatic 
literacy”: Pre-academic ESL. Improving Learning Strategies for Literacy: International Research 
Conference on First and Second Language Literacy Strategies, University of Maryland, College Park, 
MD, November 2002. 
Billmyer, K. (1990). "I really like your lifestyle": ESL Learners learning how to compliment. Working 
Papers in Educational Linguistics, 6(2), 31-48. 
Bloch, J. (2002). Student/teacher interaction via email: The social context of Internet discourse. Journal 
of Second Language Writing, 11, 117-134.  
Blum-Kulka, S. (1987). Indirectness and politeness in requests: Same or different? Journal of Pragmatics, 
11, 131-146. 
Blum-Kulka, S. (1991). Interlanguage pragmatics: The case of requests. In R. Phillipson, E. Kellerman, L. 
Selinker, M. Sharwood-Smith, & M. Swain (Eds.), Foreign/second language pedagogy research (pp. 
255-272). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Blum-Kulka, S., & Levenston, E. A. (1987). Lexical-grammatical pragmatic indicators. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition, 9, 155-170. 
Blum-Kulka, S., House, J., & Kasper, G. (1989). The CCSARP Coding Manual. In S. Blum-Kulka, J. 
House, & G. Kasper (Eds.), Cross-cultural pragmatics: Requests and apologies (pp. 273-294). Norwood, 
NJ: Ablex. 
Bou-Franch, P., & Lorenzo-Dus, N. (2005). Enough DCTs: Moving methodological debate in pragmatics 
into the 21st century. Paper presented at the 16th International Conference on Pragmatics and Language 
Learning, Bloomington, IN. 
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas Students Writing Emails to Faculty 
 
Language Learning & Technology 79 
Boxer, D. (2002a). Applying sociolinguistics: Domains and face-to-face interaction. Philadelphia: John 
Benjamins. 
Boxer, D. (2002b). Discourse issues in cross-cultural pragmatics. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 
22, 150-167. 
Brenner, K. (2006). A course in writing business e-mail. Essential Teacher, 3(2), 46-49. 
Brown, P., & Levinson, S. (1978). Universals of language use: Politeness phenomena. In E. Goody (Ed.), 
Questions and politeness (pp. 56-324). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Brown, P., & Levinson, S. (1987). Politeness: Some universals in language use. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University press.  
Cameron, D. (2003). Globalizing "communication". In J. Aitchison & D. M. Lewis (Eds.), New media 
language (pp. 27-35). New York: Routledge. 
Chen, C-F. E. (2001). Making e-mail requests to professors: Taiwanese vs. American students. Paper 
presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Association for Applied Linguistics, St-Louis, MO. 
(ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 461 299). 
Chen, C-F. E. (2006). The development of e-mail literacy: From writing to peers to writing to authority 
figures. Language Learning & Technology, 10(2), 35-55. 
Cohen, A., & Olshtain, E. (1993). The production of speech acts by EFL learners. TESOL Quarterly, 
27(1), 33-56. 
Collins, M. (1998). The use of email and electronic bulletin boards in college-level biology. Journal of 
Computers in Mathematics and Science Teaching, 17(1), 75-94. 
Crystal, D. (2001). Language and the Internet. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  
Danet, B. (2001). Cyberpl@y: Communicating online. Oxford: Berg.  
Davis, B., & Brewer, J. (1997). Electronic discourse. Albany, NY: State University of New York. 
Drake, B., Yuthas, K., & Dillard, J. F. (2000). It’s only words – Impacts of information technology on 
moral dialogue. Journal of Business Ethics, 23(1), 41-59. 
DuFon, M. A. (2003). Gift giving in Indonesian: A model for teaching pragmatic routines in the foreign 
language classroom of the less commonly taught languages. In A. Martínez Flor, E. Usó Juan, & A. 
Fernández Guerra (Eds.), Pragmatic competence and foreign language teaching (pp. 109-131). Castelló 
de la Plana, Spain: Publicacions de la Universitat Jaume I. 
Duthler, K. W. (2006). The politeness of requests made via email and voicemail: Support for the 
Hyperpersonal Model. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 11(2). Retrieved November 9, 
2006, from http://jcmc.indiana.edu/vol11/issue2/duthler.html. 
Flynn, N., & Flynn, T. (1998). Writing effective e-mail. Menlo Park: CA: Crisp.  
Fraser, B., & Nolen, W. (1981). The association of deference with linguistic form. International Journal 
of the Sociology of Language, 27, 93-109. 
Gee, J. P. (2002). Literacies, identities, and discourses. In M. J. Schleppegrell & M. C. Colombi (Eds.), 
Developing advanced literacy in first and second languages: Meaning with power (pp. 159-175). 
Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Glater, J. D. (2006, February 21). To: Professor @University.edu subject: Why it’s all about me. The New 
York Times. Retrieved March 2, 2006, from 
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas Students Writing Emails to Faculty 
 
Language Learning & Technology 80 
http://www.nytimes.com/2006/02/21/education/21professors.html?ex=1298178000&en=369f9f043899ed
57&ei=5088&partner=rssnyt&emc=rss. 
Hale, C., & Scanlon, J. (1999). Wired style: Principles of English usage in the digital age. New York: 
Broadway Books. 
Halliday, M. A. K. (1990). Spoken and written language. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Hartford, B., & Bardovi-Harlig, K. (1992). Experimental and observational data in the study of 
interlanguage pragmatics. In L. F. Bouton (Ed.), Pragmatics and language learning. Volume 3 (pp. 33-
52). Urbana, IL: DEIL. 
Hartford, B., & Bardovi-Harlig, K. (1996). "At your earliest convenience": A study of written student 
requests to faculty. In L. F. Bouton (Ed.), Pragmatics and language learning. Monograph Series Volume 
7 (pp. 55-69). Urbana, IL: DEIL. 
Herring, S. (1996). Computer-mediated communication: Linguistic, social, and cross-cultural 
Perspectives. Philadelphia: John Benjamins.  
Herring, S. C. (2002). Computer-mediated communication on the Internet. Annual Review of Information 
Science and Technology, 36, 109-168. 
House, J. (1989). Politeness in English and German: The functions of please and bitte. In S. Blum-Kulka, 
J. House, & G. Kasper (Eds.), Cross-Cultural pragmatics: Requests and apologies (pp. 96-122). 
Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
House, J. (2003). Teaching and learning pragmatic fluency in a foreign language: The case of English as a 
lingua franca. In A. Martínez Flor, E. Usó Juan, & A. Fernández Guerra (Eds.), Pragmatic competence 
and foreign language teaching (pp. 133-159). Castelló de la Plana, Spain: Publicacions de la Universitat 
Jaume I. 
Inside Higher Ed. (2006). Be polite, e-polite. Retrieved May 4, 2006, from 
http://insidehighered.com/news/2006/04/19/oregon.  
Iwai, C., & Rinnert, C. (2001). Cross-cultural comparison of strategic realization of pragmatic 
competence: Implications for learning world Englishes. Hiroshima Journal of International Studies, 7, 
157-181. 
Judd, E. L. (1999). Some issues in the teaching of pragmatic competence. In E. Hinkel (Ed.), Culture in 
second language teaching and learning (pp. 152-166). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Kasper, G. (1992). Pragmatic transfer. Second Language Research, 8, 203-231. 
Kasper, G. (2001). Classroom research on interlanguage pragmatics. In K. R. Rose & G. Kasper (Eds.), 
Pragmatics in language teaching (pp. 33-60). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Kim, M. S., & Bresnahan, M. (1994). A process model of request tactic evaluation. Discourse Processes, 
18, 317-344. 
Li, Y. (2000). Surfing e-mails. English Today, 16(4), 30-34, 55.  
Mackey, D. (2005). Send me a message: A step-by-step approach to business and professional writing. 
New York: McGraw Hill. 
Malley, S. B. (2006). Whose digital literacy it is, anyway? Essential Teacher, 3(2), 50-52. 
Marbach-Ad, G., & Sokolove, P. (2001). Creating direct channels of communication: Fostering 
interaction with e-mail and in-class notes. Journal of College Science Teaching, 31(3), 178-182. 
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas Students Writing Emails to Faculty 
 
Language Learning & Technology 81 
Martin, M. M., Myers, S. A., & Mottet, T. P. (1999). Students’ motives for communicating with their 
instructors. Communication Education, 48, 157-164. 
Murphy, B., & Neu, J. (1996). My grade's too low: The speech act set of complaining. In S. M. Gass & J. 
Neu (Eds.), Speech acts across cultures: Challenges to communication in second language (pp. 191-216). 
Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 
Payne, C. (1997). Opening the door with e-mail: From no tech to low-tech. ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED412936. Retrieved April 16, 1997, from 
http://kolea.kcc.hawaii.edu/tcc/tcc_conf97/pres/payne.html. 
Poling, D. J. (1994). E-mail as an effective teaching supplement. Educational Technology, 34(5), 53-55. 
Rinnert, C., & Kobayashi, H. (1999). Requestive hints in Japanese and English. Journal of Pragmatics, 
31, 1173-1201. 
Rose, K. R. (1996). American English, Japanese, and directness: More than stereotypes. JALT Journal, 
18(1), 67-80. 
Rose, K. R. (1999). Teachers and students learning about requests in Hong Kong. In E. Hinkel (Ed.), 
Culture in second language teaching and learning (pp. 167-180). Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Spears, R., & Lea, M. (1992). Social influence and the influence of the "social" in computer-mediated 
communication. In M. Lea (Ed.), Contexts of computer-mediated communication (pp. 30-65). London: 
Harvester Wheatsheaf. 
Sproull, L., & Kiessler, S. (1986). Reducing social context clues: Electronic mail in organizational 
communication. Management Science, 32(11), 1492-1512. 
Sproull, L., & Kiessler, S. (1991). Connections: New ways of working in the networked organization. 
Boston: MIT Press.  
Swales, J. M., & Feak, C. B. (2000). English in today’s research world: A writing guide. Ann Arbor, MI: 
University of Michigan Press.  
The New York Times. (2006, February 23). Students e-mail the oddest things. Editorial/Letters Section 
(p. A26). 
Trosborg, A. (1995). Interlanguage pragmatics: Requests, complaints and apologies. Berlin: Mouton de 
Gruyter. 
Warschauer, M. (1999). Electronic literacies: Language, culture, and power in online education. 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Weasenforth, D., & Biesenbach-Lucas, S. (2001). Just a little bit longer: A contrastive pragmatic 
analysis of requests for late submission. Paper presented at the Annual Convention of the American 
Association of Applied Linguistics, St. Louis, MO. 
Weizman, E. (1989). Requestive hints. In S. Blum-Kulka, J. House, & G. Kasper (Eds.), Cross-cultural 
pragmatics: Requests and apologies (pp. 71-95). Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
Weizman, E. (1993). Interlanguage requestive hints. In G. Kasper and S. Blum-Kulka (Eds.), 
Interlanguage pragmatics (pp. 123-137). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 
