Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num3/huangliou/ 
October 2007, Volume 11, Number 3 
pp. 64-82 
 
Copyright © 2007, ISSN 1094-3501 64 
VOCABULARY LEARNING IN AN AUTOMATED GRADED READING 
PROGRAM 
Hung-Tzu Huang 
University of Hawai'i at Mānoa 
Hsien-Chin Liou 
National Tsing Hua University 
Adult L2 learners are often encouraged to acquire new words through reading in order to 
promote language proficiency. Yet preparing suitable reading texts is often a challenge for 
teachers because the chosen texts must have a high percentage of words familiar to 
specific groups of learners in order to allow the inference of word meanings from context. 
With the help of word lists research and advances in quantitative corpus analyses using 
word frequency computer programs, this study selected sixteen articles from the computer 
corpus of a local Chinese-English magazine and used them to construct an online English 
extensive reading program. A preliminary assessment of the reading program was 
conducted with 38 college students over twelve weeks based upon vocabulary gains from 
a pretest to a posttest. The results showed that learners improved their vocabulary scores 
after using the reading program. The online extensive reading syllabus demonstrated that 
such a design for a reading program is technically feasible and pedagogically beneficial 
and provides value in both vocabulary gains and learner satisfaction. 
INTRODUCTION 
Extensive reading, reading with "large quantities of materials that is within learners' linguistic 
competence" (Grabe & Stroller, 2002, p. 259), purportedly helps in vocabulary learning by creating 
opportunities for inferring word meaning in context (see, e.g., Krashen, 2004). However, studies have 
revealed that extensive reading for second language (L2) vocabulary development may lead to such 
problems as incorrect inferences, lack of retention, and, ultimately, vocabulary learning that does not 
allow learners to use words actively and productively (Hulstijn, 1993; Wesche & Paribakht, 2000). The 
problem of guesses that are incorrect can be ascribed to the fact that unlike native speakers, L2 learners 
often lack the word knowledge necessary to make accurate inferences of word meanings from context. 
Correct inferences of word meanings are conditional upon accurate recognition of surrounding words and 
sensitive use of reading strategies (Huckin & Coady, 1999). Laufer (1989) observed that learners whose 
vocabulary size enabled them to cover 95% of the words in a text were successful in developing an 
adequate level of comprehension. However, other studies show that L2 learners commonly lack sufficient 
word knowledge to support successful guessing and often do not actively use the reading strategies that 
might aid successful comprehension (Chen, 1998; Grabe & Stoller, 1997). Thus the chances of 
comprehending unsimplified authentic texts are frustratingly low, with the chances of effective 
vocabulary acquisition lower still. 
In addition to learners' limited language competence, restricted reading opportunities with re-encounters 
of new words pose yet another stumbling block. Word knowledge is a continuum gradually developed 
with each encounter of a word in different contexts. Acquiring a word is not simply a process of 
connecting word form to word meaning, but a complex development involving the learning of 
grammatical functions such as parts of speech, sociolinguistic factors such as word connotation, and 
frequency intuitions such as collocation, all over the course of multiple encounters of target words in 
diverse contexts (Nation, 1990, 2001). However, the frequent and repetitive exposure to target words 
necessary for the development of word knowledge is often not available in an extensive reading context 
Hung-Tzu Huang & Hsien-Chin Liou Vocabulary Learning in an Automated Reading Program 
 
Language Learning & Technology 65 
because either students have limited time or the reading materials are not appropriate (Paribakht & 
Wesche, 1997).  
The current study reports a research-informed attempt to address the difficulties outlined above by 
developing an online extensive reading syllabus. The experimental web-based extensive reading 
environment was designed to facilitate vocabulary learning in two main ways: by providing 
comprehensible texts sequenced according to word difficulty levels and by ensuring repetition of target 
words. As in a similar project by Ghadirian (2003), the program sequences reading texts according to the 
''coverage'' offered by lists of high frequency words and offers highlighting of target words, glossing, and 
online referencing. The program differs from Ghadirian's in that an algorithm for prioritizing texts that 
offer multiple exposures to target words was devised and built in. To assess the usefulness of our reading 
program, 38 EFL learners whose mother tongue is Chinese were recruited for participation in the project. 
We observed the learners' performance on measures of receptive and productive vocabulary knowledge in 
relation to numbers of encounters with target words in the extensive reading program. Research that 
explored the effects of three types of computerized assistance-- glosses, sequenced reading, multiple 
encounters--informed the design of the experimental program and is outlined below.  
Computerized Glosses and Vocabulary Learning While Reading 
Researchers have maintained that to initiate word acquisition, learners' attention must, at some point, be 
directed to form-meaning relationships of new, unfamiliar target words to be learned (Ellis, 1995; 
Schmidt, 2001; VanPatten, Williams, & Rott, 2004; Wong, 2005). Provision of glosses in reading can 
facilitate vocabulary learning by directing readers' attention toward the meaning of target words when 
they encounter the word forms, as long as the annotation is not intrusive (Davis, 1989; Hulstijn, 
Hollander, & Greidanus, 1996; Leefa, 1992; Liou, 2000). Results from empirical studies in learner 
behavior have pointed to the usefulness of developing simple textual glosses for extensive reading 
purposes. For instance, a study conducted by Davis and Lyman-Hager (1997) showed that the most 
frequently consulted annotation type was word translation, which constituted 85% of the information 
learners had accessed. Likewise, Lomicka (1998) reported students' strong dependence on first language 
(L1) definitions when word meanings were unknown. Studies of multimedia glosses (Davis & Lyman-
Hager, 1997) indicate that even though learners have the options of various annotation types (e.g., 
pictures, videos, or audio glosses), they nevertheless tend to rely largely on L1 definitions and ignore 
other options, as their use of glosses is oriented toward the goal of translation and paraphrasing to achieve 
basic comprehension. Gettys, Imhof, and Kautz (2001) further explained students' behaviors with the 
concept of human mental capacity. They contended that offering various modes of information might 
overrun the real needs of readers and thus cause cognitive overload in the process of reading. Similarly, 
Hegelheimer & Tower (2004) pointed out that, because of the limited capacity of learners' working 
memory and attention, providing readers with rich kinds of information will likely create unnecessary 
distraction and disruption. Given technical difficulties and learners' limited cognitive capacity, we 
reasoned that L1 textual glosses are both feasible and effective for use in computerized extensive reading 
environments.    
Vocabulary Learning Through Sequencing of Reading Texts 
Laufer (1989) and Nation (2001) observed that learners whose vocabulary size enabled them to 
understand the meanings of 95% of the words in a text were successful in developing an adequate level of 
comprehension. Assuming that learners are able to use contextual inference strategies for vocabulary 
acquisition, Laufer (1997) and Nation (1993) suggested that a 5,000 word lexicon of general English 
vocabulary is sufficient for reaching this 95% criterion in non-specialized texts. However, most high 
school graduates in EFL countries have a far smaller vocabulary than this (Chen, 1998). Thus, many 
English teachers turn to abridged or simplified texts that can scaffold learners along the process of 
learning words while reading. Though some researchers have argued against the use of simplified texts 
Hung-Tzu Huang & Hsien-Chin Liou Vocabulary Learning in an Automated Reading Program 
 
Language Learning & Technology 66 
(e.g. Bernhardt, 1984), their role in promoting the acquisition of vocabulary and other aspects of language 
is widely acknowledged (see Day & Bamford, 1998, for an overview).  
However, the sequencing of such graded materials is often based on textbook editors' subjective 
judgments and instructors' teaching experiences, and can be a very labor-intensive process. Fortunately, 
recent advances in quantitative corpus analyses and the availability of new frequency-based word lists 
offer promising solutions to these problems. For instance, Ghadirian (2003) used word frequency analyses 
as a basis for sequencing a large number of English texts for L2 learners in his experimental TextLadder 
program. The assumption was that the learning burden could be kept to a minimum and the online 
vocabulary learning environment enhanced by ordering texts so that those containing the most frequently 
recurring words were presented first. This is based on the principle that words encountered often are 
likely to be learned before low frequency ones (Cobb & Horst, 2001; Kyongho & Nation, 1989; Nation, 
2001). Ghadirian's procedures created an order for arranging reading texts that facilitated incremental 
vocabulary acquisition.  
Close scrutiny of Ghadirian's reading resource suggests room for improvement. First, the quantitative 
results of Ghadirian's (2003) study show that the percentage of words likely to be unfamiliar was 
particularly high in the first 10 to 20 texts, ranging from 8% to 16% and about 15 to 40 new words within 
a 300-word text. This is well above the known-word level recommended by Nation (2001); he has pointed 
out that "extensive reading should contain no more than 5% unknown tokens and no less than 1-2% to 
ensure that there is new vocabulary to learn" (p. 150). Second, TextLadder was not able to control when 
or how often learners encountered target words again during the process of extensive reading, and low 
levels of the reappearance of target words would likely limit incidental vocabulary learning. Only in the 
tenth or twentieth text could learners re-encounter some of the target words they read in the first text. By 
this time, these words were already considered as familiar words by the program, yet whether learners had 
actually acquired them after merely one exposure is questionable. Lastly, Ghadirian (2003) discussed the 
sequencing and design of TextLadder but did not report the effects of using it with actual language 
learners.  The research reported here is based on Textgrader, a computerized text sequencing program that 
draws on Ghadirian's ideas for creating supportive conditions for vocabulary acquisition but includes 
improvements such as a further reduction of vocabulary load and more frequent exposures to target 
words. In addition, an investigation of the effects of using Textgrader with EFL learner-readers is 
reported below.  
Amount of Word Exposure Needed for Successful Vocabulary Acquisition 
Although it has been consistently emphasized that repeated exposure to a word is needed for an 
incremental learning process, previous studies in both L1 and L2 research have not shown agreement 
concerning how much exposure is necessary for successful vocabulary acquisition (Horst, Cobb, & 
Meara, 1998; Nagy, Herman, & Anderson, 1985, 1987; Nation, 1990; Rott, 1999; Saragi, Nation, & 
Meister, 1978). The likely explanation for these disparate results is the incremental nature of the word 
learning process. A single encounter with a word in context could already result in some amount of ability 
to recognize its meaning, while 50 exposures might still not enable learners to build the complete and 
complex word knowledge needed for productive use. Receptive and productive types of knowledge of a 
word have commonly been used to describe the degree of learners' word knowledge (Nation, 2001; Read, 
2000), and it is generally agreed that learners' vocabulary knowledge can be located on a receptive to 
productive continuum (Nation, 2001). Learners are likely to first recognize a word's form, pronunciation, 
and basic meanings; then with further experiences or practice, their word knowledge will move along the 
continuum and finally reach the point of being able to use these words freely in productive mode. Due to 
its currency among the measures devised to assess the incremental development of vocabulary learning, 
Paribakht and Wesche's (1993) Vocabulary Knowledge Scale (VKS) was adopted in the present study. 
The measure is described in detail in a later section. 
Hung-Tzu Huang & Hsien-Chin Liou Vocabulary Learning in an Automated Reading Program 
 
Language Learning & Technology 67 
THE PRESENT STUDY 
The review of selected literature suggests that material developers interested in using technology to 
construct an environment that facilitates vocabulary learning during reading would do well to build in 
access to L1 textual glosses, and to draw on the computer's capacity to identify and sequence texts so that 
learners read those with high levels of known words first and encounter unknown words frequently as 
they move through the reading materials.  
In this study, an online extensive reading syllabus called Textgrader was developed following these 
principles and tested with learners of English. As discussed, the program aims to address the two major 
difficulties commonly encountered by second language learners in processing unsimplified texts: limited 
word knowledge and insufficient exposure to target words. The research had two main goals: to evaluate 
the participants' vocabulary learning outcomes and to determine how much exposure to target words was 
needed for the development of receptive and productive word knowledge. A set of research questions 
guides the current study.    
1) If the online extensive reading program can lead to vocabulary gains on the target learners, what is 
the relation between amount of word exposure and successful receptive and productive word 
acquisition? 
2) What feedback will the learners offer in response to the use of the online extensive reading program? 
METHOD 
Participants 
The participants were 38 Chinese-speaking EFL college freshmen in a public university in Taiwan. These 
students were from two intact sections of a required Freshman English course. All 38 participants had at 
least six years of formal instruction from junior to senior high schools and were estimated to be at the 
intermediate level regarding their overall English competence. Their previous learning experience in 
schools centered on intensive reading of English texts for grammar instruction with rare extensive reading 
opportunities. 
Designing An Online Extensive Reading Syllabus 
Reading texts and four word lists. 
The first step in constructing the online syllabus that would provide comprehensible input and offer 
learners repeated contacts with target words was to find suitable reading texts for Taiwanese college 
learners. Our goal was to identify texts that provided good opportunities to learn from authentic materials 
related to home culture. In our view, imported reading materials are too often focused on introducing the 
culture of English-speaking countries. We sought texts that would minimize any reading difficulties 
associated with lack of background knowledge. With this goal in mind, we selected texts from issues of 
the Sinorama magazine (recently renamed as Taiwan Panorama, http://www.taiwan-
panorama.com/en/index.php). The Sinorama articles are mainly about issues in Taiwan in such areas as 
politics, economics, arts, society, culture, and ecology. An electronic corpus consisting of 5008 texts 
dating from 1999 to 2001 was selected for possible use in the project. Next, to ensure that target words 
appear frequently in the texts so that learners could repetitively encounter them while reading, the 
procedures implemented in Ghadirian (2003) were followed, using word lists as criteria for screening 
appropriate texts. A new method of ensuring repeated encounters with new words was devised 
specifically in our study.  
In order to identify texts in the Sinorama corpus that offered the 95% known word coverage needed for 
successful inferring of the targeted unknown words and to sequence them according to percentages of 
target words in the texts, we drew on lists of high-frequency English words. Based on our knowledge of 
Hung-Tzu Huang & Hsien-Chin Liou Vocabulary Learning in an Automated Reading Program 
 
Language Learning & Technology 68 
the previous English learning experiences of our learners, we felt it was reasonable to assume that the 
participants would already know items on West's (1953) General Service List (GSL), a list of the 2000 
most basic English word families, and the High School Frequent Word List (HSF, Cheng, 2002). The 
HSF was used as a guideline for writing high school English textbooks in Taiwan.1 
In addition to the two 'familiar' word lists, we also created two lists of target words. Considering our 
college learners' need to read English academic texts, the University Word List (UWL, Xue & Nation, 
1984) was chosen as the first target word list. It consists of 800 word families not included in the GSL or 
the HSF, but frequently found in academic texts (Nation & Kyongho, 1995). The Sinorama High-
Frequency Word list (SHF) was selected as the second target word list.  It contains 781 word families not 
in GSL, HSF, or UWL, but frequently used in the 5008 Sinorama texts. In sum, words contained in the 
GSL and HSF were treated as familiar words already acquired by learners, and those in the UWL and 
SHF were target words that learners were expected to acquire while reading in the syllabus. These four 
lists together were able to meet the 95% coverage within the Sinorama texts. Table 1 contains 
summarized data relating to the four word lists. 
Table 1. Number of Cumulated Words from Four Word Lists and Text Coverage 
Word list Number of cumulated words Cumulated percentage coverage 
Familiar word list   
GSL 7,827 84.70% 
HSF 9,712 92.01% 
Target word list   
UWL 12,833 93.48% 
SHF 13,614 96.61% 
Total 13,614 96.61% 
 
Sequencing of reading texts. 
After determining suitable reading texts and word lists, we began to sequence reading texts in an order 
that could provide learners with comprehensible input and increase their exposure to target words with the 
aid of a computer database program. First, from the 5008 texts in Sinorama, we selected only those with a 
length of 1500 to 3000 words. Second, we examined the remaining texts by comparing them to the four 
word lists; texts not reaching 95% coverage of words in the four lists were excluded.  These processes left 
us with 124 reading texts out of the 5008 in the Sinorama corpus. Third, running words in these 124 texts 
were compared with those in the familiar word lists, GSL and HSF, and target word lists, UWL and SHF. 
Our computer program sifted through the texts and sequenced them according to vocabulary difficulty.  
The text that contained the smallest number of target words and highest number of familiar words 
occurred first in the sequence as the easiest. Up to this point, the ordering procedures replicated those in 
Ghadirian's (2003) except for the use of HSF and SHF word lists. However, we took several additional 
steps to increase encounters with target words to ease the learning.  
In order to create more favorable vocabulary learning conditions in our reading program, we highlighted 
all target words in the reading texts in red on the screen and glossed them with Chinese translations to 
raise readers' awareness and attention. After the target words appeared for the first time in red, they were 
highlighted in green and also glossed with translations in later readings. Such highlighting is in line with 
the studies on textual enhancement which found typographical enhancements effectively draw learners' 
attention to target forms (Jourdenais, Ota, Stauffer, Boyson, & Doughty, 1995; Shook, 1994; Wong, 
2003, 2005).  
After the learners read the first text in the sequence, the program did not immediately add the target words 
in the first text to the familiar word lists as was done in Ghadirian's TextLadder. Instead, to ensure 
Hung-Tzu Huang & Hsien-Chin Liou Vocabulary Learning in an Automated Reading Program 
 
Language Learning & Technology 69 
repetition, our program put exposed target words in another newly created word list, the Exposed Word 
List, for target words that had appeared once. With this new list, our program sifted through texts again 
looking for the one that contained the smallest number of target words and the highest number of familiar 
words; however, this time a new screening criterion was added by using the Exposed Word List.  In order 
to ensure repetitive exposure of target words, the program searched for a text that not only contained the 
highest number of familiar words and the smallest number of target words; but one that also contained the 
highest number of words in the Exposed Word list (target words from previous texts in the sequence). 
Table 2. Procedures in Sequencing Reading Texts 
Sequence of 
procedures 
Purpose Program Action Outcome 
Step 1 For appropriate 
length of reading 
texts 
Select texts with 1500 to 
3000 words 
959 texts met the 
qualification 
Step 2 For trimming off the 
texts that do not meet 
95% coverage from 
the four word lists 
Compare the running 
words in every text to the 
four word lists (GSL, 
HSF, UWL, and SHF) 
 
Step 3 To select the easiest 
text (the first reading 
text on the sequence) 
for learners 
Compare words in every 
text with the familiar 
word lists (GSL and 
HSF) and target word 
lists (UWL and SHF) 
 
Step 4 Same as Step 3 Select the easiest text 
that has the highest 
number of familiar words 
and least number of 
target words 
Text #1 (the easiest text 
or the first text on the 
reading sequence) is 
selected 
Step 5 To select the second 
text on the sequence 
Target words in Text #1 
are added into the 
Exposed Word List 
The Exposed Word List 
has target words from 
Text #1 
Step 6 Same as Step 5 Select the one text that 
meets the following three 
criteria: 
a. The highest number of 
familiar words. 
b. The least number of 
target words. 
c. The highest number of 
words in the Exposed 
Word List. 
Text #2 (the second 
easiest text or the 
second text on the 
sequence) is selected 
 
 
 
Text #2 is not only the 
second easiest text but 
also contains the most 
target words from Text 
#1 
 
For example, if the first text in the sequence order had four target words, e.g., administrative, hypnosis, 
entrepreneur, and faculty, after learners read the text, the four words would be removed from the target 
word list and included in the Exposed Word List. After the first text in the sequence was selected, the 
program then went through the remaining texts looking for the next easiest by comparing familiar words 
and target words to texts, and also with one more searching guideline, identifying the particular text that 
Hung-Tzu Huang & Hsien-Chin Liou Vocabulary Learning in an Automated Reading Program 
 
Language Learning & Technology 70 
contained the highest number of words from the Exposed Word List. The second text selected then might 
have a new set of target words, for example, epidemic, calligraphy, and deputy (highlighted in red), but 
also include target words from the first text, administrative, hypnosis, entrepreneur, or faculty 
(highlighted in green). The second text was the second easiest, and the text that had the greatest number 
of target words from the first text. After the second reading, the program automatically added the target 
words in the second text to the Exposed Word List (which would now contain target words from the first 
two texts) and again went through the same sifting process for the next text.  In other words, the Exposed 
Word List ensured that the target words appearing in the previous texts would reappear in the following 
texts. The above procedures are presented in Table 2.  
For the purpose of a preliminary assessment on learners' vocabulary acquisition within a manageable 
instructional period of twelve weeks, we used only the first sixteen texts in the sequence of all chosen 
texts for extensive reading practice.  These sixteen texts contained a total of 223 target words that varied 
in numbers of occurrences. Three comprehension questions focusing on the content of the text rather than 
the target words were devised and presented at the end of every text. Learners were able to respond to 
these questions online and received immediate feedback concerning the correctness of their answers.  
Figure 1 illustrates the first reading text from the syllabus (The page can be accessed by going to 
http://candle.cs.nthu.edu.tw. Use candle/candle to login, choose Textgrader under the Reading 
component, and click on the first article to start).  
 
Figure 1. A reading text from the online extensive reading syllabus 
After the sequencing procedures and web programming, the sixteen texts in the syllabus demonstrated a 
satisfactory average target word rate (the proportion of target words per words of running text) of 1.9%. 
For example, the first two reading texts placed on the syllabus demonstrated target word coverage rates of 
2.4% and 3.4% respectively. That is, the first two texts contain 97.6% and 96.6% of 'familiar' words. Of 
the 223 target words in the sixteen texts, 151 appeared one to two times, and 72 appeared three times or 
Hung-Tzu Huang & Hsien-Chin Liou Vocabulary Learning in an Automated Reading Program 
 
Language Learning & Technology 71 
more. The distribution of the amount of word exposure in the sixteen reading texts is shown in Table 3. 
This distribution differed considerably from Ghadirian's TextLadder (2003), in which five exposures of 
target words were dispersed over 300 texts with no control on the interval of exposure. As is shown in the 
statistical results, our goals of controlling new word rate and ensuring repetitive target word exposure 
were thus achieved.  
Table 3. Distribution of Target Words in the Sixteen Reading Texts 
Group Number Number of target word exposures Number of target words 
Group 1 Words appearing 1-2 times 151 
Group 2 Words appearing 3-4 times 43 
Group 3 Words appearing 5-6 times 13 
Group 4 Words appearing 7-8 times 4 
Group 5 Words appearing more than 9 times 12 
Research Instruments 
Pretest  
For the purpose of exploring the amount of exposure needed for successful vocabulary acquisition, the 
pretest aimed to identify target words that were totally unfamiliar to all 38 learners and to assess learners' 
entry vocabulary level before the extensive reading activity.  The pretest consisted of a total of 60 items, 
including 50 target words (see Appendix) randomly chosen from the 223 in the target word pool and 10 
familiar words from the familiar word lists. Participants reported their knowledge of these words by 
marking a check by the words they had seen before and tried to provide an English definition or Chinese 
translation beside these words. The 50 target words and 10 familiar words in the pretest items were 
marked separately, with each correct familiar word receiving 10 points and each correct target word 2 
points, for a maximum of 100 points in each case (50x2, 10x10). Words with correct answers from any of 
the learners were considered 'known' words and excluded from the list of targets.  
Posttest  
To measure vocabulary gains after the online extensive reading activity, we selected the Vocabulary 
Knowledge Scale (Paribakht & Wesche, 1997; Wesche & Paribakht, 1996). According to its creators, the 
VKS aims "to capture initial stages or levels in word learning that are subject to accurate self-report or 
efficient demonstration, and that are precise enough to reflect gains during a relatively brief instructional 
period" (Wesche & Paribakht, 1996, p. 33). An example of the scale with the self-report categories for an 
example word institute appears in Table 4.  
Table 4. Examples of Self-Report Categories in the VKS Elicitation Scale 
Word: Institute Self-Report Category 
I. I don’t remember having seen this word before. 
II. I have seen this word before, but I don’t know what it means. 
III. I have seen this word before, and I think it means ____________.  
(synonym or translation) 
IV. I know this word.  It means ___________.  
(synonym or translation) 
V. I can use this word in a sentence: _____________.  
(If you do this section, please also do section IV). 
 
The self-report categories were translated into the learners' native language, Chinese, so that learners 
could fully understand how to do this test. The VKS posttest consisted of the same 50 target words used 
Hung-Tzu Huang & Hsien-Chin Liou Vocabulary Learning in an Automated Reading Program 
 
Language Learning & Technology 72 
in the pretest. The scoring followed procedures outlined by Wesche and Paribakht (1996). For each target 
word it yielded a score from 1 to 5, from "never having seen the word before" to "being able to make a 
correct sentence with it". For sentence scoring, two English teachers were involved and their scores were 
averaged to obtain the final score. When there were discrepancies, they met to discuss in order to achieve 
a consensus.  
Questionnaires 
Questionnaires of two kinds were designed to examine the participants' background and their attitudes 
toward extensive reading. The questionnaires were in Chinese to limit the possibility of misunderstanding 
due to their limited English ability. The first questionnaire, the Background Questionnaire, enabled us to 
obtain information on learners' computer use and Internet access at home, their perspectives on English 
learning, and their experiences with extensive reading. This 17-item questionnaire was designed on a 5-
point scale in the Likert format. Similar in format, the Evaluation Questionnaire had 20 items relating to 
the participants' perceptions of the effectiveness of the online extensive reading syllabus concerning four 
aspects: system interface design, features fostering vocabulary learning, features of reading texts, and 
motivation for future use.   
Procedures 
The design and implementation of the online extensive reading syllabus was constructed on a web 
platform first. Then, the participants completed the Background Questionnaire and pretest. They 
subsequently completed 16 reading texts online at home in a period of 12 weeks, which included both 
their winter break, when there was no formal English instruction and only a limited amount of English 
exposure was available, and the first month of a new semester. We monitored the learning process from 
the records of an online tracker program and offered help via email when necessary.  Finally, participants 
completed the posttest and the Evaluation Questionnaire.  
RESULTS 
From learners' responses to items in the Background Questionnaire, we discovered that a very high 
percentage of the learners (94.7%) used computers frequently; however, only 7.9% of them used Internet 
resources to learn English on a regular basis, and only 26.3% had past experience in using computers to 
assist language learning in English classes. For questions on learners' past extensive reading experiences, 
up to 78.9% had been encouraged to form the habit of reading regularly by their English teachers before, 
yet only 13.2% of them had extensive reading habits. The main reasons for not having extensive reading 
habits were that they did not have time for reading or they could not locate suitable materials. 
Comparison of Scores in the Pretest and Posttest 
In order to address the first research question, several statistical analyses were conducted. First, the 
independent t-test was used to examine whether learners' performances for familiar and unfamiliar words 
differed. As Table 5 shows, there was a significant difference in accuracy between familiar and target 
words (t=12.737, p<0.01), with mean scores of 84.74 (SD=15.89) and 39.00 (SD=15.41), respectively. 
This indicates familiar words were those mostly learned by this group, and target words seemed 
unfamiliar to most of the participants. This confirmed our estimation of learners' vocabulary level with 
either familiar or target words when we used the four wordlists as criteria for selection.   
Table 5. The Independent T-test for Familiar and Target Words in Pretest 
Words in pretest n Mean SD t-value df p 
Familiar Words 38 84.74 15.89 12.737 74 .000* 
Target Words 38 39 15.41    
Note: *significance level p<.01; Total score: 100 
Hung-Tzu Huang & Hsien-Chin Liou Vocabulary Learning in an Automated Reading Program 
 
Language Learning & Technology 73 
As mentioned above, scores for the VKS, i.e., the posttest, were based on learners' self-reported 
knowledge. In order to compare learners' vocabulary level in the pretest and the posttest, of the 50 target 
words used in both tests, those for which the learners were able to provide a correct translation or 
definition were identified as "known" words (words which scored 3-5 points) in both cases. The mean 
score differences of known words in the pretest and in the posttest were compared using the paired t-test. 
As is apparent from Table 6, significant overall vocabulary gains (t=8.849, p<.01) were achieved by 
learners. With a mean of 39.00 (SD=15.41) in the pretest and 49.50 (SD=17.13) in the posttest, about one 
tenth of the words were moved from "not known" (words scoring 1-2 points) to "known". 
Table 6. Learners’ Overall Vocabulary Gains by Paired t-test 
Test n Mean SD t value df p 
Pretest 38 39 17.13 8.849 37 .000* 
Posttest 38 49.5 15.41    
Note: *significance level p<.01; Total score: 100 
Cross-comparison of learners' responses in the pretest showed that a total of 10 of the 50 target words 
were completely unfamiliar to all 38 learners. On the basis of the number of times that each word 
appeared across the sixteen reading texts, the ten words were grouped into five groups as shown in Table 
7. Group One included words that appeared once or twice; Group Two, words that appeared 3-4 times; 
Group Three, words that appeared 5-6 times; Group Four, words that appeared 7-8 times; and Group Five, 
words that appeared more than 9 times. Comparisons of the word knowledge gains of these ten words 
would help us answer the question of how much exposure is needed for successful word learning within 
the online extensive reading environment.  
Table 7. Target Words Completely Unfamiliar to Learners 
Group Number Number of exposures Words in the group Word class 
Group 1 (1-2 times) 2 times monopoly Noun 
 1 time recruitment Noun 
Group 2 (3-4 times) 4 times startling Adjective 
 4 times deputy Adjective 
Group 3 (5-6 times) 6 times calligraphy Noun 
 5 times epidemic Adjective 
Group 4 (7-8 times) 8 times faculty Noun 
Group 5 (more than 9 
times) 
15 times entrepreneur Noun 
 
A repeated-measure analysis of variance (ANOVA) was computed to compare the mean scores of the five 
groups of target words, which differed in the amount of exposure. Results are shown in Table 8.   
Table 8. Analysis of Variance for Target Words with Different Amounts of Exposure 
Variable df SS MS F 
Group difference in amount of exposure (G) 4 12.663 3.166 3.589 
Subjects (S) 37 30.034 0.812  
G X S 148 130.537 0.882  
Total 189 173.234   
 
The results of the ANOVA showed that a certain degree of word knowledge was gained in all the five 
groups, including the words that merely appeared once or twice.  Also, the amount of vocabulary gain 
Hung-Tzu Huang & Hsien-Chin Liou Vocabulary Learning in an Automated Reading Program 
 
Language Learning & Technology 74 
varied significantly as a function of amount of exposure (F=3.589, p<.05), with Group Five, words which 
appeared more than nine times, achieving the highest mean score of 2.39 and Group One, words that 
appeared once or twice, having the lowest 1.68. Post hoc analysis using Least Significant Difference 
(LSD) indicated where the significant differences between groups lay, as shown in Table 9. Except for 
Group Two, which displayed a surprisingly high mean score (2.37), the mean scores demonstrated a 
gradual rise in word gains with the increase in amount of exposure. However, none of the mean scores in 
the five groups reached 3.0 or above (which required the provision of a correct Chinese translation). This 
indicated that word gains were not sufficient to bring learners from "not known" to "known" scoring 
categories.  
Table 9. Variance for Posttest Scores Among Words with Different Exposure Amount 
Group Mean SD Group 1 Group 2 Group 3 Group 4 Group 5 
Group 1 (1-2 times) 1.68 0.74  *  * * 
Group 2 (3-4 times) 2.37 0.94 *     
Group 3 (5-6 times) 2.05 1.35      
Group 4 (7-8 times) 2.08 0.67 *     
Group 5  
(more than 9 times) 2.39 1.03 *     
Note: * Sig. p<.05 
Compared with previous studies, the target words in ours might have been intrinsically more difficult. To 
explore such speculation, we compared the ten target words (those unknown to all participants) to ones in 
the word lists in the COBUILD Dictionary (Sinclair, 1995), which organizes words into five frequency 
bands, with band five being the most frequently used and easiest words, and band one the least frequent 
and most difficult words. A listing of target words in the study and the COBUILD frequency bands to 
which each word belongs appear in Table 10. As can be seen, except for words in Group Two, startling 
and deputy, which belong to band 4, most words were in band 1 or band 2, the least frequent and most 
difficult bands.  This word difficulty difference was also evident in the posttest results. Whereas the mean 
scores in other word groups showed a gradual rise in word gains with the increase of amount of exposure, 
group two displayed an unusually high mean score, almost as high as words in group five, the ones that 
appeared nine or more times. This suggested that words in Group Two could be easier to acquire than 
others.  The inherent low frequency of target words, therefore, might increase the demands on amount of 
exposure necessary for target words to be acquired in the current study.   
Table 10. Target Words and COBUILD Frequency Bands 
Group Amount of exposure Words in the group GOBUILD frequency bands 
Group 1 (1-2 times) 2 times monopoly Band 1 
 1 time recruitment Band 3 
Group 2 (3-4 times) 4 times startling Band 2 
 4 times deputy Band 4 
Group 3 (5-6 times) 6 times calligraphy Not found 
 5 times epidemic Band 2 
Group 4 (7-8 times) 8 times faculty Band 2 
Group 5 (more than 
9 times) 15 times entrepreneur Band 1 
 15 times hypnosis Band 1 
 10 times administrative Band 2 
 
Hung-Tzu Huang & Hsien-Chin Liou Vocabulary Learning in an Automated Reading Program 
 
Language Learning & Technology 75 
Results of the Evaluation Questionnaire 
The Evaluation Questionnaire included items addressing four aspects of the delivery of the reading 
program: system interface design, features fostering vocabulary learning, features of the online reading 
texts, and motivation for future use. In order to address the second research question, responses to the 
questionnaire were analyzed. As one can see in Table 11, for questions relating to learners' motivation for 
future use, 81.6% of the learners expressed their wish to continue to use a similar online reading program 
in the future. Being able to improve English reading skills (42%) and to facilitate vocabulary learning 
(33%) were the two main reasons reported by the learners. Only 18.4% of the learners indicated that they 
would not use similar tools for learning English in the future, the main reason being that they were not 
used to reading online (51%).  Of the seven learners (18.4%) who indicated that they would not use 
similar online reading programs in the future, four explained that they regarded the online extensive 
reading syllabus as a helpful tool; however, they already had well-developed extensive reading habits and 
satisfactory reading materials in print. 
Table 11. Learners’ Motivation of Future Program Use 
Questions Responses Percentage 
Will I use a similar online 
extensive reading syllabus in 
the future? 
Yes, I will 81.6%(31/38) 
 No, I will not 18.4% (7/38) 
The reason why I will use a 
similar online extensive reading 
syllabus in the future: 
Able to improve reading skills 42% (24/64) 
 Able to enhance vocabulary 33% (21/64) 
 The articles are interesting 11% (7/64) 
 There are various tools fostering 
vocabulary learning 
16% (10/64) 
 Others 3% (2/64) 
The reasons why I will not use a 
similar online extensive reading 
syllabus in the future: 
Not used to reading long articles 8% (1/12) 
 Not used to online reading 51% (6/12) 
 Dislike the fixed set schedules 
organized by the online extensive 
reading syllabus 
8% (1/12) 
 Others 33% (4/12) 
 
As for learners' responses regarding features that foster vocabulary learning in the online reading 
program, learners rated two of the four features positively with an overall mean score of 3.3 (out of 5.0).  
Repetitive exposure (mean=3.9) and highlighting with different colors on target words and exposed words 
(mean=3.8) were considered most helpful; however, the amount of gloss was reportedly least beneficial, 
with a mean of 2.9. The learners indicated that more words should be glossed to help reading 
comprehension. Regarding learners' perceptions of the reading texts, they agreed that the text genre was 
dynamically varied (mean=3.8) and the topics were interesting (mean=3.4).  Moreover, they indicated 
that, compared to selecting reading texts on their own, they preferred the online extensive reading 
syllabus that had prepared texts beforehand for them (mean=3.7). Nevertheless, the lengthy texts chosen 
in the program caused the greatest difficulties for most learners. The students felt that their reading 
comprehension dropped with such long texts. Finally, learners' reactions to the interface design of the 
Hung-Tzu Huang & Hsien-Chin Liou Vocabulary Learning in an Automated Reading Program 
 
Language Learning & Technology 76 
system had a mean of 3.7.  Overall, learners were satisfied with the layout of the online extensive reading 
syllabus. 
DISCUSSION 
Benefits of the Online Extensive Reading Program for Vocabulary Learning 
In this study, we incorporated textual gloss, highlighting, a bilingual Chinese-English concordancer, and 
high frequency word lists for computerized text selection and sequencing techniques in the design of an 
online extensive reading syllabus for vocabulary learning purposes.  To ensure comprehensible input, the 
sixteen texts included in the syllabus demonstrated an average target word rate of 1.9%, a percentage just 
under the optimal range of 2% to 5% suggested by Nation (2001).  Most of the text selection techniques 
were based on Ghadirian's work (2003). However, the distribution in our Textgrader syllabus differed 
greatly from Ghadirian's TextLadder, as we added another criterion: the Exposed Word list. This suggests 
that our goals of providing comprehensible input and repeated exposure of target words were achieved. 
The exploratory assessment with pretest-posttest comparison indicates measurable vocabulary learning 
occurred for the 38 participants, in that the percentage of learners' "known" words increased and "not 
known" words decreased after twelve weeks of extensive reading online. The learners' improved word 
knowledge may support the claim that such an online extensive reading syllabus with various learning 
tools could aid vocabulary learning via extensive reading. Similarly, feedback from the Evaluation 
Questionnaire also showed learners' overall positive perception of the online reading environment. This 
may provide positive evidence for utilizing the online extensive reading syllabus to enhance learners' 
word acquisition through reading.   
Learners' Feedback on the Online Extensive Reading Syllabus 
After the twelve-week online extensive reading experience, learners' reactions to the syllabus were largely 
positive. They appeared to approve of the various online vocabulary enhancement features as being 
effective for vocabulary acquisition. Improved reading and vocabulary abilities were outcomes the 
learners indicated as the major advantages of the syllabus.  
The feedback regarding glossing conflicted with our previous estimation of learner vocabulary level as 
suggested by the pretest. The pretest results confirmed our familiar words were indeed what had been 
mostly acquired by learners, compared with target words. Yet, our online tracking program reveals that 
the learners looked up some familiar words using the concordancer but seldom looked up target words; 
thus, we suspect that the difficulties might have originated from a common problem—learners' 
inexperience in extensive reading or look-up strategies. Learners further reported that they were not used 
to long texts and that they either lost patience or their eyes easily tired from reading online.  
Comprehensibility dropped as they increasingly struggled toward the end of the texts.  Possibly, instead 
of using extensive reading strategies, such as contextual guessing, the participants immediately sought 
help whenever they stumbled across words they did not understand.  Furthermore, they exhibited a 
tendency to make clear every single sentence before proceeding, a practice not encouraged in extensive 
reading.  This intensive reading habit, in turn, makes reading long texts more tiresome and lowers reading 
comprehension. Thus, although the new word rate had been controlled by sequencing procedures and the 
pretest results had confirmed our estimation of their vocabulary level, the participants' heavy reliance on 
glosses suggested that they still had not outgrown habits they acquired in senior high instruction—
intensive reading.   
Day and Bamford (1998) have pointed out that learners' previous experiences in reading might predispose 
them unfavorably toward extensive reading. Since intensive reading was the common in-class practice in 
Taiwan, the learners' reading habits most likely were difficult to adjust even with extensive strategy 
instruction. One other explanation is that learners' comprehension difficulty might derive from sources 
Hung-Tzu Huang & Hsien-Chin Liou Vocabulary Learning in an Automated Reading Program 
 
Language Learning & Technology 77 
other than vocabulary, such as complicated sentence patterns, their limited ability to grasp main ideas 
(Nuttall, 2000), or the different contexts and idiomatic nature of familiar words. The question of whether 
learners' reading difficulty would gradually diminish with an increase in extensive reading experience 
awaits further exploration. 
Amount of Exposure Necessary for Vocabulary Acquisition While Reading 
In this study, ten target words identified in the pretest as completely unknown to every learner were 
divided into five word groups according to their differences in the number of appearance in the sixteen 
texts. Word gains occurred for all five groups, including words in Group One, which appeared only once 
or twice. This is consistent with the findings from studies by Nagy et al. (1985, 1987) and Rott (1999) 
showing that, although improvements were minor, merely one or two exposures to a target word could 
still contribute to a learner's initial word knowledge. One or two encounters, of course, were not adequate 
for successful acquisition of more in-depth knowledge. In fact, the results from our study indicated that 
with scores below 3 on the VKS scale, learners were unable to recall the Chinese meanings of target 
words successfully even for words in Group Five, which appeared in the texts from 9 to 15 times.  
The limited word acquisition in our study adds yet another piece of evidence to previous research 
suggesting that vocabulary acquisition while one is reading can take place, but the gains may be 
superficial and unstable (Huckin & Coady, 1999; Hulstijn, 1993; Wesche & Paribakht, 2000).  Given our 
efforts to foster a favorable reading environment for vocabulary acquisition, the learners' performance 
seems unsatisfactory at first glance in comparison to some previous L2 studies.  Four possible factors 
might have contributed to the difference, namely, the use of authentic material, learners' depth of 
processing, target word difficulty, and individual differences.   
Unlike in Rott (1999), our study was more like ones by Knight (1994) and Paribakht and Weshche 
(1997), in that we used authentic texts. Paribakht and Wesche (1997) used VKS to assess learners' word 
gains in reading and found that their learners' knowledge of target words mainly reached only the 
recognition level, a result similar to the present study. When one's purpose is to grasp information rather 
than fostering vocabulary learning, it may be more difficult for authentic materials to provide adequate 
contextual cues conducive to vocabulary acquisition. Therefore, the minimally necessary amount of word 
exposure for successful acquisition might increase as a consequence of the interplay of inadequate 
contextual cues and lower inferenceability of word meanings in authentic materials. Distinguishing 
authentic texts from pre-written texts, such as those in Rott's study, is a factor that could lead to different 
results.  
Another factor influencing word acquisition outcome could have been learners' shallow processing.  It 
seems that textual gloss of Chinese translations and highlighting as preliminary noticing did not 
encourage the learners to engage in deeper mental processing to form semantic-syntactic relationships. In 
light of the nature of extensive reading, the participants' processing of texts was presumably meaning-
based.  Wesche and Paribakht (2000) indicated that, in the context of extensive reading, "[O]nce the 
immediate communicative need has been met, the learner does not undertake future mental processing of 
the word" (p. 197). The gloss originally included for ensuring correct target word meaning, although 
suggested by previous researchers as being beneficial to vocabulary acquisition, may have attenuated the 
possibility of learners' deeper mental processing. A dilemma existed here, in that precision of word 
meaning and depth of processing were both desired. A possibly more promising alternative for quality 
vocabulary acquisition is to use a combination of explicit vocabulary instruction and implicit extensive 
reading.  
As shown in our findings, based on the five frequency bands for words (Sinclair, 1995), the target words 
in our study were more difficult and, therefore, needed more exposure compared with those in previous 
studies. Last, it seems that the complex issue of the amount of exposure required for successful 
vocabulary acquisition through reading cannot be disentangled without considering the impact of possible 
Hung-Tzu Huang & Hsien-Chin Liou Vocabulary Learning in an Automated Reading Program 
 
Language Learning & Technology 78 
individual difference factors, such as effective use of reading strategies. As Pulido (2003) pointed out, the 
automaticity of reading strategies allows advanced readers to "free up the attentional resources for further 
vocabulary development" (p. 239). A similar observation was also made by VanPatten et al. (2004), 
which indicated that while higher frequency of input exposure does facilitate the establishment of form-
meaning connections, context specific factors such as learners' readiness, form saliency, and the need for 
explicit learning may also come into play. 
CONCLUSION 
The study demonstrated that using word list research and computation processing can select 
comprehensible texts for a particular group of EFL learners in order to acquire unfamiliar target words 
through reading. Advanced corpus processing techniques were used to screen and arrange appropriate 
texts for EFL learners, construct an online reading program, and put it into use with a group of learners. In 
terms of technology, texts with comprehensible vocabulary were successfully chosen and arranged with 
the help of various online tools. Pedagogically, word gains occurred, though not to a great extent, and 
learners' attitudes toward the online extensive reading syllabus were predominantly positive. 
Nevertheless, the design of the syllabus was based on a rough estimation of the general vocabulary level 
of a group of learners rather than particular individual learners' needs. Text selection will be more precise 
if syntactic complexity can be incorporated in the computation processing. In the assessment phase of the 
study, the use of a control group may yield stronger evidence.  
With regard to the measures used for assessing degree of vocabulary acquisition, it should also be noted 
that although the VKS fits the design of the current study, it is not without limitation. One of the 
limitations commonly mentioned by researchers is that it assumes a linear progress of vocabulary 
learning, implying that receptive knowledge will be acquired before productive knowledge (Waring, 
2000). Also, the VKS does not explore certain aspects of word knowledge, such as polysemy, collocation, 
and synonyms. It is clear that vocabulary measures able to address the above limitations still require 
further research. 
Still, several implications may be drawn from the current study. The online extensive reading syllabus 
could be refined to incorporate substantive corpora and word lists of various levels to accommodate the 
learning demands of different learners and even those with a different first language. Further, the online 
extensive reading syllabus appears to be especially useful for incorporating explicit teaching and implicit 
learning in light of the fact that the syllabus selected by instructors was constructed on the basis of word 
lists targeting learner groups' English proficiency. The same sets of word lists could be utilized as both in-
class direct and explicit instruction and for the online self-access extensive reading practice. Online 
extensive reading could provide more diverse usage and contexts to stabilize the vocabulary acquisition, a 
step further along the continuum of vocabulary learning. Pedagogically, we should schedule practice 
sessions in a way that provides guidance for an extensive reading program. Moreover, online material 
designers could incorporate on-going reminders on goals and strategies of extensive reading throughout 
the activity. In sum, with instructor's input in reading strategy training and word instruction, the online 
extensive reading syllabus can serve as a bridge linking explicit teaching and implicit learning for 
constructive vocabulary acquisition. 
 
APPENDIX 
Target words tested in pretest and posttest 
1. entrepreneur 
2. institute 
3. calorie 
4. hypnosis 
Hung-Tzu Huang & Hsien-Chin Liou Vocabulary Learning in an Automated Reading Program 
 
Language Learning & Technology 79 
5. perform 
6. administrative 
7. immune 
8. finally 
9. constant 
10. psychiatric 
11. session 
12. virtual 
13. therapy 
14. faculty 
15. achievement 
16. concept 
17. series 
18. combat 
19. strain 
20. personnel 
21.calligraphy 
22. clinical 
23. potential 
24. symbolic 
25. negotiate 
26. optimistic 
27. consumption 
28.interview 
29. epidemic 
30. inadequate 
31. altitude 
32. startling 
33. deputy 
34. accommodate 
35. accumulate 
36. embark 
37. initial 
38. precisely 
39. import 
40. inevitably 
41.insufficient 
42. monopolistic 
43. undertaking 
44. sustain  
45.abolish 
46. inhibit 
47. innovative 
48. recruitment 
49. sophisticated 
50. eloquently 
 
NOTES 
1. The HSF was constructed by consulting previously developed popular word lists, such as GSL and 
COBUILD (Sinclair, 1995). It was assumed that college freshmen in the current study should have 
already learned words from the HSF in high school. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The paper was supported by a grant from National Science Council, Taipei, Taiwan (under the project 
number NSC92-2524-S007-002). We would like to thank Dr. Jason S. Chang, Chieh-Cheng Wu and 
Hsin-Ping Yu for programming help and the participating students involved in the assessment phase. 
Thanks are also extended for the valuable comments on the manuscript from anonymous reviewers and 
editing efforts by Professor John Truscott. 
Hung-Tzu Huang & Hsien-Chin Liou Vocabulary Learning in an Automated Reading Program 
 
Language Learning & Technology 80 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Hung-Tzu Huang is a doctoral candidate in Second Language Studies at the University of Hawai'i. Her 
research includes second language writing development, vocabulary acquisition, and corpus linguistics. 
Email: hungtsu@hawaii.edu  
Hsien-Chin Liou is a professor in the Department of Foreign Languages and Literature at National Tsing 
Hua University in Taiwan. Her research focuses on teacher education and computer assisted language 
learning. 
Email: hsienchin@gmail.com  
 
REFERENCES 
Bernhardt, E. B. (1984). Towards an information processing perspective in foreign language reading. The 
Modern Language Journal, 68, 322-31. 
Chen, H. J. (1998). A preliminary investigation on Taiwanese EFL learners' vocabulary size. In English 
Teachers' Association (Ed.), Proceedings of the fifteenth conference on English teaching and learning in 
the Republic of China (pp. 193-211). Taipei, Taiwan: The Crane Publishing Co.  
Cheng, H. S. (2002). The high school frequent word list. Taipei, Taiwan: The College Entrance Exam 
Center.  
Cobb, T., & Horst, M. (2001). Reading academic English: Carrying learners across the lexical threshold.  
In J. Flowerdew & M. Peacock (Eds.), Research perspectives on English for academic purposes (pp. 315-
329). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Davis, J. (1989). Facilitating effects of marginal glosses on foreign language reading. The Modern 
Language Journal, 73, 41-47. 
Davis, N., & Lyman-Hager, M. (1997). Computers and L2 reading: Student performance, student 
attitudes. Foreign Language Annals, 30, 58-72. 
Day, R., & Bamford, J. (1998). Extensive reading in the second language classroom. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Ellis, N. (1995). Consciousness in second language acquisition: A review of field studies and laboratory 
experiments. Language Awareness, 4, 123-146. 
Gettys, S., Imhof, L., & Kautz, J. (2001). Computer-assisted reading: The effect of glossing format on 
comprehension and vocabulary retention. Foreign Language Annals, 34, 91-101. 
Ghadirian, S. (2003). Providing controlled exposure to target vocabulary through the screening and 
arranging of texts. Language Learning & Technology, 6, 147-164. Retrieved September 5, 2007, from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/ghadirian/default.html 
Grabe, W., & Stoller, F. (1997). Reading and vocabulary development in a second language: A case 
study. In J. Coady & T. Huckin (Eds.) Second language vocabulary acquisition (pp. 98-122). Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Grabe, W., & Stroller, F. L. (2002). Teaching and researching reading. Harlow, UK: Longman.  
Hung-Tzu Huang & Hsien-Chin Liou Vocabulary Learning in an Automated Reading Program 
 
Language Learning & Technology 81 
Hegelheimer, V. & Tower, D. (2004). Using CALL in the classroom: Analyzing student interactions in an 
authentic classroom. System, 32, 185-205. 
Horst, M., Cobb. T., & Meara, P. (1998). Beyond a clockwork orange: Acquiring second language 
vocabulary through reading. Reading in a Foreign Language, 11(2), 207-233.  
Huckin, T., & Coady, J. (1999). Incidental vocabulary acquisition in a second language: A review. Studies 
in Second Language Acquisition, 21, 181-193.  
Hulstijn, J. H. (1993). When do foreign-language readers look up the meaning of unfamiliar words? The 
influence of task and learner variables. The Modern Language Journal, 77, 139-147.  
Hulstijn, J. H., Hollander, M., & Greidanus, T. (1996). Incidental vocabulary learning by advanced 
foreign language students: The influence of marginal glosses, dictionary use, and reoccurrence of 
unknown words. The Modern Language Journal, 80, 327-339. 
Jourdenais, R., Ota, M., Stauffer, S., Boyson, B., & Doughty, C. (1995). Does textual enhancement 
promote noticing? A think-aloud protocol analysis. In R. Schmidt (Ed.), Attention and awareness in 
second language learning (Technical Report 9) (pp. 183-216). Honolulu, HI: University of Hawaii, 
Second Language Teaching and Curriculum Center.  
Knight, S. (1994). Dictionary use while reading: The effects on comprehension and vocabulary 
acquisition for students of different verbal abilities. The Modern Language Journal, 78, 285-299. 
Krashen, S. (2004). The power of reading. 2nd. Ed. Englewood, CO: Libraries unlimited.  
Kyongho, H., & Nation, P. (1989). Reducing the vocabulary load and encouraging vocabulary learning 
through reading newspaper. Reading in a Foreign Language, 6, 323-335. 
Laufer, B. (1989). What percentage of text-lexis is essential for comprehension? In C. Lauren & M. 
Nordman (Eds.), Special language: From humans thinking to thinking machine (pp. 69-75). Clevedon, 
England: Multilingual Matters.  
Laufer, B (1997). The lexical plight in second language reading: Words you don't know, words you think 
you know, and words you can't guess. In J. Coady & T. Huckin (Eds.). Second language vocabulary 
acquisition: A Rationale for pedagogy. (pp. 20-34). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Leefa, V. J. (1992). Making foreign language texts comprehensible for beginners: An experiment with an 
electronic glossary. System, 20, 63-73. 
Liou, H. C. (2000). The electronic bilingual dictionary as a reading aid to EFL learners: Research findings 
and implications. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 13, 467-476. 
Lomicka, L. (1998). To gloss or not to gloss: An investigation of reading comprehension online. 
Language Learning & Technology, 1, 41-50. Retrieved September 5, 2007, from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num2/article2/default.html 
Nagy, W. E., Herman, P. A., & Anderson, R. C. (1985). Learning words from context. Reading Research 
Quarterly, 20, 233-253. 
Nagy, W. E., Herman, P. A., & Anderson, R. C. (1987). Learning word meanings from context during 
normal reading. American Educational Research Journal, 24, 237-270. 
Nation, P. (1990). Teaching & learning vocabulary. Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
Nation, P. (1993). Vocabulary size, growth, and use. In R. Schreuder & B. Welterns (Eds.), The bilingual 
lexicon (pp. 115-134). Philadelphia: John Benjamins. 
Nation, P. (2001). Learning vocabulary in another language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Hung-Tzu Huang & Hsien-Chin Liou Vocabulary Learning in an Automated Reading Program 
 
Language Learning & Technology 82 
Nation, P., & Kyongho, H. (1995). Where would general service vocabulary stop and special purposes 
vocabulary begin? System, 23, 35-41. 
Nuttall, C. (2000). Teaching reading skills in a foreign language. London: Macmillan Education. 
Paribakht, T. S. & Wesche, M. B. (1993). Reading comprehension and second language development in a 
comprehension-based ESL program. TESL Canada Journal, 11, 9-29.  
Paribakht, T. S., & Wesche, M. (1997). Vocabulary enhancement activities and reading for meaning in 
second language vocabulary development. In J. Coady & T. Huckin (Eds.). Second language vocabulary 
acquisition: A rationale for pedagogy (pp. 174-200). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Pulido, D. (2003). Modeling the role of second language proficiency and topic familiarity in second 
language incidental vocabulary acquisition through reading. Language Learning, 53, 233-284. 
Read, J. (2000). Assessing vocabulary. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Rott, S. (1999). The effect of exposure frequency on intermediate language learners' incidental 
vocabulary acquisition and retention through reading. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 21, 589-
620. 
Saragi, T., Nation, P., & Meister, G. (1978). Vocabulary learning and reading. System, 6, 72-80. 
Schmidt, R. (2001). Attention. In P. Robinson (Ed.), Cognition and second language instruction (pp. 3-
32). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  
Sinclair, J. M. (1995). Collins COBUILD Dictionary (2nd ed.). London: HarperCollins. 
Shook, J. D. (1994). FL/L2 reading, grammatical information, and the input to intake phenomenon. 
Applied Language Learning, 5, 57-93.  
VanPatten, B. Williams, J., & Rott, S. (2004). Form-meaning connections in second language acquisition 
In B. VanPatten, J. Williams, S.Rott, & M. Overstreet (Eds.), Form-meaning connections in SLA (pp. 1-
27). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Waring, R. (2000). The "State Rating Task" - an alternative method of assessing receptive and productive 
vocabulary. Kiyo, Notre Dame Seishin University: Studies in Foreign Languages and Literature. 24, 125-
154. 
Wesche, M., & Paribakht, T S. (1996). Assessing second language vocabulary knowledge: Depth vs. 
breadth. Canadian Modern Language Review, 53, 13-39. 
Wesche, M., & Paribakht, T S. (2000). Reading-based exercises in second language vocabulary learning: 
An introspective study. The Modern Language Journal, 84, 196-213. 
West, M. (1953). A general service list of English words. London: Longman, Green & Co. 
Wong, W. (2003). Textual enhancement and simplified input: Effects on L2 comprehension and 
acquisition of non-meaningful grammatical form. Applied Language Learning, 13, 109-132.  
Wong, W. (2005). Input enhancement: From theory and research to the classroom. New York: McGraw-
Hill.  
Xue, G., & Nation, I. S. P. (1984). A university word list. Language Learning and Communication, 3, 
215-229.  
 
