Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num3/review2/ 
October 2007, Volume 11, Number 3 
pp. 29-37 
 
Copyright © 2007, ISSN 1094-3501 29 
REVIEW OF LE CHANDAIL DE HOCKEY CD-ROM 
Title Le Chandail de Hockey (The Hockey Sweater) 
Platform Windows 2000 and XP 
Mac OS X 10.3 or higher 
CD drive 
Software and hardware 
requirements 
QuickTime V.7 
Designed for 1024 x 768 resolution 
Publisher 3D courseware/ Les Éditions 3D 
http://www.editions3d.ca/hockey 
Support offered Website:  http://www.editions3d.ca/hockey 
or 
http://www.editions3d.ca/hockey/fr/Depannage.shtml (in French) 
Target language French 
Target audience Learners of French as a second language (intermediate to advanced 
level), Francophone students, literacy community 
Price $34.95 – CD-ROM 
 
Review by Catherine Caws, University of Victoria 
Le chandail de hockey is an interactive CD-ROM based on a famous Roch Carrier short story and features 
the animated film Le chandail de hockey (The Hockey Sweater) made by the National Film Board of 
Canada.  The Hockey Sweater tells the story of a young boy living in a small town in Québec in the 
1940s.  For this boy and his friends, life revolves around the ice rink, and hockey is their religion.  The 
boys worship the Montréal Canadians star Maurice Richard, and all want to wear his sweater.  In the 
story, the young boy’s life is devastated when he receives a sweater from the Toronto Maple Leafs instead 
of Richard’s sweater in the mail. Being forced to wear the sweater, he feels rejected by his peers on the 
ice and finally loses his temper.  Reprimanded by the priest for his behavior, he ends up in church praying 
that his Maple Leaf sweater be devastated by moths. The story can be considered as an allegory of the 
cultural tensions that existed in the 1960s between Anglophones and Francophones living in Québec, and, 
since its publication, Le chandail de hockey has been one of the best known pieces of French-Canadian 
literature in Anglophone Canada.  In fact, it has become so famous that the 5-dollar Canadian bill features 
an extract of the story in both official languages (The hockey sweater, 2007). Over the years, Le chandail 
de hockey has become a classic story, used in many French-as-a-Second-Language programs and courses, 
from Grade 11 to university courses.   
The CD-ROM presents an interactive way to learn more about the story and its cultural contexts, as well 
as understand the making of the animated film.  By allowing learners to interact with a famous piece of 
French-Canadian literature, the CD-ROM offers opportunities to acquire language skills through authentic 
documents.  As described by Beatty (2003), using literature in CALL has the advantages of exposing 
learners to a medium that has a "high degree of fidelity, or authenticity, in that the learning materials are 
both extensive and taken from real-world sources" (p.57). 
Le chandail de hockey CD-ROM is primarily geared towards learners of French as a second language.  Its 
main goal is to help learners develop reading and listening skills and expand on the linguistic and cultural 
context of this piece of French-Canadian literature. Moreover, considering the many activities based on 
cultural and literary knowledge, this CD-ROM will also be of interest to any French-speaking learners 
wishing to enrich their understanding of the story. The CD-ROM contains three study guides (called 
Périodes 'Sections'), each proposing activities for three proficiency levels (near-beginner, intermediate, 
and advanced), a task-based learning area (called Zone), and a cultural enrichment area (called Rencontres
Catherine Caws Review of Le Chandail de Hockey 
 
Language Learning & Technology 30 
'Encounters').  The activities directed at the advanced levels are also suited for Francophone users 
(described as pro, 'professionals', in the program).  In order to enhance the culture of hockey that is 
omnipresent in the original story, the authors of the CD-ROM have used hockey terminology to refer to 
various aspects of the learning tool.  For instance, the near-beginner level is also called peewee 'beginners' 
within the context of hockey, and the activities and features are organized around three périodes (to relate 
to the 3 periods of 20 minutes each that make a full hockey game).  
The first section (1ère période) focuses on listening skills.  To start, users can watch the full version of the 
animated film (10 minutes) about the Hockey Sweater, or view short clips of parts of the story, before 
testing their aural comprehension (the program presents a total of 8 clips of less than a minute each that 
summarize the main ideas of the story; each clip retelling parts of the original story).  A drag-and-drop 
activity (Figure 1) linking French pronunciation to pictures addresses the beginner level while more 
lengthy aural comprehension activities are geared toward the advanced level.  The comprehension 
activities will force learners to be attentive to the content of the story and probably return to the film 
before they can answer the questions.  The third activity is another drag-and-drop activity for the 
intermediate level that links recorded extracts of the story to pictures featured in the animated film.  
 
Figure 1. Sample drag-and-drop activity screen 
The second section (2e période) focuses on listening and reading skills.  In this section, users view the 
film while reading the transcript on the left so that they can associate sound with the text.  This listening 
and reading activity will be easy for intermediate and advanced students.  Near-beginner students might 
have a more difficulty making the association between sound and text because at times the text on the left 
is lengthy (Figure 2), and, as the story is told, the words in the text are not highlighted (a feature that 
would help near-beginner learners).  However, users can click on almost any word in the text to open a 
dictionary. 
Catherine Caws Review of Le Chandail de Hockey 
 
Language Learning & Technology 31 
 
Figure 2. Sample reading and listening screen 
Users can also click on the culture link for cultural annotations related to aspects of the story as it enfolds.  
For instance, as shown in Figure 2 above, a paragraph explains what Hockey Night in Canada (Soirée du 
hockey) is all about.  This is an excellent feature for students who may lack knowledge regarding aspects 
of the culture of hockey, i.e., what hockey represents for Canadians.  The annotations, written by the 
authors of the CD and illustrated at times by authentic documents from the Canadian National Archives 
are very informative and can be exploited in many ways by instructors of French, either for cultural or 
linguistic purposes.  This second section also contains activities addressing the three levels of language 
proficiency.  Each level contains between 7 and 9 different activities, from easy (e.g., matching words to 
pictures) to difficult (e.g., plot puzzles, a sentence sequencing task).  At first glance, these activities seem 
to follow mostly a behaviourist approach by providing series of exercises where students respond to 
stimuli; however, a user can navigate from one activity, or level, to another without having to finish a 
level. This flexibility has the advantage of giving more autonomy to the learner, and, thus, the activities 
accommodate various learning styles and needs (Benson & Voller, 1997).   
In the second section (2e période), the activities are more varied than in the first section (1ère période). 
They include matching activities (drag-and-drop vocabulary exercises to match words to pictures), fill-in-
the-blank dictations, exercises aiming at testing cultural knowledge and vocabulary, and reading 
comprehension.  As an example, the written comprehension exercises addressing near-beginner learners 
(Figure 3) contain 22 questions that the user can hear and read.  Each question offers four possible 
answers, each providing specific feedback to help students.  Indeed, instead of a simple, yes/no/try-again 
feedback, the program uses more authentic feedback and thus simulates a real class experience.  
Alternatively, thanks to the interactive nature of this learning tool, learners can navigate back and forth 
between the activities and the film contained in the first section.  Part of this interactivity is made possible 
by hypertext functions that are considered an ideal tool for showing the interconnections between ideas 
and themes in a program or a text, for activating semantic and lexical connotations, and for helping 
learners access information (Beatty, 2003; Redon-Dilax, 2000).  
Catherine Caws Review of Le Chandail de Hockey 
 
Language Learning & Technology 32 
 
Figure 3. Sample reading comprehension activity screen 
The third section (3e période) expands on the main ideas of the film by focusing on listening, reading, 
and writing activities. It is sub-divided into five sections (Hockey; a song about the hockey player 
Maurice Richard; hockey stars; original pages from the 1946-1947 Eaton catalogue (clothing); and 
additional Canadian Heritage notes).  In the sub-section about hockey, users have access to 14 pages of 
notes relating to the story and the culture of hockey in Canada (e.g., Saturday Hockey Night in Canada, 
the Canadian National Hockey League).  Using hypertext links, learners can navigate from one page to 
another and organize their discovery of the culture of hockey (Figure 4). 
 
Figure 4.  Sample hockey notes in third section 
All the texts contained in this sub-section were written by the authors of the CD and are illustrated by 
authentic pictures or arts originating from the National Art Gallery or the National Hockey League.  
Catherine Caws Review of Le Chandail de Hockey 
 
Language Learning & Technology 33 
The third section also contains other artifacts allowing users to expand their understanding of the story, its 
setting in the 1940s, and the broader cultural context.  The authentic song written in 1971 about the 
Canadian hockey player Maurice Richard (the player considered a hero by the young boy in the Hockey 
Sweater story) relates facts about this hockey legend and reflects the popularity of the game of hockey in 
Canada. The Eaton catalogue (Eaton is now a department store) provides virtual access to original pages 
of the 1946-1947 catalogue used by many families in Canada to order clothes and other items (Figure 5).  
It gives a sense of the fashion at the time of the story, and learners can complete a virtual online order.  
This sub-section also includes two exercises (matching words to pictures) for either the near-beginner 
level or the advanced level.  No exercises specifically address the intermediate level in this section, but 
these learners could work on the more advanced level and do the activities several times.  However, each 
exercise contains only ten items of clothing and thus provides limited practice and lexical enrichment.  
 
Figure 5. Sample page from an original Eaton Catalogue 
The next sub-section in the 3e période contains 31 hockey cards (under the sub-heading Les étoiles, 
'hockey stars') that learners can explore to learn more about famous Canadian hockey players.  Each card 
presents a picture and text on the front explaining the influence that this player had on hockey.  The card 
can be flipped by pressing a button, and on the back users will find the player statistics and biographical 
information. Finally, the last sub-section contained in 3e période includes nine multimedia cultural notes 
to supplement the story.  Each screen contains a text, written by the authors of the CD-ROM or by Gisèle 
Villeneuve, a Canadian bilingual writer and narrator. These cultural notes based on Canadian heritage are 
meant to help learners appreciate some aspects of French-Canadian society (e.g., one note explains the 
influence of the church in small villages in Québec in the 1940s). Some of these notes can be viewed in 
synchronization with the film in the second section (2e période). 
Unlike the other two sections, users do not have access to many specific exercises related to these texts or 
artefacts. At first glance, this section seems to address primarily Francophone students due to the fairly 
high linguistic level of these French documents and the focus on reading.  However, students of French as 
a second language can easily use these notes to enrich their comprehension of French-Canadian society 
and culture.  In addition, they may use the in-built dictionary to improve their reading comprehension by 
clicking on the words in the texts.  The notes can also be explored in class using a combination of 
Catherine Caws Review of Le Chandail de Hockey 
 
Language Learning & Technology 34 
learning activities. For example, the teacher could design questions to test students’ comprehension of the 
documents; a lexical "treasure hunt" could be designed using the catalogue; biographical questions can be 
formed either by the teacher or students using the hockey cards; or the song may be used to work on 
pronunciation or adapted to create other, similar lyrics for a favorite hockey star. 
The section called Zone focuses on task-based activities.  It contains extended activities based on two 
artifacts: the Eaton catalogue (Figure 5) and hockey cards.  In this section, the Eaton catalogue gives 
access to exactly the same activities as the one mentioned above (in the 3e période), and thus it is 
debatable whether it is necessary to have this activity in both places.  In the other section of the Zone, 
users can continue their discovery of famous past and present hockey players, such as Maurice Richard or 
Wayne Gretzky, and build albums, such as a scrapbook to describe and explain what their dream team 
would be (Figure 6).  This activity will be a favorite of hockey fans but might not appeal to all learners.  
 
Figure 6. Sample of activity in the Zone section 
Another fascinating part of the CD is found in Rencontres ('Encounters').  Here, learners can meet with 
the author of the story, Roch Carrier, and with Marcel Dargis, the artist who painted the scenes for the 
animated movie, through a series of short monologues based on interviews recorded specifically for this 
CD-ROM.  The videos are organized around themes (e.g., the culture of hockey, the Eaton catalogue, the 
story’s genesis, the importance of radio in the 1940s, Roch Carrier and his experience with sports) that are 
analyzed and commented on by either Carrier or Dargis, depending on the theme explored.  In 
Rencontres, the other key contributors to the story’s success are also featured:  Sheila Fishman, literary 
translator of the story into English, and Sheldon Cohen, who directed the animated film at the National 
Film Board of Canada.  This section of the CD-ROM contains excellent cultural artifacts, such as other 
paintings by Dargis that depict life at the time of the story, the 1940s.  These interviews and documents 
make us appreciate all the features that may contribute to a story’s success, namely the collaboration that 
existed between the artists involved in the making of the animated version of The Hockey Sweater.  
Pedagogically, the interviews of Carrier and Dargis can be exploited to critically analyze cultural aspects 
of the original story and the animated film, especially for learners at the intermediate and advanced levels.   
At the bottom of the screen, users have access to other functions:  log-out, home, notebook, dictionary and 
help.  The Notebook (Figure 7) lets learners record their answers or type notes as they explore the CD-
ROM.  They have the option to save and print these notes. However, it should be noted that the file 
Catherine Caws Review of Le Chandail de Hockey 
 
Language Learning & Technology 35 
function keys (new, open, print, close, save, delete) would be more accessible as buttons either at the top 
or bottom of the notebook (at present they are hidden behind the notebook).  
 
Figure 7.  Sample screen of the notebook function 
The Dictionary’s screen is organized into three parts (Figure 8):  letters of the alphabet at the top, where 
users can click to access specific words or expressions from the story and the various written documents; 
a frame on the left showing all the words included in the dictionary, and a frame on the right containing 
the information specific to the word that was selected (definition, pronunciation, collocations).  Each 
word is defined through explanatory sentences and is often illustrated in a full sentence.  Other notable 
features of the dictionary include the access to pronunciation (users can hear the words pronounced in 
standard French by a female voice), derivatives of the word, and presentation of synonyms, antonyms, 
and homonyms of the word. 
On a technological note, the Help menu is succinct but clear, available in either French or English. It 
underlines the main components of the CD-ROM and explains all the key features of each screen (users 
simply click on the frames in a sample screen). Navigating through this program is easy and users can 
easily work in synchronization between two sections in order to take full advantage of all the information 
included in the program (e.g., they can explore the story in the second section while reading about key 
cultural artifacts in the third section or listening to the interviews with Roch Carrier.  
 
Catherine Caws Review of Le Chandail de Hockey 
 
Language Learning & Technology 36 
 
Figure 8. Sample of a dictionary page 
Overall, this CD-ROM is a welcome addition to both the literary and animated versions of Le chandail de 
hockey. The interactive nature of this learning tool will help learners of French as a second language 
develop a better appreciation of the culture in which this story is rooted.  The cultural notes are rich but 
not overwhelmingly detailed, well presented, yet simply organized.   
Learners in high school and in beginner university or college French courses will appreciate the varied 
interactive activities to test their language skills and their comprehension. One minor flaw is that users 
cannot easily zoom back and forth throughout the video in order to jump to one particular point in the 
story.  Such a feature would let users listen to parts of the clips that they had not mastered during the first 
listening.  Teachers could also use this feature to enhance specific sounds or words in context and 
particular syntactical characteristics.  
At first glance, Le chandail de hockey CD-Rom seems to require a fairly good understanding of the 
French language.  However, after exploring the CD-ROM in depth, the reviewer concludes that because 
all the functions can be repeated more than once (including the exercises), and because the help functions 
offer both French and English explanations, Le chandail de hockey offers a good balance of autonomy 
and guided activity (Duquette & Laurier, 2000). A motivated beginner-advanced learner could greatly 
enhance his/her level of aural and reading comprehension in French as well as get a better sense of the 
story’s cultural and historical value.  In fact, the best quality of this tool probably resides in its ability to 
place culture at the very core of language learning.  Learners and instructors of French will find valuable 
activities and references in the Le chandail de hockey CD-ROM.  Finally, the reviewer sees additional 
benefits of using this CD-ROM if it is combined with other authentic materials, such as the short story 
book by Carrier, Les enfants du bonhomme dans la lune (published in 1998), or web sites featuring Roch 
Carrier (such as the Library and Archives Canada sites that includes information on Carrier, 
http://www.collectionscanada.ca/) or the original story (such as the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation 
Catherine Caws Review of Le Chandail de Hockey 
 
Language Learning & Technology 37 
archives site, http://archives.cbc.ca/ ).  This would allow learners to further develop their language skills 
while developing some degree of multi-literacy, a skill recognized by educators as being essential in 
today’s world of learning (Gonglewski & DuBravac, 2006). 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Catherine G. Caws is an Assistant Professor in the Department of French at the University of Victoria, 
Canada.  She teaches language and linguistics courses at the undergraduate and graduate levels and 
concentrates her research on projects related to CALL, second language acquisition, and learning and 
teaching in higher education.  In the last two years, she has been working on developing and testing a 
learning object repository for French (www.flore.uvic.ca), a project financially supported by the Social 
Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada . 
E-mail: ccaws@uvic.ca 
 
REFERENCES 
Beatty, K. (2003). Teaching and researching computer-assisted language learning.  London:  Pearson 
Education Limited. 
Benson, P., & Voller, P. (Eds.).  (1997).  Autonomy and independence in language learning.  New York: 
Addison Wesley Longman Limited. 
Carrier, R.  (1998).  Les enfants du bonhomme dans la lune.  Montréal, Québec:  Stanké. 
Duquette, L., & Laurier, M. (Eds.).  (2000).  Apprendre une langue dans un environnement multimédia.  
Outemont:  Les éditions logiques. 
Gonglewski, M., & DuBravac, S. (2006).  Multiliteracy:  Second language literacy in the multimedia 
environment. In L. Ducate & N. Arnold (Eds.), Calling on CALL:  From theory and research to new 
directions in Foreign language teaching (pp. 43-68).  CalicoMonograph Series. San Marcos, Texas: 
CALICO. 
Redon-Dilax, M.  (2000) Scénario pédagogique et hypertexte. In L. Duquette & M. Laurier (Eds.), 
Apprendre une langue dans un environnement multimédia (pp. 93-116). Outremont, Québec: Les 
éditions logiques.  
Le chandail de hockey (2005).  Retrieved on July 5, 2007, from http://www.editions3d.ca/hockey/. 
The hockey sweater (2007).  Wikipedia – The free encyclopedia. Retrieved on May 29, 2007, from 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Hockey_Sweater.  
 
