Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num2/editors/ 
June 2007, Volume 11, Number 2 
pp. 1-2 
 
Copyright © 2007, ISSN 1094-3501 1 
 
 
FROM THE EDITORS  
It is our pleasure to introduce Volume 11, Number 2 of Language Learning & 
Technology, a regular issue of our journal. We hope that all of you have successfully 
completed or are about to complete a busy academic year and are looking forward to a 
restful and productive summer. This is a very full issue that offers our readers five 
articles and a commentary, in addition to the three regular columns. 
"Manipulating L2 learners' online dictionary use and its effect on L2 word retention" by 
Elke Peters explores the effect of two enhancement techniques (a Vocabulary Test 
Announcement and Task-induced Word Relevance) on L2 learners' look-up behavior 
during a reading task and delayed word retention by Flemish learners of German. Her 
findings show a significant effect of Test Announcement and Word Relevance on 
whether a target word is looked up.  
"Students writing emails to faculty: An examination of e-politeness among native and 
non-native speakers of English" by Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas combines interlanguage 
pragmatics and speech act research with computer-mediated communication to examine 
how native and non-native speakers of English formulate low- and high-imposition 
requests to faculty. Results show that native speakers demonstrate greater resources in 
creating e-polite messages to their professors than non-native speakers. Possible 
avenues for pedagogical intervention are presented.  
"An activity theory perspective on student-reported contradictions in international 
telecollaboration" by Olga Basharina studies the intra-cultural, inter-cultural, and 
technology-related contradictions that emerged in a WebCT bulletin board 
telecollaboration among English learners from Japan, Mexico, and Russia, and explains 
such contradictions from the perspective of activity theory. The study concludes with a 
discussion of whether the learning paradigms can be bridged and cultures-of-use of 
computer technologies aligned. 
"Culture, culture learning and new technologies: Towards a pedagogical framework" by 
Mike Levy looks at ways to improve approaches to the learning and teaching of culture 
using new technologies by aligning fundamental qualities of the culture concept with 
specific pedagogical designs, tasks, and technologies. 
 "Abdullah's blogging: A generation 1.5 student enters the blogosphere" by Joel Bloch 
analyzes the blogs of a Somali immigrant student to explore their relationship to the 
development of his academic writing. The paper shows how blogging in L2 
composition courses can contribute to the development of student writing. 
"Commentary: Open access to research and the individual responsibility of researchers" 
by Thierry Chanier explains what open access means and describes two roads to open 
access and the obstacles that stand in the way. The commentary includes resources 
related to open access scientific publication as well as a selection of recommended 
links. 
The "Emerging Technologies" column by Bob Godwin-Jones describes new authoring 
tools and new initiatives in educational technology that can provide opportunities for the 
creation and distribution of on-line language learning resources.  
 
 From the Editors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 2 
 
 
 
 
The "On the Net" column by guest contributor Jesús García Laborda presents a 
comparison of the main features of some of the most well known high-stakes 
computerized exams, such as Test of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL), 
International English Testing System (IELTS), Business Language Testing Service 
(BULATS), and others.  
This issue also includes three reviews, assembled and edited by Sigrun Biesenbach-
Lucas. (1) Jesús García Laborda reviews Call Research Perspectives edited by Joy L. 
Egbert and Gina Mikel Petrie. (2) Chen Xiaobin reviews CALL Dimensions: Options 
and Issues in Computer-Assisted Language Learning by Mike Levy and Glenn 
Stockwell. (3) Pawel Szudarski reviews Mastering Polish with Two Audio CDs by 
Albert Juszczak.  
Please take a few minutes to complete the LLT subscription form if you have not 
already done so.  
We wish all of you a relaxing and productive summer! 
 
Sincerely, 
Irene Thompson and Dorothy Chun, 
Editors 
 
