 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  22 
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS 
Sponsors 
University of Hawai`i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR) 
Co-Sponsor 
Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL) 
 
University of Hawai'i National Foreign Language Resource 
Center (NFLRC)  
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials 
development projects and conducts Summer Institutes for language professionals among its many 
activities. 
2007 PRAGMATICS & LANGUAGE LEARNING CONFERENCE 
The NFLRC is pleased to be organizing and co-sponsoring the 17th International Conference on 
Pragmatics and Language Learning (PLL) on March 26-28, 2007 in Honolulu, Hawai‘i. The University of 
Hawai‘i National Resource Center for East Asia (NRCEA) and the Department of Second Language 
Studies (SLS) also serve as co-sponsors of the event. The conference will address a broad range of topics 
in pragmatics, discourse, interaction, and sociolinguistics in their relation to second and foreign language 
learning, education, and use, approached from a variety of theoretical and methodological perspectives.  
Highlights will include plenary talks by Junko Mori (University of Wisconsin-Madison) and Steven 
Talmy (University of British Columbia), two invited colloquia, and two invited workshops. Preregister by 
February 15, 2007 to enjoy special discount conference rates. 
2007 NFLRC SUMMER INSTITUTE: Developing Useful Evaluation Practices in College Foreign 
Language Programs - May 28 - June 6, 2007 
This NFLRC Summer Institute is designed to help college foreign language administrators and teachers 
engage in useful, practical, and effective program evaluations to meet a variety of purposes. It takes 
seriously the values, goals, and constraints that characterize college language programs and will provide 
language educators with a user-oriented approach to developing evaluations that maximize benefits for 
language learners and teachers, while minimizing potential negative consequences. It will also provide 
participants with tools and strategies for making program evaluation a systematic and consistently useful 
component of their FL departments. 
The Institute will be run by Dr. John M. Norris (UH Dept. of Second Language Studies), an expert in 
language program evaluation and assessment. Activities over the 9-day institute will include lectures and 
demonstrations, in-depth analyses of practical evaluation examples, invited guest speakers (language 
evaluation experts), social events, and extensive hands-on development and discussion of evaluation 
plans, procedures, and instruments for immediate use in the participants' specific program settings. 
This workshop is intended for U.S. foreign language administrators and teachers who are directly 
responsible for program evaluations in their foreign language departments. It assumes no prior grounding 
in program evaluation theory or practice, but it requires a willingness to help increase evaluation capacity 
in college FL education. In order to maximize the impact of this event across U.S. colleges, participants 
will be purposefully selected to represent diverse FL program types, based on size, languages taught, 
geography, and institutional status. Partial financial support is available to all participants in the NFLRC 
Summer Institute on a competitive and space-limited basis. Summer Institute participants are also highly 
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  23 
encouraged to participate in the ADFL SUMMER SEMINAR WEST (directly following the Summer 
Institute in Hawaii), where they will have opportunities to share their program evaluation work. 
APPLY TODAY! (DEADLINE – FEBRUARY 15, 2007) 
For more details about the Summer Institute (including information about affordable lodging options, 
fees, and more) or for the online application form, visit our website. 
2nd INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON TASK-BASED LANGUAGE TEACHING 
The NFLRC is pleased to be a co-sponsor and on the organizing committee of the 2nd International 
Conference on Task-based Language Teaching to be held on September 20-22, 2007 in Honolulu, 
Hawai‘i. The theme of the 2007 conference is “TBLT: Putting Principles to Work.” Plenary speakers will 
include Kris Van Den Branden (Katholieke Universiteit Lueven), Peter Robinson (Aoyama Gakuin 
University), Peter Skehan (Chinese University of Hong Kong), and Virginia Samuda (Lancaster 
University). We look forward to bringing together both researchers and educators from around the world 
to learn from one another’s innovations in task-based language teaching.  For more information, visit the 
TBLT 2007 website. 
NEW NFLRC PUBLICATIONS 
NFLRC ADDS A THIRD ONLINE JOURNAL 
Language Documentation & Conservation (LD&C) publishes its inaugural issue in June 2007. LD&C 
becomes the only journal, electronic or otherwise, exclusively dedicated to serving the needs of linguists 
and language activists engaged in the essential work of documenting the world's languages. While no 
reliable data exist concerning the level of such documentation, a plausible estimate is that fewer than 10% 
are well-documented, meaning that they have comprehensive grammars, extensive dictionaries, and 
abundant texts in a variety of genres and media. The remaining 90% are, to varying degrees, 
underdocumented, or, for all intents and purposes, undocumented. Moreover, the languages of the world 
are now faced with an extinction crisis, the magnitude of which may well prove to be very large. 
Consequently, there is an evident and urgent need to document the many under/undocumented languages 
of the world, and, where appropriate, to assist in their preservation.  
Check out this new journal and our many other publications. 
OUR ONLINE JOURNALS SOLICIT SUBMISSIONS 
Language Learning & Technology is a refereed online journal, jointly sponsored by the University of 
Hawai`i NFLRC and the Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research 
(CLEAR). LLT focuses on issues related to technology and language education. For more information on 
submission guidelines, visit the LLT submissions page. 
Language Documentation & Conservation is a fully refereed, open-access journal sponsored by NFLRC 
and published exclusively in electronic form by the University of Hawai‘i Press. LD&C publishes papers 
on all topics related to language documentation and conservation. For more information on submission 
guidelines, visit the LD&C submissions page. 
Reading in a Foreign Language is a refereed online journal, jointly sponsored by the University of 
Hawai`i NFLRC and the Department of Second Language Studies. RFL serves as an excellent source for 
the latest developments in the field, both theoretical and pedagogic, including improving standards for 
foreign language reading. For more information on submission guidelines, , visit the RFL submissions 
page. 
 
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  24 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education 
and Research (CLEAR)  
CLEAR's mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States.  
Projects focus on materials development, professional development training, and foreign language 
research. 
SUMMER WORKSHOPS 
CLEAR is offering six opportunities for professional development this summer, on a wide variety of 
topics.  Each workshop is three full days, and there are discounts for those attending multiple workshops.   
• Conducting Action Research in the Foreign Language Classroom 
• Integrating Technology and Assessment for Language Learning & Teaching 
• Focus on Form in the Second Language Classroom 
• Keeping Teacher and Student Talk in the Target Language 
• Making the Most of Video in the Foreign Language Classroom 
• Language Teaching and Technology 
Full descriptions, dates, pricing information, and workshop applications are available here. 
NEW WEBSITE 
To coincide with our tenth anniversary in August 2006, CLEAR launched a new website.  Please visit the 
updated site at http://clear.msu.edu and learn more about our new products and upcoming projects for the 
new funding cycle. 
MATERIALS DEVELOPMENT 
Coming Soon! • French Pronunciation and Phonetics (CD-ROM) 
• Introductory Business German (CD-ROM) 
Selected Free Products  
• NEW!  Mashups (combine media elements to create a new resource for language teaching) 
• NEW!  Viewpoint (record or upload videos to link from other sites or embed inside your own 
web pages) 
• NEW!  Hausa Online (virtual language resource page of multimedia language learning material 
for intermediate to advanced-level Hausa language learners) 
• Now in Russian! MIMEA: Multimedia Interactive Modules for Education and Assessment 
(German, Chinese, Arabic, Vietnamese, Korean, Russian; online video clips and activities) 
• Now free! Business Chinese (CD-ROM) 
• Language Learning Materials for Russian: A Content-Based Course Pack (online learning 
modules) 
• SMILE (tool for creating interactive online exercises) 
• Facilitating Connections to International Business: A Guide for Foreign Language Educators 
(guide) 
• African Language Small Group Instruction Guide (guide and video) 
• Thai Small Group Instruction Guide (guide) 
• Vietnamese Small Group Instruction Guide (guide) 
• Hindi Small Group Instruction Guide (guide)  
• Modules for Assessing Socio-Cultural Competence: German (CD-ROM) 
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  25 
• Modules for Assessing Socio-Cultural Competence: Russian (CD-ROM) 
 
CONFERENCES 
CLEAR exhibits at local and national conferences year-round. We hope to see you at ACTFL, CALICO, 
MiWLA, NCOLCTL, Central States, and other conferences. 
NEWSLETTER 
CLEAR News is a biyearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. Contact 
the CLEAR office to join the mailing list or check it out on the Web at http://clear.msu.edu/newsletter/. 
We welcome your submissions! 
 
The Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL)  
The Center for Applied Linguistics is a private, nonprofit organization that promotes and improves the 
teaching and learning of languages, identifies and solves problems related to language and culture, and 
serves as a resource for information about language and culture. CAL carries out a wide range of 
activities in the fields of English as a second language, foreign languages, cultural education, and 
linguistics.  
Featured Resources: 
• The Center for Adult English Language Acquisition (CAELA)  
CAELA was established in 2004 with funding from the Office of Vocational and Adult Education 
(OVAE), U.S. Department of Education, and its primary mission is to assist states that have emerging 
ESL populations. Resources available on its Web site include tools for teaching adult English 
language learners, a new series of briefs; and a newsletter, CAELA Currents, which includes 
subscription information. 
• The Cultural Orientation Resource (COR) Center  
The (COR) Center continues to provide materials that inform refugee service providers about refugee 
cultures and help newcomers understand fundamental aspects of life in the U.S. Culture Profiles 
provide short introductions to the cultural background of refugee populations. The Cultural 
Orientation for Refugees: A Handbook for U.S. Trainers is a new guide that provides information, 
lesson plans, and training resources for U.S. cultural orientation. 
• CAL Services 
CAL provides a variety of professional development and technical assistance services related to 
language education and assessment needs.  
 
Recent Publications: 
• Literacy and Language Diversity in the United States, 2nd Edition 
• Creating Access: Language and Academic Programs for Secondary School Newcomers  
• Language by Video: An Overview of Foreign Language Instructional Videos for Children  
• What’s Different About Teaching Reading to Students Learning English?  
 
Visit CAL’s redesigned Web site to learn more about our projects, resources, and services. 
 
