Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num1/speced.html 
February 2007, Volume 11, Number 1 
pp. 2-3 
 
Copyright © 2005, ISSN 1094-3501 2 
 
 
FROM THE SPECIAL ISSUE EDITOR 
Thanks to recent technology developments the future of listening in language learning is 
bright. In addition to dedicated CD-ROM and networked-based multimedia, online 
audio and video offer the potential to change the face of language teaching and learning 
significantly. The addition of web-based repositories such as YouTube and Google 
Video, as well as the increasing popularity of audio and video podcasts and video blogs, 
has provided a critical mass of resources that will almost certainly impact language 
teaching and learning practices in a major way.  Online audio and video communication 
through Skype and similar VOIP (Voice Over Internet Protocol) applications provide yet 
another motivation for building listening proficiency in conjunction with enhanced 
opportunities for oral interaction. Listening skills taught and acquired today will not only 
be valuable during the learning process, but will accompany students throughout their 
lives. 
The future of listening and language learning may be bright, but despite the 
acknowledged importance of listening, the research base in this area is still relatively 
thin. What that means to language teachers and researchers is a lot of new spaces to 
explore, innovate in, and understand. So with the thought of that journey in mind, I am 
delighted to introduce you to this special issue of Language Learning & Technology on 
technology and listening comprehension. The issue includes three studies that add to the 
research base, along with two commentaries. 
In the first article, "Post-comprehension breakdown use of help options in an ESL 
multimedia listening unit" Maja Grgurović & Volker Hegelheimer investigate 
differences in student use of subtitles or transcripts as text support for an academic 
lecture in an ESL course. The researchers provided students with the ability to use either 
help option and found that students overall interacted with the subtitles more frequently 
and for longer periods than with the transcripts. In terms of individual preferences, there 
was clearly a mix: of the eighteen students in the study, seven chose to use subtitles, 
three used transcripts, four used both, and four made limited use of either. Interestingly, 
all the students in the last category came from the group with lower proficiency. Their 
results support using subtitles for text support if only one option is provided, although 
they recommend providing both so that students have a choice. They further note that 
actively encouraging and training students in using help options is warranted. 
The second article "Are They Watching? Test-Taker Viewing Behavior During an L2 
Video Listening Test" by Elvis Wagner addresses a fundamental question in video-based 
listening assessment: do the test takers, in fact, actually look at the video so that they can 
take advantage of whatever additional information it affords over audio only?  By taping 
individual students taking a six-part listening test consisting of three dialogues and three 
short lectures, Wagner determined that students oriented toward the video monitor an 
average of 69% of the time, although viewing patterns at the individual level ranged 
widely. Wagner also found that video orientation time for the dialogues was greater than 
to the lectures and that while the percentage of orientation varied among the six videos 
(from 62% to 77%), there was no obvious explanation for that variation based on either 
the general category (dialogue or lecture) or order of presentation. 
 
 From the Special Issue Editor 
 
Language Learning & Technology 3 
 
 
While the first two articles focus on listening in adults, in the third, "Using digital stories 
to improve listening comprehension with Spanish young learners of English" Dolores 
Ramirez Verdugo and Isabel Alonso Belmonte look at young language learners to 
explore the impact interacting with digital stories may have on English learning. They 
conducted a 22-week study with 220 six-year-old EFL students in Spain from 12 intact 
classes divided into six experimental and six control groups. Experimental and control 
groups spent equal amounts of time (two 45-50 minute sessions per week) studying 
English, and each experimental-control pair had the same teacher. However, while the 
control group based both sessions on the textbook and teacher-led activities centered on 
it, the experimental group spent one session the same way but the second session using 
computer-based materials offering listening and graphic support for the text along with 
an interactive element. Their results showed a modest but statistically significant pre- to 
post-test gain for the experimental group. 
The first commentary "I’m only trying to help: a role for interventions in teaching 
listening" comes from Michael Rost, who begins with expanded reviews of the three 
preceding articles, noting how they represent three distinct perspectives on the ways that 
teachers can use technology to help learners listen better. In the second part of the 
commentary, he proposes a set of helpful interventions aimed at promoting repeated and 
deeper listening based on a model encompassing processes of decoding, comprehension, 
and interpretation. For each of those components, he presents example linkages to 
learner goals, targeted interventions, and related research and instructional design. 
Richard Robin follows with a commentary "Learner-based listening and technological 
authenticity" that looks at current and emerging technologies and focuses on their impact 
on the near future of language learning. He predicts that the next five to ten years will 
see increased development of strategic uses of available technology by language 
students to facilitate their learning, and that the programmed scaffolding found in 
dedicated software will be eclipsed by supports freely available to anyone using online 
materials. These support elements include repeated audio delivery, slowed audio 
delivery, accompanying texts, captioned video, translation bots, and voice chat with 
interactive native speaker practice. The shift for language learners will be paralleled by 
one for teachers, who will need to control these technologies well enough themselves to 
enable their students to use them effectively. 
I am deeply indebted to LLT Editor Irene Thompson for her work on this issue—it was 
truly a collaborative effort. Special thanks also to Editorial Assistant Hunter Hatfield and 
other members of the LLT editorial staff. Most of all, I would like to thank the many 
reviewers who gave their time freely in providing valuable feedback for the submissions 
to this issue.  
 
Phil Hubbard 
Special Issue Editor 
 
