Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num3/murphy/ 
October 2007, Volume 11, Number 3 
pp. 107-129 
 
Copyright © 2007, ISSN 1094-3501 107 
READING COMPREHENSION EXERCISES ONLINE: THE EFFECTS OF 
FEEDBACK, PROFICIENCY AND INTERACTION 
Philip Murphy 
Kanda University of International Studies 
This paper describes an ongoing project to create an online version of a reading 
programme, a custom-designed English language proficiency course at a university in 
Japan. Following an interactionist view of second language acquisition, it was 
hypothesised that comprehension of a reading passage could be enhanced by online 
materials promoting interaction between students as they completed a multiple-choice 
reading comprehension exercise. Interaction was promoted: (a) through pair work at a 
single computer and (b) by providing Elaborative feedback in the form of hints about 
incorrect answers as a means of stimulating discussion about corrections. Students were 
randomly selected from upper and lower levels of English proficiency, as determined by 
the Kanda English Proficiency Test (Bonk & Ockey, 2003), to receive either Elaborative 
feedback or Knowledge of Correct Response feedback (which supplies the correct 
answers). Within these groups, some students worked in pairs and some alone. 
Quantitative results show that the interaction between Type of feedback and Manner of 
study (individual or pair work) was statistically significant; students performed best on a 
follow-up comprehension exercise when in pairs and having been provided with 
Elaborative feedback. Furthermore, qualitative analysis of transcribed interactions also 
shows that Elaborative feedback was conducive to quality interaction. 
INTRODUCTION 
Advancing the design and use of computer-assisted language learning (CALL) activities is a key concern 
for researchers. As Chapelle (1997, pp. 19-22) explains, critical questions need to be answered about how 
CALL can be used to improve instructed second language acquisition (SLA). Two such questions are: 
1) What kind of language does the learner engage in during a CALL activity? 
2) How good is the language experience in CALL for L2 learning? 
Chapelle (1997) describes how the answer to the second question is dependent upon beliefs concerning 
what types of language use are expected to be beneficial for second language development. For those 
espousing an interactionist view of SLA (Lantolf, 2000; Lightbown & Spada, 1999; Long, 1981; Pica, 
1996; Van Lier, 1996), there is an assumption that L2 acquisition is facilitated by learners' interaction in 
the target language, thereby providing opportunities to comprehend message meaning. Accordingly, to 
ensure that L2 tasks meet such assumptions, and to facilitate SLA, researchers need to specify ideal 
observable features of learner language, such as signals that focus attention on language and features that 
may elicit a repetition or an expansion of previously acquired language. 
In line with Chapelle's recommendations, a key concern for research is how these ideal features and 
appropriate tasks can be incorporated into an experimental reading programme. This concern is relevant 
due to the two goals of the current course, namely: 
1) to provide students with the choice of an alternative and principled mode of online study and 
2) to promote learner autonomy (Benson, 2001). 
Throughout this paper, focus is placed on the first exercise that the students meet in the course, a reading 
comprehension exercise. It was hypothesised that increased interaction could be facilitated by requiring 
students to collaborate in pairs at a single computer (Beatty & Nunan, 2004; Stevens, 1992), and by 
Phillip Murphy Reading Comprehension Exercises Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 108 
providing Elaborative feedback in the form of hints to promote discussion as students self-correct errors. 
This type of feedback was provided as an alternative to Knowledge of Correct Response (KCR) feedback, 
which replicates traditional paper-based answer sheets by providing correct answers. It was also 
hypothesised that increased interaction through pair work with Elaborative feedback would be an 
effective method for promoting comprehension of a reading text. Results are analysed both quantitatively 
and qualitatively. 
Context of the Study 
During the second term of the reading course (see Murphy & Imrie, 2003 for a description), students are 
encouraged to choose from a series of activities and create, with guidance, an individualized syllabus. 
Students select, complete and then check their answers to the exercises with answer papers provided by 
the teachers. However, this procedure has proven to be problematic on the paper-based course for the 
following reasons: 
1) when correcting answers, it is uncertain whether students: a) fully understand their errors and b) 
actively engage in the process of self-correction and, 
2) for those students who choose to work outside of lesson time, there is potentially a wait of up to one 
week between lessons (and longer during holidays) before they can check their answers. 
In a bid to overcome these challenges, this research focuses on the contribution that computer-mediated 
feedback can make. A key question that arises is: how and what kind of feedback maximizes 
comprehension? It is towards this issue that the following discussion is directed. 
INTERACTION IN THE READING PROCESS 
CALL researchers have turned to the work of interactionist SLA researchers when evaluating the quality 
of learner language. As Chapelle (1997) explains, the linguistic form of: " … a good interaction is 
hypothesized to occur when the normal interactional structure has been modified because the learner has 
requested, for example, a repetition, clarification or restatement of the original input" (pp. 25-26). This 
modified interaction is thought to be good because it can function to promote both the negotiation of 
meaning of the input (Beatty, 2003; Chapelle, 2001; Long, 1985; Nunan, 1993; Pica, 1994) and greatly 
contribute to language acquisition (Ellis, 1998; Krashen, 1985; Van den Branden, 2000). From a reading 
proficiency perspective, Larsen-Freeman and Long (1991) note: 
Modification of the interactional structure of conversation or of written discourse during 
reading ... is a [good] candidate for a necessary (not sufficient) condition for acquisition. 
The role it plays in negotiation for meaning helps to make input comprehensible while still 
containing unknown linguistic elements, and, hence, potential intake for acquisition. (p. 
144) 
Following research that points to the importance of comprehensible output to the acquisition of the target 
language (Chapelle, 1997; Swain, 1985), a conscious effort was made in this study to investigate the 
effects of feedback designed to promote negotiation of meaning, form and / or content in situations 
similar to those described by Swain and Lapkin (1995): 
In producing the L2, a learner will on occasion become aware of (i.e., notice) a linguistic 
problem (brought to his / her attention either by external feedback [e.g., clarification 
requests] or internal feedback). Noticing a problem 'pushes' the learner to modify his / her 
output. (p. 373) 
Although the importance of both negotiation of meaning and comprehensible output is well documented, 
few studies have investigated the effects on reading comprehension (Van den Branden, 2000); 
nevertheless, the design of this study was informed by research that was available and specifically by 
Phillip Murphy Reading Comprehension Exercises Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 109 
studies that point to the usefulness of promoting reading proficiency through interaction (Grabe & Stoller, 
2002; Shanker & Ekwall, 2003). Despite the fact that the studies such as Eldredge and Butterfield (1986), 
Koskienen and Blum (1986) and Nes (2003) were carried out in non-computer-mediated environments, 
they provide positive implications for promoting interaction through paired online reading activities. 
Quality Student Interaction Around Computers 
As with non-computer-mediated environments, it is important to consider the interaction that is generated 
in computer-based tasks (Beatty, 2003; Stevens, 1992), and the type of interaction that is desirable for 
promoting comprehension, learning and language acquisition around computers. Based on findings from 
Fisher's (1992) study, students working on tutorial software exhibited the same IRF (Initiation, Response, 
Follow-up / Feedback) discursive structure. However, researchers have attempted to increase levels of 
interaction between students in various ways. For example, Wegerif and Mercer (1996) proposed a 
transformation to an IDRF (Initiation, Discussion, Response, Follow-up / Feedback) structure by 
including a discussion stage. Furthermore, software can also be developed to replicate techniques which 
teachers use to stimulate interaction, notably: (a) eliciting knowledge from students, (b) responding to 
what students say (confirmations, repetitions, elaborations and reformations) and (c) describing 
significant aspects of shared experiences ('we' statements) (Mercer, 2004).  
When considering the quality of interaction around computers, two key features are particularly desirable: 
(1) learners need to be actively involved (Van den Branden, 2000); and (2) learners need to produce 
Exploratory talk in which partners engage critically and constructively with each other's ideas (Mercer, 
1995). Regarding the former, Mercer (2004) explains how it is helpful for the analyst to perceive the 
degree in which students in joint activities are: "(a) behaving cooperatively or competitively and (b) 
engaging in the critical reflection or in the mutual acceptance of ideas" (p. 146). As for promoting 
Exploratory talk among learners, Wegerif, Mercer, & Dawes (1998), having been influenced by findings 
of research into effective collaborative learning (summarized in Wegerif & Mercer, 1996), note the 
importance of: sharing relevant information, reaching agreement, expecting reasons and challenges, 
discussing alternatives and encouraging peers. A key concern for research, however, is how quality 
interaction and reading comprehension can be promoted through computer-based activities.  
Reading, Computers and the Internet 
Despite the fact that models and guidelines recommending pedagogically sound practices for 
incorporating Internet-based materials exist (Berry, 2000; Brandl, 2002; Chun & Plass, 2000), a major 
concern is that the number of such examples remains limited. Likewise, guidelines for offering a reading 
course via the Internet (Caverly & McConald, 1998; Jones & Wolf, 2001; Mikulecky, 1998) are similarly 
few. However, evidence exists to support the assumption that integrating reading with computer-mediated 
support improves ESL students' reading skills (Chun & Plass, 1996; Hong, 1997; Stakhnevich, 2002; 
Williams & Williams, 2000). A common theme in studies such as these is that learners benefit from 
facilities offering support and assistance in web learning environments, for instance, from online 
dictionaries, glosses, graphics, blogs, bulletin boards or chat rooms. As a further example of a potentially 
advantageous facility that can also be offered through computer-assisted language learning (CALL), the 
following section comprises a discussion of the merits of computer-mediated feedback. 
COMPUTER-MEDIATED FEEDBACK 
One area in which computers are playing an increasingly important role in SLA concerns the 
identification of students' errors and the subsequent provision of appropriate feedback (Brandl, 1995; 
Clark & Dwyer, 1998; Tsutsui, 2004). However, many software products opt for a generic form of 
feedback and rarely go above the level of indicating whether an answer to a question is correct or 
incorrect (Sales, 1993). Beatty (2003) explains: 
Phillip Murphy Reading Comprehension Exercises Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 110 
A CALL program is likely implicitly to state 'I have the answers to your questions; just 
click here.' A teacher is more likely to say, 'What do you think the answer might be?' or 
'Why do you ask this question?' … it is difficult for computers to deal with ambiguous 
learner input, but this is an area of research that needs to be further investigated. (p. 138) 
Clariana (2000), who has published extensively on the topics of computer-mediated feedback, provides a 
succinct summary of the traditionally investigated types of feedback in CALL: 
Knowledge of response (KR) that states "right" or "wrong" or otherwise tells learners 
whether their response is correct or incorrect; Knowledge of correct response (KCR) that 
states or indicates the correct response; and Elaborative feedback that includes several 
more complex forms of feedback that explains, directs, or monitors (Smith, 1988). 
Elaborative feedback includes the forms listed below: 
1) Explanatory feedback provides additional explanations, such as why a learner's 
error response is incorrect or perhaps why a correct response is correct and various 
types of additional remedial screens that may amount to new instruction (Merrill, 
1985, 1987; Spock, 1987). 
2) Directive feedback may provide prompts, hints, or cues to assist the learner in 
determining the correct response (Nielson, 1990). Answer until correct (AUC, 
Pressey, 1926) is a common form of elaborative feedback where the learner is 
directed to respond until correct. 
3) Monitoring feedback, also referred to as advisement, lets the learner know how 
they are doing overall. (p.1) 
As can be seen, several forms of feedback exist. Accordingly, numerous researchers have tried to identify 
the most effective forms in different contexts. This issue is addressed in the next section.  
How Effective is Feedback? 
It is difficult to say which type of feedback is best for SLA as results are mixed (Clariana, 2000; Mory 
1994). For example, summarizing findings by Bangert-Drowns, Kulik, Kulik, and Morgan (1991), AUC 
and Elaborative feedback are considered to be the most effective: 
KR < no feedback < KCR < AUC = Elaborative feedback 
However, following a review of 30 studies, Clariana's (1993) findings, which are consistent with both 
Schimmel's (1983) meta-analysis of 15 studies and also Kulhavy and Wager's (1993) research, show 
feedback has proven more effective than no feedback: 
No feedback < KR = KCR = Directive feedback = Multiple try feedback (AUC) 
In addition to investigating the most effective type of feedback, various other aspects of computer-
mediated feedback have also been the focus of research. For example: 
1) Clariana and Koul (2006) investigate the effects of multiple-try immediate feedback for questions 
differing in difficulty 
2) Clariana and Koul (2005) compare multiple-try feedback to other types of feedback also for questions 
of differing difficulty 
3) Clariana (2003) and Clariana and Lee (2001) investigate the effects of recognition (multiple-choice) 
and recall (constructed-response) study tasks with feedback 
4) Clariana, Wagner and Murphy (2000) consider the timing of feedback and 
5) Nagata (1996) and Mory (1994) investigate the effects of Elaborative feedback.  
Phillip Murphy Reading Comprehension Exercises Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 111 
A key question is whether computer-based feedback can offer advantages over traditional paper-based 
answer papers. Of particular interest, therefore, is the fact that Nagata (1996) found ongoing intelligent 
computer feedback to be more effective than simple workbook answer sheets for developing grammatical 
skill in producing Japanese particles and sentences. However, Clariana (2000, p. 2) draws on research to 
show how, in contrast to Nagata (1996) and Bangert-Drowns et al. (1991), Elaborative forms of feedback 
often produce no significant improvement over KR feedback despite requiring considerable development 
and implementation cost (Merrill, 1987). Nevertheless, Ferris (2003) explains how indirect feedback, or 
Elaborative feedback from a CALL perspective, is generally thought to be conducive to long-term student 
development; it forces students to think about their own errors and self-correction, thereby leading to: " 
… increased student engagement and attention to forms and problems" (p. 52). Indeed, de Bot (1996) 
explains how students need to be active when producing language to discover what they can and cannot 
do. Noticing a problem, possibly through feedback, may be the incentive learners need to reengage with 
information in the input, thereby providing an opportunity for learning. Therefore, by placing the onus on 
the students to identify and correct their own errors, it would seem that the potential for interaction and 
negotiation of meaning, form and / or content is increased.  
 
THE NEED FOR RESEARCH 
When providing feedback, what messages should be supplied to the students on the screen? If feedback is 
presented in the form of KR or KCR feedback, it is simple to envisage what is displayed (a message such 
as right or wrong, a highlighted answer or a mark indicating the correct answer); however, with 
Elaborative feedback, what is it exactly that should be displayed to promote interaction and 
comprehension? This is the crucial question for anyone creating software to provide such feedback. 
Among the extensive literature related to the theme of feedback, the number of studies researching 
Elaborative feedback is relatively small; however, notable examples exist (Brandl, 1995; Clark and 
Dwyer, 1998; Mory, 1994; Nagata, 1996; Van der Linden, 1993). Even more difficult to find are 
examples of guidelines for its presentation. For example, Van der Linden (1993) notes: "Long feedback 
(exceeding three lines) is not read and for that reason is not useful" (p. 56). Van der Linden concludes 
that: " … feedback, in order to be consulted, has to be concise and precise." Mory (1994) recommends 
that isolated feedback should be avoided as it may provide little context for revision of an erroneous 
response. Consequently, Mory advises designers to: "… include the learner's answer and other alternative 
choices on the same screen as the feedback" (p. 287). As Chapelle (2001) explains, therefore, further 
research is vital: "What is needed are theoretically and empirically based criteria for choosing among the 
potential design options and methods for evaluating their effectiveness for promoting learners' 
communicative L2 ability" (p. 2). Accordingly, the following study comprises an investigation into the 
effectiveness of Elaborative feedback with the aim of identifying guidelines for researchers creating 
software to provide such feedback.  
Research hypotheses 
The literature shows that feedback has the potential to promote comprehension of a reading text; however, 
as to which type of feedback is more effective, results have been varied. The literature also shows that 
interaction between students can promote comprehension; however, both (a) what kind of interaction is 
generated through pair work as a result of Elaborative feedback, and (b) whether the interaction is 
sufficient to promote comprehension need investigating. The effect of a student's English proficiency 
level also needs to be determined. Stemming from this discussion, the following hypotheses were formed: 
 
 
Phillip Murphy Reading Comprehension Exercises Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 112 
Hypothesis 1: Elaborative feedback will be more effective for promoting comprehension of the reading 
text than KCR feedback. 
Hypothesis 2: Pair work will be more effective for promoting comprehension of the reading text than 
individual work. 
Hypothesis 3: Students with a higher level of English proficiency will demonstrate higher levels of 
comprehension of the reading text than those with a lower level. 
Hypothesis 4: Students studying in pairs and receiving Elaborative feedback will demonstrate higher 
levels of comprehension of the reading text than other students. 
Hypothesis 5: Students with higher proficiency receiving Elaborative feedback will demonstrate higher 
levels of comprehension of the reading text than other students. 
Hypothesis 6: Students with higher proficiency studying in pairs will demonstrate higher levels of 
comprehension of the reading text than other students. 
Hypothesis 7: Students with higher proficiency studying in pairs and receiving Elaborative feedback will 
demonstrate higher levels of comprehension of the reading text than other students. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
Participants 
The participants are first-year English majors at Kanda University of International Studies in Japan, who 
are streamed according to a test of global proficiency (Bonk and Ockey, 2003). In the 2005-6 academic 
year, 407 students (15 classes) were assigned to one of four bands: advanced (three classes), upper 
intermediate (four classes), intermediate (four classes) or lower intermediate (four classes). For the 
purpose of this study, the top two bands were grouped together and the bottom two bands were also 
grouped together. 
Materials developed for this study were trialed with 162 of the 407 first-year students. 14 others were late 
or absent for lessons, and the main study was conducted with the remaining 231 students. Six of these 231 
students (two pairs from the Elaborative feedback condition and one pair from the KCR feedback 
condition) scored 100% on the first comprehension exercise on the first attempt. Due to the fact that these 
students made no errors, and, therefore, received no feedback to promote comprehension (the focus of this 
research), these records were omitted from the study. Therefore, the statistical data analysis was 
performed on the data from the remaining 225 students. Videos were recorded of 12 volunteer students 
(six pairs) as follows: (a) four pairs were recorded during the trials and (b) two pairs were recorded during 
the main study. From analysis of the transcripts of these recordings, qualitative data is used to support / 
reject the various research hypotheses. All students agreed to participate in the study. 
Materials: Reading Materials 
Materials comprised one reading text (see Appendix A for an excerpt of the text) and two multiple-choice 
comprehension exercises, each with 15 questions (see Appendices B and C for example questions). 
Therefore, the maximum score on each exercise was 15 points. While the questions in the two 
comprehension exercises were different, the same content points were covered by corresponding 
questions. 
Materials: Feedback Treatment 
The methodology for displaying feedback is based upon the results of a study undertaken by Murphy 
(2005). Research was conducted into identifying the types of errors that students made in response to 
multiple-choice comprehension questions about a reading text and how students changed their answers 
Phillip Murphy Reading Comprehension Exercises Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 113 
following Elaborative feedback with an Answer-until-correct methodology. Students were allowed to 
change their answers until they answered correctly, until they gave up or until they ran out of time. Each 
question was associated with one piece of Elaborative feedback. Whenever a question was answered 
incorrectly, the corresponding Elaborative feedback was supplied irrespective of how many times the 
answers had been checked. Based upon interviews with students and an analysis of the way in which 
answers were changed as a result of feedback, recommendations for displaying Elaborative feedback are 
summarised as follows: 
• Students should answer all questions before receiving any feedback 
• Students should be allowed to get the computer to check their answers a maximum of four times by 
clicking on a ‘Check answers’ button on the screen at the end of the exercise. 
• After checking answers, Elaborative feedback should be provided for each of the errors. If necessary, 
there should be up to three rounds of different Elaborative feedback before the KCR feedback. For 
those who make errors, the opportunity for random guessing of answers is minimised by not 
identifying incorrectly answered questions by question number; instead, students are encouraged to 
read the feedback, reengage with the materials, locate any errors by themselves and then change any 
answers they feel are incorrect. Furthermore, in order not to identify errors by question number, 
students are not supplied the correct answers until they either finish the exercise by answering every 
question correctly or receive the KCR feedback after the three rounds of Elaborative feedback. 
• Following the first check of answers, the first round of Elaborative feedback should address the issue 
of silly errors such as selecting an incorrect answer by mistake. In this situation, students may not 
need a detailed explanation of the error if they are already able to comprehend. Instead, they just need 
an indication that an error has been made. Therefore, Elaborative feedback for each error should only 
direct students back to a key area in the text, for example: Please have a look at paragraph 6 again. 
• If errors exist the second time students submit their answers for checking, Elaborative feedback 
should include a rephrased version of the question to help students identify the incorrect answers. 
• If errors persist the third time students submit their answers, Elaborative feedback should incorporate 
expanded Explanatory and Directive feedback again in the form of hints. This time, building on the 
previous feedback, hints should include key information, sentences and / or phrases from the text 
possibly in a paraphrased form. 
• Finally, if errors persist following the fourth check of answers, students should be provided with the 
correct answers in the form of KCR feedback. If students are still unable to understand their errors, 
they should then consult their teacher. 
As can be seen, the Elaborative feedback does not comprise any new information that is not included in 
the original text. Instead, the Elaborative feedback: (a) redirects students to certain parts of the text, and / 
or (b) restates or rephrases questions and / or text, the aim being not only to provide some support and 
guidance to students during their studies, but also to encourage them to reengage with the materials by 
rereading and then interacting with a partner (if in a pair). 
Procedure 
After an introduction to the lesson (15~20 minutes) students were given 40 minutes to read the text and 
complete the first multiple-choice comprehension exercise. Students were randomly selected to undergo 
different treatments (see Table 1 below for the descriptive statistics): 
1) Students were divided into two levels (upper and lower). English proficiency level, therefore, was the 
first independent variable. 
2) Students were randomly chosen to work either individually or in pairs while completing the 
comprehension exercises. The Manner of study (individual work or pair work) of the students, 
therefore, was the second independent variable. Numbers representing the Manner of Study, Type of 
feedback and English proficiency level were incorporated into the login id numbers which were 
Phillip Murphy Reading Comprehension Exercises Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 114 
handed out together with passwords in advance of this project. As students working in pairs were 
asked to find their own partner within their class, proficiency levels within pairings were 
homogeneous. Due to the late arrival or absenteeism of partners for pair work, five students from the 
Elaborative feedback condition and nine from the KCR feedback condition had to work individually. 
3) Computer software was custom-written with the facility to provide students with one of two different 
types of feedback. In each of the different groups determined by proficiency level and Manner of 
Study, students were provided with either KCR feedback (this process replicates the traditional 
method for checking answers in that students are supplied with the correct answers on a printed 
answer paper having completed the comprehension exercise) or Elaborative feedback to encourage 
self-correction of any errors (see above for a description of the feedback treatment). When 
Elaborative feedback was generated, a hint was displayed giving students help in solving the error 
without initially stating which answer was wrong and what the correct answer should be. The hints 
were written before commencing the research and were input using the teacher interface in the 
software). Type of feedback, therefore, was the third independent variable. 
To investigate the effects of these different treatments (English proficiency level, Manner of study, and 
Type of feedback) on the comprehension of the text during the first comprehension exercise, all students 
were given 20 minutes to complete a second comprehension exercise related to the same text. This time, 
however, all students received KCR feedback. The score on this second exercise was the dependent 
variable. All input data were stored in a database and analyzed quantitatively. Furthermore, transcripts of 
the video sessions were written by the students themselves. The transcripts were then checked and 
formatted by the researcher before being analyzed qualitatively. The results and their implications are 
discussed below. 
QUANTITATIVE RESULTS 
Scores on the second comprehension exercise were stored in the computer log. A three-way ANOVA was 
then performed. Results are listed below in Table 1. 
A quantitative analysis of the results in this study shows that there is no support for Hypothesis 1 as the 
main effect of Type of feedback was not statistically significant (F (1,217)=0.01, p>.05). Therefore, 
Elaborative feedback was found to be equally as effective as KCR feedback. Students receiving 
Elaborative feedback (M=10.39, SD=2.00) in the second comprehension exercise scored slightly higher 
than, but not significantly higher than, those receiving KCR feedback (M=10.33, SD=2.15). The 
quantitative analysis also shows that there is no support for Hypothesis 2 as the main effect of Manner of 
study was not statistically significant (F(1,217)=1.19, p>.05). Therefore, individual work (M=10.24, 
SD=2.21) was found to be equally effective as pair work (M=10.46, SD=1.95). In contrast, the main 
effect of the level of English proficiency level was found to be statistically significant (F(1,217)=29.19, 
p<.05). Hypothesis 3 is supported, therefore, as higher proficiency students (M=11.04, SD=1.93) 
performed significantly better than lower proficiency students (M=9.66, SD=1.98) on the second 
comprehension exercise. 
The interaction between Type of feedback and Manner of study (see Figure 1 below) was found to be 
statistically significant (F(1,217)=4.93, p<.05). Therefore, Hypothesis 4 is supported as it made a 
difference to scores on the second comprehension exercise whether students received Elaborative or KCR 
feedback, and whether they worked individually or in pairs during the first comprehension exercise. 
When receiving Elaborative feedback, students who worked in pairs (M=10.77, SD=1.96) scored higher 
than those who worked individually (M=9.89, SD=1.95). For those receiving KCR feedback, students 
who worked in pairs (M=10.16, SD=1.91) scored lower than those who worked individually (M=10.54, 
SD=2.39).  
 
Phillip Murphy Reading Comprehension Exercises Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 115 
Table 1. Descriptive Statistics 
Type of 
feedback 
English 
proficiency 
level 
Manner 
of study 
Mean SD n 
High Alone 10.70 1.75 23 
 Pair 10.94 2.24 31 
 Total 10.83 2.03 54 
Low Alone 9.13 1.85 24 
 Pair 10.60 1.65 30 
 Total 9.94 1.88 54 
Total Alone 9.89 1.95 47 
 Pair 10.77 1.96 61 
Elaborative 
 Total 10.39 2.00 108 
High Alone 11.45 2.15 29 
 Pair 11.03 1.47 31 
 Total 11.23 1.83 60 
Low Alone 9.48 2.26 25 
 Pair 9.31 1.93 32 
 Total 9.39 2.06 57 
Total Alone 10.54 2.39 54 
 Pair 10.16 1.91 63 
KCR 
 Total 10.33 2.15 117 
High Alone 11.12 2.00 52 
 Pair 10.98 1.88 62 
 Total 11.04 1.93 114 
Low Alone 9.31 2.06 49 
 Pair 9.94 1.90 62 
 Total 9.66 1.98 111 
Total Alone 10.24 2.21 101 
 Pair 10.46 1.95 124 
Total 
 Total 10.36 2.07 225 
 
Hypothesis 5 is not supported as the interaction between Type of feedback and English proficiency level 
was not statistically significant (F(1,217)=2.96, p>.05). In other words, there was no significant difference 
between students' scores on the second comprehension exercise whatever the feedback and whatever the 
proficiency level. When receiving Elaborative feedback, higher proficiency students (M=10.83, SD=2.03) 
scored higher than lower proficiency students (M=9.94, SD=1.88). For those receiving KCR feedback, 
higher proficiency students (M=11.23, SD=1.83) scored higher than lower proficiency students (M=9.39, 
SD=2.06). 
Hypothesis 6 is also not supported as the interaction between English proficiency level and Manner of 
study was not statistically significant (F(1,217)=2.05, p>.05). It did not make a significant difference to 
scores on the second comprehension exercise whether higher or lower proficiency students worked alone 
or in pairs. Higher proficiency students scored higher when working alone (M=11.12, SD=2.00) than 
when working in pairs (M=10.98, SD=1.88). Lower proficiency students scored lower when working 
alone (M=9.31, SD=2.06) than when working in pairs (M=9.94, SD=1.90).  
Phillip Murphy Reading Comprehension Exercises Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 116 
 
Figure 1. The interaction between Manner of study and Type of feedback 
Finally, Hypothesis 7 is not supported as there was no statistically significant interaction between Type of 
feedback, Manner of study and English proficiency level (F(1,217)=0.91, p>.05). For Elaborative 
feedback, the highest score in this study was achieved when higher proficiency students worked in pairs 
(M=10.94, SD=2.24) and the lowest score was when lower proficiency students worked alone (M=9.13, 
SD=1.85). For KCR feedback, the highest score was achieved when higher proficiency students worked 
alone (M=11.45, SD=2.15) and the lowest was when lower proficiency students worked in pairs 
(M=9.31, SD=1.93). 
To summarise the findings of this quantitative analysis of the data obtained, significant results were 
obtained for: (1) the main effect of English proficiency level and (2) the interaction between Manner of 
study and Type of feedback. To help clarify the interpretation of these results, focus is now placed on 
examples of the recorded interactions which are analysed qualitatively.  
QUALITATIVE RESULTS 
The desirability of quality interaction between students around a computer was discussed earlier. 
Therefore, in order to provide a suitable context for interaction, the volunteer students were asked to work 
in pairs and the sessions were recorded and transcribed. To investigate the perceived degree in which 
students are: "(a) behaving cooperatively or competitively and (b) engaging in the critical reflection or in 
the mutual acceptance of ideas" (Mercer 2004, p. 146), this study employs the notion of Exploratory talk 
(Mercer, 1995). Furthermore, to investigate the quality of the resulting interactions and the degree to 
which students engage in the activities, reference is also made to Wegerif et al.'s (1998) pragmatic ground 
rules for promoting Exploratory talk and Wegerif's and Mercer's (1996) IDRF (Initiation, Discussion, 
Response, Follow up / feedback) structure. Examples of interactions illustrating the effects of the 
different kinds of feedback are discussed below. 
A Typical Scenario – Non-Elaborative Feedback 
A common observation in reading classes is that students often copy answers to comprehension questions 
directly from answer sheets without actually considering why their own answers are different and / or 
incorrect. The following excerpt highlights this typical dilemma when two students (Student 1 & Student 
2) receive non-Elaborative feedback, in this case, online. Having completed answering all the questions, 
Phillip Murphy Reading Comprehension Exercises Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 117 
Student 2 suggests that they should get the computer to check their answers. Following the feedback, 
Student 1 comments that it is only possible to check their answers once with KCR feedback. There was 
no attempt to self-correct all five errors, having received the KCR feedback, and the students considered 
the exercise finished.  
Student / Computer Comment 
Student 2: Yes. Check.***10 
Computer feedback: You have 10 correct and 5 incorrect. 
Student 2: We got 5 incorrect. 
Student 1: But finished. Maybe we can check it only once. Good job! 
  
Interaction with Elaborative Feedback 1 
The transcript below comprises part of the interaction between two students as they read and progress 
through the first comprehension exercise. Following the first check of their answers, Elaborative feedback 
(lines 403-405) provided by the computer refers students back to relevant paragraphs in the reading text 
for three incorrect answers. Students negotiate with each other and attempt to identify which questions are 
wrong. Students manage to identify one of the incorrectly answered questions (lines 439-440) and decide 
together to change one of their incorrect answers (line 443). 
 
Line Student / Computer Comment 
401 Student 3: O.K. Check it. O.K. So, please click. 
402 Student 4: Hah. 
403 Computer feedback: You have 12 correct and 3 incorrect. Please correct your  
404  errors. Click here to see your answers.  
405  Have a look at paragraph(s) 1, 2 and 3. 
406 Student 3: 3 incorrect.  
407 Student 4: Oh! 
408 Student 3: Yeah. Please correct your errors. Click here to see your  
409  answers … look … Have a look at paragraph … 
410 Students 3 and 4: 1, 2, 3! 
411 Student 3: Wow! 
412 Student 4: Maybe beginning of the questions. 
413 Student 3: Yeah. 
414 Student 4: Ah! 
415 Student 3: So 1, 2, 3? 
416 Student 4: Yeah. 
417 Student 3: O.K. O.K. 
418 Students 3 and 4: O.K. 
419 Student 3: So, it's one, this … 
420 Student 4: Maybe yeah … 
421 Student 3: … question … Yeah … this one… Yeah … 
422 Student 4: Mm … 
423 Student 3: … because paragraph 1's question is just only this  
424  question … 
425 Student 4: Yes … he only made a decision after carefully con  
426  consideration … he decided quickly after asking family  
427  and friends … mm … 
428 Student 3: … was not made lightly … only one … 
Phillip Murphy Reading Comprehension Exercises Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 118 
429 Student 4: Mm. 
430 Student 3: (Mumbling) … mm. 
431 Student 4: Was not made lightly … mm.  
432 Student 3: Mm. 
433 Student 4: Not only one their friends to consider, but traveling half  
434  halfway … oh oh. 
435 Student 3: He only made a decision … oh … It was very difficult. 
436 Student 4: Yeah. Not only one their friends to consider, but traveling  
437  halfway around the world from England brought other  
438  challenges as well. 
439 Student 3: He only made a decision after careful consideration. 
440 Student 4: Mm. Maybe this one. 
441 Student 3: He decided quickly? 
442 Student 4: No. 
443 Student 3: No? No? Huh huh. Ah! O.K. So change.  
 
Interaction with Elaborative Feedback 2 
In the next transcript, students interact as they discuss another potentially incorrect answer. The point of 
the question is for students to find out that it gets darker earlier in Japan than in England in the summer. 
As part of the interaction, students negotiate the meaning of fading light. They locate their second error 
(lines 552-556) and change their answer accordingly. However, both agree that they are not sure what the 
third incorrect answer is so they agree to check their answers once more (lines 568-572) and receive the 
next round of feedback. 
  
Line Student / Computer Comment 
532 Student 3: Mm … Ah, just this question? 
533 Student 4: Um? 
534 Student 3: This question. 
535 Student 4: Ah! Based upon the information in the story, Mark was  
536  surprised to see it was dark at 8:45 pm because … 
537 Student 3: It was only a quarter to … 
538 Student 4: Mark was surprised to see it was dark at 8:45p.m.  
539  because … he couldn't see … 
540 Student 3: It gets dark later in his town, maybe. No? 
541 Student 4: It gets dark later … oh … 
542 Student 3: Mm …  
543 Student 4: Dark … 
544 Student 3: No?  
545 Student 4: Later. 
546 Student 3: It gets dark … 
547 Student 4: Mm … Let see … mm … 
548 Student 3: Yeah I think so … 
549 Student 4: Mm. 
550 Student 3: … because, however the bright lights … tall building  
551  and the … ah no, no, no, no. 
552 Student 4: In Mark's hometown, there would normally be another  
553  hour of fa fading daylight … It gets dark later in his  
Phillip Murphy Reading Comprehension Exercises Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 119 
554  hometown. 
555 Student 3: Yeah, maybe it's right O.K.?  
556 Student 4: O.K. 
557 Student 3: And we can't find out which is … 
558 Student 4: Yeah. 
559 Student 3: … incorrect. Mm. So let's change it. Which which one? 
560 Student 4: It's it's right, and according to the story, he was amazed  
561  by… 
562 Student 3: That's right. 
563 Student 4: Ah, right. According to the information in the passage,  
564  the summer temperature in Japan was higher than Mark  
565  was used to … 
566 Student 3: So … 
567 Student 4: The July heat and humidity hit Mark … 
568 Student 3: So, let's check once more. 
569 Student 4: Yes … 
570 Student 3: Yeah. 
571 Student 4: … and get another hint. 
572 Student 3: Yeah. 
Interaction with Elaborative Feedback 3 
The next transcript comprises the interaction as students receive the second round of feedback. Having 
correctly changed two of their three incorrect answers, one error still remains. Following Elaborative 
feedback (lines 573-575), students are delighted to identify which question is answered incorrectly (line 
578-580). They negotiate the meaning of the hint and also the information inferred in the text about what 
time shops usually close. The point of the question is for students to determine that shops generally close 
at 5:30pm in England, much earlier than in Japan. Students then correct their third error and check their 
answers for a third time (lines 580-596). Finally, all questions are correctly answered (lines 597-599). 
 
Line Student / Computer Comment 
573 Computer feedback: You have 14 correct and 1 incorrect. Please correct your  
574  errors. Click here to see your answers.  
575  Why was Mark surprised at five minutes past six? 
576 Students 3 and 4: 1. 
577 Student 3: Incorrect! 
578 Student 4: Ah! 
579 Student 3: Why was Mark was surprised at five minutes past six? 
580 Students 3 and 4: Ah! This one! 
581 Student 4: Huh? 
582 Student 3: E? Yeah, right? In England normally closed … So, this  
583  one? 
584 Student 4: Yes. 
585 Student 3: Yes. 
586 Student 4: Yes. 
587 Student 3: Maybe?   
588 Student 4: Mm. 
589 Student 3: Yeah! The information doesn't say this … 
590 Student 4: Yeah. 
Phillip Murphy Reading Comprehension Exercises Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 120 
591 Student 3: … and … after 6 p.m. it's … 
592 Student 4: Mm. 
593 Student 3: … Japanese. 
594 Student 4: Yeah. 
595 Student 3: Yeah, not six …  
596 Student 4: Mm. 
597 Student 3: And … right, Yeah. 
598 Computer feedback: Perfect! Well done! Please click here to see your  
599  answers. 
 
The example transcripts of Elaborative feedback above exhibit numerous examples of quality interaction. 
Firstly, the transcripts contain examples of the IDRF structure as students: (1) initiate interaction 
following the feedback (lines 406-407 and 576-577), (2) discuss the feedback by trying to identify their 
errors (lines 412-418 and 578-595), (3) respond to the feedback by selecting different answers and then 
clicking to check them again (lines 443 and 596-597), and (4) receive further feedback following the 
changes which stimulates further interaction (lines 403-405 and 573-575). Throughout the examples, the 
question marks following several of Student 3's utterances, which were said with rising intonation, 
represent this student's call for confirmation to his suggestions of possible answers (lines 415, 441, 540, 
544, 555, 582 and 583). There are also examples of Exploratory talk in which students engage critically 
and constructively with each other's ideas (lines 440-443); for example, sharing information (lines 552-
556), discussing alternatives (lines 439-442 and 582-583), disagreeing (lines 441-442), and seeking 
agreement as a pair (lines 415-416, 540-548 and 582-595). Further examples of language describing a 
shared experience as students worked together are highlighted by the inclusion of words such as "We" 
(line 557) and "Let's" (lines 559 and 568). In summary, therefore, the transcripts include several of the 
features that have been associated with quality interaction between students while working at a computer. 
It should be noted that volunteers were all higher English proficiency level students. However, from 
observation by the researcher of all data collection sessions in the study, all students working in pairs 
were seen interacting with their partners. Whilst contents of interactions varied among the pairs of 
students, quality interaction was observed on numerous occasions regardless of English proficiency level. 
As per the departmental requirement, all students interacted in English. 
DISCUSSION 
In contrast to Bangert-Drowns et. al's (1991) and Nagata's (1996) research, but consistent with findings 
by Clariana (2000) and Mory (1994), a quantitative analysis of the results in this study shows that the 
main effect of Type of feedback was not statistically significant. Accordingly, therefore, it could be 
argued that KCR feedback with its cheaper development and implementation costs is a more logical 
choice for an appropriate form of computer-mediated feedback. However, results also show a statistically 
significant interaction between Manner of study and Type of feedback with mean scores as follows: (1) 
Elaborative feedback: pair work 10.77 (SD=1.96), (2) KCR feedback: individual work 10.54 (SD=2.39), 
(3) KCR feedback: pair work 10.16 (SD=1.91) and (4) Elaborative feedback: individual work 9.89 
(SD=1.95). As can be seen, students receiving Elaborative feedback scored higher when working in pairs 
and students receiving KCR feedback scored higher when working alone. It is clear from these results, 
therefore, that simply providing students with correct answers to questions in all situations may not 
necessarily be the most effective way to promote reading comprehension.  
Following an interactionist view of SLA, the discussion above highlights the desirability of collaborative 
pair work in the creation of opportunities conducive to promoting quality interaction. It was no surprise, 
therefore, that the combination of Elaborative feedback and pair work resulted in the highest score; 
however, it was surprising that students scored lower when working in pairs with KCR feedback. As to 
Phillip Murphy Reading Comprehension Exercises Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 121 
why this result may have occurred, the transcript above of a typical scenario, in which non-Elaborative 
feedback is supplied, highlights the problem inherent with KCR feedback in that students tend not to 
reengage with materials once they have been supplied with the correct answers. For this reason, 
opportunities are often lost for rereading, self-correction, self-reflection, interaction and negotiation, all of 
which have been shown to facilitate reading comprehension and SLA. 
From purely a quantitative analysis perspective, it is true to say that there was no significant advantage of 
Elaborative over KCR feedback. Indeed, while not significant, it is interesting to note that the highest 
score (M=11.45, SD=2.15) was obtained by higher English proficiency students working alone with KCR 
feedback. Furthermore, the results also suggest that higher proficiency students do better working alone 
whereas lower proficiency students do better in pairs. However, in contrast to individual work and KCR 
feedback, the first example transcript of interaction with Elaborative feedback above is an exemplification 
of how the intriguing nature of the hints stimulated students into reengaging with the materials once again 
following Elaborative feedback. Quality interaction was also generated between students working in 
pairs. Therefore, from both the qualitative analysis and an interactionist view of SLA, the combination of 
pair work and Elaborative feedback is more desirable because of the opportunities afforded the students in 
developing, not only their comprehension of reading texts, but also their English language proficiency 
skills through the quality interaction that is generated.  
Considering the interaction between Manner of study and Type of feedback once again, it was also 
surprising that students working individually and receiving Elaborative feedback scored the lowest 
(M=9.89, SD=1.95). A possible explanation for this result is connected to: the amount of time allotted to 
complete the two comprehension exercises and the amount and complexity of the feedback supplied. It is 
possible that certain students suffered from cognitive overload as they attempted to process the 
Elaborative feedback in the limited amount of time, hence the low average score. This assumption may be 
particularly true for lower proficiency students (M=9.13, SD=1.85). Pair work may have been responsible 
for alleviating this situation with the additional support of a partner to process and discuss the Elaborative 
feedback, hence the higher average score (M=10.77, SD=1.96). Although differences are not statistically 
significant, it is interesting to note that lower English proficiency level students working in pairs with 
Elaborative feedback scored high (M=10.60, SD=1.65). This score was some 1.12 points higher than the 
next highest treatment for lower proficiency students (individual work with KCR feedback (M=9.48, 
SD=2.26)) and almost equivalent to higher proficiency students working alone receiving Elaborative 
feedback (M=10.70, SD=1.75). 
Based upon these results, and also in accordance with an interactionist view of language learning, it is 
argued that pair work and Elaborative feedback, despite its more expensive development and 
implementation costs, is a preferable form of computer-mediated feedback in online multiple-choice 
reading comprehension exercises. The guidelines below for providing Elaborative feedback, therefore, 
can be used in future research studies. Moreover, and perhaps more importantly, the guidelines can be 
used as a reference point in the search for more effective methods for providing Elaborative feedback. 
IMPLICATIONS FOR PROVIDING ELABORATIVE FEEDBACK 
Suggested Guidelines 
In summary, the following guidelines are proposed to promote reading comprehension through 
Elaborative feedback and interaction: 
• Students should be encouraged to work in pairs. 
• When studying in pairs, students should be provided with Elaborative feedback. The model used in 
this study provides up to three rounds of Elaborative feedback: 
1) the first round of Elaborative feedback should be written to direct the students back to key areas 
in the text (Directive feedback) without identifying which questions are incorrectly answered. 
Phillip Murphy Reading Comprehension Exercises Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 122 
2) the second round of Elaborative feedback should rephrase questions which are incorrectly 
answered. 
3) the third round of Elaborative feedback should incorporate expanded Explanatory and Directive 
feedback again in the form of hints. In addition to the rephrased questions, feedback should 
include key information, sentences and / or phrases from the text in a rephrased or paraphrased 
form. 
4) finally, if incorrect answers remain, KCR feedback should be provided.  
• When studying alone, students should be provided with KCR feedback until more effective guidelines 
for providing Elaborative feedback to individuals are available. 
Future Research 
Certain questions remain unanswered with this research: 
1) As noted above, excessive Explanatory feedback may be a cause of cognitive overload. There are 
implications here for further research into the appropriate amount of feedback provided in a certain 
time frame and the complexity of the sentences that should appear on the screen. Therefore, it would 
be informative: 
• to investigate how comprehension is affected by Elaborative feedback if different students are 
given different amounts of time to process the same feedback to correct mistakes and 
• to compare the effectiveness of different ways of providing the same Elaborative feedback in a 
given amount of time. 
2) It would also be informative to investigate: 
• how Elaborative feedback can be offered when partners are in different locations,  
• how students' motivation is affected by different amounts of feedback as cognitive overload may 
have a detrimental influence on motivation, thereby affecting such things as the amount or quality 
of interaction, 
• how much students actually interact with their partner and 
• how much time elaboration and pair work adds to the lesson time.  
CONCLUSION 
With conflicting results regarding the effectiveness of different types of feedback reported in the 
literature, it was hypothesized that, rather than the effect of feedback alone, higher scores on a multiple-
choice comprehension exercise would be dependent upon a combination of feedback and other possible 
factors namely the Manner of study of the students and their English proficiency level. In contrast to KCR 
feedback, which can be problematic for generating discussion, the focus was placed on Elaborative 
feedback. Taking an interactionist view of language learning, it was assumed that comprehension of the 
text as measured by a multiple-choice exercise would be promoted by both: (1) Elaborative feedback in 
the form of hints to stimulate discussion, and (2) the interaction generated through pair work as students 
discussed how to correct mistakes. Quantitative data analysis showed the interaction between Type of 
feedback and the Manner of study of the students was statistically significant. Students scored highest on 
the second comprehension exercise when studying in pairs and having been provided with Elaborative 
feedback. When studying alone, students benefited from KCR feedback. 
Pica, Young, and Doughty (1987) explain how comprehension and confirmation checks, and clarification 
requests, serve as mechanisms for native speakers' modification of input when interacting with non-native 
speakers. Furthermore, they note how triggering repetition and rephrasing of input content plays a crucial 
Phillip Murphy Reading Comprehension Exercises Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 123 
role in comprehension. While in no way insinuating that computers can completely replace teachers and 
native speakers in all areas of teaching, the results here support the assumption that there are certain 
teaching roles that computers can perform to great effect. As shown in this study, with suitably written 
software and Elaborative feedback, incorrect responses triggered feedback providing rephrased and / or 
paraphrased questions and text. Students benefited by being provided with these hints about necessary 
corrections, thereby encouraging them to engage with the material once again and to interact with a 
partner about their mistakes.  
An underlying concern throughout this study has been the lack of clear rules for writing Elaborative 
feedback. Therefore, the effectiveness of any such feedback in promoting comprehension in the reading 
process may be due to a number of factors such as the length and complexity of such Elaborative 
feedback, in addition to the factors considered in this study (students' English proficiency level, Manner 
of study and Type of feedback). However, results from this study suggest that: (a) the traditional answer 
paper (KCR feedback) may not always be the optimal tool for learning from mistakes and (b) certain 
combinations of factors (Manner of study and Type of feedback) can have significant beneficial effects on 
students' learning outcomes. Both educators and students should be aware of these potential effects so that 
informed decisions can be made when selecting appropriate support to foster learning. Findings of the 
study suggest that educators would do well to promote the advantages of Elaborative feedback and pair 
work, and that students should be encouraged to study in such a way.  
With the ability to recommend different types of feedback to complement different manners of studying, 
these findings contribute to the process of custom-designing online materials for language learners 
generally. This project shows that designers can cater for different levels of second language proficiency 
by providing feedback that may promote both reading comprehension and interaction. It also shows that 
they can cater to learning preferences by offering different forms of feedback. In this respect, this project 
represents an implementation of a research-informed design that is consistent with both an interactionist 
view of language learning and a belief in learner autonomy. 
 
Phillip Murphy Reading Comprehension Exercises Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 124 
APPENDICES 
Appendix A. An Excerpt from the Reading Passage 
 
 
 
 
 
Phillip Murphy Reading Comprehension Exercises Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 125 
Appendix B. Two Example Questions from the First Comprehension Exercise 
 
 
 
Appendix C. Two Example Questions from the Second Comprehension Exercise 
 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I would like to thank the following people: (i) Christopher Candlin, my doctoral supervisor, for his words 
of wisdom, unending support, guidance and encouragement, (ii) Francis Johnson, the creator of the 
original reading course, (iii) Michael Torpey, Siwon Park and William Bonk for their much appreciated 
support, (iv), Kanda University of International Studies for the opportunities and funding I have received 
and the wonderful students who helped me so much, (v) Nana, Yuko, Tomoko, Rei and Tomomi for the 
translations, (vi) the three anonymous reviewers, Marlise Horst and Hunter Hatfield for their valuable 
feedback, and (vii) my wife Kuniko, my son Leon, my daughter Leana and my parents for their loving 
support. 
Phillip Murphy Reading Comprehension Exercises Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 126 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Originally from England, Philip Murphy has taught in Japan since 1990. With a background in computer 
science and an M.Ed. in TESOL, he is currently working towards a Doctorate in Applied Linguistics at 
Macquarie University in Sydney Australia. His research interests lie with computer-assisted language 
learning and promoting learner autonomy. 
Email: murphy@kanda.kuis.ac.jp 
 
REFERENCES 
Bangert-Drowns, R. L., Kulik, C. C., Kulik, J. A., & Morgan, M. (1991). The instructional effect of 
feedback in test-like events. Review of Educational Research, 61(2), 213-238. 
Beatty, K. (2003). Teaching and researching computer-assisted language learning. London: Longman. 
Beatty, K., & Nunan, D. (2004). Computer-mediated collaborative learning. System, 32, 165-183. 
Benson, P. (2001). Teaching and researching autonomy in language learning. London: Longman. 
Berry, L. H. (2000). Cognitive effects of web page design. In B. Abbey (Ed.), Instructional and cognitive 
impacts of Web-based education (pp. 41-55). London: Idea Group Publishing.  
Bonk, W. J., & Ockey, G. (2003). A many-faceted Rasch analysis of the L2 group oral discussion task. 
Language Testing, 20(1), 89-110. 
Brandl, K. K. (1995). Strong and weak students' preferences for error feedback options and responses. 
The Modern Language Journal, 79(2), 194-211.  
Brandl, K. K. (2002). Integrating internet-based reading materials into the foreign language curriculum: 
from teacher- to student-centered approaches. Language Learning & Technology, 6(3), 87-107. 
Caverly, D., & McConald, L. (1998). Techtalk: Distance development education. Journal of 
Developmental Education, 21(3), 36-37, 40. 
Chapelle, C. (1997). CALL in the year 2000: Still in search of research paradigms. Language Learning & 
Technology, 1(1), 19-43. 
Chapelle, C. A. (2001). Computer applications in second language acquisition: Foundations for teaching, 
testing and research. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Chun, D. M., & Plass, J. L. (1996). Facilitating reading comprehension with multimedia. System, 24, 503-
519. 
Chun, D. M., & Plass, J. L. (2000). Networked multimedia environments for second language acquisition. 
In M. Warschauer and R. Kern (Eds.), Network-based language teaching: Concepts and practice (pp.151-
170). New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Clariana, R. B. (1993). A review of multiple-try feedback in traditional and computer-based instruction. 
Journal of Computer-Based Instruction, 20(3), 67-74.  
Clariana, R. B. (2000). Feedback in computer-assisted learning. NETg University of Limerick Lecture 
Series. Retrieved September 28, 2007, from http://www.personal.psu.edu/faculty/r/b/rbc4/NETg.htm. 
Clariana, R. B. (2003). The effectiveness of constructed-response and multiple-choice study tasks in 
computer aided learning. J. Educational Computing Research, 28(4), 395-406. 
Phillip Murphy Reading Comprehension Exercises Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 127 
Clariana, R. B., & Koul, R. (2005). Multiple-try feedback and higher-order learning outcomes. 
International Journal of Instructional Media, 32(3), 239-245. 
Clariana, R. B., & Koul, R. (2006). The effects of different forms of feedback on fuzzy and verbatim 
memory of science principles. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 76, 259-270. 
Clariana, R. B., & Lee, D. (2001). The effects of recognition and recall study tasks with feedback in a 
computer-based vocabulary lesson. Educational Technology Research & Development, 49(3), 23-36. 
Clariana, R. B., Wagner, D., & Murphy, L. C. R. (2000). Applying a connectionist description of 
feedback timing. Educational Technology Research & Development, 48(3), 5-21. 
Clark, K., & Dwyer, F. (1998). Effect of different types of computer-assisted feedback strategies on 
achievement and response confidence. International Journal of Instructional Media, 25(1, winter), 55-63. 
de Bot, K. (1996). Review article the psycholinguistics of the output hypothesis. Language Learning, 
46(3), 529-555. 
Eldredge, J. L., & Butterfield, D. D. (1986). Alternatives to traditional reading instruction. Reading 
Teacher, 40, 32-37. 
Ellis, R. (1998). Discourse control and the acquisition-rich classroom. In Renandya, W. A. & Jacob, G. 
(Eds.), Learners and Language Learning, 39, 145-71. 
Ferris, R. D. (2003). Response to student writing: Implications from second language students. Mahwah, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Fisher, E. (1992). Characteristics of children's talk at the computer and its relationship to the computer 
software. Language and Education, 7(2), 187-215. 
Grabe, W., & Stoller, F. L. (2002). Teaching and researching reading: Applied linguistics in action. 
Harlow, UK: Longman. 
Hong, W. (1997). Multimedia computer-assisted reading in business Chinese. Foreign Language Annals, 
30, 335-344. 
Jones, H. J., & Wolf, P. J. (2001). Teaching a graduate content area reading course via the Internet: 
Confessions of an experienced neophyte. Reading Improvement, Spring 2001, 38(1), 2-9. 
Koskinen, P. S., & Blum, I. H. (1986). Paired repeated reading: A classroom strategy for developing 
fluent reading. The Reading Teacher, 40, 70-75. 
Krashen, S. (1985). The input hypothesis: Issues and implications. London: Longman.  
Kulhavy, R. W., & Wager, W. (1993). Feedback in programmed instruction: Historical context and 
implications for practice. In J. V. Dempsey & G. C. Sales (Eds.), Interactive instruction and feedback 
(pp.3-20). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational Technology Publications. 
Lantolf, J. P. (2000). Sociocultural theory and second language learning. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
Larsen-Freeman, D., & Long, M. (1991). An introduction to second language acquisition research. 
Essex: Longman. 
Lightbown, P., & Spada, N. (1999). How languages are learned. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Long, M. (1981). Input, interaction and second language acquisition. Annals of the NY Academy of 
Sciences, 379, 259-278. 
Phillip Murphy Reading Comprehension Exercises Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 128 
Long, M. H. (1985). Input and second language acquisition theory. In S. M. Gass & C. G. Madden (Eds.), 
Input in second language acquisition (pp.377-393). Rowley, MA: Newbury House Publishers. 
Mercer, N. (1995). The guided construction of knowledge: Talk amongst teachers and learners. 
Clevedon: Multilingual Matters. 
Mercer, N. (2004). Sociocultural discourse analysis: Analysing classroom talk as a social mode of 
thinking. Journal of Applied Linguistics, 1(2), 137-168. 
Merrill, J. (1985). Levels of questioning and forms of feedback: Instructional factors in courseware 
design. A presentation at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association in 
Chicago, Illinois. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 266 766). 
Merrill, J. (1987). Levels of questioning and forms of feedback: Instructional factors in course ware 
design. Journal of Computer-Based Instruction, 14(1), 18-22. 
Mikulecky, L. (1998). Diversity, discussion, and participation. Comparing web-based and campus-based 
adolescent literature classes. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 42(2), 84-92. 
Mory, E. H. (1994). Adaptive feedback in computer-based instruction: Effects of response certitude on 
performance, feedback-study time, and efficiency. J. Educational Computing Research, 11(3), 263-290. 
Murphy, P. M. (2005). Interactivity, usability and flexibility in an online reading course. Studies in 
Linguistics and Language Education of the Research Institute of Language Studies and Language 
Education, Kanda University of International Studies, 16, 383-433. 
Murphy, P. M., & Imrie, A. (2003). Implementing computers in a reading classroom. Studies in 
Linguistics and Language Education of the Research Institute of Language Studies and Language 
Education, Kanda University of International Studies, 14, 123-166. 
Nagata, N. (1996). Computer vs. workshop instruction in second language acquisition. CALICO Journal, 
14(1), 53-75. 
Nes, S. L. (2003). Using paired reading to enhance the fluency skills of less-skilled readers. Reading 
Improvement, 40(4), 179-192. 
Nielson, M. C. (1990). The impact of informational feedback and a second attempt at practice questions 
on concept learning in computer-aided instruction. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of 
Texas at Austin. 
Nunan, D. (1993). Introducing discourse analysis. London: Penguin. 
Pica, T. (1994). Research on negotiation: What does it reveal about second-language learning conditions, 
processes and outcomes? Language Learning, 44, 493-527. 
Pica, T. (1996). Do second language learners need negotiation? International Review of Applied 
Linguistics, 34(1),1-19. 
Pica, T., Young, R., & Doughty, C. (1987). The impact of interaction on comprehension. TESOL 
Quarterly, 21(4), 737-758. 
Pressey, S. L. (1926). A simple apparatus which gives tests and scores – and teaches. School and Society, 
23, 373-376. 
Sales, G. C. (1993). Adapted and adaptive feedback in technology-based instruction. In J. V. Dempsy & 
G. C. Sales (Eds.), Interactive instruction and feedback (pp.159-175). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational 
Technology Publications. 
Phillip Murphy Reading Comprehension Exercises Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 129 
Schimmel, B. J. (1983). A meta-analysis of feedback to learners in computerized and programmed 
instruction. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association, 
Montreal, Canada. (ERIC Document Reproduction No. ED 233 708). 
Shanker, J. L., & Ekwall, E. E. (2003). Locating and correcting reading difficulties. Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Merrill Prentice Hall. 
Smith, P. L. (1988). Toward a taxonomy of feedback: Content and scheduling. A paper presented at the 
Annual meeting of the Association for Educational Communications and Technology, New Orleans, LA. 
Spock, P. A. (1987). Feedback and confidence of response for a rule-learning task using computer-
assisted instruction. (Doctoral dissertation, University of Texas, Austin). Dissertation Abstracts 
International, 48(5), 1109. 
Stakhnevich, J. (2002). Reading on the web: Implications for ESL professionals. The Reading Matrix, 
2(2). 
Stevens, V. (1992). Humanism and CALL: A coming of age. In M. C. Pennington and V. Stevens (Eds.), 
Computers in applied linguistics: An international perspective (pp. 11-38). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual 
Matters. 
Swain, M. (1985). Communicative competence: Some roles of comprehensible input and `comprehensible 
output in its development. In S. M. Gass & C. G. Madden (Eds.), Input in second language acquisition 
(pp. 235-253). Rowley, MA: Newbury House Publishers. 
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (1995). Problems in output and the cognitive processes they generate: A step 
towards second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 16, 371-391. 
Tsutsui, M. (2004). Multimedia as a means to enhance feedback. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 
17(3-4), 377-402. 
Van den Branden, K. (2000). Does negotiation of meaning promote reading comprehension? A study of 
multilingual primary school classes. Reading Research Quarterly, 35(3), 426-443. 
Van der Linden, E. (1993). Does feedback enhance computer-assisted language learning? Computers & 
Education, 21, 61-65. 
Van Lier, L. (1996). Interaction in the language curriculum: Awareness, autonomy & authenticity. 
Harlow, UK: Longman. 
Wegerif, R., & Mercer, N. (1996). Computers and reasoning through talk in the classroom. Language and 
Education, 10(1), 47-65.   
Wegerif, R., Mercer, N., & Dawes, L. (1998). Software design to support discussion in the primary 
curriculum. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 14, 199-211. 
Williams, H. S., & Williams, P. N. (2000). Integrating reading and computers: an approach to improve 
ESL students reading skills. Reading Improvement, Fall 2000, 37(3), 98-100. 
 
