Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num2/levy/ 
June 2007, Volume 11, Number 2 
pp. 104-127 
 
Copyright © 2007, ISSN 1094-3501 104 
CULTURE, CULTURE LEARNING AND NEW TECHNOLOGIES: 
TOWARDS A PEDAGOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
Mike Levy 
Griffith University 
ABSTRACT 
This paper seeks to improve approaches to the learning and teaching of culture using new 
technologies by relating the key qualities and dimensions of the culture concept to 
elements within a pedagogical framework. In Part One, five facets of the culture concept 
are developed: culture as elemental; culture as relative; culture as group membership; 
culture as contested; and culture as individual (variable and multiple). Each perspective 
aims to provide a focus for thinking about culture, and thereby to provide a valid and 
useful point of departure for thinking about the practice of culture learning and teaching 
with new technologies. The referenced literature draws from a broad range of disciplines 
and definitions of culture. In Part Two, five projects are chosen to represent relevant 
technologies currently in use for culture learning: e-mail, chat, a discussion forum and a 
Web-based project. Each project is used to illustrate facets of the culture concept 
discussed in Part One with a view to identifying key elements within a pedagogical 
framework that can help us respond effectively to the challenge of culture learning and 
teaching utilising new technologies. Thus the goal is to align fundamental qualities of the 
culture concept with specific pedagogical designs, tasks and technologies. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
From the first attempts in the 19th century to pin down the notion of culture through to contemporary 
interpretations of the idea, culture as a concept has attracted numerous definitions and interpretations 
(Atkinson, 1999; Baldwin, Faulkner, Hecht & Lindsley, 2006; Geertz, 1973; Kramsch, 1998; Robins, 
2005; Tyler, 1881; Wilson, 1935). The recent publication by Balwin et al., Redefining Culture, presents 
over 300 definitions of culture from across the disciplines. For language learning and teaching, Omaggio 
Hadley (1993), Kramsch (1993) and Lo Bianco (2003) also provide definitions and valuable introductions 
set in an historical context. Collectively, these works give a sense of the breadth and depth of the topic 
and the range of definitions and interpretations that have been applied over time. These authors illustrate 
the multifaceted qualities of the culture concept as they discuss the relationship between culture and 
civilisation, culture as it relates to the exotic and to the ordinary, culture as a set of facts or an inventory, 
culture as a collection of practices, and culture as learned, transmitted, changing and multiple. Work to 
date has undoubtedly greatly enhanced our understandings of the culture concept, but, as Lo Bianco 
(2003, p. 11) observes, the concept of culture remains "complex and elusive" (see also Baldwin, Faulkner 
& Hecht, 2006).  
The complexity and variation in our understanding of the culture concept has been echoed in the range of 
approaches, strategies and techniques that have been advocated for language and culture teaching (e.g., 
Byram, 1997; Furstenberg, Levet, English & Maillet, 2001; Kramsch & Andersen, 1999; Liddicoat & 
Crozet, 2000; Lo Bianco, 2003; Lo Bianco & Crozet, 2003; O’Dowd, 2003). These approaches, strategies 
and techniques have aimed to highlight points of focus for learners and teachers as they engage with a 
complex topic. They have included strategies to enable learners to become more objective about their own 
culture and heritage, more aware of cultural aspects that are "hidden" (Hall, 1966), lists of attributes said 
to be representative of a particular culture, tasks that are structured to help learners examine stereotypes, 
Mike Levy Culture, Culture Learning, and New Technologies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 105 
and specific techniques and procedures to provide insight and perspective, among others. However, there 
remain areas which are not sufficiently drawn out across contexts, especially as far as the particular 
relationship between culture learning and teaching and the differential application of new technologies is 
concerned. 
The purpose of this paper is not to re-present a history of how our understandings of culture have evolved 
and developed. Nor does it aim to provide the definitive interpretation of the culture concept. But it does 
consider again important qualities of the concept and, as a result, revisits some basic ideas or assumptions 
about the fundamental nature of culture. It does this by examining the idea of culture from five 
perspectives: culture as elemental; culture as relative; culture as group membership; culture as contested; 
and culture as individual (variable and multiple). Each section overlaps and builds upon the one before.1 
The premise is that the more we know about the culture concept itself, as an object or target for learning, 
the better equipped we will be to develop the pedagogical elements required for the successful practice of 
culture learning and teaching. The five facets of the culture concept developed in part one are used as a 
basis for the discussion of five culture learning projects in Part Two. These projects include e-mail 
(projects 1 and 2), chat (project 3), a discussion forum (project 4) and a Web-based project (project 5). 
The discussion in Part Two focuses primarily on identifying: well-founded pedagogical elements among 
the projects; possible explanations or reasons for problems, data or other phenomena evident in the 
projects; and key questions or problems for culture learning, from both the learner’s and the teacher’s 
point of view. More established, tried and tested technologies form the backbone of the discussion in this 
paper such as e-mail exchanges for culture learning (see Hertel, 2003; Itakura, 2004; Jogan, Heredia, & 
Aguilera, 2001). Space limitations do not permit an exploration of all new technologies or applications 
with potential for culture learning.2  
The working definition of culture that will be used is provided by Kramsch. "In summary, culture can be 
defined as membership in a discourse community that shares a common social space and history, and 
common imaginings" (1998, p. 10). Skelton and Allen add: "Moreover, any one individual’s experience 
of culture will be affected by the multiple aspects of their identity—race, gender, sex, age, sexuality, 
class, caste position, religion, geography, and so forth—and it is likely to alter in various circumstances" 
(1999, p. 4). Thus, culture is both a manifestation of a group, or a community, and of an individual’s 
experience within it, or apart from it. As a group, members engage with one another in a shared social 
space. A common social space need not mean a shared physical space, of course, as in the communities 
and cultures that have made a virtual space for themselves online. But culture is not just about the group. 
Recognising the perspective of the individual in relation to the group is key in developing a pedagogical 
approach. 
PART ONE: WHAT WE KNOW ABOUT CULTURE 
1. Culture as elemental 
Our cultural orientation begins at birth. As we grow and learn our first language, we are acculturated into 
a particular way of life. It follows, therefore, that when a second language learner begins a new language, 
the learner is no more a "blank slate" culturally than they are linguistically. In the words of Savignon and 
Sysoyev (2002): 
 … learning of foreign culture does not start from "an absolute zero". By the time learners 
begin the study of a L2 context and its culture, they have already formed certain concepts, 
stereotypes, and expectations about L2 cultural realities. These expectations are not fixed 
and immutable. But they will influence the way learners comprehend and interpret a L2 
culture (C2). (p. 510) 
Two profound qualities of the culture concept are evident in such statements. Firstly, we may be largely 
unaware of our own cultural orientation, especially in its deeper aspects, such as those that influence 
Mike Levy Culture, Culture Learning, and New Technologies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 106 
belief systems and values (see Bourdieu, 1971; Hall, 1966; Willis, 1979). Numerous authors over many 
years have made this observation, for example describing culture as invisible or silent (Furstenberg et al., 
2001; Hall, 1959, 1966; Kramsch, 1993). Further, we may not be very successful when attempting to 
stand outside our own culture to reflect upon it, as Willis (1979) observes:  
We are therefore most deeply embedded in our culture when we are at our most natural 
and spontaneous: if you like at our most work-a-day. As soon as we think, as soon as we 
see life as parts in a play, we are in a very important sense, already, one step away from 
our real and living culture. (p. 186) 
Just how deep these core values reach can easily be overlooked or underestimated. As Lo Bianco (2003, 
p. 26) points out, culture is "always there", it is "omnipresent".  
Secondly, our cultural orientation can be projected on to others. Omaggio Hadley (1993, p. 359, citing 
Galloway, 1992) emphasises how our cultural background shapes our "attitudes, emotions, beliefs, and 
values, and the concomitant dangers of projecting one’s native frame of reference on that of the culture 
being studied…."  
The notion of projecting values and a frame of reference has been recognised in foreign language 
teaching, and perhaps most especially in teaching English as a foreign language. Notable in this respect is 
the special role and status of English as a global language. For example, Byram, Morgan and colleagues 
(1994, p. 15) list among the goals of foreign language teaching the development of "positive attitudes to 
foreign language learning and to speakers of foreign languages and a sympathetic approach to other 
cultures and civilisations." Graddol (2006, p. 66) says: "[English] is also the national language of some of 
the most free-market economies driving economic globalisation, and is often seen as representing 
particular cultural, economic, and even religious values." (see also Fishman, 1996). Along similar lines, 
Kramsch (1993) states:  
Even as an international language, English instruction transmits such Anglo-Saxon values 
as efficiency, pragmatism, and individualism, that superimpose themselves on those of the 
learners’ native culture. Foreign language instructors, on the other hand, who teach a 
second or a third foreign language to students in educational settings, generally transmit 
with that language a view of the world that mainly promotes the values and cultural 
assumptions of the L1 educational system. (p. 12) 
For contemporary language education Lo Bianco speaks of the "humanising ideals of learning by opening 
up the minds of learners to difference and otherness", "more equal social outcomes from schooling" and 
"the combating of racism, prejudice and intolerance" (2003, p. 34). These goals go deep and are 
profoundly and genuinely felt. Yet they are, still, a manifestation of a particular cultural orientation, 
reflecting a particular system of beliefs and values. Significantly, of course, this is precisely the level at 
which culture operates—on our attitudes, emotions, beliefs and values. As Galloway (1992) says, "The 
complex systems of thought and behaviour that people create and perpetuate in and for association are 
subtle and profound, so elementally forged as to be endowed by their bearers with the attributes of 
universal truth…." (Galloway, p. 88). [Author’s italics] 
Clearly, the objectivity we seek will not be easily achieved. Here it is instructive to quote Patrikis (1988), 
again cited in Omaggio Hadley (1993, p. 368), who provides wise counsel: 
For good or for bad, we all have biases. We see things in terms of what we know. 
Education, however, can turn a bias into a perspective that opens the eyes and allows 
understanding rather than into a blinder that restricts vision and ensures ignorance. 
Perhaps it is not possible to be fully and absolutely objective, but awareness of the 
problem can lead us to a kind of practical objectivity (p. 16) 
Mike Levy Culture, Culture Learning, and New Technologies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 107 
Pedagogical approaches and techniques that help learners to reflect objectively on their own culture are 
especially important because language teachers and learners need to be sharply aware of their point of 
departure in culture learning. The importance of the learner gaining an objective viewpoint is also evident 
when roles for the learner as researcher, ethnographer or anthropologist in culture learning are 
recommended (e.g., Bateman, 2002; Dubreil, 2006; Liddicoat, 2000; O’Dowd, 2006; Roberts, Byram, 
Barro, Jordan & Street, 2001; Savignon & Sysoyev, 2002). It should be noted that more subjective 
elements belonging to the thinking subject rather than the object of thought are also implicated in any 
research on culture learning (see next section). As such any study of another culture requires a researcher 
to consider and declare his or her own position and frame of reference before proceeding. 
2. Culture as relative 
In addition to its elemental qualities, culture is, fundamentally, a relative concept, not an absolute one. 
Arguably, one culture can only be understood in terms of another (Moorjani & Field 1988; Tedlock, 
1983). For the purposes of learning and teaching, the culture learner is almost inevitably drawn towards 
an approach which contrasts what "they" do with what "we" do, across a range of criteria. For example, in 
their book on teaching culture, Lo Bianco and Crozet (2003, p. 8, 40) frame the chapters around common 
themes or "axes" when discussing culture. The themes are explored in relation to Chinese, English, 
French, German, Italian and Japanese and include: 
1) The importance placed on speaking in the functioning of the society (e.g., verbosity, topic 
choice).  
2) Approaches to interpersonal relationships (e.g., terms of address, directness, face). 
3) Approaches to understanding politeness (e.g., requests, invitations, apologising). 
4) Level of ritualisation. 
5) Expression of emotions and feelings. 
Making generalisations is central in this approach: in other words the belief that what we do and what 
they do is common to all, across the two respective cultures being compared. Thus, when it comes to the 
chapter on Chinese, for example, the author makes generalisations about the topics that you may safely 
talk about (e.g., weather and food), and those you cannot (e.g., religion or politics). We are told that the 
"Chinese smile may have a variety of meanings." In fairness to the author, however, at the beginning of 
the chapter she says unambiguously, "China is a big country, so every attempt to describe it and its 
culture is fraught with the danger of generalisation." (Kaining, 2003, p. 53).3 But this does indicate the 
tension that surfaces when broad generalisations are made and considered against the likely prospect of 
individual variation. In many ways it is easy to criticise the broad generalisation, but not so easy to come 
up with a practical alternative. 
Guest (2002, p. 154) identifies a number of problems associated with a contrastive approach in learning 
and teaching the second culture (C2), and a paraphrased list of the problems follows: 
1) Oversimplification of the richness and variety within cultures leading to "caricature" rather than a 
deeper understanding. 
2) Reducing cultural understanding to discrete declarative propositions about a culture. 
3) Binary logic failing to reflect complex realities. 
4) Reducing a culture to monolithic, static categories. 
5) Encouraging stereotypes, "used to exacerbate adversity, and not to encourage mutual respect." 
6) Detailing differences can lead to withdrawal of interest in another culture. 
Mike Levy Culture, Culture Learning, and New Technologies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 108 
7) Increasingly cultural boundaries are becoming blurred and intermingled. 
Instead of taking a contrastive analytical approach, Guest (2002) argues that we should: 
…focus on the properties of individuals or character types rather than cultures at large. 
The linguistic dynamics should be adjusted according to the nature of the interaction 
(individual/small groups), and not in order to conform to an abstract, generalised, formula 
(‘culture’). Thus, instead of an overtly cultural approach it would seem that the method 
more sympathetic to psychological or small-scale interactive models would ultimately be 
both more accurate and productive. (p. 157) 
In essence Guest is recommending a move away from the learner as detached observer towards the 
learner as active participant in culture learning, and from a view of culture which is static and distant, to a 
view which is more dynamic and directly engaged. This level and kind of contact becomes more feasible 
and practical with new technologies, especially synchronous forms of communication such as chat. 
3. Culture as group membership 
Human beings live out their lives as members of groups. Early in life, the groups to which we belong are 
chosen for us; later in life we make more choices for ourselves. In our early years, our family, 
community, school and home country, with the corresponding beliefs, values and traditions, help create 
our primary cultural orientation. Then as we grow, work, travel, or learn another language, further layers 
or levels are added to the cultural mix that form an individual’s cultural identity. For Lindsay, Robins and 
Terrell (1999):  
Culture is everything you believe and everything you do that enables you to identify with 
people who are like you and that distinguishes you from people who differ from you. 
Culture is about groupness. A culture is a group of people identified by the shared history, 
values, and patterns of behaviour. (pp. 26-27) 
A group perspective on culture draws attention to the idea of membership and community and leads to 
questions such as how people identify with groups, how others identify people with groups and how 
different groups relate and interact with one another (Baldwin, Faulkner, & Hecht, 2006, p. 17). 
"Individuals are keenly aware of the critical attributes of the group with which they identify," a perceptive 
observation made by Fortman and Giles (2006, p. 96). Generally, we know immediately whether we 
belong, whether we are insiders or outsiders, welcomed, resisted or even ostracised, in relation to a 
particular group.  
Groups and cultures are distinguished from one another by a wide variety of means: geographical 
location, political persuasion, religion, clothing, food and so on. Cultures are also delimited by age (youth 
culture), profession (police culture), sports (skateboard culture) and technology (online/digital culture), 
among many others. Importantly, of course, for the topic in focus here, groups are also circumscribed and 
defined by the language they share. In this regard, the definition of culture introduced by Hymes (1974) is 
most relevant because of the particular way in which groupness is defined in relation to language:  
Culture is understood as a "speech community": a group ‘sharing knowledge of rules for 
the conduct and interpretation of speech’. Such sharing comprises knowledge of at least 
one form of speech and knowledge of its patterns of use. (p. 51) 
Hymes’ concept of speech community sets out a central role for speech—in the ways it connects and 
holds the members of the group together, and in the ways it works to sustain the group. The emphasis on 
the conduct and interpretation of speech foreground the ways in which language functions to create 
meanings in a particular context of use. This requires the learner to be skilled in pragmatics in order to be 
able to recognise contextual cues that overlay the meaning of what is actually said. This is especially 
challenging online where contextual cues are reduced or absent altogether. Knowledge of patterns of use 
Mike Levy Culture, Culture Learning, and New Technologies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 109 
is also key. Thus, the definition by Hymes stretches well beyond simply a requirement for a shared 
linguistic code. Inherent in this definition also is culture as evolving and changing through interaction 
among participants.  
Cultures operate on the basis of membership, realised through formal or informal means. As a general 
rule, individuals are not entirely free to move in and out of the group at will—though the mechanisms of 
regulation vary. Of course, language plays a key role in negotiating membership. Cultures as groups adopt 
particular practices and norms of behaviour, sometimes involving explicit or implicit rules and codes of 
conduct. One becomes a member of the culture not only by notionally agreeing to its practices, or simply 
by participating in them, but by being accepted by the membership. Gee (1996) and Rampton (1995) have 
looked closely at language use in this context, notably the ways in which language is used to cross 
boundaries and how it functions to include or exclude members of a group. Membership is not solely in 
the hands of the potential participant, it is also subject to the varied and subtle ways in which the group 
chooses to accept or reject members.  
Group membership as a goal of culture learning poses particular questions for the language learner and 
the language teacher. As Guest (2002, p. 159) pointedly asks us: "Do members of the culture really want 
foreigners to master and display the internal nuances of that culture?" Alternatively, from the learner’s 
point of view, even if it were achievable, what degree of acculturation is desirable? For example, Hinkel 
(1996) points out in her study that even though students recognised pragmalinguistic norms of the target 
culture, they were not always willing to follow them. These are searching questions for both the language 
learner and the language teacher. What we might wish of the culture learner is that they are in a position 
to make an informed decision according to their goals and their situation. Even then, however, the learner 
will not control how members of the target culture may respond and react: As Guest (2002) suggests, 
sometimes knowing too much can be as problematic as knowing too little. 
Technology itself is cultural, of course. In his work on new technologies and youth culture Kellner 
(2002), for example, is concerned about access, new literacies and the role of the market and 
commercialisation in shaping youth culture (see also Beavis (1998) on game culture). With the advent of 
the Internet and the many forms of group that may be realised online, another dimension of groupness has 
become available. Online groups, and the "digital cultures" that result provide new venues for groups and 
communities to be created and maintained (see Kim, 2000). Online groups require us to revisit questions 
of identity, membership and community and the ways in which individuals become members of such 
groups, and how their messages contribute to the group’s identity and culture. Matters of convention and 
behavioural norms in this environment are critical, as noted by Salmon (2004) when she discusses 
variations of netiquette for e-mail communication and group conferencing (see also Murphy & Levy, 
2006). Issues of gatekeeping are also important in this setting and include consideration of the ways in 
which certain individuals achieve leadership status in their groups and influence the development and 
evolution of the group over time. The role and actions of the gatekeeper, or, in the online context, the 
moderator are critical too, as we will see in the discussion of the project by Hanna and de Nooy (2003). 
4. Culture as contested 
Culture is contested at many levels, both from without and within. Thus, cultures may be contested at the 
level of the nation state or beyond, for example when a "clash of cultures" is proclaimed in the media; or 
they may be contested at the level of the individual, when "culture shock" is experienced. That cultures 
are contested within the individual as well as on a broader scale should give us pause for thought. 
When an individual learns another language, or moves to live in another country, culture may be 
contested within the individual, as differing belief systems, ideas and values meet head to head, and are 
compared and contrasted both consciously and subconsciously through feelings of disquiet and 
uncertainty. As we know culture shock is the term often used to describe the experience, an experience 
that may be more readily apparent initially, but which might linger on and remain contested and 
Mike Levy Culture, Culture Learning, and New Technologies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 110 
sometimes unresolved within an individual for many years. This is one reason why learning a language 
can be such a profound (and worthwhile) experience, because one’s core beliefs and values may be 
challenged, reoriented and reset. 
Such everyday experiences are reflected in scholarly work where definitions of culture for the last 40 
years or more have regularly included a sense in which culture was not simply echoed and transmitted, 
but contested and challenged. Thus, Giroux (1988, p. 97) defines culture "as a terrain of struggle," and 
Moon (2002, p. 15) as a "contested zone." Berger (1969, p. 6) argues that "Culture must be continually 
produced and reproduced… Its structures are, therefore, inherently precarious and predestined to change." 
Markus, Kitayama and Heiman (1996) reinforce these ideas:  
Cultural influence does not just involve a straightforward transmission of the "way to be." 
If entering a conversation, it matters what the conversant brings to the conversation, and 
whether and how the cultural messages and imperatives are accepted, or rather resisted 
and contested. (p. 863) 
Views of culture as contested have also emerged forcefully from such scholarly areas as critical 
pedagogy, critical theory and cultural studies, as well as postmodernist thought as it relates to culture. 
Postmodernist thought challenges conventional positions and interpretations and argues for "a radical 
undermining of any assumption about the stability of cultural meanings" (Barnard & Spencer 1996, p. 
141). Writers also urge a move away from monolithic descriptions of culture towards a focus on the 
"borderlands" and, for students of culture, to adopt a more ethnographic, reflexive approach in the study 
of culture (e.g., Conquergood, 1991). 
Such a perspective has also been highly visible in the literature on social linguistics and literacy, as for 
example in Gee’s (1990) work on the inequitable distribution and maintenance of dominant discourses in 
schooling (see also Gee, 1993; Bourdieu, 1982). Giroux (1988) provides a good example from critical 
pedagogy where the term culture is used to refer to: 
the representation of lived experiences, material artefacts, and practices forged within the 
unequal and dialectical relations that different groups establish in a given society at a 
particular historical point. In this case, culture is closely related to the dynamics of power 
and produces asymmetries in the ability of individuals and groups to define and achieve 
their goals. Furthermore culture is also an arena of struggle and contradiction, and there is 
no one culture in the homogeneous sense. On the contrary, there are dominant and 
subordinate cultures that express different interests and operate from different and unequal 
terrains of power. (p. 171) 
The idea of culture as multiple and layered is evident in these discussions. A more nuanced view of 
culture is needed where the unit of analysis is not a single national culture, but "different classes and 
social groups" within a culture (Hall, 1996, p. 26; see also Gee & Crawford, 1998). Language interaction, 
of course, is central to how culture evolves between groups at all levels. This echoes Hall’s view of 
communication as culture (Hall, 1959), and Geertz’s (1973) notion that "social reality is under the 
constant process of construction through message exchange." This perspective is also consistent with 
Hymes’s (1974) view of culture as speech community, described in the previous section. 
In language teaching, a view of culture as contested also requires us to consider the role of the native 
speaker and the mother tongue, especially in the context of world Englishes and the idea of native speaker 
as representative or expert (see Graddol, 2006; Kramsch, 1998; Rampton, 1990; Timmis, 2002). 
According to Graddol (2006, p. 114): "In the new, rapidly emerging climate, native speakers may … be 
seen as bringing with them cultural baggage in which learners wanting to use English primarily as an 
international language are not interested...." Here we encounter the prospect of learning the language 
Mike Levy Culture, Culture Learning, and New Technologies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 111 
without certain facets of the culture that are normally regarded as associated with it. In this example, as in 
many settings and at many levels, culture is contested. 
5. Culture as individual (variable and multiple)  
Recent psychological research has shown that perspectives on one’s own culture vary from individual to 
individual (Robins, 2005; Terracciano et al., 2005). Culture is a variable concept and understandings of 
ostensibly the same culture will differ from one person to the next. Consequently, how that culture is 
represented and understood by others will differ.  
Freadman acutely observes that our knowledge of, "…what we call our ‘own’ culture is incomplete and 
fragmentary, that it is traversed by ignorance, that it is imperfectly owned" (2004, p. 16). In the context of 
language and culture learning, this means that the teacher’s and learner’s understanding of their own 
culture (C1) will inevitably be an individual interpretation, modified by such factors as world knowledge, 
experience living abroad, political awareness and so forth. Thus, when an individual is in a position to 
represent their own culture, either as a language teacher or learner, their interpretation will be subjective 
and personal. In addition, new cultural understandings that arise from cultural contact and exchange will 
similarly be subject to individual interpretation.  
The variability of culture makes it difficult to package for others, especially for the language teacher (or 
textbook writer) who may wish to give a fair and balanced representation of the C2 to the learner. 
Whatever the teaching materials or resources used, the individual teacher will likely have their own 
opinion on the accuracy, legitimacy and balance of the claims or views that are presented. 
If we can say nothing with any certainty about cultures as a whole and have to rely on helping the learner 
develop individual perceptions, then the individual is going to acquire a very incomplete and idiosyncratic 
view of the C2. Lo Bianco captures the nature of this problem clearly and succinctly: "We must account 
both for patterns and for variation, we cannot collapse patterns into an endless slide of differences. On the 
other hand we cannot deny variation" (2003, p. 5). 
Clearly there is a tension between using broad-based norms and individual (co)constructions in culture 
learning. Fortunately, Kramsch (1993) provides one way out of this conundrum in making an analogy 
between language learning and culture learning, and in emphasising the importance of context. She says: 
Given that language teachers have to teach both a normative linguistic system and its 
variable instances of use, attention to context calls for a type of pedagogy that fosters both 
direct and indirect ways of transmitting knowledge, that values not only facts but relations 
between facts, that encourages diversity of experience and reflection on that diversity. (p. 
11) 
Thus, culture learners require multiple and diverse opportunities for direct and indirect contact with the 
C2. Modes of learning also need to allow for thoughtful reflection to gradually build an understanding of 
the target culture as well as more direct engagement where learners are encouraged to develop the ability 
to recognise salient features of the context which influence meaning within a single cultural exchange. 
The online environment adds further layers of complexity to the culture concept. Regular participation in 
online cultures simultaneously dilutes and expands our individual cultural orientation and mix. Overseas 
travel can also exert the same effect. Our cultural profile is not static and grows and develops through 
such cross-cultural experiences. In more general terms, any cultural understanding that arises from an 
exchange or interaction will be subject to the perspective and frame of reference of the individual 
observer or participant. Interpretation will depend upon the individual’s cultural and language 
background, and their knowledge and experience of their own and other cultures and the world around 
them. What one learner will come to understand or learn when observing or engaging in a cultural 
exchange, another may not.  
Mike Levy Culture, Culture Learning, and New Technologies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 112 
This paper has argued that the culture concept is complex and multifaceted, and that these facets and 
qualities need to be recognised and understood in order to successfully develop elements of a pedagogy, 
approach or methodology for culture learning and teaching. The special qualities of the culture concept 
point to a pedagogical framework involving new technologies that also has special features. The 
discussion so far, on the five facets of the culture concept and the implications for teaching, may be 
summarised as follows: 
1) Culture as elemental 
• We are deeply embedded in our own culture. 
• We have to learn about our own culture first to better understand our frame of reference. 
• Aim at "practical objectivity" and reflection, with the learner as researcher. 
2) Culture as relative 
• A contrastive approach is unavoidable, but problematic. 
• Generalisations have some value, as long as they are not considered absolute. 
• Small scale interactive models/methods are helpful. 
• Aim at direct engagement to develop a more nuanced perspective. 
3) Culture as group membership 
• Membership of groups is layered and multiple. 
• Membership is regulated formally and informally. 
• Aim at raising awareness of the cultural groups we belong to and how language is used to 
negotiate and sustain membership. 
4) Culture as contested 
• Culture is contested at many levels. 
• Culture is contested through multiple language interactions. 
• Aim at raising awareness, identifying points of contestation and managing differences. 
5) Culture as individual (variable and multiple) 
• Cultural knowledge varies from person to person and operates at many levels. 
• Students and teachers are selective in how they represent their culture. 
• Aim at sharing individual experiences and building upon them. 
This paper proceeds by reviewing five projects chosen to represent a range of pedagogical frameworks 
and technologies currently in use for culture learning. They include e-mail (projects 1 and 2), chat (project 
3), a discussion forum (project 4) and a Web-based project (project 5). A commentary on each project is 
then provided. The five facets of the culture concept described in Part One are not employed as a 
prescription to evaluate each project. Instead, they are used as a frame of reference or guide to help shed 
light on a variety of phenomena arising during the course of each project. In this way, the discussion 
seeks to: highlight pedagogical elements that were theoretically well founded; connect specific 
pedagogical elements of the projects with particular facets of the culture concept; suggest possible 
explanations or reasons for problems, data or other phenomena; and, identify key questions or problems 
for culture learning (including some possible solutions) from the perspective of the learner and the 
teacher. 
Mike Levy Culture, Culture Learning, and New Technologies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 113 
PART TWO: EXAMPLES AND DISCUSSION 
1. E-mail: A-B-C 
The Australia-Brazil-Collaboration (A-B-C) project conducted in late 2001 used e-mail to facilitate an 
online culture learning experience between 24 English language teachers at The Federal University of 
Minas Gerais (UFMG) in Belo Horizonte, Brazil and 12 language teachers (various L1s) at Griffith 
University, Brisbane, Australia. The goal of the project was to facilitate culture learning among the 
participants in both directions and to evaluate the pedagogical framework and specific tasks. The basic 
task design and sequencing was based on O’Dowd (2001). The majority of participants were non-native 
speakers of English, although many were at a high level of proficiency. The partners did not know each 
other prior to their first online communication. 
The task design and sequencing provided for analysis and reflection though a linked series of culture and 
language activities. The Brazilian participants first discussed their own culture as they thought it might be 
perceived overseas. Such an activity allowed students to recognise variation among individual viewpoints 
on the C1 within the class. It also began the process of distancing from the C1 and facilitated the 
objectivity required of a cultural orientation. Perspectives on the C1 were contrasted in class before the 
C1 and the C2 were contrasted online. Further work offline and online describing their image of the 
respective cultures were helpful in differentiating personal opinions and viewpoints with what was 
believed to be widely-held views of their country/culture. The tasks progressively allowed for 
clarification and refinement of cultural understandings, as evident in the examples below.  
The e-mails also raised questions about the value of a generalisation (culture as relative), and the 
desirability and extent to which learners might choose to adopt the norms and practices of another culture. 
An example is helpful. Many Brazilian participants gave their age at the start of their first contact e-mails 
to their Australian partners. This response was natural and spontaneous (culture as elemental). Many 
younger and older people comfortably followed this pattern, as in these examples:  
Well, my name is ---. I am 23 years old and got graduated in English last year. I work as 
an English teacher in an extension course at UFMG and I am also a tutor in an 
especialization course for English teachers. (B.2.1 - first e-mail) 
I don't know if I have already told you, but I am 23 years old and I'm preparing to do 
master next year. (B.2.2 - second e-mail) 
I'd like to introduce myself first. I am ---, 39 years old, married and an air traffic controller 
manager. (B.7)4 
Telling a stranger your age so early in a conversation is common practice in Brazil. My Brazilian students 
tell me that it helps communicate the "phase of life" you are in and thereby helps them know you. 
However, telling strangers your age at this early stage in Australia would be considered very unusual.  
This raises an interesting point for the language teacher faced with the prospect of teaching a 
generalisation about a cultural norm. For instance, if teaching Portuguese and discussing Brazilian 
culture, what would we recommend as best practice? The teacher basically has three alternatives: say it is 
customary to tell people your age when you meet them in Brazil; advise against this practice when using 
the second language because it may appear odd or unusual; or leave it to the individual once they are 
made aware of the cultural norms. This point was discussed earlier when culture and groups were 
discussed, and relates to the extent to which learners adopt specific cultural practices (see Guest, 2002).  
This example neatly exposes the limits of a generalisation and, paradoxically, its value, as well as the 
importance of the particular circumstances of use or context. In this study, not all Brazilian participants 
gave their age in their introductory e-mails. Although the question was not asked, perhaps those who have 
traveled to other countries (with more exposure to other cultures), and who realised that this was not 
Mike Levy Culture, Culture Learning, and New Technologies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 114 
necessarily the norm in other cultures declined to introduce themselves in this way (see also Ware & 
Kramsch, 2005, p. 193). 
The first contact e-mails also demonstrated well the participants' desire to correct possible over-
generalisations about the C1 and to provide a more refined, differentiated viewpoint. At the same time, 
participants also regularly began with very positive, sweeping generalisations about their partner’s culture 
(C2) while tending to downplay or be very modest about their own. This pattern was noticeable on both 
sides of the exchange, although only the Brazilian participants are quoted here. The following two e-mails 
are typical: 
To begin with, it [Belo Horizonte] is located in a state considered to be very conservative, 
we have no beaches whatsoever, we are friendly, but not as outgoing as people from Rio, 
just to mention a few differences. (B.1) 
I imagine Australia as that wonderful country with beautiful people and beautiful 
landscapes, not many economical or political problems, in short, very different from 
Brazil. How much of this is true in your view? (B.1) 
Further examples amply illustrate students being selective in the way they choose to represent their own 
culture. The following examples demonstrate this aspect. They also show how stereotypes can be useful 
in providing a point of departure for further comment and discussion, where members of a culture can 
subsequently modify, amend and refine understandings, thus giving a much more nuanced representation 
of their culture to their partners over time. 
We would like to know what people around the world might think about Brazil. It was 
funny to see so much samba, soccer, and Rio de Janeiro in the pictures. It was funny 
because not everyone in Brazil likes samba, and some people, in spite of enjoying it can’t 
dance it very well. And not every man in Brazil has a way with soccer. (B.3.1) 
There are about 1,300,000 people in Belém. Population is growing fast, which is a 
problem, since we lack key things such as employment, housing, sanitation resources etc. 
Our people are originally the result of a mix of three races: Native Americans, Africans, 
and Portuguese. Our culture is a reflection of this mosaic. The food, for example, is 
fantastic. We also have such a great variety of fruits that many Brazilians don't get to 
know all of them. (B.3.3) 
In reviewing the e-mail transcripts for this project, the range of content was striking. After the initial e-
mails, partners pursued a wide variety of mutual interests and topics. From the Brazilians, topics included 
geography, paralanguage and kinesics, food, transportation, employment, animals, music, sports, weather, 
movies, actors, pop stars and much more. Such a range is consistent with our earlier discussion on our 
cultural understandings being individual (variable and multiple) and fragmented. Therefore, 
methodologically, it would be advantageous to have a collective de-briefing session among the group of 
e-mail partners as a whole to discuss the various topics and themes identified by individuals, pairs and 
small groups. When e-mail texts are brought together and viewed as a collection of cultural exchanges, a 
very rich resource of cultural data becomes available for in-class group discussion.  
2. E-mail: O’Dowd (2003) 
The O’Dowd (2003) study followed an e-mail exchange involving five pairs of students located in Spain 
and the UK over a 1-year period. O’Dowd sought to identify the particular characteristics of an exchange 
that led to intercultural learning, in particular what led some network exchanges to fail while others 
succeeded (see also O’Dowd, 2006). 
When students begin a collaborative exchange via e-mail, they are very much working with a blank 
canvas. However careful a teacher’s preparation, no social convention dictates how a one-to-one 
Mike Levy Culture, Culture Learning, and New Technologies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 115 
relationship between partners via e-mail might proceed and evolve. O’Dowd’s (2003) study tends to 
suggest there are hits and misses: sometimes the collaborative exchange led to frustration, when partners 
felt their views were not heard or understood; in other instances, the exchange worked well and 
progressed successfully. Importantly, the results are very difficult to predict at the outset, even when a 
series of culture-learning tasks have been carefully constructed beforehand, because of variation in goals 
and motivations from individual to individual. 
Looking at some of the examples of cross-cultural e-mail interactions in O’Dowd’s study, the reader can 
readily observe evidence of culture being contested. Even in a preparatory in-class e-mail discussion 
among students, prior to the international exchange, there was an "attitude of frustration and annoyance" 
about how students believed their own culture to be perceived and represented by others abroad. In class 
efforts were also made to rationalise or explain what were considered to be national traits or behaviours. 
Then in the intercultural e-mail exchange proper, perhaps not surprisingly, there were a number of 
examples of students in their pairs "correcting misrepresentations", "fighting" stereotypes, as well as 
efforts to convince partners of the "rightness" of a viewpoint (O’Dowd, 2003, p. 124; see also Itakura, 
2004). 
O’Dowd goes on to detail one case where an e-mail partnership failed because one of the exchange 
students presented an outspoken position on regional nationalism forcefully in an introductory e-mail. 
While this may be considered a more exceptional example, this instance clearly conveys the fact that 
cultural allegiances run deep; in other words, they are not only contested, but they are elemental. The 
corresponding partner of this student commented afterwards that the e-mail exchange was not a success 
because of a failure to complete certain tasks, among other difficulties. The task may have been the 
problem, but only in the sense that it triggered deep currents of cultural allegiance. If students are asked to 
represent themselves and their culture, is it any wonder that they speak from the heart? Equally, if these 
beliefs or values are challenged or contested, it is likely that the discussion will be heated and that the 
intercultural e-mail exchange may fail. 
The advocacy or defence of social and cultural identity is often overlooked in reports on research in 
culture learning which sometimes tend to suggest that a straightforward, evenly balanced intercultural e-
mail exchange is the norm. The O’Dowd study clearly shows that students have personal goals that can 
make their presence felt. From the student’s perspective, the goal may not be language or culture learning 
per se, but to inform, explain and convince their partner of a particular viewpoint concerning their social 
and cultural identity; in other words, to project their own cultural orientation onto others. 
Setting up such technology-mediated, online partnerships therefore involves risk, for both learners and 
teachers (Belz, 2005; Stockwell & Levy, 2001; Ware & Kramsch, 2005; see also Paige, 1993). Belz 
(2005) describes two categories of risk, as follows: 
For learners, there is the risk of retreating within the self, reinforcing stereotypes and 
myths and even creating new, more negative stereotypes when confronted with the 
unknown… For teachers, there are considerable administrative, logistical, technological 
and pedagogical risks—the least of which is not the enormous personal risk that teachers 
in telecollaboration take upon themselves when young adults .... blame them because they 
did not ‘make’ their partner participate or because they did not ‘tell’ their partner to 
behave in a way that was acceptable to them. (p. 27) 
Ware and Kramsch (2005) also speak of the risks involved and provide a perceptive, extended discussion 
relating to a cross-cultural (mis)communication between learners of German in the United States and 
learners of English in Germany: they include important and poignant considerations for language 
teachers, notably in helping students to take an intercultural stance and a decentred perspective during 
their interactions if they are to prove more reliably successful. The importance of teacher preparation and 
guidance for students is made clear as is the quest for greater objectivity on the C1 and the C2. In their 
Mike Levy Culture, Culture Learning, and New Technologies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 116 
study, Ware and Kramsch (2005) mark the origins of the problem in uncertainty, about the genre of the 
online activity and the identity of the native speaker partner, and the need for the student to draw meaning 
from a text without context and the physical evidence provided by proxemics, kinetics and other 
paralinguistic features (see Tang, 2006). Yet, at the same time, Ware and Kramsch (2005) emphasise the 
value of these encounters and that with suitable preparation and debriefing by teachers and students they 
can lead to insights most difficult to attain by any other means.  
3. Chat: Toyoda and Harrison (2002) 
The asynchronous nature of e-mail helps provide valuable opportunities for reflection and representation 
of cultural understandings. The learner has the time to consider features of their own cultural background 
and those of their partner, and the time to think about how best to represent their own understanding of 
the C1. In contrast, a synchronous connection such as chat relies on short, spontaneous responses 
promoting active culture learning (Toyoda & Harrison, 2002; see also Tudini, 2003). Handling culture 
"on the fly" is critical if the language learner is to be culturally competent. But being able to notice salient 
features of the context, especially online with reduced cues, is a complex skill that requires much practice. 
Here a study by Toyoda and Harrison (2002) involving a series of chat conversations between students 
and native speakers of Japanese is used as an example of culture learning, though culture learning was not 
the focus in this study.  
The influence of cultural differences contributing to a communication problem can be recognised in many 
of the example data extracts of native speaker (NS) – non-native speaker (NNS) conversations in this 
study, even though they were not categorised as such. The reason lies in the centrality of cultural norms 
and conventions for deriving meaning from context (culture as group membership). In the discussion 
earlier in part one, Hymes (1974) noted the importance of understanding the rules of conduct and 
interpretation of speech. Kramsch  amplifies this point in citing Saville-Troike (1989): 
That meaningful context is critical to language learning has been widely recognised. There 
has not been adequate recognition, however, that this context includes understanding of 
culturally defined aspects of the communicative event, such as role relationships and 
norms of interpretations, of holistic scripts for the negotiation of meanings, as well as 
observable aspects of the setting. (Saville-Troike, 1989, p. 258) 
Interaction is dependent on the context and the way this context is perceived by the 
participants. And the two participants might see the context quite differently.... (Kramsch, 
1993, p. 11) 
The critical importance of cultural understanding for language learners when they attempt to derive 
meaning from context in each communicative event has been underestimated. Similarly, the corollary that 
each participant in the event might interpret the context differently has not been sufficiently recognised. 
Specifically differences between the NS and NNS in interpreting the context led to communication 
problems in many of the examples in Toyoda and Harrison’s study. The chat environment itself adds 
another layer of complexity for participants in their efforts to draw meaning from the context. 
Interpreting contextual meaning successfully is made more demanding in chat conversation because 
native speakers frequently produce incomplete or abbreviated sentences. Toyoda and Harrison (2002) 
provide several examples of abbreviated sentences in their Table 12. The communication difficulty in this 
example arises because of different interpretations of the noun toka which has a number of meanings 
depending upon the context. At key points in the conversation the NS and the NNS interpret the meaning 
of the word differently. All the examples at the discourse level involve a failure by the NNS to derive 
meaning from context successfully, to respond in ways that conform to NS conventions and expectations, 
that is, norms of interpretation. This was discussed extensively earlier under culture as group membership 
(Hymes, 1974).  
Mike Levy Culture, Culture Learning, and New Technologies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 117 
Further complications in deriving contextual meaning arise because of the distinctive features of chat, 
such as the strictly linear and discrete ordering and presentation of turns, and the lack of non-verbal cues 
(e.g., eye-contact, facial expressions, body language). In chat, participants are working in a reduced or 
diminished context without the richness of a face-to-face conversation and the many clues that are readily 
available to derive meaning from context (Toyoda & Harrison, 2002, p. 93). These authors note the value 
of a relatively closed chat environment with a maximum of three participants in each "communication 
zone" (Toyoda & Harrison, 2002, pp. 85, 94, 97). Problems are compounded in more open chat 
environments, especially with the multiple overlapping of turns and threads, and the difficulty of 
following—and therefore deriving contextual meaning—from a single thread (see Negretti, 1999). A 
learner’s access to digital cultures is largely determined by their ability to manage the special modes of 
interaction that predominate in the online environment. 
Helping learners to derive meaning from a better cultural understanding of the context can be approached 
directly and indirectly through learner action and reflection (Levy & Kennedy, 2004). The NS-NNS chat 
conversations themselves provide for culture learning in action. In addition, reflective culture learning can 
be greatly supported by the selective use of learner logs (Toyoda & Harrison, 2002, p. 83, 95). The 
selective use of logs can help the learner and focus on contextual expects of a particular communicative 
event echoing Guest’s (2002) point earlier about an approach to teaching culture that features "small-scale 
interactive models." Although overall culture learning was not the focus of Toyoda and Harrison’s paper, 
it is instructive to look at the data extracts and discussion from this perspective. Arguably, all language 
interactions between native speakers and non-native speakers have a cultural dimension even though it 
may not be foregrounded. 
4. Discussion forum: Hanna and de Nooy (2003) 
The examples of e-mail and chat use for language learning described in this paper so far generally aim to 
invoke cultural representation and (co-)construction within small, discrete groups of individuals, usually 
with a language learner partnered with another learner or a native speaker. In these settings, language 
learners in their pairs or small groups are relatively free to express their views and opinions as they wish. 
The learning environments and tasks involved are intended to support the language learner, in the sense 
that learners are somewhat protected in an environment that is designed to be sympathetic to the non-
native speaker—although still subject to the willingness of the individual learner to complete the tasks. 
These kinds of learning environment are intended to serve a pedagogic function. The same cannot be said 
for an Internet discussion forum intended solely for native speakers. Such Internet forums are not 
designed or intended for language learners. Their role is not pedagogic, but truly authentic. These forums 
bring with them a set of cultural norms and expected behaviours. Authentic discussion forums are 
especially demanding for non-native speakers because concessions are not made for the language learner. 
Hanna and de Nooy (2003) provide a good example.5 They describe a project whereby four anglophone 
students of French post messages to a forum run by the French newspaper Le Monde. What is so striking 
in this study is that a student who wrote in English, and not French, was welcomed into the forum while 
others who wrote in French were apparently discouraged. The two students that were accepted focused on 
the declared topic and expressed their interest and willingness to take part in the discussion; the two 
students that were discouraged approached forum participants as language learners with a personal 
request to practise their French. As Hanna and de Nooy (2003, p. 77) observe, the primary function of the 
forum is not to teach French, but to provide a venue for vigorous discussion and debate. As a result, an 
ability to engage in a particular cultural practice proved more important than linguistic training, or indeed 
an ability to speak French. If non-native speakers wish to participate, they have to accept the terms and 
conditions of membership. 
The terms and conditions are set by the official moderator of the forum, as well as by other "unofficial" 
moderators/participants in the group (Hanna & de Nooy, 2003, p. 72). In this way, an authentic Internet 
Mike Levy Culture, Culture Learning, and New Technologies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 118 
forum exposes students to the ways in which cultural groups establish and maintain their membership 
through acceptance and non-acceptance, and through the influence of privileged individuals within the 
group, for example the moderator, or "older" members who for various reasons have acquired status 
within the group. In a discussion group, acceptance is made visible by enthusiastic or encouraging 
responses to posts, while non-acceptance may be visible or invisible, either through explicit negative 
responses or, sadly for the language learner, no response at all. Again, as Hanna and de Nooy (2003, p. 
72) note, "In a forum where this policing of appropriate behaviour is carried out with a minimum of 
congeniality, moderation can function as a kind of initiation or indeed informal teaching." [Author’s 
italics] 
Preparation for encounters of this kind in Internet forums is clearly essential. Hanna and de Nooy (2003, 
p. 71) emphasise the importance of appropriate task design, training, awareness-raising and preparation. 
Active participation within these groups is highly demanding and probably should be limited to the more 
advanced students. In any case, careful student preparation and rehearsal is needed. This could be 
achieved by enabling learners to rehearse in specially constructed learning environments which parallel 
the cultural practices of the real forum, and which essentially play by the same rules, but which support 
lower proficiency level learners. In fact, there is no reason why learners at a lower level of proficiency 
might not be included in discussion groups with a pedagogical focus on culture learning. The important 
point is to expose learners to a moderated environment which requires participants to conform to, or least 
be able to work within, certain rules and cultural practices. Often the degree to which one has to conform 
is not predictable in advance; sometimes the culture learner can only discover they have crossed some 
invisible line by the reactions conveyed by other members of the group. What this example clearly 
demonstrates is that in real world cultures participants are not "protected" in ways that they might come to 
expect in educational learning environments. In this case, the moderator was not a sympathetic language 
teacher and learners were exposed to a harsher reality. 
5. Web-based project: Furstenberg et al. (2001) 
In the last example here, Furstenberg, Levet, English and Maillet (2001) describe a web-based, cross-
cultural, curricular initiative entitled Cultura. This project involves a very detailed and carefully devised 
"methodology" or "mode of learning" for culture learning. The focus in this example is on how the web is 
used to foster cross-cultural understanding between American and French students (see also Levet & 
Waryn, 2006). The project is especially noteworthy for its detailed pedagogical framework.  
At the heart of the approach are four progressive stages. In stage 1, three types of questionnaires are 
distributed to both groups of students; the answers provided in the students’ native language are then 
collated and posted on the Internet side by side. The survey questions are deceptively simple: Through 
word association, sentence completions and reactions to situations, students provide a substantial corpus 
of rich data for analysis. In stage 2, students analyse the data in a researcher role, first individually, and 
then collectively in their respective classes. At this stage, they identify patterns, connections and 
contradictions in the data, and write down their observations and comments. In stage 3, the students begin 
to communicate their reactions and observations to their counterparts in a forum that is accessible to all 
participants. At this stage, the postings are not anonymous and so a personal reaction to specific 
comments is possible; however, the asynchronous form of communication allows plenty of time for 
reflection. Finally, in stage 4, students broaden their field of view and analyse a greater range of 
documents representing both cultures. 
It is noteworthy that the language chosen for the forums is the native language; the target language is 
reserved for classwork. As with other aspects of this project, the decisions concerning occasions for the 
use of the L1 and the L2 are well-reasoned and deliberate. The L1 is used when expression of "cultural 
nuances" is a priority as in the questionnaires and the forums (Levet & Waryn, 2006, p. 98); the L2 is 
used "exclusively for in-class and writing activities" (Bauer, deBenedette, Furstenberg, Levet, & Waryn, 
Mike Levy Culture, Culture Learning, and New Technologies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 119 
2006, p. 35). The choice of the L1 for much of the work in the shared C1-C2 spaces emphasises the 
importance of representing one’s own culture and one’s relation to it as accurately as possible. Thus, there 
is more likelihood that discussion will centre upon culture differences rather than inadequacies with the 
target language. 
Cultura is exceptional for the ways in which its structure, content, tasks, strategies and techniques are 
designed to account for many of the facets of the culture concept, as described in the first part of this 
paper. The learning partnership is at once reciprocal, interactive and constructed suggesting at the outset 
that partners will learn about each other in ways that are respected, equitable and balanced. The stages 
and sequencing are central to the approach. Importantly, one-to-one contact with partners is delayed. At 
first, contact with the target culture is indirect and anonymous rather than individual and personal. Not 
only do these strategies allow one-to-one e-mail exchanges that may lead to tension to be postponed—to 
counter the potential problems of culture as contested—they also promote a data driven approach that 
enhances the students’ research skills and objectivity which, in turn, helps them respond to the elemental 
qualities of the culture concept. Collated responses to the three questionnaire tasks in stage 1 further 
support and complement this approach while at the same time generating valuable data. Data is 
aggregated and analysed as a set, with names removed, again directing student’s attention to patterns and 
trends rather than individual responses. Strategies and techniques are therefore in place to protect or 
insulate the individual student during the initial stages of the project. By the time students engage directly 
in one-to-one interactions with their counterparts in the forum, they have been given a prolonged 
opportunity to reflect on a wide range of responses collectively and individually and begun to form their 
own considered opinions. They are more deeply sensitised and aware of not only their own opinion on a 
variety of cultural matters, but the range of opinions that particular issues or topics might generate. 
Considered use is also made of the learners’ native language and target language. As a result learners are 
far more likely to avoid simple generalisations, or to derive too much from one-off instances of the kind 
that might normally lead them to jump to conclusions prematurely. Yet more techniques, such as the daily 
log, help the individual student to formulate and refine their ideas in a process that is recognised as 
gradual and evolving. Using a mix of strategies, techniques and technologies, allows for progressive, 
incremental engagement with a second culture. 
Significantly, Cultura contains mechanisms which effectively insulate the student from direct, person-to-
person contact with C2 partners initially (the e-mail projects did this also, but in a less coherent and 
structured way). Implicitly, the methodology contains an approach to risk management, enabling us to 
locate, perhaps for the first time, a practical solution to the problems of risk in culture learning and 
teaching, as discussed by Paige (1993) and Belz (2005) earlier. While it has long been recognised that 
culture is contested, and that teaching culture may involve risk, it is only in exceptional projects like this 
one that efforts have been made to build these understandings into a pedagogical framework. This 
framework actually allows culture to be contested within a safe, carefully managed learning environment. 
The authors of this framework have been able to transform an understanding of a facet of the culture 
concept, culture as contested, into an imaginative and workable pedagogy which fully utilises the options 
available with new technologies. 
CONCLUSION 
We have now reached a point where the strands of this paper may be brought together thus linking the 
five facets of the culture concept presented in Part One with the exemplar projects and the corresponding 
pedagogical techniques and strategies described in Part Two. Table 1 brings the elements together. Each 
project is categorised in broad terms according to its primary areas of focus by selecting from the five 
facets of the culture concept (column 2). It is assumed that all five facets of the culture concept are 
probably present in some form in each project, but that certain facets may be foregrounded as a result of 
the participants, and the technologies and pedagogical techniques and strategies in use.  
Mike Levy Culture, Culture Learning, and New Technologies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 120 
Table 1 shows the multiple ways in which the projects respond to particular facets of the culture concept. 
The wide variety and range of techniques and strategies is exceptional, reflecting perhaps the complexity 
of the culture concept, its unique attributes as an object for learning—especially in the way the subject 
and the object are intertwined—and the care with which it needs to be managed in the language classroom 
if culture learning is to be successful. 
Table 1 (Part 1). A Pedagogical Framework for Culture Learning 
Exemplar 
projects 
Primary foci 
Culture as: 
 
Technologies, pedagogical techniques & strategies 
 
E-mail:  
Project 1 
Elemental 
Relative 
Individual 
 
Asynchronous communication 
Task & activity sequencing, reflect on C1 before C2 
In-class activities before between-class activities 
Explore stereotypes 
Compare & contrast C1 & C2 
Discuss emerging patterns 
Question & explore generalisations 
Individual interpretation & representation 
Knowledge pooling through cross-group debriefing sessions 
Incremental refinement of understandings of C2 
E-mail: 
Project 2 
Elemental 
Contested 
Individual 
Group 
membership 
 
As above, plus: 
Long term collaboration 
Groups we belong to, groups we do not 
Challenge the comfort zone relative to NS norms 
Reflect on how we can present ourselves & our culture to our 
partners 
Discuss the intercultural stance & the decentred perspective 
Chat:  
Project 3 
Elemental 
Relative 
Individual 
 
Synchronous communication 
Small-scale interactive models, for example, individual & small 
group examination of carefully selected extracts from learner logs 
Explore NS norms of interpretation in relation to specific 
communicative events 
Language, context & use, for example, pragmatics 
Value of relatively closed chat environment 
Discussion 
forum:  
Project 4 
Group 
membership 
Contested 
 
 
Discuss L2 NS groups 
Insider/outsider perspectives 
Group creation, maintenance & regulation, offline & online 
Group moderation, gatekeepers etc. 
Norms & expectations; variation & conformity 
Pedagogical contexts vs authentic contexts 
NNS requirements & rehearsal with a view to NS group 
"membership" 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mike Levy Culture, Culture Learning, and New Technologies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 121 
Table 1 (Part 2). A Pedagogical Framework for Culture Learning 
Exemplar 
projects 
Primary foci 
Culture as: 
 
Technologies, pedagogical techniques & strategies 
 
Elemental 
 
 
Semester long project 
Collective, reciprocal learning partnership 
Asynchronous forums  
Student as researcher, ethnographer: data driven 
Data collection: Questionnaires, surveys, polls 
Comparative analysis of collated responses: out-of-class, individual 
activities followed by in-class, group activities 
Relative 
 
 
Comparative approach 
Reflect on how common words express the culture, for example, 
home 
Compare a word with its translation, for example, freedom (L1 vs L2) 
Observe & extract patterns in the data 
Weigh the general against the particular 
Examine similarities & differences, in-class & between-class 
Contested 
 
 
Aggregated data first, 1-1 contact second 
Anonymous before personal 
L1 for out-of-class questionnaires & online forums 
L2 for in-class tasks & writing activities 
Techniques to neutralise/moderate risk 
Web-based 
project:  
Project 5 
Individual 
(variable & 
multiple) 
Personal diary 
Formulate hypotheses, Q & A, verification/revision  
Expand to include multiple people, documents, voices etc. 
 
All the projects, bar the chat project, in their pedagogies and technologies demonstrated a reflection first 
approach, especially in the ways in-class work tended to precede between-class work, and offline 
activities generally preceded online activities. In the chat project, the reflective work came afterwards 
through discussion of the log. Still, as a general principle, one would expect the use of asynchronous 
technologies to precede synchronous in culture learning. Direct contact introduces a high level of risk for 
the learner, and perhaps for the teacher as well, in terms of the potential for misunderstanding or 
disagreement. However, it still has an important role to play. Synchronous communication is potentially 
useful in providing a real-time interactive environment to help learners become more aware of how 
meaning is derived from context, moment by moment, during each communicative event. Reflection 
alone is not enough. Students also need to "read" how culture is communicated through language, and 
how to recognise norms of interpretation and patterns of use. Overall, culture learning will derive from 
interactive exchanges that allow for action and reflection that encourage a "dialogue" in the learner’s 
mind between the broader generalisation and individual instance.  
Undoubtedly, with a concept as complex and multifaceted as culture, further work needs to be completed 
to clarify, order and prioritise the dimensions of the concept. A robust, but flexible, pedagogical 
framework is required that is theoretically well-founded. Such a framework also needs to be practical, not 
oversimplified so as to underplay the importance of key facets of the culture concept, nor so complicated 
that it cannot be readily translated into effective strategies and techniques in the classroom.6 It is hoped 
that the framework presented here goes some way toward meeting these goals. 
 
Mike Levy Culture, Culture Learning, and New Technologies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 122 
NOTES 
1. For the purposes of the discussion it is helpful to dissect culture into various parts, but the underlying 
assumption is still that the culture concept is essentially holistic in nature (see Tang, 2006). 
2. Note that a number of emerging applications may also prove valuable for culture learning;, for example 
web logs or blogs, wikis and podcasting (Ducate & Lomicka, 2005; Murray & Hourigan, 2006). Such 
applications will continue to evolve to match the multimodal, collaborative, social environments made 
possible by the functionality of Web 2.0 (O’Reilly, 2005). Note also that blogging, for example, remains a 
form of asynchronous communication between members of a virtual discussion group so much of the 
present discussion remains relevant (see sections relating to e-mail and discussion forums). 
3. On the basis of a rich description, Tang (2006) provides a valuable examination of Chinese behavioural 
culture. 
4. The keycodes refer to the Brazilian participants in the study and were developed to indicate the 
keycode of the participant (e.g., B.2) and the particular email message (e.g., B.3.2 refers to the second 
email message from participant 3). 
5. Thorne (2006) has also provided a commentary on the Hanna & de Nooy (2003) study and Furstenberg 
et al. (2001). The perspective in this paper has raised different points and care has been taken not to repeat 
the key points raised by Thorne. 
6. The degree of specificity chosen for defining the culture concept is a key issue. Frameworks and 
models vary widely in their form and in the number of their constituents and include, among many: the 
two broad concepts of "Big C" and "little c" cultures; the "Three Ps" (perspectives, products and 
practices) for foreign language learning as advocated by the Standards for Foreign Language Learning in 
the US (see Tang, 2006); the six principles for a revised view of TESOL and culture (Atkinson, 1999); 
and the series of models constructed by Hecht, Baldwin & Faulkner (2006, p. 64) for defining culture that 
"present visual representations of the relationships between and among the [7] themes." 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I would like to thank most sincerely the three anonymous readers of this article for their detailed and 
perceptive feedback. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Dr Mike Levy is Head of School and Associate Professor of Languages and Linguistics at Griffith 
University. For the last 25 years, his principal interest in teaching and research has been Computer-
Assisted Language Learning (CALL). He has published widely in the field. His recent books include 
CALL Dimensions, co-authored with Glenn Stockwell (Erlbaum, 2006), and Teacher Education and 
CALL, co-edited with Phil Hubbard (Benjamins, 2006). His research interests include online teaching 
pedagogies, mobile learning strategies, and theory development for the principled use of new 
technologies in language and culture learning. Currently, he is Chair of the Conference Planning 
Committee for the third WorldCALL Conference which is to be held in Fukuoka, Japan, 5-8 August 
2008. 
E-mail: Michael.levy@griffith.edu.au 
 
Mike Levy Culture, Culture Learning, and New Technologies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 123 
REFERENCES 
Atkinson, D. (1999). TESOL and culture. TESOL Quarterly, 33(4), 625-654. 
Baldwin, J. R., Faulkner, S. L., & Hecht, M. L. (2006). A moving target: The illusive definition of 
culture. In J. R. Baldwin, S. L. Faulkner, M. L. Hecht, & S. L. Lindsley (Eds.), Redefining culture: 
Perspectives across the disciplines (pp. 3-26). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Baldwin, J. R., Faulkner, S. L., Hecht, M. L., & Lindsley, S. L. (Eds.) (2006). Redefining culture: 
Perspectives across the disciplines. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Barnard, J., & Spencer, J. (Eds.). (1996). Encyclopedia of social and cultural anthropology. London: 
Routledge. 
Bauer, B., deBenedette, L., Furstenberg, G., Levet, S., & Waryn, S. (2006). The Cultura Project. In J. A. 
Belz & S. L. Thorne (Eds.), Internet-mediated intercultural foreign language education (pp. 31-62). 
Boston, MA: Thompson Heinle.  
Bateman, B. E. (2002). Promoting openness toward culture learning: Ethnographic interviews for students 
of Spanish. The Modern Language Journal, 86(3), 318-331. 
Beavis, C. (1998). Computer games, culture and curriculum. In I. Snyder (Ed.), Page to screen: Taking 
literacy into the electronic era (pp. 234-255). London: Routledge. 
Belz, J. (2005). Intercultural questioning, discovery and tension in Internet-mediated language learning 
partnerships. Language and Intercultural Communication, 5(1), 3-39. 
Berger, P. L. (1969). The sacred canopy: Elements of a sociological theory of religion. New York: 
Anchor Books. 
Bourdieu, P. (1971). Systems of education and systems of thought. In M. F. D. Young (Ed.), Knowledge 
and control: New directions for the sociology of education (pp. 189-207). London: Collier-MacMillan. 
Bourdieu, P. (1982). The school as a conservative force: Scholastic and cultural inequalities. In E. Bredo 
& W. Feinberg (Eds.), Knowledge and values in social and education research (pp. 391-407). 
Philadelphia: Temple University Press. 
Byram, M. (1997). Teaching and assessing intercultural communicative competence. Clevedon, England: 
Multilingual Matters. 
Byram, M., Morgan, C., & colleagues (1994). Teaching-and-learning language-and-culture. Clevedon, 
England: Multilingual Matters. 
Conquergood, D. (1991). Rethinking ethnography: Towards a critical cultural politics. Communication 
Monographs, 58, 179-194. 
Dubreil, S. (2006). Gaining perspective on culture through CALL. In L. Ducate & N. Arnold (Eds.), 
Calling on CALL: From theory and research to new directions in foreign language teaching (pp. 237-
268). Texas State University: CALICO. 
Ducate, L. C., & Lomicka, L. L. (2005). Exploring the blogosphere: Use of web logs in the foreign 
language classroom. Foreign Language Annals, 38(3), 410-421. 
Fishman, J. A. (1996). Summary and interpretation: Post-imperial English 1940-1990. In J. A. Fishman, 
A. W. Conrad, & A. Rubal-Lopez (Eds.), Post-imperial English. Status change in former British and 
American colonies, 1940-1990 (pp. 623-641). Berlin & New York: Mouton de Gruyter. 
Mike Levy Culture, Culture Learning, and New Technologies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 124 
Fortman, J., & Giles, H. (2006). Communicating culture. In J. R. Baldwin, S. L. Faulkner, M. L. Hecht & 
S. L. Lindsley (Eds.), Redefining culture: Perspectives across the disciplines (pp. 91-102). Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Freadman, A. (2004). When the king and queen of England came to town: Popular entertainment, 
everyday life, and the teaching of ‘culture’. Inaugural lecture in the University of Melbourne, 23 
November 2004. Retrieved October 10, 2005, from 
http://www.fritss.unimelb.edu.au/about/staff/freadman_lecture.html 
Furstenberg, G., Levet, S., English, K., & Maillet, K. (2001). Giving a virtual voice to the silent language 
of culture: The Cultura project. Language Learning and Technology, 5(1), 55-102. 
Galloway, V. B. (1992). Towards the cultural reading of authentic texts. In H. Byrnes (Ed.) Languages 
for a multicultural world in transition (pp. 87-121). Reports of the Northeast conference on the teaching 
of foreign languages. Lincolnwood: National Textbook Company. 
Gee, J. P. (1990). Social linguistics and literacies: Ideology in discourses. London: Falmer Press. 
Gee, J. P. (1993). Postmodernism and literacies. In C. Lankshear & P. L. McLaren (Eds.), Critical 
literacy: Politics, praxis, and the postmodern (pp. 271-295). Albany: State University of New York Press. 
Gee, J. P. (1996). Social linguistics and literacies: Ideologies in discourses (2nd ed.). London: Taylor & 
Francis. 
Gee, J. P., & Crawford, V.M. (1998). Two kinds of teenagers: Language, identity, and social class. In D. 
E. Alvermann, K. Hinchman, D. Moore, S. Phelps, & D. Waff (Eds.), Reconceptualizing the literacies in 
adolescents’ lives (pp. 225-245). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Geertz, C. (1973). The interpretation of cultures, selected essays. New York: Basic Books. 
Giroux, H. A. (1988). Teachers as intellectuals: Towards a critical pedagogy of learning. Granby, MA: 
Bergin & Garvey. 
Graddol, D. (2006). English next. London, UK: British Council. 
Guest, M. (2002). A critical ‘checkbook’ for culture teaching and learning. ELT Journal, 56(2), 154-161. 
Hall, E. T. (1959). The silent language. New York: Doubleday. 
Hall, E. T. (1966). The hidden dimension. New York: Doubleday. 
Hall, S. (1996). The problem of ideology: Marxism without guarantees. In D. Morley & K. H. Chen 
(Eds.), Stuart Hall: Critical dialogues in cultural studies (pp. 25-46). London: Routledge. 
Hanna, B. E., & de Nooy, J. (2003). A funny thing happened on the way to the forum: Electronic 
discussion and foreign language learning. Language Learning & Technology, 7(1), 71-85. 
Hecht, M. L., Baldwin, J. R., & Faulkner, S. L. (2006). The (in)conclusion of the matter: Shifting signs 
and models of culture. In J. R. Baldwin, S. L. Faulkner, M. L. Hecht, & S. L. Lindsley (Eds.), Redefining 
culture: Perspectives across the disciplines (pp. 53-73). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Hinkel, E. (1996). When in Rome: Evaluations of L2 pragmalinguistic behaviours. Journal of 
Pragmatics, 26, 51-70. 
Hertel, T. J. (2003). Using an E-mail exchange to promote cultural learning. Foreign Language Annals, 
36(3), 386-396. 
Hymes, D. (1974). Foundations in sociolinguistics: An ethnographic approach. Philadelphia: University 
of Pennsylvania Press. 
Mike Levy Culture, Culture Learning, and New Technologies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 125 
Itakura, H. (2004). Changing cultural stereotypes through e-mail assisted foreign language learning. 
System, 32, 37-51. 
Jogan, M. K., Heredia, A. H., & Aguilera, G. M. (2001). Cross-cultural E-mail: Providing cultural input 
for the advanced foreign language student. Foreign Language Annals, 34(4), 341-346. 
Kaining, L. (2003). Chinese. In J. Lo Bianco & C. Crozet (eds.) Teaching invisible culture: Classroom 
practice and theory (pp. 53-100). Melbourne: Language Australia Ltd. 
Kellner, D. (2002). New media and new literacies: Reconstructing education for the new millennium. In 
L. Lievrouw & S. Livingstone (Eds.), The handbook of new media (pp. 99-104). London: Sage 
Publications. 
Kim, A. J. (2000). Community building on the Web. Berkeley, CA: Peachpit Press. 
Kramsch, C. (1993). Context and culture in language teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Kramsch, C. (1998). Language and culture. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Kramsch, C., & Andersen, R.W. (1999). Teaching text and context through multimedia. Language 
Learning & Technology, 2(2), 31-42. 
Levet, S., & Waryn, S. (2006). Using the Web to develop students in-depth understanding of foreign 
cultural attitudes and values. In. R. Donaldson & M. Haggstrom (Eds.). Changing language education 
through CALL. (pp. 95-118). Oxford: Routledge. 
Levy, M., & Kennedy, C. (2004). A task-cycling pedagogy using audio-conferencing and stimulated 
reflection for foreign language learning. Language Learning & Technology, 8(2): 50-68. 
Liddicoat, A. J. (2000). Everyday speech as culture: Implications for language teaching. In A.J. Liddicoat 
& C. Crozet (Eds.) Teaching languages, teaching cultures (pp. 51-63). Melbourne: Applied Linguistics 
Association of Australia and Language Australia. 
Liddicoat, A. J., & Crozet, C. (Eds.) (2000). Teaching languages, teaching cultures. Melbourne: Applied 
Linguistics Association of Australia and Language Australia. 
Lindsay, R. B., Robins, K. N., & Terrell, R. D. (1999). Cultural literacy: A manual for school leaders. 
Thousand Oaks: Corwin. 
Lo Bianco, J. (2003). Culture: Visible, invisible and multiple. In J. Lo Bianco & C. Crozet (Eds.) 
Teaching invisible culture: Classroom practice and theory (pp. 11-38). Melbourne: Language Australia 
Ltd. 
Lo Bianco, J., & Crozet, C. (Eds.) (2003). Teaching invisible culture: Classroom practice and theory. 
Melbourne: Language Australia Ltd. 
Markus, H. R., Kitayama, S., & Heiman, R. J. (1996). Culture and "basic" psychological principles. In E. 
T. Higgins & A. W. Kruglanski (Eds.), Social psychology: Handbook of basic principles (pp. 857-913). 
New York: Guilford. 
Moon, D. J. (2002). Thinking about ‘culture’ in intercultural communication. In J. N. Martin, T. K. 
Nakayama, & L. A. Flores (Eds.), Readings in intercultural communication: Experiences and contexts 
(2nd ed., pp. 13-21). Boston: McGraw Hill. 
Moorjani, A., & Field, T. T. (1988). Semiotic and sociolinguistic paths to understanding culture. In A. J. 
Singerman (Ed.), Toward a new integration of language and culture. Reports of the Northeast Conference 
on the Teaching of Foreign Languages (pp. 25-45). Middlebury, VT: Northeast conference, 1988. 
Mike Levy Culture, Culture Learning, and New Technologies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 126 
Murphy, M., & Levy, M. (2006). Politeness in intercultural e-mail communication: Australian and 
Korean perspectives. Journal of Intercultural Communication 12. Retrieved December 12, 2006, from 
http://www.immi.se/intercultural/nr12.htm 
Murray, L., & Hourigan, T. (2006). Using micropublishing to facilitate writing in the foreign language. In 
L. Ducate & N. Arnold (Eds.), Calling on CALL: From theory and research to new directions in foreign 
language teaching (pp. 149-179). Texas State University: CALICO. 
Negretti, R. (1999). Web-based activities and SLA: A conversation analysis research approach. Language 
Learning & Technology, 3(1), 75-87. 
O’Dowd, R. (2001). E-Contact: Challenges and opportunities for online intercultural learning.  Paper 
presented at the EuroCALL Conference, University of Nijmegan, Nijmegan, The Netherlands, 30 August 
– 2 September, 2001.  
O’Dowd, R. (2003). Understanding the "other side": Intercultural learning in a Spanish-English e-mail 
exchange. Language Learning & Technology, 7(2), 118-144. 
O’Dowd, R. (2006). The use of videoconferencing and e-mail as mediators of intercultural student 
ethnography. In J. A. Belz & S. L. Thorne (Eds.), Internet-mediated intercultural foreign language 
education (pp. 86-120). Boston, MA: Thomson Heinle.  
O’Reilly, T. (2005). What is Web 2.0? Design patterns and business models for the next generation of 
software. Retrieved December 3, 2006, from 
http://www.oreillynet.com/pub/a/oreilly/tim/news/2005/09/30/what-is-web-20.html 
Omaggio Hadley, A. (1993). Teaching Language in Context. Boston, MA.: Heinle & Heinle. 
Patrikis, P. (1988). Language and culture at the crossroads. In A. J. Singerman (Ed.), Toward a new 
integration of language and culture. Reports of the Northeast Conference on the Teaching of Foreign 
Languages (pp. 13-24). Middlebury, VT: Northeast conference, 1988. 
Paige, R. M. (1993). On the nature of intercultural experiences and intercultural education. In R. M. Paige 
(Ed.), Education for the intercultural experience (pp. 1-19). Yarmouth, NE: Intercultural Press. 
Rampton, M. B. H. (1990). Displacing the ‘native speaker’: Expertise, affiliation, and inheritance. ELT 
Journal, 44(2), 97-101. 
Rampton, M. B. H. (1995). Crossings. London: Longman.  
Roberts, C., Byram, M., Barro, A., Jordan, S., & Street, B. (2001). Language learners as ethnographers. 
Clevedon, England: Multilingual Matters. 
Robins, R. W. (2005). Psychology: The nature of personality: Genes, culture and national character. 
Science (7 October 2005). 310(5745), 62-63. 
Salmon, G. (2004). E-moderating: The key to teaching and learning online (2nd ed.). Oxford: Taylor and 
Francis.  
Savignon, S. J., & Sysoyev, P. V. (2002). Sociocultural strategies for a dialogue of cultures. The Modern 
Language Journal, 86, 508-524. 
Saville-Troike (1989). The ethnography of communication. Second edition. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 
Skelton, T., & Allen, T. (1999). Introduction. In T. Skelton & T. Allen (Eds.), Culture and global change 
(pp. 1-10). London: Routledge. 
Stockwell, G. R., & Levy, M. (2001). Sustainability of e-mail interactions between native speakers and 
nonnative speakers. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 14(5), 419-442. 
Mike Levy Culture, Culture Learning, and New Technologies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 127 
Tang, Y. (2006). Beyond behaviour: goals of cultural learning in the second language classroom. The 
Modern Language Journal, 90(1), 86-99. 
Tedlock, D. (1983). The spoken word and the work of interpretation. Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press. [Cited in Moorjani and Field, 1988.] 
Terracciano, A., Abdel-Khalek, A. M., Adam, N., Adamovova, L., Ahn, C.–k, Ahn, H.–n., et al. (2005). 
National character does not reflect mean personality trait levels in 49 cultures. Science (7 October 2005). 
310(5745), 96-100. 
Thorne, S. L. (2006). Pedagogical and praxiological lessons from internet-mediated intercultural foreign 
language education research. In J. A. Belz & S. L Thorne (Eds.), Internet-mediated intercultural foreign 
language education (pp. 2-30). Boston: Thomson Heinle. 
Timmis, I. (2002). Native speaker norms and international English: A classroom view. ELT Journal, 
56(3), 240-249. 
Toyoda, E., & Harrison, R. (2002). Categorization of text chat communication between learners and 
native speakers of Japanese. Language Learning & Technology, 6(1), 82-99. 
Tudini, V. (2003). Using native speakers in chat. Language Learning & Technology, 7(3), 141-159. 
Tyler, E. (1881). Anthropology: An introduction to the study of man and civilisation. New York: 
Appleton. 
Ware, P. D., & Kramsch, C. (2005). Toward an intercultural stance: Teaching German and English 
through telecollaboration. The Modern Language Journal, 89(2), 190-205. 
Willis, P. (1979). Shop floor culture, masculinity and wage form. In J. Clarke, C. Critcher & R. Johnson 
(Eds.), Working class culture: Studies in history and theory (pp. 185-198). London: Hutchinson. 
Wilson, J. D. (1935). Culture and anarchy by Matthew Arnold. Cambridge: The University Press. 
 
