Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num3/review1/ 
October 2007, Volume 11, Number 3 
pp. 18-28 
 
Copyright © 2007, ISSN 1094-3501 18 
REVIEW OF eSPINDLE VOCABULARY & SPELLING PROGRAM ONLINE 
Title eSpindle Vocabulary & Spelling Program Online 
Platform Windows® 98, ME, 2000, XP, Vista 
Mac OS® 9.1 or later, Mac OS X 
Minimum hardware 
requirements 
800 x 600, 16-bit color display (minimum) 
1024 x 768 recommended 
Sound Card 
Speakers or headphones 
Software requirements Netscape 5 or higher,  
Internet Explorer 6 or higher,  
Firefox (recommended)  
Flash Player 9 or higher 
Publisher eSpindle Learning 
Website: http://www.espindle.org/ 
Phone: 866-377-4635  
Support offered (1) Orientation Slide Show:  
http://www.espindle.org/introduction.html  
 (2) Live Support: http://www.espindle.org/  
 (3) Teacher Professional Development (w/site license) 
Target language English 
Target audience High Beginner to Advanced, ages 7 to adult ESL learner 
Price 10 Day Individual Trial: Free 
30 Day Classroom Trial: Free (up to 40 students)  
1 Year Auto-Renewing: US $79.80 
1 Year Non-Renewing: US $99.80 
Lifetime Membership: US $599 
Site license: $24.50-9.50 per student per year 
Publication Year 2005 
Review by Justin Olmanson, University of Texas at Austin 
The ability to successfully make sound-to-symbol connections is seen both as a key enabler of functional 
literacy (Norton, Kovelman, & Petitto, 2007) and as an integral component in reading acquisition (Nag, 
2007). Children developing literacy skills in English, a language that employs an opaque, inconsistent 
orthography, progress at less than half the rate of children developing literacy skills in languages that use 
transparent, consistent orthographies, such as Italian or Spanish (Seymour, Aro, & Erskine, 2003). 
The eSpindle Spelling and Vocabulary Program (eSpindle) is an online language learning program 
designed to lessen the drudgery of spelling practice and support the systematic study of vocabulary for 
first language (L1) and second language (L2) English language learners, ages 7 to adult. An outgrowth of 
a parent initiative created to help children study for spelling tests (Warda, 2005), the application quizzes 
its users on individual words stored in a database and arranged by word difficulty and learning goal. 
eSpindle’s uncluttered interface, limited scope, and both internal and hyperlinked scaffolds make it an 
appropriate choice for L2 English language learners interested in systematically increasing their 
familiarity with high frequency and orthographically difficult words in a context-reduced environment. 
Based on the learner’s stated goal and self-selected English proficiency level, eSpindle organizes its bank 
of over 100,000 words to gradually and systematically move the learner toward goals such as spelling bee 
preparation, English as Second Language word learning, SAT preparation, or homework help. 
Justin Olmanson Review of eSpindle Vocabulary & Spelling Program Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 19 
Ma and Kelly (2006) outline two contemporary approaches to vocabulary acquisition, termed implicit and 
explicit. The implicit approach, while viable for L1 learners, presents a trinity of obstacles for L2 learners. 
First, it necessitates high levels of guessing within contexts ranging from supportive to unsupportive. 
Second, the hit-and-miss nature of contextual guessing constrains the rate of learning (Hulstijn, 1992). 
Third, the vocabulary that is acquired in this implicit fashion tends to be only receptively available to the 
learner due in part to a lack of iterative and variegated interaction (Wesche & Paribakht, 2000). The 
explicit approach, in contrast, reflected in the design of eSpindle, posits that learners can benefit from a 
decontextualized, often systematic focus on vocabulary acquisition via word memorization, definitions, 
sparse contextual examples, and other strategies. Comprised of a single, modifiable, quiz-like activity 
designed to focus the learner’s attention on word form, use, and meaning, eSpindle fits squarely within 
the explicit subcategory of CALL applications that address L2 vocabulary learning (Ma & Kelly, 2006).  
During the eSpindle registration process, the learner is asked to choose one of the goals listed above and 
self-select an initial English proficiency/grade level. Upon login, these selections affect the type and 
difficulty level of the words (Table 1), which appear in the 15 to 500+ item quizzes generated by the 
application. According to Warda (personal communication, June 29, 2007), in the case of words in the 
'English Improvement' section, each word was given a grade level assignment based on the following 
process: a composite score was compiled by first averaging six textbook publishers’ grade level 
designations; this was then refined via a review by eSpindle’s editors using heuristics centering on word 
length and the extent to which a word followed, or failed to follow, conventional phoneme-to-grapheme 
mappings. 
Table 1. Example Words from the eSpindle English Improvement Section by Grade Level. 
Grade Level Words from the English Improvement Section 
1st about, back, bell, came, car 
2nd across, afternoon, ahead, airport, alike 
3rd anger, animal, apron, arch, arithmetic 
4th addition, adjacent, admire, adverb, advertise 
5th abandon, ability, abode, aboriginal, absence  
6th abbreviate, abnormal, absolutely, abundance, abundant  
7th abbey, abject, able-bodied, aborigine, abrasion  
8th abase, abash, abate, abhorrent, abjure 
9th abbess, abdication, abduction, abet, abhorrence 
10th abed, aboveboard, abstemious, accrue, acme 
11th aberration, abrade, abstruse, abut, accession  
12th accolade, adamant, adjuration, allusion, anathematize  
college cession, chine, connive, consortium, contingency  
graduate ambient, antimacassar, aplomb, atelier, biblioklept   
 
Both default and advanced configurations (Figure 1) are available within the quiz format from the 
preferences page. In the default, spelling-centered mode, the target word is pronounced for the learner by 
either a text-to-speech generated male voice (e.g., technology) or a recorded female voice (e.g., language) 
and is available for repeated listening as the learner works to spell the word within a text entry field. In 
the advanced, vocabulary-centered setting, a form of active vocabulary recall is required (Laufer, Elder, 
Hill, & Congdon, 2004); i.e., the learner must produce the word in the text entry field based on a written 
definition, part of speech, a fill-in-the-blank example sentence, and the number of letters in the target 
word. The learner may also request the first and last letters of the target word.  
Justin Olmanson Review of eSpindle Vocabulary & Spelling Program Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 20 
 
Figure 1. A comparison of the eSpindle default and advanced mode quiz features. 
From the start quiz page, the learner sets the target number of correct responses (Figure 2) and clicks the 
‘Start Quiz’ button. This opens a page with an embedded Adobe Flash movie containing the dynamically 
generated quiz elements. Regardless of the proficiency level and/or learner-selected goal, the quiz 
interaction and interface remain constant. 
 
Figure 2. The eSpindle start quiz page. 
The quiz interface (Figure 3) is comprised of an oversized text input box, the target word’s printed 
definition, and an example sentence with a blank in place of the word in question. In the default mode, a 
pair of blue buttons allows the learner repeated opportunities to listen to a pronunciation of the target 
word (e.g., grim) or to have the written fill-in-the-blank sentence read with the target word inserted (e.g., 
grim). Sandwiched between these buttons is the word’s part-of-speech information, and below them the 
attribution for the example sentence, as well as a comment button, reside. The learner’s progress, in the 
form of the number of correct answers given, is shown on the right – located between the text input box 
and the submit button. Finally, the learner may choose to bypass a word via the skip button in the lower 
right-hand corner. While many users will find the interface straightforward and intuitive, those at the 
lower bounds of English language proficiency may require some help or experimentation time in figuring 
out the function of each button, whose text may exceed their proficiency level (e.g., submit, comment, and 
example are listed as fourth grade words by eSpindle’s own ranking system). For these learners, icons or 
L1 tooltips (supplemental descriptive text in the learner’s L1 displayed when a user positions or hovers 
the cursor over an element of the graphical user interface), instead of English button text, may be more 
appropriate.  
Justin Olmanson Review of eSpindle Vocabulary & Spelling Program Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 21 
 
Figure 3. The eSpindle quiz page set to the default spelling-centric mode (target word is ‘grim’). 
Depending on the correctness of the typed learner output, one of two different screens appear. If the 
learner were to mistakenly type 'glim' (instead of 'grim') and click the submit button the program provides 
one iteration for the learner to correct the error (Figure 4). The application supports the second attempt by 
showing correctly spelled portions of the word and blanks in place of the misspelled portions ('g_im'). If 
the learner wishes to view the word immediately, a 'show answer' button is also available.  
 
Figure 4. The eSpindle quiz page default mode (target word is grim; entered word is glim). 
Entering the word correctly or incorrectly in the second iteration yields the same basic result (Figure 5). 
The correct spelling of the word is shown in a special font color, and an option to hear the spelling of the 
word is given by the 'abc' button within the text input box. The submit button is replaced by a pink 'next' 
button, and four buttons leading to external hyperlinked resources are offered for further word meaning 
and usage exploration. Additionally, if the word happens to sound or look like other words, or is easily 
misspelled, a picture of a woman (whom eSpindle calls Shirley Brainy) appears along with some printed, 
explicatory text aimed at helping the learner avoid certain word-specific pitfalls. While helpful, the 
comprehensibility of the proffered Shirley Brainy message suffers due to a suboptimal alignment between 
the message and the English language proficiency level of the learner. This issue is most notable at the 
lower proficiency levels. For example, at the first grade level Shirley Brainy’s message for the word you 
Justin Olmanson Review of eSpindle Vocabulary & Spelling Program Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 22 
is, “another word that sounds like you is ewe which is a female sheep”. Based on eSpindle’s own grade 
level ranking system nearly half the words in the sentence (another, word, ewe, which, female, sheep) are 
one to three grade levels above the first grade level.  
 
Figure 5. The eSpindle quiz page configured to support word memorization and further exploration. 
A click on any of the external hyperlinked exploration buttons opens a new browser window containing 
additional information about the target word and its meaning. Answers.com offers a meta-collection of 
information from sources including the American Heritage Dictionary, the Houghton Mifflin Thesaurus, 
and WordNet. Merriam-Webster affords a pronunciation example, a list of inflected forms, word 
etymology, and meaning variations. Wikipedia offers encyclopedic information and disambiguation when 
required. ThinkMap situates the target word within a visual thesaurus (Figure 6) and offers word 
pronunciation and disambiguation support. While all are accessible free of charge, ThinkMap limits the 
number of searches or links an unsubscribed user can explore to seven per visit.  
Justin Olmanson Review of eSpindle Vocabulary & Spelling Program Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 23 
 
Figure 6. The ThinkMap Visual Thesaurus (word passed from eSpindle is grim). 
Words which are spelled correctly the first time in eSpindle are removed from future quizzes while 
misspelled words are added to a printable practice list (Figure 7) and are retested in subsequent quizzes 
until the word has been successfully spelled in three successive quizzes. As all quizzes consist of the same 
components and follow the same format regardless of proficiency level or learning goal, misspelled words 
at one level can and do appear again despite an adjustment in the proficiency level or learning goal. 
Misspelled words beyond the scope of learner interest or academic necessity can be eliminated from 
future quizzes via a visit to the somewhat cryptically labeled 'practice words' link on the administration 
page. Similar to the quiz interface and Shirley Brainy text, the website’s administration pages and 
navigational architecture present substantial challenges for learners at the lower bounds of English 
language proficiency.  
 
Figure 7. The eSpindle printer-friendly practice word list. 
eSpindle also has a teacher administration component which allows educators to assign goals or upload 
custom word lists (Figure 8) to all or specific subgroups of students. Progress reports can be viewed by 
the educator at several grain sizes (Figures 9 and 10). Additionally, teachers can gain access to any 
student account created under the same site license, meaning student information need only be entered 
once before all site educators have the ability to add subject or learner-specific words to a student’s list 
(e.g., ESL, science, language arts, math).  
Justin Olmanson Review of eSpindle Vocabulary & Spelling Program Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 24 
 
Figure 8. The eSpindle teacher administration 'add words' page. 
 
Figure 9. The eSpindle teacher administration classroom progress page. 
Justin Olmanson Review of eSpindle Vocabulary & Spelling Program Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 25 
 
Figure 10. The eSpindle teacher administration student/quiz-specific progress page. 
A Parents’ Choice Foundation Winner in 2006, eSpindle employs a theoretical framework of lexical (vs. 
sublexical) neurological storage/recall, explicit instructed vocabulary acquisition, input elaboration, and 
error noticing, which is evidenced in the application’s design and echoed via its organizational literature. 
In its white paper (Warda, 2005), the non-profit organization explains eSpindle’s raison d’être by 
forefronting:  
• the ways accurate spelling and a robust vocabulary enable individuals to more fully participate in 
professional and academic circles; 
• the mismatch between phonics/strategy-based spelling and vocabulary approaches, and the high 
incidence of irregularly spelled words which may be best acquired via memorization and 
repetition; 
• the difficulty students and parents have in working together to find meaningful, efficient ways to 
improve spelling and vocabulary that go beyond the norm of weekly spelling test practice. 
Whether one favors a single, dual, or parallel neurological model for spelling storage and retrieval 
(Henry, Beeson, Stark, and Rapcsak, 2007; Norton, et al., 2007), relative agreement exists that for 
frequently used words, as well as words which fail to follow conventional phoneme-to-grapheme 
mappings, memorization at the lexical level is an efficacious approach (Cook, 2001; Henry, et al., 2007; 
Ma & Kelly, 2006; Norton et al., 2007). Thus, a strong case can be made for the appropriateness of 
eSpindle as a tool for L2 English language learners interested in building spelling and vocabulary 
knowledge in a context-reduced, word-centric fashion. Furthermore, a subgroup of L2 learners for whom 
drill-and-practice for spelling and vocabulary acquisition is personally effective and/or culturally resonant 
may find eSpindle a highly efficacious aid (though as of September, 2007, no study has been conducted 
with eSpindle to lend empirical evidence in support of or opposition to this assertion).   
In as much as eSpindle was designed as a complement to other methods of English language instruction, 
such as natural language and phonics-based programs (Warda, 2005), Wood’s (2001) and Chapelle’s 
(1998) utilization of an interactionist perspective in framing SLA theory for the purposes of software 
evaluation becomes useful. The application’s specialized focus, the interactive nature of its quizzes, its 
use of multiple types of information and media, as well as its membership in the ranks of CALL, invite an 
evaluation based on a hybridized amalgam (Table 2) of criteria for multimedia CALL design (Chapelle, 
1998, 2003) and vocabulary development (Wood, 2001; Yip & Kwan, 2006).  
Justin Olmanson Review of eSpindle Vocabulary & Spelling Program Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 26 
Table 2. Evaluative criteria adapted from Chapelle (1998, 2003), Wood (2001) and Yip & Kwan (2006) 
applied to the eSpindle quiz (based on an interactionist model of SLA).  
Model 
Area 
Criteria Internally 
Present 
Externally 
Linked 
Absent 
X   Designer Selected 
Input organized based on proficiency/goal type 
X   Instructor Selected 
Via goal selection and custom word uploading 
X X  N
ot
ic
in
g 
Sa
lie
nt
 F
or
m
s 
Input 
Highlighting (at 
the lexical level) 
Learner Selected Via goal selection and custom word uploading 
  X Simplification 
No simplified word-related content available 
X X  Elaboration Limited internal via Shirley Brainy, high external 
X   Redundancy 
Target word is pronounced, viewed, and typed 
  X Adaptation 
Word difficulty auto-adjusts up, but not down 
 X  Se
m
an
tic
 &
 S
yn
ta
ct
ic
  
C
om
pr
eh
en
si
on
 
Input 
Background 
Activation Limited: word families and some L1 equivalents 
X   Production 
Limited: target word is typed in by learner 
X   Error Noticing 
Application and learner-led noticing supported 
  X 
Target 
Language 
Output 
Novel Application 
No opportunities to use the word in new ways 
  X Goal-Based 
Production of exact not approximate spellings 
X   Error Specific Correctly spelled portions of target word given 
  X 
Iterative 
Correction via 
Modification 
Heuristic Strategies 
No higher-order scaffolds or hints proffered 
X X  [Task Appropriate] 
Roles Limited internal interaction, learner-led external 
X   [Interactant] 
Relationships Limited to two iterations of output and support 
  X 
Maximal 
Positive 
Interaction 
[learner-
computer] Co-Construction  
Application supplies all task-based information 
  X Peer Collaboration 
No support given for peer collaboration 
X   Learner/Computer 
Limited to target word spelling and/or recall 
  X 
N
eg
ot
ia
tio
n 
of
 M
ea
ni
ng
 
Communication 
Goals 
Outcome Options Three fixed options: success, partial success, and  
failure 
Note: An 'X' signifies a criterion’s presence within eSpindle (Internally Present), presence in one of the hyperlinked 
resources such as ThinkMap and Answers.com (Externally Linked), or absence (Absent). The merged cell below 
these designations outlines the extent to which and/or the manner in which a criterion is present or absent. 
Justin Olmanson Review of eSpindle Vocabulary & Spelling Program Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 27 
While checklists for CALL evaluation are no panacea (Chapelle, 1998), for the purposes of this review, 
Table 2 yields some worthwhile insights into the level and means of support one might expect from 
eSpindle when used in various instructional settings and for different language learning purposes. As a 
tool for learning high frequency English vocabulary and irregularly spelled words at the lexical level, it 
offers support for noticing lexical form, comprehending the given input, and negotiating meaning via 
interaction.  
Future versions of eSpindle may benefit from design changes that meet the needs of additional groups of 
learners and align with current language teaching methodologies which forefront context, relevance, and 
learner-centered environments, thereby expanding the audience for which the application is an 
appropriate tool. Some candidate design changes might include:  
• expanded and/or multiple examples of the target word in diverse contexts, 
• the inclusion of common idioms and collocations, 
• additional opportunities for iterative error correction, 
• a quiz mode for each of Laufer et al.’s (2004) four vocabulary understanding designations, 
• integrated support for input-highlighting and error-noticing at the sub-lexical level, 
• the inclusion of within-quiz hints and strategies based on word properties and etymology, and   
• built-in book-specific or topic-specific word lists organized by chapter and/or word frequency.  
eSpindle, a 501(c)3 nonprofit organization which has pledged to match every purchased membership 
(currently at 5,000) with a free license for learners in difficult economic situations (Warda, 2005), 
recently launched a demo quiz, a vocabulary and spelling themed word list wiki, and scheduled a Word 
Cup event for those interested in competing with other word lovers around the world (Warda, personal 
communication, June 30, 2007). 
Finally, eSpindle is primarily a tool for practicing spelling words and improving one’s grasp of individual 
word meaning. In terms of its place within the realm of supplemental tools for L2 English development, it 
exhibits a good learner fit for those interested in a training-orientated, explicit, context-reduced focus on 
improving spelling and increasing exposure to high-frequency and orthographically inconsistent words. 
For these learners and others faced with certain institutional constants such as weekly spelling tests and 
norm-referenced standardized language tests, eSpindle lives up to its name as an online tool which 
weaves together the threads of word meaning and form to assist in the development of better spellers and 
aspiring wordsmiths. 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Justin Olmanson (M. Ed., Harvard University) is a Ph.D. student in Instructional Technology within the 
Curriculum and Instruction Department at the University of Texas at Austin. His research interests 
include artificial intelligence in literacy development, Deleuzian design trajectories in CALL, and the 
influence discourse and personal epistemologies exert on classroom technology use. 
E-mail: olmansju@mail.utexas.edu 
Website: http://edu.audiotap.com/academic 
 
REFERENCES 
Chapelle, C. A. (1998). Multimedia CALL: Lessons to be learned from research on instructed SLA. 
Language Learning & Technology, 2(1), 21-39. 
Justin Olmanson Review of eSpindle Vocabulary & Spelling Program Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 28 
Chapelle, C. A. (2003). English language learning and technology: Lectures on applied linguistics in the 
age of information and communication technology. Language learning and language teaching monograph 
series. Philadelphia: John Benjamins. 
Cook, V. (2001). Second language learning and language teaching. London: Oxford University Press. 
Henry, M. L., Beeson, P. M., Stark, A. J., & Rapcsak, S. Z. (2007). The role of left Perisylvian cortical 
regions in spelling. Brain and Language, 100, 44-52. 
Hulstijn, J. H. (1992). Retention of inferred and given word meanings: Experiments in incidental 
vocabulary learning. In P. J. Arnaud & H. Bejoint (Eds.), Vocabulary and applied linguistics (pp. 113-
125). London: MacmillanAcademic and Professional, LTD. 
Laufer, B., Elder, C., Hill, K., & Congdon, P. (2004). Size and strength: Do we need both to measure 
vocabulary knowledge? Language Testing, 21(2), 202-226. 
Ma, Q., & Kelly, P. (2006). Computer assisted vocabulary learning: Design and evaluation. Computer 
Assisted Language Learning, 19(1), 15-45. 
Nag, S. (2007). Early reading in Kannada: The pace of acquisition of orthographic knowledge and 
phonemic awareness. Journal of Research in Reading, 30(1), 7. 
Norton, E. S., Kovelman, I., & Petitto, L.-A. (2007). Are there separate neural systems for spelling? New 
insights into the role of rules and memory in spelling from functional magnetic resonance imaging. Mind, 
Brain, and Education, 1(1), 48-59. 
Seymour, P. H. K., Aro, M., & Erskine, J. M. (2003). Foundation literacy acquisition in European 
orthographies. British Journal of Psychology, 94, 143-174. 
Warda, R. (2005). Research based tutoring of English spelling: White paper (Research). Retrieved April 
26, 2007, from eSpindle Learning Inc. at http://www.espindle.org/whitepaper.pdf. 
Wesche, M. B., & Paribakht, T. S. (2000). Reading-based exercises in second language vocabulary 
learning: An introspective study. The Modern Language Journal, 84(2), 196-213. 
Wood, J. (2001). Can software support children's vocabulary development? Language Learning & 
Technology, 5(1), 166-201. 
Yip, F. W. M., & Kwan, A. C. M. (2006). Online vocabulary games as a tool for teaching and learning 
English vocabulary. Educational Media International, 43(3), 233-249. 
 
