Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num1/net/ 
February 2007, Volume 11, Number 1 
pp. 4-15 
 
Copyright © 2007, ISSN 1094-3501 4 
ON THE NET 
Listening: You've Got To Be Carefully Taught 
Jean W. LeLoup 
SUNY Cortland 
Robert Ponterio 
SUNY Cortland 
INTRODUCTION 
Listening is arguably the most important skill required for obtaining comprehensible input in one’s first 
and any subsequent languages. It is a pervasive communicative event: we listen considerably more than 
we read, write, or speak (Decker, 2004; Omaggio Hadley, 2001; Wilt, 1950, cited in Hysop & Tone, 
1988). Given the importance of listening, the natural assumption is that listening skills are actively taught 
to both first (L1) and second (L2) language learners. However, this is not necessarily so in L1 instruction 
(Hysop & Tone, 1988). The situation is slightly more sanguine in L2 instruction, but only in recent years. 
For some time, listening was regarded as a "passive" or "receptive" skill and, consequently, not 
particularly crucial as a skill area to be taught. Researchers then began to recognize the importance of 
listening and its role in comprehensible input (Krashen, 1982), and attention to and adoption of newer 
comprehension-based methodologies brought the issue to the fore. Listening became a skill to be 
reckoned with and its key position in communication recognized (Feyten, 1991; Omaggio Hadley, 2001). 
Listening is a skill to be taught, with concomitant strategies to help L2 learners be successful (Berne, 
2004). 
The proficiency movement, with its emphasis on the use of authentic materials, underscored the value of 
developing listening skills in L2 learners. Where and how, then, do educators obtain authentic materials 
for use in the instruction of aural skills? This was a particular problem for L2 teachers and learners in 
geographic areas devoid of native speakers (NSs). Technology has been a real boon to this conundrum, 
ensuring that no one need be isolated from L2 input generated by NSs anymore. An internet connection is 
all that is needed to gain access to a myriad of examples of NS speech. Nevertheless, the wise L2 
instructor must prepare appropriate activities for working with NS audio and video clips that will 
maximize comprehension and minimize frustration on the part of the learners. For this column, we have 
chosen two sites to serve as examples of what is possible in online lessons through communications 
technologies. The sites discussed below will give the reader an idea of what can be done in terms of 
materials development and also how to prepare one’s students for optimal work with the aural input. 
BBC LANGUAGES 
 
The BBC Languages site presents a smorgasborg of listening activities for several languages: French, 
Spanish, German, Italian, Mandarin Chinese, Greek, and Portuguese. Pages focusing on these languages 
are fairly extensive and offer several different listening exercises for language learners. 
The Better @ languages section runs you through a series of "excuses" for not attempting to learn another 
language and asks for corroboration or denial. Then it presents a list of nine remarks and explanations 
tailored to your responses, designed to encourage you to begin language study. 
LeLoup and Ponterio Listening: You've Got to be Carefully Taught 
 
Language Learning & Technology 5 
 
The Better @ listening section is based on the premise that language learners want to be able to "use" the 
language they are learning. In order to accomplish this, exposure to natural real-life language samples is 
imperative. The languages treated in this section are French, German, Italian, and Spanish. All languages 
have similar sections for listening activities. 
 
 
LeLoup and Ponterio Listening: You've Got to be Carefully Taught 
 
Language Learning & Technology 6 
For each of the above-mentioned languages we find a series of 5 listening activities, including  
A recipe: 
 
Deciphering time in a context: 
 
LeLoup and Ponterio Listening: You've Got to be Carefully Taught 
 
Language Learning & Technology 7 
Recognizing the gist of a question: 
 
Getting directions from someone in the street: 
 
LeLoup and Ponterio Listening: You've Got to be Carefully Taught 
 
Language Learning & Technology 8 
Shopping in a market and asking prices of items: 
 
The language learner has three chances to listen, opportunities to confirm/corroborate one's response, and 
eventually the transcript of the clip is provided for reinforcement or checking. After the fifth activity, 
several strategies are suggested to improve listening comprehension. 
LeLoup and Ponterio Listening: You've Got to be Carefully Taught 
 
Language Learning & Technology 9 
 
Other activities for these languges can be acessed through the 
main Languages page: http://www.bbc.co.uk/languages/ 
The activities for Chinese, Greek and Portuguese are slightly 
different and include videos that demonstrate useful phrases and 
basic language structures to a beginning language learner. 
For example, the Portuguese section presents videos of NSs in the 
process of interacting on the following topics: greetings, 
introducing yourself and others, saying a bit about yourself, 
buying coffee and drinks, finding your way, shopping for food, 
finding and booking a room, getting around by public transport, 
ordering a meal, and summer in Brazil. 
In addition to listening, the listener has the option of hearing and 
seeing the text in either the target language (TL) or the L1. Once 
through all the phrases in a given selection, the entire video can 
be played, giving more context and flow to the conversations. 
 
In this Talk Portuguese lesson on shopping for food, we see the background information provided to set 
up the situation presented in the Flash player. 
 
LeLoup and Ponterio Listening: You've Got to be Carefully Taught 
 
Language Learning & Technology 10 
In this Talk Greek lesson we see the Flash player options for viewing the Greek text, the English text, or 
pronunciation assistance as the sentence is heard. 
 
 
The Chinese section, in addition to the sorts of audio activities already mentioned, includes introductory 
material for a variety of topics. 
 
LeLoup and Ponterio Listening: You've Got to be Carefully Taught 
 
Language Learning & Technology 11 
These activities use Pinyin script instead of Chinese characters. 
 
They also include short videos with transcripts. 
 
All of these languages provide additional links to cultural notes, pronunciation guides, language notes, 
and additional useful phrases with each selection. At the end, the learner can take a quiz to check 
comprehension and progress. 
LeLoup and Ponterio Listening: You've Got to be Carefully Taught 
 
Language Learning & Technology 12 
 
Not to ignore the less-commonly-taught (but not less-commonly-
spoken!) languages, another page is devoted to an extensive listing of 
more languages found across Europe, as well as Japanese and Urdu. 
While not represented to the depth of the above languages, these 
languages are acknowledged, their history provided, and some key 
phrases represented in audio clips as well as in written form, including 
non-Roman scripts where appropriate. 
Here, for instance, is a sample from the Guide to Urdu. 
 
An added benefit for each of the language sections is a tutor page, which provides instructions on use of 
the activities and materials. Several activities have accompanying worksheets that can be downloaded as 
.pdf files. Also available within the tutor section is a page entitled Get the most out of video. This section 
LeLoup and Ponterio Listening: You've Got to be Carefully Taught 
 
Language Learning & Technology 13 
provides tips and strategies for using video in teaching. Twelve different approaches to using video are 
listed. Clicking on each individual approach yields more in-depth directions for lesson activities while 
using the video. 
 
Perhaps owing to their geographic proximity to the UK, added activities for French, Spanish, German, 
and Italian include further tutorial courses. One, called Talk French (or Spanish, German, Italian), 
addresses basic topics, and includes video clips, word games for practice on the computer, and worksheets 
for comprehension checks. A second one, French Steps (or Spanish, German, Italian), is a 24 step online 
course for beginners that addresses survival French, the basics of L2 vocabulary, and allows learners to 
track their progress through the activities for each section. 
 
LeLoup and Ponterio Listening: You've Got to be Carefully Taught 
 
Language Learning & Technology 14 
This BBC site for languages is extensive and offers many things for many people in many languages. 
Considerable thought an organization has gone into its development, making it a useful tool for language 
teachers. Authentic language can also be found on a great many web sites that are much less ambitious. 
VIDEO CLIPS OF SURVIVAL CHINESE 
The Video Clips of Survival Chinese site developed by Jianhua Bai and supported by the Andrew Mellon 
foundation uses a series of 20 Quicktime movies of survival situations including: Hotel Check In, Hotel 
Check Out, Changing Money, Asking Directions, Ordering Meals, Seeing A Doctor, Bargaining, Post 
Office, etc. Each clip can be viewed with an annotated transcript in which key expressions are glossed. 
There is also a series of questions for each video. The acknowledgements section thanks Clara Yu and 
Middlebury College for the use of the video clips, pointing out the value of collaborative efforts in 
developing such materials in an academic environment. 
 
CONCLUSION 
Improved speed of the Internet and the generalization of broadband access, along with faster processors, 
has greatly facilitated the distribution of audio and video media online. In addition to sites like the ones 
highlighted above that incorporate media into language lessons, an unending stream of audio and video 
from around the world is now accessible to the language learner for practice and to language as a basis for 
lessons. Television and radio, including news and documentaries, music videos, indeed, almost any video 
imaginable and unimaginable, is now at our fingertips through sources such as Google Video or YouTube 
(see this issue's Emerging Tech column for further discussion of video in language learning). As search 
tools improve as well, finding just the right video clip to support a language lesson keeps getting easier. 
Five years ago the Internet held the promise of access to authentic audio and video. Today that promise is 
realized, but the future is likely to exceed our wildest imaginations. 
 
 
LeLoup and Ponterio Listening: You've Got to be Carefully Taught 
 
Language Learning & Technology 15 
REFERENCES 
Berne , J. E. (2004). Listening comprehension strategies: A review of the literature. Foreign Language 
Annals, 37(4), 521-533. 
Decker, M.A. (2004). Incorporating guided self-study listening into the language curriculum. The 
Language Teacher, 28(6), 5-9. Retrieved November 11, 2006, from http://www.jalt-
publications.org/tlt/articles/2004/06/decker. 
Feyten, C. M. (1991). The power of listening ability: An overlooked dimension in language acquisition. 
The Modern Language Journal, 75(ii), 173-80. 
Hyslop, N. B., & Tone, B. (1988). Listening: Are We Teaching It, and If So, How? ERIC Digest 
ED295132. Retrieved November 11, 2006, from http://www.ericdigests.org/pre-928/listening.htm. 
Krashen, S. D. (1982). Principles and practice in second language acquisition. Oxford: Pergamon Press. 
Omaggio Hadley, A. (2001). Teaching language in context. 3rd Ed. Boston, MA: Heinle. 
Wilt, M. E. (1950). A study of teacher awareness of listening as a factor in elementary education. Journal 
of Educational Research, 43(8), 626-636. 
 
