Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num2/basharina/ 
June 2007, Volume 11, Number 2 
pp. 82-103 
 
Copyright © 2007, ISSN 1094-3501 82 
AN ACTIVITY THEORY PERSPECTIVE ON STUDENT-REPORTED 
CONTRADICTIONS IN INTERNATIONAL TELECOLLABORATION 
Olga K. Basharina 
University of New Mexico 
ABSTRACT 
This process-oriented study focuses on contradictions that emerged in a WebCT bulletin 
board collaboration among English learners from Japan, Mexico and Russia, and explains 
them from the perspective of activity theory (Leont’ev, 1978, 1981; Engeström, 1987, 
1999).  The study identified a) two intra-cultural contradictions – to post or not to post, to 
sound formal or informal; b) three inter-cultural contradictions – unequal contribution, 
genre clash/plagiarism, clash of topic choice; and c) three technology-related 
contradictions – message overload as hindering community formation, bulletin board as 
too "slow" when compared to chat, and names and gender confusion. These contradictions 
were catalyzed by the clash of curricula versus interactive learning paradigms (Lemke, 
1998): the outcomes of different cultures-of-use of computer technologies (Thorne, 2003), 
instructors’ mediation, and resources available to learners within their broader socio-
cultural contexts. The study concludes with a discussion of whether the learning 
paradigms can be bridged and cultures-of-use of computer technologies aligned. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Earlier studies on international telecollaboration1 were primarily descriptive, focusing on the design and 
implementation aspects, or framed within a product-oriented paradigm (Chapelle, 2001; Warschauer & 
Kern, 2000). Over the last decade, however, there has been a shift toward process-oriented research and a 
focus on the contexts of computer use and evolving interaction. The most recent studies on 
telecollaboration (Belz, 2001, 2002, 2003; Belz & Muller-Hartmann, 2003; Belz & Thorne, 2006; Chase, 
Macfadyen, Reeder & Roche, 2002; Kramsch & Thorne, 2002; O’Dowd, 2003, 2005; Schneider & von 
der Emde, 2006; Thorne, 2003, 2006; Ware, 2005) explore the kinds of cultural contact afforded by a 
technological medium. Special attention in recent studies is paid to tensions and misunderstandings that 
might hinder intercultural learning (Belz, 2001, 2002, 2003; Kramsch & Thorne, 2002; O’Dowd, 2003, 
2005; Thorne, 2003; Ware, 2005). These studies relate online tensions to the socio-cultural dimension of 
telecollaboration and the ways students make sense how their partners make communicative choices.  
Building on previous research on online intercultural misunderstandings, I explore contradictions, a term 
used by activity theorists in reference to problems, ruptures, breakdowns and clashes (Kuutti, 1996), that 
emerged in the 12-week long interaction on the WebCT2 multithreaded bulletin board3 among English 
learners from Japan, Mexico and Russia. More specifically, the study4 builds on previous research by 
Thorne (2003), an activity theorist, and his concept "cultures-of-use" of an artifact, defined as "the 
historically sedimented characteristics that accrue to a CMC tool from its everyday use" (p. 40).  
Whereas previous studies mainly focused on students from the USA and Western Europe, participants of 
this study were students from Japan, Mexico and Russia who have received less attention in the research 
on international telecollaboration (Carney, 2005; Murray, 2000). Participants in this study were 
significantly culturally distanced from one another in geopolitical and economic terms.5 Related to this 
feature is Belz’s (2002) argument that national differences in computer access and technological know-
Olga K. Basharina Contradictions in International Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 83 
how raise new "important ethical and methodological questions for telecollaborative foreign language 
study" (p. 73).  
In previous studies the focus was on language exchange task-based assignments, such as discussion of 
texts among students from the USA learning European languages and their European counterparts 
learning English (Belz, 2003; Belz & Thorne, 2006; Kramsch & Thorne, 2002; O’Dowd, 2005; Ware, 
2005). In comparison, this study involved English language learners who engaged in asynchronous 
interaction in English on their topics of interest. The choice of such a format for the project stemmed from 
my personal experience using WebCT in graduate classes I took earlier, which appeared to be effective in 
two ways: 1) the interaction was contingent, 2) students were granted more agency and a sense of 
ownership of the bulletin board (Potts, 2001). I was hoping that a similar effect would be achieved 
through the use of WebCT in the project under investigation. 
Furthermore, previous studies were ethnographic and operated with the two levels of analysis – a complex 
interplay of macro-level (social contexts) and micro-level (agency) phenomena (Belz, 2002, 2003).   I use 
the activity theory framework (Basharina, 2005; Cole & Engeström, 1994; Engeström 1987, 1999; 
Lantolf, 2000; Lantolf & Genung, 2002; Leont’ev, 1974, 1978, 1981; Mantovani, 1996; Nardi, 1996; 
Thorpe, 2002; Vygotsky, 1978, 1934/86) with its key notions of mediation, contradictions, community, 
culture and cognition, which provides an additional avenue to explore intercultural tensions.  
In what follows I review the previous research on tensions in telecollaboration. I then describe the 
telecollaborative project under investigation and methodology used in this study. In the findings section I 
focus on major contradictions that emerged in the process of telecollaboration (to be consistent with the 
activity theory vocabulary, tensions will be referred to as contradictions in the rest of the paper). I 
conclude this paper with a discussion of the practical implications. 
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND 
Interrelationship between Contexts and Contradictions 
The exploration of intercultural misunderstandings in recent research often leads scholars to investigate 
the complex interrelationship between structure (i.e., context and setting) and agency (i.e., situated 
activity and self), given that in online interaction we deal with at least two contextual layers: off-line, 
sitting in front of the computer screens in the context of culture; and online, through textual 
representations of selves (Lam, 2000) in the context of situation (Kramsch, 1993). It has been argued that 
the chances of misunderstanding in online environments increase due to the nature of an online medium 
which relies on typing and Internet speed, as well as a lack of paralinguistic and non-verbal cues (Ferrara, 
Bruner & Whittemore, 1991; Mantovani, 1996; Murray, 1991; Yates & Orlikowski, 1993). In addition, it 
was recently found that the sources of misunderstanding in online telecollaboration are rooted in the 
broader socio-cultural contexts, which inform the linguistic choices of students online. The newly 
identified variables behind online contradictions include differences in students’ frames of reference with 
regards to local discursive norms of language use (Kramsch & Thorne, 2002), language valuation (Belz, 
2002; Ware, 2005), the ways students co-construe the context of online communication (Ware, 2005) and 
their communication partners (Meagher & Castanos, 1996; O’Dowd, 2003, 2005). 
Kramsch and Thorne (2002), for example, interrogate the presumption that computer-mediated 
communication naturally helps learners to understand their partners’ local conditions of language use and 
to build a global common ground for intercultural understanding. In their study of French-American 
telecollaboration, quite often students run across intercultural misunderstanding based on the limited 
knowledge of the "different social and cultural conventions under which each party is operating" (p. 90) 
and "very little awareness that such an understanding is even necessary" (p. 98). Most of the French 
interlocutors, for example, used factual, impersonal, dispassionate genres of writing. They extensively 
used argument building logical connectors such as "for example," "however," "moreover," as well as 
Olga K. Basharina Contradictions in International Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 84 
made nuanced corrections to what they felt were American misjudgments about the situation in France. 
By contrast, the American students, who initiated this exchange in order to understand "how they live 
their everyday lives" viewed this instance of Internet-mediated communication as a ritual of mutual trust 
building and used an informal, highly personal genre. The authors explain the misunderstanding as "a 
clash of cultural frames caused by the different resonances of the two languages for each group of 
speakers and their different understanding of appropriate genres" (p. 94-95). In Kramsch and Thorne’s 
interpretation, "each group mapped the communicative genres they were familiar with onto their foreign 
language communicative practices in cyberspace." Consequently, the educational implication drawn from 
their study is to prepare students to deal with global communicative practices that require mastering "far 
more than local communicative competence" (p. 99). 
A number of recent studies found that the contradictions may also take place because of the misalignment 
of academic calendars, institutionalized classroom scripts, methods of learning accreditation, academic 
socialization and technological access (Belz, 2002; Belz & Muller-Hartmann, 2003; O’Dowd, 2005; 
Thorne, 2003). These studies emphasize the importance of physical contexts consisting of mediating tools 
and other people in shaping an online interaction. 
Thorne (2003), for example, in his study demonstrates how the learners’ relationship with physical 
contexts and computers may facilitate contradictions. He approached the same set of data used in the 
earlier study by Kramsch and Thorne (2002) from the perspective of the crucial role of the physical 
context of local cultures. Thorne (2003) argues that online and other activities emerge on the "intersection 
of histories of use with the contingencies of emergent practice" and represent the "culture-of-use" of an 
artifact (p. 40). He found that the activity of online interaction was different for the French than it was for 
the Americans, in part because the Internet communication was used differently in each case; e.g., French 
students were communicating through a surrogate (the teacher who was sending their messages). Thorne 
concludes that radically different cultures-of-use of Internet communication was one of the major reasons 
for the tension between the French and American students. 
Activity Theory and Contradictions  
Thorne’s concept of "cultures-of-use" of an artifact (2003) draws from the extensive explorations of 
activity theorists of a tool-mediated, goal-oriented, culturally and historically situated collaborative 
activity as applied to any human activity including human-computer interaction. Activity theory is based 
on the premise that cognitive development has a cultural and social origin (Lantolf & Thorne, 2006; 
Vygotsky, 1978). Nardi (1996) argues that "consciousness is located in everyday practice: you are what 
you do. And what you do is firmly and inextricably embedded in the socio-cultural matrix of which every 
person is an organic part" (p. 7). Activity theory allows us to break down the interrelationship between the 
structure and agency into smaller categorical elements, representing what Nardi calls "socio-cultural 
matrix," and, by zooming in, trace the developmental path of that relationship. In the beginning stages of 
development, the purposeful acts of the individual are accomplished through the joint activity of a learner, 
physical/symbolic tool(s), and another person(s) performing together as a working social system to 
achieve some outcome under cultural constraints such as rules (Figure 1). Only after that are the inter-
psychological categories used between people in discursive practices appropriated as tools for thinking 
within individuals as intra-psychological categories.  
Mediation is the mechanism through which external socio-cultural activities are transformed into internal 
mental functioning. The source of mediation can be either a material tool (for example, a string around 
one’s finger as a reminder); a system of symbols (language), or the behavior of another human being in 
social interaction. Mediators, in the form of objects, symbols, and persons transform natural, spontaneous 
impulses into higher mental processes, including strategic orientations to problem solving. In the case of 
language learning, this mediation can take the form of a textbook, visual material, classroom discourse, 
opportunities for second language interaction, instruction, or other kinds of teacher assistance.  
Olga K. Basharina Contradictions in International Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 85 
 
Figure 1. Activity System Model (Engeström, 1987) 
People participate in multiple activity systems within their local and global contexts, including online. In 
real life we engage in "an intertwined and connected web of activities that can be distinguished according 
to their objects" (Kuutti, 1996, p. 30). International telecollaboration is also an activity system which is 
embedded within broader institutional, historical and geopolitical contexts. A person engaged in one 
activity system is simultaneously influenced by other activity systems in which she/he participates. These 
influences are both horizontal, happening across communities, and also vertical as social actions are also 
embedded within history, culture and inequitable power relations that both influence the meaning 
production and shape human activities in important ways.  
Contradictions within an Activity System 
Within an activity system, all elements constantly interact with one another and are virtually always in the 
process of working through changes. Changes in the design of a tool may influence a subject's orientation 
toward an object, which, in turn, may influence the cultural practices of the community. In addition, it is 
possible that the object and motive themselves will undergo changes during the process of activity 
(Kuutti, 1996). It is not surprising that Engeström (1987) called an activity system "a virtual disturbance-
and-innovation-producing machine" (p.11) and emphasized the importance of contradictions, driving 
these changes.  
Activity theorists see contradictions as sources of development. Engeström (1987) characterizes a 
contradiction as "a social, societally essential dilemma which cannot be resolved through separate 
individual actions alone – but in which joint cooperative actions can push a historically new form of 
activity into emergence" (p. 16). The resolution of contradictions, according to Engeström, takes place in 
the process of "living movement leading away from the old" (p. 16), when transforming an object/goal 
into a new outcome takes place. An example of contradiction is evident in a situation, when a person is 
torn by two or more opposite goals, and when the additional immediate circumstances may influence 
his/her final decision-making. This is very similar to construction of new knowledge in a community of 
learners as a result of negotiation of different, and often times, opposite meanings (Wenger, 1998). 
Contradictions among Activity Systems 
Whereas above I focused on contradictions among elements of a single activity system, in this section I 
will discuss contradictions among two or more interacting activity systems, given that contradiction 
indicates a misfit not only between different developmental phases of a single activity, but between 
different activities (Kuutti, 1996). 
Thorne (2003) and Wertsch, Minick, and Arns (1984) showed how the same task is implemented 
differently by means of available tools across different socio-cultural contexts. Thorne (2003) found that 
Olga K. Basharina Contradictions in International Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 86 
when people from several cultures engage in the same task, the use of tools in their different socio-
cultural, socio-historic contexts may illustrate "a heterogenous set of communicative practices with 
different rules, community norms, and division of labor" and may differ interculturally "in the same way 
as communicative genres and personal styles do" (p. 40). Internet communication tools are often 
"different cultural artifacts for different communities, precipitating consequential effects on the processes 
of communication, relationship building, and language development" (Thorne, 2003, p. 41). That is why, 
various contradictions in international telecollaboration, such as, for example, genre clash (Kramsch & 
Thorne, 2002), can take place not only due to the differences in students’ frames of reference with regards 
to their cultural norms of language use, but due to the mismatch of activities (cultures-of-use) in two 
different contexts.  
In my model of Intercultural Context-Embedded Telecollaborative Activity (Figure 2) I use the example 
of telecollaboration among Japanese, Mexican and Russian students (J, M, R), who had their context-
specific tools, rules, objects, communities and division of labor as they engaged in the telecollaboration.  
 
Figure 2. Intercultural Context-Embedded Telecollaborative Activity (ICETA) model (Basharina, 2005; 
adapted from Engeström, 1987) 
When the students engaged with computers in similar ways, and when their objects, rules/norms 
coincided, they formed one activity system. In Figure 2 the outcomes of activity is a larger circle with the 
dark circle inside, which represents the emergence of the shared "third place" (Kramsch, 1993). At the 
same time, students whose tools, norms/rules and objects significantly mismatched oftentimes failed to 
form the shared community, experienced intercultural contradictions, and also remained outside the "third 
place," in the three separate white zones of their local contexts.  
To sum up this review and to link it to my study, first I argue that contradictions (ruptures and tensions) 
should be viewed as an integral element of any activity or of a relationship among two or more activities; 
and, second, that their investigation should look beyond students’ frames of reference to include their 
broader cultures-of-use of computer technologies. 
METHODOLOGY  
According to Vygotsky (1978), the analysis of rough and conflict-based situations may bring a lot of 
insights into interpreting the developmental path of a particular phenomenon. Therefore, this study is 
Olga K. Basharina Contradictions in International Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 87 
guided by two questions: 1) what were the contradictions that emerged in the project under study? and 2) 
what were the underlying reasons for those contradictions? To answer these questions I turn to 
methodological principles and tools suggested by activity theory.  
Activity theory is more valuable for understanding what went wrong, rather than doing predictive work 
(Nardi, 1996). It "rejects cause and effect, stimulus response, explanatory science in favor of a science 
that emphasizes the emergent nature of mind in activity and that acknowledges a central role for 
interpretation in its explanatory framework"  (Cole, 1996, p.104). In order to understand, for example, 
how a tool is used, one has to study its use over time allowing for the usage to develop (Kaptelinin & 
Nardi, 1997). In this regards, ethnographic methods that track the history and development of practice as 
it naturally occurs fit well with the goals of activity theory. 
Research Contexts and Participants 
The project involved 52 Japanese students who came on a year-long exchange program to South-Western 
Canada, 37 Mexican students located in Northern Mexico, and 46 Russian students located in North-
Eastern Russia. They were all 18-22 years old and in their second or third year of college. Their English 
proficiency varied from intermediate to advanced.  
The 12-week-long telecollaborative project was an adjunct to the English courses taught in the three 
universities across the globe6. The purpose of the project was to promote thought-provoking, engaging 
and active interaction in English as a second/foreign language with the hope of improving students’ 
English language use and intercultural awareness. The students were divided into four forums with 
approximately equal number of participants from each of three cultures and across genders. 
I was a researcher, a teaching assistant of the Japanese students, and a participant in the project. The 
Japanese and Mexican instructors were my fellow graduate students and the Russian instructor was my 
former colleague. This gave me access to the project and helped me establish trusting relationships with 
participants.  
Internet Access  
There were differences in students’ access to computer technology. Whereas all Japanese and Mexican 
students had free access at their universities and all of them, except for four Mexican students, had 
Internet at their dormitories or at home, most of the Russian students had limited access on campus and 
half of them did not have computers and Internet access at home. They could use dial-up Internet for free 
only during their lab time. Internet speed was also slower in the Russian context. 
Project Integration 
Shortly before the project, we posted the schedule, instructions on how to use the bulletin board, 
suggested topics, and certain requirements, such as writing five messages a week on the project website. 
These guidelines were used differently in the three instructional contexts.  
The Japanese students engaged in a telecollaboration and in two other activities such as web-quests7 and 
journal writing during their lab time. They were encouraged to interact during their out of class time as 
well. For the Mexican students it was an entirely out-of-class activity conducted instead of essay writing. 
The Russian students engaged with the project during their lab time, but compared to the Japanese 
students, they did not do any other additional web-activities. The decision of the Russian instructor to 
conduct the project during lab time was related to the Russian students’ lack of Internet access at home. 
Taking into account other tasks, the Japanese instructor allocated 20 percent, and the Mexican instructor 
25 percent, of the total grade for student participation in the project. Because the Russian university 
followed a different institutional script (Belz, 2002) with no percent-based break-down of the total grade, 
the Russian instructor did not allocate any percentage for student participation, but made the project the 
only task for which students received a course grade.  
Olga K. Basharina Contradictions in International Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 88 
Data Collection and Analysis 
Those students who signed consent forms participated in the data collection procedure described in Table 
1.8  
Table 1. Types of Data Collected for the Study 
# of students 
interviewed/surveyed Timeline of the Project Type of Data 
Japanese  Mexican  Russian  
Beginning  Language learning & technology use survey 47 37 39 
Middle  E-mail & face-to-face focus interviews  28 31 36 
End Intercultural awareness post-survey  26 37 35 
 Individual & group  interviews 40 22 18 
Additional data WebCT bulletin board protocols, interviews with instructors 
 Russian students: Written project evaluations 
 Japanese students: Journal entries 
 
After documenting students’ reflections on contradictions and content analysis of interaction protocols, I 
engaged in an exploration of the underlying reasons for contradictions through interviews with students 
and instructors. Transcripts of all tape recorded interviews9 were coded for recurrence of emergent 
themes, sorted and grouped. Within each group, response categories were counted by frequency. To 
determine when it was time to stop processing data, I used the four criteria proposed by Lincoln and Guba 
(1985): exhaustion of sources, saturation of categories, emergence of regularities, and overextension.  
Validity 
I take the view that validity in qualitative research is a judgment produced by the readers of a research 
text. In this light, validity is not a property of my data, research design, or analysis per se; it is a social 
construction focused on the credibility, trustworthiness, reliability, and believability of my accounts 
(Altheide & Johnson, 1994; Guba, 1981). This research attempted to verify credibility through the use of 
several types of data and critical subjectivity. Data was continuously reviewed and reorganized and 
literature continually consulted.  
Limitations 
Qualitative studies such as this are intended to provide detailed descriptions of one set of participants in 
one setting, existing within a fixed period in time. Although such studies may inform other educators and 
instructors as to the range and types of issues that may be pertinent to their own settings, the results 
cannot be extended and directly applied to other learning situations. 
The next limitation is related to the nature of the qualitative research methods such as the ‘truth value’ of 
the study.  There are hardly any means of ensuring that what students wrote and said was what they 
actually believed.  With this type of data collection, I relied on the honesty and accuracy of the 
participant’s responses.  The concerns I had about inaccurate accounts and false claims were minimized 
by creating a trusting relationship with students, anonymous surveys, and by ensuring students that they 
would not be deducted marks for providing ‘right’ or ‘wrong’ answers; rather, they would be rewarded 
for participating and expressing themselves honestly to the best of their ability.  
FINDINGS 
The study identified a) two intra-cultural contradictions – to post or not to post, to sound formal or 
informal; b) three inter-cultural contradictions – unequal contribution, genre clash/plagiarism, clash of 
topic choice; and c) three technology-related contradictions – message overload as hindering community 
Olga K. Basharina Contradictions in International Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 89 
formation, bulletin board as too "slow" when compared to chat, and names and gender confusion. Intra-
cultural contradictions refer to tensions which emerged based on participants’ assumptions and beliefs 
about the project and their communication partners, usually prior their engagement with the international 
online community. Inter-cultural and technology-related contradictions emerged during the process of 
interaction. 
Intra-Cultural Contradictions 
To Post or Not to Post? 
Students from all three cultures experienced anxiety at the beginning of the project, related to their 
unawareness of what to expect from the interaction and communication partners. Sierra, a Mexican 
student, for example, wrote:  
At the beginning of the project i was a little confuse, i didn't know what to say, what to 
write, how to response the other msgs but while i was writing the messages i like the idea 
to interact with people of other places so i send a lot of messages more than the teacher 
told me to send. (IRC interview, italics added) 
At the beginning of the project Sierra felt confused and unsure what to write about, because, for her, 
participation in such an international project and interaction with students from Japan and Russia was an 
entirely new experience. Sierra’s anxiety began to disappear when she started to interact and when she 
found out more about the project. This demonstrates how her inner contradiction was resolved during "the 
living movement" (Engeström, 1987), and how her goal of online activity changed from being an abstract 
class requirement to a situated interest in interaction. For her and some other students from all three 
cultures, the activity moved from educational to personal, from extrinsic to intrinsic motivation.  
Yasu, a Japanese student, also experienced inner tension at the beginning of the project because she was 
afraid of seeming "strange" due to irreconcilable cultural differences, which she thought existed among 
participating students. She wrote in her journal: 
At first, I only could read their messages and could not respond them. I was too conscious 
and worried to be seen strange. The reason is because my way of thinking is based on 
Japanese very much and I thought it might sound strange for Mexican or Russian students. 
I myself have been surprised to hear different opinion from different culture and I thought 
difference is bad thing at that moment. (Journal entry, italics added)  
After Yasu realized that other students felt more or less comfortable in posting their messages, she also 
posted her introduction. After she received replies, her anxiety began to disappear as she realized that she 
had a lot in common with her communication partners:  
I posted my introduction on the online discussion board. …When I found respond to my 
postings, I was very glad that someone was interested in my topic and gave me back a 
message. As I read the message, I realized that other students from Mexico and Russia 
also have the same kind of interests as me. …Now my way of thinking is changing. 
(Journal entry, italics added)  
Yasu’s reflection demonstrates the emergence of the motive to interact along with the resolution of her 
inner contradiction as a result of the "living movement," after she received personal replies full of 
positivism and support.  
In addition to contradictions associated with the novelty of the online experience, some Russian students 
experienced contradiction  related to their lack of technological experience and concern to seem less 
knowledgeable. As some Russian students said in the interview: "I was afraid, because I had no practice 
of working on the Internet" (Misha); "I felt less confident because I thought that their English would be 
Olga K. Basharina Contradictions in International Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 90 
much better than ours" (Zoya).  Concern with seeming less knowledgeable made the Russian students 
prepare for the project beforehand, which somewhat resolved their contradiction. As Kostya, a Russian 
student said in the interview:  
I was concerned about participating in the project. I thought they were all monsters and so 
advanced. If they read my poor messages, I thought, I would disgrace our department of 
World economics and myself. Therefore, I had to learn grammar again - how the sentences 
are written. This might have improved my grammar. (Italics added) 
Later, when the project began, many Russian students realized that the Japanese and Mexican English 
language proficiency was similar or even less advanced than their own English proficiency. This 
significantly reduced their anxiety level. As Shura, a Russian student said in the interview: "I was afraid 
that I would seem odd compared to them, but it seemed to me that the level of their knowledge is similar 
to ours." This indicates how the living movement of participation helped her to resolve her tension.  
To Sound Formal or Informal? 
Because the project was also a part of students’ academic courses for which they were evaluated, many of 
them faced a dilemma fostered by the interplay between their non-academic identities and discursively 
constructed institutional roles of the classroom. Feeling happy for his Japanese soccer team that won over 
the Polish team on the soccer championship, Taro wrote a very emotional and informal message: 
Subject Re: World Cup  
yes!!!!!!!!!!!! i feel pretty fine this morning because......japan's  national team beat poland 
by score of 2-0!!!!!! i really wanted to see this match on tv but i couldn't because i'm in 
canada right now.... japan is going to win the world cup!!!!!(i'm half  kidding, half 
serious...) hmmmm....sorrry for not being academic....i'm just  excited... (italics added) 
Toward the end of his message, however, he realized that he was too informal and apologized for "not 
being academic."  The contradiction between students’ youth identities and perceptions of the online 
activity as an academic task was also evident in the following exchange between the two Russian 
students:  
Zina: I think formal is much better then informal. If it is informal - than it is chat. 
Shura: But our speech should be informal, because we are young people. 
Zina: How could you write informally, say, about social problems - I could not 
understand! It should be more formal, it's not "Simpsons." (Interview, italics added) 
In this example, Zina, who did not participate actively in the project and who wrote only academic and 
task-based messages, thought that the bulletin board was designed for academic interaction. Shura, on the 
other hand, thought that being too serious and highly academic was inappropriate on the bulletin board 
and that writing should reflect students’ personal youth identity.  
Students faced a dilemma not only with regards to the choice of the level of formality, but with regards to 
the choice of academic or personal topics for discussion. For example, Ulyana, a Russian student, saw a 
dramatic distinction between what she really wanted to write about as a young woman and what she 
thought she was expected to write about, as a student of the World economics department and a 
participant of an academic international project: 
Subject Re: New start  
Hi, Olga! I want to know, what kind of letters should we write? Letters of our real interest, 
or letters on political, economy problems. As for me I am interested in problems of health, 
sports, fashion e.t.c Best wishes 
Olga K. Basharina Contradictions in International Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 91 
Ulyana 
Interestingly, none of the Mexican students openly expressed similar internal concern. This might have 
been related to the Mexican students’ more extensive experience of participation in online youth 
communities, which value casual relations. 
Inter-cultural Contradictions 
Unequal Contribution (Russian complaint) 
A striking statistic was that almost all new threads were initiated by the Russian students (Table 2). 
Table 2. Thread Initiation Statistics  
Students Japanese Mexican Russian 
 % of Total Threads 
Mean 
Number per 
Person 
% of Total 
Threads 
Mean 
Number per 
Person 
% of Total 
Threads 
Mean 
Number per 
Person 
Forum A 13.2 2.0 10.7 2.1 76.1 13.6 
Forum B 17.8 2.0 10.3 1.5 71.9 8.8 
Forum C 26.0 2.6 9.2 1.3 64.9 7.7 
Forum D 19.9 2.6 8.8 2.1 71.3 11.1 
Analysis of messages also identified that the Russian students posted longer messages, compared to the 
Japanese and Mexican students. Some of their messages were the size of two computer screens. Because 
of such unequal participation, many Russian students said: "Mexicans and Japanese should send more 
information and topics."  
Several Russian students found it frustrating that the Japanese and Mexican students just sent them web-
site links instead of "writing the information." Tina said: "You write something not according to the plan, 
but from your heart and soul and wait for reply, but receive either no reply, or just 2 lines. And they only 
throw their sites – search as you want" (Interview). When Naoko, a Japanese student, provided a website 
link about Japanese holidays instead of describing them in her message, the response from Yana, a 
Russian student, to Naoko’s short message was: 
 
Subject: re: Japanese holidays  
HI!!! My name is Yana. Why donot you write some information about it? I think that it is 
very interesting to know about it!!! We have some similar holidays. Ilike it very much!!! 
Do you know some Russian national holidays? If you want to know, please ask.(Italics 
added) 
The last sentence in Yana’s message also serves as an indicator of her attempt to encourage feedback 
from her communication partner.  
Many Japanese students did not write much about their culture and traditions, because they were 
concerned that they could give misleading information: "I am afraid to give mistaken idea about my 
culture" (Naoko); "I have to think and choose topics carefully so that I will not tell those people wrong 
information or anything like that" (Yuka). They needed to refer to sources in order to provide accurate 
information about their culture, which they were not willing to do unless they were really motivated. 
Therefore, they either provided very little information ("I tried to explain my culture simply" (Yuka)), or 
avoided altogether writing about their own culture. 
Genre Clash/Plagiarism (Mexican Complaint) 
When, Petr, a Russian student, wrote the following message: 
Olga K. Basharina Contradictions in International Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 92 
Subject Globalization  
Globalization One of the important aspects of globalisation is integration. Economic, 
political and other connections between countries develop. Today it’s impossible to grow 
without foreign affairs, and it’s better to trade with your partner on good or at least 
satisfactory terms – and countries unite and unite with each other. So, according to this 
theory, the more a country integrates, the better is it for its economy. American magazine 
"Foreign policy" investigated the level of integration of 62 countries. Russia occupies the 
39th place – a bit worse than average, just between Japan and Senegal. The USA – the 
12th place. The highest level of globalisation now is in Ireland, Switzerland and 
Singapore. 13 indicators were considered during the evaluation. They describe level of 
integration in different spheres – economy, politics, international trade, informational 
technologies exchange etc. Specialists think that it’s small countries that are considerably 
involved in the integration. And such huge countries as India, China, Brazil, Indonesia are 
in the bottom of the list. It can be easily explained by the fact that small countries depend 
on foreign trade quite more than big ones owing to having fewer resources and fewer 
transport expenses. But the integration can be regarded as dangerous as it reduces 
countries' independence. So, there are two attitudes to the integration. Which one is 
correct?          
The reply from Karl, a Mexican student, was: 
Subject Re: Globalization  
Hi everyone... 
 
The only thing that i want to know is...what do you think about globalization ??? (Italics 
added) 
In this example of genre clash we see the dissatisfaction of Karl with Petr’s message which he found to be 
dispassionate, distanced, too long and academic. Petr, guided by the assumption that the communication 
should be academic, was in conflict with Karl, who viewed it as informal conversation. For Petr it was all 
about transfer of objective information; for Karl it was a relationship-building activity as he wanted to 
find out Petr’s personal accounts of globalization written in an informal register.  
Because of the formal, dispassionate and academic genre of the Russian students’ messages, the Mexican 
students accused them of plagiarism. In Sierra’s view, the Russian students engaged in the practice of 
"writing beforehand," which was opposite to the Japanese and Mexican students’ practice of "writing at 
the moment." She characterized the Russian messages in the following way:  
The russians are like they write the msgs, but …it isn't seems like they write in the moment 
with theirs own word their msgs were perferct, they didn't have any mistake and japanese 
were like they write at the momento... what they think in this momento and i prefer to 
write what you think in this momento than write something that i found in internet or a 
book.... is like copy paste... and is better in your own word because you are practicing your 
English. (IRC interview, italics added) 
Sierra said that "writing beforehand" would be quite acceptable on the asynchronous bulletin board as 
long as copied information is "put in one’s own words," because it is important "to know how to say the 
things without the people say that they dont want to read that message because is very long....  and it not 
seems like the persons write" (IRC interview, italics added). In this statement Sierra raised the importance 
of being communicatively competent in an international online environment. Overall, many Mexican 
students characterized the Russian messages as long, same, "boring," "scattered all over the place," which 
Olga K. Basharina Contradictions in International Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 93 
made many Mexican students share Elisa’s opinion: "first I was interested in both – Japanese and Russian 
messages, but than was bored by Russian messages."  
The Japanese students’ impressions were similar to the Mexican students’. Miki, for example, said: 
"Mexicans write in less academic language, Russians in more academic language, and Japanese mostly 
reply" (Interview). In comparison, many Russian students shared Zhenya’s opinion: "They write in ‘free 
English’ and don’t use dictionary. Japanese and Mexicans are more free: ‘hi!’ ‘Wow!’ We wrote 
‘faithfully your’s’ ☺ we were not as free as they were" (Interview). Also:  
Japanese and Mexican English is different, not as ours, and their sentence structure is 
different. For example, we pay more attention to grammar and than, we know that "I" 
should be written in capital letter and they wrote in small. Almost everybody in our group 
and our instructor as well thought that their English and grammar was worse than ours. 
And I don't know what they thought about our English. (Olya, Interview) 
Clash of Topic Choice ( Mexican Complaint) 
In addition, the Mexican and Japanese students expressed their complaint about too-culture-specific 
messages initiated by the Russian students. Teresa, for example, said in the interview: "Come on, the 
Russians, for example, start telling about this specific things about their culture that we had no idea they 
even exist, and they talk about it like it was a global common knowledge. I could understand only 10%."  
Indeed, the largest number of messages initiated by the Russian students during the first 6 weeks of the 
project, were about their native culture (Table 3), such as "National holidays", "Customs and traditions", 
"Sports", "History," "Education," "Economic situation," "Russian meals."  
Table 3. Breakdown of Topic Initiation: Averages of Total Posted in Weeks 1-6 and 6-12. 
 1-6 Weeks 6-12 Weeks 
Topics Japanese Mexican Russian Japanese Mexican Russian 
Casual  7 4 33 12 6 41 
Course-based 3 2 7 4 0 19 
Cultural (own culture) 2 6 144 5 2 38 
Cultural (other 
cultures) 2 0 12 6 1 15 
Global 6 0 20 4 4 15 
Total 20 12 216 31 13 128 
Mean*  0.4 0.3 4.8 0.6 0.4 2.8 
Note: This table represents all newly initiated topics across 4 forums that were categorized and counted with a 
purpose to demonstrate a) unequal topic initiation activity by students from three cultures and b) students’ topic 
preferences.  
*Averages of total posted messages per person.  
The students realized that the lack of background knowledge about a particular culture may discourage 
interaction, as they may end up not knowing what to talk about. As Machiko, a Japanese student said: "I 
felt that the topic was sometimes too local so that we couldn’t afford to discuss over nationalities. …Even 
if we are not from the same country, we should be able to follow the subjects provided the sense in 
common" (Mako).  
3. Technology-Related Contradictions  
Message Overload as Hindering Community Formation 
Students from all three cultures felt threatened by the overwhelmingly large number of messages that 
appeared on the bulletin board daily. As Masumi, a Japanese student, said in the interview: "If I go to the 
Olga K. Basharina Contradictions in International Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 94 
web after an interval and there are a lot of messages which are unread, it discourages me to do that." Miki, 
another Japanese student, added: "I do not have enough time to read every single message. If I can’t read 
every message it makes me feel that I am not sure what exactly is going on" (Interview). Also, Alla, a 
Russian student said: "Firstly when there were not many persons I was looking forward to see other 
postings very much. And now when we have so many students there I want to follow all messages but it’s 
difficult" (Mid-interview). 
Message overload also resulted in difficulties to form a community. Stella, a Mexican student, said:  
"Something that i didn’t like was that the messages was so difficult to find.. you know .. you didn’t know 
if somebody answered you.. and you couldn’t keep a conversation with one person" (mid-interview). She 
further continued: 
My motivation is that a person that i wrote keep writing me.. so i can mantein a real 
conversation, but when i wrote someone and then that person don’t write me so i have to 
look for another conversation  but i don’t feel confortable because i get lost.. you know 
what i mean. (Mid-interview) 
This also led to the following decision making problems, expressed by Akiko:   
There are sometimes many messages, and there are sometimes same topics. Therefore, I 
puzzle which is appropriate topic I should post. Moreover, when messages increased about 
one topic, I also puzzle which I should follow pre-message or topic, because topic was 
developed and was sometimes changed. (Mid-interview)  
In addition, the overwhelming number of messages caused their devaluation. As Yukako, a Japanese 
student, said:  
Sometimes, I have no idea what to say about some specific topics because, I feel there are 
too many topics to discuss something deeper and I am not sure how and how much I can 
do that.  Many topics seem very superficial, I sometimes feel.   
Bulletin Board as  too "Slow" Compared to Chat 
Some students found the bulletin board to be a slow means of communication. Jose, a Mexican student, 
wrote: 
Message no. 3527[Branch from no. 2565]  
Subject Re: What is your opinion about online discussions?  
Hi everyone. I think online discussions are fine but are too slow, is good because you can 
interact with other contries people and talk about other cultures. But if we can chat maybe 
we talk better because sometimes you are inspired to talk about a topic and if you wait 
maybe you forget everything. Is my point of view. (Italics added) 
This tension reveals students’ desire to approximate delayed bulletin board interaction to the immediate 
response (Thorne, 2003). Based on this, several students from all three cultures expressed their preference 
for chat over the asynchronous bulletin board interaction. These students placed e-mail interaction on the 
continuum between chatting and word processing. They shared Elisa’s, a Mexican student’s opinion, 
"When u r chating u can short some words and u dont have to worry about any grammar or spelling 
problem but in BB or in works for schools you have to write everything right and complete" (chat 
interview).  
Names and Gender Confusion 
The final technology-related tension had to do with the lack of visual cues. The Japanese students could 
not distinguish between Mexican and Russian names. As Kaneko, a Japanese student, said: "Sometimes I 
Olga K. Basharina Contradictions in International Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 95 
confused that this opinion is from which country’s people. I wish I could recognize them. I’m trying to 
mention my nationality every time, but it’s troublesome" (Journal entry). In comparison, for the Mexican 
and Russian students it was, sometimes, problematic to distinguish between Japanese female and male 
names. 
Outcomes of Contradictions 
The outcomes of telecollaboration were not only in different ways of student participation, but in attitudes 
they formed about one another. The attitudes of the 38.1% of Mexican students became less positive 
toward the Russian students (Table 4). 
Table 4. Change of Attitude toward Communication Partners  
 Japanese toward Mexicans toward Russians toward 
Attitud
e 
Mexicans Russians Japanese Russians Japanese Mexicans 
 % % % % % % 
More 
Positive 
59.5 
 
69.2 
 
61.8 
 
41.2 
 
51.4 
 
40.0 
 
Less 
Positive 
2.4 
 
5.1 
 
8.8 
 
38.2 
 
2.9 
 
5.7 
 
Same 38.1 
 
25.6 
 
29.4 
 
20.6 
 
45.7 
 
54.3 
 
 
In contrast, most of the Japanese students did not change their attitudes toward the Russian students for 
the worse, as they did not consider the writings of the latter to be plagiarism. The Japanese students also 
participated the least, and their positive attitude might be explained by their lower degree of personal 
investment in the project. The attitudes of approximately 50% of the Russian students remained the same, 
perhaps because they did not receive the amount and kind of information that would have radically 
changed their attitudes toward Japanese and Mexicans. In addition, the fact that the Russian students 
acknowledged that their messages might have been "long and boring" seems to suggest a reason why their 
attitudes toward their Japanese and Mexican peers weren't adversely affected.  
DISCUSSION AND IMPLICATIONS 
Explanation of contradictions 
Nardi (1996) argues that the challenge activity theory has set for itself is to understand "the 
interpenetration of the individual, other people and artifacts in everyday activity" (p. 7). This study 
demonstrated the complexity of this interpenetration, shaped by contradictions among elements of a 
single activity and among interacting activities. The study found three levels of contradictions: 1) intra-
cultural, that represented students’ assumptions and beliefs prior or outside of the telecollaborative 
activity; 2) inter-cultural, that emerged during the telecollaboration, and 3) technology-related 
contradictions. Students were participants of multiple activity systems simultaneously (Figure 2). They 
were embedded in their local classrooms, an online global community, and broader contexts of their local 
cultures. The intra-cultural contradictions emerged within their local activity systems before students had 
a chance to become legitimate participants of the online intercultural community. The intercultural 
contradictions, on the other hand, emerged after students began to interact with one another. These 
contradictions were the result of having the same task – online telecollaboration – but engagement in 
different activities, characterized by differences in their objects/motives and mediating tools.  
 
Olga K. Basharina Contradictions in International Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 96 
Different Objects: Assignment vs. Free Interaction 
The Russian instructor, informed by her local conditions, engaged her students in an academic essay-
writing activity, drastically different from the Japanese and Mexican students’ interactive activity. In their 
interviews, some of the Russian students expressed their awareness of the reason for the contradictions. 
Dasha, for example, said that compared to the Japanese and Mexican students, for the Russian students 
the project was an academic activity similar in nature to essay writing: "Our students wrote long and same 
messages as they viewed the project as an assignment and it was boring." Tina, another Russian student, 
thought that the differences in participation were due to the fact that they followed a fixed plan and were 
strictly controlled by their instructor, whereas the Japanese and Mexican students interacted freely:  
Japanese and Mexicans did not have control, right?  – they interacted freely, it seems to 
me, but we did not. They probably looked at our messages with eyes like jars – so many 
similar topics about republic, everyone writes similar things – give me a break! If we also 
had the same conditions as they did, our participation would have been different. 
(Interview, italics added) 
Different Educational Paradigms and Socio-Economic Orders 
Whereas the Japanese and Mexican instructors advocated the interactive learning paradigm, the Russian 
instructor was a proponent of the curricular paradigm. According to Lemke (1998), the curricular 
paradigm is the educational paradigm of industrial capitalism and factory-based mass production, which 
resembles them in its authoritarianism, top-down planning, rigidity, and economies of scale. It assumes 
that someone else decides what one needs to know and arranges for one to learn it, all in a fixed order and 
timetable. The interactive learning paradigm, on the other hand, assumes that people determine what they 
need to know based on their participation in activities where such needs arise, and in consultation with 
knowledgeable specialists. They learn in the order that suits them, at a comfortable pace, and just in time 
to make use of what they learn. The interactive paradigm is the paradigm of how people with power, 
access to information and resources choose to learn. 
The curriculum and interactive learning paradigms are linked to different socio-economic orders: Fordist 
and Post-Fordist (Castells, 1998). These paradigms also correspond to three phases in Computer Assisted 
Language Learning – structural, cognitive, and socio-cognitive – which mark the shift from the content of 
computer programs to the content of human-to-human interaction (Warschauer & Kern, 2000). The 
Fordist socio-economic order, with its lack of Internet access, shaped most of the Russian students’ 
participation and justified the objects and rules of activity set by their instructor. Because of the lack of 
Internet access, Russian students wrote messages off-line and posted them from floppy disks by simply 
initiating new threads on the bulletin board during their limited time in the lab. Such practice also 
explains why their messages were scattered all over the place, creating disorder on the bulletin board. As 
Luda, a Russian student, said: 
I don't have the Internet at home, so I have a chance to read and reply messages only 
during the lessons in the computer class. I live in a dormitory, and I can use my friend's 
computer to write the messages on the disc. And then I ask my friend who has the Internet 
at home to send my messages. That's why my messages appears rarely and one by one. 
(Italics added)  
This also explains why many Russian students were upset when they received the website links instead of 
outlined information, why they read very few messages and wrote much more off-line, as well as why 
they had a limited sense of interlocutors and online community.  
Differences in Russian Students’ Participation 
Olga K. Basharina Contradictions in International Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 97 
The findings of this study echo Thorne’s (2003) proposition that intercultural telecollaboration needs to 
"explicitly take into account cross-class and cross-social material condition differences" (p. 47), not only 
across different cultures but also within cultures. For example, a few Russian students did not follow the 
objects and rules set by their instructor. These students had better access to the Internet and were more 
motivated and computer literate. Because of this, their engagement with computer technology was similar 
to that of the Japanese and Mexican students. In contrast, the other Russians students who had limited 
access and low levels of computer literacy engaged in traditional monologic writing practice, 
characterized by precise information transfer and error-free performance. Those who were introduced to 
online communication for the first time in the context of an academic course automatically ascribed the 
essayist style of writing to online interaction. In comparison, the Japanese and Mexican students, and the 
few Russian students who had unlimited access and high-speed Internet, spent significantly more hours 
sending e-mails and chatting online in their out-of-class time. For many of them the Internet was 
associated with the "illusion of proximity" (Thorne, 2003), informality, and interactivity. 
Embeddedness in Different Broader-Activity-Systems 
Being situated within different broader-activity-systems made students transfer their diverse local 
learning and communication models to online context. The reason why only the Mexican students noticed 
the supposed cases of plagiarism was explained by the reinforcement of an anti-plagiarism policy at their 
university. Their instructor was urged to enforce the plagiarism rules whenever she noticed cutting and 
pasting. For example, she spent the first two weeks of the course dealing only with plagiarism and 
explicitly prohibited it in the course outline10.  In comparison, the Japanese and Russian students did not 
say anything about the enforcement of an anti-plagiarism policy at their universities.  
The type of contradictions described by Yasu earlier, when she was afraid to post her message because of 
the perceived cultural differences, was shaped by her broader imagined communities/activity systems 
(Anderson, 1991; Pavlenko & Norton, 2005). Yasu, influenced by broader geopolitical situation, 
imagined herself and her communication partners as extremely culturally distant from one another ,which 
caused her hesitancy at the beginning. As for the Russian students, they perceived the project not as a 
mere interaction, but as something having broader international significance. Alla, a Russian student said:  
"it's an international project and we are the face of our Republic" (interview). This fact motivated students 
and, at the same time, raised their anxiety level. The Russian students’ imagined community had its origin 
in the context of their broader history of isolation from the Western world, which also contributed to their 
elevated anxiety about communicating at the beginning of the project. 
Computer Tools as Constraining Community Formation 
The study found that in international telecollaboration we deal with double mediation, as the tasks are 
mediated not only by instructors but by the tools themselves. For example, the engagement with the 
project’s communication tools became a challenging task for many students, as it was based not on oral or 
chat communication but on asynchronous written interaction in the English language. Students 
experienced pressure to read all messages, which overloaded the bulletin board in a short period of time.  
In addition, their experience of interaction was constrained by the number of technical inconveniences 
and slow Internet connection in the Russian context.  
The study also found that some students tended to transfer their model of engagement with synchronous 
chat to asynchronous interaction. For example, they found the latter to be less fun than synchronous chat 
communication. This was reported by mainly male students from all three cultures, who had fast Internet 
connection and unlimited access and who liked to engage in chat interaction. 
Pedagogical Implications 
If we return to the discussion of the theoretical background of this study, it becomes clear that 
contradictions were the result of students’ attempts to form the shared intercultural context-embedded 
Olga K. Basharina Contradictions in International Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 98 
telecollaborative activity (ICETA, Figure 2). Whereas the intra-cultural contradictions were resolved as 
soon as the project began, the inter-cultural contradictions remained unresolved and resulted in forming 
negative attitudes among some students.  
Thorne (2003) argues that for successful intercultural and international telecollaboration to take place and 
in order for Internet-mediated interpersonal or hyperpersonal relationships to develop, there should be 
certain minimum alignment of cultures-of-use. When conducting international telecollaboration, the 
reality dictates that there will always be differences in motives, objects, rules of activity, tools, the ways 
instructors mediate activities to students, as well as differences in learning paradigms, all due to the 
differences in the socio-economic, cultural, educational, and material conditions in different cultural 
contexts (Castells, 1998). Warschauer (1999), for example, argues that although teachers in his study tried 
to implement an interactive paradigm to varying degrees, full implementation of such a paradigm "would 
necessitate broader changes in how schooling is structured and is, thus, beyond the scope of any 
individual teacher" (p. 164).  
We cannot and should not expect educational institutions in different countries to align their cultures-of-
use, but we can make students become aware of how broader material conditions and educational 
paradigms can impact interaction (Mayor & Swann, 2002). The misalignments in cultures-of-use and 
educational traditions may serve as good teachable moments about intercultural differences and tolerance 
(Belz & Muller-Hartmann, 2003). In this light, the current study emphasizes the importance of instructor 
involvement in "discerning, identifying, explaining, and modeling culturally-contingent patterns of 
interaction in the absence of paralinguistic meaning signals" (Belz, 2003; p. 92). There should be some 
time allocated on exploration of communication partners’ local contexts and educational systems. The 
participants might exchange videos with the information about their cities and universities. Instructors 
need to communicate better with one another and discuss the objects and rules of the use of the bulletin 
board in their instructional contexts.  
In addition, the study suggests the following implications to address each of the contradictions found in 
this study. Students’ attention should be called to how their writing genres carry traces of a wide range of 
contextually and culturally situated views (Ware, 2005) and conditions. They should depart from the 
"attitudes of universalism" and from over-emphasis on foreignness (Bennett, 1993), and instead, learn to 
understand behaviors as originating from particular cultural-historical contexts (Agar, 1994). Students 
need to learn how to distinguish between the model of computer-mediated communication as 
transmission of information and computer-mediated communication as negotiation of shared meaning 
(Carey, 1988). 
Special attention should be paid to reducing students’ anxiety associated with the novelty of the 
experience and perceived cultural differences by allocating time to address the issue of possible internal 
contradictions, similar to the ones described in this study. Instructors should explain to students what to 
expect from a project and prospective communication partners, as well as possible dilemmas concerning 
the degree of formality/informality students may face, and help them choose the "golden middle."   
Toward Making Online Interaction More User-Friendly. 
To eliminate contradictions associated with the use of computer tools, it is desirable that students have a 
computer literacy workshop prior to their engagement with the project. Another implication is to reduce 
the number of students in each forum, at least, to 15-18 and to relieve students’ stress by instructing them 
to give up on the idea to track all newly-appeared messages. Students may be instructed to go to the 
bulletin board two or three times a week, at a particular time and read only the threads that are interesting 
to them. Instructors may also inform students of the most popular ongoing discussions on the bulletin 
board in the classroom.  
Olga K. Basharina Contradictions in International Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 99 
Instructors should explain to students that asynchronous communication is one of the most optimal modes 
for international telecollaboration (given the differences in time-zones) and for development of academic 
language, due to the extra time it provides for reflection. To avoid name and gender confusion among 
students from different cultures, instructors should conduct mini-lessons at the beginning of the project on 
popular names of the communication partners' countries.  
Recommendations for Further Research 
Following the present line of discussion, additional research is needed to explore the role of instructor 
mediation in shaping international telecollaboration. What needs to be investigated in this area is how 
instructors integrate exchanges into their classes and take on a more pro-active role to guide students 
through their intercultural interaction. One of the ways to implement such research is to analyze the 
classroom transcripts of instructors who work with their students on how to interact online and then 
conduct evaluations of how effective this training was. In addition, there is a need for collaborative 
studies to be implemented by all instructors who participate in projects from various instructional 
contexts. Such multiple-perspective studies will shed deeper insights into the moment-to-moment situated 
challenges instructors may face in implementing and facilitating international  telecollaborations.  
 
NOTES 
1. Telecollaboration is defined by Belz as "internationally-dispersed learners in parallel language classes 
using Internet communication tools such as e-mail, synchronous chat, threaded discussion and MOOs … 
in order to support social interaction, dialogue, debate and intercultural exchange" (2003, p. 1). 
2. WebCT courseware was first developed at the University of British Columbia and is now commercially 
available to public and private schools and universities throughout the world. The courseware has a 
variety of components including web-based resources and links, an assessment grid, a calendar, private 
chat-rooms, and an electronic bulletin board. The different components can be put together by the 
instructor to provide materials and information that are specific to each course. 
3. On a WebCT bulletin board students’ entries can be organized chronologically or in threads that follow 
a particular theme or topic. Students can see who wrote the latest posting, follow the line of an argument 
among a group of students, and interject at any point. Each posting includes a student’s name, a date a 
message was posted, and a subject of the message. The instructor and students can use a quote function to 
incorporate the text from a previous posting in order to comment on it in a new posting. Students can post 
their academic essays and pictures onto the electronic bulletin board by using an attachment, or by 
copying and pasting their document onto a message. 
4. This paper is a part of the broader unpublished dissertation research by Basharina (2005).  
5. Among the Russian students there were some who came from a rural area and who represented low 
socioeconomic status. Many Japanese students reported in the interview that they had to work part-time to 
save money for the trip to Canada. In comparison, the Mexican university brochure described local 
students as representing the wealthiest socio-economic class. 
6. The university in Mexico was a modern upper economic status institution for privileged students. The 
university in Russia was the major university in that region and the Russian students were enrolled in one 
of the most prestigious departments. The 8-month exchange program at the Canadian university hosted 
100 Japanese students and was geared toward development of their English proficiency and intercultural 
awareness. Only those Japanese students who had high TOEFL scores were allowed to take one or two 
regular courses with Canadian students; otherwise, they were in "Japanese only" classes. The Japanese 
students participating in this telecollaboration were from such homogenous classes. 
Olga K. Basharina Contradictions in International Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 100 
7. WebQuest is a research activity, first invented in 1995 at San Diego State University, in which students 
collect and analyze information using the Internet. 
8. Whereas students were evaluated for participation in the project, their participation in the research was 
volunteer-based and had no bearing on their final grades. Students’ and instructors’ names were changed 
and individually identifying information about participants was removed. Within each electronic message 
all the original formatting, spelling, use of alternate characters, emoticons etc. were left as written by the 
participants. 
9. The interviews lasted 40 minutes on average. I interviewed the Japanese students right after the project 
ended. Most of the Mexican students preferred chat interviews in the private Web-CT chat-room or using 
MSN software. The remaining Mexican students were interviewed by their instructor face-to-face after 
the project ended, based on the questions I sent her. I interviewed the Russian students face-to-face upon 
my arrival in Russia a month after the project ended. The Russian students chose to be interviewed in the 
Russian language; therefore, all recordings after being transcribed have been translated into English. 
10. Several Mexican students confirmed that the anti-plagiarism policy was enforced by instructors who 
came from the US and Canada and by their university policy oriented toward Western standards. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I am very grateful to the students, instructors, and project coordinators from the three universities in 
Canada, Mexico and Russia, and to my dissertation chair, Dr. Stephen Carey. I would like to separately 
acknowledge Dr. Paige Ware for her constructive feedback on a rough draft of this paper. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Olga Basharina is an adjunct faculty at the department of Language, Literacy and Socio-Cultural Studies 
at the University of New Mexico. The interdisciplinary areas of her research interests include language 
and literacy development in a socio-cultural context, instructional technology, and theory and practice in 
teacher education. 
E-mail: okb@unm.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Agar, M. (1994). Language shock: Understanding the culture of conversation. New York: William 
Morrow. 
Altheide, D., & Johnson, J. (1994). Criteria for assessing interpretive validity in qualitative  research. In 
N. Denzin and Y. Lincoln (Eds.), Handbook of qualitative research (pp. 485-499). Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage.  
Anderson B. (1991). Imagined communities. London: Verso. 
Belz, J. A., & Thorne, S. L. (Eds.). (2006). Internet-mediated intercultural foreign language education. 
Boston, MA: Heinle & Heinle.  
Basharina, O. (2005). An activity system analysis of international telecollaboration: Contexts, 
contradictions and learning. Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation, University of British Columbia. 
Olga K. Basharina Contradictions in International Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 101 
Belz, J. (2001). Institutional and individual dimensions of transatlantic group work in network-based 
language teaching. ReCALL, 13(2), 213-231. 
Belz, J. (2002). Social dimensions of telecollaborative foreign language study. Language Learning & 
Technology, 6(1), 60-81. 
Belz, J. (2003). Linguistic perspectives on the development of intercultural competence in 
telecollaboration. Language Learning & Technology, 7(2), 68-117. 
Belz, J & Muller-Hartmann, A. (2003). Teachers as intercultural learners: Negotiating German-American 
telecollaboration along the institutional fault line. The Modern Language Journal, 87(i), 71-89. 
Belz, J. A., & Thorne, S. L. (2006). Internet-mediated intercultural foreign language education. In J. A. 
Belz, & S. L. Thorne (Eds.), Internet-mediated intercultural foreign language education. Boston, MA: 
Heinle & Heinle.  
Bennett, M. (1993). Towards ethnorelativism: A development model of intercultural sensitivity. In M. 
Paige (Ed.), Education for the intercultural experience (pp. 21-71). Yarmouth, ME: Intercultural Press. 
Carey, J.W. (1988). Communication as culture: Essays on media and society. London: Unwin Hyman. 
Carney, N. (2005). A Critical Review of Telecollaborative Projects Involving Japan. Unpublished 
Masters Thesis, Pennsylvania State University. 
Castells, M. (1998). Information technology, globalization, and social development. UNRISD Discussion 
Paper No. 114.  
Chapelle, C. A. (2001). Computer applications in second language acquisition:  Foundations for 
teaching, testing and research. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Chase, M. Macfayden, L. Reeder, K. & Roche, J. (2002). Intercultural challenges in networked learning: 
Hard technologies meet soft skills. First Monday, 7(8). Retrieved January, 2003, from 
http://firstmonday.org/issues/issue7_8/chase/index.html 
Cole, M. (1996) Cultural Psychology: A Once and Future Discipline. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press. 
Cole, M., & Engeström, Y. (1994). A cultural-historical approach to distributed cognition. In: G. Salomon 
(Ed.), Distributed cognitions: Psychological and educational considerations. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Engeström, Y. (1987). Learning by expanding: An activity-theoretical approach to developmental 
research. Helsinki: Orienta-Konsultit. Retrieved October 7, 2003, from 
http://communication.ucsd.edu/MCA/Paper/Engestrom/expanding/toc.htm 
Engeström,Y. (1999). Learning by expanding: Ten years after. Retrieved March, 14, 2003 from 
http://lchc.ucsd.edu/MCA/Paper/Engestrom/expanding/intro.htm 
Ferrara, K., Bruner, H., & Whittemore, G. (1991). Interactive written discourse as an emergent register. 
Written Communication, 8, 8-34. 
Guba, E. (1981). Criteria for assessing the trustworthiness of naturalistic inquires. Educational Research 
Information Center Annual Review Paper, 29, 75-91. 
Kaptelinin, V., & Nardi., B. (1997). The Activity Checklist: A tool for representing the ‘Space’ of context. 
Research Report, Department of Informatics, Umeå University.  
Kramsch, C. (1993). Context and culture in language teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Kramsch, C., & Thorne, S. (2002). Foreign language learning as global communicative practice. In D. 
Block, & D. Cameron (Eds.), Globalization and language teaching (pp. 83-100). London: Routledge. 
Olga K. Basharina Contradictions in International Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 102 
Kuutti, K. (1996). Activity theory as a potential framework for human-computer interaction research. In 
B. A. Nardi (Ed.), Context and consciousness: Activity theory and human-computer interaction. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Lam, W.S. (2000). L2 literacy and the design of the self: A case study of a teenager writing on the 
Internet. TESOL Quarterly, 34(3), 457 – 482. 
Lantolf, J.P. (Ed.). (2000). Sociocultural theory and second language learning.  New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
Lantolf, J. P., & Genung, P. (2002). "I'd rather switch than fight": An activity-theoretic study of power, 
success, and failure in a foreign language. In C. Kramsch (Ed.) Language acquisition and language 
socialization: Ecological perspectives. London: Continuum. 
Lantolf, J., & Thorne, S. L. (2006). Sociocultural theory and the genesis of second language development. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.  
Lemke, J.L. (1998). Metamedia literacy: Transforming meanings and media. In D. Reinking, L. Labbo, 
M. McKenna, & R. Kiefer (Eds.), Literacy for the 21st century: Technological transformation in a post-
typographic world (pp.283-301). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Leont’ev, A.N. (1978). Activity, consciousness and personality. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Leont’ev, A.N. (1981). Problems of the Development of the Mind (M. Kopylova Trans.). Moscow: 
Progress Publishers. 
Lincoln, Y., & Guba, E. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. 
Mantovani, G. (1996). New communication environments: From everyday to virtual. London: Taylor 
Francis. 
Mayor, B., & Swann, J. (2002). The English language and ‘global’ teaching. In M. R.Lea, & K. Nicoll 
(Eds.), Distributed learning: Social and cultural approaches to practice. London: Routledge Falmer.  
Meagher, M.E., & Castanos, F. (1996). Perceptions of American culture: The impact of an electronically-
mediated culturally exchanged program on Mexican high school students. In S. C. Herring (Ed.), 
Computer-mediated communication: Linguistic, social and cross-cultural perspectives (pp. 173-185). 
Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins. 
Murray, D. (1991). The composing process for computer conversation. Written Communication, 8(1), 
p.35-55. 
Murray, D. (2000). Protean communication: the language of Computer-Mediated Communication. 
TESOL Quarterly, 34(3), 397-421. 
Nardi, B. (1996). Context and consciousness: Activity theory and human-computer interaction. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  
O’Dowd, R. (2003). Understanding the "other side": Intercultural learning in a Spanish-English e-mail 
exchange. Language Learning & Technology, 7(2), 118-144. 
O’Dowd, R. (2005). Negotiating Socio-cultural and Institutional Contexts: The Case of Spanish-
American Telecollaboration. Language and Intercultural Communication, 5(1), 40-56. 
Pavlenko, A., & Norton, B. (2005). Imagined communities, identity, and English language teaching. In J. 
Cummins and C. Davison (Eds.), Kluwer Handbook of English Language Teaching. Dordrecht: Kluwer 
Academic Publishers. 
Potts, D. (2001). Inside Online. Unpublished Master Thesis, University of British Columbia. 
Olga K. Basharina Contradictions in International Telecollaboration 
 
Language Learning & Technology 103 
Schneider, J., & von der Emde, S. (2006). Conflicts in cyberspace: From communication breakdown to 
intercultural dialogue in online collaborations. In J. A. Belz, & S. L. Thorne (Eds.), Internet-mediated 
intercultural foreign language education. Boston, MA: Heinle & Heinle.  
Thorne, S. (2003). Artifacts and cultures-of-use in intercultural communication. Language Learning & 
Technology, 7(2), 38-67. 
Thorne, S. L. (2006). Pedagogical and praxiological lessons from internet-mediated intercultural foreign 
language education research. In J. A. Belz, & S. L. Thorne (Eds.), Internet-mediated intercultural foreign 
language education. Boston, MA: Heinle & Heinle.  
Thorpe, M. (2002). From independent learning to collaborative learning: New communities of practice in 
open, distance and distributed learning. In M. Lea & K. Nicoll (Eds.). Distributed learning: Social and 
cultural approaches to practice. London: Routledge Falmer. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1934). Revised and edited by Alex Kozulin (1986). Thought and Language. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge: 
Harvard University Press.  
Ware, P. D. (2005). "Missed" Communication in online communication: Tensions in a German-American 
telecollaboration. Language Learning & Technology, 9(2), 64-89.  
Warschauer, M. (1999). Electronic literacies: Language, culture, and power in on-line education. 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Warschauer, M., & Kern, R. (2000). Network-based language teaching: Concepts and practice. New 
York: Cambridge University Press. 
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice. Learning, meaning, and identity. New York, NY: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Wertsch, J.V., Minick, N., & Arns, F.J. (1984). The creation of context in joint problem solving. In B. 
Rogoff & J. Lave (Eds.), Everyday cognition: Its development in social context. New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
Yates, J. & Orlikowski, W. J. (1993). Knee-jerk anti-LOOPism and other email phenomena: Oral, 
written, and electronic patterns in computer-mediated communication. MIT Sloan School Working Paper 
No 3578-93. 
 
