Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num1/grgurovic/ 
February 2007, Volume 11, Number 1 
pp. 45-66 
 
Copyright © 2007, ISSN 1094-3501 45 
HELP OPTIONS AND MULTIMEDIA LISTENING: STUDENTS’ USE OF 
SUBTITLES AND THE TRANSCRIPT 
Maja Grgurović and Volker Hegelheimer 
Iowa State University 
ABSTRACT 
As multimedia language learning materials become prevalent in foreign and second 
language classrooms, their design is an important avenue of research in Computer-
Assisted Language Learning (CALL). Some argue that the design of the pedagogical 
materials should be informed by theory such as the interactionist SLA theory, which 
suggests that input modification can help comprehension, but does not provide specific 
guidance regarding choices designers should make when they attempt to implement 
theory-based features like modified input. This empirical study was designed to provide 
evidence about one such issue: whether subtitles or transcripts are more effective in 
providing modified input to learners. 
A multimedia listening activity containing a video of an academic lecture was designed to 
offer help in the form of target language subtitles (captions) and lecture transcripts in cases 
of comprehension breakdowns. Eighteen intermediate ESL students enrolled in an 
academic listening class at a research university participated in the study. Two tests and 
questionnaires in addition to screen recordings were used to analyze students' performance 
on the activity and their use of help. 
The results indicate that participants interacted with the subtitles more frequently and for 
longer periods of time than with the transcript. Also, the study identified four patterns of 
learner interaction with the help options. Since, overall, the participants interacted with 
help less than half of the time they opened help pages, an important challenge in 
investigating help options lies in finding ways to promote the use of help. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
As multimedia language learning materials are becoming increasingly common in foreign and second 
language classrooms, the design of those materials is becoming an important avenue of research in 
Computer-Assisted Language Learning (CALL). Chapelle (2003) argues that the real challenge in applied 
linguistics at present is the search for "evidence for the most effective ways to design software for CALL, 
to use software effectively in tasks, and to help learners to take advantage of the electronic resources 
available to them" (p. xiii). Addressing the challenge, this paper offers suggestions on the design and 
implementation of software help options (L2 subtitles and L2 transcript) in a multimedia listening 
activity. Also, it investigates the learner’s use of multimedia listening software with a particular focus on 
learner interaction with subtitles and transcripts in cases of comprehension breakdowns. Finally, the paper 
examines if and how learners take advantage of help options available to them. 
REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE 
Theoretical Framework  
The interactionist SLA theory considers interaction to be a crucial factor for language acquisition since it 
can promote negotiation of meaning (Long, 1996; Pica, 1994). Although originally based on the study of 
the negotiation of meaning between human interlocutors, the notion of interaction in CALL was extended 
Maja Grgurović and Volker Hegelheimer Help Options and Multimedia Listening 
 
Language Learning & Technology 46 
to include person-computer interaction during a task completion by a single user (Chapelle, 2003). A key 
component of this theory—that only the input that is noticed, or apperceived, can become beneficial—
provides guidance for the design of instructional materials, which should contain features that enhance 
input through modifications (Chapelle, 2003, p. 40) such as added redundancy and change of the input 
mode. Following Chapelle’s (1998) suggestions relevant for the development of multimedia CALL, the 
online unit used in this study was constructed to investigate the effectiveness of two types of input 
modifications, subtitles and transcripts, within a listening comprehension unit centered around a video of 
an academic lecture. In particular, these two textual help options were selected because they can add 
redundancy to the aural input by changing the input mode from its aural form in the video into the textual 
form of subtitles and a transcript, hence addressing different learning styles. 
Multimedia Listening and Help Options Studies 
Quite a bit has been written about the different characteristics of multimedia that can enhance reading 
(Chun & Plass, 1997), vocabulary acquisition (Plass, Chun, Mayer & Leutner, 1998), and even speaking 
(Borras & Lafayette, 1994). However, a smaller number of studies (Brett, 1996, 1997) investigated the 
use of multimedia software for listening comprehension. When investigating learners’ attitudes towards 
multimedia, Brett (1996) found that 86.9% of students believed that a multimedia application they were 
introduced to would improve their listening skills. Also, in questionnaires, participants preferred 
multimedia for listening over media such as video and audio (Brett, 1997). Finally, learners had better 
listening comprehension scores on a multimedia task than on a paper and pencil task in which the input 
was delivered via video and audio tapes (Brett, 1997). More research into the use of multimedia listening 
materials is necessary as is research into help options, which Pujolà (2002) defined as "resources of the 
program which assist the learner in performing a task" (p. 241). Since several studies investigating help 
options (Hegelheimer & Tower, 2004; Hsu, 1994; Liou, 1997, 2000; Pujolà, 2002) proved instrumental 
for the current research study, their main findings are briefly reviewed here. Appendix provides the 
summary of results of these help option studies. 
Hsu’s study (1994) was one of the first studies examining ESL students’ use of help options (audio 
repetition, textual repetition, and the dictionary) while listening to a story delivered on the computer. 
Textual repetition was in the form of a transcript, which was displayed on the screen when students 
requested help after being unable to comprehend the spoken input. Frequencies of help function use 
showed that the transcript was the most often used tool followed by aural repetition and the dictionary. 
The participants also mentioned in questionnaires that the transcript was the most effective tool. Finally, 
Hsu (1994) found that the amount of requests for textual help positively correlated with participants’ 
listening comprehension scores. 
Liou (1997) also studied the frequency and effectiveness of help use. She examined how 20 college 
students at a Taiwanese university interacted with eight online help functions in a self-paced multimedia 
video disc. The textual help options included English and Chinese scripts in addition to the video control 
functions (pause and rewind) and five other options (see Appendix for details). Liou (1997) divided the 
participants into an "effective" and an "ineffective" group based on three factors: listening proficiency, 
direct student observation, and instructors’ records. Frequency of help access showed that the ineffective 
group requested twice as much help as the effective group and used the replay of aural input more than 
the English and Chinese scripts. The effective group, on the other hand, used the English script most, 
followed by the replay function and the Chinese script. As can be seen from Hsu’s and Liou’s results, the 
transcript was among the most frequently used forms of help. In another article about the same study, 
Liou (2000) reported that 80% of participants found the English script useful. However, contrary to Hsu 
(1994), Liou (1997) found that frequency of help use did not correlate with listening scores. 
In addition to the transcript, Pujolà (2002) examined the use of subtitles (which were in his study a part of 
one help option) as well as six other help facilities (Appendix). Based on participants’ decoding level, the 
Maja Grgurović and Volker Hegelheimer Help Options and Multimedia Listening 
 
Language Learning & Technology 47 
ability to decode input, Pujolà divided 22 beginner EFL students into four groups (higher, average, lower, 
and poorer decoders) and observed their use of textual help. He found that participants in each group 
behaved in "varied, idiosyncratic ways" (p. 253), so it was difficult to draw conclusions that would apply 
to all participants in one group especially since some participants in lower groups never used textual help. 
Generally, the higher decoders used the replay and rewind functions more than the transcript and/or 
subtitles. The use of textual help increased as the decoding level decreased, so some poorer decoders 
relied on it to such an extent that at times "they were doing a reading task instead of listening" (p. 253). 
Pujolà believed that this was due to the participants’ perception of the purpose behind textual help. While 
the higher groups used textual help as a backup for listening, lower groups tended to use it as a necessary 
part of the listening process. In terms of overall help use, there was no correlation between the use of any 
help facility (including textual help) and participants’ linguistic level. 
Another study that looked at the use of textual help in multimedia software was Hegelheimer and Tower 
(2004). The participants were 94 beginner EFL students at a university in the Middle East who used a 
CALL software program for self-study over a period of eight weeks. The use of the software was a 
required part of the course and students worked with it at their own pace. Options of the program included 
the Repeat button, which repeated the previous sentence aurally, and the ABC button, which repeated the 
previous sentence aurally together with its transcript. The teachers introduced the Repeat button to the 
participants, but not the ABC button, which may be a reason why, overall, the Repeat button was used 
more than the ABC button. The results showed that the simultaneous display of audiovisual and textual 
input (ABC button) was negatively correlated with comprehension scores. The ABC button was the most 
frequently used help option for the 30 lowest-performing participants. The thirty highest-performing 
participants used the Repeat button most frequently. As in Pujolà’s (2002) study, the participants showed 
great variation when using help options. For example, half of the participants did not use the ABC button 
at all. More research is necessary to explain why that was the case. Liou (1997) hinted at this issue when 
wondering if it was the students who did not use the environment to their advantage or CALL designers 
who offer more help than necessary.  
In sum, previous literature shows that help options to aid listening comprehension have not been 
thoroughly investigated, and that there are mixed results on the relationship between the use of help and 
comprehension scores (positive relationship in Hsu, 1994; no relationship in Liou, 1997; negative 
relationship in Hegelheimer & Tower, 2004). The current study attempts to address this gap by examining 
the use of target language subtitles and the transcript. 
Subtitles and Navigational Patterns 
Among the studies about help options reviewed in the previous section, only Pujolà’s (2002) examined 
subtitles as a help option in multimedia listening materials. However, the research on the influence of 
subtitled/captioned TV programs on listening comprehension has been going on for a number of years as 
the work of Vanderplank (1988, 1990) and Garza (1991) shows. Borras and Lafayette (1994) investigated 
advanced learners’ use of digital video with and without subtitles and concluded that learners who have 
control over subtitles exhibit better comprehension and better production of the language. Guillory (1999) 
also used digital video clips to check the comprehension of beginner French learners, dividing learners 
into three groups: no captions, full captions, and keyword caption. Guillory (1999) concluded that the full 
caption group performed better than the keyword caption group although both caption conditions proved 
beneficial for students’ comprehension. Taking into account these findings, the present study 
implemented full, intralingual subtitles1 that students had complete control over to look at students’ 
interaction with them and describe navigational patterns necessary for better understanding the design and 
use of help in multimedia listening software. 
Of the studies in the previous section, Hsu’s (1994) was the only one to investigate navigational patterns. 
Hsu found that the higher and lower proficiency groups did not follow the same pattern when requesting 
Maja Grgurović and Volker Hegelheimer Help Options and Multimedia Listening 
 
Language Learning & Technology 48 
help. The lower group followed the audio repetition-transcript-dictionary pattern while the higher group 
followed the transcript-dictionary pattern. Hsu, however, did not attempt to explain the reasons behind 
this type of participant behavior. In another study, Desmarais, Duquette, Renie, and Laurier (1998) 
described and accounted for linear and chaotic patterns of interaction with a multimedia videodisc. In a 
linear schema, participants completed the activities and moved through them in a linear order. In a chaotic 
schema, participants switched from one activity to another and abandoned them, possibly because of the 
task type and task difficulty, as well as a lack of participant learning goals. In another article about the 
same study, Desmarais, Laurier, and Renie (1998) concluded that proficiency levels influenced 
navigational patterns since the intermediate learners established a more linear pattern while the beginners 
engaged in activities that were sometimes too difficult. This difficulty prompted learners to interrupt the 
activities, which resulted in a more chaotic pattern. This result corroborates Hsu’s (1994) findings and 
calls for more investigation of similar multimedia environments, an aim of this paper. 
Research Questions 
Although the literature on multimedia listening has looked at help options, none of the studies, to our 
knowledge, has compared the use of subtitles and transcripts, which is important to understand, both for 
teachers who use multimedia materials with their classes and for software designers who create them. In 
this study, which was conducted in an intact class, these two textual help options are compared for 
frequency and time of use. In addition, the reasons for a learner’s choice of a help option are explored 
through questionnaires and interviews. Furthermore, to better understand patterns of help option use or 
the ways in which learners access help, this study looks at participants’ navigational patterns. Finally, this 
study examines the effect of proficiency level on the use of help and the performance of the participants. 
There are four research questions in the study: 
1. How frequently and for how long do participants use two help options (subtitles and the transcript) 
offered in a multimedia activity?  
2. Are there patterns of participants’ behavior that suggest differences in how they approach help, and if 
so, how could those patterns be explained?  
3. Are there differences in the use of help options between participants at different proficiency levels? 
4. What are participants’ attitudes towards two help options before and after the activity? 
METHOD 
Participants 
Participants in this study were 18 ESL college students enrolled in one section of the Academic English 
Listening class at a large state university in the U.S. Midwest in the spring semester of 2004. The students 
were placed in the class based upon their scores on the listening section of an in-house ESL placement 
test. The participants were from 7 different countries: China (8), Korea (4), Japan (2), India (1), Malaysia 
(1), Peru (1), and Vietnam (1) with their self-reported TOEFL scores ranging from 500 to 615 on the 
paper-based version of the TOEFL test, with a mean score of 559 (SD 30). For the purpose of the study, 
the participants were divided into two groups: higher intermediate (10 students) and lower intermediate (8 
students) based on a) the instructor’s opinion of their listening ability, b) their present grade in the course, 
c) a self-evaluation of listening proficiency, d) scores on an initial academic listening test and e) self 
reported TOEFL scores.  
Materials 
The materials were integrated into the course syllabus and consisted of two tests (initial listening 
comprehension and delayed recall), two questionnaires (pre and post-listening), an unstructured 
retrospective interview, and the CALL multimedia listening activity, which was specifically designed for 
this research. To circumvent the issues frequently associated with the use of isolated tasks in CALL 
Maja Grgurović and Volker Hegelheimer Help Options and Multimedia Listening 
 
Language Learning & Technology 49 
research, such as the lack of motivation and engagement, the activity was made an integral part of the 
class and the topic was chosen based on the authors’ previous experience teaching the same course. All 
the materials were tested and improved during two pilot studies (Grgurović, 2005). 
The initial listening comprehension test consisted of an academic lecture of a similar format and length as 
the one used in the CALL activity as well as ten multiple choice questions. The pre- and post-listening 
questionnaires were given to participants before and after the main CALL activity. The pre-listening 
questionnaire examined participants’ familiarity and previous use of two help options (subtitles and the 
transcript), as well as surveyed which of the two help options the participants would use in a hypothetical 
multimedia listening activity. The post-listening questionnaire looked at the participants’ use of the 
transcript and subtitles and examined the rationale behind the use. At the end of the study, a retrospective 
interview was also conducted to gather more details about participants’ behavior during the CALL 
activity. 
The main material in this study was an online CALL activity entitled the ‘Astronomy’ unit. Although 
designed as an online unit that could be delivered via the Internet, the unit was accessed locally to avoid 
bandwidth problems. The Astronomy unit consisted of an eleven-minute video of a lecture on astronomy 
given by a professor in front of a group of students. Following suggestions regarding the ideal length of 
listening segments (i.e., 30 -120 seconds) for intermediate ESL learners (e.g., Rubin, Quinn & Enos, 
1988; Thompson & Rubin, 1993), the video was divided into ten segments of approximately 30 to 90 
seconds. This segmentation also enabled participants to check and monitor their comprehension of the 
lecture as they proceeded through the unit. The video segments could be played only once to make the 
delivery of input similar to delivery in a lecture hall where students usually don’t hear the same lecture 
twice. Additionally, this kept the initial exposure to the lecture the same for all participants. This way, the 
viewing of the lecture for the first time was made as authentic as possible. Furthermore, each video 
segment was accompanied by a multiple choice comprehension question. In all, the activity consisted of 
ten questions and four cumulative multiple-choice, post-listening questions that appeared after the last 
video segment.  
Apart from the video, the other core components of the unit were two help options—the subtitles and the 
transcript. These options were given to students only after they had viewed the video segment and 
answered the comprehension questions incorrectly. This meant that help was offered only in cases of 
comprehension breakdowns when students needed help in order to move on. Each of the help options 
included the video segment and, for the second viewing, the participants could choose either to a) open 
the page with the subtitled video (Figure 1) or b) open the page with the lecture transcript and the video 
(Figure 2). 
Maja Grgurović and Volker Hegelheimer Help Options and Multimedia Listening 
 
Language Learning & Technology 50 
 
Figure 1. Screen shot of a page containing the video, subtitles, and dictionary 
 
Figure 2. Screen shot of a page containing the video, transcript, and dictionary 
Maja Grgurović and Volker Hegelheimer Help Options and Multimedia Listening 
 
Language Learning & Technology 51 
The participants progressed through the Astronomy unit as outlined in Figure 3. First, they went through a 
tutorial that explained how to go through the activity and offered a sample video segment they could 
interact with. This was done to give learners basic training in the application (Hubbard, 2004) and to 
minimize the exploratory behavior sometimes found in the initial steps of using the program (Desmarais, 
Duquette, Renie & Laurier, 1998). Then, the participants viewed video segment 1 for the first time and 
proceeded to comprehension question 1. If the answer was correct, they moved on to segment 2. 
However, if the answer was incorrect, they were offered to view segment 1 again either with the subtitles 
or the lecture transcript. The subtitles which appeared at the bottom of each video segment were 
synchronized with the video and the participants used the play and pause buttons to control the video and 
the subtitles. They could also rewind and fast-forward the video using the video controller. The transcript 
for each segment appeared next to the video, which was controlled in the same manner. When on the 
transcript page, the learners could choose whether to play the video or not, but the transcript was 
displayed even if the video was not played. 
Video segment 1
Comprehension
question 1
Correct Incorrect
Video segment 2
Video + subtitles + (dictionary)
Video + transcript + (dictionary)
Tutorial
 
Figure 3. Progression through the Astronomy unit (Tutorial through Video segment 2) 
The participants could interact with the help option for as long as they wanted to. Then, when they were 
ready, a slightly modified version of comprehension question 1 was presented, i.e., the answer choices 
were presented in a different order. If the correct answer was chosen, they went on to segment 2; if not, 
they were given the same help options until they got the correct answer. The activity ended once they had 
correctly answered all ten questions and received the score for the four post-listening questions. 
As a part of each help option, the participants had access to an online English-English dictionary, which 
they could keep open or hidden. Originally, this research also aimed at investigating the use of the 
dictionary, which has been previously researched as a help option (Hegelheimer & Tower, 2004; Hsu, 
1994; Liou, 1997; Pujolà, 2002). However, because the participants in this study did not access it at all, 
the use of the dictionary is not examined here.  
Maja Grgurović and Volker Hegelheimer Help Options and Multimedia Listening 
 
Language Learning & Technology 52 
When designing the Astronomy unit, special care was given to the following issues: primary users, user 
navigation, and control options. The primary users were the intact class of Academic listening students 
who interacted with the unit for only one class period. The navigation and control issues were 
implemented to narrow the realm of investigation and to control for variables. Since previous research has 
shown that students vary in their use of help (Pujolà, 2002; Hegelheimer and Tower, 2004), help use in 
the Astronomy unit was encouraged through linear navigation and an inability to skip help. To ensure this 
navigation, the right mouse click was disabled, the toolbar with the back button removed, and each new 
page opened in the same window. Furthermore, after each multiple-choice question, students received 
immediate feedback, which made them notice the input on help option pages better because of added 
redundancy and mode change. As for control options, the users did not have any control over the first 
viewing of the video but could choose the help option and could control the video as a part of help 
options during a second viewing. 
Procedures 
This study was conducted as a part of the academic listening course syllabus and took place over 3 weeks. 
The class met twice a week for fifty minutes in the classroom or the computer lab depending on the 
activities, while interviews were scheduled outside of class time. Since the computer lab had only ten 
computers equipped with the data collection software, the participants were divided into two groups using 
the alphabetical class list. After all participants had completed the pre-listening questionnaire, the first 
group did the initial listening comprehension test while the second worked on the Astronomy unit. The 
next class period the groups switched places. Before participants started the Astronomy unit, they were 
given verbal instructions on how to use the unit and were directed to explore the tutorial with written 
instructions and a sample video segment. The screen recording program Camtasia Recorder (2004) was 
used to capture participants’ moves through the activity. In addition, the whole group was observed by 
one of the authors. The screen recordings were the core data collection instrument, while the observation 
helped select participants for interviews and helped explain sometimes atypical behavior noted in the 
recordings (for example, when students experienced technical difficulties). Since the participants were 
using headphones to listen to the lecture in order not to disturb one another, the screen recordings did not 
contain audio but only video of participants’ interaction with the Astronomy unit. Once the participants 
completed the Astronomy unit, they proceeded to the post-listening questionnaire and, in the third week 
of study, they completed the recall test. After reviewing the questionnaires, tests, and several screen 
recordings, six participants were invited to retrospective interviews because they switched between two 
help options or did not use help at all. Only three of the participants agreed to meet for an interview, 
during which they were shown parts of their screen recordings and questionnaire answers to elicit details 
about their choice of help options. When all the data were collected, the screen recordings of all 
participants were transcribed.  
Analysis 
To answer the four research questions in this study, the data were analyzed using quantitative and 
qualitative data analysis approaches.  
To address research question 1 about the frequency and time of participants’ interaction with help options, 
the number of times each participant opened each help page and number of seconds spent on the page 
were examined. While all the learners who did not correctly answer a question had to go to the page with 
the help options, the screen recordings revealed that some learners did not use (or interact with) the help 
options. Rather, they simply clicked on the link to the help page and as soon as the page loaded they 
proceeded to the question page where they chose another option, i.e., they were fishing for the correct 
answer using the trial and error method. For learners who engaged in such behavior, no useful interaction 
was possible. Based on the loading times of the video clips embedded in the help pages and the rapid 
progression of participants, the researchers determined that to usefully interact with the help option, 
Maja Grgurović and Volker Hegelheimer Help Options and Multimedia Listening 
 
Language Learning & Technology 53 
approximately seven seconds needed to elapse. The same criterion was applied to the frequency of 
interaction so that only the help openings that involved useful interaction with help (called instances) 
were examined. Once this criterion was set, the following variables were examined: help page openings, 
instances of interaction, and time spent on the help page. Then, descriptive statistics were obtained for 
these variables and paired t-tests were performed to compare the two help options. The list of all the 
variables in the study is given in Table 1. 
Table 1. Variables Examined in the Study 
 Variable name Explanation 
1 Help page openings Total number of times help pages were opened  
2 Instances of interaction Number of times help pages were opened and 
participants usefully interacted with them 
3 Subtitles instances of interaction Number of times subtitle help pages were opened and 
participants usefully interacted with them 
4 Transcript instances of interaction Number of times transcript help pages were opened and 
participants usefully interacted with them 
5 Time on help page Total time on help pages in useful interaction 
6 Time on subtitles page Time on subtitle help pages in useful interaction 
7 Time on transcript page Time on transcript help pages in useful interaction 
8 Incorrect answers Total number of incorrect answers on 10 multiple 
choice questions following video segments  
9 Post-listening questions Total number of correct answers on 4 post-listening 
questions 
10 Recall test questions Total number of correct answers on the recall test (max 
10) 
 
To address research question 2, help page openings, instances of interaction, and time spent on the help 
page were examined to group participants according to common navigational behavior. The data showed 
that there are four distinct patterns of interaction: a) subtitles pattern b) transcript pattern c) non-
interaction pattern and d) mixed pattern. The participants following these patterns used only subtitles or 
only transcripts during the activity, did not use any help options (non-interaction), or used both help 
options (mixed interaction pattern). Based on the patterns, the participants were assigned into four groups 
and means for six variables (incorrect answers, time on help page, help page openings, instances of 
interaction, post-listening questions, and recall test questions) were calculated for each group. After that, 
the means were compared using a single-factor ANOVA to see whether there were significant statistical 
differences among groups, followed by a post hoc analysis (Tukey’s Honestly Significant Difference, 
HSD) to determine exactly which group(s) were different.  
To address research question 3 on the possible differences between groups at two proficiency levels, the 
higher and the lower group were compared across ten variables (see Table 1) using a two-tailed t-test (p ≤ 
0.05).  
To address research question 4, examining participants’ attitudes towards help options before and after 
the Astronomy unit, pre- and post-listening questionnaire answers were compared to see how many 
students changed their preferences. Also, the reasons for the change of preferences were examined by 
using questionnaire and interview responses.  
Maja Grgurović and Volker Hegelheimer Help Options and Multimedia Listening 
 
Language Learning & Technology 54 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Research Question 1: Frequency and Time of Help Option Use 
Frequency 
Overall, the participants exhibited great variation in help openings, a finding already reported in the 
literature (Hegelheimer & Towers, 2004; Pujolà, 2002). The subtitles pages were accessed more 
frequently than the transcript pages. In the course of the activity, the subtitles pages were opened on 
average 6.88 times (SD = 4.95) and the transcript pages 2.17 times (SD = 3.68). Thus, subtitles page 
openings accounted for 76% of all help page openings—three times more than transcript page openings 
(24%). Table 2 shows the descriptive statistics for frequency of help option use. 
Table 2. Help Page Openings and Instances of Useful Interaction by Help Option 
 Help page openings Instances of interaction (Useful interaction)  
 Frequency Mean, (SD) Total in % Frequency Mean, (SD) Total in % 
Subtitles 124 6.88  (4.95) 76 48 2.66 (3.20) 65 
Transcript 39 2.17  (3.68) 24 26 1.44 (2.15) 35 
Total 163 9.06  (5.47) 100 74 4.11 (3.34) 100 
 
When looking at the breakdown of instances of interaction by the two help options in Table 2, the results 
show that 65% of all interactions were those with the subtitles which is almost twice as many as with the 
transcript (35%). It could be that it was easier for the participants to play the video with subtitles than read 
the transcript and play the video at the same time because they could read smaller amounts of text or 
because they were accustomed to subtitles. Indeed, five participants who exclusively used the subtitles 
reported in questionnaires that they always (4) or sometimes (1) watched subtitled movies on DVD.  
The comparison of help page openings and instances of interaction with help options revealed that only 
45% of help page openings resulted in help use (Table 3). The remaining 55% of the openings were 
classified as non-interaction because the participants opened help (since that was the only way to proceed 
with the activity), but they did not use it.  
Table 3. Comparison of Help Page Openings and Instances of Interaction with Help Options 
 Total Total in % 
Help page openings 163 100 
Instances of interaction (Useful interaction) 74 45 
Non-interaction 89 55 
 
The data also revealed an interesting finding about dictionary use. Not a single participant opened the 
dictionary link or interacted with the dictionary, which was available in both help options. Low dictionary 
use was noted in other studies as well (e.g., Hegelheimer & Tower, 2004; Kon, 2002).   
Frequency of help option use is an important issue for research into design and implementation of help 
options in CALL listening materials since help may not be always used even when readily available. This 
may be due to a number of factors such as interface design and time on task. Thus, it is possible to add to 
claims that there may be more help than needed in multimedia materials (Liou, 1997).  
Time 
The results of the amount of time on the help options showed that the participants spent twice as much 
time on the subtitles pages (44 min 43 sec) than on the transcript pages (21 min 17 sec), which suggests 
that participants made more use of the subtitles judging both by amount of time and frequency of 
Maja Grgurović and Volker Hegelheimer Help Options and Multimedia Listening 
 
Language Learning & Technology 55 
interaction. Also, the participants varied greatly in their help time from no help openings, and thus no 
time spent on help, to more than 10 minutes on help which was almost one third of the amount of time 
spent on task for that participant. To further examine time spent on help, its distribution in one minute 
intervals is given in Figures 4 and 5. 
0
2
4
6
8
10
0 0-1 1-2 2-3 3-4 4-5 5-6 6-7 7-8 8-9
Time interval in minutes
N
u
m
b
e
r 
o
f 
p
a
rt
ic
ip
a
n
ts
 
Figure 4. Time spent on the subtitles in one minute intervals (N=18) 
0
2
4
6
8
10
0 0-1 1-2 2-3 3-4 4-5 5-6 6-7 7-8 8-9
Time interval in minutes
N
u
m
b
e
r 
o
f 
p
a
rt
ic
ip
a
n
ts
 
Figure 5. Time spent on the transcript in one minute intervals (N=18) 
Figure 4 reveals that five participants did not use subtitles at all, two used it less than one minute, and the 
remaining eleven used it between 1 and 9 minutes overall. Figure 5 shows that ten students did not 
interact with the transcript, one used it less than a minute, and seven used it between 1 and 8 minutes. 
More explanation of the behavior of participants who did not use subtitles/transcript at all can be found in 
the results to research question 2. 
As can be seen from both Figure 4 and Figure 5, the highest number of participants spent less than one 
minute both on the subtitles pages (n=7) and the transcript pages (n=11). Four participants spent between 
1 and 2 minutes on the transcript (Fig. 5) and three participants spent between 1 and 2 minutes on the 
subtitles (Fig. 4), suggesting that this time interval is to be the most frequent for all participants, i.e., most 
participants got the information they needed in that time interval. 
Both figures show that the number of participants accessing help decreased as the amount of time spent 
on help increased. In the case of subtitles, this decrease is steady and could be explained by the fact that 
Maja Grgurović and Volker Hegelheimer Help Options and Multimedia Listening 
 
Language Learning & Technology 56 
participants usually tended to watch the whole video segment without fast-forwarding it. Also, the 
average video segment in the activity was 1 minute and 5 seconds long. In case of the transcript, the 
decline in frequency is not so gradual, probably because not a lot of participants used the video when 
reading the transcript (only three students for a total of 4 times). Moreover, as some participants reported, 
it was quicker to read the transcript than view the video in real time. When shown his recording, 
participant 10 commented: "When I use the transcript it make[s] me speed up." Similarly, when talking 
about the transcript, participant 17 remarked: "I can get information very quickly." In sum, the differences 
in use of the two help options may be related to the nature of reading (quicker) and viewing (slower) in 
this type of activity. 
To compare the use of the two help options on three variables (help page openings, instances of 
interaction, and time on help pages), a paired two-tailed t-test (df =17, t =1.6083) was run. The results 
(Table 4) show that the difference between the subtitles and transcript page openings may not be due to a 
chance (p < 0.0089), while no statistical significance was found for instances of interaction and time spent 
on help pages. When interpreting the results, it is important to note that the set up of the study and the use 
of an intact class of 18 participants does not allow for easy generalization of results to other contexts. 
Follow-up studies with a greater n-size would be necessary for that.  
Table 4. Results of t-tests for the Use of Subtitles and Transcript 
 Subtitles  
N=18 
Transcript 
N=18 
p 
 Mean SD Mean SD  
Help page openings 6.88 4.95 2.17 3.68 0.00894* 
Instances of interaction 2.66 3.20 1.44 2.15 0.24493 
Time on help pages 02:29  01:11  0.14990 
Note: Time is displayed in minutes and seconds. 
* p ≤ 0.05 
Research Question 2: Patterns of Interaction with Help Options 
Based on the analysis of the number of help page openings, instances of interaction, and time spent on 
help pages, four patterns of navigational behavior emerged: a) subtitles pattern, b) transcript pattern, c) 
non-interaction pattern, and d) mixed pattern.  
The participants in the subtitles group (n=7) used only the subtitles as help during the activity and did not 
use the transcript at all. The transcript group participants (n=3) used only the transcript and did not access 
the subtitles. Also for both groups, the number of incorrectly answered questions is similar to the number 
of subtitle instances of interaction (subtitles group) or transcript instances of interaction (transcript group). 
This means that the students used help when they selected an incorrect answer unlike the students in the 
non-interaction group who did not use help at all although the activity was designed to encourage help 
use. Retrospective interviews and questionnaires identified several possible reasons for using only one 
help option: level of ease in using the help option, personal preferences, and previous experience with the 
help option. Participants’ comments are presented in Table 5.  
The non-interaction group participants (n=4) exhibited very specific behavior in the activity since they 
had 10 or more openings of help pages per participant but mostly only one instance of interaction. This 
suggests that the participants did not use help even though they opened help pages. Moreover, it is 
interesting to note that all of the participants in this group belonged to the lower proficiency group. This 
finding supports the claim by Desmarais, Laurier, and Renie (1998) that navigational patterns may be 
connected with participants’ proficiency levels. 
 
Maja Grgurović and Volker Hegelheimer Help Options and Multimedia Listening 
 
Language Learning & Technology 57 
Table 5. Participants’ Reasons for Using Only One Help Option 
Category Participant’s comment Participant 
"Because it’s the easiest way to follow all the words the 
speaker says" 
9 Level of ease 
"I chose subtitles since it was easy for me to find what 
information I missed to answer a question..." 
11 
"I don’t like transcript because I lost my concentration for 
listening from reading too much" 
12 Personal preference 
"In spite of learning English from the middle school, it's hard 
to speak and listen English for most [Korean] students. But 
most students can read and write. Anyway what I want to tell 
you is that this is the problem for English education in my 
country. So for me to read sentence is to easy for 
understanding some story" 
6 
"I watch TV with subtitles" 20 Previous experience with 
help "I’m accustomed to reading subtitles while listening" 11 
 
The mixed interaction group (n=4) consisted of participants who used both the subtitles and the transcript 
at least once in the activity. These participants switched between two help options either within the same 
question or in the course of the activity. When compared to other groups, the mixed interaction group had 
the highest number of instances of interaction in addition to the longest total time spent on help on 
average per participant, which points to the interpretation that this group made extensive use of help. It 
appears that experimenting with help is one of the reasons for switching between two help options. For 
example, participant 18 remarked that she wanted to have a choice to see which help option worked better 
for her. Similarly, participant 10 commented, "I just want to compare them [the subtitles and the 
transcript]."  
In order to get a more detailed analysis of the four different groups, a single-factor ANOVA with the p 
value set at the .05 level was used to compare mean scores of groups across six variables. Statistical 
significance between groups (Table 6) was found for three variables: incorrect answers, help page 
openings, and instances of interaction. Also, for time on help page variable, the p value is approaching 
statistical significance. However, since the division into groups was made after the experiment was 
conducted and since the groups were small, the results can only serve as indicators of statistically 
significant relationships that warrant further research. 
Table 6. ANOVA Results for Group Differences on Interaction with Help 
 Subtitles 
group 
N=7 
Transcript 
group 
N=3 
Non-
interaction 
group N=4 
Mixed 
interaction 
group N=4 
p 
 Mean Mean Mean Mean  
Incorrect answers 4.14 4 7 5.5 0.0318* 
Time on help page 03:52 03:53 00:54 05:55 0.0540 
Help page openings 5.71 6.33 13 13 0.0379* 
Instances of interaction 4 4.33 0.75 7.5 0.0234* 
Post-listening 
questions 
2.43 2.33 1.75 2 0.0740 
Recall test questions 6.14 3.67 0 3.75 0.1630 
Note: Time is displayed in minutes and seconds.  
*p ≤ 0.05 
Maja Grgurović and Volker Hegelheimer Help Options and Multimedia Listening 
 
Language Learning & Technology 58 
As shown in Table 6, the subtitles and the transcript groups have very similar performance on average in 
terms of incorrect answers, time spent on help, instances of useful interaction with help, and scores on the 
post-listening questions. The subtitles group seems to have, by far, the best recall test score. The weakest 
group overall is the non-interaction group whose participants have the highest number of incorrect 
answers, shortest time on help pages in useful interaction, smallest instances of useful interaction, and 
weakest score on the delayed recall test. As an example, not a single student in the non-interaction group 
could recall any ideas from the lecture.  
In order to determine which specific group(s) may differ from others on the variables under investigation, 
a post hoc comparisons procedure—Tukey’s Honestly Significant Difference (Tukey HSD) was used. 
Tables 7 and 8 show the pairs of groups whose differences between means were statistically significant at 
the .05 level when two-tailed t-tests for all pairs of groups were run. It is interesting to note that although 
four groups differed significantly on the help page opening variable (p=0.0379*) when the ANOVA was 
performed, Tukey’s comparison method did not detect any significance probably because the p value was 
adjusted. Similarly, although the p value for the time on help page variable was not significant (p=0.540), 
Tukey’s HSD method revealed statistical significance between the non-interaction and the mixed 
interaction groups (Table 8). 
Table 7. T-test Results for the Differences Between the Non-interaction and the Subtitles Groups 
 Non-
interaction 
group  
 Subtitles group   p 
 Mean SD Mean SD  
Incorrect 
answers 
7 1.6 4.14 0.9 0.03336* 
* p ≤ 0.05 
 
Table 8. T-test Results for the Differences Between the Non-interaction and the Mixed Interaction Groups 
 Non-
interaction 
group  
 Mixed interaction 
group  
 p 
 Mean SD Mean SD  
Time on help 
page 
00:54 00:59 05:15 3:22 0.0355* 
Instances of 
interaction 
0.75 0.5 7.5 5.1 0.0136* 
Note: Time is displayed in minutes and seconds.  
* p ≤ 0.05 
Tables 7 and 8 show that the non-interaction group significantly differed from the mixed interaction and 
subtitles groups on three variables. In addition to the weakest performance, this result makes the non-
interaction group the most different from the other groups and thus of interest for CALL software 
designers and applied linguists who should try to create materials that would encourage useful interaction 
for this type of learner who chose not to use input modifications and thus did not benefit from the 
enhanced input.  
Research Question 3: Performance of Participants at Different Proficiency Levels 
The data about the performance of two proficiency groups showed that groups varied in their use of help 
options. The average performance of higher (n=10) and lower (n=8) groups is given in Table 9. When 
Maja Grgurović and Volker Hegelheimer Help Options and Multimedia Listening 
 
Language Learning & Technology 59 
examining total time spent on the help page, it can be seen that the higher group spent almost twice as 
much time on average interacting with help options. This finding is in contrast with Liou’s (1997), whose 
results showed that the ineffective group requested twice as much help as the effective group. In this 
study, a possible explanation for the overall low time on help for the lower group could be due to the fact 
that two of the participants did not use help at all and that four of the eight participants in this group 
belonged to the non-interaction group as well.  
When looking at time and frequency of useful interaction with each help option, data show that the higher 
group made more use of the subtitles, though the average difference between the means of two groups 
was not statistically significant. Interestingly, time and frequency of interaction with the transcript did not 
vary much between groups. The lower group, on average, opened help pages more times than the higher 
group, but the higher group had more useful instances of interaction—another proof that the higher group 
used help options more effectively. This result is similar to the finding of Hegelheimer and Tower (2004), 
who suggest that lower proficiency students may not only lack the competence to take advantage of help 
options, but also may not know which help options may be more beneficial to them.  
Table 9. Performance of the Higher and Lower Proficiency Groups on the Activity 
 
Table 9. Performance of the Higher and Lower Proficiency Groups on the Activity (cont.) 
Note: Time is displayed in minutes and seconds 
H-higher group 
L-lower group 
A two-tailed t-test revealed statistical significance between the higher and lower groups on three variables 
(incorrect answers, post-listening questions, and recall test questions). As could be expected, the means in 
Table 10 show that the higher group had better comprehension and recall. Obviously, the weaker students 
did not comprehend the content of the lecture well and did not answer many comprehension questions 
correctly. Immediately after the lecture, their comprehension is even lower, while a week after the 
activity, on the recall test, many of them could not remember any ideas from the activity. The reason for 
this may be that the lecture was too difficult for the students or that the help options were not employed 
 
 
Incorrect 
answers 
Time on 
subtitles 
pages 
Time on 
transcript  
pages 
Total time 
on  
help pages 
Help page 
openings 
Subtitles 
help page 
openings 
Transcript 
help page 
openings 
 H L H L H L H L H L H L H L 
Total 42 49 32:20 12:23 12:27 08:50 44:47 21:13 70 93 55 69 15 24 
Mean 4.20 6.12 03:14 01:33 01:15 01:06 04:29 02:39 7.00 11.63 5.50 8.63 1.50 3.00 
SD 1.48 1.64 2:50 01:53 1:33 2:30 2:41 2:31 4.57 5.68 4.67 5.01 2.07 5.10 
 
 
Instances of 
interaction 
Subtitle 
instances 
Transcript 
instances 
Post- 
listening 
questions 
Recall 
test questions 
 H L H L H L H L H L 
Total 51 23 37 11 14 12 26 13 62 7 
Mean 5.10 2.88 3.70 1.37 1.40 1.5 2.60 1.62 6.20 1.17 
SD 3.73 2.47 3.80 1.69 1.84 2.62 0.84 0.92 2.82 2.04 
Maja Grgurović and Volker Hegelheimer Help Options and Multimedia Listening 
 
Language Learning & Technology 60 
effectively to compensate for comprehension breakdowns, which consequently resulted in low learning 
outcomes. Finally, as already noted, some of the weaker students did not interact with the material at all, 
since half of the group exhibited the non-interaction pattern of help use. This result supports Pujolà 
(2002), who also found that some of the lower group participants never used help. As in all CALL 
research, the result can be interpreted in the light of motivation and student attitudes but the effects of 
those variables were minimized by the way the task was set up and integrated into the course.  
Table 10. Comprehension and Recall Data for the Higher and Lower Proficiency Groups 
 Higher proficiency group    
N=10 
Lower proficiency group      
N=8 
p 
 Mean SD Mean SD  
Incorrect 
answers 
4.2 1.48 6.12 1.64 0.018682* 
Post listening 
questions 
2.6 0.84 1.62 0.92 0.032143* 
Recall test 
questions 
6.2 2.82 1.17 2.04 0.001977* 
* p ≤  0.05 
Research Question 4: Attitudes towards Help Options 
To look at attitudes towards help options, participants’ answers from pre- and post-listening 
questionnaires were compared. The subtitles were preferred over the transcript—thirteen students chose 
the subtitles and five chose the transcript both before and after the activity. Although the ratio between the 
preference for subtitles and the transcript did not change (13:5), only one student kept to the transcript and 
nine students to the subtitles (Table 11). This means that 8 students changed their preferences after they 
encountered help; 4 changed from transcript to subtitles and 4 from subtitles to transcript. 
Table 11. Participants’ preferences of help options as reported in questionnaires 
                  Preferred help option  
Before the activity After the activity 
Number of 
students 
Transcript    Transcript 1 
Transcript Subtitles 4 
Subtitles Subtitles 9 
Subtitles Transcript 4 
 
A possible explanation for this shift in preferences could be that the participants realized which help 
option worked better for them. A comment from participant 5 supports this: "I think I switch my answer 
because I realized that it was easy for me to follow the lecture and understanding the speaking using 
subtitles (like a close caption on TV)." Also, it can be speculated that the participants chose the type of 
help they were most exposed to in everyday life. This was supported by answers to the question about 
familiarity with transcripts and subtitles—out of 18 participants, 10 were familiar with subtitles, 1 with 
both subtitles and transcripts, and 7 with none. 
CONCLUSION AND LIMITATIONS 
The results of this study about the use of subtitles and transcripts as help options in cases of listening 
comprehension breakdowns showed that the participants used the subtitles more frequently and for longer 
periods of time than the transcript. The subtitles were also the preferred help option before and after the 
activity, and it appears that the participants picked the help option they were predisposed to in daily life. 
Maja Grgurović and Volker Hegelheimer Help Options and Multimedia Listening 
 
Language Learning & Technology 61 
The higher proficiency group also used subtitles more frequently and for longer amounts of time than the 
lower proficiency group although both groups exhibited very similar behavior on the transcript. 
Overall, the results show that the participants spent less time interacting with help options than was 
anticipated when the study was set up, since the help pages were used only 45% of the time they were 
opened. The failure of participants to make use of help options could be because of the task 
characteristics, such as the degree of control and time pressure. It appears that some of the participants did 
not like the fact that they could not skip help after answering a comprehension question incorrectly. 
Moreover, time on task was limited to one class period of fifty minutes, which may have forced some of 
the participants to finish quicker and did not allow them to use help to the extent they wanted, a factor 
that could be controlled in future studies. Additionally, it could be speculated that external factors such as 
motivation and attitudes towards the task could have influenced students’ behavior as well.  
In the course of the activity, the participants exhibited great variation in the time spent on help, and a 
large variation was also noted in frequency of help page openings and instances of useful interaction with 
help. These findings support Hegelheimer and Tower (2004), and Pujolà (2002), who also found 
variations in the use of help.  
This research also identified four patterns of participants’ interaction with help options (subtitles, 
transcript, non-interaction, and mixed interaction pattern) and described behavior of participants 
following those patterns. The analysis showed major differences between subtitles and transcript groups 
on one side and the non-interaction group on the other in terms of performance, help page openings, and 
instances of useful interaction with help. While the subtitles and the transcript groups performed similarly 
on comprehension questions during and after the activity as well as on time and frequency of help use, the 
non-interaction group varied the most in behavior and performance from all other groups, probably due to 
task difficulty and lack of motivation. 
The results of this study need to be interpreted with the following limitations in mind. First, the number of 
participants was relatively small and homogeneous in terms of proficiency levels. Second, the time 
constraint of one class period limited the time spent on task, while technical limitations (no audio with 
screen recordings, time-consuming transcriptions) slowed down the data analysis process. However, some 
of these issues are difficult to circumvent when conducting research in an authentic classroom where 
many of the variables cannot be controlled.  
Implications  
The fact that students preferred subtitles and used subtitles more than the transcript calls for making 
subtitles the help option in multimedia listening materials of this kind. However, if CALL designers are 
not limited to only one help option, offering transcripts in addition to subtitles is likely the best solution 
because it provides learners with a choice. Also, rather than superimposing a prescribed route through the 
material as was done here, we would now argue for giving users more control over the choice of help by 
introducing the option to skip help altogether to accommodate different learning styles and preferences. 
Based on the results of this study, it seems that the real issue of investigating help options lies in help use 
vs. no help use. The non-interaction group participants who opened help pages but did not use help 
showed the weakest performance during and after the activity. All of the participants in this group were 
also in the lower proficiency group, which could partly explain their weak performance. From the point of 
view of SLA acquisition theory, low comprehension could have resulted from no/minimal use of input 
modifications available in the form of subtitles and transcripts. All of the other groups that made use of 
input modifications demonstrated better learning gains overall.  
If help use is found beneficial, then the question for CALL designers, teachers using CALL materials, and 
learners interacting with help options is how to encourage the use of help. CALL designers could 
implement software demos and tutorials that would promote the use of help. Teachers could prompt the 
Maja Grgurović and Volker Hegelheimer Help Options and Multimedia Listening 
 
Language Learning & Technology 62 
use of help for both in-class (use of lecture transcripts, subtitled digital video) and out-of-class listening 
(captioned TV program, subtitled movies on DVD). They could also create CALL tasks that would 
require the use of help, as well as observe students using help to encourage an effective use of learning 
strategies. Finally, learners could be trained by teachers to use help options to their advantage (Hubbard, 
2004). 
Suggestions for Future Research 
There are several possible paths to follow regarding future research on help options in multimedia 
listening materials. First, if a replication of the present study is to be done, it could include a different 
setting. The research could compare the use of the software in class, outside of class for homework, and 
for independent study to see whether user interaction with help options would be different. Second, future 
studies could be longitudinal and investigate help option use over a longer period of time for the same 
group of participants. Also, future research could look at a different and larger sample of participants. The 
use of the program by beginner and advanced students could add to the understanding of user behavior as 
influenced by the proficiency level. Other important variables, such as student computer familiarity and 
attitudes towards computers for language learning, could be taken into account when designing future 
studies. Finally, the issues of motivation and student engagement should be assessed as a part of CALL 
research because they affect student performance and consequently implications drawn from the data. 
No matter which of these paths future research takes, the goal should remain to help CALL researchers 
and practitioners, CALL software designers, and CALL users get a better understanding of interaction and 
help use in multimedia listening materials. 
 
Maja Grgurović and Volker Hegelheimer Help Options and Multimedia Listening 
 
Language Learning & Technology 63 
APPENDIX.  Summary of studies dealing with help options in multimedia listening materials 
Author 
year 
Title Participants Materials Help options 
used 
Frequency of 
help option use 
Patterns 
described 
Usefulness 
(self-reported)  
Hsu, 
1994 
Computer 
assisted 
language 
learning 
(CALL): the 
effect of ESL 
students’ use of 
interactional 
modifications 
on listening 
comprehension.  
15 
beginner 
ESL 
students 
divided 
into higher 
and lower 
group 
Interactive 
Active 
English 
CD-ROM 
program  
Three input 
modifications 
displayed from 
the beginning 
aural repetition 
text 
reinforcement 
dictionary 
1. text 
reinforcement  
2. aural 
repetition 
3. dictionary 
Lower group: 
aural 
repetition-text 
reinforcement-
(dictionary) 
 
Higher group: 
text 
reinforcement-
(dictionary) 
Most 
beneficial 
modifications 
are:  
text 
reinforcement  
audio 
repetition 
dictionary  
Liou, 
1997 
 
 
 
 
Liou, 
2000 
Research on 
on-line help as 
learner 
strategies for 
multimedia 
CALL 
evaluation.  
 
Assessing 
learner 
strategies using 
computers: new 
insights and 
limitations.  
 
20 EFL 
college 
students 
divided 
into 
effective 
and 
ineffective 
group  
Self-paced 
interactive 
video unit 
(IVD) 
Eight help 
functions 
displayed on 
request 
Chinese script 
English script 
gist 
background 
information 
idiom search 
(dictionary) 
 word search 
(dictionary) 
 repetition 
(current 
sentence) 
 repetition 
(previous  
sentence) 
video control 
(pause and 
rewind) 
video controller 
rewind  
English script 
Chinese script 
 
Ineffective 
group: 
rewind 
English script 
Chinese script 
 
Effective group:  
1. English script 
2. rewind 
3. Chinese script 
 pause 85%a 
backward 
85% 
English script 
80% 
glossary 80% 
repetition of  
previous 
sentence 80% 
repetition 
70% 
Chinese script 
55% 
Note. Out of 100% 
 
Maja Grgurović and Volker Hegelheimer Help Options and Multimedia Listening 
 
Language Learning & Technology 64 
APPENDIX Continued 
Author year Title Participants Materials Help options 
used 
Frequency of 
help option use 
Patterns 
described 
Usefulness 
(self-
reported)  
Pujola, 2002 CALLing for 
help: 
researching 
language 
learning 
strategies 
using help 
facilities in a 
web-based 
multimedia 
program.  
22 Spanish 
adult EFL 
students 
divided 
into four 
groups of 
decoders: 
Higher 
Average 
Lower 
Poorer 
 
Web-based 
multimedia 
program 
(imPRESSions) 
Seven help 
facilities 
1. dictionary 
2. cultural 
notes 
3. transcript 
4. subtitles 
5. video 
controls 
6. feedback 
7. exerts 
module 
 
 
  
Hegelheimer 
& Tower, 
2004 
Using CALL 
in the 
classroom: 
Analyzing 
student 
interactions 
in an 
authentic 
classroom.  
91 
beginner 
EFL 
students 
 
CD program 
New Dynamic 
English 
Three options 
available on 
request  
ABC button 
(repetition of 
aural input 
accompanied 
by displayed 
text) 
repeat button 
(aural 
repetition) 
glossary 
Repeat  
ABC 
Glossary 
 
High 
performance 
group 
Repeat  
ABC 
 
Low 
performance 
group 
ABC 
Repeat 
  
 
 
 
NOTES 
1. In this study, subtitles are English captions of the English video soundtrack. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers and the editors for their insightful comments and 
suggestions that helped improve this article. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Maja Grgurović is a doctoral student in the Applied Linguistics and Technology Program at Iowa State 
University. She holds an MA degree in TESL/Applied Linguistics from Iowa State. Her research interests 
are CALL, multimedia, listening, and integration of technology into language teaching and teacher 
education.  
E-mail: gmaja@iastate.edu 
 
Maja Grgurović and Volker Hegelheimer Help Options and Multimedia Listening 
 
Language Learning & Technology 65 
Volker Hegelheimer, Associate Professor, teaches courses on technology in language teaching and 
research, language assessment, and research methodology. His research interests include applications of 
the WWW and emerging technologies in language learning and language testing. He has presented his 
research and held academic workshops at numerous national and international conferences. His 
publications have appeared in journals such as Language Learning & Technology, Language Testing, 
System, Computer-Assisted Language Learning, ReCALL, CALICO Journal, and he has contributed to 
several edited volumes on Computer-Assisted Language Learning. 
E-mail: volkerh@iastate.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Borras, I., & Lafayette, R. (1994). Effects of multimedia courseware subtitling on the speaking 
performance of college students of French. The Modern Language Journal, 78 (1), 61-75. 
Brett, P. (1996). Using multimedia: An investigation of learners’ attitudes. Computer Assisted Language 
Learning, 9 (2-3), 191-212.   
Brett, P. (1997). A comparative study of the effects of the use of multimedia on listening comprehension. 
System, 25 (1), 39-53.  
Camtasia Recorder (Version 2.0.5) [Computer software], 2004. Okemos, MI: TechSmith Corporation. 
Chapelle, C. A. (1998). Multimedia CALL: lessons to be learned from research on instructed SLA. 
Language Learning and Technology, 2 (1), 22-34. 
Chapelle, C. A. (2003). English language learning and technology: Lectures on applied linguistics in the 
age of information and communication technology. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Chun, D. M., & Plass, J. L. (1997). Research on text comprehension in multimedia environments. 
Language Learning & Technology, 1 (1), 1-35. 
Desmarais, L., Duquette, L., Renie, D., & Laurier, M. (1998). Evaluating learning interactions in a 
multimedia environment. Computers and the Humanities, 22, 1-23. 
Desmarais, L., Laurier, M., & Renie, D. (1998). The analysis of navigation patterns in CALL. Computer 
Assisted Language Learning, 11 (3), 309-315. 
Garza, T. (1991). Evaluating the use of captioned video materials in advanced foreign language learning. 
Foreign Language Annals, 24 (3), 239-258. 
Grgurović, M. (2005). Research into the use of help options in a multimedia listening unit. Unpublished 
MA thesis, Department of English, Iowa State University, Ames, IA.  
Guillory, H.G. (1999). The effect of keyword captions to authentic French video on learner 
comprehension. CALICO Journal, 15(1-3), 89-108. 
Hegelheimer, V., & Tower, D. (2004). Using CALL in the classroom: Analyzing student interactions in 
an authentic classroom. System, 32, 185-205. 
Hsu, J. (1994). Computer assisted language learning (CALL): The effect of ESL students’ use of 
interactional modifications on listening comprehension. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Department of 
Curriculum and Instruction, College of Education, Iowa State University, Ames, IA. 
Maja Grgurović and Volker Hegelheimer Help Options and Multimedia Listening 
 
Language Learning & Technology 66 
Hubbard, P. (2004). Learner training for effective use of CALL. In S. Fotos, & C. M. Browne, (Eds.), 
New Perspectives on CALL for Second Language Classrooms, (pp. 45-67). Mahawah, New Jersey: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Kon, C. K. (2002). The influence on outcomes of ESL students’ performance strategies on a CALL 
listening comprehension activity. Unpublished MA thesis, Department of English, Iowa State University, 
Ames, IA.  
Liou, H.C. (1997). Research on on-line help as learner strategies for multimedia CALL evaluation. 
CALICO Journal, 14 (2-4), 81-96. 
Liou, H.C. (2000). Assessing learner strategies using computers: new insights and limitations. Computer 
Assisted Language Learning, 13 (1), 65-78. 
Long, M. H. (1996). The role of linguistic environment in second language acquisition. In W. C. Ritchie, 
& T. K. Bhatia, (Eds.), Handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 413-468). San Diego: Academic 
Press. 
Pica, T. (1994). Research on negotiation: What does it reveal about second-language learning conditions, 
processes, and outcomes? Language Learning, 44(3), 493-527. 
Plass, J.L., Chun, D. M., Mayer, R. E., & Leutner, D. (1998). Supporting visual and verbal learning 
preferences in a second language multimedia learning environment. Journal of Educational Psychology, 
90 (1), 25-36.  
Pujolà, J.-T. (2002). CALLing for help: Researching language learning strategies using help facilities in a 
web-based multimedia program. ReCALL, 14 (2), 235-262. 
Rubin, J., Quinn, J., & Enos, J. (1988). Improving foreign language listening comprehension. Report on 
Project 017AH70028, (Sept.) Washington, DC: International Research and Studies Program, U.S. 
Department of Education. 
Thompson, I., & Rubin, J. (1993). Improving listening comprehension in Russian. Report on Project 
017A00032. International Research and Studies Program, U.S. Department of Education. 
Vanderplank, R. (1988). The value of teletext sub-titles in language learning. ELT Journal, 42 (4), 272-
281. 
Vanderplank, R. (1990). Paying attention to the words: practical and theoretical problems in watching 
television programmes with uni-lingual (CEEFAX) sub-titles. System, 18 (2), 221-234. 
 
