Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num3/lansungchang/ 
October 2007, Volume 11, Number 3 
pp. 130-151 
 
Copyright © 2007, ISSN 1094-3501 130 
A MOBILE-DEVICE-SUPPORTED PEER-ASSISTED LEARNING 
SYSTEM FOR COLLABORATIVE EARLY EFL READING 
Yu-Ju Lan 
Yao-Ting Sung 
Kuo-En Chang 
National Taiwan Normal University 
Collaborative learning methods which emphasize peer interaction have been widely 
applied to increase the intensity and effectiveness of EFL reading programs. However, 
simply grouping students heterogeneously and assigning them group goals does not 
guarantee that effective collaborative learning will ensue. The present research includes 
two studies. In Study One, the weaknesses of collaborative learning in a traditional EFL 
setting were observed. Then, in Study Two, a mobile-device-supported peer-assisted 
learning (MPAL) system was developed for the purpose of addressing the identified 
weaknesses. Two classes of twenty-six third grade students participated in the present 
research to examine the unique contribution of MPAL to collaborative EFL reading 
activities. The collaborative behavior of elementary EFL learners was videotaped and 
analyzed. Detailed analysis of the videotaped behavior indicated that MPAL helped 
improve collaboration in elementary school level EFL learners and promotes their reading 
motivation. 
INTRODUCTION 
Due to increased globalization and internationalization in recent decades, English has become the lingua 
franca of the world due to its widespread use in academia, business, commerce, and technology (Spolsky 
& Shohamy, 1999). As a result, study of the English language has increased worldwide. In Taiwan, 
formal English as a foreign language/English as a second language (henceforth referred to simply as EFL) 
instruction begins at the elementary school level. However, because of the limited opportunities for 
exposure to English, Hirvela (2004) highlighted the importance of providing reading materials to second 
language (L2) learners so that they can learn the rhetoric and writing styles of the language through 
reading. Moreover, there is a growing recognition that reading provides important opportunities for L2 
development (Day & Bamford, 1998). Reading is especially important for learners of EFL in an 
educational setting with limited L2 resources (Gehard, 1996). Therefore, the teaching of English reading 
is receiving increasing attention from EFL teachers and researchers. 
To achieve the reading goals set for elementary learners, intensive intervention programs have been 
viewed as an effective approach (Clay, 1993; Foorman & Torgesen, 2001; Hiebert, Colt, Catto, & Gury, 
1992; Slavin, Madden, Karweit, Dolan, & Wasik, 1992; Taylor, Frye, Short, & Shearer, 1992). Further, 
collaborative learning that includes groups working together and peer assistants has been widely used in 
English reading programs to create the necessary intensity and strong support for learning. Numerous 
studies have confirmed the positive educational effects of collaborative learning on the instruction of 
English reading. Collaborative learning (or peer-assisted learning) can improve the cognitive activity of 
students (Hartup, 1992) and their reading outcomes (Greenwood, 1996; Ghaith, 2003; Slavin, 1988). 
Collaborative learning can also increase motivation and satisfaction (Ushioda, 1996), as well as the 
enthusiasm of students through the achievement of goals as a group (Nichols & Miller, 1994). 
Although the effectiveness of collaborative learning in EFL reading has been clearly demonstrated, a 
collaborative learning environment in an EFL classroom in Asia may differ markedly from one in the 
West. Other pedagogical challenges (such as the diversity of students’ reading ability, social and 
Y.-J. Lan, Y.-T. Sung, & K.-E. Chang A Mobile-Device-Supported Peer-Assisted Learning System 
 
Language Learning & Technology 131 
economic differences, class size, time constraints, and available resources) become problematic when 
EFL teachers try to adopt collaborative methods for reading instruction in traditional EFL classes (Curtis, 
1998; Lan, Chang, & Sung, 2004; Reed, 2002). 
Mobile technology is currently a feasible approach to overcoming many of the obstacles in current 
methods of EFL reading instruction. Standing on the shoulders of the giant, CALL (Computer Assisted 
Language Learning, e.g., Barker & Torgesen, 1995; Mioduser, Tur-Kaspa, & Leitner, 2000; Speziale & 
La-France, 1992; Sung, Huang, & Chang, under review), mobile assisted language learning (MALL) has 
the capability of providing EFL learners with the same opportunities for independent and targeted reading 
practice and immediate corrective feedback as CALL. In recent years, many studies have explored new 
methods of language learning made possible by the unique features of MALL, including portability, 
social interactivity, context sensitivity, connectivity, individuality, and immediacy (Attewell & Webster, 
2004; Chinnery, 2006; Klopfer, Squire, & Jenkins, 2002; Soloway et al., 2001). 
Research suggests that MALL has excellent potential for providing students with rich, real time, 
collaborative and conversational experiences both in and outside the classroom. However, the focus of 
MALL is mostly on speaking (Kukulska-Hulme, 2005), vocabulary (Thornton & Houser, 2005), phrases 
(Thornton & Houser, 2005; Morita, 2003), and grammar (Sung, Huang, & Chang, 2006), rather than early 
reading skills. Furthermore, most subjects in recent studies of MALL have been college students. Few 
studies have investigated how mobile technology benefits the reading skills of elementary students. The 
subjects of studies by Zurita and Nussbaum (2004) (6- and 7-year old children) and Soloway and his 
colleagues (2001) (k-12 students) are exceptions, but the learning objective in these studies was not 
specifically English reading skills. Further, although the most widely used hand-held devices (e.g., 
cellular phones, personal digital assistants, and mp3 players such as iPods) have a good reputation in 
MALL research, their small screens have been frustrating (Carlson, 2002). 
Considering the limited number of MALL studies focusing on early EFL reading skill training, and fewer 
studies using elementary EFL learners as participants, the purpose of this research was to investigate how 
mobile technology benefits collaboration in elementary EFL learners. Rather than measuring specific 
learning gains, this research focuses on the weaknesses of collaborative learning in traditional EFL 
reading activities and how these weaknesses could be overcome by using mobile technology. To achieve 
this objective, two studies were conducted. In the first study, collaborative learning behavior was 
observed in elementary EFL students to clarify deficiencies in traditional reading activities. In the second 
study, for the purpose of enhancing collaboration in elementary EFL learners, we first developed a 
mobile-device-supported peer-assisted learning (MPAL) system based on the results of Study One. In 
addition to the characteristic of mobility, the MPAL was implemented on Tablet PCs under the 
considerations of its bigger screen size, compared with the hand-held devices mentioned above, as well as 
the easy input equipment (stylus) that Tablet PCs could provide. The efficacy of MPAL in overcoming 
the perceived limitations of traditional collaborative learning was then assessed.  
STUDY ONE: COLLABORATIVE EFL READING ACTIVITIES WITHOUT 
TECHNOLOGICAL SUPPORT 
To develop a mobile-device-supported reading system that can enhance collaborative learning in EFL 
students, learners were first observed in class during traditional reading activities. All student activities 
were videotaped and analyzed by two observers. The analysis was intended to identify deficiencies in 
collaborative reading in traditional EFL settings, as well as the opportune moment to introduce mobile 
technology in EFL learners’ collaborative reading activities.  
 
 
Y.-J. Lan, Y.-T. Sung, & K.-E. Chang A Mobile-Device-Supported Peer-Assisted Learning System 
 
Language Learning & Technology 132 
Methods 
Design 
The first study was conducted during the first semester of the school year using a quasi-experimental 
design. Two classes of third grade students using identical materials participated in this study. One class 
(experimental group) learned reading using the collaborative learning approach, and the other class 
(control group) learned reading by individual learning and whole class activities led by the EFL 
instructor. All reading activities were videotaped for subsequent analysis by two observers who were 
instructed to record and analyze all collaborative behavior and interactive discourse observed in the 
experimental group.  
Participants 
The subjects in Study One included 52 third grade students (two classes of 26 students, 14 males and 12 
females in each class) from an elementary school in Taipei, Taiwan. One class was randomly chosen as 
the experimental group and the other as the control group. All enrolled subjects were considered 
beginning-level learners, although they had received two years of EFL instruction in elementary school. 
According to the Taipei Municipal Education Department's standards for the elementary school English 
curriculum, all third-grade students must learn all letters in the English alphabet, 30 words, and 20 
sentences of basic daily conversation and classroom English. 
The students were divided into heterogeneous reading groups based on their level of English achievement 
in the second grade. Grade A students were classified as high reading ability, those at grade B or C were 
classified as medium reading ability, and those at grade D or Fail were classified as low reading ability. 
As a result, the experimental group had 6 high-ability, 11 medium-ability, and 9 low-ability students; the 
control group had 7 high-ability, 10 medium-ability, and 9 low-ability students. Students with more 
advanced English ability (referred to as "group leaders") were grouped with two or three students with 
lower ability (medium- and low-ability students) which resulted in both classes having seven reading 
groups (each consisted of five groups with four members and two groups with three members). 
Instruments 
Description of early EFL reading activities and teaching materials. Study One employed a program with 
five basic-level teaching packages. The lesson structure of the teaching materials was based on a balanced 
foundation of language skills: each teaching package included instructional material for basic linguistic-
skills (phonemic awareness, phonics rules, and sight words) as well as text reading articles. This study 
package was similar to the one used in the second study (Appendix D). The basic linguistic skills training 
module for each teaching package included phonics rules and selected English words for instruction in 
sight identification. Based on the linguistic skill objectives in each teaching package, a carefully tailored 
written text was used as reading material to provide the students with opportunities to apply their skills to 
comprehending written text. 
Each teaching package included two activities and lasted for two periods (40 minutes each period; 160 
minutes for each teaching package). In general, elementary school students in Taiwan receive two periods 
of instruction on English each week; therefore, each teaching package was taught over a period of two 
weeks. Thus, the five teaching packages were applied for a total of 10 weeks. In the initial series of two-
period reading activities, both groups used printed materials to practice basic linguistic skills together as a 
class or by working in pairs. In the second series of two-period activities, the two groups learned via 
different approaches. The experimental group engaged in collaborative group reading activities in which 
the students were permitted to assist each other when reading the assigned text. However, the students in 
the control group received instruction from the EFL teacher or were asked to practice individually. 
Procedure 
Y.-J. Lan, Y.-T. Sung, & K.-E. Chang A Mobile-Device-Supported Peer-Assisted Learning System 
 
Language Learning & Technology 133 
Before the experiment, the students in the experimental group were asked to agree on and follow their 
own collaborative reading rules (Appendix A). In the first two-lesson activities, the EFL teacher 
instructed the students in sight words, phoneme segmentation, and phonics rules. After direct modeling 
(in which the EFL teacher demonstrated the correct pronunciation of sight words and explicitly presented 
the phonics rules employed to decode and encode English words), the EFL teacher led entire-class 
activities and inter-group speed-reading contests. At the second of the two-lesson activities of each 
teaching package, the students in the experimental group participated in collaborative text reading 
activities while seated in groups around a desk. Each student read the text according to a step-by-step 
reading guide (Appendix B), after which they performed peer assessment. Whenever they encountered a 
problem reading a word or comprehending its meaning, the students were permitted to ask for instructed 
help from their group leader or groupmates. 
In contrast with the experimental group, the students in the control group used identical reading materials 
but only received instruction from the teacher in the first two-lesson activity. In the second two-lesson 
activity, the students were then asked to read the articles individually following a simplified version of the 
step-by-step reading guide (Appendix C). 
Data collection 
During the experiment, video-cameras were installed in two corners of the room so that each camera 
could videotape four reading groups. Additionally, seven digital voice recorders were used to record oral 
discourse between group members. Upon completion of the reading activity, two observers reviewed all 
videotaped group reading sessions. The observers were instructed to record and classify all intra-group 
interactive behavior observed during the recorded group reading activity. The Pearson product-moment 
correlation of the frequencies of various behaviors from the two copies of the records was then computed. 
To identify the most opportune time to introduce mobile technology and associated scaffolding in EFL 
collaborative reading activities, the observation was also intended to identify deficiencies in any of the 
following aspects of group learning: (a) support provided by groupmates, (b) feedback provided by 
groupmates, and (c) collaborative processes. 
Results 
After the treatment finished the two observers repeatedly watched the videotapes and listened to the 
digital voice recordings until all the discourses and interactive behavior exhibited by the experimental 
group were coded. The observations focused on interactive behavior among groupmates and the problems 
that might have reduced the effectiveness of group collaboration. The Pearson product-moment 
correlation of the frequencies of various behaviors computed from the two copies of the records was 
0.968. 
The analytical results of the video data and discourse in the experimental group revealed frequent peer-
assisted learning behavior in the collaborative reading groups. Examples 1 and 2 are two concrete positive 
examples of the components "support provided by groupmates" and "feedback provided by groupmates," 
in which group leaders helped group members read assigned tasks and provided feedback. Besides, in the 
following examples (Examples 1, 2, and 3) if students use Chinese (their native language) to 
communicate with each other, the particular discourse conducted in Chinese will be printed in italics, 
followed by its Chinese version in parentheses. 
Example 1. 
Group 1:  
Group members: Tracy, Pole, Joe and Faye 
 
Tracy: OK, now everyone read the text. Step two, mmm… you read and circle the words you do not know. 
(你們自己讀，再把不會的字圈起來) 
Y.-J. Lan, Y.-T. Sung, & K.-E. Chang A Mobile-Device-Supported Peer-Assisted Learning System 
 
Language Learning & Technology 134 
(Students read and circle unknown words.) 
Tracy: Don’t be afraid to circle too many unknown words. (不要害怕圈太多字) What I care is honest. 
(我在意的是誠實) Don’t cheat. (不要騙我) Just let me know which word you don’t know. 
(盡管讓我知道你們什麼字不會念) I will teach you. (我會教你們) 
Pole: Tracy, how to say the word? (這個字怎麼讀) (Pole points to the word ‘Rat’.) 
Tracy: r r /r/r/, a a /a/a/, /r/a/ /ra/, t t /t/t/, /rat/. Rat is a big mouse, and mouse means a small one. (Rat 
是大老鼠，mouse是小老鼠) Understand? (component: support provided by groupmates, positive) 
Pole: Understand. Thank you. 
Tracy: Joe, Faye, any question? 
Joe: Tracy, how to say the word? (怎麼讀這個字) (Joe points to the word ‘Will’.) 
Tracy: (Covers the last three letters, ‘ill’, shows letter w to Joe and supports scaffolding.)  w w, say 
what? (怎麼念) (component: support provided by groupmates, positive) 
Joe: w w /u/. 
Tracy: i i… 
Joe: /i/i/. 
Tracy: l l … 
Joe: (Kept silent.)  
Tracy: (Models the sound of the letter "l") l l /l/l/. /u/i/ /ui/ /l/ /uil/. Say it. (念一遍) 
Joe: /u/i/ /ui/ /l/ /uil/. (component: support provided by groupmates, positive) 
 
Example 2. 
Group 7:  
Group members: Esther, Ann, Apple and Sandy 
 
(Students read text.) 
Esther: Hey, read out loud, the guide says ‘read aloud’. (嘿，讀出聲音，這份guidance說read aloud) Ann, listen 
and say "Mr. and Mrs." (Ann，聽我讀跟著念Mr. and Mrs) (points to the words)  
Ann: ‘Mr.’ and ‘Mrs.’  
Esther: Good (component: feedback provided by groupmates, positive), now how to say the word? 
(這個字怎麼讀) (points to the word ‘had’) 
Ann: (kept silent.)  
(Apple and Sandy begin to read and discuss together.) 
Esther: When you read a word, you cover the latter letters and sound the beginning sound, then the middle 
sound and say the two sounds together, and then add up the ending sound and say them together. Like this. 
(當你讀一個字時，先蓋住後面的字母，先讀開頭的字母，然後是中間的字母，然後把兩個字母拼起來，
然後再把最後一個字母加近來一起讀，像這樣) (covers letters a and d) h h /h/h/, a a /a/a/, /h/a/ /ha/, then 
(然後) d d /d/d/, then say them together (然後一起念), it becomes /had/. (就變成 /had/) OK? (component: 
support provided by groupmates, positive) 
Now you try. Apple, Sandy, any question?  Hey, don’t chat. (不要聊天) 
Apple and Sandy: We don’t. (我們沒有) 
Esther: Good, let me know if you have questions. (有問題要告訴我) Ann, you say the word. (你讀這個字) 
Ann: /h/a/d/ /had/. 
Esther: Good. (component: feedback provided by groupmates, positive) 
(Esther was keeping busy in supervising and helping her groupmates to read.) 
 
However, it was also found that simply placing students in groups heterogeneously and assigning them 
group goals (e.g., winning the inter-group reading contest and being rewarded) did not guarantee effective 
collaboration during the whole reading activity. Several weaknesses in the collaborative process were 
identified by the observers. First, the group leaders differed in their small-group collaborative reading 
activity in that some of them were constantly busy helping their groupmates whereas others spent most of 
their time reading individually. As a result, students in groups with busy leaders may have experienced 
Y.-J. Lan, Y.-T. Sung, & K.-E. Chang A Mobile-Device-Supported Peer-Assisted Learning System 
 
Language Learning & Technology 135 
delays in assistance from their group leaders (classified as ‘postponed support’), whereas leaders in other 
groups were constantly available for helping anyone (including those belong to a different group) in need 
of learning support (classified as 'invisible helper'). Furthermore, the medium-ability students were 
frequently asked to read by themselves because their group leaders were busy helping their low-ability 
groupmates. The lack of immediate feedback resulted in medium-ability students frequently 
demonstrating uncertainty or confusion during the reading activity (classified as ‘absent feedback’). Other 
weaknesses in a small group included group leaders teasing or ignoring groupmates because of their 
slower rate of learning (classified as ‘conflict-oriented collaborative process’), resulting in increased 
passivity in these students. In a specific example of the components of 'collaborative process', Example 3 
shows a negative episode in which the group leader in Group 3 lost his temper and teased his group 
member. 
Example 3. 
Group 3:  
Group members: Richard, Jasmine and Angel 
 
(Students read step-by-step reading guide handout and the copy of the text.) 
Jasmine: Richard (the group leader), how to do step 1? (第一個步驟怎麼做) 
Richard: (Reads the guide statement.) Look at the Picture and think about its meaning.  See, look and think. 
(看到沒，看一看，想一想) 
(Angel looks around.  She is not sure how to do it.) (component: support provided by groupmates, 
negative) 
Richard: (to Angel) Hey, what are you doing? Quickly, do it. (趕快讀啦) 
Angel: But, but, …, I don’t know how to read. (可是…我不知道怎麼讀) 
Richard: (Points to the handout of the reading instruction.) Look at this and read. (看這個步驟跟著讀) 
(Richard sound angry and ignores Angel while reading the text.) (component: collaborative process, 
negative) 
Angel: How to say this? (這個字怎麼讀) (Points to the word ‘six’ and asks Richard.) 
Richard: Who knows?! Oh, how terrible it is! (喔！怎麼這麼慘啊) My God! (component: collaborative 
process, negative) 
(Richard complains about the stupid question Angel asked him, and then he chatted with Jasmine.) 
Angel: (Sounding scared) Please teach me say the word. (請…教我讀這個字) (Points to the word ‘six’). 
(component: collaborative process, negative) 
Richard: (Says the word ‘six’.) /siks/ /siks/, don’t forget. 
Angel: How to say this? (這個怎麼念) (Points to the word ‘kids’.) 
Richard: Oh, /kidz/, /kidz/, oh, my God!  Teacher, teacher, she even doesn’t know how to say the letter sound. 
(她連字母發音都不會) I don’t know how to teach her! (我不知道怎麼教她) (component: collaborative 
process, negative) 
(The teacher comes to the group and shows the peer-assisted method to Richard then comforts and encourages 
Angel.) 
STUDY TWO: SOLVING WEAKNESSES BY SUPPORT FROM MOBILE TECHNOLOGY 
The findings of Study One appeared to show that collaborative learning and peer-assisted learning are 
feasible strategies for helping elementary EFL learners learn to read. In most of the small reading groups, 
the group leaders were willing to help their groupmates and provide their peers with necessary 
scaffoldings and feedback (see Examples 1 and 2). The study also found that elementary EFL learners 
require adequate support to address the above weaknesses and to enhance the teaching of EFL reading. 
The weaknesses identified in Study One were used to design a mobile-device-supported peer-assisted 
learning (MPAL) system implemented on the environment of Tablet PCs to support collaborative learning 
in elementary EFL learners. This study revealed how computer technology can be used to solve the 
shortcomings in traditional collaborative reading activities. 
Y.-J. Lan, Y.-T. Sung, & K.-E. Chang A Mobile-Device-Supported Peer-Assisted Learning System 
 
Language Learning & Technology 136 
Methods 
Design 
The second study also adopted a quasi-experimental design but was executed in the second semester. In 
advance of the experiment, the control group received training in collaborative learning to minimize 
differences in the collaborative learning experience between the two groups (the experimental and the 
control groups). The video data were also collected but were analyzed quantitatively by coding the 
behaviors according to the defined categories and then calculating the frequency of each behavior for 
comparison of differences between the two groups. 
Participants 
Similarly to the evaluation of collaborative EFL reading activities, the mobile-device-supported activities 
were investigated over a 10-week period with the same subjects in the second semester of the same school 
year. All subjects were grouped into the same groups as described in Study One. 
Instruments 
Description of early EFL reading activities and teaching materials. Study Two employed five additional 
teaching packages at more advanced levels. The lesson structure of the materials used in the second study 
was identical to that of Study One. Appendix D is an example of a teaching package used in Study Two. 
The reading activities resembled that of Study One except that the collaborative learning approach was 
used in both groups. 
Observation checklists. Study Two involved a more quantitative approach. In the observation checklists 
(see Appendix E), the EFL reading behaviors were categorized as learning-related and learning-unrelated 
behaviors according to whether the observed behaviors related to the specific learning activities. 
Additionally, the learning-related behaviors included three reading behaviors: individual, inter-group, and 
intra-group. The students were observed in four-minute segments. For each segment, observers coded the 
frequency of target behaviors at 15-second intervals. Finally, the relative frequency of each target 
behavior was calculated for comparison. In Study Two, observers focused on the weaknesses of 
collaborative learning activities observed in the two groups. 
Hardware: Tablet PCs. Despite the usual limitations of mobile electronic devices (e.g., small screen), the 
tablet PC was a more appropriate device in this study because of its editing support. Tablet PCs allowed 
students to easily note and mark the learning materials; consequently the effect of different levels of 
typing skill was limited in this study. The hardware used in this study was TravelMate C110 Convertible 
Tablet PC. Appendix F lists the detailed specifications for the device. 
Mobile-device-supported Peer-Assisted Learning (MPAL) System. The design purposes of MPAL were, 
first, to provide elementary EFL learners with necessary scaffolding during individual learning, especially 
when their group members are not available to provide them with feedback, and, second, to provide a 
simple method for EFL learners to assist each other, particularly when some group members are 
occupied. The MPAL model consists of two modules: (1) a phonological-skills training module and (2) a 
peer-assessment module. Figure 1 illustrates the learning flow for the MPAL and the function of each 
module. 
The phonological-skills training module was comprised of two submodules: sight words and phonetic 
words. After students log into the MPAL system, MPAL first assesses their reading skills (sight and 
phonetic word identification skills) relative to a standard determined by EFL teachers. Upon passing the 
test, the students were allowed to access the peer-assessment module (Figure 1, left); students who failed 
the test were returned to the phonological-skills training module for additional practice with MPAL 
(Figure 1, right). With the coaching support provided by the system, students practiced sight and phonetic 
word identification for each unit until their ability reached specified testing standard. Throughout the 
Y.-J. Lan, Y.-T. Sung, & K.-E. Chang A Mobile-Device-Supported Peer-Assisted Learning System 
 
Language Learning & Technology 137 
learning process (practice as well as testing), the MPAL system recorded the learning results, provided 
both real-time feedback and learning support, and assessed mastery of skills. 
 
Figure 1. The learning flow in the MPAL system. 
After the students mastered the target sight words and phonics rules for each unit, under the control of the 
MPAL system, they continued text reading (Figure 1, left). The MPAL system maintained a list of 
qualified online helpers including the names of all students that passed the peer-assessment process. The 
first five students who had passed the Test of sight words and phonetic words, as well as finished the step 
of meaning-based reading, read the text to their EFL teacher in an online assessment via Skype. After 
passing the test, their names were added to a list of those eligible to assist their peers in online peer 
assessments or in text reading. 
Generally, after entering the peer-assessment module, the students first read the text individually and 
asked for online help via Skype (a peer-to-peer internet-based telephony) whenever they encountered 
reading or comprehension difficulties. After they were able to read individually and comprehend the text 
(i.e., able to correctly answer the comprehension questions), they would invite two available online 
helpers and demonstrate their ability to read the text. The text was continuously displayed on their screens 
when performing peer assessment, and the online helpers noted mispronounced words by clicking on the 
word with a stylus. Immediately after completing the assessment, MPAL automatically evaluated the 
performance of the student by calculating the accuracy ratio and assessing the result as a ‘fail’ or ‘pass’. 
The reader could then become eligible as an online assistant after receiving a 'pass' from two different 
online helpers. If one of the two online helpers assessed the reader as ‘fail’, the readers were required to 
continue reading the text. Figure 2 shows examples of the learning activities involved in online peer 
assessment. 
Reading task 
pass fail 
Meaning-based reading 
Interactive practice module 
pass fail 
MPAL 
Practice reading aloud with reading partners 
 
Ask for help (online helper or group members) 
Invite reading partners (at least two) 
partners) 
Test (sight words & 
phonetic words) 
Test (sight words & 
phonetic words) 
Online peer assessment pass fail 
 
Enter next reading mission 
Y.-J. Lan, Y.-T. Sung, & K.-E. Chang A Mobile-Device-Supported Peer-Assisted Learning System 
 
Language Learning & Technology 138 
 
Figure 2. An example of online peer assessment. 
Procedure 
Before the treatment, the control group was trained in collaborative learning and was also asked to 
formulate collaborative reading rules by entire-class discussion. The group was also asked to agree to 
follow all rules during the study. Conversely, the experimental group was simply asked to review the 
collaborative reading rules and follow them.  
Shortly after the training session for collaborative learning skills, five advanced level teaching packages 
(see Appendix D) were taught during the treatment period (10 weeks). Each package was taught in two 
two-lesson activities. In the first two-lesson activity, the teaching activities were similar to those 
described in Study One. However, in the second two-lesson activity, the activities were conducted 
differently. In the control group, students first reviewed the materials (sight words and phonetic words) 
through direct instruction and tests administered by the EFL teacher. They were then asked to 
collaboratively read a printed text with their peers in groups following the step-by-step reading guide 
(Appendix G). Finally, each student was asked to read the text to two of their peers (peer-assessment). 
Students who passed the peer-assessment were instructed to wear paper crowns and print their names on 
the blackboard to signify that they were qualified helpers available for reading assistance or assessment. 
In contrast to the control group, each student in the experimental group received a Tablet PC with a stylus 
and a headset which the students used for collaborative reading activities with the support of the MPAL 
system. 
The main differences between the collaborative EFL reading activities without technological support (the 
control group) and those with support (the experimental group) were the following: First, during text 
reading activities, the MPAL allowed the students to find available helpers easily and receive help not 
only from their groupmates but also from the online helpers (any student who had passed peer-
assessment). Additionally, two or three students spontaneously formed a learning group by making an 
online call (using Skype) when performing online peer-assessment activities or peer-assisted learning. 
Moreover, the results of peer-assessment were available from MPAL immediately upon completion of 
assessment. Thus, both the EFL teacher and the students were able to precisely monitor the learning 
process and outcome. Second, during phonological-skills training activities, the experimental group 
Invite two students to 
help in the online 
assessment. 
Y.-J. Lan, Y.-T. Sung, & K.-E. Chang A Mobile-Device-Supported Peer-Assisted Learning System 
 
Language Learning & Technology 139 
received real-time learning support and feedback from MPAL during individual reading activities when 
no other help was available. 
Data collection 
During the treatments, all activities were recorded by three digital video cameras. Two were focused on 
two small reading groups (one on each group), and one was focused on the entire class. After completion 
of the experiment, the same observers reviewed the video data. However, in contrast to Study One, the 
purpose of observation was to determine the frequency of target behaviors listed in the observation 
checklists (Appendix E). The Pearson product-moment correlation of the observation results of the 
records was then computed. To document the efficacy of MPAL, the observation focused on the 
following aspects of collaborative behavior: (a) support provided by groupmates, (b) visible or invisible 
helper, (c) feedback provided by groupmates, and (d) collaborative processes. 
Results 
The observations of learning behavior recorded in this study had two objectives. One was comparison of 
weaknesses due to postponed support, invisible assistance, lack of immediate feedback, and conflict-
oriented collaboration in the two groups. Another objective was identifying differences in collaborative 
behavior (learning-related and learning-unrelated) between the two groups. 
After the treatment finished, two observers tallied the frequency of each target behavior. Pearson product-
moment coefficient of concordance was then computed from the decoded results obtained from the two 
copies of the records. The Pearson correlation was 0.78 (p < .01).  
Comparison with weaknesses identified in Study One 
Table 1. The Frequencies of the Four Target Behaviors and the Chi-Square Analysis Results 
Groups Chi-square Behaviors Experimental Control χ2(1,1) 
Real-time 33 7 
support 
Postponed  11 15 
11.46* 
Visible 35 25 
helper 
Invisible  1 1 
.06 
Real-time 37 18 
feedback 
Absent 13 65 
35.21* 
collaboration-oriented 79 72 
collaborative process 
conflict-oriented  4 17 
8.17* 
*p < .05. 
Table 1 displays the frequencies of the four target behaviors related to support, helper, feedback and 
collaborative process. Each target behavior was confirmed by chi-square analysis to identify significant 
differences between the two groups. Results of chi-square analysis revealed that the two groups 
significantly differed in behaviors related to support (χ2(1,1) = 11.46, p < .05), feedback (χ2(1,1) = 35.21, p < 
.05) and collaborative process (χ2(1,1) = 8.17, p < .05). These statistical findings revealed that the incidence 
of postponed support, absent feedback, and conflict-oriented collaboration was significantly lower in the 
Y.-J. Lan, Y.-T. Sung, & K.-E. Chang A Mobile-Device-Supported Peer-Assisted Learning System 
 
Language Learning & Technology 140 
experimental group than in the control group. However, the result of chi-square analysis related to helper 
type showed that there was no significant difference between the two groups. 
Comparison of collaborative learning behaviors 
All the reading activities were videotaped during the treatments. Two observers watched the video data 
and recorded the results based on the observation checklists. The EFL reading behaviors were categorized 
as learning-related and learning-unrelated behaviors. The learning-related behaviors included three 
reading behaviors: individual, inter-group, and intra-group. Table 2 displays the frequency of each 
category of behaviors. Results of chi-square analysis revealed that the frequency of learning-related (the 
sum of individual, inter-group, and intra-group items) and learning-unrelated behaviors in the 
experimental group significantly differed from that of the control group (χ2 (1,1) = 90.61, p < .05).  
Table 2. The Frequency of Group Reading Behaviors and the Chi-Square Analysis Results 
Groups Group reading behaviors Experimental Control 
Learning-related   
Individual 142 97 
Inter-group 157 35 
Intra-group 201 121 
Sum 500 253 
Learning-unrelated 78 167 
Chi-square (χ2(1,1)) 90.61* 
*p < .05. 
According to Table 2, the students in the experimental group concentrated on EFL reading activities 
(fewer learning-unrelated behaviors) with the support of MPAL. Table 2 also reveals that MPAL 
benefited collaborative reading behavior (both inter- and intra-group), especially inter-group behavior 
because of the use of peer-to-peer internet-based telephony. 
In addition to the above comparison, the frequency of each behavior category in each observed turn (4-
minute interval) was compared between the two groups to identify different trends in student behavior 
during collaborative reading activities (see Figure 3). As illustrated in Figure 3, students in the 
experimental group were more focused than the students in the control group. The students consistently 
paid attention during reading activities with the support of MPAL. Conversely, the students in the control 
group tended to pay attention to learning activities during the first half of the two-lesson reading activities 
only. Subsequently, they were easily distracted, and their attention decreased as the activities progressed. 
Similar differences also appeared on learners’ anxiety, motivation, and oral reading confidence. Those 
students’ attitudes were identified  by video data observation. It was found that students in the 
experimental group, especially the lower-ability students, were eager to practice what was instructed and 
ask for online help without hesitation or fear of being teased by the helper. Furthermore, the desire of 
becoming a qualified online helper also motivated them to be willing to read to their peers over and over 
again until they passed the online peer-assessment. 
 
 
 
 
 
Y.-J. Lan, Y.-T. Sung, & K.-E. Chang A Mobile-Device-Supported Peer-Assisted Learning System 
 
Language Learning & Technology 141 
a. 
 
b.  
 
Figure 3. The frequencies of each behavior category happened in each observed turn: (a) the experimental 
group and (b) the control group. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION  
The goal of this study was to explore the potential application of mobile technology for elementary EFL 
reading instruction. Due to limited reference studies found in this area and to avoid careless use of mobile 
technology in education, a two-study research was conducted to explore the reasonable moments and 
methods for introducing mobile technology in the teaching and learning of elementary EFL reading. In 
Y.-J. Lan, Y.-T. Sung, & K.-E. Chang A Mobile-Device-Supported Peer-Assisted Learning System 
 
Language Learning & Technology 142 
Study One, by observing twenty-six third grade students (experimental group) learning to read in a small 
group, the weaknesses which might hinder students’ collaborative learning were identified. This in turn 
laid the groundwork for designing a mobile learning system. The data analyzed in the first study indicated 
that simply grouping students into heterogeneous small groups does not guarantee effective collaboration 
even with collaborative and peer-assisted learning behavior. 
Careful analysis of the video data revealed the limitations of traditional group learning, including delayed 
support, invisible helpers, lack of feedback, and conflict-oriented collaborative processes. This finding 
challenges traditional collaborative learning approaches in which students are heterogeneously grouped to 
work together and to reach a common goal (Johnson & Johnson, 1994; Ravenscroft, Buckless, & Hassall, 
1999; Slavin, 1986). The findings also demonstrate that if the students are grouped heterogeneously with 
different levels of critical skills needed for reading tasks, additional learning support (scaffolding) is 
necessary for an effective collaborative and peer-assisted learning process.  
Based on the findings of Study One, the use of mobile technology for elementary EFL reading activities 
was evaluated in Study Two. In Study Two, a mobile-device-supported peer-assisted learning (MPAL) 
model was used to support the collaborative reading activities of elementary EFL learners. 
According to the results of Study Two, it is our distinct impression that MPAL seemed to reduce anxiety 
in elementary EFL learners, promote motivation to learn, and enhance oral reading confidence. These 
findings are consistent with recent studies evaluating the application of CALL in EFL such as instruction 
for early reading skills by Mioduser, Tur-Kaspa, and Leitner (2000) and the study of individualization of 
instructional sequence by Speziale and La-France (1992). The present study also bears similarities to 
previous studies of MALL which explored the possibility of learning vocabulary via cell phone 
(Kukulska-Hulme, 2005; Thornton & Houser, 2005) or Personal Digital Assistant (PDA) (Zurita & 
Nussbaum, 2004). 
Furthermore, with the scaffoldings provided by MPAL, students could read on their own or receive online 
help without their group leaders. Thus they demonstrated a higher level of concentration on reading tasks, 
particularly the low- and medium-ability students. This finding underscores the value of technology for 
EFL students with lower reading ability as suggested by Foster, Erickson, Foster, Brinkman, and 
Torgesen (1994). The experimental results of the current study are also consistent with the findings of 
Attewell and Webster (2004) that mobile learning inspires enthusiasm in young adults and increases their 
motivation to improve their reading skills. In addition to the positive effect on collaborative learning, the 
weaknesses identified in Study One were effectively addressed by the support of MPAL. 
In summary, it appears that the use of mobile devices in collaborative EFL reading activities reduces the 
stress experienced by students and facilitates student collaboration. Use of these devices also opens a new 
world of possibilities where students can individually engage in EFL reading activities anywhere and at 
any time with the assistance of learning support and real-time feedback. Immediate responses to requests 
for help or feedback allow students to learn reading according to their individual needs and individual 
pace. Furthermore, it seems likely that the availability of online helpers not only enhances the usability of 
the help resource but also encourages students to pass the peer-assessment process and thereby achieve 
the status of online helper. This study provides further evidence that a mobile-device-supported EFL 
reading program is an emerging portable and potential solution that can provide students with adaptable 
and ubiquitous support for collaborative EFL reading activities at virtually any place and time. 
 
 
 
Y.-J. Lan, Y.-T. Sung, & K.-E. Chang A Mobile-Device-Supported Peer-Assisted Learning System 
 
Language Learning & Technology 143 
APPENDICES 
Appendix A. Collaborative Reading Rules 
I will: 
1. take good care of the learning materials and equipment. 
2. concentrate. 
3. be willing to learning with others. 
4. follow the reading guide. 
5. work hard. 
6. ask for help when I need it. 
7. be nice in discussions with others. 
8. answer the requests of others for learning help. 
9. be a responsible peer. 
10 tidy up the material when I have finished reading. 
 
I will not 
1. tease others. 
2. chat or play with others when learning. 
3. fight with others. 
4. make noise. 
5. discuss in a loud voice. 
6. wander around. 
 
 
Y.-J. Lan, Y.-T. Sung, & K.-E. Chang A Mobile-Device-Supported Peer-Assisted Learning System 
 
Language Learning & Technology 144 
Appendix B. Step-By-Step Reading Guide Used in Experimental Group in Study One 
Story Title: _______________________________________________ 
Group: _______  Name: _________  Date: _______ 
 Do and check.  
(  ) 1. Look at the picture and think about its meaning:  
who, what, where, and when? 
(  ) 2. Read aloud the story.  
If there are some words that you cannot read: 
 Circle the words you do not know.  
 Try to read them using phonics rules. 
 Are they sight words?  
 Ask your groupmates to help you.  
(  ) 3. Read aloud again.  
(  ) 4. Read the story to your group. 
Peer assessment:  
Performance    
Signature    
Signature    
 
 
Appendix C. Step-By-Step Reading Guide Used in Control Group in Study One 
Story Title: _______________________________________________ 
Group: _______  Name: _________  Date: _______ 
 Do and check.  
(  ) 1. Look at the picture and think about its meaning:  
who, what, where, and when? 
(  ) 2. Read aloud the story.  
If there are some words that you cannot read: 
 Circle the words you do not know.  
 Try to read them using phonics rules. 
 Are they sight words?  
 Ask your teacher to help you.  
(  ) 3. Read aloud again and assess your reading. 
Self-assessment:       
Y.-J. Lan, Y.-T. Sung, & K.-E. Chang A Mobile-Device-Supported Peer-Assisted Learning System 
 
Language Learning & Technology 145 
Appendix D. An Example of Teaching Packages Used in Study Two 
Group: _____ Class: ______ Name: _________  Number:_______ Date: ______ 
 
Today’s mission: 
1. Practice the sight words (Sight words_a.ppt) 
2. Practice the phonetic words (Phonetic words_a.ppt) 
3. Read the article "What is it in the box?" & answer the questions 
4. Peer-assessment: Read the article to two of your classmates.  
Sight words: 
by, asked, guess, said, isn’t, can, does, doesn’t, baby, sing, know, will, who, so, no, look, like, her 
Phonetic words: 
ob cob hob job mob rob  
ock chock cock dock hock lock nock rock shock sock 
op chop cop hop lop pop shop top 
ot cot dot got hot jot lot pot rot shot 
ox box pox fox 
ob cob hob job mob rob  
o 
ock chock cock dock hock lock nock rock shock sock 
 
Peer-Assessment 
Signature: ______________        Date: ________ 
What is it in the box? 
Doctor Dodd sits on a log by the pond. 
Doctor Dodd has a big box. 
"What is it in the box?" asked Tom. 
"Guess," said Doctor Dodd. 
"Is it a doll?"  "No, it isn’t." 
"Is it a fox?"  "No, it isn’t." 
"It has spots.  It can hop. 
It does not look like her baby. 
It likes to sing in the pond." 
"What is it in the box?" asked Doctor Dodd. 
"I know it.  It is a …," said Tom. 
Y.-J. Lan, Y.-T. Sung, & K.-E. Chang A Mobile-Device-Supported Peer-Assisted Learning System 
 
Language Learning & Technology 146 
What is it in the box? 
Doctor Dodd sits on a log by the pond. 
Doctor Dodd has a big box. 
"What is it in the box?" asked Tom. 
"Guess," said Doctor Dodd. 
"Is it a doll?"  "No, it isn’t." 
"Is it a fox?"  "No, it isn’t." 
"It has spots.  It can hop. 
It does not look like her baby. 
It likes to sing in the pond." 
"What is it in the box?" asked Doctor Dodd. 
"I know it.  It is a …," said Tom. 
 
 
Answer the questions: 
(   ) 1. What is it in the box? 
(1) A rabbit.  (2) A bug.  (3) A frog. 
(   ) 2. Which animal doesn’t look like her baby? 
(1) Butterfly.  (2) Cat.  (3) Pig. 
(   ) 3. What is the baby of a frog? 
(1) Kitten.  (2) Tadpole.  (3) Puppy. 
(   ) 4. Draw a line to match the baby animals and their moms. 
 Piggy    Sheep 
 Lamb    Bear 
 Duckling    Pig 
 Cub     Hen 
 Chick    Duck 
Y.-J. Lan, Y.-T. Sung, & K.-E. Chang A Mobile-Device-Supported Peer-Assisted Learning System 
 
Language Learning & Technology 147 
Appendix E. Observation Checklists Used in Study Two 
Date:  Unit:  Observed group:        
Observe intervals 1st 2d 9th 
Time       Observed behaviors Students’ numbers 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 
Set up or operate the TabPCs                         
Do practice                         
Do test                         
Use Skype                         
individual 
Idle helper (ignore help request)                         
Peer-assessment                         
Teach another to learn materials                         
Teach another to use TabPC                         
Be taught to use TabPC                         
Be taught to learn materials                         
Waiting for peer-assessment                         
Ask for help                         
negotiation                         
communication                         
inter-group 
discussion                         
Peer-assessment                         
Teach another to learn materials                         
Teach another to use TabPC                         
Be taught to use TabPC                         
Be taught to learn materials                         
Waiting for peer-assessment                         
Ask for help                         
negotiation                         
communication                         
discussion                         
Sharing with group mates                         
Encouraging group mates                         
Le
arn
ing
-re
lat
ed
 be
ha
vio
rs 
intra-group 
Watching group mates                 
… 
        
 
  Students’ numbers 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 
Chatting with others                         
Playing with others                         
Moving around                         
Catnapping                         
Playing alone                         
Abstracted                         
Leaving seat                         
Looking around                         
Learning-
unrelated 
behaviors 
Other behaviors                 
… 
        
 
Y.-J. Lan, Y.-T. Sung, & K.-E. Chang A Mobile-Device-Supported Peer-Assisted Learning System 
 
Language Learning & Technology 148 
Appendix F. The Specification of TravelMate C110 Convertible Tablet PC 
Operation system: Microsoft® Windows XP Tablet PC Edition 
Platform: Intel® CentrinoTM mobile technology 
Processor: Low Voltage Intel® Pentium® M processor at 800 MHz; 512KB L2 cache memory  
Chipset: Intel® 855GM chipset with 400 MHz front-side bus 
Wireless technology: Integrated, coexistent, Intel® PRO/Wireless 2100 network connection 802.11b 
Memory: 256MB of DDR memory and a Flash BIOS can be upgraded to 2GB, 512KB; support shadow 
RAM 
Screen: 512 Flash BIOS; support shadow RAM; The notebook screen can be swiveled up to 180o  
Storage: 30 GB of DASP (Disk Anti-Shock Protection) hard disc storage 
External drive: IEEE1394 DVD 
Size/weight: 257 by 216 by 25.4 mm/ 1.45 Kg 
 
Appendix G. Step-By-Step Reading Guide Used in Study Two 
Story Title: _______________________________________________ 
Group: _______  Name: _________  Date: _______ 
 Do and check.  
(  ) 1. Look at the picture and think about its meaning:  
who, what, where, and when? 
(  ) 2. Read aloud the story.  
If there are some words that you cannot read: 
 Circle the words you do not know.  
 Try to read them using phonics rules. 
 Are they sight words?  
 Ask your groupmates to help you.  
(  ) 3. Read aloud again.  
(  ) 4. Answer the questions by yourself. 
(  ) 5. Discuss the answers with your group members.  
Self-assessment:       
(  ) 6. Read the story to two of your classmates. 
Peer assessment:  
Performance    
Signature    
Signature    
 
 
 
Y.-J. Lan, Y.-T. Sung, & K.-E. Chang A Mobile-Device-Supported Peer-Assisted Learning System 
 
Language Learning & Technology 149 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This research was supported by a grant from the National Science Council, Republic of China, under 
contract no. NSC 96-2520-S-003-012-MY3. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Yu-Ju Lan received the B.S. degree in Computer Science from Chinese Culture University, Taipei, 
Taiwan, R.O.C., in 1990 and M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in Information and Computer Education from 
National Taiwan Normal University, Taiwan, in 1995 and 2006, respectively. Her research interests 
include EFL instruction and research, ICT in education, and mobile learning. 
Email: yujulan@gmail.com 
Yao-Ting Sung received the M.S. and Ph. D. degrees in Education and Psychology and Counseling from 
National Taiwan Normal University, Taiwan, R.O.C., in 1992 and 2000, respectively. He is a professor of 
Department of Education and Psychology and Counseling at National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei. 
His research interests include the psychology of learning and computer-assisted instruction. 
Email: sungtc@ntnu.edu.tw 
Kuo-En Chang is currently vice president and a professor in the Department of Information and Computer 
Education at National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei. He is also a co-chair of the National Project of 
e-Learning. His research interests include intelligent tutoring systems, web-based learning, and learning 
technology. His main research work is the design of web-based systems with applications to education. 
Email: chang@ice.ntnu.edu.tw 
 
REFERENCES 
Attewell, J., & Webster, T. (2004). Engaging and supporting mobile learners. In Proceedings of 
MLEARNING 2004: Mobile learning anytime everywhere (pp. 15-20). London, UK: Learning and Skills 
Development Agency. 
Barker, T. A., & Torgesen, J. K. (1995). An evaluation of computer-assisted instruction in phonological 
awareness with below average readers. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 13(1), 89-103. 
Carlson, S. (2002, October 11). Are personal digital assistants the next must-have tool? The Chronicle of 
Higher Education, 49(7). Retrieved November 30, 2006, from 
http://chronicle.com/free/v49/i07/07a03301.htm. 
Chinnery, G. (2006). Emerging Technologies - Going to the MALL: Mobile Assisted Language Learning. 
Language Learning & Technology, 10(1), 9-16. Retrieved November 30, 2006, from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num1/emerging/default.html. 
Clay, M. M. (1993). An observation survey of early literacy achievement. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. 
Curtis, A. (1998). What EFL teachers learn from action research? Proceedings of the 1998 Korea TESOL 
Conference, 9-14. 
Day, R. R., & Bamford, J. (1998). Extensive reading in the second language classroom. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Y.-J. Lan, Y.-T. Sung, & K.-E. Chang A Mobile-Device-Supported Peer-Assisted Learning System 
 
Language Learning & Technology 150 
Foorman, B. R., & Torgesen, J. (2001). Critical elements of classroom and small-group instruction 
promote reading success in all children. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 16(4), 203-212. 
Foster, K. C., Erickson, G. C., Foster, D. F., Brinkman, D., & Torgesen, J. K. (1994). Computer 
administered instruction in phonological awareness: Evaluation of the Daisyquest program. The Journal 
of Research and Development in Education, 7, 126-137. 
Gehard, J. G. (1996). Teaching English as a foreign or second language. Ann Arbor, MI: University of 
Michigan Press. 
Ghaith, G. (2003). Effects of the learning together model of cooperative learning on English as a foreign 
language reading achievement, academic self-esteem, and feelings of school alienation. Bilingual 
Research Journal, 27(3), 451-474. 
Greenwood, C. R. (1996). Research on the practices and behavior of effective teachers at the Juniper 
Gardens Children’s Project: Implications for the education of diverse learners. In D. L. Speece & B. K. 
Keogh (Eds.), Research on classroom ecologies (pp. 39-67). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Hartup, W. W. (1992). Having friends, making friends, and keeping friends: Relationships as educational 
contexts. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 345 854)  
Hiebert, E. H., Colt, J. M., Catto, S. L., & Gury, E. C. (1992). Reading and writing of first-grade students 
in a restructured Chapter I program. American Educational Research Journal, 29, 545-572.  
Hirvela, A. (2004). Connecting reading & writing. Ann Arbor, MI: The University of Michigan Press. 
Johnson, D. W., & Johnson, R. T. (1994). Together and alone: Cooperative, competitive, and 
individualistic learning (4th ed.). Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 
Klopfer, E., Squire, K., & Jenkins, H. (2002). Environment detectives: PDAs as a window into a virtual 
simulated world. Proceedings of IEEE International Workshop on Wireless and Mobile Technologies in 
Education. Vaxjo, Sweden: IEEE Computer Society, 95-98. 
Kukulska-Hulme, A. (2005). The mobile language learner—now and in the future. Fran Vision till 
Praktik. Language Learning Symposium, Umea University, Sweden. Retrieved November 30, 2006, from 
http://www2.humlab.umu.se/symposium2005/program.htm.  
Lan, Y. J., Chang, K. E., & Sung, Y. T (2004). DIAMOND hunt: A reading teaching approach for EFL 
beginners’ reading skills development. Proceedings of International Conference on Education and 
Information Systems: Technologies and Applications, 3, 92-96. 
Mioduser, D., Tur-Kaspa, H., & Leitner, I. (2000). The added learning value of computer-based 
instruciton of early reading skills in preschool children at high risk for learning disabilities. Journal of 
Computer Assisted Learning, 16, 267-273. 
Morita, M. (2003). The Mobile-based Learning (MBL) in Japan. Proceedings of the First Conference on 
Creating, Connecting and Collaborating through Computing. Retrieved December 28, 2005, from 
http://csdl2.computer.org/comp/proceedings/c5/2003/1975/00/19750128.pdf. 
Nichols, J. P., & Miller, R. B. (1994). Cooperative learning and student motivation. Contemporary 
Educational Psychology, 19, 167-178. 
Ravenscroft, S. P., Buckless, F. A., & Hassall, T. (1999). Cooperative learning – A literature guide. 
Accounting Education, 8(2), 163-176. 
Reed, J. (2002). The pedagogical challenges for western ESL teachers in Asia. Contact, 28(4), 1-8. 
Slavin, R.E. (1986). Using student team learning (3rd ed.). Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins 
University. 
Y.-J. Lan, Y.-T. Sung, & K.-E. Chang A Mobile-Device-Supported Peer-Assisted Learning System 
 
Language Learning & Technology 151 
Slavin, R. E. (1988). Cooperative learning and student achievement. Educational Leadership, 46(2), 31-
33. 
Slavin, R. E., Madden, N. A., Karweit, N. L., Dolan, L., & Wasik, B. A. (1992). Success for all: A 
relentless approach to prevention and early intervention in elementary schools. Arlington, VA: 
Educational Research Search. 
Soloway, E., Norris, C., Blumenfeld, P., Fishman, B., Krajcik, J., & Marx, R. (2001). Log on education: 
Handheld devices are ready-at-hand. Communications of the ACM, 44(6), 15-20. 
Speziale, M., & La-France, L. (1992). Multimedia and students with learning disabilities: The road to 
success. Computing Teacher, 20(3), 31-34. 
Spolsky, B., & Shohamy, E. (1999).  The languages of Israel: Policy, ideology, and practice. Clevedon, 
UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Sung, Y. T., Huang, C. C., & Chang, K. E. (2006). The design and application of a mobile devices-based 
real time formative assessment system. Paper presented at the IADIS International Conference Mobile 
Learning, July, 13-16, Dublin. 
Sung, Y. T., Huang, J. S., & Chang, K. E. (in press). Enhancing students' strategy use and reading 
comprehension through a computer assisted strategies teaching and learning environment. Computers in 
Human Behavior. 
Taylor, B. M., Frye, B. J., Short, R., & Shearer, B. (1992).  Classroom teachers prevent reading failure 
among low-achieving first-grade students. Reading Teacher, 45, 592-597. 
Thornton, P., & Houser, C. (2005). Using mobile phones in English education in Japan. Journal of 
Computer Assisted Learning, 21(3), 217-228. 
Ushioda, E. (1996). Learner autonomy 5: The role of motivation. Dublin, Ireland: Authentik. 
Zurita, G., & Nussbaum, M. (2004). Computer supported collaborative learning using wirelessly 
interconnected handheld computers. Computer & Education, 42, 289-314. 
 
