Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num1/smith/ 
February 2008, Volume 12, Number 1 
pp. 85-103 
 
Copyright © 2008, ISSN 1094-3501 85 
METHODOLOGICAL HURDLES IN CAPTURING CMC DATA: THE 
CASE OF THE MISSING SELF-REPAIR 
Bryan Smith 
Arizona State University 
This paper reports on a study of the use of self-repair among learners of German in a task-
based CMC environment. The purpose of the study was two-fold. The first goal sought to 
establish how potential interpretations of CMC data may be very different depending on 
the method of data collection and evaluation employed. The second goal was to explicitly 
examine the nature of CMC self-repair in the task-based foreign language CALL 
classroom. Paired participants (n=46) engaged in six jigsaw tasks over the course of one 
university semester via the chat function in Blackboard. Chat data were evaluated first by 
using only the chat log file and second by examining a video file of the screen capture of 
the entire interaction. Results show a fundamental difference in the interpretation of the 
chat interaction which varies as a function of the data collection and evaluation methods 
employed. The findings also suggest a possible difference in the nature of self-repair 
across face-to-face and SCMC environments. In view of the results, this paper calls for 
CALL researchers to abandon the reliance on printed chat log files when attempting to 
interpret SCMC interactional data. 
INTRODUCTION 
Though the field of computer-assisted language learning (CALL) is a rapidly emerging area within 
applied linguistics, the amount of CALL research on many current SLA topics is relatively modest. 
Though computer-mediated communication is fundamentally different than face-to-face communication, 
CALL/SLA studies often do not adequately ground their inquiry in existing "traditional" SLA research. 
Further, many CALL studies do not make use of existing technology in their data collection and analysis 
methods, which can severely limit the impact and relevance of their findings. This is unfortunate because 
CALL can be a powerful vehicle for exploring many of the core elements of current SLA theory. One of 
these core areas is the role of self-repair in L2 development. The present study explores self-repair in a 
task-based synchronous computer-mediated communicative (SCMC) environment and employs video 
screen capture software to evaluate the amount and nature of self-initiated self-repair (SISR) in an SCMC 
context. In this paper I will first establish the relevance of self-repair to SLA in both traditional and CMC 
environments. Then, through the discussion of a classroom-based empirical L2 study I will point out how 
using video screen capture technology yields a markedly different and more precise picture of the nature 
of SISR in an SCMC environment.  
Self-repair in SLA 
Learner self-repair or self-correction has been explored in a variety of educational contexts from various 
theoretical perspectives and with a focus on both native speakers and second/foreign language learners1. 
Self-repairs are seen as important from an SLA perspective because they provide us insights into a 
learner's interlanguage (IL) development. Indeed, self-repair is viewed by many as evidence of noticing 
an observable behavior from which we can infer that a learner has engaged in some monitoring strategy 
or has noticed a production error (Kormos, 1999).   
Self-repair occurs when speakers detect that their output is faulty or inappropriate in some way. The 
speech flow is halted and a self-correction is executed. Foster & Ohta (2005) define self-correction as 
"self-initiated, self-repair, [which] occurs when a learner corrects his or her own utterance without being 
prompted to do so by another person" (p.420). Wouk (2005) makes the distinction between same turn 
Bryan Smith Methodological Hurdles in Capturing CMC Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 86 
self-repair in which a speaker, in the process of producing an utterance, stops that utterance before 
completion and continues it in some way that involves alteration of the syntactic structure that is being 
produced. The speaker may abort the utterance in progress and begin a completely new structure or 
change the syntactic framework of the utterance, utilizing lexical elements of the old syntax in a new 
syntactic frame. Buckwalter (2001) notes that the SLA literature normally equates repair with correction. 
This view precludes any investigation of difficulty that occurs in the absence of observable error such as a 
learner's preemptive action when anticipating difficulty. Kormos (2000) labels such occurrences as covert 
self-repair, whereby a learner notices an error prior to articulation and repairs it. Most of the SLA 
research on self-repair involves the overt variety since the phenomenon of covert self-repair can only be 
explored in highly controlled experimental settings or through the use of verbal reports or stimulated 
recall (Gass & Mackey, 2000).  
Output 
Self-repair is a type of modified output first argued by Swain (1985) to be key in SLA and is now 
considered to be a fundamental construct in current SLA theory (Izumi, 2003; Shehadeh, 1999, 2002; 
Swain & Lapkin, 1995). Modified or "pushed" output refers to corrections or rephrasings that are elicited 
by the L2 learner's interlocutor. Swain's (1985; 2005) comprehensible output hypothesis argues for the 
importance of learner output in terms of enhancing the noticing of one's own errors and states that the role 
of output is, at a minimum, "to provide opportunities for contextualized, meaningful use, to test out 
hypotheses about the target language, and to move the learner from a purely semantic analysis of the 
language to a syntactic analysis of it" (p. 252). Swain & Lapkin (1995) argue that when learners produce 
the target language, external or internal feedback leads them to notice a gap in their existing (IL) 
knowledge. This noticing pushes them to consciously reprocess their utterances to produce modified 
output. Research also suggests that learning depends partly on learners' ability to focus on form when they 
notice such a gap in their IL and also on the extent to which noticing is learner-initiated (Doughty & 
Williams, 1998; Long & Robinson, 1998).  
The benefits of pushed output have also been discussed in terms of learner collaboration, which results in 
language related episodes "where students reflect consciously on the language they are producing" (Swain 
2001:53). Though much of the interactionist research to date suggest that language related episodes are 
often triggered by lexis, there is also evidence that a great deal of learner collaboration is related to form 
(Ohta, 2001; Swain, 2001). 
Though technically different from pushed output, self-initiated self-repairs are functionally similar to 
pushed output in that they serve to test hypotheses about the target language, trigger creative solutions to 
problems, and expand the learner's existing resources (Kormos, 1999). Self-repair, therefore, occupies an 
important position in SLA theory. 
Research on Self–repair 
Self-correction data have been collected through a variety of means in L2 research, including picture 
description, spatial description, interviews, storytelling, open narration, and information gap activities 
(Camps, 2003; Fathman, 1980; Kormos, 2000; Lennon, 1990; van Hest, 1996; Verhoeven, 1989). 
Generally speaking, the research to date on self-repair suggests that language learners tend to prefer self- 
over other-repair (Buckwalter, 2001; Foster & Ohta, 2005; van Lier, 1988); that L2 speakers self-repair 
more often than native speakers (Kormos, 2000; van Hest, 1996); and that self-repair more often leads to 
modified output than does other-initiated repair. Researchers have also explored various types of self-
repairs such as repairs of the message conveyed, repairs in the manner of expression (or appropriateness 
repairs), and error repairs, which have included lexical, phonetic, and grammatical repairs. Out of this 
work emerge trends in the type of SISR that occurs during learner interaction as well as several key 
variables that affect the nature and amount of self-repair, including learner preferences, developmental 
factors, and task type.   
Bryan Smith Methodological Hurdles in Capturing CMC Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 87 
Types of self-repair 
In most of the SLA research on self-repair, researchers have generally concentrated on the focus and 
structure of self-repair. Kormos (2000) found that lexical errors were repaired considerably more 
frequently than grammatical errors in the L2. This is in line with a general assumption by researchers of 
L2 production that L2 learners pay considerably more attention to lexical appropriateness than to 
grammatical accuracy. Kormos also found that the distribution of self-repairs shows no considerable 
difference between L1 and L2 data in the frequency of the various types of self-repairs. In contrast, 
Lennon (1990) found relatively little self-correction among his university level L1 German L2 English 
speakers, though when they did self-correct they most often focused on lexical items. Fathman (1980) 
found that 50% of all repairs were lexical in nature. 
Van Hest (1996) discusses self-repair structure in terms of three components: 1) a reparandum, which is 
either an error or an inappropriate expression; 2) an editing phase, which occurs immediately following 
the interruption of the flow of speech; and 3) a reparatum, which is the actual correction or change of the 
problematic item. Much of this work is based on research from L1 psycholinguistics and Levelt's (1983) 
repair classification system (Kormos, 2000; van Hest, 1996). This work makes a distinction between overt 
and covert repair. From this perspective, covert repairs (those made before articulation) proceed the same 
way as overt repairs. One must infer covert repair through indirect evidence such as word or phrase 
repetitions, syllabic repetition, silent pauses, etc. (Postma & Kolk, 1992). Van Hest proposes the model 
below for classifying overt self-repair. The present study adapts this model for classifying instances of 
SISR. The reasons for choosing the model proposed in van Hest (1996) for the current study were that 
this model is based largely on Levelt (1983), which has been applied widely in the in the literature on 
self-repair (Kormos, 2000).  Further, this model is quite systematic and reliable, emerging out of a corpus 
of almost 5,000 self-repairs produced by Dutch speakers in their L1 and L2 across various task types. 
Finally, adapting such a strong existing taxonomy allows for more powerful comparisons of results across 
related studies.  
Overt Self-Repairs 
• Error repair (E-repair): Those repairs made because the speaker has made an error. 
• Appropriateness repair (A-repair): Those repairs made because the speaker thinks the original 
message is inappropriate in some way. For example, a message may be perceived as not having been 
specific enough.  
• Different repair (D-repair): Those repairs in which the speaker interrupts his current message to 
introduce a new, totally different topic. 
• Rest repair (R-repair): All other types of overt self-repair. 
Covert Self-Repairs 
• Those cases whereby the speaker discovers imminent trouble in his/her message and “interrupts” 
him/herself before the troublesome item is uttered. 
In this work van Hest (1996) found that appropriateness repairs accounted for 39.7% of self-repairs, with 
error repairs making up 22.4%, different repairs 10.1%, with 12.3% of self-repairs remaining unclassified. 
Covert repairs made up 15.5% of all L2 self-corrections. Interestingly, Levelt's model does not explain 
where errors of morphology should go, though some researchers have collapsed syntactic and 
morphological errors together in a broader category of "grammatical" errors (Lai & Zhao, 2006).  
Developmental factors in self-repair 
Both age and L2 proficiency level seem to affect the amount and nature of self-repair (Camps, 2003; 
Fathman 1980; Kormos, 1999; van Hest, 1996; Verhoeven, 1989). Of these factors, proficiency-related 
variables in self-repair are particularly relevant to the current study. Camps (2003) suggests that learners 
who make a large number of errors possess a more limited knowledge of the target language, and 
Bryan Smith Methodological Hurdles in Capturing CMC Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 88 
therefore are not as well prepared to notice errors and correct them. They may be unaware of errors 
because either they do not know what a correct form would look like or they are too busy attending to 
other elements in their production (like finding suitable lexical items to express their ideas).  
In contrast, van Hest (1996) found that advanced learners correct themselves less frequently than lower 
level learners. Additionally, beginning and intermediate L2 speakers produced significantly more self-
repairs of lexical errors and significantly fewer repairs of lexical appropriateness than the advanced L2 
speakers. Likewise, Kormos (1999) found that participants at a higher level of proficiency self-corrected 
linguistic errors significantly less frequently than learners at the pre-intermediate level, whereas they 
repaired the appropriateness of informational content more frequently than pre-intermediate students did.  
Task type as a variable in self-repair 
L2 self-repair research also reveals that the frequency of repairs concerning the information content of the 
message varies across tasks (Poulisse, 1997; van Hest, 1996). Van Hest, for example, suggests an effect 
for task type, concluding that tasks requiring more precise expression will result in more appropriateness 
repairs than in tasks with less-rigid structure. Kormos (2000) also suggests that the frequency of 
appropriateness repairs both in L1 and L2 is affected by task characteristics and the situational variables 
of the interaction. 
Self-Repair in a CALL Context 
Self-repair has been accepted by many as evidence of noticing (Lai & Zhao, 2006), which has been 
argued to be fundamental to the SLA process (Schmidt, 1993). Text-based chat has been argued to be a 
good venue for exploring self-repair, since it seems to provide an increase in processing time and 
opportunity for learners to focus on form (Pellettieri, 1999; Shehadeh, 2001; Smith, 2004), which may 
lead to a heightened potential for noticing one's own errors. Indeed, Yuan (2003) suggests that the nature 
of SCMC requires learners to attend to both linguistic forms as well as the meaning of their 
communication. 
The printed text may also add to the salience of input and output in general and the noticing of non-target-
like input and output in particular (Izumi, 2002; Salaberry, 2000; Smith, 2004). Smith has also argued that 
a heightened saliency of linguistic input and output is a favorable byproduct of the CMC interface, with 
increased saliency due largely to the permanence of the message. This notion of permanence has also 
been used to explain the lack of learner uptake in a synchronous computer-mediated communication 
(SCMC) environment (Smith, 2005). Kitade (2000) suggests that internet chat provides opportunities for 
learners to self correct both grammatical and pragmatic errors in their own linguistic output for essentially 
two reasons: first, there is no turn-taking competition and, second, there is more time for things like self-
monitoring. Also, there are few paralinguistic cues available in text-based chat, which might reduce the 
sense of urgency to respond, and this, in turn, might facilitate learners' ability to monitor their language 
output more closely.  SCMC texts are not ephemeral like oral/aural input and learners can scroll up/down 
to access an earlier message quite easily. Whether they in fact do this is an empirical question. Taken 
together, these features may positively influence a learner's ability to notice and subsequently correct non-
target like language (Lai & Zhao, 2006; Smith & Gorsuch, 2004).  
Recent studies on CMC self repair 
Studies of self-repair in a CMC context are few. Those that do exist tend not to build on the existing work 
on self-repair (from the non-CMC applied linguistics literature) and take a limited view of the types of 
self-repair investigated. These studies are often stifled by a failure to employ existing technology in the 
data collection and evaluation phases of the research.  
Jepson (2005) found that though both voice and text chats contained various types of repair moves, self-
correction was not among them. He suggests that self-correction in an SCMC context may be rare 
Bryan Smith Methodological Hurdles in Capturing CMC Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 89 
because speakers do not notice their errors or because the non-native speaker – non-native speaker SCMC 
context is not conducive to self-correction. Lee (2002) considered self-corrections in the framework of a 
broader study on the nature of modification devices in a CMC environment and categorized them as 
belonging to one of two categories, lexical or grammatical. Though no statistical data were provided, Lee 
reports that most of the self-corrections made by her intermediate-level L2 learners of Spanish were made 
on the "concordance of gender and number" (p. 284), and only occasionally was incorrect usage of lexical 
items recognized and self-corrected. She suggests that learner keyboarding skills, language proficiency, 
and attention to linguistic aspects might contribute to a high number of errors in (written) production.  
Yuan (2003) found that of 512 errors in his CMC data, only 44 or 8.59% of them were self-repaired. Over 
43% of the self-repairs were grammatical in nature (sentence structure, agreement, noun/article, and 
preposition), though errors of nouns/articles and prepositions were only very rarely self-corrected. Errors 
of verb tense, modals, and adjective-noun sequences were never self-corrected. Lexical self-repairs 
accounted for almost 30% of the self-repairs. Yuan also counted self-repairs of spelling errors (25%).  
Most notable is the fact that although learners made 57 verb tense errors (exactly as many as sentence 
structure errors), none of these errors were self-corrected. Yuan argues that evaluating such CMC chat 
logs allows one the advantage of seeing certain processes that the learner undergoes while trying to 
construct meaning in their L2, arguing that they provide "real, recorded examples of errors (repaired or 
unrepaired) learners made while trying to achieve certain communicative goals" (p. 204). 
One of the very few studies to employ screen capture technology in an SLA/CALL study is Lai & Zhao's 
(2006) study which examines the capacity of text-based chat to promote learners' noticing of their own 
problematic production. In this study instances of learner self-correction are viewed as evidence of 
noticing. Lai & Zhao found that online chat was superior to face-to-face interaction for promoting 
noticing of mistakes even after controlling for differences in the amount of language output produced in 
each condition.  
As we can see from these few studies, using printed chat logs in the evaluation of SCMC data is the 
methodological "industry standard" (with the notable exception of Lai & Zhao). Though chat logs 
certainly do have value for interpreting SCMC interaction, they fail to capture a significant portion of the 
data. It is precisely these "missing data" that may provide the most insight into the potential roles of 
monitoring, attention and noticing, and pushed output in interlanguage development within a CMC 
context. In order to gain a more complete view of learner CMC interaction, especially that which involves 
learner self-repair, use of a dynamic screen capture record is required. Relying on a static artifact to make 
claims about a dynamic process requires an uncomfortably wide and unnecessary leap of faith. 
For example, Jepson (2005) reports that there were absolutely no self-correction moves in his data, 
claiming that the SCMC environment is perhaps not conducive to self-correction. This seems unlikely 
since there is ample research that strongly suggests a heightened degree of attention to form in a CMC 
context. More likely is the possibility that significant self-repair did occur, but the data collection 
methodology employed was not sensitive enough to detect it. Jepson (2005) suggests employing 
technology that records each keystroke in an effort to uncover what he calls "hidden" self-correction. He 
comments that in his study it was not possible to observe if participants edited their own messages before 
they sent them and acknowledges that some self-correction repair moves may not have been measurable. 
This is an important point of which some CALL researchers have taken note (see, for example, 
Pellettieri's, 1999, use of YTalk). However, this approach is not only cumbersome when it comes to data 
analysis; it also obscures other potentially interesting elements of online interaction such as scrolling as a 
strategy to "recapture" previous content. Due to this limitation, Smith & Gorsuch (2004) suggest that 
claims about the occurrence of certain interactional moves and strategies largely require one to infer too 
much in those studies that use only a hard copy transcript of the interaction.  
Bryan Smith Methodological Hurdles in Capturing CMC Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 90 
It seems, then, that if there are instances of self-repair that appear on the chat logs, there must be many 
more that are attempted, but edited out before the message is sent to the interlocutor. It is important to 
note that from an interactionist perspective on SLA, the potential value of this output in the form of self-
repairs is not diminished by the fact that they may be subsequently edited out by the learner.  
CMCovert repair 
In an SCMC context a unique type of self-repair is possible that may be considered a CMC-specific form 
of self-repair. In this case a message is typed, but a self-initiated correction or rephrasing is executed 
before the message is sent to the interlocutor. The self-repair is certainly overt from a psychological 
perspective, but essentially "covert" from the interlocutor's perspective in that there is never any evidence 
of there having been a self-repair or rephrasing. Further, such repair is often not immediate and regularly 
contains several "embedded" self-repairs in the same evolving message. The proposed methodology 
allows an examination of this type of self-repair, heretofore lost to methodological limitations of the 
research design.  
This type of self-repair is different from true covert repair since, in the latter, we may not expect the same 
output-related benefit that may only be present upon actually producing the target language. Of course, 
some of the argued benefits of pushed output for the speaker are obtained only once the interlocutor reacts 
to a speaker's productive output. In an SCMC environment, these conditions will be the same, as will 
possible benefits achieved when one engages in truly covert self-repair2.  
However, what I term here as "CMCovert" self-repair is an interesting and largely unexplored 
phenomenon that may provide us valuable insights into the nature of such self-repair as well as the effect 
of CMCovert self-repair on SLA. Given the pervasiveness of such repairs I argue that any examination of 
the occurrence and possible effects of SCMC self-repair from the repairer’s point of view  simply must 
include this CMCovert self-repair. To do this one must abandon the practice of simply using printed chat 
logs to analyze CMC interactional data and employ more dynamic means such as screen capture 
technology. This does not only apply to investigations of self-repair, but to CMC learner interaction in 
general as suggested by Smith & Gorsuch (2004).  
THE CURRENT STUDY 
The purpose of the current study is two-fold. First, I wish to establish empirically just how misguided it 
would be for CALL researchers to continue to rely on printed chat logs alone when making SLA-related 
claims about SCMC interaction. This inadequacy is revealed by comparing two types of data from the 
same task-based interaction sessions: the printed chat log and the Camtasia screen capture video record of 
the same session for the same participants (hereafter chatscript). The amount of SISR, then, is the 
dependent variable in this study with the learners in this study serving as their own control group. Data 
collection/evaluation methodology is the independent variable. Second, the nature of learner self-repair in 
this SCMC context will be explored. Though there is considerable research on face-to-face self-repair, 
there is very little CALL work on this topic.  
Research Questions 
This study explores what Buckwalter (2001) has described as self-initiated self-repair, albeit in a SCMC 
environment. Following Lai & Zhao (2006), self-repairs were defined as episodes where the participants 
immediately corrected their own production without prompts from their interlocutors. Some of these 
episodes are visible on the final chat logs of each session and, as we will see, some are not. All SISR 
episodes, however, are visible on the video file of the relevant chat session.  
The research questions are as follows: 
Bryan Smith Methodological Hurdles in Capturing CMC Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 91 
• Does the hard copy transcript of chat interactions differ from that which is available using a screen 
capture program in terms of the amount of SISR that is evident? 
• What is the nature of CMCovert self-repair?  
In order to answer these questions, hard copies of all the chat logs for all participants across all tasks were 
analyzed and coded for instances of SISR. Hypothesis 1 predicts that evidence of a significantly higher 
amount of SISR will be found in the screen capture condition. This prediction is based largely on Smith & 
Gorsuch (2004), who found that a similar method of data collection captured a much richer picture of the 
CMC interaction of the participants in their study. Drawing from previous research on self-correction as 
well as CALL, a substantial amount of CMCovert self-repair is expected (Hypothesis 2a). More 
pronounced attention to form manifested in a higher number of grammatical self-repairs than lexical self-
repairs are expected due to the increased planning/monitoring, and processing time afforded by the CMC 
medium (compared to a face-to-face setting). Also, because of the relatively low proficiency level of the 
participants (Novice-High), more self-correction of grammar-related problems is expected (Hypothesis 
2b). It is also expected that few appropriateness (A) self-repairs relative to the number of error (E) self-
repairs will be found also due mostly to the relatively low proficiency level of the participants 
(Hypothesis 2c). A summary of the four directional hypotheses follows below: 
• Hypothesis 1: A significantly higher amount of SISR will be found in the screen capture condition 
than in the hard copy transcript condition. 
• Hypothesis 2a: A substantial amount of CMCovert self-repair is expected. 
• Hypothesis 2b: More SISR of grammar-related problems than lexical ones are expected.  
• Hypothesis 2c: Few appropriateness (A) SISRs relative to the number of error (E) SISRs will be 
found. 
Methodology 
Participants 
Forty-six beginner-high proficiency level students participated in this study as part of their regularly 
scheduled German language course at a major southwestern university in the United States. Students were 
required to meet once every other week in the foreign language micro-computing lab. Six CMC sessions 
were scheduled over the course of the semester. All students were either sophomore or junior 
undergraduates and all were native speakers of English. None were German majors. Their proficiency 
level and placement in the German sequence was determined by an in-house online placement test. All 
participants in the present study were characterized by the instructor of record as roughly at the ACTFL 
Novice-High proficiency level and were familiar with the chat function in Blackboard. All participants 
did complete one training session prior to data collection to ensure they were familiar with the general 
task and procedures since they were not necessarily accustomed to performing similar task-based CMC 
activities in their German class. Though there was some evidence of target cultural materials and short 
samples of authentic literature, the core textbook and instruction were largely organized along a 
grammatical syllabus.  
Materials  
Paired participants completed one jigsaw task per session over the course of the semester, which resulted 
in a potential total of six tasks per student (assuming perfect attendance). This task type was chosen 
because of its structural requirement of two-way information exchange by participants who are striving to 
reach a convergent goal. Pairs were not necessarily matched from week to week. Though each task was 
slightly different, they all follow Pica, Kanagy, and Falondon's (1993) task features for jigsaw tasks. Four 
of the six tasks were video-based, whereby one learner (learner A) would view a two-minute dramatic 
video clip that corresponded to the week's assigned course content. The other learner (learner B) would 
not view this clip but would study a series of eight stills from the same video clip, randomly arranged. 
Bryan Smith Methodological Hurdles in Capturing CMC Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 92 
The stills were such that a logical order was not discernable simply by examining the photos alone but 
quickly and easily sequenced upon viewing the clip from which they were taken. The remaining two tasks 
were standard sequential ordering tasks, where learners each held three out-of-sequence pictures which 
when put together made up a logical story sequence.  The video-based tasks were directly tied to the core 
content and textbook of the course and came from the ancillary DVD and workbook accompanying the 
main course textbook. Participants interacted with one another via the chat function in Blackboard and 
were assigned to one of various paired "groups" under Blackboard's Communication tool, Virtual 
Classroom. Following Smith & Gorsuch (2004) and Lai & Zhao (2006), the dynamic screen capture 
software Camtasia was employed to record exactly what appeared on each participant's computer screen 
in real time. Camtasia has the capability of recording and creating a movie file of each participant's 
computer screen, allowing one to play back the chat session in its entirety.   
Procedures  
Participants were required to attend and participate in each session since these were built into the syllabus 
of the course. Participation in the study was voluntary and followed the university's prescribed IRB 
protocol. The six CALL tasks described above were completed every other week during the middle part 
of the semester (over 12 weeks). Each class lasted approximately one hour. The average amount of time it 
took pairs to complete each task was just over 25.5 minutes as measured by the time stamp on the chat 
logs of the interactions. No specific time limit was placed on students once they began the task; however, 
given the length of the class, participants realistically had about 40 minutes to complete each task.  
All students worked collaboratively online with a partner. Each participant was given task sheet A or B. 
All of those holding task sheet A were grouped together and separate from those students in group B. This 
was done in order to reduce the chance that any participant would gain visual access to their interlocutor’s 
(partner’s) task sheet/video clip. For the video-based tasks, the clip for that session was made available to 
group A in each dyad. These students viewed the clip with headphones on while their partner studied the 
still images of various scenes from the same video clip (group B). Once the video clip had played through 
one time, participants were directed to interact with their assigned chat partner and decide the proper 
order of the pictures held by student B. In order to successfully complete this task, learner A had to 
describe in detail the events in the short video clip (in the target language) while learner B attempted to 
place the pictures in order based on these descriptions. Likewise, learner B was told to describe each 
picture to learner A in order to facilitate this ordering. Learners were instructed to interact using the target 
language with the goal of agreeing on a likely order to the still images held by learner B. Once this order 
was agreed on learners were to declare the task completed by typing the proposed order of the pictures 
and writing "finished". Upon task completion, Camtasia was stopped and the video record of the 
interaction saved to a removable storage drive. The chat logs of these interactions were saved 
automatically in Blackboard.  
Data analysis  
Following Kormos (2000), truly covert repairs were not considered in the data since one can only infer 
these occurrences. Rather, CMCovert self-repairs (those that are recorded, but which do not appear on the 
chat logs), as well as those which are truly overt (appearing on the chat logs), were considered. Following 
Lai & Zhao (2006) and Lee (2002), spelling mistakes/corrections were not counted in the data. Errors in 
the obligatory capitalization of German nouns and subsequent self-corrections were counted and coded as 
lexical errors (EL). Since the first research question sought to compare the amount of self-repair evident 
when employing two data collection methodologies in a paired groups fashion, only those participants 
whose chat records showed evidence of self-repair across both of these methodologies were candidates 
for inclusion in these data. To this end, all printed chat logs (n=94) of pair interaction were evaluated and 
coded for instances of self correction (method A) using the coding scheme below (see Table 1), which is 
adapted from van Hest (1996). Table 2 shows examples of each of these categories from the data. 
Bryan Smith Methodological Hurdles in Capturing CMC Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 93 
Table 1. Description of Types of Self-Repair. 
Type of self-repair Description 
Lexical (EL) 
The learner has selected the wrong word and substitutes the 
correct one for it. 
 
Morphological (EM) The learner corrects a morphological error. Error 
Syntactic (ES) 
The learner produces a grammatical construction which 
cannot be finished without violating the grammar of the 
target language. 
Lexical (AL) 
The learner replaces one term with another, usually more 
precise, term which better fits the concept s/he wishes to 
express. 
Syntactic (AS) The learner replaces the original syntactic construction with a construction which, in his/her opinion, is more appropriate. 
 
Appropriateness 
Insertion (AI) The speaker repeats part of the original utterance and inserts one or more words to specify his/her message. 
Different (D) The speaker interrupts his/her current message to introduce a new, totally different topic. Abandonments. 
Rest (R) All other self-repairs that do not fit cleanly into any of the other categories. 
Note: Other categories discussed in van Hest (1996) were either not appropriate for the CMC context, for 
example, phonological errors, or were not present in the data and, therefore, are not included in these 
tables. 
This resulted in a total of eight chatlogs. That is, out of the transcripts of the twenty-eight students 
completing the tasks described above, there was evidence of self-repair on only eight of the 94 chatlog 
transcripts, or 8.5%. This resulted in a total of 9 instances of self-repair (see Table 3). Next, the 
corresponding Camtasia file was viewed in its entirety (method B) for each corresponding transcript 
(n=8). Each video file was coded for instances of SISR according to the same coding scheme (Table 1).  
Table 2. Examples of Self-repair Types 
Type of self-repair Camtasia Chatlog 
Lexical (EL) …ist hat auch… …hat auch… 
Morphological (EM) …welche Buchstaben ist… …welche Buchstab ist … Error 
Syntactic (ES) …weil er dieas maädchen… …weil er das mädchen… 
Lexical (AL) …bitte Wurst und S Schnitzel. …bitte Schnitzel. 
Syntactic (AS) …wann er mit sein freundin… …wann er sein freundin… Appropriateness 
Insertion (AI) Drei Leute sind [im Morgen] im Restaurant. [+] 
Drei Leaute sind im Morgen 
im Restaurant. 
Different (D) die männer  sind look▌ wie sagt man looking to look at? wie sagt man to look at? 
Note: A coding scheme adapted from Smith & Gorsuch (2004) is shown in the Appendix. 
Results 
The chat data for the target learners yielded a total of 1,464 words. The number of words produced by 
these learners on the tasks considered ranged from 101 to 398 (M=183, SD=93). As can be seen from 
Bryan Smith Methodological Hurdles in Capturing CMC Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 94 
Table 3 below, there were many more instances of self-repair evident when using method B. A Wilcoxon 
Signed Ranks Test shows that significantly more instances of learner self-repair were captured using 
method B than method A (z = 2.53, p =. 01, r = .79; see Table 4). To allow for a clearer comparison to 
previous studies, "standardized scores" for instances of self-correction relative to the quantity of discourse 
produced by each participant were calculated.  As can be seen from Table 5, the Wilcoxon Signed Ranks 
Test yielded very similar results (z = 2.52, p = .01, r = .88). Viewed another way, learners who engaged in 
task-based CMC interaction with a partner actually self-repaired about six times per one hundred words 
(of printed transcript), whereas they appear to have self-repaired less than once per one hundred words 
based on the hard copies of the chat logs alone3.  
Table 3. Self-repairs by Type, Across Method of Data Collection 
Method Type of Self-Repair Chat log Camtasia Totals 
Lexical (EL) 3 23 26 
Morphological (EM) 2 29 31 
Syntactic (ES) 4 16 20 
Error 
Total (E) 9 68 77 
Lexical (AL) 0 5 5 
Syntactic (AS) 0 9 9 
Insertion (AI) 0 3 3 
Appropriateness 
Total (A) 0 17 17 
Different D 0 1 1 
Rest R 0 0 0 
 
Table 4. Comparison of Self-repairs in chat logs vs. Camtasia 
Method N M SD z p effect-size r 
A (Chat log) 8 1.13 .35  
B (Camtasia) 8 10.75 5.31 2.53 .01 .79 
 
Figure 1 below shows two transcript versions of the same chat interaction. The left column is the 
"Camtasia-enhanced" chatscript, which was transcribed while viewing the video screen capture file. The 
column on the right shows a traditional chat log of the same segment without the benefit of the Camtasia 
file. In column B only one instance of SISR is evident (lines 6b-7b) whereas column A shows at least 
three non-spelling self-repairs (lines 5a, 6a-7a, and 8a). The SISR in lines 5a and 8a go undetected when 
relying on printed chat logs alone. The appendix shows the coding scheme employed in evaluating the 
Camtasia data.  
Table 6 shows the data realigned to collapse the categories of morphological and syntactic self-
corrections together into the broader category of "grammatical" self-repair. This will allow for an easier 
comparison with data reported in previous studies discussed earlier. Although there were almost twice as 
many grammatical self-repairs as lexical self-repairs, this difference was not statistically significant. 
Finally, when we compare the differences in self-corrections of errors with self-corrections of 
appropriateness issues, we find that learners self-repaired significantly more errors (z = 2.53, p =. 01, r 
= .68; see Table 7). In order to see if there were any differences in which types of self-repairs learners 
engaged in within the error (EL, EM, ES) and appropriateness (AL, AS, AI) categories (see Table 3) a 
Friedman test was performed. Differences within each category were not statistically significant.  
 
Bryan Smith Methodological Hurdles in Capturing CMC Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 95 
SCMC Chatscript 
Column A 
Hard copy of transcript 
Column B 
1a. Pierre: er hat seine geschaft 
aufgeraumt  12:59:43  
2a. Pierre: bildung C er geht nach hause 
und seine garge ist nicht sauber  1:00:08  
3a. Daniel: D-Der man ging ins [2a] garage 
und es ist sehr schmustivg  1:00:29  
4a. Daniel: E-er gi heht raus deines  
zimmem er r  1:00:54  
5a. Daniel: F-ErDas Garage ist sauber und 
er hat eine hacke im hand  1:01:15  
6a. Daniel: **in deiner hand  1:01:26   
7a. Daniel: seiner*  1:01:31  
8a. Daniel: meine ist def  seine 
geschaftrft?  1:02:19 
9a. Daniel: ich habe kaein geschaft nur ein 
garage und ein Bettzimmer.  1:02:36  
1b. Pierre: er hat seine geschaft 
aufgeraumt  12:59:43  
2b. Pierre: bildung C er geht nach hause 
und seine garge ist nicht sauber  1:00:08  
3b. Daniel: D-Der man ging ins garage und 
es ist sehr schmustig  1:00:29  
4b. Daniel: E-er geht raus deines 
zimmer  1:00:54  
5b. Daniel: F-Das Garage ist sauber und er 
hat eine hacke im hand  1:01:15  
6b. Daniel: **in deiner hand  1:01:26   
7b. Daniel: seiner*  1:01:31  
8b. Daniel: seine geschaft?  1:02:19 
 
9b. Daniel: ich habe kein geschaft nur ein 
garage und ein Bettzimmer.  1:02:36 
Figure 1. Camtasia enabled chatscript and printed chat log comparison. Click the following link to view 
this actual segment from the data (link to Camtasia Example Flash file) 
 
Table 5. Self-Repairs Per Word Across the Two Data Collection Methods 
Method N M SD z P effect-size r 
A (Chat log) 8 .007 .003  
B (Camtasia) 8 .061 .020 2.52 .01 .88 
 
Table 6. Percentage of the Total Number of Self-Repairs (Grammatical vs. Lexical) 
Method Grammatical self-repairs Lexical self-repairs Other self-repairs (AI & D) 
A (Chat log) 6 (67%) 3 (33%) 0 (0%) 
B (Camtasia) 54 (63%) 28 (33%) 4 (5%) 
Note: Morphological and syntactic categories were collapsed together into a larger grammatical category 
 
Table 7. Method B Error and Appropriateness Self-Repairs 
Self-repair type N M SD z P effect-size r 
Errors 8 8.50 4.63  
Appropriateness 8 2.13 1.36 2.53 .01 .68 
 
In sum, the data suggest that the Camtasia screen capture method (method B) of data collection and 
analysis yields significantly more evidence of SISR than does the chat log method (method A). There are 
also significantly more SISRs of errors than appropriateness points. In all cases the effects were of a 
strong magnitude as indicated by the high effect-size r measure. No differences across sub-types of error 
and appropriateness SISRs were found. 
Bryan Smith Methodological Hurdles in Capturing CMC Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 96 
The degree of support for the specific hypotheses presented in the previous section is listed below: 
• Hypothesis 1: A significantly higher amount of SISR will be found in the screen capture condition 
than in the hard copy transcript condition. 
Result: Strongly supported 
• Hypothesis 2a: A substantial amount of CMCovert self-repair is expected. 
Result: Strongly supported 
• Hypothesis 2b: More SISR of grammar-related problems than lexical ones are expected.  
Result: Partially supported 
• Hypothesis 2c: Few appropriateness (A) SISRs relative to the number of error (E) SISRs will be 
found. 
Result: Strongly supported 
DISCUSSION 
The data suggest that relying on printed transcripts alone may create the impression that learners do not 
self-correct very often in an SCMC environment – clearly a faulty conclusion. Indeed, these numbers 
show that evaluating instances of self-correction on the basis of printed chat logs alone leads to an 
underestimation by over eight-fold of the amount of self correction that actually occurred. In fact, the 
present data may be a conservative estimate of this difference since Lai & Zhao's (2006) data show an 
even higher rate of self-correction in an SCMC setting (29 self-corrections per one hundred words). Such 
a pronounced and fundamental mis-characterization of the nature of SCMC interaction can help explain 
conclusions such as those in Jepson (2005) who, finding little self-repair in his CMC data, stated that 
though both voice and text chats contained various types of repair moves, self-correction was not among 
them. Jepson also suggests that self-correction in an SCMC context may be rare because speakers do not 
notice their errors, and thus would not need to correct them. Alternatively, he suggests that since self-
correction is very dependent on the social context of the interaction (Kormos, 1999), it may be that the 
non-native speaker – non-native speaker SCMC context is somehow not conducive to self-correction. For 
example, learners may not see the need for accuracy or may perceive self-correction as face threatening. 
This rationale, however, contradicts much of the recent CMC interactionist research which suggests that 
the CMC environment most likely enhances noticing (Lai & Zhao, 2006; Smith, 2004). 
The results from the current study are similar in some ways to previous findings and quite different in 
other ways. Yuan (2003) found that learners corrected under 9% of their errors in a CMC environment. 
His data, which includes self-repair of spelling errors, suggests that the CMC environment does not 
always make errors more salient to learners, at least not verb tense and modal errors, which were never 
self-repaired. In order to make Yuan's data more comparable to this study, the spelling self-corrections in 
his data need to be removed. This results in a new number of 33 self-repaired errors (down from 44) of 
which 20 were grammatical (61%) and 13 were lexical (39%). These numbers are quite similar to those 
found in the present study (63% and 33% respectively). It is also interesting to note that the method of 
data collection does not seem to influence the relative amount of each type of self-correction recorded 
(Table 6). This point is reinforced when we consider that Yuan's data were based on printed transcripts of 
the chat interaction. 
In terms of which types of SISR learners engage in, it seems the results are largely in conflict with the 
existing self-repair literature, which is largely limited to face-to-face studies. Van Hest (1996), for 
example, found that almost 40% of SISR were appropriateness repairs compared with 22% of error SISRs. 
Kormos (2000) reports that almost 39% of all SISRs were error repairs compared with almost 23% 
appropriateness SISRs. This study found a relatively high percentage of "different" repairs (almost 22%) 
Bryan Smith Methodological Hurdles in Capturing CMC Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 97 
as well. Kormos also found little difference in grammatical and lexical error self-repairs (16.9% and 
14.2% respectively), which is similar in some ways to the findings in the present study.  
The little data available that specifically focuses on learner self-correction in a CMC environment 
suggests that learners do self-correct in an SCMC task-based setting, perhaps due to a heightened degree 
of noticing, which is fostered by the SCMC environment itself. Second, learners tend to focus on errors 
rather than appropriateness issues when engaged in SISR and virtually no "different" and "rest" points. 
Third, learners seem to correct grammatical points more often than lexical points, though this difference 
was not statistically significant.  
Though it is normally of little value to compare CALL with face-to-face studies, it is interesting to note 
the pronounced differences in what learners seem to self-correct across the two environments. Taken 
together, the face-to-face self-repair literature seems to show a clear preference for lexical self-repairs 
over grammatical self-repairs, precisely the opposite of that found in most of the SCMC studies. The 
question, then, is why this may be so. 
Written communication normally affords more opportunity for attention to form, whereas spoken 
language often occurs under more time pressure to achieve fluency (Chapelle, 2003). The SCMC 
interaction allows for more processing time, which is conducive to focusing on form. The visual saliency 
of the text as well as the permanency of the written word, which enables one to review the previous 
"utterances," allows learners to focus their attention on the formal aspects of their output without 
disrupting the flow of communication.  
Context Influencing the Nature of Self-Correction 
Linguistic context 
It is not surprising that self-repair of grammar-related problems is so common in the data given the 
relatively high percentage of morphological errors made by the learners. Aside from the noted potential 
for the CMC environment to enhance a focus on form, it may also be that errors that do not require a 
major restructuring of the utterance, but rather merely need to apply simple rules of grammar (as do 
morphological errors) are more likely to be self-corrected by L2 speakers (Kormos, 2000). In the SCMC 
environment this condition may be enhanced as these relatively "minor" morphological errors are 
rendered more salient due largely to their "permanence" on the screen. This may help explain why Table 
3 shows nearly a 2:1 ratio of the number of morphological errors self-repaired to the number of syntactic 
errors repaired in the Camtasia condition.  
Classroom Context 
The nature of the language instruction that the learners are used to may influence what they choose to 
self-correct. For example, if learners receive instruction that stresses the importance of grammatical 
accuracy in successful communication and students regard grammatical errors as serious flaws in their 
performance, they may make an effort to correct their grammatical errors. This notion is supported by 
Bardovi-Harlig and Dörnyei (1998), who found that grammatical errors were more salient for L2 speakers 
in a foreign language setting than for L2 learners in a naturalistic environment. The students in the present 
study fall clearly into the former category. 
There may also be a complex combination of L1 and L2 linguistic, classroom, and cultural influences that 
come together to influence the nature of SISR. Shonerd (1994) notes the seeming selectivity of learner 
self-repair and suggests the nature of self-repair may be culturally bound. His Japanese L1 speakers made 
more morphological and syntactic self-repairs of their English usage and fewer lexical and pronunciation 
repairs than did other L1 groups. In terms of the present data, there were numerous SISRs that involved 
the capitalization of German nouns. As mentioned, these SISRs were coded as lexical errors. The 
Bryan Smith Methodological Hurdles in Capturing CMC Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 98 
interaction of German and English linguistic factors and the classroom cultural context may have come 
together to influence the nature of SISRs in this study.  
Limitations of the Current Study 
Perhaps the clearest limitation of the current findings is the small sample size (n=8) from which the data 
are drawn. Thus, it is hard to generalize from these data. However, the choice was made from the outset 
to include only those chat records which contained hard copy evidence of SISR. This resulted in a low 
pool of participants (much lower than actually took part in the study) from which the self-repair data was 
drawn. Indeed, this is the only way to really make the comparisons needed to answer research question 1, 
which asked whether the hard copy transcript of chat interactions would differ significantly from a 
Camtasia-enabled transcript. 
Perhaps another limitation was that the interaction was not anonymous. The role of anonymity in CMC 
interaction is well established (Zhao, 1998). It could be that knowing who one's interlocutor is has some 
effect on the amount and nature of one's SISR. For example, it could be that knowing the identity of one's 
interlocutor may affect whether or not one self corrects depending on the learner's relationship to that 
interlocutor. This is an empirical question that could be taken up in future research. 
Another limitation is that the tasks learners completed each week, while conforming broadly to Pica, 
Kanagy, and Falondon's (1993) jigsaw task type, were slightly different, which may have influenced the 
nature of the SISRs. In addition to the large body of literature on the effect of task type on learner 
interaction, the self-repair literature also suggests that the frequency and type of self-repair is affected by 
the task structure (see, for example, van Lier, 1988). It would be interesting to test van Hest's (1996) 
assertion that those tasks requiring more precise expression will result in more A-repair. A first step in 
this work would be to establish what exactly draws out "more precise" expression in an SCMC context 
that goes beyond the "precision" elicited by the CMC medium itself. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS  
The results of this study suggest that relying on printed chat logs alone when analyzing SCMC data is a 
very tenuous undertaking. The recommendation here is to abandon this practice in CMC research in favor 
of one similar to that presented in this study, at least when data salient to the specific area of inquiry may 
be lost. 
Future inquiry using this methodology may include exploring the influence of classroom context on the 
type of self-correction. It would be interesting to see if, for example, learners accustomed to a 
communicative classroom context engage in a different type of SISR than those learners who are used to 
more structure-oriented contexts. Second, because there seems to be a trend toward learners self-repairing 
grammatical points rather than lexical ones in a SCMC environment, it would be interesting to explore 
this notion further with larger numbers of students perhaps across various target languages. As it stands, 
there is a theoretical rationale to explain this occurrence as well as some empirical evidence to support it, 
but the data are far from conclusive. Third, the SCMC medium may itself influence the nature of SISR. 
One artifact of this medium is the ability learners have of scrolling back in the chat text to review 
previous messages. Indeed, Lai & Zhao (2006) base some of their predictions on this assumption. Though 
such occurrences in an SCMC setting are well established, the influence of this feature of SCMC 
interaction has not specifically been shown to directly impact the nature or amount of SISR. Future 
research may wish to explore this idea more explicitly. Finally, it seems that existing models of SISR are 
insufficient to account for what occurs in an SCMC context. A model of SISR specific to the SCMC 
context would be helpful for future inquiry into this important area of applied linguistics. 
 
Bryan Smith Methodological Hurdles in Capturing CMC Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 99 
NOTES 
1. Self-repair in this paper is considered synonymous with self-initiated self-completed correction. Self 
repair and self-correction are used interchangeably. 
2. As one reviewer points out, in true covert repair learners may engage in hypothesis testing in their 
minds as evidenced in some think aloud protocols. However, I argue that CMCovert self-repair is indeed 
unique in that in an SCMC environment we often see many lengthy and embedded self-repairs, whereas 
in a face-to-face environment these are often shorter, more direct, and immediate. 
3. The number of words produced by each individual was used when calculating this figure and not the 
total words produced by the dyad. 
 
Bryan Smith Methodological Hurdles in Capturing CMC Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 100 
APPENDIX 
SCMC Coding Scheme 
Coding symbol Meaning Explanation 
 
strikethrough 
Indicates text that has been 
typed and subsequently 
deleted before message is 
sent. 
Strikethrough shows messages or parts of messages 
that a learner has typed but deleted before sending 
the final message. None of the strikethrough text 
appears on the screen of the interlocutor nor on the 
hard copy of the chat log. 
 
Black bar + 
underline ▌ 
 
Indicates text with embedded 
deletion has been deleted. 
Black vertical bar indicates 
where deletion begins. 
Deleted text is underlined to 
the left of the bar. 
Black bar + underline is used when a message or 
part of a message which already has some deleted 
sections is subsequently deleted in its entirety. This 
coding allows the acknowledgment of deletions of 
text with embedded deletions.  
 
 
[post-hoc inserted 
text] 
 
Indicates that the text within 
the brackets has been 
inserted at a later point in the 
message. 
Note: A second, third, etc. occurrence of post-hoc 
inserted text is signified with double/triple brackets 
respectively [[text]], [[[text]]].   
 
[post-hoc deleted 
text] 
Indicates that the deleted text 
within the brackets was 
deleted at a later point in the 
message. 
Note: A second, third, etc. occurrence of post-hoc 
deleted text is signified with double/triple brackets 
respectively [[text]], [[[text]]].   
 
[+] 
Indicates the point in the 
message at which the [post-
hoc inserted text] was 
inserted.  
Note: The point in the message at which a second, 
third, etc. post-hoc insertion is made is signified 
with double/triple brackets respectively [[+]], 
[[[+]]].  
 
[-] 
Indicates the point in the 
message at which the [post-
hoc deleted text] was 
deleted. 
Note: The point in the message at which a second, 
third, etc. post-hoc deletion is made is signified with 
double/triple brackets respectively [[-]], [[[-]]]. 
 
[+/-] 
Indicates the point in the 
message at which a correction 
was made. 
This code is used for short one or two character 
corrections such as for capitalization, spelling, typos, etc. 
This code eliminates the need for using the more lengthy 
[-][+] in sequence.  
 
 
[line number] 
 
Example: [3] 
Indicates the point in text 
currently being typed but not 
yet sent where a new line 
from the interlocutor appears 
on the screen of the target 
participant.  
Often a line from the interlocutor will appear on the 
screen mid-way through a message which is in the 
process of being typed. This code indicates both the 
point at which this new message appears and its line 
number on the chat log/chatscript. For example in 
the chat text below Jordan's line 3 appears while 
Katarina is typing line 6. Specifically, it occurs 
immediately after Katarina types the word "nimmt". 
 
 
 
Bryan Smith Methodological Hurdles in Capturing CMC Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 101 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The author wishes to thank the following people (in alphabetical order). Shana Bell, Jamison Gray, Peter 
Lafford, and, of course, the participants in the study. Also, many thanks go out to the reviewers and those 
at LLT for such insightful suggestions and close reading of the manuscript. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Bryan Smith is Assistant Professor of Educational Linguistics at Arizona State University. His research 
interests include language learner interaction and computer-mediated communication in the 
second/foreign language classroom. 
Email: bryansmith@asu.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Bardovi-Harlig, K., & Dornyei, Z. (1998). Do language learners recognize pragmatic violations? 
Pragmatic versus grammatical awareness in instructed L2 learning. TESOL Quarterly, 32, 233-262.  
Buckwalter, P. (2001). Repair sequences in Spanish L2 dyadic discourse: A descriptive study. The 
Modern Language Journal, 85, 380-397.  
Camps, J. (2003). The analysis of oral self-correction as a window into the development of past time 
reference in Spanish. Foreign Language Annals, 36, 233-242.  
Chapelle, C. (2003). English language learning and technology: Lectures on applied linguistics in the age 
of information and communication technology. Philadelphia: John Benjamins.  
Doughty, C., & J. Williams. (Eds.). (1998). Focus on form in classroom second language acquisition. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Fathman, A. (1980). Repetition and correction as an indication of speech planning and execution 
processes among second language learners. In H. Dechert, & M. Raupach (Eds.), Towards a cross-
linguistic assessment of speech production (pp. 77-85). Frankfurt: Lang. 
Foster, P., & Ohta, A. S. (2005). Negotiation for meaning and peer assistance in second language 
classrooms. Applied Linguistics, 26, 402-430. 
Gass, S. M., & Mackey, A. (2000). Stimulated recall methodology in second language research. Mahwah, 
NJ: Erlbaum Associates. 
Izumi, S. (2003). Comprehension and production processes in second language learning: In search of the 
psycholinguistic rationale of the output hypothesis. Applied Linguistics, 24, 168-196.  
Jepson, K. (2005). Conversations and negotiated interaction in text and voice chatrooms. Language 
Learning & Technology, 9(3), 79-98.  
Kormos, J. (1999). Monitoring and self-repair in L2. Language Learning, 49, 303-342.  
Kormos, J. (2000). The role of attention in monitoring second language speech production. Language 
Learning, 50, 343-384.  
Lai, C., & Zhao, Y. (2006). Noticing and text-based chat. Language Learning & Technology, 10(3), 102-
120.  
Bryan Smith Methodological Hurdles in Capturing CMC Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 102 
Lee, L. (2002). Synchronous online exchanges: A study of modification devices on non-native discourse. 
System, 30, 275-288.  
Lennon, P. (1990). Investigating fluency in EFL: A quantitative approach. Language Learning, 40, 387-
417. 
Levelt, W. (1983). Monitoring and self-repair in speech. Cognition, 14, 41-104. 
Long, M.H., & Robinson, P. (1998). Focus on form: Theory, research, and practice. In C. Doughty & J. 
Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in classroom SLA (pp. 15-41). New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Ohta, A. S. (2001). Second language acquisition processes in the classroom setting. Learning Japanese. 
Mahweh, NJ: Erlbaum Associates. 
Pellettieri, J. (1999). Why-talk? Investigating the role of task-based interaction through synchronous 
network-based communication among classroom learners of Spanish. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, 
University of California, Davis. 
Pica, T., Kanagy, R., & Falodun, J. (1993). Choosing and using communication tasks for second language  
research and instruction. In G. Crookes & S. M. Gass (Eds.), Tasks and second language learning (pp. 9–
34). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Postma, A., & Kolk, H. (1992). The effects of noise masking and required accuracy on speech errors, 
disfluencies, and self-repairs. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 35, 537-544.  
Poulisse, N. (1997). Compensatory strategies and the principles of clarity and economy. In G. Kasper & E. 
Kellerman, Communication strategies: Psycholinguistic and sociolinguistic perspectives (pp. 49-64). 
London: Longman. 
Schmidt, R. (1993). Awareness and second language acquisition. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 
13, 206–226. 
Shehadeh, A. (2002). Comprehensible output, from occurrence to acquisition: An agenda for acquisitional 
research. Language Learning, 52, 597-647. 
Shehadeh, A. (2001). Self-and other-initiated modified output during task-based interaction. TESOL 
Quarterly, 35, 433-457.  
Shehadeh, A. (1999). Non-native speakers' production of modified comprehensible output and second 
language learning. Language Learning, 49, 627-675. 
Shonerd, H. (1994). Repair in spontaneous speech: A window on second language development. In V. 
John-Steiner, C. Panofsky & L. W. Smith, (Eds.) Sociocultural approaches to language and literacy: An 
interactionist perspective (pp. 82-108). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  
Smith, B. (2004). Computer-mediated negotiated interaction and lexical acquisition. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition, 26, 365-398. 
Smith, B. (2005). The relationship between negotiated interaction, learner uptake, and lexical acquisition 
in task-based computer-mediated communication. TESOL Quarterly, 39, 33-58.  
Smith, B., & Gorsuch, G. J. (2004). Synchronous computer mediated communication captured by 
usability lab technologies: New interpretations. System, 32, 553-575.  
Swain, M. K. (1985). Communicative competence: Some roles of comprehensible input and 
comprehensible output in its development. In S. M. Gass & C. G. Madden (Eds.), Input in second 
language acquisition (pp. 235–253). Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
Bryan Smith Methodological Hurdles in Capturing CMC Data 
 
Language Learning & Technology 103 
Swain, M. (2001). Integrating language and content teaching through collaborative tasks. Canadian 
Modern Language Review, 58, 44-63.  
Swain, M. (2005). The output hypothesis: Theory and research. In E. Hinkel (Ed.), Handbook on research 
in second language teaching and learning (pp. 471-484). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.  
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (1995). Problems in output and the cognitive processes they generate: A step 
towards second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 16, 371-391.  
van Hest, E. (1996). Self-repair in L1 and L2 production. Tilburg: Tilburg University Press. 
van Lier, L. (1988). The classroom and the language learner. New York: Longman. 
Verhoeven, L. T. (1989). Monitoring in children's second language speech. Second Language Research, 5, 
141-155.  
Wouk, F. (2005). The syntax of repair in Indonesian. Discourse Studies, 7, 237-258.  
Zhao, Y. (1998). The effects of anonymity on peer review. International Journal of Educational 
Telecommunication, 4, 311-346. 
 
