 News From Our Sponsors 
 
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS 
Sponsors 
University of Hawai`i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR) 
Co-Sponsor 
Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL) 
 
University of Hawai'i National Foreign Language Resource 
Center (NFLRC) 
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials 
development projects and conducts workshops and conferences for language professionals among its 
many activities. 
FILIPINO AS A GLOBAL LANGUAGE: FUTURE DIRECTIONS & PROSPECTS 
This conference, to be held on March 17-19, 2008 at the University of Hawai‘i at Manoa, is a venue for 
bringing together scholars, writers, language teachers, researchers and other practitioners from around the 
world to discuss issues pertaining to the role of Filipino as a global language. Participants can be teachers, 
researchers, program administrators/coordinators and other practitioners who are directly involved in the 
promotion and nurturing of the Filipino language, literature and culture. This first conference is geared 
towards establishing a tradition of scholarly meetings of this kind among practitioners in the field of 
Filipino language, literature and culture studies.  (The NFLRC serves as co-sponsor for this event). 
2008 SECOND LANGUAGE RESEARCH FORUM 
Just in! With the theme, Exploring SLA: Perspectives, Positions, and Practices, the Second Language 
Research Forum (SLRF) returns to the University of Hawai‘i at Manoa for the third time on October 17-
19. 2008 (with the NFLRC serving as co-sponsor). Check out our website as more information becomes 
available. 
NEW NFLRC PUBLICATIONS 
Selected papers from Pragmatics in the CJK Classroom: The State of the Art 
This online collection (http://nflrc.hawaii.edu/CJKProceedings/) presents 10 selected papers from the 
forum on Pragmatics in the CJK Classroom: The State of the Art held from June 5 to June 7, 2006 at the 
University of Hawai‘i-Manoa in Honolulu, Hawai‘i. The papers are representative of the many 
outstanding contributions to the field of L2 pragmatics that were presented at the gathering. The papers 
are also representative of the diverse range of research interests and pedagogical issues taken up by the 
conference presenters. Cumulatively, the papers in this volume address current concerns in L2 pragmatics 
that range from the development of pragmatic competence by children and college-age students in both 
foreign and second language settings to pragmatics-focused instruction in the foreign language classroom 
for students at all levels of foreign language learning. The pedagogically-oriented contributions are 
diverse in their scope: from innovative approaches for teaching true beginners to the specialized 
curriculum of students receiving post-graduate professional training. Instructional innovations for L2 
classroom pragmatics-focused teaching from each of the language groups — Chinese, Japanese, and 
Korean — are included. 
Check out our many other publications. 
OUR ONLINE JOURNALS SOLICIT SUBMISSIONS 
Language Learning & Technology  13
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology is a refereed online journal, jointly sponsored by the University of 
Hawai`i NFLRC and the Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research 
(CLEAR). LLT focuses on issues related to technology and language education. For more information on 
submission guidelines, visit the LLT submissions page. 
Language Documentation & Conservation is a fully refereed, open-access journal sponsored by NFLRC 
and published exclusively in electronic form by the University of Hawai‘i Press. LD&C publishes papers 
on all topics related to language documentation and conservation. For more information on submission 
guidelines, visit the LD&C submissions page. 
Reading in a Foreign Language is a refereed online journal, jointly sponsored by the University of 
Hawai`i NFLRC and the Department of Second Language Studies. RFL serves as an excellent source for 
the latest developments in the field, both theoretical and pedagogic, including improving standards for 
foreign language reading. For more information on submission guidelines, , visit the RFL submissions 
page. 
 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education 
and Research (CLEAR) 
CLEAR's mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States.  
Projects focus on materials development, professional development training, and foreign language 
research. 
MATERIALS DEVELOPMENT 
Selected Products 
The list below comprises just some of our free and low-cost materials for language educators.  Be sure to 
visit our website occasionally for updates and announcements on new products: http://clear.msu.edu. 
• NEW!  Celebrating the World’s Languages: A Guide to Creating a World Languages Day Event 
(guide) – This publication provides a step-by-step guide to planning "World Languages Day," a 
university event for high school students designed to stimulate interest in learning languages and 
to highlight the importance of cultural awareness. 
• NEW!  La phonétique française (CD-ROM) – Now available in beta version, this cross-platform 
multimedia program consists of interactive lessons that can be used by French teachers to learn 
how to teach pronunciation, or by advanced students working independently. 
• CLEAR’s Rich Internet Applications initiative has been underway for over a year. RIA is a 
research and development lab where our programmers are working on free tools that language 
teachers can use to create online language teaching materials – or have their students create 
activities themselves! 
o NEW!  Audio Dropboxes (put a dropbox in any web page; students’ recordings get put 
into your dropbox automatically) 
o NEW!  Conversations (record prompts for students to do virtual interviews and 
conversations) 
o Mashups (combine media elements to create a new resource for language teaching) 
o Viewpoint (record or upload videos to link from other sites or embed inside your own 
web pages) 
o SMILE (tool for creating interactive online exercises) 
• MIMEA: Multimedia Interactive Modules for Education and Assessment (German, Chinese, 
Arabic, Vietnamese, Korean, Russian; online video clips and activities) 
Language Learning & Technology  14
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  15
• Language Learning Materials for Russian: A Content-Based Course Pack (online learning 
modules) 
 
Coming Soon! • Introductory Business German (CD-ROM) 
PARTNERSHIP WITH ACTFL 
In January and February 2008, CLEAR collaborated with the American Council on the Teaching of 
Foreign Languages (ACTFL) to manage their student video podcast contest, “Not Just a Language 
Class!”  This contest was part of the Discover Languages… Discover the World! 
(http://www.discoverlanguages.org) national public awareness campaign to build public support for 
language education.  Students were asked to create a two-minute video podcast depicting how the study 
of other languages had had an impact on their lives.  ACTFL contacted CLEAR and requested that we 
create an online submission and storage system for the podcast entries based on our Rich Internet 
Application called Viewpoint.  We were able to tailor the contest website to ACTFL’s needs, and look 
forward to future collaboration – watch for this annual contest!  (ACTFL is using our Rich Internet 
Applications… are you?  http://ria.clear.msu.edu)  
CONFERENCES 
CLEAR exhibits at local and national conferences year-round. We hope to see you at ACTFL, CALICO, 
MiWLA, NCOLCTL, Central States, and other conferences. 
UPCOMING CONFERENCE PRESENTATIONS 
• Central States Conference - Dearborn, MI - March 6-8, 2008  
• Workshop: Using Rich Internet Applications in Your Classroom 
• Session: Report from the R&D Lab: Rich Internet Applications for Language Learning 
• Session: Reaching Out and Building Enrollment through a "World Languages Day"  
• CALICO - San Francisco, CA - March 18-22, 2008  
• Session: Learners' Perception and Preference of Audio Stimuli During an Online Pragmatics 
Test  
NEWSLETTER 
CLEAR News is a biyearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. Contact 
the CLEAR office to join the mailing list or check it out on the Web at http://clear.msu.edu/newsletter/. 
We welcome your submissions! 
 
The Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL) 
The Center for Applied Linguistics is a private, nonprofit organization that promotes and improves the 
teaching and learning of languages, identifies and solves problems related to language and culture, and 
serves as a resource for information about language and culture. CAL carries out a wide range of 
activities in the fields of English as a second language, foreign languages, cultural education, and 
linguistics.  
Featured Resources: 
• CAL News 
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  16
 our new periodic electronic newsletter created to provide periodic updates about our 
 
• 
 (the Alliance) consists of individuals and 
 
• 
ruction in elementary and secondary schools 
• or Research on the Educational Achievement and Teaching of English Language 
d CREATE Web site to learn more about CREATE, its research and 
sletter 
•  
ages campaign led by ACTFL, CAL has developed a regular Web 
 
• 
 variety of professional development and technical assistance services related to 
 
ecent Publications: 
 for Dual Language Education, Second Edition 
s 
rams and Classrooms 
isit CAL’s Web site to learn more about our projects, resources, and services. 
CAL News is
projects and research s well as information about new publications, online resources, products, and
services of interest to our readers. Visit our Web site to sign up. 
Alliance for the Advancement of Heritage Languages 
The Alliance for the Advancement of Heritage Languages
organizations who share a commitment to advancing language development for heritage language 
speakers in the United States. The Alliance is committed to fostering the development of the heritage
language proficiencies of individuals in this country as part of a larger effort to educate members of 
our society who can function professionally in English and other languages. The Alliance has 
revamped its Web site to offer expanded content and improved navigation. 
 
National K-12 Foreign Language Survey Underway 
CAL conducts a national survey of foreign language inst
every decade to gain greater understanding of current patterns and shifts over time in enrollments, the 
number of schools offering foreign language classes, the types of foreign language offerings, foreign 
language curricula and methodologies, teacher qualifications and training, and the effects of NCLB, 
among other issues. We are currently conducting the third survey to be able to show trends in foreign 
language education at three points in time (1987, 1997, 2007). For further details, see the fall 2007 
update. 
 
Center f
Learners (CREATE) 
Visit the newly expande
upcoming events. To keep current on CREATE activities, sign up to receive an electronic new
and periodic announcements.  
Spotlight on Language Series
In support of the Discover Langu
series to provide information about specific languages. These language spotlights are introductory in
nature and are intended to encourage readers to explore these languages and CAL’s work with them 
in more detail. Different languages will be highlighted periodically.  
CAL Services 
CAL provides a
language education and assessment needs.  
R
• Guiding Principles
• Developing Reading and Writing in Second Language Learners 
ce• Refugees from Burma: Their Backgrounds and Refugee Experien
• An Insider’s Guide to SIOP Coaching 
rsion: Fostering Effective Prog• Realizing the Vision of Two-Way Imme
• What’s Different About Teaching Reading to Students Learning English?  
 
V
