Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num2/yoon/ 
June 2008, Volume 12, Number 2
pp. 31-48 
 
Copyright © 2008, ISSN 1094-3501 31
MORE THAN A LINGUISTIC REFERENCE: THE INFLUENCE OF 
CORPUS TECHNOLOGY ON L2 ACADEMIC WRITING 
Hyunsook Yoon 
Dongguk University, Korea 
This paper reports on a qualitative study that investigated the changes in students’ writing 
process associated with corpus use over an extended period of time. The primary purpose 
of this study was to examine how corpus technology affects students’ development of 
competence as second language (L2) writers. The research was mainly based on case 
studies with six L2 writers in an English for Academic Purposes writing course. The 
findings revealed that corpus use not only had an immediate effect by helping the students 
solve immediate writing/language problems, but also promoted their perceptions of lexico-
grammar and language awareness. Once the corpus approach was introduced to the writing 
process, the students assumed more responsibility for their writing and became more 
independent writers, and their confidence in writing increased. This study identified a 
wide variety of individual experiences and learning contexts that were involved in 
deciding the levels of the students’ willingness and success in using corpora. This paper 
also discusses the distinctive contributions of general corpora to English for Academic 
Purposes and the importance of lexical and grammatical aspects in L2 writing pedagogy. 
INTRODUCTION 
Recently, corpus technology has demonstrated great potential for second language (L2) writing 
instruction by integrating vocabulary, grammar, and discourse patterns of given types of writing into the 
teaching of L2 writing (Gledhill, 2000; Hyland, 2002; Jabbour, 1997, 2001; Tribble, 1999, 2002). A 
substantial number of corpus studies have been involved in developing corpus-informed syllabi, teaching 
materials, and classroom activities (e.g., Conrad, 1999; Flowerdew, 1998; Thurstun & Candlin, 1998). 
Those studies have emphasized that the corpus approach not only can enhance learners’ awareness of 
lexico-grammatical patterning of texts, but also can foster inductive learning. Whereas early corpus 
research had an impact on the development of classroom materials and grammar references, researchers 
have begun to look at academic written discourse, in combination with genre analysis, to inform English 
for Academic Purposes (EAP) materials (J. Flowerdew, 2002) and "help students to develop competence 
as writers within specific academic domains" (Tribble, 2002, p.131).   
While many corpus studies have mainly focused on genre-based text analysis and materials development, 
relatively few studies have examined students’ writing experiences in association with corpus use. 
Moreover, those studies are limited in terms of their scope and data collection methods. The studies have 
addressed student reactions to a corpus-based lesson (Sun, 2000), the importance of training students in 
the corpus approach for their own use (Turnbull & Burston, 1998), and the effectiveness of independent 
corpus investigations (Kennedy & Miceli, 2001; Fan & Xu, 2002). Notably, most of the studies have 
focused on teaching a corpus approach per se rather than incorporating it into the writing process. In 
terms of data collection procedures, many of these studies conducted a one-time evaluation of students’ 
use of corpora within a short time and provided limited qualitative insights (Fan & Xu, 2002; Sun, 2000), 
or else they studied a very small sample of participants with little use of corpora (Turnbull & Burston, 
1998). In short, the previous studies did not fully illuminate students’ corpus use in L2 writing, thus 
resulting in a limited understanding of the role of corpus use in student writing development.   
Even fewer studies have examined the effect of the corpus approach on students’ performance, which 
makes it difficult to assume the value of corpus-based pedagogy (L. Flowerdew, 2002). As Lee and 
Swales (2006) observed, there were only a few studies that examined students’ attitudes toward corpora 
Hyunsook Yoon The Influence of Corpus Technology on L2 Academic Writing 
 
or concordancing in EAP writing classes. Those are Yoon and Hirvela (2004), Gaskell and Cobb (2004), 
and Lee and Swales (2006). 
Being aware of the scarcity of the studies in the area, Yoon and Hirvela (2004) examined ESL students’ 
corpus behavior and their attitudes towards using corpora. Using quantitative and qualitative analysis, 
they found that corpus use helped the students learn common usage patterns of words, which resulted in 
increased confidence about L2 writing. 
Gaskell & Cobb (2004) argued from their preliminary research that concordancing can also help lower-
intermediate L2 learners with their grammar learning. They provided data-driven writing feedback to the 
students’ typical errors by using the online concordancing software. The students were led to online 
concordance links from their drafts so as to correct their errors themselves. They found that although the 
results did not indicate a dramatic decrease in students’ errors, many students believed concordancing was 
useful and concordance information could be a successful grammar resource.  
In contrast to the two studies that used general corpora, Lee and Swales (2006) designed an experimental 
course for doctoral students who worked with both specialized and general corpora. As non-linguists-
turned-corpus analysts, the students explored the lexico-grammatical and discourse patterns of their own 
disciplinary genres. The findings revealed that their knowledge about disciplinary writing increased 
through the "technology-enhanced rhetorical consciousness-raising” activity (p. 72).  
The above-mentioned studies can be seen as an answer to the widespread criticism that "the various 
educational uses of concordancing are more talked about than tested with real learners" (Gaskell and 
Cobb, 2004, p. 317). The studies have increased our understanding of corpus use in L2 writing, but they 
do not provide an extensive treatment of the role of the corpus approach in L2 writing pedagogy. There is 
a need for further research that explores how the use of corpus technology affects students’ L2 writing 
behavior and process. As Phinney (1996) points out, technology may not automatically generate better 
written products, but it may change "the way writers approach the writing process" (p.139). Much needs 
to be done to find out how the use of corpora affects students’ L2 writing experiences as a whole. Yoon 
and Hirvela (2004) collected student feedback on their perceptions of corpora through semi-structured 
interviews, but it was limited to one-time short interviews. We still need more qualitative insights to 
determine the potential of concordance work in students’ writing development over a longer period of 
time.  
In addition, little research has looked at the students’ individual experiences in the analysis of corpus use. 
In fact, many corpus studies have regarded learners as a monolithic group rather than as idiosyncratic 
individuals. Some research found differences in the effect of corpus use on language learning related to 
personal backgrounds, such as language proficiency and familiarity with the new approach (Turnbull & 
Burston, 1998; Yoon & Hirvela, 2004). Given the individual and private process of writing, we need to 
develop learner-specific descriptions of corpus use in order to adjust our instruction to learners’ needs.  
Another important issue in the use of corpora in L2 writing pedagogy is the selection of corpora. Many 
previous corpus studies used in-house programs or specialized corpora as opposed to general corpora. It is 
true that many scholars have emphasized the usefulness of specialized corpora in EAP. However, general 
corpora can also have a place in L2 writing classrooms. Many teachers may not have the time or skill to 
develop their own corpora. Fortunately, some general corpora allow free access so that teachers do not 
need to construct their own corpora. More importantly, general corpora can make distinctive contributions 
to EAP writing programs. Considering that students are often from a variety of disciplines, it may be 
impractical to focus on one discipline-specific corpus in writing courses. General corpora can be used 
more effectively by focusing on the most frequent general words, thus catering to the needs of all the 
students in the program. Bernardini (2001), one of the proponents of using general corpora in language 
teaching, argues that easily accessible online corpora (e.g., the Bank of English) opened a new era for 
"wide-ranging exploration of the pedagogic potential of large corpora" (p.220), which can promote 
Language Learning & Technology 32
Hyunsook Yoon The Influence of Corpus Technology on L2 Academic Writing 
 
"serendipitous learning" (p. 226.) We need an empirical report from actual teaching that uses easily 
accessible general corpora to encourage teachers and students to use the new corpus approach. 
This study attempts to fill several gaps in the research literature by examining the writing process 
associated with corpus use over time, investigating how corpus use affects the way students deal with 
linguistic issues in writing and the ways they approach L2 writing. Additionally, the study considers a 
variety of students’ individual experiences and learning contexts so as to deepen our understanding of 
corpus use in ESL tertiary classrooms. The research questions addressed were as follows: 
How do ESL students use corpus technology in L2 academic writing? 
How does corpus technology affect their language learning and approaches to L2 writing? 
What are individual experiences and contextual factors that mediate the influence of corpus technology on 
students’ L2 writing?  
METHODS 
Setting  
The research site of the study was a graduate-level advanced ESL academic writing course at a large 
American research university. This university requires non-native English speakers to take an ESL 
writing placement test upon their arrival. The results are used to assign students to one of three courses in 
the undergraduate or graduate sequences in the program. The final course in the graduate sequence was 
chosen for this study. The course was taught by a veteran ESL teacher who had used corpus work 
extensively in his own teaching. A preliminary study was conducted with the same instructor one year 
prior to the present study in order to develop research skills and enhance the design for the present study. 
Prior contact in the earlier study (Yoon & Hirvela, 2004) established significant rapport between the 
instructor and the researcher.  
The class met twice per week for two and a half hours per session for ten weeks. The course was an ideal 
choice for the purpose of this study in that the teacher incorporated the corpus approach into the 
curriculum as part of the regular classroom activities, rather than focusing on teaching the approach per 
se. The research site can be seen as an EAP writing course, rather than a general ESL course, given its 
content and emphasis on disciplinary writing. The course not only taught the students about the general 
structure of academic papers, but also required them to follow the writing conventions of their own fields. 
As such, students chose the topic and content of their writing based on their interests and needs in their 
studies.  
The classroom teacher in this study used a free online corpus, the Collins COBUILD Corpus, which is 
one of the largest general corpora available. As general corpora are often used to represent common usage 
of the language, the issue of representativeness becomes more important for general corpora than for 
specialized corpora because "corpus results always depend to a large extent on size and composition of 
the corpus" (Kaltenböck & Mehlmauer-Larcher, 2005, p.76). The Collins Cobuild corpus was considered 
a good choice for the study because of its accessibility and size. The corpus, also known as the Bank of 
English, consists of more than 500 million words as of January 2007 and continues to expand in size 
based on carefully designed sampling methodology. The Collins COBUILD website 
[http://www.collins.co.uk/Corpus/CorpusSearch.aspx] provides a concordance and a collocation sampler 
from which one can draw 40 randomly chosen concordance lines and see what are statistically the most 
frequent 100 collocates. The sampler offers instructions on how to conduct a search, though the 
concordance and collocate search process requires minimal technical skill. Also, the corpus is word-class 
tagged so that one can narrow a search by using the part-of-speech tags (e.g., search "use/NOUN"). 
Language Learning & Technology 33
Hyunsook Yoon The Influence of Corpus Technology on L2 Academic Writing 
 
The teacher wanted students to integrate corpus use into their writing to become more independent and 
advanced writers.1 He required students to search the corpus regarding their own writing problems and to 
e-mail the search results to him on a weekly basis. He then combined those results on handouts regularly 
provided to the class so students could benefit from each other’s corpus searches. In addition, he usually 
began class sessions by commenting on writing errors that he found in students’ drafts. He encouraged 
them to research the problems through the corpus. He also wrote feedback on their papers, directing them 
to search out solutions rather than correcting errors immediately. In so doing, he expected that by the end 
of the course, the class would generate a useful lexicon that stemmed from their own errors. Worth noting 
here is the instructor’s pedagogical model for the design of the course. Students were expected to use 
corpora to solve their sentence-level writing problems by themselves, while the teacher used other 
materials (e.g., Swales & Feak’s, 1994, Academic writing for graduate students) and activities (e.g., 
constructing a style manual for academic papers in a given field) to teach the organizational and rhetorical 
aspects of academic writing. 
Data Collection and Analysis  
As this study adopted a primarily qualitative framework in order to closely examine the students’ L2 
writing process over an extended period of time, it focused on six case study participants among the 14 
students in the class. Regarding nationality, the class was not very diverse; ten students were Korean, 
three were Chinese, and one was Romanian. At the beginning of the course, six students were chosen to 
reflect diversity in age, gender, academic major, writing experiences, and technology skills, and they 
became the main focus of the research. The study followed up on the six focal students in the subsequent 
quarter in order to examine their independent corpus use and L2 writing after they left the writing course. 
In this respect, this study can be seen as a response to Chambers’ (2007) call for research on students’ 
autonomous corpus use apart from classroom-based use. Reviewing earlier studies in learner corpus 
consultation, Chambers also called for further report from non-corpus expert teachers (rather than from 
researcher-teachers), which was also implemented in the present study. 
This study used triangulation of multiple methods and data sources as a way of ensuring credibility of the 
data as well as obtaining thick contextualized descriptions about the topic. The data came from six main 
sources: 1) classroom observational notes, 2) interviews, 3) recall protocols, 4) corpus search logs, 5) 
class corpus search assignments, and 6) written reflections on corpus use. During classroom observations 
over the ten weeks of the quarter, observational notes were kept in a researcher journal. The participants 
were interviewed approximately once every two weeks for an hour during the first quarter. However, due 
to a corpus service breakdown that occurred several times during the following quarter, comparatively 
fewer interviews were conducted in the second quarter. The unexpected technological breakdown made 
the interviews address hypothetical questions rather than real-world experiences. Questions were 
restructured to ask students how they would have used the corpus had it been available at that time. All 
interviews were recorded on audiotape and transcribed as soon as possible in a standard word-processing 
program for subsequent analysis. As is common in qualitative research, analysis of the data components 
was done simultaneously with data collection so that the study was shaped to focus on issues emerging as 
data were collected.  
 
Participant Background  
This study constructed portraits of the six focal students consisting of individual life experiences and 
writing experiences. Those experiences were a lens through which to understand different contexts of the 
individual students’ L2 writing experiences. Table 1 provides an overview of those experiences which 
were considered likely to be most relevant to this study.  
 
Language Learning & Technology 34
Hyunsook Yoon The Influence of Corpus Technology on L2 Academic Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 35
Table 1. Overview of Case Study Participants 
 Wol2 (28, F)  Chan (29, M) June (24, F) Sung (32, M) Nick (29, M)  Ming (29, M) 
L1 Korean Korean Korean Korean Romanian Chinese 
Program of study M.Ed., Special 
Education 
Ph.D., 
Natural 
Resources 
Education 
M.S., 
Aerospace 
Engineering 
Ph.D., History M.S., Nuclear 
Engineering 
Ph.D., 
Molecular 
Genetics 
Years of English 
learning3 12 13 13 14 5 10+ 
Months in U.S. at 
the start of the 
study 
12 1 1 1 12 1 
TOEFL (TWE) 
scores4 240 (4.0)  270 (4.5)  240 (3.5)  253 (4.0)  217 (3.5)  607 (3.5)  
Unique 
experiences 
affecting English/ 
literacy skills 
Korean 
language 
teacher (3 ½ 
years) 
Military 
service at US 
Army base  
MEd qualitative 
research thesis  
 MA in Japan Took previous 
writing classes 
in the ESL 
program 
Published a 
paper in English
L2 writing 
experience 
TWE TWE & Took 
a class in 
Korea  
TWE TWE 1 yr coursework 
in US &previous 
writing classes 
TWE & 
Published a 
paper in English
Computer skills Low Intermediate High Low High  High  
 
Four students were majoring in science-related fields (one in combined science and education); one was 
in education; and the other one in the humanities. Two participants, Wol and Nick, had been in the United 
States for one year; the other four students were new arrivals, and they were still adjusting to the new 
environment as foreigners. All except Nick were experiencing their first academic term in an American 
university setting. Wol had been in the United States for the previous year as a housewife, but this was 
her first American academic term. 
The students were assumed to be at similar, if not the same, levels of writing proficiency because they 
were assigned to the course based on placement test results or after completing the prerequisite courses. 
Nick was the only one who was not directly assigned to the course by the test. He had spent one year in 
the institution where he took the first two courses of the three course-sequenced writing program. During 
that time, Nick also performed many writing assignments in classes and learned L2 writing. Table 2 
presents a more specific description of the focal students’ views of L2 learning and their writing 
processes, which were obtained from the initial interviews with them.  
Wol enjoyed writing in her native language, as she used to be a Korean language arts teacher. She did not 
have any academic writing experiences in English. She neither had much content knowledge nor 
disciplinary writing experience in her field of study, since the major was a new field to her. Nevertheless, 
she was confident in her L2 writing, as she believed she could always generate many ideas with ease. At 
the same time, she wanted to develop her own writing style. She even hoped to keep her unique L1 voice 
in L2 writing. 
Like Wol, Chan enjoyed writing in general, and among the participants he had the most experience in L1 
academic literacy. He wrote a qualitative research thesis in partial fulfillment of the requirements for his 
master’s degree in Korea. Moreover, pursuing the same major throughout his college and graduate studies 
provided him with a large amount of content knowledge in his field. He was not afraid of L2 writing, and 
he believed any type of writing activity was manageable. Most of all, he had a sincere, genuine interest in 
Hyunsook Yoon The Influence of Corpus Technology on L2 Academic Writing 
 
L2 writing. Thus, his goal in writing was not just to communicate ideas, but to develop persuasive and 
powerful texts. 
Table 2. Overview of Participants’ Views on Language Learning and Writing Experiences 
 Wol Chan June Sung Nick Ming 
Confidence in 
grammar? Yes Yes No No Yes Yes 
Enjoy writing? Yes Yes No No Informal writing only No 
L1 academic 
writing 
experience 
Experienced Very experienced Inexperienced 
Semi-
experienced Inexperienced Experienced 
Confidence in L2 
writing? Yes Yes No No Yes (very high) Yes (high) 
Uses of L1 in L2 
writing 
Used L1 
mainly for 
organizing 
Used L1 
mainly for 
organizing 
Thought in L1 
first even for 
expressions 
Thought in L1 
first even for 
expressions 
Rarely used L1 
Used L1 
mainly for 
organizing 
Difficulties in L2 
writing 
Language 
issue, content 
knowledge 
Idiomatic 
expressions, 
language issue
Organizational 
concerns 
Rhetorical 
concerns 
No major 
difficulties 
Different 
writing culture
L2 writing 
processes 
Careful 
drafting/ 
writing, local 
revision 
Whole 
composition, 
global revision
Little revision 
due to lack of 
time 
Careful 
drafting/ 
writing, local 
revision 
Whole 
composition, 
global revision 
Little revision 
due to lack of 
time 
Writing foci / 
goals of L2 
writing 
Good writing 
beyond 
communicating 
Genuine 
interest in 
writing 
Get the ideas 
on paper 
Get the ideas 
on paper 
Communicating 
content  
"Good enough" 
writing 
Initial attitude to 
corpus use Positive  Positive  Unsure  Negative  Very positive Positive 
 
June, the youngest participant, did not like writing in general and was inexperienced in L1 academic 
writing. For her, writing was just "stressful," as she had no successful experience in writing, even in 
Korean. As a science major, she was not given many opportunities to write papers. Most of her 
assignments were about computer programming, and she wrote reports that were preoccupied with 
numbers and mathematical formulae. Thus, she was not confident in writing in her L1, let alone her L2. In 
fact, she reported a great difficulty in L2 academic writing from the beginning. She also showed a lack of 
confidence in grammar. For her, L2 writing was a burden that required her to work hard to get across her 
points. 
Sung had a diverse background in terms of life experiences, languages, and academic studies. He majored 
in Japanese linguistics in a Korean university and studied international politics for his master’s degree in a 
Japanese university, writing his master’s thesis in Japanese. At the time of this study he was pursuing his 
Ph.D. in history at an American institution. English was therefore his third language. Like June, Sung 
disliked writing in general. Similarly, his primary concern in writing was to get his ideas across on paper, 
with an emphasis on correct use of linguistic features.   
As mentioned earlier, Nick had completed the first two courses of the writing program. Since that 
program incorporated corpus use into the curriculum, Nick was the only participant who had already been 
exposed to the corpus. In fact, he participated in the prior study, where he expressed a highly positive 
attitude toward corpus use. He did not like writing in his native language, and neither did he have any 
experience in L1 academic writing. Like June, Nick did not have many opportunities to write with words, 
but mainly worked with numbers and formulae in his science major. Regarding L2 writing, he enjoyed 
Language Learning & Technology 36
Hyunsook Yoon The Influence of Corpus Technology on L2 Academic Writing 
 
informal correspondence, such as by email. He had great confidence in writing in English, although he 
did not enjoy it. For him, writing in English was not difficult. He said his confidence came from his 
experiences in writing courses.   
The last participant, Ming, had extensive experience in Chinese academic writing from his college and 
graduate studies. With respect to L2 writing, Ming’s experience was very similar to Nick’s. Ming did not 
enjoy writing, but he liked shorter, more informal forms of writing, such as web-based chatting and 
emailing. He wrote only because he had to do it. However, he showed a great amount of confidence in his 
L2 writing. His primary focus in his writing was to communicate content to readers. He viewed the main 
purpose of writing as making himself understood by others. He did not care so much about text as long as 
his writing was "good enough."  
With respect to the corpus, Wol, Chan, Nick, and Ming were initially positive toward its use. As noted 
earlier, Nick was highly enthusiastic toward the corpus. In contrast, June and Sung showed an 
unfavorable attitude toward corpora, albeit for different reasons: June had difficulty using the search 
technique, and Sung questioned the usefulness of the corpus over the dictionary.  
It was apparent, from the beginning of the study, that the students’ L2 writing praxis was an intricate 
picture of their L1 academic literacy experiences, L2 learning history, disciplinary content knowledge, 
and educational/cultural learning contexts.  
FINDINGS 
Students’ Corpus Use in L2 Writing  
This section reports the findings of the six students regarding their use of the corpus and their evaluations 
of its value in their L2 writing. The participants’ corpus search logs, e-mail assignments, and interviews 
revealed their frequency of corpus use, the purpose of specific corpus searches, and their corpus use 
patterns while writing.  
On the whole, Wol, Chan, and Sung used the corpus much more frequently than June, Nick, and Ming, as 
confirmed by the number of corpus search logs (19 pages and 11 pages on average, respectively) and also 
through interviews. The former three used it for other courses and their own needs in L2 writing, as well 
as for the writing class, while the latter three reported that they only used the corpus for class writing 
assignments. One factor that might explain this difference is their respective fields of study. The latter 
three were science majors, where they may have had less need for writing in their courses. On the other 
hand, the former three were non-science majors (i.e., education, history, and science education), fields 
likely to require more writing and a wider variety of styles.  
The participants looked up the problematic words and patterns which they encountered frequently during 
the process of writing and revising essays for the course. Table 3 shows some examples of the 
participants’ main corpus search items. Many of them frequently searched for appropriate preposition 
usage, as indicated by their self-reports. The next most common use of the corpus was for correct usages 
and contexts of words. Such usages include questions about what kind of complements verbs take (e.g., 
clause or noun form), whether verbs are commonly used as active or passive forms (e.g., "consist of" vs. 
"is consisted of"), and which collocations the verbs take. The most frequently searched word class was 
verb form, which shows that the participants had the most interest or difficulty in verb usage.  
Chan’s corpus use here deserves discussion. As the most frequent user, his corpus use illustrated a wide 
range of corpus searches and considerable depth of analysis and interpretation. The other participants’ 
corpus searches were mostly limited to so-called "substantial" linguistic elements for sentence 
construction, such as verbs, nouns and prepositions. Chan had a similar repertoire at the beginning, but 
expanded it to include "less crucial" linguistic features (e.g., adjectives and adverbs). His enthusiasm and 
passion about corpus analysis were quite noticeable throughout the study. He not only checked the corpus 
Language Learning & Technology 37
Hyunsook Yoon The Influence of Corpus Technology on L2 Academic Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 38
to solve linguistic/writing problems, but he also browsed through the corpus, out of curiosity, to test 
whether the corpus would provide better expressions, even when he had no problem. He said, "I wanted 
to use the corpus because I was also curious about how well it will produce the results, whether there are 
better expressions, as well as in order to check whether mine is correct."   
Table 3. Examples of Participants’ Corpus Search Items 
  
Purpose  
Chan Wol  Sung 
Item  Remark  Helpful  Time5 Item  Remark Helpful Time Item  Remark  Helpful Time 
Usage/ 
Contexts of 
uses 
 
regarding 
have difficulty 
understanding 
(noun?/verb?) 
addressing 
(noun?/verb?) 
both in?/ in 
both? 6 
on the contrary/  
to the contrary  
in contrast/  
by contrast  
to? 
in + ing? 
need 
"of"? 
appropriat
e/-ly? 
proper 
sequence? 
 
yes  
yes 
yes(++)7 
 
yes(++) 
 
yes 
 
no 
 
no 
8' 
15' 
30'  
 
10' 
 
7' 
 
15' 
 
30'   
relate 
classify 
influence 
ground 
accompany 
absorb 
project 
 
become 
 
help 
rate(verb) 
  
  
prep also
prep also
prep also
prep also
prep also
joinable 
verb 
joinable 
verb 
+ing? 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
 
yes 
 
yes 
30" 
1'30" 
  
  
30" 
 
1' 
  
 
 
1'30" 
  
regard 
pen(verb) 
embed 
evaluate 
seem 
describe 
harbor(verb) 
opaque 
obscure 
controversial 
encounter 
accuse 
reluctance 
clothe 
consist 
+clause? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
prep also 
 
 
passive? 
yes 
no 
yes 
no 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
5" 
5" 
3' 
3' 
2' 
  
5' 
  
  
3' 
  
1' 
1' 
2' 
3' 
V+N8 review(noun) 
summary  
war 
problem/issue 
discussion 
 
 
verb? 
verb? 
little  
little  
yes 
yes(+++)
yes 
10' 
10' 
15'  
20' 
4' 
    experience 
contract 
damage 
 no  
yes 
1' 
5' 
V+N         depict 
enunciate 
what 
object? 
yes 1' 
adj+N 
  
frequency 
  
high? yes 3' 
  
bias 
mistake 
 yes 30" 
  
approach 
  
 no 2' 
  
adv+adj lower quite? yes 2'                 
adv+V affect  yes 20'                  
V+adj feel difficult? yes 8'                 
 
While Chan had a genuine interest in the corpus, the other participants perceived it more pragmatically as 
a problem-solving tool. It was a necessary inconvenience for them. Sung said, "I use it because I need it, 
not because I like it. I hope I can write without it." Ming’s corpus use was also need-based, particularly 
for writing assignments. He emphasized he would use the corpus more frequently if he had more writing 
to do because it was only during writing that problems arose.  
In fact, as Ming insisted, the participants’ frequency of corpus use seemed to be related to the amount of 
writing tasks they had to complete. Table 4 shows each participant’s number of writing assignments for 
each quarter. All of the participants had at least three writing assignments in the writing class in the first 
quarter. On the other hand, the amount of writing tasks in the second quarter, when they were no longer in 
a writing course, varied considerably among them. The table shows that the three science-major 
participants, June, Nick, and Ming, had no major writing tasks, although they sometimes wrote short lab 
reports. These three participants used the corpus infrequently.   
As mentioned above, Nick and Ming were initially positive towards corpus use. Despite their positive 
attitudes toward the corpus, however, they actually used the corpus infrequently during the study time 
frame. Ming attributed this mainly to his lack of time, while Nick simply had few writing assignments. 
He simply did not have to use the corpus. Also, it seemed that his increased confidence in English writing 
Hyunsook Yoon The Influence of Corpus Technology on L2 Academic Writing 
 
required less use of the corpus as time passed. Nonetheless, they indicated that they planned to use 
corpora more frequently when they did encounter more writing assignments and formal papers. 
Table 4. The Amount of the Participants’ Writing Assignments 
Name  1st quarter  2nd quarter  
Wol 3 writing class assignments  
6 short papers for content courses 
1 case study paper, weekly journal, 2 
interview papers, 1 reflection paper 
Chan 3 writing class assignments 
1 major paper for content course  
1 long research proposal, 5-6 page long 
weekly memo  
June 3 writing class assignments 
Weekly journal for content course 
Lab report (mainly mathematical 
formulae) 
Sung 3 writing class assignments 
2 papers for content courses 
2 research papers 
Nick 3 writing class assignments No textual writing 
Ming 3 writing class assignments 1 short proposal  
 
 June initially showed an unfavorable attitude toward corpora. Her attitude, however, became positive, 
with increased use. She appreciated the weekly corpus search assignments that gave her more 
opportunities to practice. This suggests that students may need to be exposed to technology for a certain 
period of time in order to effectively use it or like it. June’s change to a positive attitude, however, did not 
prompt her to use corpora more frequently. In fact, June often struggled with corpus use. One reason was 
that she needed more training to use the search technique effectively. Also, her lower level of language 
proficiency hindered her corpus use. She experienced difficulty in putting the collocate words in correct 
order with the target words. During the study, she kept checking about whether her search and analysis 
were correct. As such, she reported that she wanted someone to help interpret the results and make the 
necessary patterns for her.  
Interestingly enough, Sung, the only participant who initially showed a clearly negative attitude toward 
corpus use, turned out to be one of the most frequent corpus users. He generally turned in a two- or three-
page search log per week while the other participants submitted one page on average. This was an 
unexpected finding. His studies in history required a great deal of writing, so he had a need for and a keen 
interest in improving his writing.  
Some participants used the corpus while initially composing their writing assignments, while others used 
it only for revising. Interestingly, the more frequent corpus users, Wol, Chan, and Sung, used it for 
composing. The less frequent users’ main purpose was in revision. June, who was in this category, 
reported that a key factor was its availability at the time of writing. However, she preferred using a 
dictionary for initial composing while reverting to the corpus for revision. Nick delayed his corpus use 
until the revision stage because he wrote his first draft by hand and then typed it into a computer when the 
corpus was available. He often marked problematic words in his handwritten draft, and then checked 
them in the corpus when revising.  
With respect to the benefits of corpus use, most participants expressed similar points, such as learning 
common usage patterns and showing subtle nuances and contexts of usage. In other words, the students 
agreed that it provided textual help in writing. When corpora are viewed as a linguistic resource, one 
important question that arises is the precise role they play in language learning. The participants 
themselves asked profound questions regarding whether new learning would take place by corpus use. 
Their comments were revealing. Wol suspected that corpus use did not create new knowledge because she 
only used it to double-check or review whether her current knowledge was correct. If the data were 
inconsistent with her current knowledge, she just ignored it and did not expand her range of linguistic 
Language Learning & Technology 39
Hyunsook Yoon The Influence of Corpus Technology on L2 Academic Writing 
 
performance. Her learning curve remained static. She said (all quotations from students are translations 
from their original Korean):  
When I am looking for, say, a phrasal verb, I don’t do guessing in advance. From my past 
rote learning experiences, I always try to recall what I learned. Even when I look up the 
corpus, I try to recite my memory from the rote learning, rather than guessing based on the 
data. So, for me, even guessing or checking just means checking whether my memory is 
correct. (Interview 5) 
Chan asked the same question: "Which comes first? Do I analyze the data from the scratch or do I 
interpret the data just based on my prior knowledge?" He continued:   
When I analyze corpus data, especially the collocate output, I often ask myself the 
question whether I think my prototype9 is correct based on the data or on what I’ve 
learned. I seem to use and interpret the data based on my prior knowledge. Therefore, I 
doubt whether I can interpret the data and construct prototypes if I don’t have any 
grammar or word knowledge. (Interview 2)   
Certainly, people refer to their prior knowledge to acquire new knowledge, and corpus analysis requires a 
certain level of prior grammar and word knowledge. As noted earlier, an interesting question is whether 
corpus use only confirms, reinforces, or serves to review the student’s prior knowledge, or whether it 
extends the process to new learning. One clear finding from the study was that most of the participants 
did not use the corpus for learning new material. This point becomes more evident if we look at their 
corpus use behaviors. They rarely used the corpus for unknown words or phrases; rather, they used it for 
checking or extending their current knowledge about words. This might not seem surprising given their 
advanced level as L2 users. On the other hand, some reported that they checked the dictionary for 
definitions of unfamiliar words in order to obtain new information about meanings and usages. They 
viewed the corpus as a linguistic resource like a dictionary, as well as a linguistic checker.   
In addition to providing actual textual help in writing, the corpus seemed to help the participants gain a 
psychological advantage in their language learning. Once they checked assignments against the corpus, 
the students seemed to feel more confident about their L2 writing. Chan said, "if I look up the corpus, I 
feel confident, because once I check it, I feel it’s right and I feel comfortable." Ming also said, "I have 
confidence because I get common usage. I am sure I follow the common usage." According to Nick, 
"Because I know I have 40 sentences [from which] I can pick the best phrase, I feel confident because it’s 
not mine and I know it’s right." That is, if they consulted the corpus, they felt confident about using the 
common usage correctly, which could enhance their overall confidence in their writing. On the other 
hand, as noted earlier, Nick added that gaining more confidence in his English writing would, perhaps 
ironically, lessen his need to use corpora.  
Changes in the Students’ L2 Learning and Approaches to L2 Writing 
Changes in the students’ L2 learning 
This section presents the findings concerning the participants’ understanding of language learning 
acquired through the corpus approach and their later approaches to L2 writing. It is necessary, though, to 
be cautious about placing too much emphasis on the antecedents or determinants of the changes that were 
observed in the students’ perceptions. In a qualitative inquiry like this, it may be misleading to conclude 
that the students’ perceptions of language and L2 writing changed due only to corpus use experiences. In 
particular, the fact that corpus work comprised only part of the writing course makes it difficult to identify 
any conclusive evidence of changes in writing practices. Despite these caveats, certain similarities appear 
that point in the direction of the corpus’ influence. 
Language Learning & Technology 40
Hyunsook Yoon The Influence of Corpus Technology on L2 Academic Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 41
Vocabulary 
(make, use,..) 
Grammar  
(Verb + Noun + Preposition) 
Usage/Collocation 
(make use of) 
With respect to understanding of the target language, most participants expressed a combined concept of 
vocabulary and grammar, or "lexico-grammar" in technical terms, by the end of the study. For example, 
Chan initially had a strong grammar-based view of language, that is, "grammar is the core of the language 
and learning a language is learning grammar." He also held a clear distinction between words and 
grammar; words are for representing meaning, while the purpose of grammar is to connect those words. 
Later, however, his attitude toward language changed. He viewed grammar more through the concept of 
collocation.  
Learning a language is to learn how the people of that language use the language. 
Basically, what we learned as grammar is all related to collocation. For example, we just 
learned "make use of" as a chunk, but the fact that it is not "make use in" or "make usage 
of" is based on collocation. (Interview 8)  
Furthermore, for Chan, vocabulary, grammar, and usage (collocations or idioms) are all mixed concepts. 
He explained the relationship among those while drawing an insightful diagram (Figure 1):  
In Korea, we taught "vocabulary" "grammar" and "idioms" separately. But they are not 
separate, but all one. Actually, we have to learn words focusing on expressions, and, in the 
middle, here is usage or collocation. Let’s take an example of "make use of." In the past, 
we taught words and grammar separately. But we can teach them both; if we teach the 
word "make," teach like this (circling vocabulary and usage together in the diagram), and 
if we teach grammar, teach like this (circling usage and grammar together in the 
diagram). I think this is the main approach of collocation, and if we expand the approach, 
we can cover all of them. (Interview 8)  
 
 
 
Figure 1. Chan's perception of collocation 
While it is not clear whether the change in the students’ view of language was solely the result of corpus 
use, the corpus approach that focuses on collocation and that intermingles form with meaning pushed the 
boundaries of grammar and lexis to a merged area and promoted positive perceptions of lexico-grammar. 
As advanced ESL students, their writing problems were often related to word usage rather than 
grammatical aspects, and their experiences with corpora enabled them to address these problems 
meaningfully.   
Another important influence of corpus use on language learning was increased awareness of the 
importance of collocation and language sensitivity. Once participants were aware of the importance of 
collocations or common usage patterns, most of them reported that they began to pay more attention to 
the combinations of words in their reading as well as their writing. Chan reported that he started paying 
much more attention to the common expressions or collocations since beginning corpus use. The 
following is extracted from his reflection notes:     
A change after corpus use is that I came to pay attention to the expressions that I ignored 
in the past. I usually focused on understanding content and didn’t focus on word usage, 
except for some cases when I found beautiful expressions. However, after the quarter, I 
came to pay attention to the aspect. (Written reflections)  
June paid close attention to usage patterns in her academic pursuits but also expanded this concern to her 
pleasure reading in English.  She said:   
Hyunsook Yoon The Influence of Corpus Technology on L2 Academic Writing 
 
When reading an English text, I focus on word usage. During the winter break, I read the 
novel "Big Fish." I used to read just for getting information, but at that time, I also looked 
at the usage. I am trying to get more familiar with the patterns. (Interview 5)  
Unlike June, Wol did not consciously pay attention to common usage patterns, although she felt that her 
knowledge about collocations increased as she was exposed to various English texts. Wol added that 
expressions that became familiar through reading naturally came out in her writing. This reiterates a 
crucial point: exposure and noticing (whether it be conscious or unconscious) can be transferred to 
learning and writing.  
In short, corpus use not only helped them to solve immediate writing/language problems, but also seemed 
to expand their language awareness and helped them with their language learning. In other words, 
developing the awareness that collocations exist or that they are important in language learning/writing is 
an educational process in itself. It leads learners to focus on those patterns, resulting in learning.  
Changes in the students’ approaches to L2 writing  
At the beginning of the study, the participants perceived four areas as the main causes of writing 
difficulties: 1) insufficient command of the target language, 2) organizational and rhetorical concerns, 3) 
inadequate content knowledge, and 4) unfamiliar writing culture. By the end of the study, they still 
reported difficulties writing due to insufficient command of the target language. However, they noted 
improvement in the other areas and attributed it to writing instruction and writing practice during the first 
quarter. Therefore, they believed there to be progress in three of four main problem areas. The language 
difficulty area (#1 above) could not be so easily resolved. 
On the other hand, by the second quarter, all but June reported that they were more confident about 
writing than in the previous quarter. They mostly attributed their success to three factors: 1) the writing 
course (partly corpus use), 2) more writing experience, and 3) their enhanced disciplinary/content 
knowledge.  
Chan found L2 writing much less burdensome than in the previous quarter. He attributed this change to 
successfully finishing the final long paper in the writing course. In addition, his "bank of expressions" 
expanded through corpus use and writing practice. Ming agreed that writing in the second quarter was 
much easier due to the extensive practice offered in the class. Wol also said her writing became easier in 
the second quarter mainly due to her enhanced content knowledge. However, while writing may have 
become easier in general, she was frustrated at making the same mistakes in grammar and expressions. In 
other words, her intellectual appreciation of writing and approach to writing improved, but troublesome 
language issues lingered on.   
While Sung also felt much more comfortable with writing later in the study, he still encountered 
grammatical difficulties. He tried to reduce the frequency of chronic grammatical mistakes. At the same 
time, he pointed out his lack of a variety of expression and how he tended to "stick to only familiar 
vocabulary and structures": 
I felt much more comfortable about writing this quarter, and the process of writing also 
got easy. But I still have difficulties using articles and prepositions. Maybe they can never 
be fixed completely. I just try to get used to those uses and focus on them in revision to 
lessen the number of mistakes. (Interview 5)  
June was the only participant who lost confidence in writing later in the study. The main reason was that 
her major field offered few chances to write in English, thus preventing her from gaining additional 
practice in writing. She felt her writing skills may even have declined because she did not have a lot of 
writing practice. She still faced various difficulties from linguistic issues to idea generation to 
organization. 
Language Learning & Technology 42
Hyunsook Yoon The Influence of Corpus Technology on L2 Academic Writing 
 
Overall, the participants praised the advantages of corpus use in L2 writing. They commented that corpus 
use particularly helped them acquire the correct usage of words, which was a chronic problem in their 
writing. Wol and Sung valued the corpus over the dictionary when they wanted to check correct usages. 
The usefulness of the corpus was also reflected in the fact that they were at a loss when the technology 
malfunctioned at times in the second quarter. June did realize that the corpus provided an advantage over 
other references when the corpus became unavailable due to technical problems. As the most extensive 
corpus user, Chan felt helpless when the corpous was unavaible. He became used to editing his writing by 
using the corpus, but once access to it was lost, he just finished his writing with little revision. That is, the 
technology breakdown deprived him of a vital resource for editing. Without the corpus, he wrote without 
consulting a dictionary when he encountered trouble spots. On the other hand, while he showed a great 
level of corpus dependency throughout the study, he indicated that time and interest is more closely 
related to the reduction of writing errors:  
I don’t think corpus use directly reduces writing errors. Rather, I think the amount of 
errors is related to how much time I spend on revising during the writing process. I think 
we make mistakes, not because we don’t know, but because we don’t check. When 
writing, I have a sense that this may be wrong, but I don’t check because I have no time, 
and then the teacher points out the error. So, corpus helps, but it’s more an issue of 
whether we have time and willingness to check. (Interview 3) 
The participants’ overall writing process (drafting, composing, and editing) did not undergo dramatic 
changes as a result of corpus use. The general process remained the same, but there were minor changes. 
For example, students seemed to pay closer attention to word usage and collocation during writing and 
editing. While other factors, such as instruction, influenced their writing process, the use of corpus 
technology enabled them to include a self-editing step. For instance, Wol said corpus use helped her form 
a habit of checking and double-checking her writing. Previously, she did little revision. Another student, 
Ming, also commented on the editing step added to his writing process:   
If I don’t have corpus, I will not check after I write all the papers. But with corpus, I 
search on that instant in the corpus. (Interview 4) 
Chan also noted the influence of the corpus on his writing process. He often checked the corpus for 
accuracy and clarity during writing, and so he reported a change not only in the process, but also in the 
quality of writing. He felt that corpus use gave him more confidence in his writing: 
My approach to writing did not change all together from a big picture, but since the part of 
checking the corpus came in my writing process, the quality and process of my writing has 
changed to a certain degree. I came to check the corpus quite often during writing. I check 
the corpus to find the most appropriate expressions and depend on the corpus before I 
produce the final product. If I check the corpus, I feel more confident about the quality of 
my writing. (Interview 3) 
June reported that her use of the corpus changed her understanding of language, which then changed her 
approach to writing. That is, after she realized that a word changes meaning depending on the context, she 
began to pay more attention to the uses of words when writing.  
In short, once the corpus approach was introduced to the writing process, the participants took more 
responsibility for their writing by checking the corpus, and they approached writing with more ease and 
confidence. 
DISCUSSION  
The primary purpose of this study was to examine the ways corpus technology affects ESL students’ L2 
writing experiences. The findings revealed that the corpus approach heightened the students’ language 
Language Learning & Technology 43
Hyunsook Yoon The Influence of Corpus Technology on L2 Academic Writing 
 
awareness, which, in turn, affected their approaches to writing and the writing process. Regardless of their 
frequency of corpus use, their exposure to it made them aware of the importance of common usage and 
collocation in writing. That is, the corpus served as a meaningful reference for language input and also 
served as a catalyst in helping them to become more attentive to their writing. 
The participants’ overall writing process did not dramatically change after adopting the corpus. However, 
the general process underwent changes that were minor but useful. They formed a habit of checking their 
writing while composing, rather than writing only rough, unpolished drafts, and hence the base was built 
for independent learning. In other words, as the corpus approach was introduced and linked to the writing 
process, they took more responsibility for their writing. The fact that corpora were available also gave 
them more confidence in the quality of their final product. As such, their overall confidence in writing 
increased, and they approached writing with less emotional stress. The finding that they had more control 
over their own language learning and writing is an important point given that the main writing difficulties 
they encountered later were in the language domain.  
As newcomers, the participants initially struggled with two things: 1) the language issue and 2) academic 
discourse familiarization – learning a different academic culture and its disciplinary writing practices. In 
particular, most of them had few experiences in academic writing in English. But, later, their enhanced 
knowledge about the content in their discipline and acculturation in the disciplinary environment made 
them feel that writing came easier to them. However, they still struggled while seeking  the appropriate 
linguistic features to express their intended meanings. Therefore it appears that the linguistic domain 
remained a major challenge even for the advanced level students, who were well trained in composition 
skills. This finding lends support to Hinkel’s (2002) call for directing greater attention to the linguistic 
features in L2 writing instruction. She emphasizes the need for addressing "the issue of language 
development, lexicon expansion, or sentence construction for NNSs [non-native speakers]" (p.56) in 
writing instruction. For L2 writers, the focus on content without taking into account their linguistic 
concerns may not lead them to become competent writers.  
As a matter of fact, while current writing research has mainly addressed the so-called more global or 
discourse aspects of writing, such as content and rhetoric, "a lack of grammatical or lexical accuracy can 
[still] be a major issue for L2 writers" (Ferris & Hedgcock, 1998, p.274). While L2 writers are well 
trained in developing their ideas, the linguistic domain is often a major challenge for many of them. 
Grammar-focused instruction may not adequately prepare them for the linguistic demands of L2 writing. 
Therefore, L2 writing research and pedagogy should address this issue more fully in order to help 
students become more competent writers. Here corpus technology (e.g., general corpus concordancing) is 
a promising tool to help L2 writers deal with linguistic problems in writing. Tribble (1999) and Jabbour 
(2001) argue that the corpus approach not only raises learners’ language awareness but also can 
contribute to an understanding of functions of linguistic features in context.  
This study found that a wide array of individual experiences and contextual factors played an important 
role in determining the frequency and range of corpus use, selection of linguistic items for searches, the 
depth of analysis and interpretation, and thus the successful exploitation of corpus resources. The 
experiences and factors identified in this study were various: nature of writing experiences in L1 and L2, 
interest in writing improvement, characteristics of the field of study, need for the resources, familiarity 
with the corpus technology, time availability, and level of English language and writing proficiency. 
Noteworthy was the relationship between participants’ frequency of corpus use and the number of writing 
assignments. The number of writing tasks varied among the students, and this affected their corpus use. 
This need-based attitude toward corpus use is a revealing finding. If the technology is not geared toward 
the students’ immediate needs, it may not capture their interest despite its value in improving their 
writing. Hence, despite the usefulness of the technology, lack of meaningful engagement with writing 
would limit its appeal.  
Language Learning & Technology 44
Hyunsook Yoon The Influence of Corpus Technology on L2 Academic Writing 
 
Also worth noting are the findings about the use of general corpora in EAP. Specialized corpora can be 
useful resources that present discipline-specific linguistic and discourse patterns in EAP writing contexts. 
At the same time, it is useful to recognize the strengths of general corpora over discipline-specific corpora 
in an EAP classroom for students from a variety of disciplines. Here it is important to recall that advanced 
L2 learners can acquire discourse level or rhetorical characteristics more quickly than linguistic features. 
While writing instruction can address the global level issues effectively, general corpora can be used to 
help students deal with their chronic, harder-to-acquire linguistic problems on their own. In particular, as 
seen in the participants’ behaviors in this study, students can learn technical words specific to their 
disciplines through their own reading and content knowledge. This is consistent with Jabbour’s (1997) 
point that students may be more familiar with the subject words than their EAP teachers, while those 
words may be irrelevant to the class as a whole. In sum, general corpora that present the most frequently 
occurring general words can be used effectively, because they cater to the needs of all the students in an 
EAP classroom.    
Lastly, without challenging the value of the findings, some limitations of the study should be noted. This 
study primarily investigated students’ writing experiences rather than examining their writing products in 
relation to corpus use. We cannot conclusively generalize from a limited number of participants. 
However, the qualitative approach helps us understand processes of learning that are not easily 
identifiable through quantitative methods. Some of the insights gained can be further examined in 
quantitative studies that investigate their applicability over a broader range and larger number of 
participants. A valuable future line of inquiry, for example, could examine whether corpus use can effect 
changes in the students’ writing proficiency.  
IMPLICATIONS FOR PEDAGOGY  
The findings of the study provide significant implications for teaching L2 writing in an EAP classroom, 
especially where corpus use is integrated into instruction. While recent writing research mainly addresses 
the global or discourse aspects of writing, language issues should not be ignored. For L2 writers, the 
mastery of lexical and grammatical accuracy can contribute to an increased confidence in themselves as 
writers as well as a possible increase in the quality of their writing. These findings suggest a need for a 
pedagogy that accounts for a longer-term language learning process to acquire expressions and word 
usage than is recognized in conventional class preparation.  
One especially important benefit of the corpus approach in this course was its focus on collocation 
patterns and typical contexts of word use. This focus on commonly used language chunks can help L2 
learners acquire conventional use and fluency, which is often not achieved by studying structural rules. 
Thus, the study suggests a strategy that integrates lexico-grammatical features into language education 
and writing instruction. The combined concept of lexis and grammar can enhance students’ repertoire of 
English expressions and usage in L2 writing.    
A significant finding of the study is that students took more responsibility for their language learning as a 
result of their corpus experience. This is one of the most important roles that corpus technology plays in 
L2 writing. Corpora are tools that allow students to solve their linguistic and writing problems 
independently, and they raise students’ linguistic awareness through problem-solving with authentic texts. 
This suggests that L2 writing instructors can incorporate the student-initiated corpus search as a 
supplement to classroom activities (rather than replace the conventional ways of teaching) in order to 
promote students’ independence and self-monitoring. 
In the present study, a wide variety of individual experiences and learning contexts were involved in 
deciding the level of the students’ willingness and their degree of success in using corpora. Writing 
teachers who attempt to incorporate the corpus approach into their instruction need to understand the 
multi-faceted aspects of technology use that could facilitate or impede the individual students’ L2 writing. 
Language Learning & Technology 45
Hyunsook Yoon The Influence of Corpus Technology on L2 Academic Writing 
 
It is clear that not all students learn in the same way, and the new technology may not work equally well 
for all students. In particular, one important pedagogical question to be addressed is how to meet the 
needs of students who are at variant levels in their development of academic literacy, including those in 
the same course, who are presumed to have roughly the same level of L2 writing ability. For example, 
students’ low level of grammar or language proficiency will probably interfere with their corpus use. L2 
educators need to identify individual difficulties and needs in students’ L2 writing and help the students 
build upon their strengths so as to develop skills that compensate for or overcome their weaknesses. 
Serious thought should be given to ways to manage unexpected technology malfunctions that could occur 
during the course of instruction, a frustration that may inhibit student learning, as seen in this study when 
some students were left helpless after the online corpus broke down. It is imperative that students have 
comparable resources made available so they can continue studies in the event of a technological 
breakdown. Alternatives include making corpora materials available off-line, such as on a CD-ROM, or 
in dictionaries that are created using corpora data. Although such dictionaries do not allow students to use 
corpus resources to the fullest, they can at least provide them with the most common contexts of words, 
which is preferable to giving them out-of-context definitions. 
CONCLUSION  
When it comes to writing development, corpus-based activity is not the only or the best approach for all 
learners, but this study has shown it to be an important learning tool that has significant pedagogical 
potential in EAP writing contexts. Corpora can be used not only as a linguistic resource that helps 
students to solve immediate writing/language problems, but also as an important tool that encourages 
learners to become more independent L2 writers. If well planned, learning with corpora can enhance the 
learners’ writing experiences and their confidence, and thus contribute to their overall writing 
development.  
 
NOTES 
1. This study adopted the approach used in Yoon & Hirvela (2004). See it for a detailed illustration of 
concordance work integrated into a writing class. 
2. The names of the participants are pseudonyms to ensure confidentiality. 
3. Student approximated years of study. 
4. Ming’s score is based on the former paper-and-pencil test, while the others are based on computer-
based tests. 
5. For the amount of time, < ' >indicates minute, and < " > indicates second. 
6. Chan searched the same item three times on different days. 
7. The participant marked level of satisfaction. 
8. For simple representation, linguistic class terms for the search are presented in acronyms. That is, V 
stands for verb, N for noun, prep for preposition, adj for adjective, and adv for adverb. Also, target 
searches are in bold. For example, V+N indicates that the participant searched the noun in order to find 
appropriate verbs that are commonly used with the noun. 
9. “Prototype strings” are the most commonly used forms of word usage. The teacher taught the class how 
to use concordance and collocate data to construct “prototype strings” as a way of integrating corpus use 
with students’ language learning. 
Language Learning & Technology 46
Hyunsook Yoon The Influence of Corpus Technology on L2 Academic Writing 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I would like to thank the reviewers of this manuscript as well as the editors for their insightful comments 
and suggestions on an earlier draft of this paper. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Hyunsook Yoon is an assistant professor of the Department of English at Dongguk University, Korea. 
She has a Ph.D. in Foreign and Second Language Education from The Ohio State University. Her 
research interests include corpus linguistics, second language reading and writing, teacher education, and 
ESP/EAP. 
E-mail: hsyoon3@dongguk.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Bernardini, S. (2001). ‘Spoilt for choice’: A learner explores general language corpora. In G. Aston (Ed.), 
Learning with corpora (pp. 220-249). Houston, TX: CLUEB. 
Chambers, A. (2007). Popularising corpus consultation by language learners and teachers. In E. Hidalgo, 
L. Quereda, & J. Santana (Eds.), Corpora in the foreign language classroom: Selected papers from the 
sixth international conference on teaching and language corpora (TaLC 6) (pp.3-16). Amsterdam/New 
York: Rodopi. 
Conrad, S. (1999). The importance of corpus-based research for language teachers. System, 27(1), 1-18. 
Fan, M., & Xu, X. (2002). An evaluation of an online bilingual corpus for the self-learning of legal 
English. System, 30(1), 47-63. 
Ferris, D., & Hedgcock, J. (1998). Teaching ESL composition: Purpose, process, and practice. Mahwah, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Flowerdew, J. (Ed.). (2002). Academic discourse. Harlow, England: Longman. 
Flowerdew, L. (1998). Integrating 'expert' and 'interlanguage' computer corpora findings on causality: 
Discoveries for teachers and students. English for Specific Purposes, 17(4), 329-345. 
Flowerdew, L. (2002). Corpus-based analyses in EAP. In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic discourse (pp. 
95-114). Harlow, England: Longman. 
Gaskell, D., & Cobb, T. (2004). Can learners use concordance feedback for writing errors? System, 32(3), 
301-319. 
Gledhill, C. (2000). The discourse function of collocation in research article introductions. English for 
Specific Purposes, 19(2), 115-135. 
Hinkel, E. (2002). Second language writers' text: Linguistic and rhetorical features. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Hyland, K. (2002). Activity and evaluation: Reporting practices in academic writing. In J. Flowerdew 
(Ed.), Academic discourse (pp. 115-130). Harlow, England: Longman. 
Language Learning & Technology 47
Hyunsook Yoon The Influence of Corpus Technology on L2 Academic Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 48
Jabbour, G. (1997). Corpus linguistics, contextual collocation, and ESP syllabus creation: A text analysis 
approach to the study of the medical research article. Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, University of 
Birmingham, UK. 
Jabbour, G. (2001). Lexis and grammar in second language reading and writing. In D. Belcher, & A. 
Hirvela (Eds.), Linking literacies: Perspectives on L2 reading-writing connections (pp. 291-308). Ann 
Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press. 
Kaltenböck, G., & Mehlmauer-larcher, B. (2005). Computer corpora and the language classroom: On the 
potential and limitations of computer corpora in language teaching. ReCALL, 17(1), 65-84. 
Kennedy, C., & Miceli, T. (2001). An evaluation of intermediate students' approaches to corpus 
investigation. Language Learning & Technology, 5(3), 77-90. 
Lee, D., & Swales J. (2006). A corpus-based EAP course for NNS doctoral students: Moving from 
available specialized corpora to self-compiled corpora. English for Specific Purposes, 25(1), 56-75. 
Phinney, M. (1996). Exploring the virtual world: Computers in the second language writing classroom. In 
M. Pennington (Ed.), The power of CALL (pp. 137-152). Houston, TX: Athelstan. 
Sun, Y.-C. (2000). Using on-line corpus to facilitate language learning. Paper presented at the Annual 
Meeting of the Teachers of English to Speakers of Other Languages, British Columbia, Canada. 
Swales, J., & Feak, C. (1994). Academic writing for graduate students: A course for nonnative speakers 
of English. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press. 
Thurstun, J., & Candlin, C. (1998). Concordancing and the teaching of the vocabulary of academic 
English. English for Specific Purposes, 17(3), 267-280. 
Tribble, C. (1999). Writing difficult texts. Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, Lancaster University, UK. 
Tribble, C. (2002). Corpora and corpus analysis: New windows on academic writing. In J. Flowerdew 
(Ed.), Academic discourse (pp. 131- 149). Harlow, England: Longman. 
Turnbull, J., & Burston, J. (1998). Towards independent concordance work for students: Lessons from a 
case study. ON-CALL, 12(2), 10-21. 
Yoon, H., & Hirvela, A. (2004). ESL student attitudes toward corpus use in L2 writing. Journal of Second 
Language Writing, 13(4), 257-283. 
 
