Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num2/chencheng/ 
June 2008, Volume 12, Number 2
pp. 94-112 
 
Copyright © 2008, ISSN 1094-3501 94
BEYOND THE DESIGN OF AUTOMATED WRITING EVALUATION: 
PEDAGOGICAL PRACTICES AND PERCEIVED LEARNING 
EFFECTIVENESS IN EFL WRITING CLASSES 
Chi-Fen Emily Chen and Wei-Yuan Eugene Cheng 
National Kaohsiung First University of Science and Technology, Taiwan 
Automated writing evaluation (AWE) software is designed to provide instant computer-
generated scores for a submitted essay along with diagnostic feedback. Most studies on 
AWE have been conducted on psychometric evaluations of its validity; however, studies 
on how effectively AWE is used in writing classes as a pedagogical tool are limited. This 
study employs a naturalistic classroom-based approach to explore the interaction between 
how an AWE program, MY Access!, was implemented in three different ways in three EFL 
college writing classes in Taiwan and how students perceived its effectiveness in 
improving writing. The findings show that, although the implementation of AWE was not 
in general perceived very positively by the three classes, it was perceived comparatively 
more favorably when the program was used to facilitate students’ early drafting and 
revising process, followed by human feedback from both the teacher and peers during the 
later process. This study also reveals that the autonomous use of AWE as a surrogate 
writing coach with minimal human facilitation caused frustration to students and limited 
their learning of writing. In addition, teachers’ attitudes toward AWE use and their 
technology-use skills, as well as students’ learner characteristics and goals for learning to 
write, may also play vital roles in determining the effectiveness of AWE. With limitations 
inherent in the design of AWE technology, language teachers need to be more critically 
aware that the implementation of AWE requires well thought-out pedagogical designs and 
thorough considerations for its relevance to the objectives of the learning of writing. 
INTRODUCTION 
Automated writing evaluation (AWE), also referred to as automated essay scoring (AES)1, is not a brand-
new technology in the twenty-first century; rather, it has been under development since the 1960s. This 
technology was originally designed to reduce the heavy load of grading a large number of student essays 
and to save time in the grading process. Early AWE programs, such as Project Essay Grade, employed 
simple style analyses of surface linguistic features of a text to evaluate writing quality (Page, 2003). Since 
the mid-1990s, the design of AWE programs has been improving rapidly due to the advance of artificial 
intelligence technology, in particular natural language processing and intelligent language tutoring 
systems. Newly developed AWE programs, such as Criterion with the essay scoring engine "e-rater" by 
Educational Testing Service and MY Access! with the essay scoring engine "Intellimetric" by Vantage 
Learning, boast the ability to conduct more sophisticated analyses including lexical complexity, syntactic 
variety, discourse structures, grammatical usage, word choice, and content development. They provide 
immediate scores along with diagnostic feedback in various aspects of writing and can be used for both 
formative and summative assessment purposes. In addition, a number of AWE programs are now web-
based and equipped with a variety of online writing resources (e.g., thesauri and word banks) and editing 
features (e.g., grammar, spelling, and style checkers), which make them not only an essay assessment tool 
but also a writing assistance tool. Students can make use of both AWE’s assessment and assistance 
functions to help them write and revise their essays in a self-regulated learning environment.  
Although AWE developers claim that their programs are able to assess and respond to student writing as 
human readers do (e.g., Attali & Burstein, 2006; Vantage Learning, 2007), critics of AWE express strong 
skepticism. Voices from the academic community presented in Ericsson and Haswell’s (2006) anthology, 
Chi-Fen Emily Chen & Wei-Yuan Eugene Cheng Beyond the Design of Automated Writing Evaluation 
 
for example, question the truth of the industry’s publicity for AWE products and the consequences of the 
implementation of AWE in writing classes. They distrust the ability of computers to "read" texts and 
evaluate the quality of writing because computers are unable to understand meaning in the way humans 
do. They also doubt the value of writing to a machine rather than to a real audience, since no genuine, 
meaningful communication is likely to be carried out between the writer and the machine. Moreover, they 
worry whether AWE will lead students to focus only on surface features and formulaic patterns without 
giving sufficient attention to meaning in writing their essays.  
The development and the use of AWE, however, is not a simple black-and-white issue; rather, this issue 
involves a complex mix of factors concerning software design, pedagogical practices, and learning 
contexts. Given the fact that many AWE programs have already been in use and involve multiple 
stakeholders, a blanket rejection of these products may not be a viable, practical stand (Whithaus, 2006). 
What we need are more investigations and discussions of how AWE programs are used in various writing 
classes "in order to explicate the potential value for teaching and learning as well as the potential harm" 
(Williamson, 2004, p. 100). A more pressing question, accordingly, is probably not whether AWE should 
be used but how this new technology can be used to achieve more desirable learning outcomes while 
avoiding potential harms that may result from limitations inherent in the technology. The present study, 
therefore, employed a naturalistic classroom-based approach to explore how an AWE program was 
implemented in three EFL college writing classes and how student perceptions of the effectiveness of 
AWE use were affected by different pedagogical practices.  
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Assessment Validation of AWE: Theory-Based Validity and Context Validity 
AWE programs have been promoted by their developers as a cost-effective option of replacing or 
enhancing human input in assessing and responding to student writing2. Due to AWE vendors’ relentless 
promotion coupled with an increasing demand for technology use in educational institutions, more and 
more teachers and students have used, are using, or are considering using this technology, thus making 
research on AWE urgently important (Ericsson & Haswell, 2006; Shermis & Burstein, 2003a; 
Warschauer & Ware, 2006). Most of the research on AWE, however, has been funded by AWE 
developers, serving to promote commercial vitality and support refinement of their products. Industry-
funded AWE studies have been mostly concerned with psychometric issues with a focus on the 
instrument validity of AWE scoring systems. They generally report high agreement rates between AWE 
scoring systems and human raters. They also demonstrate that the scores given by AWE systems and 
those by other measures of the same writing construct are strongly correlated (see Dikli, 2006; Keith, 
2003; Phillips, 2007). These findings aim to ensure AWE scoring systems’ construct validity and provide 
evidence that AWE can rate student writing as well as humans do.  
Assessment validation, however, is more complex than simply comparing scores from different raters or 
measures. Chung and Baker (2003) caution that "high reliability or agreement between automated and 
human scoring is a necessary, but insufficient condition for validity" (p. 29). As Weir (2005) points out, 
construct validity should not be seen purely as "a matter of the a posteriori statistical validation," but it 
also needs to be viewed as an "a priori investigation of what should be elicited by the test before its actual 
administration" (p. 17). Weir stresses the importance of the non-statistical a priori validation and suggests 
that "theory-based validity" and "context validity" are crucial for language assessment. From a socio-
cognitive approach, Weir notes that these two types of validity have "a symbiotic relationship" and are 
influenced by, and in turn influence, the criteria or construct used for marking as part of scoring validity 
(p. 20). He calls special attention to the role of context in language assessment, as context highlights the 
social dimension of language use and serves as an essential determinant of communicative language 
ability.  
Language Learning & Technology 95
Chi-Fen Emily Chen & Wei-Yuan Eugene Cheng Beyond the Design of Automated Writing Evaluation 
 
To examine the theory-based validity of AWE, we need to discuss what writing is from a theoretical 
perspective. A currently accepted view of writing employs a socio-cognitive model emphasizing writing 
as a communicative, meaning-making act. Writing requires not only linguistic ability for formal accuracy 
but, more importantly, meaning negotiation with readers for genuine communicative purposes. Writing 
thus needs to take into account both internal language processing and contextual factors that affect how 
texts are composed and read (Flower, 1994; Grabe & Kaplan, 1996; Hyland, 2003). Most AWE programs, 
however, are theoretically grounded in a cognitive information-processing model, which does not focus 
on the social and communicative dimensions of writing. They treat texts solely as "code" devoid of 
sociocultural contexts and "process them as meaningless ‘bits’ or tiny fragments of the mosaic of 
meaning" (Ericsson, 2006, p. 36). They "read" student essays against generic forms and preset 
information, but show no concern for human audiences in real-world contexts.  
Even the Conference on College Composition and Communication (CCCC) in the U.S. has expressed 
disapproval of using AWE programs for any assessment purpose and made a strong criticism: "While 
they [AWE programs] may promise consistency, they distort the very nature of writing as a complex and 
context-rich interaction between people. They simplify writing in ways that can mislead writers to focus 
more on structure and grammar than on what they are saying by using a given structure and style" (CCCC, 
2006). CCCC’s criticism expresses their concern with not only the theory-based validity of AWE 
programs but also a washback effect, or a "consequential validity" (in Weir’s, 2005, terminology): AWE 
use may encourage students to write to gain high scores by giving more attention to the surface features 
that are more easily detected by AWE systems than to the construction of meaning for communicative 
purposes (Cheville, 2004).  
With regard to the context validity, information on how and why AWE is used to assess student writing in 
educational contexts is often lacking (Chung & Baker, 2003). When the context and the purpose of using 
AWE are unknown, it is difficult to truly judge the validity of AWE programs. In addition, Keith (2003) 
points out that most psychometric studies on AWE have been conducted on large-scale standardized tests 
rather than on classroom writing assessments; hence, the validity of AWE could differ in these two types 
of contexts. He speculates that the machine-human agreement rate may be lower for classroom 
assessments, since the content and meaning of student essays is likely to be more valued by classroom 
teachers. 
Another important validation issue for AWE is the credibility of the scoring systems. A number of studies 
found that writers can easily fool these systems. For instance, an essay that is lengthy or contains certain 
lexico-grammatical features preferred by the scoring systems can receive a good score, even though the 
content is less than adequate (Herrington & Moran, 2001; Powers, Burstein, Chodorow, Fowles, & 
Kukich, 2002; Ware, 2005). Students can thus devise means of beating such systems, rather than making 
a real effort to improve their writing. Moreover, since AWE systems process an essay as a series of codes, 
they fail to recognize either inventive or illogical writing (Cheville, 2004), nor can they recognize 
nuances such as sarcasm, idioms, and clichés used in student essays (Herrington & Moran, 2001). When 
meaning and content are more emphasized than form, the fairness of AWE scoring is often called into 
question. 
Pedagogical Foundation of AWE: Formative Learning and Learner Autonomy 
To enhance their pedagogical value, several AWE programs, such as MY Access! and Criterion, have 
been developed for not only summative but also formative assessment purposes by providing scores and 
diagnostic feedback on various rhetorical and formal aspects of writing for every essay draft submitted to 
their scoring systems. Students can then use the computer-generated assessment results and diagnostic 
advice to help them revise their writing as many times as they need. The instructional efficacy of AWE, 
as Shermis and Burstein (2003b) suggest, increases when its use moves from that of summative 
Language Learning & Technology 96
Chi-Fen Emily Chen & Wei-Yuan Eugene Cheng Beyond the Design of Automated Writing Evaluation 
 
evaluation to a more formative role. Though AWE scoring systems’ validity remains contended, their 
diagnostic feedback function seems pedagogically appealing for formative learning.  
Formative assessment is used to facilitate learning rather than measure learning, as it focuses on the gap 
between present performance and the desired goal, thus helping students to identify areas of strengths and 
weaknesses in gaining directions for improvement (Black & Wiliam, 1998). For second language (L2) 
writing, formative feedback, as Hyland (2003) suggests, is particularly crucial in improving and 
consolidating learners’ writing skills. It serves as an in-process support that helps learners develop 
strategies for revising their writing. Formative feedback can therefore support process-writing approaches 
that emphasize the need for multiple drafting through a scaffold of prompts, explanations, and suggestions. 
Although formative feedback is a central aspect of writing instruction, Hyland and Hyland (2006) point 
out that research has not been unequivocally positive about its role in L2 writing development since many 
pedagogical issues regarding feedback remain only partially addressed. The form, the focus, the quality, 
the means of delivery, the need for, and the purpose of feedback can all affect the usefulness of feedback 
in improving writing. These issues are vital not only for human feedback but for automated feedback as 
well.  
Studies on AWE for formative learning, however, have not been able to demonstrate that automated 
feedback is of much help during students’ revising process. The most frequently reported reason is that 
automated feedback provides formulaic comments and generic suggestions for all the submitted revisions. 
Thus, students may find it of limited use. Moreover, since such feedback is predetermined and unable to 
provide context-sensitive responses involving rich negotiation of meaning, it is useful only for the 
revision of formal aspects of writing but not of content development (Cheville, 2004; Grimes & 
Warschauer, 2006; Yang, 2004; Yeh & Yu, 2004). Additionally, Yang’s (2004) study reveals that more 
advanced language learners appeared to show less favorable reactions toward the AWE feedback. 
Learners’ language proficiency may constitute another variable affecting the value of such feedback. 
AWE programs, like many other CALL tutors, are designed to foster learner autonomy by performing 
error diagnosis of learner input, generating individualized feedback, and offering self-access resources 
such as dictionaries, thesauri, editing tools, and student portfolios. In theory, such programs can provide 
opportunities for students to direct their own learning, independent of a teacher, to improve their writing 
through constant feedback and assistance features in a self-regulated learning environment. However, 
whether students can develop more autonomy in revising their writing through computer-generated 
feedback and making use of the self-help writing and editing tools available to them is uncertain. This 
may lead to questions of student attitudes toward and motivation for the use of AWE (Ware, 2005). 
Additionally, Beatty (2003) cautions that CALL tutors often "follow a lock-step scope and sequence," 
thus giving learners "only limited opportunities to organize their own learning or tailor it to their special 
needs" (p. 10). Such a problem may also occur when AWE is used.   
Vendor-funded studies on AWE programs have demonstrated significant improvement on standardized 
writing tests (e.g., Attali, 2004; Elliot, Darlington, & Mikulas, 2004; Vantage Learning, 2007). Although 
these results are encouraging, Warschauer and Ware (2006) criticize many of these studies for being 
methodologically unsound and outcome-based. Accordingly, a major problem of this type of research is 
that "it leaves the educational process involved as a black box" (p. 14). These studies seem to attribute the 
observed writing improvement to the AWE software itself but ignore the importance of learning and 
teaching processes. Warschauer and Ware thus suggest that research on AWE should investigate "the 
interaction between use and outcome" (p. 10), for it can provide a more contextualized understanding of 
the actual use of AWE and its effectiveness in improving writing.  
One recent classroom-based AWE study on the interaction between use and outcome is particularly worth 
noting. Grimes and Warschauer (2006) investigated how MY Access! and Criterion were implemented in 
U.S. high school writing classes. They found two main benefits of using AWE: increased motivation to 
Language Learning & Technology 97
Chi-Fen Emily Chen & Wei-Yuan Eugene Cheng Beyond the Design of Automated Writing Evaluation 
 
practice writing for students and easier classroom management for teachers. More importantly, their study 
revealed three paradoxes of using AWE. First, teachers’ positive views of AWE did not contribute to 
more frequent use of the programs in class, as teachers needed class time for grammar drills and 
preparation for state tests. Second, while teachers often disagreed with the automated scores, they viewed 
AWE positively because, for students, the speed of responses was a strong motivator to practice writing, 
and, for teachers, the automated scores allowed them to offload the blame for grades onto a machine. 
Third, teachers valued AWE for revision, but scheduled little time for it. Students thus made minimal use 
of automated feedback to revise their writing except to correct spelling, punctuation, and grammatical 
errors. Their revisions were generally superficial and had little improvement in content. In addition, the 
use of these two programs did not significantly improve students’ scores on standardized writing tests. 
The authors caution that AWE can be misused to reinforce artificial, mechanistic, and formulaic writing 
disconnected from communication in real-world contexts.  
Based on the studies reviewed here, it can be concluded that the validity of AWE scoring systems has not 
been thoroughly established and the usefulness of automated feedback remains uncertain in any 
generalized sense. AWE programs, even those designed for formative learning and emphasizing learner 
autonomy, do not seem to improve student writing significantly in either form or meaning. Therefore, 
AWE programs are often suggested to be used as a supplement to writing instruction rather than as a 
replacement of writing teachers (Shermis & Burstein, 2003b; Ware, 2005; Warschauer & Ware, 2006). 
Yet, how AWE can be used as an effective supplement in the writing class and how different learning 
contexts and pedagogical designs might affect the effectiveness of AWE warrants further investigation. 
The present study addresses these issues by exploring the interaction between different pedagogical 
practices with an AWE program in three EFL writing classes and student perceptions of learning 
outcomes. The purpose is to reveal how different learning/teaching processes affect the perceived value of 
AWE in improving students’ writing.  
METHODOLOGY 
The Context 
This study is a naturalistic classroom-based inquiry that was conducted in three EFL college writing 
classroom contexts in a university in Taiwan. The three writing classes, for third-year English majors, 
were taught by three instructors who were all experienced EFL writing teachers. They shared some 
common features in their writing instruction: 1) the three writing courses were required of third-year 
Taiwanese college students majoring in English; 2) their course objectives all aimed to develop students’ 
academic writing skills; 3) the three instructors used the same textbook and taught similar content; 4) each 
class ran for 18 weeks and met three hours per week; and 5) they adopted a similar process-writing 
approach, including model essay reading activities followed by language exercises and pre-writing, 
drafting and revising activities.  
An AWE program, MY Access! (Version 5.0) (Vantage Learning, 2005), was implemented in the three 
writing classes for one semester on a trial basis. The main purpose for the AWE implementation was to 
facilitate students’ writing development and to reduce the writing instructors’ workload. Before the 
writing courses started, the three instructors received a one-hour training workshop given by a MY 
Access! consultant. The workshop introduced how each feature of the program worked; however, it did 
not provide hands-on practice or instructional guidelines. Consequently, the three instructors had to spend 
extra time working with the program to familiarize themselves with its features and to develop their own 
pedagogical ideas for the AWE implementation. They had total autonomy to design writing activities with 
MY Access! as they saw fit for their respective classes. No predetermined decision on how to incorporate 
the program with their writing instruction was made by the institution or the researchers.  
 
Language Learning & Technology 98
Chi-Fen Emily Chen & Wei-Yuan Eugene Cheng Beyond the Design of Automated Writing Evaluation 
 
Participants  
The three writing classes varied slightly in size: there were 26 students in Class A, 19 in Class B, and 23 
in Class C. All the students were Taiwanese third-year college students majoring in English. They had 
formally studied English for eight years: six years in junior and senior high school and two years in 
college. Their English language proficiency was approximately at the upper-intermediate level. They 
were taking the required junior year EFL academic writing course and also had taken fundamental 
academic writing courses in their freshman and sophomore years. It was their first time using AWE 
software in their writing classes. As English majors, most of them were highly motivated to develop their 
English writing skills.  
AWE Software 
MY Access! is a web-based AWE program using the IntelliMetric automated essay scoring system 
developed by Vantage Learning. The scoring system has been calibrated with a large set of pre-scored 
essays with known scores assigned by human raters. These essays are then used as a basis for the system 
to extract the scoring scale and the pooled judgment of the human raters (Elliot, 2003). It can provide 
holistic and analytic scores on a 4-point or 6-point scale along with diagnostic feedback on five 
dimensions of writing: focus and meaning, content and development, organization, language use and style, 
and mechanics and conventions. The program offers a wide range of writing prompts from informative, 
narrative, persuasive, literary, and expository genres for instructors to select for writing assignments. It 
can be used as a formative or summative assessment tool. When used for formative learning, the program 
allows for multiple revisions and editing. Students can revise their essays multiple times based on the 
analytic assessment results and diagnostic feedback given to each essay draft submitted to the program. 
When run for summative assessment, the system is configured to provide a single submission with an 
overall assessment result.   
In addition, the program provides a variety of writing assistance features, including My Editor, Thesaurus, 
Word Bank, My Portfolio, Writer’s Checklist, Writer’s Guide, Graphic Organizers, and Scoring Rubrics. 
The first four features were most commonly used in the three writing classes: 1) My Editor is a 
proofreading system that automatically detects errors in spelling, grammar, mechanics and style, and then 
provides suggestions on how such problems can be corrected or improved; 2) Thesaurus is an online 
dictionary that offers a list of synonyms for the word being consulted; 3) Word Bank offers words and 
phrases for a number of writing genres, including comparison, persuasive, narrative, and cause-effect 
types of essays; 4) My Portfolio contains multiple versions of essays from a student along with the 
automated scores and feedback. It allows students to access their previous works and view their progress.  
Data Collection and Analysis 
The data included the students’ responses to the end-of-the-course questionnaire made by the researchers, 
focus group interviews with the students, individual interviews with writing instructors, and the students’ 
writing samples along with the scores and feedback generated by MY Access!. The questionnaire surveyed 
the students’ perceived effectiveness of using MY Access! for writing improvement, with a primary focus 
on the adequacy and helpfulness of its automated scores, feedback, and writing assistance features. Four 
major writing assistance features – My Editor, Word Bank, Thesaurus, and My Portfolio – were chosen to 
be evaluated, as they were the most commonly used modules in the three classes. The questionnaire 
contained both multiple-choice questions using a Likert scale and open-ended questions. In total, 53 out 
of 68 students (21 from Class A, 18 from Class B, and 14 from Class C) responded to the questionnaire.  
To triangulate the questionnaire results and recapitulate the learning process with the AWE program, 
three focus group interviews with the students from each class and two interviews with the instructors of 
two classes were conducted after the courses ended. The students participating in interviews were all 
volunteers and given a small gift certificate to thank them: five from Class A, five from Class B, and six 
Language Learning & Technology 99
Chi-Fen Emily Chen & Wei-Yuan Eugene Cheng Beyond the Design of Automated Writing Evaluation 
 
from Class C. The instructors of Class A and Class B agreed to be interviewed, but the instructor of Class 
C declined; therefore, the information about Instructor C was obtained only through the survey results and 
the interview with the students from Class C. Each interview lasted approximately one hour and was 
conducted in Mandarin Chinese. The interviewees were asked to talk about how MY Access! was used in 
their writing classes, how they felt about the value of the program, and what factors affected their 
perceived effectiveness of using the program. All the interviews were audio-taped and then transcribed in 
Chinese and translated into English. In addition, the students’ writing samples along with their automated 
scores and feedback documented in their online portfolios were used to validate their self-reports. 
FINDINGS 
Pedagogical Practices with AWE 
The three instructors implemented MY Access! as an integrated part of their writing instruction, but they 
did not have the same pedagogical practices using the program. According to the interview data, the 
differences in the AWE implementation among the three classes were particularly noteworthy in three 
respects: 1) ways of integrating the AWE program into each instructor’s process-writing curriculum, 2) 
uses of the automated scores and feedback for student writing improvement, and 3) decisions on when 
and when not to use the AWE program.  
Ways of Integrating AWE into the Process-Writing Curriculum 
Instructors A and B both designed two stages for students’ drafting and revising process. At the first stage, 
students worked with the program independently, pre-submitting their essay drafts and revising their 
writing according to the automated scores and feedback they received for each draft. Instructor A, 
however, required her students to achieve a minimum satisfactory score of 4 out of 6 before submitting 
their essays for teacher assessment and peer review. At the second stage, she gave written feedback to the 
students’ essays that had achieved the required level and conducted peer review activities through in-class 
guided discussions. The students then had to revise their essays based on the instructor’s feedback along 
with their peers’ comments. Finally, they resubmitted their revisions to the instructor for a final check and 
published their work on a web-based course platform for everyone in the class to read. Instructor A 
designed the two-stage process for two major reasons. First, she had less confidence in the usefulness of 
the AWE program: she believed that the program could only help students improve some basic linguistic 
forms and organization structures. Second, she believed human input was imperative for students’ 
revising process especially in the areas of content development and coherence of ideas.   
Instructor B, who also implemented My Access! in two stages, did not require her students’ writing to 
reach a certain level at the first stage; rather, she allowed them to revise their essays using the program as 
often as needed and only set a deadline for them to submit their essays to her. In the second stage, she 
gave written feedback to the students’ essays; in addition, she conducted individual teacher-student 
conferencing sessions, where they discussed what the students could do to improve their writing with 
reference to both the automated feedback and the teacher feedback, yet the automated feedback was given 
less emphasis. Then, the students revised their essays again and resubmitted their essays to the instructor 
for a final check. Instructor B also emphasized the importance of human input and considered teacher 
assessment and feedback much more important and meaningful than that given by the AWE program.   
Unlike Instructors A and B, who played substantial roles in facilitating students’ writing process, 
Instructor C did not provide feedback or much consultation during students’ drafting and revising process. 
Rather, she used MY Access! to do all the assessing and responding and also asked the students to work 
with the program autonomously. In addition, she asked them to post their essay drafts in "Yahoo! Groups" 
for online peer review. However, she did not give specific guidelines on how peer review should be done; 
as a result, the students felt that their peers’ comments usually lacked substantial suggestions and then 
they lost interest in doing online peer review after a couple experiences. Except for conducting language 
Language Learning & Technology 100
Chi-Fen Emily Chen & Wei-Yuan Eugene Cheng Beyond the Design of Automated Writing Evaluation 
 
exercises and pre-writing activities, Instructor C’s involvement in the students’ writing process was 
minimal. What she did was give summative assessments for all the submitted essays at the end of the 
semester. 
Uses of AWE’s Scores and Feedback for Student Writing Improvement 
Both instructors A and B reported that they did not have strong trust in the automated scoring and 
feedback system; they had more confidence in their own assessment. Nevertheless, Instructor A set a 
score of 4 as a threshold for turning in essays for human assessment. She chose this score on the basis of 
the "MY Access Six Point Holistic Rubric": "4" indicates that the essay achieves an "adequate" level of 
communicating the writer's message, while "5" indicates "good" and "6" indicates "very effective." She 
also asked the students to take advantage of the automated feedback to help them reduce mistakes or 
problems in grammar, language use, and organization. In so doing, she was able to lessen her grading 
load and focus more on the meaning and content development in her own feedback. 
Instructor B gave less emphasis to automated scores and feedback; instead, she asked her students to pay 
greater attention to the grades and feedback given by her. This was because she found the automated 
scores that her students obtained were very similar (i.e., most of them obtained a score of 3 or 4 for their 
first drafts) and doubted that such scores provided valid evaluations of their writing. Also, she found that 
the information in the automated feedback was vague and formulaic, and thus regarded such feedback as 
of little help to them.  
Instructor C counted the automated scores as part of the students’ actual grades, which suggested that she 
might have had more confidence that the automated scores were able to reflect students’ writing 
performance to a reliable extent. Moreover, without giving teacher feedback, she asked the students to 
rely only on the automated feedback during their revision process, which implied that she seemed to trust 
such feedback to provide sufficient and useful information in guiding students to improve their writing.  
Decisions on When and When Not to Use AWE  
Both Classes A and C implemented MY Access! for sixteen weeks, but Class B used it for only six weeks. 
Instructor B decided to discontinue the AWE implementation for three reasons. First, she pointed out that 
the automated scores and feedback were of little help in improving students’ writing, as mentioned earlier. 
Second, due to the vagueness of the automated feedback, she had to spend more time explaining what the 
feedback really meant by providing more specific details, which she thought did not reduce, but increased, 
her workload. Third, she and her students felt frustrated in working with the program due to many 
technical problems they encountered but could not solve. She reported frankly that she did not spend 
much time figuring out how the program worked and that her competence in working with computer 
technology was generally not very good. She then decided to ask the students to use MS Word instead, 
which they all knew how to work with.  
Instructors A and C had no difficulties in working with the program. However, Instructor A did not ask 
her students to use the program for all the writing assignments. She commented that the AWE program 
imposed constraints on the topical content, the organizational structure, and the discourse style the 
students could use in their writing. She felt that these constraints restricted students’ creativity and idea 
development. Therefore, she provided them other opportunities to practice writing with more freedom. 
For instance, for their final assignment she asked them to write an essay about Taiwan using any style 
they preferred. Her purpose was to allow students to write this essay in a personally more meaningful and 
stylistically less restrained manner. 
In contrast, Instructor C used the program for both formative and summative assessment of all the writing 
assignments. In addition, she used it as a writing assessment tool for the final exam to measure students’ 
timed essay writing performance. Her purpose, according to the students’ account, was to give them a 
timed writing exam experience, which was similar to the writing exams given in TOEFL or GMAT. 
Language Learning & Technology 101
Chi-Fen Emily Chen & Wei-Yuan Eugene Cheng Beyond the Design of Automated Writing Evaluation 
 
However, after the exam, quite a few of her students complained to her about using this method to 
determine their final exam grades, since they had not practiced timed essay writing before, nor did they 
trust the fairness of machine scoring based on their experience of using the program for the whole 
semester. Instructor C was persuaded by the students’ entreaties and decided to allow them to submit the 
revision of their final-exam essays to her for re-assessment. This decision reveals that her confidence in 
machine scoring seemed to be lowered because of the students’ reactions to the use of AWE. 
Below is a summary of the major differences in pedagogical practices with MY Access! among the three 
writing classes (see Table 1). 
Table 1. Pedagogical Practices with MY Access! in Three Writing Classes 
 Class A Class B Class C 
Purpose of Use - Formative assessment  - Formative assessment  - Both formative and 
summative assessment  
Ways of Use - Students wrote multiple 
drafts using the program 
during the early drafting 
and revising process.   
- Both the assessment and 
assistance features were 
emphasized.  
- Students wrote multiple 
drafts using the program 
during the early drafting 
and revising process.  
- The assistance features 
were emphasized more 
than the assessment 
features. 
- Students wrote multiple 
drafts using the program 
during the whole writing 
process. 
- The program also served 
as a writing assessment 
tool for the final exam.   
- The assessment features 
were more emphasized 
than the assistance 
features. 
Grading Policy - Students were not allowed 
to turn in their essays to 
the teacher until they 
gained a score of 4 or 
above. 
- Students’ actual grades 
were determined by the 
teacher. 
- The automated scores 
were unimportant and 
used for reference only.  
- Students’ actual grades 
were determined by the 
teacher. 
- The automated scores 
accounted for 40% of 
students’ final grades. 
- Students’ actual grades 
were determined by both 
the program and the 
teacher. 
Human 
Feedback  
- The teacher gave feedback 
during students’ later 
revising process. 
- In-class peer review was 
conducted.  
 
- The teacher gave 
feedback and provided 
teacher-student 
conferencing during 
students’ later revising 
process. 
- No peer review was 
conducted. 
- The teacher gave 
feedback to all the 
essays at the end of the 
semester but provided 
little consultation during 
students’ revising 
process.  
- Online peer review was 
loosely conducted.  
Duration of 
Use  16 weeks 6 weeks 16 weeks 
Number of 
Essays Written 
using AWE 
4 take-home essays  2 take-home essays 6 take-home essays & 1 timed in-class essay 
 
Language Learning & Technology 102
Chi-Fen Emily Chen & Wei-Yuan Eugene Cheng Beyond the Design of Automated Writing Evaluation 
 
The three different AWE implementations were likely affected by four important factors: 1) the teachers’ 
attitudes toward AWE scores and feedback, 2) their views on the role of human feedback, 3) their 
conceptions of the teaching and learning of writing, and 4) their technology-use skills in working with the 
AWE program. For instance, a combination of AWE facilitation with human feedback, as was found in 
Classes A and B, was probably due to the instructors’ limited confidence in AWE and their greater 
emphasis on the importance of human feedback, whereas the autonomous use of AWE in Class C might 
have resulted from the instructor’s elevated level of confidence in the AWE program. However, Instructor 
C’s confidence in the AWE’s assessment function may have also been reduced by her students’ reactions 
at the end of the semester. On the other hand, a mixture of machine-governed writing and more personally 
meaningful writing, as found in Class A, probably resulted from the instructor’s perception of the 
limitations of the AWE program in facilitating writing and her view of how writing should be taught and 
learned. Finally, the quick abandonment of the AWE implementation in Class B was likely attributed to 
the instructor’s disapproval of the AWE program and her incompetent technology-use skills.  
Student Perceptions of AWE Effectiveness  
Overall Evaluation of AWE 
According to the questionnaire survey, none of the students found MY Access! greatly helpful, 55% of 
them considered it either moderately or slightly helpful, and the other 45% found it unhelpful (see Table 
2). Of particular note are the different ratings among the three writing classes. In Class A, 86% of the 
students thought that the program was more or less helpful for their writing improvement, compared to 
28% in Class B and 43% in Class C. The high positive response from Class A suggested that the way MY 
Access! was implemented in Class A seemed to be the most effective. On the other hand, the very 
negative reactions from Class B probably resulted from the short period of implementation, which may 
not have given students sufficient opportunities to experience any benefits of the program. Additionally, 
their reactions could have been negatively influenced by the instructor’s apparent disapproval of the 
program. 
Table 2. Overall Perceived Effectiveness of Using MY Access! 
To what degree do you think using MY 
Access! can help you improve your writing? 
Greatly 
helpful 
Moderately 
helpful 
Slightly 
helpful 
Not  
helpful 
Class A (N=21) 0 6 (29%) 12 (57%) 3 (14%) 
Class B (N=18) 0 1 (6%) 4 (22%) 13 (72%) 
Class C (N=14) 0 2 (14%) 4 (29%) 8 (57%) 
Total (N=53) 0 9 (17%) 20 (38%) 24 (45%) 
(Note: This question was designed purposely not to include "Neutral" as a choice option) 
Adequacy and Helpfulness of AWE Scores and Feedback 
It is noteworthy that none of the respondents showed agreement regarding the adequacy of automated 
scores (see Table 3). A very high percentage of disagreement, 83%, was found in Class B, whereas 57% 
in Class A and 42% in Class C. Class B’s widespread distrust of the computer-rated scores was probably 
due to the instructor’s negative attitude toward those scores. As one student from Class B remarked, 
"How is it possible for us to trust this kind of scores if our teacher does not think they are valid?" As for 
Class A, since they often found discrepancies between the automated assessment results and their 
Language Learning & Technology 103
Chi-Fen Emily Chen & Wei-Yuan Eugene Cheng Beyond the Design of Automated Writing Evaluation 
 
instructor’s assessment and their peers’ comments, their confidence level in these scores was not high. 
Only in Class C did close to 60% of the respondents hold a neutral attitude toward the automated scores, 
which may be due to the fact that they received only automated scores and thus had nothing to compare 
them with.    
Table 3. Reactions toward AWE Scores and Feedback 
 SA A N D SD 
The scores given by MY Access! are adequate. 
Class A (N=21) 0 0 9 (43%) 12 (57%) 0  
Class B (N=18) 0 0 3 (17%) 13 (72%) 2 (11%) 
Class C (N=14) 0 0 8 (58%) 2 (14%) 4 (28%) 
The written feedback given by MY Access! is helpful for revision. 
Class A (N=21) 0 7 (33%) 4 (20%) 7 (33%) 3 (14%) 
Class B (N=18) 0 1 (6%) 8 (44%) 6 (33%) 3 (17%) 
Class C (N=14)  0 4 (29%) 3 (21%) 4 (29%) 3 (21%) 
(Note: SA=strongly agree; A=agree; N=neutral; D=disagree; SD=strongly disagree) 
The reasons that the students gave for such negative reactions toward the automated assessment were 
similar to what has been found in the literature. According to their self-reports, there were four major 
problems with the scoring system. 
1) It favors lengthiness. The longer an essay is, the higher score it is awarded by the program. 
2) It overemphasizes the use of transition words. The score of an essay can be increased immediately 
by adding more transition words such as ‘as a result’, ‘to sum up’, or ‘on the other hand’ without 
changing other things.  
3) It ignores coherence and content development. An essay that has four or five paragraphs containing 
"key words" related to the topic can be awarded a high score, even though it has serious coherence 
problems and illogical ideas.  
4) It discourages unconventional ways of essay writing. One student from Class C recalled that she 
once used a story as an introduction in her essay but received a low score along with the feedback 
indicating a logical problem between the introduction and the conclusion. She then deleted the story 
and wrote a conventional introduction instead, which improved her score greatly. This shows that 
the scoring system values conventional, formulaic essay writing styles. Hence, the AWE program 
may not only fail to adequately assess students’ writing but also restrict the ways students express 
themselves.   
With regard to the helpfulness of the AWE feedback, around 50% of the respondents in each class 
considered it to be of no help. Although they commented that the automated feedback helped them pay 
attention to some previously unattended language use problems (such as formality, use of the passive 
voice, and sentence variety), they also criticized the feedback for being "vague," "abstract," "unspecific," 
"formulaic," and "repetitive." Thus, it did not provide them useful guidance to help them revise their 
essays. This was particularly evident in the areas of coherence and content development. Moreover, 
students would receive no feedback if their essays were judged as "off-topic." A few students who had 
this experience remarked that they felt very frustrated because the program gave no explanation of why 
their essays were off the topic. This problem became even worse when teacher feedback was also lacking, 
Language Learning & Technology 104
Chi-Fen Emily Chen & Wei-Yuan Eugene Cheng Beyond the Design of Automated Writing Evaluation 
 
as in the case of Class C. These findings show that the AWE feedback alone was unable to provide 
sufficient or substantial suggestions addressing students’ writing problems.   
Helpfulness of AWE Writing Assistance Features 
The three classes had slightly more positive reactions toward the helpfulness of AWE writing assistance 
functions than that of assessment scores (see Table 4). Class A rated the four writing assistance features 
more positively than the other two classes. The combined percentage of "agree" and "neutral" for each 
item was over 70%. This result can be attributed to Instructor A’s emphasis on both the assessment and 
assistance functions of MY Access! (see Table 1). Moreover, she clearly demonstrated to her students how 
to use each function of the program. In contrast, Instructor B had difficulty showing the students how to 
use some of the functions properly, whereas Instructor C asked her students to explore the assistance 
features by themselves, but some did not know how to use these features. 
Table 4. Reactions Toward AWE Writing Assistance Features  
 SA A N D SD 
It is helpful to use My Editor during my writing process. 
Class A (N=21) 0 9 (42%) 8 (38%) 3 (15%) 1 (5%) 
Class B (N=18) 0 6 (33%) 3 (17%) 7 (39%) 2 (11%) 
Class C (N=14) 0 2 (14%) 6 (72%) 3 (7%) 3 (7%) 
It is helpful to use Word Bank during my writing process. 
Class A (N=21) 0 6 (29%) 10 (48%) 3 (14%) 2 (9%) 
Class B (N=18) 0 6 (33%) 2 (11%) 6 (33%) 4 (22%) 
Class C (N=14)  0 2 (14%) 4 (29%) 6 (43%) 2 (14%) 
It is helpful to use Thesaurus during my writing process. 
Class A (N=21) 0 8 (38%) 8 (38%) 4 (19%) 1 (5%) 
Class B (N=18) 0 4 (22%) 6 (33%) 6 (33%) 2 (11%) 
Class C (N=14) 1 (7%) 1 (7%) 5 (36%) 5 (36%) 2 (14%) 
It is helpful to use My Portfolio during my writing process. 
Class A (N=21) 0 3 (14%) 12 (58%) 3 (14%) 3 (14%) 
Class B (N=18) 0 2 (11%) 6 (33%) 7 (39%) 3 (17%) 
Class C (N=14) 0 3 (21%) 4 (29%) 3 (21%) 4 (29%) 
(Note: SA=strongly agree; A=agree; N=neutral; D=disagree; SD=strongly disagree) 
Among the four writing assistance features, My Editor was viewed slightly more favorably than the others, 
probably because it helped the students immediately identify their spelling, grammar, and punctuation 
mistakes as well as some style problems. However, the students reported that the drawback of this feature 
was similar to the automated feedback: it was not informative enough. For example, it flagged a mistake 
in verb tense but did not advise which tense to use. Some students even doubted the usefulness of the 
grammar-check function since the program was unable to take the context of language use into 
consideration. As for Word Bank and Thesaurus, the students pointed out two major problems: first, no 
Language Learning & Technology 105
Chi-Fen Emily Chen & Wei-Yuan Eugene Cheng Beyond the Design of Automated Writing Evaluation 
 
explanations or example sentences were provided to illustrate how each word was used; second, the 
words and phrases collected in these two features were not sufficient to meet their needs. In regard to My 
Portfolio, students enjoyed easy access to their essays along with scores and feedback, but they did not 
find it of particular help during their writing process. 
Appropriateness of AWE Implementation 
While many limitations of the program’s assessment and assistance functions could have negatively 
affected student perceptions of the effectiveness of AWE use, the three classes’ different reactions were 
also likely affected by the specific ways the AWE program was implemented. The students’ comments on 
the appropriateness of the implementation of the program centered around four issues: use of automated 
scores, need for human feedback, students’ language proficiency, and purpose for learning writing. 
1) Use of Automated Scores. Class B was the only one that disregarded the automated scores, whereas 
Class A and Class C used those scores for different purposes. The students of Class A generally approved 
of the policy that they had to pre-submit their essays to the program and achieve a minimum satisfactory 
score before teacher assessment. The required minimum score (i.e., 4 points) was not too hard for them to 
obtain in the preliminary stage of their writing process. Therefore, they did not perceive the automated 
assessment as a threat. Instead, many of them viewed it as a self-confidence builder because it ensured 
that the grades they received from the instructor would not be too low. Moreover, since their essays still 
had to be assessed by the instructor, they would not stop revising their essays just because they had 
obtained a good computer-rated score.  
Unlike Class A, the students of Class C were more anxious about the automated scores they received for 
their essays because those scores accounted for 40% of their final grades. Many of them did not find it an 
appropriate way of assessing their writing since the AWE scoring system had numerous biases. They 
suggested that AWE scores should be used only as references to show whether their writing would be 
improved during the drafting and revising process rather than actual indicators of their writing 
performance. 
2) Need for Human Feedback. All the students in the interviews contended that human feedback was 
indispensable even when AWE software was used. The students in Class A considered teacher feedback 
much more valuable than automated feedback because the teacher provided more specific, concrete 
suggestions and personal comments regarding both form and meaning. In addition to teacher feedback, 
they also found peer feedback beneficial to them, as it helped them expand or reformulate their ideas from 
different perspectives. Class A’s more favorable attitude toward the AWE implementation (as compared 
to the other two classes) may have also been related to the availability of both teacher feedback and peer 
feedback complementing AWE feedback. 
In Class B, since the instructor displayed a strong distrust of AWE scores and feedback, the students 
tended to react similarly; hence, they relied heavily on teacher feedback, which they considered of much 
greater importance than AWE feedback. As for Class C, many of the students disapproved of the use of 
the AWE program without teacher feedback. They did not find using the program autonomously to be of 
much help in improving their writing. Some remarked that the absence of teacher feedback in the AWE 
learning environment negatively affected their attitudes not only toward the AWE program but also 
toward the writing class in general. This suggests that the use of the AWE program to replace the 
teacher’s role in assessing and responding to student essays would not satisfy students’ needs nor would it 
motivate them to take such a writing class again. 
3) Students’ Language Proficiency. A number of students suggested that this program might be more 
suitable for students whose English proficiency level was lower. They commented that, first, as third-year 
English majors, they had already learned fundamental essay writing skills and therefore should not have 
been constrained by so many machine-controlled rules in their writing. Instead, they wished to write with 
Language Learning & Technology 106
Chi-Fen Emily Chen & Wei-Yuan Eugene Cheng Beyond the Design of Automated Writing Evaluation 
 
more flexibility and creativity. Secondly, since the program provided help mainly in the areas of 
mechanical accuracy and formal organization, students thought that such help would be more useful to 
beginners or intermediate learners since form tended to be viewed more importantly than meaning in 
early-stage learning of L2 writing. Thirdly, many of them pointed out that, as more advanced writers, they 
needed assessment and feedback focusing more on the meaning of their writing. Since the AWE program 
failed to focus on meaning, students did not find a strong need to use it for the learning of more advanced 
writing skills. These responses suggest that students who are at a more advanced language proficiency 
level may not want their writing to be confined by a set of machine-governed criteria, and furthermore 
they do not find such machine-generated form-focused responses to be valuable. 
4) Purpose for Learning Writing. This issue is related to the previous one: students at different language 
proficiency levels may not have the same purpose for learning writing. One key question that is 
constantly asked in L2 writing classes is whether form or meaning should receive greater emphasis. For 
the students of the three classes, the consensus was that more weight should be given to meaning 
generally, and specifically idea development and meaning construction processes. Although many of 
them agreed that this program helped them to produce grammatically correct and conventionally well-
organized essays, they doubted the value of using the program to learn writing if no teacher facilitation 
was provided. For instance, one student criticized the program for "depriving learners of an opportunity to 
show human qualities in their writing" and claimed that if students followed all the program’s rules to 
write, their writing would "lose vitality." Moreover, some students, particularly from Class C, questioned 
why they had to write for a computer program that did not understand what they wrote. They did not see 
any purpose in learning writing this way nor did they consider it possible to achieve their goal of writing 
to communicate by interacting with the software. 
DISCUSSION 
Overall, AWE use was not perceived very positively by students in the three writing classes, and this is 
likely due to limitations inherent in the program’s assessment and assistance functions. The literature on 
AWE use has also pointed out limitations in the design of AWE technology, such as favoring lengthiness 
and certain lexico-grammatical features, failing to recognize incoherent or illogical writing, and 
generating formulaic and unspecific feedback (Cheville, 2004; Herrington & Moran, 2001; Powers et al, 
2002; Ware, 2005; Yang, 2004). This study, however, shows that writing teachers’ pedagogical practices 
with AWE software can further affect student perceptions of the effectiveness of AWE in facilitating their 
learning of writing.  
The AWE implementation was viewed comparatively more favorably when the program was used to 
facilitate students’ early drafting and revising process, and when the teacher made a policy of asking 
students to meet a preliminary required standard and subsequently provided human feedback (Class A). 
The integration of automated assessment and human assessment for formative learning offers three 
advantages. First, it can assure students that their writing has achieved a minimum acceptable level before 
human assessment and can increase their confidence in writing to a certain extent. Second, it can help 
teachers focus more on meaning negotiation and idea development when giving their feedback, since the 
program has made suggestions to improve mechanical accuracy and organization. Third, it can reduce the 
impact of automated assessment whose validity remains questionable because the machine-rated scores 
serve only as a preliminary assessment, whereas teacher-rated scores are the final evaluation of students’ 
writing performance. 
The study has also revealed the necessity of providing human feedback in the AWE learning environment 
to redress the limitations of AWE feedback. Computer-generated feedback from the MY Access! system, 
though delivered instantly and viewed as helpful in improving some formal aspects of writing, provides 
only formulaic, generic information that cannot address students’ individual writing problems, 
particularly in the areas of coherence and idea development, whereas human feedback can attend to 
Language Learning & Technology 107
Chi-Fen Emily Chen & Wei-Yuan Eugene Cheng Beyond the Design of Automated Writing Evaluation 
 
meaning, respond to the writer’s thoughts, and give specific, personal comments. Moreover, giving 
human feedback can redress the limitations of the cognitive information-processing model that AWE is 
based on and take into account the social and communicative dimensions of writing. It is imperative to 
note that the use of AWE as a surrogate writing coach without human feedback may frustrate students 
since there is no meaning negotiation between the writer and human readers. As Rothermel (2006) 
cautions us, although some AWE programs claim to use the process-writing approach to improve 
students’ writing "through a continuous, iterative process of writing and revising," these programs 
actually "mask a different ideology, one that defines not just writing, but also teaching and learning, as 
formulaic and asocial endeavors" (p. 200). AWE, if used alone without appropriate human input and 
feedback, seems unlikely to help students achieve the goal of writing for effective communication in 
terms of both form and meaning. 
Furthermore, any use of CALL software needs to take into consideration learner characteristics and 
learning goals. The students in this study were all third-year English majors who had already learned 
fundamental essay writing skills. They questioned the value of AWE since they did not want to be 
confined by machine-governed rules nor did they want to be assessed by a machine that did not 
understand what they wrote. These reasons, in fact, are closely related to students’ goals for learning 
writing. As Ericsson (2006) suggests, "during discussions of the machine scoring of writing, participants 
must carefully consider why we ask students to compose essays and what we expect them to gain from 
knowing how to compose such texts" (p. 30).  
Since many AWE programs currently hold up rather static and formulaic models of "good writing", such 
as the prototypical five-paragraph essay (Ware & Warschauer, 2006), AWE programs may be of help in 
training students to write stylistically and structurally well-formed essays that the test graders may prefer 
to read. This approach could be useful if the learning goal is to strengthen the form of essay writing or to 
achieve a high score on large-scale institutionalized writing tests. This can also explain why many studies 
on AWE, particularly those funded by the industry, highlight its effectiveness in improving the scores of 
students taking standardized writing tests. On the other hand, if the goal is to communicate the writer’s 
thoughts effectively to real audiences and demonstrate the writer’s creativity and originality, using AWE 
is probably not a good choice. This concern can be particularly important for advanced language learners, 
as they may want to transcend conventional writing styles and develop their own styles to demonstrate the 
vitality of their writing.  
Whether to focus on form or meaning in L2 writing has been the subject of many debates (Hyland, 2003); 
however, the choice is never an either-or question, but rather a matter of degree of emphasis. Advanced 
language learners may expect feedback on their writing to be more meaning-focused and may not be 
contented with predominantly form-focused responses provided by the machine (Yang, 2004). Therefore, 
how to strike a balance between form and meaning in L2 writing instruction merits serious attention when 
AWE is used as a pedagogical tool. In the present study, we see how an instructor attempted to attend to 
both form and meaning by asking students to tackle their grammatical and organizational problems 
through the machine-generated feedback while helping them to construct meaning and develop a sense of 
audience through teacher feedback and peer review. Moreover, this instructor did not require students to 
use AWE all the time but provided them opportunities to write on personally meaningful topics and with 
individually preferred styles. This flexibility in integrating facilitation of both machine and human may 
help students, on the one hand, to enhance their autonomy as learners and to raise their awareness of 
writing conventions and mechanics by working with AWE independently, and, on the other hand, to learn 
to write for meaning construction and genuine purposes by interacting with the teacher and peers in the 
AWE learning environment. 
 
 
Language Learning & Technology 108
Chi-Fen Emily Chen & Wei-Yuan Eugene Cheng Beyond the Design of Automated Writing Evaluation 
 
LIMITATIONS OF THE STUDY AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
This paper has presented a descriptive study illuminating important insights into the process of teaching 
and learning writing with AWE and its linkage to student perceptions of learning outcomes. It is, however, 
an exploratory study and has several limitations. First, the teachers’ views of AWE use and instructional 
rationales were not exhaustively documented. The study would have been more revealing if the 
viewpoints of the instructor who emphasized the autonomous use of AWE had been obtained. Second, the 
study would have uncovered more in-depth information showing what was actually happening in the 
AWE learning environments if classroom observations had been conducted. Third, the findings may be 
limited to this particular EFL context of advanced English learners. The transferability of the findings 
depends to a large degree on the similarity of other learning contexts to the present one. Fourth, the 
learning outcomes were investigated only through students’ perceptions; the real gains could be further 
examined by comparing student essays before and after AWE use. A final limitation is the difficulty of 
attributing effects to any single factor. This study shows how a combination of contextual and 
pedagogical factors interact holistically, but how individual factors contribute specifically to the 
effectiveness of AWE needs further investigation.  
Many language scholars and educators have pointed out that it is vital to investigate the pedagogical 
effectiveness of using technology in various learning contexts, rather than merely to focus on the 
effectiveness of the technology innovations (e.g., Beatty, 2003; Chapelle, 2003; Levy & Stockwell, 2006; 
Warschauer & Ware, 2006). Therefore, in addition to the research on how AWE software can be 
redesigned to address its inherent limitations, more classroom-based research on pedagogical practices 
with AWE is certainly needed. Further research may employ more rigorously-designed experimental 
investigations to validate the findings of this exploratory study or conduct longitudinal case studies to 
probe more deeply into teaching and learning processes with AWE and the long-term effects of using this 
technology for writing improvement. Moreover, how to measure the "effectiveness" of using AWE in 
writing classes is a crucial issue. The definition of effectiveness can vary depending on how teachers and 
students perceive the goals for the learning of writing. Students’ language proficiency levels, cultural 
backgrounds, needs for learning to write in English, and learning contexts may all influence their 
perceptions of learning goals. AWE research needs to investigate learning outcomes from multifaceted 
perspectives and take into deliberate consideration learners’ characteristics, needs, and goals for learning 
writing.  
CONCLUSIONS 
AWE software is still a developing technology that has not yet reached a fully mature stage. With many 
limitations inherent in the design of AWE technology, the particular pedagogical practices that 
accompany AWE use are critical. The relationship between technology and pedagogy, as Stockwell 
(2007) suggests, can be seen "as a symbiotic one, where they are mutually dependent upon each other, 
potentially to their benefit, but also potentially to their detriment" (p. 118). Therefore, while the design of 
AWE software needs to be improved to overcome its limitations and to keep up with current writing 
pedagogical theories, more effective pedagogical practices also need to be developed in order to augment 
the benefits as well as to minimize the problems that AWE technology may bring to students in their 
learning of writing. 
It is important to emphasize that human facilitation should not be absent in AWE learning environments, 
because, first, writing is a social-communicative act involving the negotiation of meaning between writers 
and readers, and, second, writing instruction requires appropriate pedagogical designs capable of 
responding to contextual changes and learner needs, which cannot be accomplished by machines. AWE, 
like any existing technology used in the learning of writing, requires well thought-out pedagogical ideas 
and strategies for its implementation in writing classes. As Hyland (2003) claims, "writing cannot be 
developed by new tools but only by proper instruction, and this involves providing learners with 
Language Learning & Technology 109
Chi-Fen Emily Chen & Wei-Yuan Eugene Cheng Beyond the Design of Automated Writing Evaluation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 110
appropriate tasks and support" (p. 147). In writing instruction, assessing student writing and providing 
quality feedback are essential components, yet they are often complex in nature and challenging to 
writing teachers. When AWE is used, this job does not necessarily become easier for teachers but may 
become more complicated, requiring more technological competence in working with AWE and more 
careful pedagogical designs to integrate AWE into writing instruction. This study hopes to increase 
language teachers’ critical awareness of how the design of AWE technology can affect its use and how 
pedagogical practices can affect the effectiveness of AWE for writing improvement. Writing teachers 
need to be fully aware of the limitations of AWE technology as well as students’ learning needs and 
contexts in making decisions about how to maximize effective AWE use and to minimize undesirable 
outcomes.  
 
NOTES 
1. The term automated essay scoring (AES) is used more broadly and frequently than the term automated 
writing evaluation (AWE). However, we chose AWE instead of AES because the function of current 
essay grading technology is more than just scoring essays automatically. It also provides other forms of 
feedback as well as various writing assistance tools. 
2. Examples of commercial AWE programs include Criterion developed by Educational Testing 
Service, MY Access! by Vantage Learning, Intelligent Essay Assessor by Pearson Education, and WritePl
by College Board (see an overview of automatic essay scoring programs in Dikli, 2006 and Phillips, 
acer 
007). 
 
2
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We would like to thank most sincerely the three anonymous reviewers as well as the two editors 
special issue, 
of this 
Joel Bloch and Richard Kern, for their valuable suggestions and comments on our 
anuscript.  m
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Chi-Fen Emily Chen is Associate Professor and currently Chair of the Department of English at National 
Kaohsiung First University of Science and Technology, Taiwan. Her research interests include computer-
literacy, second language writing, and discourse analysis. 
 
ests include second language writing, computer-assisted language 
-mail: weiyuan.cheng@msa.hinet.net 
 
assisted language learning, electronic 
Email: emchen@ccms.nkfust.edu.tw 
Wei-Yuan Eugene Cheng earned his master degree at National Kaohsiung First University of Science and
Technology in 2006. His research inter
learning, and vocabulary acquisition.  
E
REFERENCES 
Attali, Y. (2004). Exploring the feedback and revision features of Criterion. Paper presented at the 
National Council on Measurement in Education in San Diego, CA. April, 2004. 
Chi-Fen Emily Chen & Wei-Yuan Eugene Cheng Beyond the Design of Automated Writing Evaluation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 111
Attali, Y., & Burstein, J. (2006). Automated essay scoring with e-rater v.2. Journal of Technology, 
Learning, and Assessment, 4(3), 1-30. 
Beatty, K. (2003). Teaching and researching computer-assisted language learning. New York: Longman.  
4. 
. (2003). English language learning and technology. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
nal, 
. 
alidity of automated scoring of 
p. 23-40). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.  
lington, K., & Mikulas, C. (2004). But does it really work? A national study of MY Access! 
g of meaning: Is a paragraph more than an equation? In P. F. Ericsson 
quences. 
of writing. 
 
search Association in San Francisco, California. April 7-11, 2006. 
riting? College 
3). Second language writing. New York: Cambridge University Press.  
. (2003). Validity and automated essay scoring systems. In M. D. Shermis & J. Burstein (Eds.), 
uage 
Black, P., & Wiliam, D. (1998). Assessment and classroom learning. Assessment in Education, 5(1), 7-7
Chapelle, C. A
Cheville, J. (2004). Automated scoring technologies and the rising influence of error. English Jour
93(4), 47-52.  
Conference on College Composition and Communication (2006). Writing assessment: A position 
statement. Retrieved July 20, 2007, from http://www.ncte.org/cccc/resources/positions/123784.htm
Chung, G. K. W. K., & Baker, E. L. (2003). Issues in the reliability and v
constructed responses. In M. D. Shermis & J. Burstein (Eds.), Automated essay scoring: A cross-
disciplinary perspective (p
Dikli, S. (2006). An overview of automated scoring of essays. Journal of Technology, Learning, and 
Assessment, 5(1), 1-35.  
Elliot, S. (2003). IntelliMetric: From here to validity. In M. D. Shermis & J. Burstein (Eds.). Automated 
essay scoring: A cross-disciplinary perspective (pp. 71-86). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Elliot, S., Dar
Effectiveness. Paper presented at the National Council on Measurement in Education in San Diego, CA. 
April, 2004. 
Ericsson, P. F. (2006). The meanin
& R. Haswell (Eds.), Machine scoring of student essays: Truth and consequences (pp. 28-37). Logan, 
UT: Utah State University Press.  
Ericsson, P. F., & Haswell, R. (Eds.) (2006). Machine scoring of student essays: Truth and conse
Logan, UT: Utah State University Press. 
Flower, L. (1994). The construction of negotiated meaning: A social cognitive theory 
Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press. 
Grabe, W., & Kaplan, R. (1996). Theory and practice of writing. Harlow: Longman. 
Grimes, D., & Warschauer, M. (2006). Automated essay scoring in the classroom. Paper presented at the
American Educational Re
Herrington, A., & Moran, C. (2001). What happens when machines read our students’ w
English, 63(4), 480-499. 
Hyland, K. (200
Hyland, K., & Hyland, F. (2006). Feedback on second language students’ writing. Language Teaching, 
39(2), 83-101.  
Keith, T. Z
Automated essay scoring: A cross-disciplinary perspective (pp. 147-167). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum.  
Levy, M., & Stockwell, G. (2006). CALL dimensions: Options and issues in computer-assisted lang
learning. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Chi-Fen Emily Chen & Wei-Yuan Eugene Cheng Beyond the Design of Automated Writing Evaluation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 112
 Erlbaum Associates. 
essay scoring: A literature review. Kelowna, B. C., Canada: Society for 
ater: 
4.  
sted or computer-driven 
, UT: Utah State University Press.  
. 
erspective (pp. xiii-xvi). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
ALL 
(2), 105-120. 
d 
ing assessment. In A. 
and 
i Putra Malaysia Press. 
uage Teaching Research, 10(2), 1-24.  
mmar-checkers in college writing 
nce 
ollege 
tudents’ writing. Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on English Teaching and Learning in 
the Republic of China (pp. 35-48). Taichung, Taiwan: Chaoyang University of Technology.  
 
Page, E. (2003). Project essay grade: PEG. In M.D. Shermis & J. Burstein (Eds.), Automated essay 
scoring: A cross-disciplinary perspective (pp. 43-54). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Phillips, S. M. (2007). Automated 
the Advancement of Excellence in Education. Retrieved July 24, 2007, 
from http://www.saee.ca/pdfs/036.pdf. 
Powers, D. E., Burstein, J. C., Chodorow, M., Fowles, M. E., & Kukich, K. (2002). Stamping e-r
Challenging the validity of automated essay scoring. Computers in Human Behavior, 18(2), 103-13
Rothermel, B. A. (2006). Automated writing instruction: Computer-assi
pedagogies? In P. F. Ericsson & R. Haswell (Eds.), Machine scoring of student essays: Truth and 
consequences (pp. 199-210). Logan
Shermis, M. D., & Burstein, J. (Eds.) (2003a). Automated essay scoring: A cross-disciplinary perspective
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Shermis, M. D., & Burstein, J. (2003b). Introduction. In M. D. Shermis & J. Burstein (Eds.), Automated 
essay scoring: A cross-disciplinary p
Stockwell, G. (2007). A review of technology choice for teaching language skills and areas in the C
literature. ReCALL, 19
Vantage Learning. (2005). MY Access! (Version 5.0) [computer software]. Newtown, PA: Vantage 
Learning. 
Vantage Learning. (2007). MY Access! Efficacy Report. Newtown, PA: Vantage Learning. Retrieve
December 2, 2007, from http://www.vantagelearning.com/school/research/myaccess.html. 
Ware, P. (2005). Automated writing evaluation as a pedagogical tool for writ
Pandian, G. Chakravarthy, P. Kell, & S. Kaur (Eds.), Strategies and practices for improving learning 
literacy (pp. 174-184). Selangor, Malaysia: Universit
Warschauer, M., & Ware, P. (2006). Automated writing evaluation: Defining the classroom research 
agenda. Lang
Weir, C. J. (2005). Language testing and validation: An evidence-based approach. New York: Palgrave 
MacMillan.  
Whithaus, C. (2006). Always already: Automated essay scoring and gra
courses. In P. F. Ericsson & R. Haswell (Eds.), Machine scoring of student essays: Truth and 
consequences (pp. 166-176). Logan, UT: Utah State University Press.  
Williamson, M. M. (2004). Validity of automated scoring: Prologue for a continuing discussion of 
machine scoring student writing. Journal of Writing Assessment, 1(2), 85–104. 
Yang, N. D. (2004). Using MyAccess in EFL writing. The proceedings of 2004 International Confere
and Workshop on TEFL & Applied Linguistics (pp. 550-564). Taipei, Taiwan: Ming Chuan University.  
Yeh, Y. L., & Yu, Y. T. (2004). Computerized feedback and bilingual concordancer for EFL c
s
