Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num2/xingetal/ 
June 2008, Volume 12, Number 2
pp. 71-93 
 
Copyright © 2008, ISSN 1094-3501 71
RAISING STUDENTS' AWARENESS OF CROSS-CULTURAL 
CONTRASTIVE RHETORIC IN ENGLISH WRITING VIA AN E-
LEARNING COURSE 
Minjie Xing, University of Manchester 
Jinghui Wang, Harbin Institute of Technology 
Kenneth Spencer, University of Hull 
 
This study investigated the potential impact of e-learning on raising overseas students' 
cultural awareness and explored the possibility of creating an interactive learning 
environment for them to improve their English academic writing. The study was based on 
a comparison of Chinese and English rhetoric in academic writing, including a comparison 
of Chinese students' writings in Chinese with native English speakers' writings in English 
and Chinese students' writings in English with the help of an e-course and Chinese 
students' writings in English without the help of an e-course. Five features of contrastive 
rhetoric were used as criteria for the comparison. The experimental results show that the 
group using the e-course was successful in learning about defined aspects of English 
rhetoric in academic writing, reaching a level of performance that  equalled that of native 
English speakers. Data analysis also revealed that e-learning resources helped students to 
compare rhetorical styles across cultures and that the interactive learning environment was 
effective in improving overseas students' English academic writing. 
INTRODUCTION 
Academic writing is complex in that it involves more than grammar. It involves familiarity with the 
writing conventions of university culture and disciplinary subcultures in which the second/foreign 
language learner participates (Schneider & Fujishima, 1995). Ballard and Clanchy (1984) found that 
while a student is inducted into a particular discipline through lectures, discussions, and laboratory work, 
it is through the written assignments that success is most commonly judged. 
Although foreign language proficiency is at the heart of writing, the real problem for overseas students is 
not language-related errors, but the fact that students have not met the expectations of the academic reader 
of the target language. Learners who come from communities that practise other forms of discourse, or 
communities in which literate discourse serves either no viable function or an entirely different purpose, 
are at a disadvantage, because they have not realised or accepted the registers and purposes of discourse 
in the academic community (Grabe & Kaplan, 1989; Stern, 1992).  
For some overseas students, essays have to be written in the unfamiliar rhetorical styles of the target 
culture (Crowe & Peterson, 1995). An added complexity is that different cultural conventions are 
involved in academic argument. These conventions are important from the point of view of the teacher in 
that overseas students may have a logical orientation, but it may be perceived to be illogical to a reader 
anticipating a different culturally-constrained demonstration of logic.  
Jordan (1997) looked at the writing difficulties of overseas postgraduates attending writing classes at a 
university in the U.K. The students were asked to comment on their own writing problems using a six-
point scale, ranging from no difficulties to a lot of difficulties. The order of problem areas selected by the 
students (%) is listed below: 
 
 
Xing, Wang, and Spencer Students' Awareness of Cross-Cultural Contrastive Rhetoric 
 
vocabulary  62% 
style    53% 
spelling   42% 
grammar   38% 
punctuation  18% 
handwriting  12% 
A similar questionnaire was given to the students’ instructors. Their responses were as follows:  
style   92% 
grammar   77% 
vocabulary  70% 
handwriting  31% 
punctuation  23% 
spelling   23% 
The results illustrate the mismatch between student and instructor perceptions of the problems associated 
with students' written work. Whereas students selected vocabulary as offering the greatest challenge 
(62%), instructors clearly indicated style as being of greatest concern (92%). Students generally 
underestimated their problems, with large discrepancies for style and grammar when compared with the 
instructors’ perceptions. Clearly this academic barrier will lead to an escalation of academic culture shock 
for the overseas students, especially as it was not seen as a barrier by nearly 50% of the students 
surveyed.  
Weir (1988) also conducted a wide-ranging survey of instructors  and students that considered the writing 
difficulties of overseas students and concluded that the clarity of the message and the arrangement and 
development of written work were the most important criteria in tutors' assessments of written work. 
However, further research by Santos (1988), who investigated the reactions of 178 professors to two 400-
word compositions, one of which was written by a Chinese student, revealed that lexical errors were the 
most serious problem for non-native speakers, suggesting that Jordan's students' perceptions may not be 
wholly incorrect.  
Achieving success in a new culture does not, however, lie solely in learning the grammar and lexicon of 
the language. Ability to negotiate cultural barriers and develop new ways of learning are also essential. 
Teachers need to be familiar with the socio-cultural sources of the problems encountered by overseas 
students writing in a foreign language, including differences in rhetorical styles (Cai, 1993). As most 
overseas students bring with them linguistic, cultural, attitudinal, and academic experiences (Leki, 1992), 
and many of them already possess study skills at an advanced level in their own language, what they 
actually need is help in transferring these skills to the target language and adjusting them to a different 
academic environment (Jordan, 1997). The rationale for the development of the e-course described here 
was to lessen the impact of these cultural barriers by raising students' awareness of cross-cultural 
contrastive rhetoric and facilitating their academic writing in the target language. 
Theoretical Bases 
Contrastive rhetoric is the study of the differences that occur between the discourses of different 
languages and cultures as reflected in foreign students' writing. Kaplan (1966) suggested that all written 
languages contain a variety of organisational modes, and that native speakers recognise which modes to 
use and the consequences of their choices. However, he implied that the non-native speaker does not 
Language Learning & Technology 72
Xing, Wang, and Spencer Students' Awareness of Cross-Cultural Contrastive Rhetoric 
 
possess a complete inventory of possible alternatives, does not recognise the sociolinguistic constraints of 
those alternatives, and does not know what constraints a choice imposes on the text. Kaplan's data were 
used (see Connor, 2002; Hinds, 1990; Hirose, 2003) to support contrastive rhetoric as a theory that dealt 
with foreign language learners' cultural barriers in their academic writing. 
Such studies show how writers' cultural backgrounds influence their organisation of writing; what they 
choose to use as evidence in supporting their main ideas; how they express their main ideas; and how they 
write in the foreign language (Benda, 1999). They also show how different rhetorical preferences are 
reflected in textual organisation in different languages (Grabe & Kaplan, 1989). Contrastive rhetoric is 
also an area of research in second/foreign language learning that identifies problems in composition 
encountered by second/foreign language writers by referring them to the rhetorical strategies of the first 
language. It maintains that language and writing are cultural phenomena, and, as a direct consequence, 
each language has unique rhetorical conventions (Connor, 1996).  
For foreign students, linguistic and cultural patterns transfer to their writing in the target language not 
only at the word and sentence level but also at the discourse level (Moran, 1991). Since their original 
styles may not work with the new tasks assigned by the target language teachers, they need to adapt to the 
new academic context which has its own conventions (Jordan, 1997). White (2001) explored the reasons 
why a student who has produced a grammatically acceptable text failed to fulfil the requirements of the 
writing task and indicated that cultural expectancies influence the perceived success or failure of written 
communication. 
Learning to compose in a foreign language is not an isolated classroom activity, but a social and cultural 
experience. For example, the rules of English composition encapsulate values that are absent in, or 
sometimes contradictory to, the values of other societies. Likewise, the rules of Chinese writing reflect 
beliefs and values that may not be found in other societies. Therefore, learning the rules of composition in 
a foreign language is, to a certain extent, learning the values of the corresponding foreign society (Shen, 
1989). The process of learning to write in the target language is a process of creating and defining a new 
identity and balancing it with the old identity.  
The following five contrastive features were identified for study, based on the research of Ballard and 
Clanchy (1991), Cho (1999), Connor (1996), Cortazzi and Jin (1997), and Schneider and Fujishima 
(1995). 
1. Inductive vs. Deductive (Presence and Placement of Thesis Statement) 
A paper written in the preferred British or American deductive style, in which the main idea is stated first, 
would be considered poorly written in China, where the inductive pattern is more common, with 
background material given first to lead the reader to the main point (Cortazzi & Jin, 1997). For the same 
reason, a Chinese student's delayed introduction of purpose makes the writing appear incoherent to the 
English-speaking reader (Ballard & Clanchy, 1991; Connor, 1996). Matalene (1985) argued, based on 
sample essays written by Chinese ESL students in China, that arguments are often delayed and statements 
sometimes seem unconnected in the eyes of the Western reader. Scarcella (1984) examined the function 
of initial sentences in native- and non-native English-speaking American university freshman essays and 
found that non-native speakers tended to use longer but less effective "orientations" (i.e., introductions to 
the topic). Schneider and Fujishima (1995) also claim that, at the discourse level, the Chinese student has 
learned the technique of starting with a broad topic and gradually narrowing it down to the focus of the 
paper.  
It is possible to judge whether an essay is inductive or deductive by looking at the presence and placement 
of the thesis statement, as Cho (1999) suggests. A thesis statement is defined as a sentence summarising 
the fundamental argument of an essay (Megginson, 1996). Therefore, if the thesis statement is placed at 
Language Learning & Technology 73
Xing, Wang, and Spencer Students' Awareness of Cross-Cultural Contrastive Rhetoric 
 
the beginning of the introduction or in the first paragraph, the essay is assumed to be deductive, and if not, 
it might be either inductive or quasi-inductive. 
2. "Start-Sustain-Turn-Sum" vs. "Introduction-Body-Conclusion" (Number of Paragraphs) 
It is claimed that Chinese rhetorical style consists of a four-part pattern: qi ('start, open') establishes the 
field or prepares the reader for the topic; cheng ('carry on, sustain') introduces and develops the topic; 
zhuan ('turn') turns to a seemingly unrelated subject or looks at the problem from another angle; and he 
('conclude') sums up the essay whereby the author's opinion is established or hinted at (Connor, 1996; 
Grabe & Kaplan, 1998; Hinds, 1990; Swales, 1990). This pattern is believed to have originated 
historically in Chinese poetry (Tsao, 1983). Differently from the qi-cheng-zhuan-he pattern, the English 
way of structuring an essay, though its structure is flexible, normally includes introduction, body and 
conclusion. English essays generally place more emphasis on form than do Chinese essays. Each part has 
its distinct function: the introduction brings out the theme, the middle contains the argument with its 
supporting evidence, and the ending summarises the essay. Chinese writing places the emphasis more on 
the whole: it is more synthetic, more changeable, and there is no clear-cut separation between the parts. 
Also, Chinese rhetorical style is not very strict about the need for coherent links between parts. It relies 
more heavily on the reader's interpretation. 
The structural pattern of an essay can be determined by looking at the number and function of the 
paragraphs. Cho (1999) proposes that "the total and average numbers of paragraphs may reflect the 
general structure of the essay that each group of students intended to construct" (p. 23). From this view, 
comparing numbers and functions of paragraphs may reveal rhetorical differences between the two 
groups and contribute to the identification of the rhetorical style of an essay. 
3. Circular vs. Linear (Topic Sentences and Topic Changes) 
Kaplan (1966) suggested that Anglo-European expository essays follow a linear development, whereas in 
Chinese the paragraph development may be said to be "turning and turning in a widening gyre." The 
circles or gyres turn around the subject and show it from a variety of tangential views, but the subject is 
never looked at directly. Ostler (1997) demonstrated that 89% of essays by native speakers of American 
English in her study put the theme at the beginning of the essay. Because of their familiarity with the 
Anglo-European linear style, many Western teachers find Asian students' essays confusing, either because 
there is no topic sentence in a paragraph or because too many things are mentioned within one paragraph. 
As a result, they commonly comment that a paragraph is irrelevant, illogical, or unclear. Shen (1989) 
claimed that the essential rule for English logical organisation is the use of a topic sentence, whereas the 
essential structural rule for Chinese composition is to proceed from the surface to the core. Young (1994) 
contended that the qi-chen-zhuan-he pattern continues to influence Chinese writing, and Western readers 
might see Chinese style as circular starts, tangential views, and subdued stances. In Eason's (1995) study, 
Chinese students employed topic-comment structure, delayed introduction of purpose, and abruptly 
shifted their viewpoint. None of the American students exhibited topic-comment structure or delayed 
introduction of purpose. 
Circularity can be measured by looking at the frequency of topic changes in paragraphs where topic 
sentences are used. Linearity can be indicated by a low frequency of topic changes or a low average 
number of topic sentences in a paragraph.  
4. Metaphorical vs. Straightforward (Use of Metaphors and Proverbs) 
In China, one of the important criteria for grading writing is the use of allusion, analogy, and proverbs, 
since their usage is thought to contribute to the beauty of the language (Chen & Chung, 1994). ESL/EFL 
teachers often comment that their students use patterns of language and stylistic conventions that they 
have learnt in their native languages and cultures. This transfer is not just idiosyncratic variation but 
involves recurring patterns of organisation and rhetorical conventions reminiscent of writing in the 
Language Learning & Technology 74
Xing, Wang, and Spencer Students' Awareness of Cross-Cultural Contrastive Rhetoric 
 
students' native language and culture (Connor, 1996, p. 3). Matalene (1985) found that Chinese students 
are fond of fixed patterns such as proverbs, idioms, maxims, literary allusions, and analogies, and also 
defer to tradition and to the authority of the past. In contrast, Western readers regard these patterns as 
clichés, and Western teachers of writing encourage students to write in their own voice using their own 
words.  
The elusiveness of allusions, analogies, and proverbs allows, or even encourages, more than one 
interpretation of their meaning. Whether it is or is not desirable to use metaphors and proverbs is open to 
debate, but this is one of the areas where contrastive differences in rhetoric can be examined. 
5. Explicit Discourse Markers (Marks of Coherence and Unity) 
English essays use explicit discourse markers to signal relations between sentences and parts of texts. 
These devices are words or phrases that act as aids to help readers make connections between what has 
already been stated and what is forthcoming  (Connor, 1996). Comparisons are based on the counts of 
these logical devices within texts. It is through devices such as these that the writer is able to organise 
ideas and help readers follow along from one sentence to another (Byram, 1989). English readers expect 
and require landmarks of coherence and unity as they read. They believe that the writer needs to provide 
transitional statements. In Chinese, the beauty of writing is believed to lie in delicacy and subtlety, not in 
its straightforwardness (Shen & Yao, 1999). The Chinese language places emphasis on coherence of 
meaning rather than coherence of form. As long as ideas are flowing, it does not matter whether there is 
coherent form, for, as the proverb goes, "Every river flows into the sea." This underlying attitude toward 
writing affects the way textual information is organised and the techniques employed to implement the 
writing task. 
Discourse markers are also called "signposts" or "transitions." They give the appearance that logical 
connections exist between sentences, paragraphs and sections of the essay and allow readers to piece 
together ideas into a logically coherent argument. Burstein, Kukich, Wolff, Lu and Chodorow (1998) used 
discourse markers, in addition to syntactic information and topical content vector analyses, to mark essays 
because the total number of discourse markers reflects the general coherence and unity of the essay. 
Comparing the number of such markers should reveal rhetorical differences between the groups.  
Because L2 writers bring with them various cultural experiences that affect their writing, EFL teaching 
may not be successful if the underlying culture in the first language (L1) is not addressed, or if contrasts 
between L1 and L2 writing structures are not made sufficiently explicit. Students need to know not only 
the forms of language, but also the cultural constraints associated with the forms and the consequences of 
selecting a particular form. Understanding those contrastive aspects of two cultures may constitute the 
first step for ESL/EFL students to attain sensitivity to common errors traceable to their first language and 
culture. Approaches such as contrastive rhetoric provide a mechanism through which teachers may gain 
understanding of the problems faced by their students when trying to learn how to produce a coherent and 
cohesive text in L2 (Kaplan, 1990). 
METHOD 
Research Questions 
The first research question focuses on the rhetorical styles of Chinese and UK writers and asks: what are 
the differences in style, as measured by the indicators discussed, between UK and Chinese writers? 
Clearly, a failure to demonstrate measurable differences would undermine the theory outlined in the 
preceding sections. 
The second research question deals with the attainments of a group of 60 PhD students who have studied 
academic English, and asks: using the five measures outlined above, have these students already attained 
Language Learning & Technology 75
Xing, Wang, and Spencer Students' Awareness of Cross-Cultural Contrastive Rhetoric 
 
a rhetorical style close to that used by UK writers, or does their English writing remain indistinguishable 
from that of other Chinese writers who have studied less or no English? 
The third research question concerns the success of the training course that is designed to shift the 
students’ style of writing closer to that of UK writers: is the training course successful in shifting student 
performance, and does the additional access to the associated e-course produce additional benefits? 
Participants 
Altogether 90 Chinese students and 15 English university lecturers participated in this study. Sixty 
students who were PhD candidates majoring in natural sciences at the Harbin Institute of Technology 
(HIT), China, were assigned to the Study Group. They were randomly assigned to an Experimental Group 
(N = 30) or a Control Group (N = 30) during the training phase.  Students from both the Experimental and 
the Control Groups had four hours of English language instruction per week (two hours for 
listening/speaking and two hours for reading/writing). In addition, the Experimental Group used the e-
course for academic writing for supplementary instruction. Students in the Experimental Group were 
expected to spend twenty minutes every other week for each unit in the e-course. If students completed 
the assignment in less than twenty minutes, they could log out or use more time to follow further 
comparisons and discussions online.  
In addition, 30 Chinese students majoring in Chinese language studies (the Chinese Writers Group), 
provided a baseline for identifying  rhetorical features in Chinese. Fifteen of these students were from 
Harbin Teachers' University and 15 were from Heilongjiang University. All of them were in their final 
year of undergraduate studies.  
Fifteen lecturers from Salford (the UK Writers Group) were teaching a basic foundation English course 
and most of their students were Chinese. Their essays were used as an English baseline for comparison 
with the writing style of the non-native speakers (NNS).  
The E-Learning Course 
An e-learning environment for the teaching of English academic writing was designed and implemented 
at the Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT) and Salford University. The objectives of the e-course were:  
• to raise awareness of differences in rhetorical styles;  
• to facilitate students' academic writing in the target language (English) 
to encourage social interaction among peers, between students and tutors and between EFL students and 
native speakers of English. 
The five contrastive rhetorical features were explained in the e-course, and opportunities for interaction 
among participants were provided through the use of synchronous chat room facilities, including 
occasional use of Web video cameras, and asynchronous e-mail and bulletin boards. 
The curriculum content of the e-course is summarised in Table 1. 
The students wrote an essay every other week during the study, going through the same process each 
time. During the writing process, students sent their first drafts to the e-course bulletin board and 
compared them with the Western linear vs. Chinese non-linear rhetorical organization templates, which 
were displayed in the discussion area of the e-course system. The tutor provided feedback on the students’ 
performance so that all members could look at both the draft essay and the tutor's comments. Students 
were encouraged to send their comments on their peers' work to the online discussion. They could also 
compare their own essays and those of their peers with essays written by Salford University lecturers, and 
then synchronously or asynchronously discuss essential aspects of the topic with native speakers before 
producing the final version of their own essays. This interactive procedure is shown in Figure 1. 
 
Language Learning & Technology 76
Xing, Wang, and Spencer Students' Awareness of Cross-Cultural Contrastive Rhetoric 
 
Table 1. Curriculum Content of the e-Course. 
 Instructions Activities 
Week 1-2 
Theme/thesis 
statement 
definition of thesis 
statement and its 
functions 
• read the model essays and identify thesis statement 
• read the model essays with thesis statements 
omitted and insert an appropriate statement  
• read the model essays with thesis statements taken 
out and write appropriate thesis statements  
• write an essay of approximately 400 words on the 
topic of "Autonomy and control in higher 
education" with emphasis on the placement of 
theme/thesis statement. 
Week 3-4 
Topic 
sentences 
definition of topic 
sentence and its 
functions 
• select the topic sentence in each paragraph in the 
model essays 
• compare the selected sentences with the original and 
see if they are  identical? Similar?  
• read the model essays with topic sentences left out 
and insert appropriate topic sentences 
• read the model essays with topic sentences taken 
out and write appropriate topic sentences  
• write an essay of approximately 400 words on the 
topic of "The use of internet in higher education" 
with one topic sentence in each paragraph. 
Week 5-6 
Structure 
introduction, main 
body, conclusion and 
their functions 
• read model essays without paragraph division and 
divide the essays into paragraphs  
• write three paragraphs with one for the introduction, 
one for the body, and one for the conclusion 
• write an essay of approximately 400 words on the 
topic of "Advantages and disadvantages of online 
university degree programs" with a three-or-four 
paragraph essay consisting of an introduction, main 
body and conclusion. 
Week 7-8 
Paragraphs 
definition of 
paragraphs and their 
functions 
• read the model essays presented in one paragraph 
and divide them into paragraphs 
• write a four-paragraph essay with a topic sentence 
in each paragraph. 
Week 9-10 
Discourse 
markers 
definition of 
discourse markers 
and their functions 
• identify all the discourse markers in a sample essay 
• explain how their omission would affect the essay.  
• write an essay of approximately 400 words on the 
topic of "What do you think of the English courses 
at universities?" with an emphasis on discourse 
markers. 
 
The contrastive features displayed on the bulletin board were available to all students in the Experimental 
Group. These features and the pre-experiment analysis of the students' essays were displayed as text, 
charts and graphs, with figures presented in different colours that contrasted the Chinese and English 
styles. Tutors made comments about content, organization, vocabulary, grammar, and mechanics, with an 
emphasis on the English writing style, and sent them to the bulletin board. Model essays produced by 
Language Learning & Technology 77
Xing, Wang, and Spencer Students' Awareness of Cross-Cultural Contrastive Rhetoric 
 
native speakers of English had the five different contrastive features marked with different colours to help 
students identify the particular features.  
Writing process in the e-course 
 
                                                                                        (second draft) 
                                                                
                                                                
 
 
 
 
 
 
NS model essays 
Discussion 
among 
students 
Discussion 
with native 
speakers 
 
E-course 
bulletin board 
Contrastive         
features First draft 
Final 
product 
Teacher 
feedback 
Figure 1. The writing process in the e-course. 
If there was anything they did not understand, or if they needed clarification, students could write to 
native speakers, peers, or tutors for additional assistance. After consultation, they sent the discussed 
points to the bulletin board for everybody to read. The process of reformulation (rewriting, revising) of 
essays with reference to contrastive features, teacher and peer feedback, model essays, and interactions 
with native speakers, was intended to facilitate changes in the way in which the essays were constructed, 
gradually shaping students’ writing style to reflect features associated with English academic writing.  
The communication between Chinese students and English native speakers allowed students to observe, 
compare and analyse parallel materials from their respective cultures. They could exchange viewpoints in 
a reciprocal way and gain an ever-deepening understanding of the other culture, thereby expanding their 
cross-cultural analysis.  
Online discussions in a risk-free environment, brainstorming and categorizing, and debriefing are 
examples of instructional methods that allowed learners to examine their understanding of course 
objectives through interaction with other individuals. Learners were encouraged to test their ideas against 
alternative views and alternative contexts. Within this cognitive construction approach, other people are 
considered to be a source of conflict that stimulates new thinking. Cooperative learning creates 
opportunities to form communities of inquiry that in turn encourage critical dialogue. 
Materials 
Materials for Studying the Contrastive Rhetorical Features 
Immediately before the start of the writing course for the Harbin PhD students, three sets of essays were 
analysed: Chinese essays produced by the Chinese Writers Group (30 essays); English essays by the UK 
Writers Group (15 essays); and the first essays in English by the 60 PhD students in the Study Group, 
Language Learning & Technology 78
Xing, Wang, and Spencer Students' Awareness of Cross-Cultural Contrastive Rhetoric 
 
which was later randomly divided into the Control Group (30 essays) and Experimental Group (30 
essays). These essays were analysed for the five features of contrastive rhetoric to explore the following: 
• the difference between essay writing styles in Chinese and English;  
• a baseline description of the essay writing style of the Study Group;  
a "norm" for essay writing by English native speakers.  
Materials for the E-course 
The materials used in the e-course came from three sources: the model English essays designed for the 
International English Language Testing System (IELTS, published by Cambridge University Press); the 
model English essays by the UK Writers Group; and English essays written by Chinese students in the 
Study Group. In addition, during the learning process, students' essays were consistently uploaded into the 
e-course as an input to trigger online discussion and feedback from both the tutor and other English native 
speakers. Students' final draft essays were also uploaded into the e-course so that everybody could see 
what improvements had been achieved. 
Assessment 
In the pre-training period of this study, all the students from the Study Group wrote an essay of about 400 
words on the title of "What do you think are the advantages and disadvantages of higher education and to 
what extent have you benefited from higher education?" Their essays were analysed according to the five 
contrastive rhetoric features. To obtain a comparative view, the essays by the UK Writers Group and 
those from the Chinese Writers Group, all on the same topic, were analysed to compare their contrastive 
features.  
The Study Group was then randomly divided into the Control Group and the Experimental Group (which 
had access to the e-learning course). Both the first (pre e-course) and last essays of the Control and 
Experimental Groups were analysed to determine shifts in writing style during the e-course training 
period.  
For the purpose of this research, the same definitions of terms were applied to all sets of data (English and 
Chinese). The method proved useful in that it revealed rhetorical patterns from the two cultures. The 
principal researcher coded the essay data for the position of thesis statement, presence of topic sentences, 
number of paragraphs, use of metaphors and number of discourse markers for later statistical analysis (see 
Appendix). In addition, two lecturers at HIT also coded the rhetorical features of all essays. Cronbach's 
Alpha for inter-rater reliability was 0.87 with inter-rater correlations of 0.6, 0.7, and 0.8. The data from 
the experimental study on the e-course for writing style were analysed using the Statistical Package for 
the Social Sciences (SPSS). 
RESULTS 
Pre-Training Results 
The initial analysis was conducted to determine the pre-course, base level scores for the five aspects of 
rhetorical style for the three main groups: Chinese writers, UK writers, and the 60 Chinese students of 
English (Study Group), who would later be randomly assigned to the Experimental and Control Groups 
for the training period.  
The comparisons of words and paragraphs are interval data, and were evaluated by ANOVA and t-tests, 
whereas presence of metaphors and topic changes in the groups, and the position of the thesis statement 
are categorical data and were evaluated by Crosstabs analysis, which uses Chi-square to determine 
significance. The three groups of writers had different levels of education and writing competence, and it 
was anticipated that the length of the essays would vary. Therefore, before comparisons were made, essay 
length was checked for statistically significant differences across the groups. The results of the ANOVA, 
Language Learning & Technology 79
Xing, Wang, and Spencer Students' Awareness of Cross-Cultural Contrastive Rhetoric 
 
comparing the four groups, are presented in Table 2, together with post-hoc Bonferroni t-test results. The 
ANOVA was statistically significant, F (3,101) = 12.16, p < 0.001, and the post-hoc tests indicated that 
there were significant differences between the Experimental and Control Groups when compared with the 
Chinese writers group. Therefore, for interval data comparisons between the groups that were found to 
have different word totals, the count of discourse markers and paragraphs was standardised at a rate per 
100 words. 
Table 2. Comparison of Essay Word Totals 
Between Subjects ANOVA Bonferroni post-hoc t-tests, p values 
  N M SD 2 3 4 
1 Experimental 30 414.27 45.68 p=1.00(NS) p=0.47(NS) p<0.01 
2 Control 30 417.80 45.77  p=0.67(NS) p=0.01 
3 UK 15 451.00 107.29   p=0.70(NS) 
4 Chinese 30 504.07 71.55    
ANOVA, F (3,101) = 12.16, p < 0.001  
 
In order to determine the extent to which the e-course could help students adjust to the English rhetorical 
style, it was necessary to confirm that, with the measures used in this study, there were real differences 
between the English style of writing of the UK writers and the Chinese style of the Chinese students. The 
experimental hypothesis was that on the measures used to evaluate rhetorical styles there would be 
statistically significant differences between the UK and Chinese writers. The results of the statistical tests 
are shown in Table 3. Statistically significant differences were observed for all measures, confirming that 
there are differences in those aspects of the style of writing, which are the subject of this investigation, for 
UK subjects writing in English and Chinese subjects writing in Chinese. The UK writers used 
significantly more discourse markers and paragraphs and tended not to use metaphors or change topics 
within a paragraph. They also usually indicated the main thesis of the essay within the first paragraph. 
These results confirm previous results in the field of comparative rhetoric. 
Table 3. Comparison of Rhetorical Style in Essays Written by UK and Chinese Writers 
 UK vs Chinese Writers 
N M  p value 
Discourse 
Markers 
UK 15 16.47 t(15)=11.59 p<0.01 Chinese 30 1.73 
Paragraphs UK 15 5.10 t(18)=2.75 p=0.01 Chinese 30 4.00 
 N %  p value 
Metaphors UK 15 86.70 χ2(1)=11.38 p<0.01 Chinese 30 33.30 
Topic 
Changes 
UK 15 100.00 χ2(1)=7.28 p<0.01 Chinese 30 63.30 
Thesis 
Statement 
UK 15 60.00 χ2(1)=19.45 p<0.01 Chinese 30 16.70 
 
The essence of the study was the investigation of changes in rhetorical style of a group of students who 
received different training regimes. However, change can only be expected if the students perform at a 
different level when compared with UK writers and Chinese writers. Table 4 compares the pre-training 
essays of the Study Group with the UK writers, and shows that significant differences exist between the 
groups on 4 of the 5 measures, and that change may be expected to occur on these 4 measures. 
 
Language Learning & Technology 80
Xing, Wang, and Spencer Students' Awareness of Cross-Cultural Contrastive Rhetoric 
 
Table 4. Comparison of Rhetorical Style in Pre-Training Study Group with UK Writers 
 Combined Study Group vs UK Writers 
N M  p value 
Discourse 
Markers 
Study 60 10.48 t(16)=-4.63 p<0.01 UK 15 16.47 
Paragraphs Study 60 3.97 t(16)=-2.90 p=0.01 UK 15 5.10 
 N %  p value 
Metaphors Study 60 60.00 χ2(1)=3.77 p=0.05 UK 15 86.70 
Topic 
Changes 
Study 60 85.00 χ2(1)=2.56 p=0.11(NS) UK 15 100.00 
Thesis 
Statement 
Study 60 28.30 χ2(1)=8.59 p=0.04 UK 15 60.00 
 
Table 5 compares the pre-training essays of the Study Group with the Chinese writers, and shows that 
significant differences exist between the groups on 4 of the 5 measures. This indicates that members of 
the Study Group have already changed their style of writing when compared with the Chinese writers. For 
three of the measures (discourse markers, paragraphs, metaphors) their style is significantly different from 
both Chinese and UK writers. There are fewer topic changes in the essays of the Study Group making 
them indistinguishable as a group, in a statistical sense, from the UK writers. However, in terms of 
placement of the thesis statement, they remain similar to the Chinese writers. 
Table 5. Comparison of Rhetorical Style in Pre-Training Study Group with Chinese Writers 
 Combined Study Group vs Chinese Writers 
N M  p value 
Discourse 
Markers 
Study 60 2.56 t(78)=21.37 p<0.01 Chinese 30 0.34 
Paragraphs Study 60 0.96 t(88)=3.46 p<0.01 Chinese 30 0.81 
 N %  p value 
Metaphors Study 60 60.00 χ2(1)=5.69 p<0.02 Chinese 30 33.30 
Topic 
Changes 
Study 60 85.00 χ2(1)=5.43 p=0.02 Chinese 30 63.30 
Thesis 
Statement 
Study 60 28.30 χ2(3)=3.94 p=0.27(NS) Chinese 30 16.70 
 
The Study Group of 60 students was randomly divided into an Experimental and Control Group during 
the training phase. The two groups were compared on pre-training essays to ensure equality of initial 
performance. The results indicate that for all the measures of rhetorical style used in this study there were 
no initial differences between the Experimental and Control Groups (Table 6). 
 
 
 
 
Language Learning & Technology 81
Xing, Wang, and Spencer Students' Awareness of Cross-Cultural Contrastive Rhetoric 
 
Table 6. Comparison of Rhetorical Style in Essays Written by Experimental and Control Groups 
 Experimental vs Control Groups 
N M  p value 
Discourse 
Markers 
Experimental 30 10.30 t(58)=-0.57 p=0.57(NS) Control 30 10.67 
Paragraphs Experimental 30 4.00 t(58)=0.32 p=0.74(NS) Control 30 3.93 
 N %  p value 
Metaphors Experimental 30 60.00 χ2(1)=0.00 p=1.00(NS) Control 30 60.00 
Topic 
Changes 
Experimental 30 86.70 χ2(1)=0.13 p=0.72(NS) Control 30 83.30 
Thesis 
Statement 
Experimental 30 30.00 χ2(5)=9.18 p=0.10(NS) Control 30 26.70 
 
The results from Tables 2 to 6 are summarised in Figure 2. 
0
20
40
60
80
100
Discourse markers
per 100 words
Paragraphs per
100 words
Metaphors not
present
Topic changes not
present
Thesis statement
in first paragraph
%
 o
f U
K
 G
ro
up
 V
al
ue
s
Chinese writers
Study group
UK writers
 
Figure 2. Pre-training values on five measures of rhetorical style for the Chinese Writers Group (30 
subjects), Study Group (60 subjects), and UK Writers Group (15 subjects), expressed as percentage of UK 
Writers Group scores. 
Post-Training Results 
During the training period (September, 2002 – January, 2003) the Control Group did not use the e-course, 
which provided the Experimental Group with learning materials about contrastive rhetoric features and 
opportunities to discuss their writing with peers, the tutors, and native speakers of English. 
Post-training phase essays were analysed to determine the change that had occurred during the training 
period and the extent to which they were comparable with the UK writers’ style. Table 7 shows the results 
of the ANOVA comparing the total words in essays of the Experimental and Control Groups and UK 
writers. There was no statistical difference in total words between the groups, F(2,74) = 0.84, p = 0.44. 
Language Learning & Technology 82
Xing, Wang, and Spencer Students' Awareness of Cross-Cultural Contrastive Rhetoric 
 
Table 7. Comparison of Post-training Essay Word Totals 
 N M SD 
Experimental 30 456.90 38.99 
Control 30 436.53 50.00 
UK 15 451.00 107.29 
ANOVA, F (2,74) = 0.84, p = 0.44
 
Table 8 shows the ANOVA results comparing discourse markers for the Experimental and Control 
Groups and UK writers. There is a statistical difference between the groups, F(2,74) = 31.95, p < 0.001. 
Bonferroni post-hoc tests show that the e-course group has more than closed the gap between their pre-
training phase performance and that of the UK writers, to the extent that they now significantly exceeded 
the UK writers’ use of discourse markers. However, the Control Group used significantly fewer markers 
than either the Experimental Group or the UK writers. 
Table 8. Comparison of Post-Training Number of Discourse Markers 
Between Subjects ANOVA Bonferroni post-hoc t-tests, p values 
  N M SD 2 3 
1 Experimental 30 19.67 2.12 p<0.01 p<0.01 
2 Control 30 13.67 2.28  p=0.01 
3 UK 15 16.47 4.86   
ANOVA: F (2,74) = 31.95, p < 0.001   
 
Table 9 shows the ANOVA results comparing the number of paragraphs for the Experimental and Control 
Groups and UK writers. There is a statistical difference between the groups, F(2,74) = 14.43, p < 0.001. 
Bonferroni post-hoc tests show that the e-course has closed the gap between the Experimental Group and 
the UK writers to the extent that they have again significantly exceeded the UK writers’ use of 
paragraphs. There is, however, no significant difference between the Control Group and UK writers. 
Table 9. Comparison of Post-Training Number of Paragraphs 
Between Subjects ANOVA Bonferroni post-hoc t-tests, p values 
  N M SD 2 3 
1 Experimental 30 6.03 0.72 p<0.01 p=0.02 
2 Control 30 4.60 4.60  p=0.33(NS) 
3 UK 15 5.13 5.13   
ANOVA: F (2,74) = 14.43, p < 0.001   
 
Tables 10, 11 and 12 show the comparisons for use of metaphors, changes of topic within a paragraph and 
the position of the thesis statement. The Experimental Group’s use of metaphors remained significantly 
different from the style of the UK Writers Group’s essays, χ2 (1) = 6.67, p < 0.01, as did the Control 
Group’s use of this feature, χ2 (1) = 4.05, p < 0.04. However, there was no reduction in the number of 
students changing topics in a paragraph, χ2 (2) = 3.75, p < 0.15, because the group had already adopted 
this approach to their English writing style, as indicated in the pre-training data. The position of the thesis 
paragraph, for which the pre-training scores were closer to the Chinese writers, also changed significantly 
for the Experimental Group when compared with the Control Group, χ2 (5) = 14.66, p < 0.01, with 66.7% 
placing the thesis statement in the first paragraph, compared with 28.3% before the experiment. However, 
both groups did not show a statistically significant difference when compared with the UK writers. 
 
 
Language Learning & Technology 83
Xing, Wang, and Spencer Students' Awareness of Cross-Cultural Contrastive Rhetoric 
 
Table 10. Comparison of Post-Training Metaphors 
 UK vs Experimental and Control Groups 
 N %  p value 
UK 15 86.70 
χ2(2)=6.88 p=0.03 Experimental 30 46.70 
Control 30 56.70 
 UK vs Experimental 
UK 15 86.70 χ2(1)=6.67 p=0.01 
Experimental 30 46.70 
 UK vs Control 
UK 15 86.70 χ2(1)=4.05 p=0.04 
Control 30 56.70 
 Control vs Experimental 
Experimental 30 46.70 χ2(1)=0.60 p=0.44(NS) 
Control 30 56.70 
Note: % = the percentage of the group not using metaphors 
Table 11. Comparison of Post-Training Topic Changes 
 UK vs Experimental and Control Groups 
 N %  p value 
UK 15 100.00 
χ2(2)=3.75 p=0.15(NS) Experimental 30 86.70 
Control 30 83.30 
 
Table 12. Comparison of Post-Training Thesis Statement 
 UK vs Experimental and Control Groups 
 N %  p value 
UK 15 60.00 
χ2(8)=22.20 p=0.01 Experimental 30 66.70 
Control 30 43.30 
 UK vs Experimental 
UK 15 60.00 χ2(6)=9.57 p=0.14(NS) 
Experimental 30 66.70 
 UK vs Control 
UK 15 60.00 χ2(5)=7.95 p=0.16(NS) 
Control 30 43.30 
 Control vs Experimental 
Experimental 30 66.70 χ2(5)=14.66 p<0.01 
Control 30 43.30 
 
These results of Tables 8 to 12 are summarised in Figure 3, which shows the post-training results for the 
Control and Experimental Groups relative to the performance of the Chinese writers and UK writers.  
Language Learning & Technology 84
Xing, Wang, and Spencer Students' Awareness of Cross-Cultural Contrastive Rhetoric 
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Discourse markers
per 100 words
Paragraphs per 100
words
Metaphors not
present
Topic changes not
present
Thesis statement in
first paragraph
%
 o
f U
K
 G
ro
up
 V
al
ue
s
Chinese writers
Control
Experimental
UK writers
 
Figure 3. Post-training values on five measures of rhetorical style for the Chinese Writers, Control Group, 
Experimental (E-learning) Group, and UK Writers Group, expressed as percentage of UK Group scores.  
Student Questionnaire 
A questionnaire was administered immediately after the course to the Experimental Group to assess 
attitudes to various aspects of the e-course. The questionnaire contained ten questions; the first eight 
questions were multiple choice requiring a single choice to be selected, and the last two questions were 
open-ended questions for students to express their own opinions and judgment.  
The questionnaire was constructed to: 
• elicit students’ perceptions about the advantages and disadvantages of using the e-course in their EFL 
learning process;  
• to determine the extent to which the subjects felt they benefited from the e-course; 
to gather ideas on how the e-course could be improved.  
The questionnaire and summary data are presented in Table 13. 
DISCUSSION 
In response to the first research question, the results show that there are differences in rhetorical style 
between the UK and Chinese writers on all the measures used in the study. The Chinese writers used 
fewer discourse markers and paragraphs, and there was more use of metaphors in the Chinese group and a 
greater tendency to change topics within paragraphs. A much smaller proportion of Chinese writers (17%) 
had a thesis statement in the first paragraph when compared with the English writers (60%). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Language Learning & Technology 85
Xing, Wang, and Spencer Students' Awareness of Cross-Cultural Contrastive Rhetoric 
 
Language Learning & Technology 86
Table 13. Responses to Questionnaire 
Frequency %
N=30
Q.1 From which of the following do you think you have benefited most in the e-course?
a Contrastive features. 21 70
b Native speaker model essays. 3 10
c Drafting process. 3 1
d Tutor's feedback. 3 1
Q. 2 Which of the following methods do you think worked well in the e-course?
a Demonstration of contrastive features and model essays in text only. 1 3
b Demonstration of contrastive features and model essays in text + charts/graphs. 4 13
c Communicating with peers, tutors, native speaker with text + voice. 20 67
d Communicating with peers, tutors, native speaker with text + camera. 5 17
Q. 3 How do you evaluate the materials provided in this e-course?
a They are not sufficient. 25 83
b They are too many to digest. 2 7
c They are above/below my level. 2 7
d They are just right. 1 3
Q. 4 What do you think of the model essays on the e-course?
a It is quicker and more cost effective to get them from the e-course than from books or 22 73
handouts.
b It is most useful to have different colours and symbols for different rhetoric features. 1 3
c It provides the flexibility to read more or fewer model essays than are necessary to meet 5 17
individual needs.
d The presentation format is easy to understand. 2 7
Q. 5 What do you think of the online communication with peers?
a It was easy for me to see if I am better or worse than my peers. 4 13
b It was good as I can challenge the ideas from my peers. 1 3
c It was good for communicating with the tutor in less formal settings. 5 17
d It was no better than communicating with tutors and native speakers. 20 67
Q. 6 What do you think of the online communication with tutors?
a It was quicker to get the tutor's feedback online than from class. 5 17
b It was more convenient to communicate with the tutor online than to go to the tutor's 4 13
office.
c It was less formal but more helpful to get tutor's feedback online. 4 13
d It was less scaring than face to face with the tutor. 17 57
Q. 7 What do you think of the online communication with the native English speakers?
a It is a better method to acquire the target culture than from books. 5 17
b It will be more beneficial if the online communication is more frequent. 18 60
c It does not provide what I need. 1 3
d It does not help as the native speakers do not have tutors' expertise. 6 20
Q. 8 How do you evaluate the e-course?
a It is useful in that it functions in an interactive way. 27 91
b It is less stressful to use than work in class. 1 3
c It is more fun to play with. 1 3
d It is not as useful as a class with a teacher. 1 3
0
0
 
Xing, Wang, and Spencer Students' Awareness of Cross-Cultural Contrastive Rhetoric 
 
The aim of the study was to determine the extent to which members of the Study Group changed their 
rhetorical style during the training phase, but this was predicated on the assumption that the Study Group 
had not already assumed a rhetorical style that was indistinguishable from that of the UK writers. 
Comparisons between the Study Group and UK writers showed that on four of the measures of rhetorical 
style the Study Group can be distinguished from the UK writers, but that for one measure, having one 
topic per paragraph, the group had shifted towards the style adopted by the UK writers (see Table 4). 
When compared with the Chinese writers (see Table 5), the Study Group was also significantly different 
on four measures, showing that their writing style had changed during their studies of English on most of 
the measures considered in this study, shifting away from the style associated with the Chinese writers, 
except for the tendency not to place the thesis statement in the first paragraph. However, they had still not 
achieved a style that was indistinguishable from the UK writers except for the tendency to have one topic 
per paragraph. Therefore, change in rhetorical style on four of the measures, especially position of the 
thesis statement that had remained close to the style adopted by the Chinese writers, was possible for the 
Study Group. 
The post-training results (see Tables 8 to 12) show that the course, which was designed to shift the 
rhetorical style of the Study Group towards that of the UK writers, was successful in this endeavour. For 
the Control Group this occurred for two of the four measures (number of paragraphs, position of thesis 
paragraph) For the Experimental Group, which had the added benefit of the e-course, this move towards 
the UK writers’ style occurred on three of the measures (number of discourse markers, number of 
paragraphs, position of thesis paragraph). For each of these measures, the difference between the Control 
Group and the Experimental Group was statistically significant. However, for the Experimental Group, 
the shift was such that it remained distinguishable from the UK Writers Group on two measures by virtue 
of the participants’ tendency to use more discourse markers and paragraphs than the UK group. This 
difference between the UK writers and the Experimental Group was statistically significant, with the 
Experimental Group now having higher rates of use.  
These results show that even without access to the e-course the participants in the training scheme 
changed their writing style so that it became similar to the UK writers in terms of the number of 
paragraphs and position of the thesis statement. Students without access to the e-course, although they did 
increase their use of discourse markers, still used them at levels below those observed with the UK 
writers. The effect of e-course provision for the Experimental group was to boost levels of performance to 
the extent that their essays may be perceived to have a slightly exaggerated level of discourse markers and 
paragraphs compared to the UK writers. 
The use of metaphors in writing appears to be a characteristic that participants in both Control and 
Experimental Groups were reluctant to give up. After participation in the training scheme, there was still a 
significant difference in the use of metaphors when both groups were compared with the UK writers (see 
Table 10). 
There is a clear indication from the questionnaire that the students were aware that knowledge of different 
rhetorical styles will assist their academic writing. The majority of students (Q.1: 70%) identified 
contrastive features as the most beneficial feature of the course, which accords with the observation from 
tutors that the group needed to gain a deeper understanding of differences in writing styles.  
The e-course shifted the focus of the training period from instruction to individual learning, giving 
students more opportunities than their Control Group peers to assimilate the new contrastive features and 
refine their cognitive representations of a UK rhetorical style by interacting with a virtual social world. 
Almost all the students found the e-course useful because it provided opportunities for interaction (Q.8: 
91%). In the e-course learning environment, each individual student was able to play the dual role of 
participant and tutor. 
Language Learning & Technology 87
Xing, Wang, and Spencer Students' Awareness of Cross-Cultural Contrastive Rhetoric 
 
The shifts in style were significantly greater for the e-course Experimental Group when compared with 
the Control Group, and this supports the view of learning arising from interactions and the dynamic 
nature of the interplay between tutors, learners, and peers. However, the group did not simply accept that 
all features of the system were equally useful, with a large number believing that the online 
communication with peers was no better than communicating with tutors and native speakers (Q.5: 67%). 
The interactive nature of the assessment within the e-course, an approach that Lee (2006) has shown to 
produce benefits in the form of more complex writing, may also have contributed to the performance of 
the Experimental Group.  
As educational technology matures, it will have the capacity to provide interactive environments that 
support the collaborative aspects of learning, leading Hyland (2006) to conclude that collaboration brings 
significant changes to the social dimension of learning, making writing classes more collaborative with 
students being more active by, for example, taking the initiative in discussions. This social dimension of 
constructivist learning was rated highly by the e-course students, with a majority stating that they would 
like more frequent online communication with native English speakers (Q.7: 60%), although 20% 
identified the native speakers' lack of pedagogic skills as being a disadvantage.  
The e-course made student writing more widely available to an audience of peers and created a greater 
awareness of audience and communicative purpose. Warschauer (2002) and Greenfield (2003) indicate 
that this motivates less proficient students and provides a non-threatening environment for students to 
practice their literacy skills and receive peer feedback on their work. There is evidence from Fitze (2006) 
that the electronic environment encourages participation from students who do not interact in face-to-face 
situations. This may have contributed to the impact of the computer-based learning environment in this 
study because a majority of the students found the online communication with tutors to be less 
intimidating than going to the tutor’s office (Q.6: 57%). 
This experiment shows the benefits of helping students become competent cross-cultural communicators  
by providing an autonomous learning environment that has been shown to significantly change the 
rhetorical style of students, when compared with a conventional course. Within the e-course, students 
were provided with opportunities to explore and construct their knowledge base, taking a more active role 
in acquiring the target language, as elucidated by Hawisher and Selfe (2006) when they considered 
globalization and cyberspace. They no longer relied solely on their textbooks and saw the benefits of a 
cost-effective system for distributing materials, such as the model essays by native speakers (Q.4: 73%), 
and even complained that there were insufficient materials (Q.3: 83%). This is an encouraging response 
because it indicates that the materials provided were in demand.  
Generally, from the open-ended questions, the perception of the e-course was that: 
• Overall, the e-course was seen as robust and constructive. 
• Contrastive features were helpful in understanding cultural differences. 
• The resources on the e-course were helpful, though not sufficient, and more English resources were 
needed to establish an EFL autonomous learning environment. 
More online communication would facilitate knowledge construction and cross-cultural exploration. 
LIMITATIONS OF THE STUDY 
Although the findings of this study may be applicable to other higher education institutions that are 
considering applying Web-based teaching and research in ESL, there are limitations. The e-course was 
designed specifically for Chinese PhD students in the Natural Sciences who had studied English for a 
number of years, and the findings for other groups of students may vary according to their cultural 
heritage and their proficiency in the target language. New courses, especially those involving novel 
technological approaches, may be susceptible to novelty effects that exaggerate the benefits. A more 
pressing concern, and one that requires further investigation, is the relative impact of the various 
Language Learning & Technology 88
Xing, Wang, and Spencer Students' Awareness of Cross-Cultural Contrastive Rhetoric 
 
components of the e-course. For example, is there a synergism between the components that produce the 
beneficial effects, or are some aspects less important than others, as suggested by student responses to the 
questionnaire?  
CONCLUSION 
This study explored the learning of English academic writing via an e-course in addition to conventional 
classroom instruction. It was designed to investigate the potential impact of educational technology on 
language learning and to explore the possibility of creating an interactive learning environment via online 
communication to raise overseas students' awareness of cross-cultural contrastive rhetoric. The data 
analysis demonstrated that there was a measurable difference in the rhetorical styles used by Chinese and 
UK writers, and that the Study Group of sixty PhD students majoring in natural sciences at the Harbin 
Institute of Technology (HIT), China was distinguishable from both UK and Chinese writers on four of 
the five measures used. The conventional training course brought about significant changes in the 
participants’ style of writing in two of the four measures for which change was anticipated. However, the 
provision of the e-course increased the magnitude of this change, and extended it from two to three of the 
four measures. Although problems with the e-course were identified (e.g., insufficient materials and 
limited opportunities for online communication with native English speakers), the course was well 
received by a majority of students, with many expressing the wish to have more frequent and more 
personalised exchanges with native English speakers online.  
 
APPENDIX: Sample Essay Data (Pre- and Post-Training) 
  
What do you think of the English courses in the universities? (draft, Student E1) 
 
Para1 
Language is REGARDED AS A TOOL to be used everyday and English is taken as AN AXIOM that should be 
piled up in the daily life. It opens another window for us to see the outside world. It helps us understand 
better how people live in the western world where English is spoken as MOTHER TONGUE. Therefore, 
English courses in the universities are necessary. 
 
Para2 
Because of its importance, we start to learn English from grade school, then junior school and high 
school. It is no doubt someone may argue that we spend too much time on learning English due to the 
courses arranged by ministry of education. The motive of learning will stimulate the learning action. The 
basic components of learning motive are need of learning and expect of learning. Knowing what English 
learners' need is very important. There is a survey by South Medical University about the needs of 
English learning for the students. They sends out 300 inquiry papers, 243 returned, 66% of the 
correspondents say they had passed the CET6, and 6.1% of the correspondents attended TOL, EPT, WSK 
etc. This indicates that the students have a high level English background. Most university students say 
they strongly or highly need the professional English speaking and writing ability. Many say that they 
need the professional oral English, skills of translation and being familiar with the western culture. The 
aims of the English learners are very practical: they are mainly about motive of communication, they are 
eager to get the ability of oral English and writing English.  
 
Para3 
Teachers at the university continuously explain the grammar points and vocabulary details and students 
revise these points to gain high marks for examinations. We do not feel learning new knowledge, nor use 
the language in real-life situations. There are gaps between ideality and reality. There are still other 
Language Learning & Technology 89
Xing, Wang, and Spencer Students' Awareness of Cross-Cultural Contrastive Rhetoric 
 
purposes for us to choose learning English, we could make a lot of friends from different areas. This is 
also important, for we could exchange research methods and expand our views about the world, I do 
think it's necessary for students of science knowing some other areas such as society, humanity.  
 
Para4  
We need two types of English courses: speaking lessons and writing lessons. Teachers in both lessons 
should encourage students to make a presentation about our study, which is fun for us all. We can sit 
down together and listen to others what work they are recently doing. For presenters they collect datum 
from us and try to make the presentations perfect, this disciplines their skills of making presentation and 
teachers give help on this, too. If English courses do not provide what we need, I think we do not have to 
have English courses. 
 
Codes: 
Theme/thesis statement: in the first paragraph 
Topic sentence: topic change in paragraph 2 
Metaphor (SMALL CAPS): 3 
Discourse markers (bold italics): 18 
Number of paragraphs: 4 
 
What do you think of the English courses in the universities? (final version after the e-course, Student E1) 
 
Para1 
University students do not have to take English courses unless the courses provide them with what 
they need. They have already taken A LONG JOURNEY of studying English from kindergarten, to junior 
school, then to high school and the LONG MARCH extends to university. There is no doubt that they have 
spent too much time on learning the language, including its structure and vocabulary. It is time for them 
to use it and to put what they have learnt into practice.  
 
Para2 
Motivation is the key for individual's learning, as is indicated by a survey from South Medical University. 
A questionnaire on the needs of English learning for the tertiary students was sent out to 300 students and 
243 returned. 66% of the responses expressed that they had passed the highest national English test CET6 
and 6.1% passed international English tests such as TOL, EPT, WSK. The result reveals that the 
university students have already had a very strong English background. The open questions of the 
questionnaire also show that most students expressed their strongly desire to use the language such as in 
presentation, in translation and in cultural exchange. The aim of the English learners are very practical: 
real-life communication in both oral and written form.  
 
Para3 
Apparently, there is discrepancy between expectation and reality: university English courses are still 
about grammar points, vocabulary details, and therefore students do not feel learning anything new. The 
lack of oral and writing in English courses remains a problem in the curriculum and no wonder many 
students prefer not to go to English courses, but surfing on the internet reading authentic English 
materials instead. 
 
Para4 
It will be beneficial for the students if the university can arrange two types of English courses: one is oral 
English in class where students are encouraged to express themselves in English. The presenters can 
collect ideas from other students and improve their presentation skills. It will also be good fun for all the 
students no matter which discipline they are from, for they can sit down and share with what work they 
are currently doing, which expands their view of the world. The other is writing course after class. 
Language Learning & Technology 90
Xing, Wang, and Spencer Students' Awareness of Cross-Cultural Contrastive Rhetoric 
 
Students can do research on a certain topic and give their opinion to the e-forum. As other students are 
from different areas, they might see it from other angles and comment or add in new ideas. The teacher 
can guide them to use the appropriate expressions and structures to express their ideas. Students can then 
be confident to use the English is real-life situations. 
 
 
Codes: 
Theme/thesis statement: in the first paragraph 
Topic sentence: one in each paragraph 
Metaphor (SMALL CAPS): 2 
Discourse markers (bold italics): 26 
Number of paragraphs: 4 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Minjie Xing is Senior Language Tutor at the University of Manchester, UK. She obtained her MA in 
Education from the University of Hull (1998) and PhD in Educational Technology in Language and 
Culture at the University of Salford (2002). Her research interests are e-learning, autonomous learning, 
and Chinese character development for foreign language students. 
Email: Minjie.Xing@manchester.ac.uk 
Ken Spencer is Lecturer in Education at the University of Hull, UK. He obtained his MSc in Psychology 
from the University of Newcastle Upon Tyne (1976) and PhD in Education at the University of Hull 
(2000). His research interests are e-learning, effectiveness of educational technologies, and orthographic 
influences on literacy. 
Email: k.a.spencer@hull.ac.uk 
Jinghui Wang is Professor of Applied Linguistics at the Harbin Institute of Technology, China. He 
obtained his BA at Northeast Teachers’ University (1985) and MA at Beijing Foreign Studies University 
(1991). He is presently completing his PhD in Education at the University of Reading, UK. His research 
interests are discourse across cultures, metacognitive beliefs and strategies and computer-assisted 
language learning. 
Email: j.h.wang@hit.edu.cn 
 
REFERENCES 
Ballard, B., & Clanchy, J. (1984). Study abroad: A manual for Asian students. Kuala Lumpur: Longman 
Malaysia. 
Ballard, B., & Clanchy, J. (1991). Assessment by misconception: Cultural influences and intellectual 
traditions. In L. Hamp-Lyons (Ed.), Second language writing in academic contexts, (pp. 122-134). 
Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing Corporation. 
Benda, J. (1999). Qualitative studies in contrastive rhetoric: An analysis of composition research. 
Retrieved December 18, 2007, from http://web.syr.edu/~jpbenda/methcomm.htm. 
Burstein, J., Kukich, K., Wolff, S., Lu, C., and Chodorow, M. (1998). Enriching Automated Essay 
Scoring Using Discourse Marking: Discourse Relations and Discourse Markers. Proceedings of the 
Conference of Computational Linguistics, East Stroudsburg, Pa., 15-21. Retrieved January 21, 2008, from 
http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu/article/burstein98enriching.html. 
Language Learning & Technology 91
Xing, Wang, and Spencer Students' Awareness of Cross-Cultural Contrastive Rhetoric 
 
Byram, M. (1989). Cultural studies in foreign language education. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Cai, G. (1993). Beyond bad writing: Teaching English composition to Chinese ESL students. Paper 
presented at the College Composition and Communication Conference, San Diego CA. 
Chen, G. H., & Chung, J. (1994). The impact of Confucianism on organizational communication. 
Communication Quarterly, 42(2),  93-105. 
Cho, J.H. (1999). Contrastive Rhetoric. Unpublished PhD thesis. Bowling Green State University, 
Bowling Green, OH. Retrieved December 18, 2007, from http://faculty.fullerton.edu/jcho/dispreface.htm 
Connor, U. (1996). Contrastive rhetoric: Cross-cultural aspects of second-language writing. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Connor, U. (2002). New directions in contrastive rhetoric. TESOL Quarterly, 36(4), 493-510. 
Cortazzi, M., & Jin, L. (1997). "Communication for learning across cultures." In D. McNamar & R. 
Harris (Eds.), Overseas students in higher education: Issues in teaching and learning (pp. 76-90). New 
York: Routledge. 
Crowe, C., & Peterson, K. (1995). Classroom research: Helping Asian students succeed in writing 
courses. Teaching English in the Two Year College, 22(1), 31-37. 
Eason, C. A. (1995). Argumentative essays written by native speakers of Chinese and English: A study in 
contrastive rhetoric. Unpublished doctoral dissertationUniversity of Illinois, Rubana-Champaign, IL. 
Fitze, M. (2006). Discourse and participation in ESL face-to-face and written electronic conferences. 
Language Learning & Technology, 10(1), 67-86. 
Grabe, W., & Kaplan, R. (1989). Writing a second language: Contrastive rhetoric. In D. Johnson  & D. 
Roen (Eds.), Richness in writing: Empowering ESL students, (pp. 263 -283). New York: Longman. 
Grabe, W., & Kaplan, R. B. (1998). Theory and practice of writing, (3rd ed.). New York: Addison 
Wesley Longman.  
Greenfield, R. (2003). Collaborative e-mail exchange for teaching secondary ESL: A case study in Hong 
Kong. Language Learning & Technology, 7(1), 46–70. 
Hawisher, G.E., & Selfe, C.L. (2006). Globalization and agency: Designing and redesigning the literacies 
of cyberspace. College English, 68(6), 619-636. 
Hinds, J. (1990). Inductive, deductive, quasi-inductive: Expository writing in Japanese, Korean, Chinese, 
and Thai. In U.Connor & A.M. Johns (Eds.), Coherence in writing: Research and pedagogical 
perspectives (pp. 87-110). Alexandria, VA: TESOL. 
Hirose, K. (2003). Comparing L1 and L2 organizational patterns in the argumentative writing of Japanese 
EFL students. Journal of Second Language Writing, 12, 181–209. 
Hyland, K. (2006). Feedback on second language students' writing. Language Teaching, 39(2), 83–101.   
Jordan, R. R. (1997). Identification of problems and needs: a student project. In A.P. Cowie  & J.B. 
Heaton (Eds.), English for academic purposes (pp. 67-89). Reading, UK: University of Reading. 
Kaplan, R.B. (1966). Cultural thought patterns in intercultural education .Language Learning, 16(1-2), 1-
20. 
Kaplan, R. B. (1990). Writing in a multilingual/multicultural context: What is contrastive about 
contrastive rhetoric? The Writing Instructor. Fall, 51-62. 
Language Learning & Technology 92
Xing, Wang, and Spencer Students' Awareness of Cross-Cultural Contrastive Rhetoric 
 
Language Learning & Technology 93
Lee, Y-J. (2006). The process-oriented ESL writing assessment: Promises and challenges. Journal of 
Second Language Writing, 15(4), 307–330. 
Leki, I. (1992). Understanding ESL writers: A guide for teachers. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook. 
Matalene, C. (1985). Contrastive rhetoric: An American writing teacher in China. College English, 47(8), 
789 - 808. 
Megginson, D. (1996). The Thesis Statement. The University of Ottawa, Writing Centre. Retrieved 
December 18, 2007, from http://www.uottawa.ca/academic/arts/writcent/hypergrammar/thstatmt.html. 
Moran, C. (1991). We write, but do we read? Computers and Composition, 8(3), 51-61. 
Ostler, S. E. (1997). Contrastive Rhetoric: Myths, facts and pedagogy. Paper presented at the TESOL 
Conference,  Chicago, IL. 
Santos, T. (1988). Professors' reactions to the academic writing of nonnative-speaking students. TESOL 
Quarterly, 22(1), 69-88. 
Scarcella, R. (1984). How writers orient their readers to expository essays: A comparative study of native 
and non-native English writers. TESOL Quarterly, 18(4), 671-688. 
Schneider, M. L., & Fujishima, N. K. (1995). When practice doesn't make perfect: The case of a graduate 
ESL student. In D.Belcher, & G. Braine (Eds.), Academic writing in a second language: Essays on 
research & pedagogy (pp. 231-265). Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing Corporation.  
Shen, F. (1989). The classroom and the wider culture: Identity as a key to learning English composition. 
College Composition and Communication, 40(4), 459-466. 
Shen, S., & Yao, H. (1999). The impact of Chinese culture on Chinese learners' use of English writing. 
Proceedings of the 1999 International Symposium on Language Teaching Beijing-Kunming. Beijing: 
Foreign Language University Press. 
Stern, H. H. (1992). Issues and options in language teaching. Oxford: Oxford Press. 
Swales, J. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Tsao, F. (1983). Linguistics and written discourse in particular languages: Contrastive studies: English 
and Chinese. In R.B. Kaplan (Ed.), Annual review of Applied Linguistics 3 (pp. 99-117). Rowley, MA: 
Newbury House.  
Warschauer, M. (2002). Networking into academic discourse. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 
1(1), 45–58. 
Weir, C. (1988). Academic writing – Can we please all the people all the time? In P. C. Robinson (Ed.), 
Academic writing: Process and product. ELT Documents 129. 
White, R. (2001). Closing the gap between intercultural and business communication skills. University of 
Reading, Department of Applied Linguistics. Retrieved December 18, 2007, from 
http://www.rdg.ac.uk/app_ling/closing.htm. 
Young, L. W. L. (1994). Crosstalk and culture in Sino-American communication. New York: Cambridge 
University Press. 
 
