Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num3/review2/ 
October 2008, Volume 12, Number 3
pp. 23-32 
 
Copyright © 2008. ISSN 1094-3501 23
REVIEW OF ACTIVECHINESE: CHINESE LANGUAGE SKILLS FOR THE 
BUSINESS WORLD 
Title ActiveChinese: Chinese Language Skills for the Business World 
Platform Windows® 98, ME, 2000, XP; Mac OS X 
Minimum hardware and 
software requirements 
Display: 800x600 minimum, 1024x768 preferred, with 32-bit color depth 
(millions of colors).  
Connection: Broadband (cable modem, DSL, or LAN).  
Browser: IE 5.5, 6.0, Firefox 1.0 
Plug-ins: Macromedia Flash 7.0 or later.  
Settings: Browser must have cookies and JavaScript enabled and pop-up 
blocker disabled for www.activechinese.com; computer must have audio 
and microphone enabled.  
Audio: Speakers.  
Voice Over IP software: suggested to have a Skype (www.skype.com) 
account for working with tutors in real-time. 
Publisher ActiveChinese, Inc. 
One Market Street, Spear Tower, Suite 2260 
San Francisco, CA 94105 
http://www.activechinese.com/ 
Support offered FAQ; Online contact form; Online one-on-one tutor 
Target language Chinese 
Target audience Beginner to Intermediate 
Price Depends on which of the four courses (Ice Breakers, Adjusting to the 
New Environment, Cultivating a Deep Understanding, Chinese Business 
World 1-2-3) and the package options the learner selects, with the prices 
ranging from USD $99.00 to $599.00. 
Review by Scott Chien-Hsiung Chiu, Michigan State University 
The learning process is no doubt more efficient when language learners are focused, engaged, and in 
charge of their own learning.  Such language learners usually have specific goals for their own learning, 
and, furthermore, they are motivated and responsible for planning their learning activities, evaluating their 
performance, and monitoring their overall learning processes (Little, 1999, 2007); in short, such learners 
can be called autonomous. Computer Assisted Language Learning (CALL) applications and computer-
based educational materials have been widely regarded as supportive of learner autonomy (Warschauer, 
2002; Weasenforth, Meloni, & Biesenbach-Lucas, 2005). Nevertheless, the perceived potentials for 
fostering autonomy in the electronic learning environment are not fully realized until hypermedia 
interactivity is improved and broader access to the Internet is available (Hémard, 2006).  Benefiting from 
the increasing availability of Internet technology and exploiting the enhanced interactivity of Rich 
Internet Applications (RIAs)1, ActiveChinese introduces an online virtual classroom, Chinese Language 
Skills for the Business World.  It incorporates the latest technology in multimedia design on the Internet, 
and, on its website (http://www.activechinese.com/intro1.jsp#Intro1), it promises to "provide a 24/7 
visual and audio learning tool for 21st century Chinese learners" and make "learning Chinese thus much 
easier than ever before" (para.7). As an Internet-based language learning environment, ActiveChinese 
combines up-to-date features of interactive websites, such as Flash animation and RIAs, and the 
benefitsof video-conferencing, such as Skype. 
ActiveChinese is a self-contained language learning website that provides a Chinese learning environment 
for beginning to low-intermediate adult learners of Chinese as a second or foreign language, particularly 
Scott Chien-Hsiung Chiu Review of ActiveChinese. 
 
those who have an interest in Chinese language skills for business purposes. 
Design and Modules of Active Chinese 
As shown in Figure 1, the opening portal of ActiveChinese consists of five principal components, which 
are displayed on the navigation bar. Each lists different aspects of the program’s language learning 
resources, namely, Lesson Plan, Resources, Live Tutor, Community, and Culture Shocker. By placing the 
five resource components on the navigation bar, the authors have created a navigational architecture that 
allows users to easily select the different online learning resources and materials for their needs. 
 
Figure 1. The main portal of the ActiveChinese virtual classroom. 
• Lesson Plan lists all available lessons and their learning materials, including written exercises, 
lesson content, transcripts, audio files, and video files. Learners can access forty-two lessons in 
the Lesson Plan section, and additionally, they can monitor their learning progress and the 
activities most recently completed in each lesson. 
• Resources is divided into five sub-units, comprising learners’ personal vocabulary lists, 
vocabulary from each lesson, rules of the Chinese Pinyin2 system, explanations of how Chinese 
characters are composed, and a Pinyin keyboard that allows learners to manipulate syllable 
combinations and listen to their own pronunciation. 
Language Learning & Technology 24
Scott Chien-Hsiung Chiu Review of ActiveChinese. 
 
Language Learning & Technology 25
•  Live Tutor offers users the option of scheduling a tutoring session with Chinese tutors in 
Shanghai over the telephone or through Internet connection options, such as Skype or Google 
Talk. 30-minute tutoring sessions are available around the clock.  
•  Culture Shocker describes cultural issues, facts, and interactions, such as trying to get directions 
by asking people in the street or leaving tips at restaurants; the scenarios are depicted in a series 
of eight comics, along with verbal explanations by an animated tutor. 
• Community is a virtual space for learners to exchange their learning experiences in an online 
forum, or blog.  Examples from Culture Shocker and other downloadable materials, such 
as Adobe Reader Chinese fonts, are also available . 
Lesson Content 
ActiveChinese features a 24-hour live tutoring service, Flash-animated materials in each lesson (which 
include dialogues, culture points, drills, and self-assessments), an e-book of lesson transcripts, drills and 
writing exercises, and downloadable audio-visual review materials. Learners are able to plan their own 
learning activities and select the online resources available to them. They complete lessons at their own 
pace according to their own schedule, with no risk of missing any part of the lesson. In addition, they can 
monitor their learning progress and practice the target language by themselves or with a tutor over the 
Internet, all of which represent key points in autonomous learning. In the following, this review focuses 
on the Flash-animated lessons and the tutoring sessions. 
In Lesson Plan, forty-two Flash-animated lessons have been categorized into beginning, advanced 
beginning, and low intermediate proficiency levels, as well as lessons for business Chinese at the 
intermediate level. It is not specified how these proficiency levels were defined although it is clear that 
the different levels are based on the difficulty and complexity of the lesson content. With the help of an 
online tutor, users have to decide on the lessons that match their needs, as well as their level of Chinese 
proficiency. Each of the lessons follows the same organizational pattern and consists of six sections which 
provide practice in oral communication and listening. Each lesson starts with a short introduction to the 
context and the goal of the lesson provided by a virtual tutor. After the introductory section, the lessons 
continue with a Flash-animated movie clip of situational dialogues based on daily themes and topics for 
the different proficiency levels, such as "self-introduction" and "going shopping" for beginners, "at the 
restaurant" and "visiting a Chinese family" for advanced beginners, and "handling an emergency" and 
"farewell at the airport" for the low-intermediate level.   
To improve learner skills in business Chinese, the program offers twelve intermediate level lessons 
focusing on business situations, such as "holding a meeting", "business banquet", "business negotiation", 
"interview", "the first day at work," "technical problems in the office," "marketing research," 
"advertising," "visiting the factory," "placing an order," and "payment and delivery." The dialogues are 
presented by two or more animated characters playing the roles of typical Chinese restaurant waiters, 
government officials, and business people. In Lesson Plan , the forty-two lessons are categorized into four 
different proficiency groups but listed in a sequential order, from Lesson 1 to Lesson 42. The content of 
each lesson focuses on a specific communicative situation, and it can be assumed that learners do not 
need to follow the sequential order of the lessons but can select the topics in which they are most 
interested first and go back to other units later. 
Support for Lesson Learning 
Each dialogue can be viewed and listened to in three modes: (1) at normal conversational speed without 
English translation in order to improve learners’ listening ability in real-life situations; (2) in a slow-paced 
mode with English word-by-word and sentence-by-sentence explanations by a virtual tutor to assist 
comprehension; and (3) with dialogues broken down into phrases and accompanied by the added feature 
that learners can play each of the phrases or record their own pronunciation to compare to model 
pronunciation. 
Scott Chien-Hsiung Chiu Review of ActiveChinese. 
 
In the normal conversational mode, the speed at the beginner level is slightly slower than that at the 
higher levels. The Flash animation in the dialogues not only simulates real-life settings but also shows in 
detail objects that are typically associated with these situations, for example, the moon cakes and gift 
boxes one encounters when visiting a Chinese family on the day of the Moon Festival. Flash animations 
of the dialogues are designed to give learners the feeling of being in a real-life setting. However, the 
rationale for using Flash-animated materials rather than videos of real people in real-life situations is not 
clear, and Flash materials usually take a lot more time and effort to produce than videos of real people. 
When looking closely at the lip movements of the animated characters, one can notice that they do not 
correspond to the sounds uttered by the characters. This might be a drawback since research has found 
that visual cues have an important effect on the learning of L2 pronunciation (De Bot, 1983; Hardison, 
2005). Mismatch of lip movements and speech sounds could have a misleading effect on speech 
perception (Hardison, 1999). Therefore, target language input with the visual cues of these animated 
dialogues may not facilitate L2 learners’ pronunciation, although the main goal of these contextualized 
animated dialogues might not be the practice of pronunciation but the introduction of a situation for target 
language use. 
A feature of the slower-paced mode is the illustration of Chinese tones, which resembles a music score in 
which notes are represented by arrows going from left to right and high to low, indicating the pitch 
contour of each word and pitch change of the tone (Figure 2). This technique is often used in teaching 
Chinese tones. The unique feature of mode 2 is the animated graphic representation of the tones of each 
word in the sentence. In general, Tone 1 is always at the highest pitch in a speaker’s pitch range, as shown 
in the arrow on the far right in Figure 2, and Tone 4, as shown in the first arrow in Figure 2, drops from 
the highest pitch to the lowest pitch.   
 
Figure 2. Visualization of Chinese tones.  
Language Learning & Technology 26
Scott Chien-Hsiung Chiu Review of ActiveChinese. 
 
The third mode of dialogue presentation is a practice mode, which provides users with the opportunity to 
replay individual sentences and to practice the dialogues at their own pace. As shown in Figure 3, 
ActiveChinese allows users to record their own voice and compare it to a recorded model in a mouse-over 
mode, which provides learners with an opportunity to practice and monitor their pronunciation. Users also 
have the option of turning the Pinyin or English translation (English subtitles) on or off. However, they do 
not receive any feedback on their pronunciation from the program like other products, such as MyET. 
Instead, they have to compare their own oral language output to the model speech themselves. Having 
learners monitor their own speech output might support autonomy; however, research on feedback in 
auditory training has demonstrated its importance, raising the question of the adequacy of self-monitoring 
(Engwall & Bälter, 2007; Logan, Lively, & Pisoni, 1991).  
 
Figure 3. Pronunciation practice of sample dialogue. 
In addition to the lack of feedback, another problem surfaces in the recording of model pronunciation 
with respect to tone sandhi3. For example, as shown in Figure 4, the expression ni hao is composed of two 
Tone 3 words next to each other. Tone sandhi should apply here, meaning that the first character should 
change from Tone 3 to Tone 2. This occurs at normal conversational speed, but not in the slow, or 
practice, mode. In Figure 4, learners should be able to see and hear the tone change in the first word. Lack 
of tonal alternation in the word-by-word mode can be misleading for beginning learners and might in fact 
foster incorrect pronunication patterns. 
After each dialogue, a series of language points are addressed by a virtual tutor, who explains orally in 
English, cultural and linguistic points related to the dialogue. For example, in the episode  "Visiting a 
Chinese family," the culture and language points focus on kinship terms, which in Chinese are related to 
the complicated cultural concept of family and could be unfamiliar to learners from Western cultures. In 
Language Learning & Technology 27
Scott Chien-Hsiung Chiu Review of ActiveChinese. 
 
the latter part of the Flash-lessons, exercises and self-assessments are provided, which allow users to 
practice and use the target language from the lesson. Overall, the Flash-lesson materials follow a 
procedure similar to a presentation-practice-production (PPP)4 sequence, in which learners are provided 
with a context of language use, guided to practice the target linguistic forms, and then encouraged to 
develop their language ability by producing the target language in other contexts. While the selected 
target features in ActiveChinese might be too easy or even uninteresting, especially for learners who have 
already learned some Chinese or who are heritage speakers of Chinese, the diverse number of topics and 
language points at each level allow learners to select their own foci for learning and practice. Learners can, 
therefore, take responsibility for planning their own learning activities and monitor their progress.  
 
Figure 4. Tone sandhi not reflected in word-by-word presentation. 
Live Tutor 
An innovative feature of ActiveChinese is its 24-hour online, one-on-one tutoring sessions, which can be 
found under the tab Live Tutor. Instead of going through the Flash-lesson materials on their own, learners 
can schedule a tutoring session with a tutor in Shanghai who can provide guided tutoring through each 
lesson's pronunciation aspects, language points, and exercises. The tutoring session can take place by 
regular telephone through a landline, or it can be arranged through Internet communication programs, 
such as Skype, Yahoo Messenger, MSN Messenger or Google Talk. This personalized service can also 
compensate for the potential downside of pre-selected materials in the lessons. The live tutor can respond 
to learners’ questions instantly and is more flexible than the FAQ section on the website in helping with 
learners’ questions or needs. In addition, the Chinese tutor can assess a learner’s proficiency level and 
recommend an appropriate lesson sequence. It is not clear, however, if and how the tutors have been 
trained in assessing learners’ language ability or in Chinese language pedagogy.   
Language Learning & Technology 28
Scott Chien-Hsiung Chiu Review of ActiveChinese. 
 
I asked a beginning learner of Chinese to go through a live tutoring session by talking with a native 
Chinese instructor from Shanghai via Skype. During the twenty-minute trial session, the tutor guided the 
learner through the lesson materials in English, responded to the learner’s questions, and suggested a 
timetable according to which a beginner course package might be completed. The learner found it to be an 
interesting and pleasant language tutoring experience. In general, Live Tutor can assist learners in 
monitoring their learning and provide an opportunity to practice spoken Chinese with a native speaker. As 
research has emphasized, target language use (Little, 2007) and learners’ awareness of developmental 
processes are essential elements of developing language learner autonomy (Hémard, 2006).  
Resources, Community, and Culture Shocker modules 
In the Resources section of the website, learners can listen to the pronunciation of each Chinese 
consonant and vowel in isolation. The writing of Chinese characters is explained through pictures, and 
stroke order is illustrated with animation. Another beneficial resource is the personal vocabulary book 
that learners can create for their own reference. Learners can add words from both the vocabulary in the 
lessons and from the built-in dictionary, which is searchable in both Chinese and English. The program 
also allows learners to generate vocabulary items in the form of flashcards which they can study online 
(see Figure 5) or print out. While this function enables learners to develop memory-related strategies 
through mechanical means, a drawback may be the lack of context or sentence examples for each word. 
Generally speaking, Resources provides learners with additional relevant information and materials that 
not only encourage learners to select external resources to expand their knowledge of Chinese but also to 
develop different learning strategies.   
 
Figure 5. Sample online vocabulary flashcard. 
Language Learning & Technology 29
Scott Chien-Hsiung Chiu Review of ActiveChinese. 
 
Community is a virtual community for registered learners who are interested in sharing and interacting 
with other learners online.  Learners can find information on cultural issues as well as lesson content. The 
"Blogs" and "Discussion Forum" in this section allow learners to reflect on their own language learning 
and share experiences with other registered learners. Such a virtual community of learners has the 
potential of promoting learners’ autonomous learning by addressing principles of learner involvement and 
learner reflection (Little, 2007). However, the content in Community is variable and not as organized as in 
the other sections on this website. Learners logged onto the website need to log in again to the forum to 
post messages, and the dearth of posts and responses shows that online discussion activities are not 
frequently used. It would be desirable to have a community moderator who could help to keep the site 
active in order to make full use of this community function.  
The last tab, Culture Shocker, contains information about cultural aspects of living in China that may be 
unfamiliar to foreigners. Information about Culture Shocker can also be found in Community. 
Nevertheless, this apparent repetition is not redundant but highlights cultural information about the 
rapidly growing and changing China. Instead of perpetuating stereotypes about ancient Chinese culture, 
Culture Shocker portrays life and customs in contemporary China (Figure 6) through 40 comics. For 
example, Culture Shocker 9 points out that the way people exchange business cards in China is a crucial 
aspect of their  business relationship. It is expected that business people pass and receive business cards 
with both hands and address the person with his or her job title and name immediately after receiving the 
card. Such information is particularly helpful and important for learners who want to develop successful 
business relationships with Chinese people.While the use of comics might trivialize the cultural 
information, they are more visually interesting than text only culture vignettes and might be a way to 
mitigate culturally sensitive information, such as China’s one-child policy, which is addressed in Culture 
Shocker 18. The comic shockers and explanations are presented in English instead of Chinese. Although 
it would be desirable to contextualize language within culture knowledge and vice versa, cultural 
information explained in English might be more suitable for lower-level learners who want to acquire 
information about modern Chinese culture. 
 
 
Figure 6. A Culture Shocker example. 
Language Learning & Technology 30
Scott Chien-Hsiung Chiu Review of ActiveChinese. 
 
Language Learning & Technology 31
Summary 
ActiveChinese introduces an Internet-based language learning environment which combines traditional 
materials and hypermedia with communication technology. Overall, ActiveChinese presents a promising 
language learning environment in a self-contained website that incorporates interactive technology and 
links learners with appropriate learning resources to foster their autonomy. The strengths of this program 
lie in the situational dialogues and the simulation of daily life, the graphic representation of Chinese 
tones, the variety of linguistic and cultural points, and online live tutoring sessions. ActiveChinese allows 
learners of Chinese to determine their own pace and focus on learning materials that fit their needs. 
Beginning or low-intermediate adult learners of Chinese, particularly those who want to acquire some 
Chinese language skills and cultural knowledge for business purposes, will find this program intuitive and 
approachable.  Distance learners who are in a Chinese-as-a-foreign-language environment or a self-study 
setting can benefit from the direct communication with native Chinese speakers and interaction among 
learners provided by this commercial package. The website can also serve as supplemental material to a 
regular in-class program as instructors and learners will find that the variety of everyday topics and 
cultural points easily fits into their curricular needs or individual interests. Although the lessons are 
designed for beginning to low-intermediate learners of Chinese, the content and materials are flexible and 
can be used by a learner at any level desiring instruction in a particular area or skill that ActiveChinese 
addresses. The practical purpose of learning a language is to communicate and interact with people. 
ActiveChinese emphasizes the communicative purposes and interactivity of language learning and, 
therefore, turns learning Chinese into an active experience.  
 
NOTES 
1. Rich Internet Applications (RIAs), introduced by Macromedia (now 
Adobe http://www.adobe.com/resources/business/rich_internet_apps/), are web applications with 
functionality and features that offer a more interactive experience for web us
see 
ers (also 
s). 
ls). 
http://clear.msu.edu/teaching/online/ria/about.php for language learning application
2. Pinyin, more formally called Hanyu Pinyin, is the most common Standard Mandarin Romanization 
system in use and uses the Latin alphabet to represent sounds in Standard Mandarin 
(see http://www.pinyin.info/index.html for detai
3. There are a few rules for combining tones when speaking, called tone sandhi.  Sometimes tones change 
based on other tones in nearby syllables. The most common change occurs when two Tone 3s are next to 
each other: the first Tone 3 changes to Tone 2.  
4. The PPP model (presentation, practice, production) is a second-language teaching method that sets up a 
situation, conducts drills, and leads to original performance (de la Fuente, 2006).  Typically, in the first 
stage, presentation, the targeted forms are in context (cf., the Dialogue sections of the Flash lessons).   In 
the second stage, practice, learners repeat the target items and practice with predetermined or focused 
structures (cf., the Drill sections). Then, in the production stage, learners produce the forms and 
expressions they have learned in an open situation such as in a role-play (cf., the Expression part in the 
Drill sections and Self-Assessment sections). 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Scott Chien-Hsiung Chiu is a Ph.D. student in the Second Language Studies Program at Michigan State 
University.  He has worked as a research assistant in the Rich Internet Applications project at the Center 
Scott Chien-Hsiung Chiu Review of ActiveChinese. 
 
Language Learning & Technology 32
for Language Education and Research (CLEAR) at MSU and is also an instructor of Chinese at the 
Lansing Chinese School. 
E-mail: chiuchie@msu.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Engwall, O. & Bälter, O. (2007). Pronunciation feedback from real and virtual language teachers. 
Computer Assisted Language Learning, 20(3), 235-262. 
De Bot, K. (1983). Visual feedback of intonation I: Effectiveness and induced practice behavior. 
Language and Speech, 26(4), 331-350.  
de la Fuente, M. J. (2006).  Classroom L2 vocabulary acquisition: Investigating  the role of pedagogical 
task and form-focused instruction. Language Teaching Research, 10(3), 263-295. 
Hardison, D. M. (1999). Bimodal speech perception by native and nonnative speakers of English: Factors 
influencing the McGurk effect. Language Learning, 49(2), 213-283. 
Hardison, D. M. (2005). Second-language spoken word identification: Effects of perceptual training, 
visual cues, and phonetic environment. Applied Psycholinguistics, 26(4), 579-596. 
Hémard, D. (2006). Evaluating hypermedia structures as a means of improving language learning 
strategies and motivation. ReCALL, 18(1), 24-44. 
Little, D. (1999) Developing learner autonomy in the foreign language classroom: A social-interactive 
view of learning and three fundamental pedagogical principles. Revista Canaria de Estudios Ingleses, 38, 
77–88. 
Little, D. (2007). Language learner autonomy: Some fundamental considerations revisited. Innovation in 
Language Learning and Teaching, 1(1), 14-29. 
Logan, J.S., Lively, S.E., & Pisoni, D.B. (1991). Training Japanese listeners to identify English /r/ and /l/: 
A first report. Journal of the Acousticical Society of America, 89(2), 874-886. 
Warschauer, M.(2002). A developmental perspective on technology in language education. TESOL 
Quarterly, 36(3), 453–475. 
Weasenforth, D., Meloni, C., & Biesenbach-Lucas, S. (2005).  Learner autonomy and course management 
software. In B. Holmberg, M.A. Shelley, & C.J. White (Eds.), Distance education and languages: 
Evolution and change (pp. 195-211). Clevedon: Multilingual Matters. 
