Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num2/editors/ 
June 2008, Volume 12, Number 2
p. 1 
 
Copyright © 2008, ISSN 1094-3501 
 
 
FROM THE EDITORS  
We are pleased to present Volume 12, Number 2 of Language Learning and Technology, which 
is a special issue on “Technology and Learning to Write,” guest edited by Joel Bloch. Together 
with our indefatigable Associate Editor, Rick Kern, Joel has assembled four articles that report 
on the latest research in how technology can be helpful for L2 writers. Please see the From the 
Special Issue Editor column for a description of the content of this special issue. 
 
In conjunction with the four articles, Bob Godwin-Jones provides an excellent, timely overview 
of cutting-edge modes and uses of writing online in the "Emerging Technologies" column. His 
column "Web-writing 2.0: Enabling, documenting, and assessing writing online" describes new 
tools and services that facilitate online composing, editing, and assessing writing. 
The issue also includes two reviews, compiled and edited by Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas. 
The first review by Lesley Huff evaluates NetTrekker d.i., a web-based search engine 
that helps teachers and students in English-speaking classrooms find appropriate 
learning materials for a wide range of subjects and for multiple levels of ability. It is 
especially helpful for teachers who need to provide "differentiated instruction" for 
different types of learners in their classroom, e.g., for students whose first language is 
not English. There are specific tools and resources for English language learners, such 
as translation tools that translate between English and 14 other languages. The second 
review by Jody Gabler examines the 2005 book A Practical Guide to Using Computers 
in Language Teaching, which is targeted towards teachers who are new to using 
technology in instruction and is designed to help them integrate computer technology 
into their language teaching – from providing the rationale for doing so to numerous 
ideas for classroom activities to technical considerations for both teachers and 
administrators. 
We would like to share some good news with our readers.  First, we are delighted to welcome 
two excellent additions to our LLT team:  Trude Heift and Carla Meskill have accepted our 
invitation to become Associate Editors.  We would like to thank Rick Kern for his many years of 
outstanding service to the journal. 
 
Second, in a recently completed survey of senior experts around the world, reported at the 
Computer Assisted Language Instruction Consortium (CALICO) conference held in San 
Francisco, March 18-22, 2008, LLT was ranked highest for overall quality among 19 educational 
technology-related journals. Researchers Bryan Smith and Barbara Lafford also reported that 
more than twice as many of these experts try to publish their own work in LLT than in the next 
two highest rated journals combined.  LLT was also included in two of the European Science 
Foundation's 2007 lists of exemplary journals; the first list was for Linguistics journals, and the 
second for Pedagogical and Educational Research journals. No other journal dealing with the 
uses of technology in language teaching and learning was included in both lists. 
 
If you are not already a subscriber, please take a few minutes to fill out the form for a free 
subscription to LLT. 
One final note:  Starting with this issue, LLT will be publishing PDF files only, discontinuing the 
HTML version. We wish you all a relaxing and productive summer! 
 
Irene Thompson & Dorothy Chun 
 
1
