Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num2/call.pdf 
June 2008, Volume 12, Number 2
p. 113 
 
Copyright © 2008, ISSN 1094-3501 113
 
Call for Papers for Special Issue of LLT 
 
Theme: Technology and Learning Vocabulary 
 
Guest Editor: Tom Cobb 
 
A characteristic of learning the vocabulary of a second or foreign language is the sheer size of the task. 
This has led many pedagogical vocabulary specialists to consider possible roles for information 
technology to help with aspects of task management and organization. One has focused on the content to 
be learned, using text and corpus analysis to determine which words need to be learned for different goals 
and levels. Another has focused on the learner, providing such services as planned recycling, planned 
recontextualization, memory support, supplementary resource provision (glosses, dictionaries, and 
pictures), or production and feedback opportunities, whether machine based (cloze passages, etc.) or 
mediated (various kinds of computer mediated communications). Much of the learner oriented or tutorial 
software has evolved out of models and theories of vocabulary acquisition and growth in interesting ways. 
And yet, with so much apparent potential, it is not entirely clear that many computer based vocabulary 
support systems survive very long beyond their period of initial development and testing, or ever pass 
through an extended period of formative reinvestment of user feedback. This special issue of Language 
Learning and Technology aims to prioritize vocabulary studies that are theoretically based, empirically 
validated, and have passed through at least one cycle of formative evaluation in the hands of users. 
 
Possible submissions include but are not limited to studies of the following: 
 
• longitudinal, empirical studies of cycles of formative development of a vocabulary training system or 
support system 
• new approaches to the identification or delivery of to-be-learned lexis through text, corpus, or 
WWW-as-corpus analysis 
• approaches to realizing vocabulary learning models or theories as computer programs 
• studies of non-PC based tutorial software for some aspect of vocabulary development (cell phones, 
video games, etc.) 
• reviews of approaches to computer assisted vocabulary acquisition over the past 15 years 
 
Please send an email of intent with a 250-word abstract by September 30, 2008, to llt-editors@hawaii.edu  
 
