Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num2/speced.html 
June 2008, Volume 12, Number 2
pp. 2-6 
 
Copyright © 2008, ISSN 1094-3501 2
 
 
FROM THE SPECIAL ISSUE EDITOR 
In my book on using technology in L2 composition teaching (Bloch, 2007), I begin with 
an anecdote from one of the earliest CALL-sig (Special Interest Group) meetings at the 
International TESOL conference in the early 1980s. At a panel of some of the leaders of 
the sig, a colleague asked whether there was any evidence that computers helped 
students write better. The experts hemmed and hawed that there was no real evidence to 
prove this and there was even some evidence that students might even write less. The 
colleague responded that she couldn’t ask her dean to buy computers unless there was 
proof that they helped students write better. 
Today, we may still have to beg administrators for money, but the use of various 
technologies has become almost inevitable. The issue that teachers must ask now is: 
Given the vast number of technologies they have access to—be it hardware, software, or 
Internet technologies—which ones are most appropriate for the teaching they are 
engaged in? Teachers are overwhelmed by the number of technologies continually 
coming online. Before one technology is fully understood, a new technology is released 
that promises an even better learning experience. When I wrote my book, I feared that 
the moment the book was published, it would be outdated. In fact, a slew of new 
technologies that I had barely mentioned are now seen as potential tools for composition 
teachers. Microblogging sites like Twitter, social networking sites like Facebook, and 
new ways of integrating multimedia have become new sites for potential research. 
There is a second issue underlying the question of whether technology can help students 
write better, which has long intrigued me. Namely, that the answer to this question is 
always “it depends.” This question was first raised to me by Chris Haas (1996), who 
graduated from the same rhetoric program at Carnegie Mellon as I. Chris had done 
research on how the size and the resolution of the monitor affected the quality of the 
writing. Thus, the statement made by the panelist that sometimes students write less does 
not say anything about the inherent nature of the computer but about how it was 
designed or configured, a point that Larry Lessig (1999) would later expound upon in his 
book on the impact of technological architectures on how they are to be used. Haas also 
did research on another important factor: How do the different backgrounds of students 
affect how they use the computer? There were few "digital natives" at that time, so Haas 
focused on the different writing backgrounds of her participants, including myself. If 
you add the "teacher" factor to this mix of potential influences, especially their attitudes 
toward technology, background in computers and in writing, and their goals and plans 
for implementation, we can see that any answer to the question of how a particular 
technology affects student writing may not be generalizable from one situation to 
another. 
Despite the inability to give a definitive, universal answer to the question "How does 
technology affect student writing?" we still pursue an answer. The articles published in 
this issue of Language Learning & Technology represent some of the most recent 
attempts to address the question.  Being guest editor of this issue has allowed me to step 
out of my often confining job as a composition teacher in a large American university to 
see how different technologies are being used around the world. What frankly surprised 
me was that the great majority of abstracts initially submitted for this issue came from 
teachers working in EFL contexts, which, on second thought, should not be so surprising 
considering the tremendous growth in the use of technologies, as well as a strong  
Joel Bloch From the Special Issue Editor 
 
 
 
optimism in their potential, in countries where English is not the dominant language.  
The growth of the Internet has provided a means for helping teachers deal with a variety 
of problems that have long concerned them: how to find authentic discourse, how to 
create authentic interactions, how to extend the audience for student writers, and how to 
access programs that were once locked behind gated walls. The Internet has clearly 
become the dominant technology for facilitating interactions among students, between 
students and teachers, and between native and nonnative speakers. There are also more 
macro-level issues as well that have contributed to the interest in using technologies in 
language learning. 
There has been a growing recognition of the important role technology can play in social 
and economic development. Nicholas Negroponte (1995) and Harold Rheingold (2003) 
have written extensively on the impact of technology in Asian countries, where three of 
the articles in this issue were written. One of these is from Korea, which has the highest 
per capita wireless penetration, although the research was conducted in the United 
States. A fourth article is set in Israel, which has the highest per capita number of start-
up technology companies in the world. All of these social, historical, and economic 
factors have contributed to the growing interest and acceptance of technology in the 
composition classroom. 
Another factor that intrigued me after reading all the submitted abstracts was which 
technologies were of greatest interest. What initially surprised me was that there was 
very little interest in what we call Web 2.0 technologies. Web 2.0 is a somewhat 
controversial term that refers to a growing number of technologies that allow users to 
become both consumers and producers of web content. Using Web 2.0 technologies in 
the composition classroom can have a tremendous impact since they can be used not 
only to help students with their print-based writing but also to help them become literate 
using a variety of technologies. There has been a growing interest in these technologies 
in L2 composition, and there have been a number of online conferences or convergences 
sponsored by Webheads in Action, as well as online courses supported by the TESOL 
Electronic Village Online, which have focused heavily on the use of Web 2.0 
technologies. My own fear of writing an outdated book was partly based on the feeling 
that I had spent too much time on some of the "older" technologies, like chat rooms or 
web page design, and not enough on Web 2.0 at a time when books that focused solely 
on Web 2.0 were being published. 
After giving some thought to why there were so few Web 2.0 abstracts, the explanation 
was not too surprising. Although I have taught ESL composition for many years, my 
educational background is primarily in L1 composition theory. One of the differences I 
have sensed, without too much hard evidence, is that L1 composition has become more 
technologically driven while L2 composition has remained more problem-driven. As I 
have tried to show in my research, these two areas are not incompatible, but the 
differences between them can affect not only the nature of the research but also what 
types of students are being studied. Much L1 composition research has focused on the 
usefuless of the newest technologies for advanced-level students or those aiming for a 
professional writing career, as such students are likely to require the technology in future 
work. On the other hand, ESL teachers, who rarely teach students at such an advanced 
level, are more concerned with students who have difficulties in their writing ability. 
The result has been that L2 research has focused in much greater depth on those 
technologies that were thought to be most useful for solving the problems students 
Language Learning & Technology 3
Joel Bloch From the Special Issue Editor 
 
 
 
have. Although there has been a lot of anecdotal evidence concerning potential, there has 
been little formal research on how twittering or creating Facebook pages help develop 
student writing at any level. 
Of the four articles in this issue, three of them address older technologies and one a 
relatively new one. The authors of these articles all work in an EFL context. These 
papers are problem-centered and address not so much whether technologies can improve 
the writing product but rather the writing process. All these papers share one other 
quality: they all deal with the implementation of a technology and the interrelationship 
of the architecture of the technology, its use in the writing classroom, and the 
backgrounds of its users. Although none of these papers can conclude anything 
definitive about the beneficial effects of using the technology, they all find that its 
usefulness depends heavily on the interaction of these factors. 
Yoon’s paper is the second of a series she has written on the implementation of a 
concordancing program in an advanced graduate-level composition course (Yoon & 
Hirvela, 2004). Her work reflects the evolution of the use of concordancing. While 
initially the domain of linguistic researchers, the development of Internet-based 
programs like Collins Cobuild, has allowed teachers to use concordancing first as a 
means to develop teaching materials and more recently as a tool for student use. Yoon 
examines how students used the concordancing program to search for strings of 
grammatical items and collocational relationships. She finds that differences among 
student attitudes, backgrounds, and writing experiences affect how they used the 
program and how they viewed its effectiveness. She does not address whether the 
student writing had improved, something that could not really be addressed, but rather 
how the use of concordancing could improve the writing processes of the students, 
which could in turn improve their future writing. Finally, she reminds us that we are 
dealing with technologies that can, and often do, crash and how this instability can affect 
students’ perception and use of technology. 
Kol and Schcolnik discuss an often-used technology: asynchronous discourse. Interest in 
asynchronous discourse has often been eclipsed by the newer, Web 2.0 technologies 
such as blogging. However, as Kol and Schcolnik demonstrate, asynchronous discourse 
can be an important tool for generating ideas and reflecting on these ideas. As in Yoon’s 
paper, the technology can provide a space where students can reflect on particular 
aspects of their writing processes. But perhaps the most important aspect of this paper is 
how the technology facilitates interaction in an academic writing class. As Kol and 
Schcolnik argue, interaction can be difficult in a class where none of the students are 
native English speakers. However, interaction is essential in the kinds of argumentative 
writing assignments Kol and Schcolnik have their students write. Argumentative writing 
requires a dialogue with those who agree with you, those who disagree, and those in the 
middle. Although Kol and Schcolnik do not show whether the use of asynchronous 
discourse can produce better argumentative papers, they do show how it can produce a 
more robust process of invention, which, as has long been argued, can facilitate a more 
sophisticated level of argumentation. 
Xing, Wang, and Spencer deal with a more controversial problem: the question of how a 
technology can be used to teach Chinese-speaking students the appropriate rhetorical 
forms found in Western academic writing. Both synchronous and asynchronous 
technologies have been popular in second language learning to link native and nonnative 
Language Learning & Technology 4
Joel Bloch From the Special Issue Editor 
 
 
 
speakers. Xing, Wang, and Spencer take this a step further to explore whether these 
technologies can be used to teach academic rhetoric. They situate their research in the 
controversy over contrastive rhetoric. The study of contrastive rhetoric, which has been 
fiercely debated since the publication of Robert Kaplan’s (1966) seminal paper, 
compares the rhetoric of the student’s home culture to the rhetoric of the target language 
to attempt to explain how the former may influence the latter, often in negative ways (cf. 
Bloch & Chi, 1995). Proponents of contrastive rhetoric assume that speakers of one 
language transfer rhetorical forms from their home language to their second language. 
They argue that Chinese speakers learn a form of rhetoric that if transferred into their 
English-language writing may be difficult for English-language readers to follow or may 
be inappropriate in that particular genre. Proponents typically find, as Kol and Schcolnik 
also found, that they can use technology to create a cooperative learning environment 
that can help students develop their writing. 
While Xing et al. tackle a controversial topic, Chen and Cheng examine one of the most 
controversial technologies, namely, Automated Writing Evaluation (AWE) programs. 
These programs were first developed to evaluate student essays submitted in high stakes 
testing programs to reduce the need for qualified teachers to serve as evaluators. 
Proponents have argued that their evaluations correlate highly with those of human 
evaluators. Opponents have criticized and even ridiculed AWE programs on the grounds 
that they promote false criteria for evaluating student papers. Chen and Cheng propose a 
different direction for using these programs -- as a way of providing feedback for 
students. Their research raises two old questions about CALL. The first is whether 
technology can replace teachers. The second is whether technology should be used to 
relieve teachers of certain tasks, so they have time for other, perhaps more important, 
aspects of teaching. AWE programs cannot, of course, replace teachers, but this paper 
asks whether they can provide extra rounds of feedback that could help students in 
revising their papers. Chen and Cheng do not find a definitive answer to this question. 
What they do find is how various teacher and student factors might have to be 
considered in searching for the answer. As in Yoon’s paper, both student attitudes and 
teacher attitudes can have a tremendous effect on whether the technology can be useful. 
The articles in this issue provide an important perspective on how teachers can match 
the problems they are facing with the appropriate technology and how that choice of 
technology can affect how a course is taught. These articles demonstrate various ways in 
which the introduction of a technology is never a neutral act but can be affected by a 
variety of factors ranging from student/teacher attitudes to the architecture of the 
technology and how stable it is.  
Before concluding my commentary, I must give kudos to Mark Warschauer, who 
founded the journal, and Dorothy Chun and Irene Thompson, who have valiantly 
maintained it, for their vision of the importance of an open access, online journal long 
before being "open and online" was cool. As a reviewer, I have frequently seen 
potentially interesting articles that suffer from the author’s lack of access to the latest 
journals whose growing costs make them difficult for individuals or libraries to own. In 
the age of the Internet, there has been a tremendous push for freeing information from 
behind real or virtual gates that deny universal access so that it could be used by anyone 
who has access to the Internet, regardless of where they live. Richard Stallman has 
defined this freedom as being "free as in free speech, not as a free beer", by which he 
means that information should be made available so that anybody can use it and develop 
it (Williams, 2002). Universities such as MIT and Carnegie Mellon have made 
Language Learning & Technology 5
Joel Bloch From the Special Issue Editor 
 
Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
course materials available for anyone to study. Personally, it makes me feel good that 
when someone asks me for an article, I can give them a link rather than having to 
download a file from behind a password-protected website to which I have the privilege 
of unlimited access. No more worries that I’m in violation of the Digital Millennium 
Copyright Act (DMCA) for bypassing the journal’s copy protection. danah boyd (that’s 
how she spells her name) has argued that those who can should only publish in open 
access journals and that everyone should cite articles from such journals in order to raise 
their profile in the academic world. I don’t know if open access is the future of academic 
publishing, but I am thankful that Dorothy and Irene have given me the opportunity to 
participate in this endeavor. 
I would also like to thank all the reviewers not only for their time but also for their 
patience and perspective in helping us shape the articles that appear in this issue. I would 
like to thank Rick Kern for all his help in putting this issue together, and, most of all, I 
would like to thank Hunter Hatfield, without whom this issue might still be floating 
around Cyberspace. 
 
Sincerely, 
Joel Bloch 
 
REFERENCES 
Bloch, J., & Chi, L. (1995) A comparison of the use of citations in Chinese and English 
academic discourse. In D. Belcher & G. Braine (Eds.), Academic writing in a Second 
Language (pp. 231-274). Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
Bloch. J. (2007). Technology in the L2 composition classroom. Ann Arbor: University of 
Michigan Press. 
boyd, d. (2008, February 6). Open-access is the future: Boycott locked-down academic 
journals. Retrieved May 14, 2008, from 
http://www.zephoria.org/thoughts/archives/2008/02/06/openaccess_is_t.html. 
Haas, C. (1996). Writing technology: Studies on the materiality of literacy. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Elbaum. 
Kaplan, R. B. (1966). Cultural thought patterns in intercultural education. Language 
Learning, 16, 1-20. 
Lessig, L. (1999). Code and other laws of cyberspace. New York: Basic Books.  
Negroponte, N. (1995). Being digital. New York: Knopf 
Rheingold, H. (2003). Smart mobs: The next social revolution. Cambridge, MA: 
Perseus. 
Williams, S. (2002). Free as in freedom: Richard Stallman’s crusade for free software. 
O’Reilly & Associates, Sebastopol, CA. 
Yoon, H., & Hirvela, A. (2004). ESL student attitudes toward corpus use in L2 writing. 
Journal of Second Language Writing, 13(4), 257-283.  
 
6
