Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num2/review1/ 
June 2008, Volume 12, Number 2
pp. 17-25 
 
Copyright © 2008. ISSN 1094-3501 17
REVIEW OF netTrekker d.i. 
Title netTrekker d.i. 
Platform All capable of supporting the designated browsers. 
Software requirements Netscape 5 or higher, or 
Internet Explorer 6 or higher, or 
Firefox (recommended), or 
Safari 
Flash Player 9 or higher 
Publisher Thinkronize Inc. 
Support offered FAQ list, contact options, and help links 
Target language English 
Target audience K-12 students and teachers  
Price $1,595 per school building per year. Multiple building and district 
discounts are available. 
Publication Year 2005 
Review by Leslie Huff, Washington State University 
Today’s public school classrooms aim at educating an extremely diverse population of students. Sitting 
side by side in the same classroom, mainstream classrooms are likely to have advanced learners, students 
whose first language is not English, struggling readers, and other students who, for a vast array of 
reasons, do not fit the mold of average students. Addressing the wide range of learning needs of this 
diverse population is essential if all students are to succeed academically. One approach that helps 
teachers identify and target the needs and strengths of their students is differentiated instruction.  
Differentiated instruction is a student-centered method of teaching that emphasizes an active, meaning-
focused approach to education (Tomlinson & Allan, 2000). It highlights the importance of scaffolding, 
student engagement, and student choice to promote learning for all students, regardless of their age, 
ability, interests, or linguistic backgrounds. Similar to a common strategy used in language teaching, a 
key component of differentiated instruction is providing materials at multiple levels of ability so that all 
students are challenged but still feel information is accessible at their level. Research support for this 
component has long shown that the most efficient learning takes place when learners are neither bored nor 
anxious (Howard, 1994; Jensen, 1998) and when the challenge inherent in the task matches the skills of 
the learner (Csikszentmihlyi & Csikszentmihlyi, 1988; Vygotsky, 1986). In addition, differentiated 
instruction suggests that students who require scaffolds to support their learning should have them 
available (Fitzgerald & Graves, 2004). It also addresses the needs of language learners by providing 
resources at multiple levels, scaffolding learning, and engaging students as active agents in the learning 
process.  
netTrekker d.i., a web-based, educator-evaluated search engine, provides resources that enable teachers to 
easily incorporate the elements of differentiated instruction (scaffolding, engagement, and choice) to 
maximize student learning in their classrooms. Because it is a web-based tool, netTrekker d.i. requires no 
additional set-up on the part of the school or teacher. Teachers and students access netTrekker d.i. in a 
school computer lab or a single computer classroom depending on how they choose to use the search 
engine and what technology is available. Schools simply use a user name and password to access the 
search engine. Although NetTrekker d.i. has specific components that focus on English language learners 
(ELLs), it is not intended as a tool only for ELLs; all students can benefit from its incorporation into the 
curriculum. It is convenient and easy for both teachers and students to use. Overall, netTrekker d.i. is a 
highly effective and useful tool in differentiating classroom instruction.
Leslie Huff Review of netTrekker d.i. 
 
netTrekker d.i. provides scaffolds that help teachers and students navigate the search engine to find 
appropriate learning material. By dividing subjects by school level (elementary, middle, and high school), 
netTrekker d.i. makes information on pertinent subjects easily accessible. It also helps to differentiate 
instruction by providing readability ratings for the Web sites it houses within each school level. These 
readability ratings have been assessed by educators based on composite scores of standard, long-used 
readability formulas and frameworks including the Automated Readability Index (Senter & Smith, 1967), 
the Flesch-Kincaid Index (Flesch, 1948), the Gunning Fog Index (Gunning, 1968), the McLaughlin 
SMOG Readability Formula (McLaughlin, 1969), and the Lexile Framework for Reading (MetaMetrics, 
2008). netTrekker d.i. assigns a one to five readability rating to each Web site included in its search 
engine based on the average scores from these readability assessments (netTrekker d.i., 2005). Additional 
readability assessments have been made through formulas based on grade level expectations. Because 
readability ratings are presented for each site in a search, teachers and students can easily recognize 
material that matches a student’s reading level. Figure 1 shows how readability ratings are presented on 
netTrekker d.i.   
 
Figure 1. Screenshot of netTrekker d.i.’s Readability ratings. 
In fact, scaffolding is one area in which netTrekker d.i. truly excels. From the very first page, teachers and 
students visit, visual clues are provided with illustrated subject markers to help students guide their 
search. Figure 2 shows the scaffolds provided on the initial search page for ESL learners, which is similar 
Language Learning & Technology 18
Leslie Huff Review of netTrekker d.i. 
 
to that for other learners. For example, users can search by subject or grade level, and, once they have 
found sites that specifically address the topic they are looking for, they can search by readability rating for 
a site that fits their needs. 
 
 
Figure 2. Initial subject page for ESL learners. 
netTrekker d.i. also provides a dictionary hotlink through which every word on a site is linked to an 
online English-English dictionary. Students can click on a word and find the definition, part of speech, or 
pronunciation instantaneously. There is also a "read-aloud" function that allows students to listen to 
words, phrases, or entire texts that they highlight. The read-aloud function also works with the dictionary 
definitions that students may have accessed through hotlinks. This read-aloud function offers dual mode 
support for struggling readers, pronunciation exposure for language learners, and verification for students 
who are unsure of a particular word or phrase they are reading. The read-aloud function can be used to 
support understanding during any search for information using netTrekker d.i.  Additional resource links, 
such as maps, encyclopedias, and grammar guides, are also available to help scaffold learning. 
To maximize student engagement, and thereby learning, it is important to tap into the diverse interests of 
students. The netTrekker d.i. database houses over 180,000 web sites to support the learning interests of a 
diverse student population. NetTrekker d.i. compiles web sites on its search engine through proactive 
exploration and user recommendations. This variety of sites allows students and teachers to choose 
resources providing opportunities that may increase interest-based motivation in learning. While many of 
the sites available through netTrekker d.i. could be accessed through other search engines, searching 
netTrekker d.i. provides a level of security for teachers and parents because all sites on netTrekker d.i. 
Language Learning & Technology 19
Leslie Huff Review of netTrekker d.i. 
 
have been reviewed by educators. Students searching netTrekker d.i. will not happen upon inappropriate 
sites when they are trying to find information for their school work. Once students have netTrekker d.i. 
accounts, they can access the search engine from any computer with an Internet connection, including 
computers at home, in public libraries, and any other location. As noted previously, unlike other 
commonly used search engines, netTrekker d.i. rates each site for readability and provides read-aloud 
options for students who struggle with reading comprehension. Moreover, only academically relevant, 
age-appropriate sites are available to students.  
A search for "hydrosphere" provides an example of the variety of sites and learning resources available 
through netTrekker d.i. (Figure 3).  Seventy-eight different sites about the earth’s hydrosphere are 
available for elementary school students and teachers to access.  
 
Figure 3. Partial results from a search for hydrosphere sites. 
The sites provide information on oceans, rivers, deltas, and other water formations, as well as about 
particular habitats or animals in and around the water, the water cycle, and many other water-related 
topics. The variety available to students allows them to learn about the hydrosphere by exploring their 
own interests. This is essential to learning because interesting tasks motivate learners to be more engaged 
in learning and the learning process (Meltzer & Hamann, 2004; Tomlinson & Allan, 2000). Interesting 
tasks can also lead to students becoming more autonomous in their learning (Tomlinson & Allan, 2000). 
Additionally, students begin at an early age to access information from a variety of sources and integrate 
Language Learning & Technology 20
Leslie Huff Review of netTrekker d.i. 
 
the information they find, thereby helping them develop important academic skills such as critical 
thinking and synthesis.   
Another example of a resource that provides opportunities for students to be engaged in their learning is 
netTrekker d.i.’s "people search." This function allows for searches by name, era, occupation, gender, 
and/or heritage. It lets teachers provide broad parameters for an assignment, such as "research a 20th 
century female artist" or "find a prominent humanitarian and research his/her work," and allows students 
to discover people whom they find exciting, intriguing, or otherwise motivating to study. Through the 
people search on netTrekker d.i., students, even ELLs, have a high likelihood of success in finding 
someone who fits the criteria of an assignment and who interests them personally. Offering multiple 
categories to search for people presents students with an opportunity to follow choices that interest them 
and allows them to learn in ways that best suit their learning styles, more fully explained below. Figure 4 
shows some of the categories available for searching on the netTrekker d.i. people search. As with other 
searches on netTrekker d.i., many of the people and web sites found in a famous people search could be 
found via other search engines, but the navigational scaffolds along with the reading scaffolds that 
netTrekker d.i. offers provide students, especially those with limited L2 reading and language skills, with 
a likelihood of success and assistance understanding what they find. Moreover, what they find through 
netTrekker d.i. will be appropriate, accurate, and comprehensive.  
 
 
Figure 4. NetTrekker d.i.’s Famous Person Search options. 
Language Learning & Technology 21
Leslie Huff Review of netTrekker d.i. 
 
Equally important to interest-based choice, or what students learn, is the choice of information sources, or 
how students learn. Students vary greatly in their learning styles and preferences, and netTrekker d.i. is a 
tool that supplies learners with resources from which they can learn and discover sites that best suit their 
individual learning needs. Whether students are auditory, visual, or kinesthetic learners, the Web sites 
housed in the netTrekker d.i. database offer learners choices of media/mode that support their learning 
preferences. For example, netTrekker d.i. embraces multiple styles of learning by incorporating sites with 
interactive, informational, visual, and auditory instructions and activities. Teachers and students can 
choose a site that matches students’ learning styles simply by selecting an image search, clicking on a site 
at the appropriate reading level in a Web search, or reading the short synopsis of the site on the search 
results page. Language learners can use the "legend," located below the synopsis, to find Web sites that 
support their learning with visual content cues by checking for videos, charts, and picture symbols. 
The hydrosphere sites mentioned previously are good examples of the variety of learning strategies 
offered through netTrekker d.i. links. The hydrosphere sites offer a range of readability levels (from level 
2 to level 5) and provide additional information through hyperlinked texts, visuals (e.g., photos, diagrams, 
maps), videos, guided activities (e.g., brainstorming, drawing, poetry writing), animated systems/cycles, 
and other forms of instruction. Having access to such variety helps all learners gain access to information 
about the subject and enhances their individual learning by using learning activities and modes that 
teachers and learners agree best suit the learners’ needs.  
netTrekker d.i. can be used for an array of classroom activities to meet a variety of goals. For example, in 
order to find the characteristics of sedimentary rock formations, students can work in pairs to find the 
similarities and differences among these formations. One partner reads the information while the other 
takes notes. Or, in order to investigate an assigned planet, groups can use netTrekker d.i. and present the 
information to the class later on a poster, or in a skit or presentation. Or perhaps individual students can 
use netTrekker d.i. to investigate a specific event of the American Civil Rights Movement about which 
they will write a newspaper article, or language learners can compare an event or person from their 
home country or culture with one from the American Civil Rights Movement. At times when students are 
finished with seatwork early, netTrekker d.i. can be used to learn more about a topic discussed in class. 
Language learners can use downtime to complete listening or reading tasks on Web sites accessed 
through netTrekker d.i.’s ESL learner’s search. The opportunities for learning with netTrekker d.i. and its 
uses in the classroom are plentiful. Once students understand how to search, they need only the topic or 
parameters of their inquiry to begin using netTrekker d.i. in their learning. netTrekker d.i. can be used as 
a resource for structured classroom activities, independent learning opportunities, and guided research-
based learning.  
More important for teachers of English language learners, netTrekker d.i. offers an entire section devoted 
to the special needs of ESL learners. It includes a search option that covers the same subjects available to 
all learners, plus extra subjects devoted to developing language skills and cultural understanding, such as 
holidays and traditions from a variety of countries. Web sites that focus on the four skills taught in a 
traditional language learning setting (i.e., reading, writing, speaking, and listening) are available through 
the netTrekker d.i. ESL learners’ search. The language learning sites include visual and aural depictions 
of pronunciation, read-and-listen activities, and other multimodal instructional techniques. Figure 5 shows 
an example of a pronunciation site housed on netTrekker d.i. 
As another specific resource for ESL students, netTrekker d.i. offers language translation tools which 
translate between English and 14 other languages. The translation tools include children’s and picture 
dictionaries, allowing students to obtain meaning without necessarily having to read. Furthermore, many 
content areas, including math, history, and geography, also have Spanish or other language sites linked to 
support content area learning. The benefits of developing a learner’s first language as a means of 
promoting second language knowledge is well documented (Crawford, 2004; Herrera & Murry, 2005). 
These kinds of supports and scaffolds provide students of limited English proficiency with avenues for 
Language Learning & Technology 22
Leslie Huff Review of netTrekker d.i. 
 
success despite linguistic barriers. Figure 2 above shows the subject page for ESL learners and the 
pictorial guides students can use to aid them in their search.  
 
 
Figure 5. A pronunciation page accessible through netTrekker d.i.. 
Navigating through the netTrekker d.i. system is simple for all levels of learners and teachers. netTrekker 
d.i. provides visual guides to help language learners and struggling readers find what they are looking for.
netTrekker d.i. presents students with an option to save their searches so that the searches can be easily 
revisited.  The search engine provides ample scaffolding, not only for the content it displays, but also for 
the navigation of its site so that all users can guide their own learning successfully.  
As with any educational technology, netTrekker d.i. has its shortcomings. While the searches are easy to 
use and results are plentiful, the searches are not exhaustive. For example, well-known, commonly 
reported-on people, such as Jane Goodall, the famous primatologist, are included, but finding a unique, 
rarely investigated personality, such as Ruth Patrick, a limnologist specializing in water ecology and 
clean-up, is more difficult. However, this inconvenience is outweighed by the fact that what is found will 
be useful and appropriate.  
Another inconvenience may be experienced in linking to some sites.  Occasionally, links are not working 
or not able to access the sites. This does not appear to be a common problem when using netTrekker d.i., 
but it can be a source of frustration, particularly for learners and teachers on a tight schedule. netTrekker 
d.i. does provide avenues to report problems such as these to the company for remedy or removal. 
A lack of time is a common source of frustration for teachers attempting to incorporate differentiated 
instruction strategies into their classrooms while also trying to meet standardized curricular needs. Having 
Language Learning & Technology 23
Leslie Huff Review of netTrekker d.i. 
 
to locate resources that are accessible for students at a variety of levels complicates the differentiation 
process even more. netTrekker d.i. provides teachers with a plethora of resources at all levels of ability in 
one place, far superior to standard search engines. It is a convenient and effective resource that teachers 
can use to differentiate their lessons. They can use it as a tool to challenge and engage all students during 
a computer lab session, as homework, or as part of ongoing projects in the classroom, thereby maximizing 
students’ learning. netTrekker d.i. categorizes, differentiates, and scaffolds material, allowing teachers to 
focus on effectively engaging every student in learning. 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Leslie Huff is a Ph.D. candidate in the College of Education at Washington State University in Pullman, 
Washington. Her focus of study is the intersection between media, identity, and English language 
learners. 
E-mail: leslie_huff@wasu.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Crawford, J. (2004). Educating English learners: Language diversity in the classroom, (5th ed.). Los 
Angeles: Bilingual Education Services. 
Csikszentmihlyi, I., & Csikszentmihlyi, M. (1988). Optimal experience: Psychological studies of flow in 
consciousness. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Fitzgerald, J., & Graves, M. F. (2004). Scaffolding reading experiences for English-language learners. 
Norwood, MA: Christoper-Gordon Publishers. 
Flesch, R. (1948). A new readability yardstick. Journal of Applied Psychology, 32, 221-233. 
Gunning, R. (1968). The techniques of clear writing. Philadelphia: McGraw Hill. 
Herrera, S. G., & Murry, K. G. (2005). Mastering ESL and bilingual methods: Differentiated instruction 
for culturally and linguistically diverse (CLD) students. Boston: Pearson/Allyn and Bacon 
Howard, P. (1994). An owner’s manual for the brain. Austin, TX: Leornian Press. 
Jensen, E. (1998). Teaching with the brain in mind. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and 
Curriculum Development. 
McLaughlin, G. H. (1969). SMOG grading—a new readability formula. Journal of Reading, 12, 639-946. 
Meltzer, J., & Hamann, E.T. (2004). Meeting the literacy development needs of adolescent English 
language learners through content area learning. Part One: Focus on motivation and engagement. 
Retrieved April 6, 2007, from http://www.alliance.brown.edu/db/ea_catalog.php.  
MetaMetrics, Inc. (2008) Retrieved May 9, 2008, http://www.lexile.com/EntrancePageHtml.aspx?1 
netTrekker d.i. (2005). netTrekker d.i. Readability Scores. Thinkronize, Inc. Retrieved November 15, 
2007, from http://school.nettrekker.com/tts/vocalize.epl/frontdoor/ 
Smith, E. A. & Senter, R. J. (1967). Automated readability index, AMRL-TR, 66-22. Wright-Patterson 
AFB, OH: Aerospace Medical Division. 
Tomlinson, C. B., & Allan, S. D. (2000). Leadership for differentiating schools and classrooms. 
Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. 
Language Learning & Technology 24
Leslie Huff Review of netTrekker d.i. 
 
Language Learning & Technology 25
Vygotsky, L. (1997). Thought and language. (A. Kozulin, Trans.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
 
