Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num3/chenetal/ 
October 2008, Volume 12, Number 3
pp. 93-113 
 
Copyright © 2008, ISSN 1094-3501 93
EFFECTS OF SHORT-TERM MEMORY AND CONTENT 
REPRESENTATION TYPE ON MOBILE LANGUAGE LEARNING 
Nian-Shing Chen, National Sun Yat-sen University 
Sheng-Wen Hsieh, Far East University 
Kinshuk, Athabasca University 
Due to the rapid advancements in mobile communication and wireless technologies, many 
researchers and educators have started to believe that these emerging technologies can be leveraged 
to support formal and informal learning opportunities. Mobile language learning can be effectively 
implemented by delivering learning content through mobile phones. Because the screen size of 
mobile phones is limited, the presentation of materials using different Learning Content 
Representation (LCR) types is an issue that needs to be explored. This study addresses the issue of 
content adaptation in mobile language learning environments. Two dimensions have been taken 
into consideration to identify a promising solution: instructional strategies (LCR types: written 
annotation and pictorial annotation), and learners’ cognitive models (verbal and visual short-term 
memory). Our findings show that providing learning content with pictorial annotation in a mobile 
language learning environment can help learners with lower verbal and higher visual ability 
because such learners find it easier to learn content presented in a visual rather than in a verbal form. 
Providing learning content with both written and pictorial annotation can also help learners with 
both high verbal and high visual abilities. According to the Cognitive Load Theory, providing too 
much information may produce a higher cognitive load and lead to irritation and a lack of 
concentration. Our findings also suggest that providing just the basic learning materials is more 
helpful to learners with low verbal and visual abilities. 
INTRODUCTION 
Mobile learning (m-learning) has emerged as the next generation of e-learning (Sharples, 2000). One of 
the main reasons for this is the high availability of mobile devices. The market penetration of mobile 
phones, for example, in Austria, is currently at 81% and the numbers are still increasing (Kaesshaefer, 
2004). Wikipedia (n.d.) reports that several countries now have more mobile phones than people, and that, 
in 2006, 80% of the world’s population had mobile phone coverage. A large number of people today 
carry mobile phones or other similar mobile devices with them most of the time. Thus, m-learning has the 
potential to be an important instrument for lifelong learning (Holzinger, Nischelwitzer, & Meisenberger, 
2005).  
However, some researchers still doubt the value of using mobile devices for education. They argue that 
the excitement shown by learners is temporary (Gay, Stefanone, Grace-Martin, & Hembrooke, 2001). 
Experiments have shown that some learners cannot effectively use mobile devices during their learning 
(Hsi, 2003). Researchers typically agree that mobile devices such as PDAs and mobile phones serve only 
as an extension for learning; they do not replace existing learning tools (Liu, Wang, Liang, Chan, Ko & 
Yang, 2003). Moreover, not all learning content and activities are suitable for mobile devices (Gay et al., 
2001). There seems to be no consensus among researchers over the learning outcomes facilitated by 
mobile devices.  
Some researchers have concluded that if Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) for 
education can incorporate related learning theories and instructional strategies, the learning outcomes can 
be improved significantly (Riffell & Sibley, 2005; Clark, 1994; Wiredu, 2005). Meanwhile, Alavi and 
Leidner (2001) reported that a majority of previous studies have mainly relied on the stimulus-response 
theory, which probed only the relationship between information technology (stimulus) and learning 
outcome (response); future studies should also take learners’ characteristics into consideration in 
Nian-Shing Chen, Sheng-Wen Hsieh, and Kinshuk Short-Term Memory and Content Representation Type 
 
Language Learning & Technology 94
assessing the learning outcome of technology-mediated learning. Alavi and Leidner also pointed out that 
the Psychological Learning Process (PLP) of learners is an important mediator that cannot be neglected. 
Therefore, we wanted to re-examine how learners’ PLP would affect the learning outcome in a mobile 
language learning environment. This research explored the learning outcomes of mobile language 
learning based on the PLP. 
According to the cognitive information processing viewpoint, human beings absorb and apply knowledge 
via the internal PLP, which includes observation, attention, identification, transformation and 
memorization. The basic architecture of the cognitive information processing model is the Multi-Store 
Model (Atkinson & Shiffrin, 1968). This model consists of three types of memory: Sensory Memory, 
Short-Term Memory (STM) and Long-Term Memory (LTM). Previous research has shown that L2 
reading skills are highly correlated with STM ability (Geva & Ryan, 1993; Harrington & Sawyer, 1992). 
Abu-Rabia (2003) found significant correlations between STM ability and L2 writing proficiency as 
measured by a test of written language. 
Baddeley proposed a new representation of STM, called the Working Memory Model (WMM), shown 
in Figure 1, which states that external information is actually processed in three different parts when it 
enters into STM via sensory memory (Baddeley, 2003). Baddeley describes the WMM as a system 
composed of one Central Executive with three subsystems, including the Phonological Loop (PL), the 
Visuo-Spatial Sketch Pad (VSSP), and the Episodic Buffer (Figure 1), where information is not only 
temporarily stored but is also processed simultaneously. The darker areas represent long-term or 
crystallized knowledge and the lighter ones represent working memory. That is, the Multi-Store Model 
views STM only as storage, whereas the WMM views STM not only as storage, but also as a system
different kinds of processing power. If learners are provided with suitable Learning Content 
Representation (LCR) types that favor their different STM processing abilities (Courtney, 1998; Fuste
1994; MacGregor, 1987; Miller, 1956), can we then produce better learning performance? This l
very important implication that different learners have different STM processing abilities. STM abilit
this paper refers to the PL STM ability and VSSP STM ability. In general, we can say that PL STM 
ability refers to verbal ability and VSSP STM ability refers to
 with 
r, 
eads to a 
y in 
 visual ability.  
 
Figure 1. Working Memory Model (Baddeley, 2003). 
Nian-Shing Chen, Sheng-Wen Hsieh, and Kinshuk Short-Term Memory and Content Representation Type 
 
According to the above analysis of the literature, it is evident that the learner’s STM ability is an 
important issue for studying learning outcomes and that examining learning outcomes from just the MSM 
viewpoint is not appropriate. We therefore want to examine learning outcomes in m-learning using STM 
ability from the Working Memory Model viewpoint, which includes both storage and processing abilities. 
To achieve this goal, another important issue to consider is how to transfer information from STM into 
LTM for longer retention. The Levels of Processing Theory (Cermak & Craik, 1979; Craik, 2002) states 
that a memory trace can persist in LTM if it involves a deeper level of processing. Many research efforts 
based on the Levels of Processing Theory have been published in the literature. Among them, the use of 
annotations as instructional strategies in vocabulary learning has been very popular (e.g., Plass, Chun, 
Mayer, & Leutner, 1998). There are two major types of annotation: pictorial and written (Al-Seghayer, 
2001). In addition, studies of vocabulary learning strategies such as the use of word annotations (Cohen, 
1981; Taylor & Taylor, 1990) and keyword annotations (Courtney, 1998; Pressley, Levin & Miller, 1982) 
have been shown to require deeper processing of word meanings and to enhance retention of target words. 
In this study, we investigate the use of pictorial annotations and written annotations as the instructional 
strategies. We call these two types of annotation Learning Content Representation types. 
The Dual-Coding Theory says that learning is more effective when learners use more than one sensory 
modality, for instance, verbal and visual processing together, and when connections are clearly made 
between information contained in each modality (Mayer & Sims, 1994). We therefore hypothesize that 
providing multi-sensory learning content by combining written and pictorial annotation will have a 
differential effect on the learning performance of students with different verbal and visual abilities. 
Moreover, from the Cognitive Load Theory perspective (Sweller, 1994), information may only be stored 
in LTM after first being attended to and processed by STM. STM, however, is extremely limited in both 
capacity and duration. These limitations will, under some conditions, impede learning (Sweller, 1994). 
For example, learners with both lower verbal and visual ability are quite different from learners with both 
higher verbal and visual ability, so we also want to know if combining both written and pictorial 
annotation would cause higher cognitive load and impede the learning performance of these learners. 
The aim of our research is to explore how to better match different instructional strategies (LCR types) 
for presenting English vocabulary learning content with learners’ individual STM ability (verbal or visual) 
using mobile phones, and examine how the relationship affects English vocabulary learning. The English 
Vocabulary Recognition and Recall (EVRR; Al-Seghayer, 2001; McDaniel & Mason, 1985) test will be 
used to assess how students use mobile phones to learn English words. 
METHODOLOGY 
Research questions 
We hypothesize that delivering written annotation-based learning content to learners with good verbal 
ability will result in better learning outcomes. Similarly, delivering picture annotation-based learning 
content to learners with good visual ability would result in better learning outcomes. Accordingly, the 
research questions posed in this study are as follows: 
• For learners with higher verbal ability and higher visual ability, will learning content with either 
written annotation or pictorial annotation result in better learning performance than basic content 
without any annotation? 
• For learners with lower verbal ability and higher visual ability, will learning content with pictorial 
annotation result in better learning outcomes than basic content without any annotation? 
• For learners with lower verbal ability and lower visual ability, will learning content with either 
written annotation or pictorial annotation result in learning outcomes significantly different from 
basic content without any annotation? 
Language Learning & Technology 95
Nian-Shing Chen, Sheng-Wen Hsieh, and Kinshuk Short-Term Memory and Content Representation Type 
 
• For learners with higher verbal ability and lower visual ability, will learning content with written 
annotation result in better learning outcomes than basic content without any annotation? 
With regard to the Dual-Coding and Cognitive Load Theories, we were also interested to see the impact 
of content with both written and pictorial annotation on learners with different STM abilities. 
Consequently, this study asked the following additional questions: 
• For learners with higher verbal ability and higher visual ability, will learning content with both 
written and pictorial annotation result in better learning outcomes than basic content without any 
annotation? 
• For learners with lower verbal ability and higher visual ability, will learning content with both written 
and pictorial annotation result in better learning outcomes than basic content without any annotation? 
• For learners with lower verbal ability and lower visual ability, will delivering learning content with 
both written and pictorial annotation result in learning outcomes significantly different from basic 
content without any annotation? 
• For learners with higher verbal ability and lower visual ability, will delivering learning content with 
both written and pictorial annotation result in better learning outcomes than basic content without any 
annotation? 
Participants 
The subjects who participated in our experiment were ESL students in four classes. Classes 1 and 2 were 
from the Industrial Technology Education Department from Kaohsiung (N=71), while Classes 3 and 4 
were from the Information Management Department of Far East University (N=85). The students were 
between 19 and 22 years of age and were all enrolled in the four classes for credit. To meet the minimum 
large sample size criterion (n = 30) for each group, the minimum sample size in our experiment needed to 
be 120 (30 × 4 = 120). However, in order to have more statistical significance, we used 160 as our sample 
size. Four subjects did not provide the necessary background information, so their data were removed 
from the study, leaving a total of 156 students.  
 
 
Figure 2. Four groups of learners classified by STM abilities 
Since each learner has a different STM ability for processing the content of different LCR types delivered 
by SMS (Short Message Service) or MMS (Multimedia Message Service), different LCR types would 
need to fit with each learner’s individual STM ability to achieve better performance. We therefore 
Language Learning & Technology 96
Nian-Shing Chen, Sheng-Wen Hsieh, and Kinshuk Short-Term Memory and Content Representation Type 
 
Language Learning & Technology 97
assigned learners to four groups according to their different STM abilities. These four groups are shown 
in the four quadrants in Figure 2 and are listed below: 
Quadrant 1 (Q1): learners with higher STM ability in both PL (verbal) and VSSP (visual) components; 
Quadrant 2 (Q2): learners with lower STM ability in PL (verbal) and higher STM ability in VSSP 
(visual); 
Quadrant 3 (Q3): learners with lower STM ability in both PL (verbal) and VSSP (visual); and 
Quadrant 4 (Q4): learners with higher STM ability in PL (verbal) and lower STM ability in VSSP (visual). 
Materials 
In order to evaluate vocabulary learning performance in m-learning, we adopted the method proposed by 
Nation (2001). The corpora used in our experiment were sampled from the most common 1000 and 2000 
vocabulary items selected from the most common 2284 words suggested by Bauman (1995).  
Before we conducted the lab experiment, we conducted a pretest to assess the students’ original English 
vocabulary abilities to avoid including words that students were already familiar with. We chose 50 words 
for testing students’ original English vocabulary ability and 24 words for the mobile vocabulary learning 
experiment. We adopted Bauman’s most common 2284 English words, which are listed based on the use-
frequency order. There are two attribute values associated with each English word. The first number 
represents its order in the list based on frequency of use, and the second number represents its frequency 
of occurrence within about one million words in the Brown Corpus (one component corpus of Bauman's 
analysis). For example, the entry <40, 2203, more> indicates that the word “more” is ranked as 40th on the 
list of use-frequency and appears 2203 times in the Brown Corpus. To obtain our 50 words for testing 
students’ original English vocabulary ability, we selected one word from every 40 words starting from the 
40th word, “more,” and continuing until 2000th word, “scenery.” Appendix 1 contains the list of these 50 
English words. The test required students to write down the Chinese meaning of each word. Their 
answers were counted as correct if the students gave at least one answer for a word with multiple 
meanings. 
After students completed the pretest, we found that most of them could get the correct answers only up to 
the 1348th word, which implies that the students’ original English vocabulary ability is at about this level. 
Therefore, we selected the 24 English words for the experiment after the 1500th word, as these were likely 
to be to unfamiliar to the students. Appendix 2 shows the list of the selected words. Each of these 24 
words was then represented in four different ways for the experiment: 
LCR type A — providing the English word with its spelling, phonetic transcription, and Chinese 
translation (no additional annotation; this is the "basic" learning material);  
LCR type B — providing the basic learning material of LCR type A, plus written annotation such as a 
sample sentence using the English word and its Chinese translation;  
LCR type C — providing the basic learning material of LCR type A, plus pictorial annotation such as a 
picture to represent the meaning of the English word;  
LCR type D — providing the basic learning material of LCR type A, plus pictorial annotation and written 
annotation.  
Examples of the four different LCR types for one English word presented on a mobile phone are shown 
in Figure 3. Types A and B are delivered by SMS and types C and D are delivered by MMS. 
Nian-Shing Chen, Sheng-Wen Hsieh, and Kinshuk Short-Term Memory and Content Representation Type 
 
 
English  
Word 
English  
Word 
English  
Word 
English  
Word 
Written 
Annotation 
Pictorial 
Annotation 
Written 
Annotation 
Pictorial 
Annotation 
Figure 3. An example of the four types of Learning Content Representation for the English word “Dig” 
Hypothesis 
Based on the previous discussion, the hypotheses in our study are as follows: 
Hypothesis 1 (H1): For learners with higher verbal ability and higher visual ability (Q1), type B or type C 
learning content will result in better learning outcomes than type A learning content.  
Hypothesis 2 (H2): For learners with lower verbal ability and higher visual ability (Q2), type C learning 
content will result in better learning outcomes than type A learning content. 
Hypothesis 3 (H3): For learners with lower verbal ability and lower visual ability (Q3), neither type B or 
type C learning content will result in learning outcomes significantly different from type A learning 
content. 
Hypothesis 4 (H4): For learners with higher verbal ability and lower visual ability (Q4), type B learning 
content will result in better learning outcomes than type A learning content. 
Based on the Dual-Coding and Cognitive Load Theories, we can hypothesize that hypotheses 5, 6, 7 and 
8, which combine both written and pictorial annotation, will benefit learners in Q1, Q2, and Q4 but not 
learners in Q3: 
Hypothesis 5 (H5): For learners with higher verbal ability and higher visual ability (Q1), type D learning 
content will result in better learning outcomes than type A learning content. 
Hypothesis 6 (H6): For learners with lower verbal ability and higher visual ability (Q2), type D learning 
content will result in better learning outcomes than type A learning content. 
Hypothesis 7 (H7): For learners with lower verbal ability and lower visual ability (Q3), type D learning 
content will not result in learning outcomes significantly different from type A learning content. 
Hypothesis 8 (H8): For learners with higher verbal ability and lower visual ability (Q4), type D learning 
content will result in better learning outcomes than type A learning content. 
Language Learning & Technology 98
Nian-Shing Chen, Sheng-Wen Hsieh, and Kinshuk Short-Term Memory and Content Representation Type 
 
Language Learning & Technology 99
Procedure 
The experimental procedure consisted of four different steps, as presented in Figure 4. The whole process 
took place in the same computer lab. 
Step One – Introduction. First, participants met with the researcher in the computer lab, where each was 
asked to fill out a background questionnaire. Then students were told that the objective of this experiment 
was to learn English vocabulary using a mobile phone. This step took about 15 minutes. 
 
Figure 4. Experimental procedures 
Step 2 – Measuring STM ability. In the second step, all participants were seated at individual computers 
for the STM ability test using the STM ability test system (Hsieh, 2006). The system design was based on 
Wright (1988) and Chen, Lee, and Chen (2005), with some modifications to fit into our study. The system 
architecture of the STM ability test and examples of written and pictorial content can be found 
in Appendix 3. There were 60 questions in this STM ability test, 30 questions for written materials and 3
for pictorial materials. Each question was presented on the computer screen for 7 seconds and the 
participants were given 5 seconds to respond. It took a total of 12 minutes (60 questions at 12 seconds 
each) to complete this step. As soon as the participants completed the STM ability test, the system 
recorded each participant’s STM ability score, which is a value converted to a standard normal 
distribution with a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1. We then divided the students into four groups, 
with 61 in Quadrant 1, 36 in Q2, 30 in Q3 and 29 in Q4. For the validity of this working memory test, 
interested readers can refer to Chen, Lee and Chen (2005). 
0 
Step 3 – Vocabulary Learning. In the third step, every participant was then immediately assigned a 
mobile phone to learn the 24 English words delivered by SMS or MMS. All participants individually read 
the English words sent out by the researcher to their mobile phones. Each participant received the same 
24 English words, 6 words for each representation type. To avoid the learning effect of representation 
types presented in a fixed order, we adopted an LS-4 design (Table 1) to deliver these four representation 
types for participants in each group. For example, participant P1 in group 1 received 6 words randomly 
selected from 24 words represented in type A format, then 6 words randomly selected from the remaining 
18 (represented in type B format), then 6 words randomly selected from the remaining 12 (represented in 
type C format) and lastly the remaining 6 words (represented in type D format). At the same time, 
participant P2 in group 1 received 6 words randomly selected from 24 words (represented in type B 
format), then 6 words randomly selected from the remaining 18 (represented in type D format), and then 6 
words randomly selected from the remaining 12 (represented in type A format) and lastly the remaining 6 
words (represented in type C format). The same procedure was applied to groups 2, 3 and 4. The average 
time set for learning one English word in the majority of L2 experiments was about 2 minutes (Jones, 
2004; Nikolova, 2002). Therefore, we allowed 50 minutes for the learners to learn the 24 English words 
in our experiment. 
 
 
 
Nian-Shing Chen, Sheng-Wen Hsieh, and Kinshuk Short-Term Memory and Content Representation Type 
 
Table 1. The LS-4 Design 
 T1 T2 T3 T4 
P1 A B C D 
P2 B D A C 
P3 C A D B 
P4 D C B A 
.. .. .. .. .. 
Pn .. .. .. .. 
Pn: Numbered variable representing a participant in a group 
Tn: Treatment of the English Vocabulary corpora 
A = LCR type A; B = LCR type B; C = LCR type C; D = LCR type D 
Step 4 – Data collection instruments. In the fourth step, after viewing the materials with which to learn 
24 English words, all participants were immediately asked to sit for the English Vocabulary Recognition 
and Recall (EVRR) test to assess their English vocabulary learning performance. These recognition and 
recall tests are often used to examine learners’ English vocabulary knowledge (Al-Seghayer, 2001). 
However, test and measurement studies indicate that these two forms of testing are quite different and 
demand separate processing strategies (Cariana & Lee, 2001; Jonassen & Tessmer, 1996). For example, 
recognition tests usually involve multiple-choice activities in which learners select or guess the correct 
response from the given alternatives. Such tests may strengthen existing memory traces (McDaniel & 
Mason, 1985). Recall, on the other hand, demands the production of responses from memory. It is more 
difficult than recognition because learners must search for the correct response within their mental 
representation of the newly experienced information (Cariana & Lee, 2001; Glover, 1989; McDaniel & 
Mason, 1985). 
Figures 5 and 6 show examples of a recognition test item and a recall test item. Participants spent 
approximately 15 minutes completing the EVRR test.  
 
Figure 5. Example of a recognition test item 
 
 
Figure 6. Example of a recall test item 
Language Learning & Technology 100
Nian-Shing Chen, Sheng-Wen Hsieh, and Kinshuk Short-Term Memory and Content Representation Type 
 
Language Learning & Technology 101
After all steps were completed, we conducted a focus group interview, for which 8 participants were 
selected. To effectively evaluate our hypotheses, the interview questions focused on our research 
hypotheses. The following is a list of questions used to assess what learners learned from participating in 
the English vocabulary learning experiment. During the interviews, learners were asked three modified 
open-ended questions that were originally proposed by Al-Seghayer (2001). We first present the original 
questions in Chinese given to students, followed by translations to English. 
中文題目: 
 
第一個討論問題，實驗中四種不同的學習內容呈現型態哪種對於單字學習與記憶最有幫助？ 
第二個討論問題，在本實驗中，您對實驗中四種不同的學習內容呈現型態哪種對於單字意義的傳
遞印象最深？ 
第三個討論問題：在本實驗的行動化學習的環境下，哪些特點幫助像你這樣的學習者進行英語學
習？ 
 
Question 1: Which one of the four LCR types is best for helping you to learn and memorize the English 
vocabulary in the experiment?  
Question 2: Which one of the four LCR types can provide better meaning about English words for you in 
the experiment?  
Question 3: What are the good features in this kind of mobile learning environment that help you, as a 
language learner, to effectively learn English vocabulary?  
The open-ended questions were used to allow more freedom of responses, to elicit more information from 
the participants, and to check the accuracy of the quantitative results. The focus group transcripts were 
reviewed by the test moderator and teaching assistants immediately after the interview. Appendix 4 
contains transcript records from the focus group interviews, which will be cited in the following analysis. 
RESULTS 
The EVRR test scores were used for assessing the learning outcome in our study. Table 2 shows the 
descriptive statistics results. We conducted the repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) for 
learners with four different STM capacities (Quadrants 1 to 4), with LCR types as independent variables 
and scores measured by the EVRR test as dependent variables. The Mauchly’s test of sphericity was 
conducted before the repeated measures analysis of variance. An important result of Mauchly’s test of 
sphericity showed that the covariance of the three within-subject variables (recognition score, recall score 
and average score) was not homogeneous. Thus, an adjusted degree of freedom statistic provided by the 
Greenhouse-Geisser correctional formula was used to do the repeated measures analysis of variance. 
Otherwise, if the result is not significant, based on the sphericity assumption, no adjustment to the degrees 
of freedom is needed (Hair, Tatham, Anderson & Black, 1998). 
A significant result of the ANOVA indicates that the mean scores of the four LCR types (A, B, C and D) 
are not equal. In such a case, a post-treatment pair-wise comparison is used to compare the mean scores of 
the four types. Conversely, a result that is not significant indicates that the mean scores of the four 
different types are equal. Based on the result shown in Table 3, the pair-wise comparison was not 
needed. Table 4 shows the analysis results with respect to the eight hypotheses. 
 
Nian-Shing Chen, Sheng-Wen Hsieh, and Kinshuk Short-Term Memory and Content Representation Type 
 
 
 
Table 2. Descriptive Statistics of the Four Research Hypotheses 
 
* Mean scores are presented as percentages 
Table 3. Results of Repeated Measures ANOVA 
 
 
The analysis results for H1 in Table 4 show the following: 
1. EVRR scores of learners who were presented with information as LCR type B (p = 0.000) or type C (p 
= 0.000) were significantly better than the scores of learners who were presented with information as 
LCR type A in the recognition test; 
2. EVRR scores of learners who received information as either LCR type B (p = 0.006) or type C (p = 
0.011) were significantly better than the scores of learners who received information as LCR type A in the 
recall test. The same result also appeared in average scores for type B (p = 0.000) and type C (p = 0.000). 
Language Learning & Technology 102
Nian-Shing Chen, Sheng-Wen Hsieh, and Kinshuk Short-Term Memory and Content Representation Type 
 
Therefore, we can conclude that H1 is accepted. This implies that learners with higher verbal ability and 
higher visual ability can benefit from learning content that contains either written annotation or pictorial 
annotation. 
Table 4. Results of the Eight Research Hypotheses 
 
For H2, the EVRR scores of learners who received information as LCR type C were better than the scores 
of learners who received information as LCR type A (p = 0.000) in the recognition test. Moreover, 
learners who received information as LCR type C exhibited better EVRR scores than learners who 
received information as LCR type A (p = 0.000) in the recall test. Average scores of learners who 
received information as LCR type C were also better than those of learners who received information as 
Language Learning & Technology 103
Nian-Shing Chen, Sheng-Wen Hsieh, and Kinshuk Short-Term Memory and Content Representation Type 
 
LCR type A (p = 0.000). Therefore, we can conclude that the H2 is accepted. This implies that learners 
with higher visual ability can benefit from learning content that contains pictorial annotation. 
For H3, there is no significant difference in these three scores among learners who received information 
as LCR types A, B and C. Therefore, we can conclude that H3 is also accepted. This implies that learners 
with lower verbal ability and lower visual ability do not benefit from learning content containing either 
written or pictorial annotation. 
For H4, it is evident that scores of learners who received information as LCR type B are better than those 
of learners who received information as LCR types A (p = 0.000) and C (p = 0.005) in the recognition test. 
However, this is not the case in the recall test. Therefore, we can conclude that the H4 is only partially 
accepted. This implies that learners with higher verbal ability benefit from learning content containing 
written annotation with regard to recognition. 
For H5, we found that recognition scores of the learners who received information as LCR type D were 
better than those of learners who received information as LCR type A (p = 0.000) and that recall scores of 
learners who received information as LCR type D were also better than those of learners who received 
information as LCR type A (p = 0.001). In addition, the average scores of learners who received 
information as LCR type D were better than those of learners who received information as LCR type A (p 
= 0.000). Therefore, we can conclude that H5 is accepted. This implies that learners with higher verbal 
ability and higher visual ability can benefit from learning content containing combined written and 
pictorial annotation. 
For H6, recognition scores of learners who received information as LCR type D were better than those of 
learners who received information as LCR type A (p = 0.000). However, in the recall test, scores of 
learners who received information as LCR type D were not significantly better than those of learners who 
received information as LCR type A. Average scores of learners who received information as LCR type D 
were better than those of learners who received information as LCR type A (p = 0.002). Therefore, we 
can conclude that H6 is only partially accepted. This implies that learners with higher visual ability can 
benefit only somewhat from learning content containing combined written and pictorial annotation with 
regard to recognition. 
For H7, there was no significant difference in the scores of learners who received information as LCR 
types A and D on both the recognition and recall tests. Therefore, we can conclude that H7 is also 
accepted. This implies that learners with lower verbal ability and lower visual ability do not benefit from 
learning content containing both written and pictorial annotation. 
Table 5. Focus Interview Participants 
Code Age STM ability Quadrant Average Score of LCR type Verbal Visual 1 2 3 4 all 
SB-1-W 20 0.847 1.127 1 50.0 41.7 66.7 58.3 54.2 
SB-1-B 20 1.080 0.790 1 92.0 100.0 91.7 91.7 93.8 
SB-2-W 20 -0.458 0.772 2 58.3 33.3 58.3 38.3 47.1 
SB-2-B 23 -0.046 0.618 2 83.3 83.3 91.7 91.7 87.5 
SB-3-W 20 -0.425 -0.364 3 58.3 50.0 33.3 25.0 41.7 
SB-3-B 21 -0.078 -0.696 3 92.0 83.3 91.7 83.3 87.5 
SB-4-W 23 0.587 -0.217 4 37.5 30.0 25.0 43.0 33.9 
SB-4-B 20 0.671 -0.022 4 83.0 91.7 66.7 66.7 77.1 
SB refers to the subjects who participated in the mobile learning experiment. 
Number refers to the quadrant to which the subject belongs. 
W refers to the worst EVRR test score. 
B refers to the best EVRR test score. 
Language Learning & Technology 104
Nian-Shing Chen, Sheng-Wen Hsieh, and Kinshuk Short-Term Memory and Content Representation Type 
 
Language Learning & Technology 105
 
Finally, for H8, recognition scores of learners who received information as LCR type D were better than 
the scores of learners exposed to LCR type A (p = 0.000). However, in the recall test, scores of learners 
who received information as LCR type D were not significantly better than those of learners who received 
information as LCR type A. The average scores of learners who received information as LCR type D 
were also better than those of learners who received information as LCR type A (p = 0.000). Therefore, 
we can conclude that H8 is only partially accepted. This implies that learners with higher verbal ability 
can benefit only somewhat from learning content containing both written and pictorial annotation with 
regard to recognition. 
Focus group interviews were also conducted to acquire qualitative evidence to support the results from 
the quantitative experiment. Eight participants were selected from the 156 participants by using the 
extreme or deviant case sampling method. The background information on these participants is shown 
in Table 5. For the sake of privacy, Table 5 uses a coding scheme (SB-Quadrant-EDCS) to replace the 
real names of the students. SB means subject, Quadrant is the number of STM ability Quadrant, and W 
and B of EDCS are the lowest and highest scores on the EVRR test. 
Focus Group Interview Results  
Transcripts of interviews (provided in Appendix 4) with the Q1 students revealed that the students felt 
that written or pictorial annotation can provide better learning outcomes (SB-1-B-83) than no annotation 
(SB-1-W-62). The Q2 students felt that pictorial annotation can provide better learning effects (SB-2-B-
50), more cues (SB-2-B-52), more attractive content (SB-2-W-85), and better representation than words 
(SB-2-B-81). These are the qualitative findings to support H1 and H2. The Q3 students show that the 
feedbacks on the four LCR types are similar (SB-3-B-68). When student SB-3-W saw a lot of written 
annotation or pictorial annotation, the student felt irritated and unable to concentrate on learning (SB-3-
W-78). This may be the result of the learner’s insufficient STM. For learners in Q3 (those with lower 
verbal ability and lower visual ability), more annotation causes a higher cognitive load in their STM, 
according to the Cognitive Load Theory, and prevents those learners from learning. The Q4 students all 
agree that written annotation can help them remember more English vocabulary items (SB-4-B-19). The 
qualitative findings seem to only partially support H3 and H4. 
Transcripts of interviews with the Q1 students show that the written annotation plus pictorial annotation 
can provide better learning outcomes (SB-1-B-56). The Q2 students felt that pictorial annotation can 
provide better learning outcomes and cues, and that they are more appealing. However, there are no 
qualitative findings to show that combined annotations provide better learning outcomes and cues nor that 
they are more appealing. Therefore, we can conclude that H6 is not supported qualitatively. The Q3 
students show similar feedback from the four LCR types (SB-3-B-68). The transcripts also reveal that 
even though written annotations could help learners memorize vocabulary items in a more organized way 
and understand how to remember vocabulary items (SB-3-B-46), learning outcomes in the four LCR 
types do not vary on a large scale (SB-3-B-25), and baseline group content (LCR type A) would be the 
most difficult to memorize (SB-3-B-27). So, the qualitative findings do not seem to support H7. 
Finally, transcripts of interviews with the Q4 (SB-4-B and SB-4-W) students show no support for the 
hypothesis that combined annotations provide students with better learning outcomes compared to 
students in the baseline group. Therefore, we can conclude that H8 is not supported. 
DISCUSSION 
Quantitative results suggest that learners with lower verbal ability and higher visual ability (Q2) will 
benefit more from learning content with pictorial annotation than from content with no annotation. The 
limited qualitative findings tend to support this conclusion, suggesting that pictorial annotation can help 
learning and memorizing more than no annotation. Based on both quantitative and qualitative findings, 
Nian-Shing Chen, Sheng-Wen Hsieh, and Kinshuk Short-Term Memory and Content Representation Type 
 
Language Learning & Technology 106
the most suitable method to help these learners study in the mobile language learning environment is to 
provide them with more pictorial and less written annotation. This result matches findings by Geva and 
Ryan (1993) and Harrington and Sawyer (1992). 
Results also suggest that providing basic learning materials can help learners with lower verbal and visual 
ability (Q3) to learn better. A possible reason is that, since these students do not have high verbal and 
visual abilities, providing them with too many written or pictorial annotation will increase the cognitive 
load in their STM and thus could make them irritable and unable to concentrate. According to the 
Cognitive Load Theory (Sweller, 1994), learners in such situations would probably ignore or skip the 
information that caused the overload. How much information a learner would consider to be an overload 
is a matter for further study. 
According to the research of Geva and Ryan (1993) and Harrington and Sawyer (1992), learners with 
higher verbal ability exhibit better skills for learning with verbal material. Therefore, providing them 
learning content in verbal forms would achieve better results than providing the content in nonverbal form. 
Thus, theoretically speaking, for learners with higher verbal and lower visual ability (Q4), learning 
content type B should help students achieve higher EVRR scores than learning content type A. However, 
H4 in Table 4 shows that this condition is only valid for the recognition not the recall test. Consequently, 
we should be cautious about claiming that providing this type of learner with more written annotation is a 
suitable teaching strategy in m-learning.  
Both quantitative and qualitative findings support the hypothesis that, in the mobile language-learning 
environment, learners with higher verbal and visual ability (Q1) will achieve better results from learning 
content with written and/or pictorial annotation than they would from learning content without any 
annotation. However, to what extent learners benefit from these annotations and whether or not the 
Cognitive Load Theory will affect these learners are issues worth further study. Finally, Hypotheses 5-8 
show that the effects of both the Dual Code Theory and the Cognitive Load Theory are also supported. 
The use of more than one modality by learners (learners presented with combined-annotation LCR type D 
content) is more effective than the use of single modality (learners presented with only single-annotation 
LCR type A content), such as in the case of Q1 learners. However, for the group with lower verbal and 
visual ability (Q3), learners presented with combined-annotation content (LCR type D) performed 
significantly worse than learners presented with no annotation. 
Moreover, it is interesting to note the comments from SB-4-B and SB-4-W. SB-4-B’s comment (SB-4-B-
66) explains the quantitative results and tells us why the English vocabulary recall test scores of LCR type 
B are not better than LCR type A. According to SB-4-B’s interview statement, providing more than one 
illustrative sentence could help learners to have a better learning outcome, which could result in a 
significant difference in English vocabulary recall scores. The other interesting comment was from SB-4-
W (SB-4-W-72). Evidently, SB-4-W did not see the benefits of written annotation because SB-4-W 
usually spent more time on recall when no pictorial annotation was provided. Moreover, according 
to Table 4, the SB-4-W’s verbal ability is 0.587 and visual ability is -0.217. Therefore, these two finding
prove that even if we provide written annotation to help Q4 learners (SB-4-W) who do have higher verbal 
ability, their lower visual ability could reduce the benefits of the written annotation. 
s 
CONCLUSION 
This study addresses the issue of content adaptation in mobile language learning. To identify a promising 
solution two dimensions have been taken into consideration: instructional strategies (LCR types: written 
and pictorial annotations) and learner’s cognitive type (STM ability: verbal and visual). The findings can 
contribute to the design of more effective content adaptation for mobile language learning.  
In summary, providing learning content with pictorial annotation in a mobile language learning 
environment can help learners with lower verbal and higher visual ability learn, because they are 
Nian-Shing Chen, Sheng-Wen Hsieh, and Kinshuk Short-Term Memory and Content Representation Type 
 
cognitively better equipped for learning content presented in visual form. Providing learning content with 
both written and pictorial annotation can help learners with higher verbal and visual ability. Results also 
suggest that providing basic learning materials can help learners with lower verbal and visual ability. 
According to the Cognitive Load Theory, providing this type of learner with too many written or pictorial 
annotations will only increase the cognitive load, leading to irritation and lack of concentration. 
It should be noted that, theoretically, learners with higher verbal ability should exhibit better skills for 
learning verbal material. Therefore, providing them with learning content in verbal form should achieve 
better results than providing it in a nonverbal form. However, this condition was only valid in our 
recognition but not in the recall test. Consequently, further study is needed to analyse whether providing 
this type of learner with more written annotation is indeed a suitable teaching strategy in mobile language 
learning. Our study also shows that the effects of both Dual Coding and Cognitive Load Theories are 
supported in that the use of more than one modality by the high ability learners is more effective than the 
use of a single modality. However, for learners with lower verbal and visual abilities, combined-
annotation content (LCR type D) is not suitable. 
As for future study, in order to provide a wider perspective, it could be promising to include socio-
cognitive or social constructivist theory in the curriculum design for mobile language learning. Also 
recommended is use of the same research framework to study smart phones or PDAs instead of traditional 
mobile phone devices, in order to see the differences that may arise due to the their somewhat larger 
screen size and pen-input capabilities. 
 
APPENDIX 
Appendix 1. 50 English Words Selected for Students’ Original English Vocabulary Abilities Test 
Basic English Vocabulary Test 
English words 
Mark ‘X’ if 
you don’t 
know the 
meaning of 
this word 
Write down 
the Chinese 
meaning if you 
know this 
word 
English words 
Mark ‘X’ if 
you don’t 
know the 
meaning of 
this word 
Write down 
the Chinese 
meaning if you 
know this 
word 
40 2203 more     1040 88 invite     
80 1086 find     1080 82 seed     
120 768 write     1120 77 guide     
160 611 home     1160 72 snow     
200 522 line     1200 69 passage     
240 457 report     1240 65 brain     
280 394 direct     1280 62 absolute     
320 344 body     1320 58 afford     
360 311 thus     1360 55 noise     
400 284 death     1400 52 solve     
440 262 road     1440 48 burst     
Language Learning & Technology 107
Nian-Shing Chen, Sheng-Wen Hsieh, and Kinshuk Short-Term Memory and Content Representation Type 
 
480 232 modern     1480 45 interference     
520 213 island     1520 42 fortunate     
560 195 english     1560 40 coal     
600 183 employ     1600 37 insect     
640 172 
opportunity     1640 35 sugar     
680 160 touch     1680 33 convenient     
720 147 current     1720 30 crown     
760 141 
progress     
1760 28 
companion     
800 131 burn     1800 25 destructive     
840 124 
engineer     1840 23 bunch     
880 117 
shoulder     1880 21 resign     
920 109 destroy     1920 19 wreck     
960 102 stick     1960 17 essence     
1000 94 admit     2000 15 scenery     
 
Appendix 2. The 24 English Words Selected for the Experiment 
1 1501 persuade v 
2 1511 raw a 
3 1585 bless v 
4 1594 cheap a 
5 1623 drum n 
6 1638 melt v 
7 1675 sweat n 
8 1684 dig v 
9 1854 fancy a 
10 1864 loyal a 
11 1877 explode v 
12 1878 fasten v 
13 1905 arrow n 
14 1907 cruel a 
15 1928 obey v 
16 1962 ambitious a 
17 1968 ash n 
18 2013 landlord n 
19 2021 silk a 
20 2061 patriotic a 
21 2065 pardon n 
22 2119 beast v 
Language Learning & Technology 108
Nian-Shing Chen, Sheng-Wen Hsieh, and Kinshuk Short-Term Memory and Content Representation Type 
 
23 2221 pigeon n 
24 2240 parcel n 
Appendix 3. System Architecture of the STM Ability Test and Examples of Written and Pictorial 
Content 
The STM test system can be divided into two main parts, front-end and back-end. The front-end manages 
communication with users and records user behavior. The back-end aims to analyze users’ abilities. 
 
The system architecture of STM ability test  
Language Learning & Technology 109
An example of written and pictorial content used in the STM test  
Nian-Shing Chen, Sheng-Wen Hsieh, and Kinshuk Short-Term Memory and Content Representation Type 
 
 
Language Learning & Technology 110
Appendix 4. Transcripts of the Focus Group Interviews (Translated to English) 
Code Content 
SB-1-B-40  I think that it is more useful when Pictorial Annotation and Written Annotation are 
displayed at the same time. 
SB-1-B-56  Actually, I think only if one can read out a sentence with the learning English vocabulary 
can really help to spelling out that vocabulary correctly. So, when Pictorial Annotation and 
Written Annotation are displayed at the same time which can give me the best impression. 
SB-1-B-83  I think that picture is easier to draw people’s attention at the first place 
SB-1-W-62  I don’t know, but the worst case should be no annotations provided. 
SB-1-W-17  In addition, I also think under the aid of Written Annotation, I am able to comprehend 
more about the usage of an English vocabulary than just vocabulary itself. 
SB-2-B-50  I think using Pictorial Annotation to convey English vocabulary meaning can incur the 
best impression to me. 
SB-2-B-52  Because I can easily associate the meaning of vocabulary by the picture, to um~ meaning 
that I could have clues to find it out. 
SB-2-W-85  I agree, therefore, I always pay more attention on pictures rather than words. Sometime, I 
could realize the main meaning of a vocabulary simply looking at the Pictorial Annotation. 
SB-2-B-81  People say “one picture is worth than a thousand words”, so, pictures are better than 
words. 
SB-2-B-9  Because watching Pictorial Annotation can help me not only remember English 
vocabulary but also help me to recall that vocabulary. 
SB-2-B-38  In response to SB-4-B’s comments, I think um~ illustrative sentences is a bit annoying but 
a little useful. I disagree with your argument that illustrative sentences can help 
understanding the meaning of English vocabulary. 
SB-3-B-68  My answer is the same as the first question; four types are similar to me. 
SB-3-W-78  But, when I saw a pile of Written Annotation or Pictorial Annotation, my mood will 
become very irritated and unable to concentrate on learning. 
SB-3-B-46  I also think, um~, those English vocabularies with illustrative sentences can help me to 
memorize vocabularies in a more organized way and realize how to remember 
vocabularies. 
SB-3-B-25  In response to this question, I would say that there is not much difference to me. 
SB-3-B-27  Um. But, the way that giving only an English vocabulary and its Chinese translation is the 
most difficult to memorize. 
SB-4-B-66  Because, I think I can better memorize the meaning of a vocabulary by articulating 
through the context of its illustrative sentence. So, if more illustrative sentences are 
provided, I think I can learn better. 
SB-4-W-72  I prefer the type of Pictorial Annotation because my imagination ability is not good, and it 
usually takes me longer time to recall if no Pictorial Annotation is provided. So, I need 
picture to facilitate my thinking. 
SB-4-B-19  I realized that I can memorize the meaning of an English vocabulary better if it is 
facilitated with Written Annotation. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This study was supported by the National Science Council, Taiwan, under grant NSC97-2511-S-110-005-MY3 and 
NSC97-2631-S-024-002 
 
Nian-Shing Chen, Sheng-Wen Hsieh, and Kinshuk Short-Term Memory and Content Representation Type 
 
Language Learning & Technology 111
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Nian-Shing Chen is Professor of the Department of Information Management, National Sun Yat-sen 
University, Taiwan. He is currently a visiting Professor at the University of Queensland, Australia. He has 
published over 200 research papers in international refereed journals, conferences, and book chapters. His 
research areas include e-learning, knowledge management, and the use and development of online 
synchronous learning and wireless technologies to enhance learning. 
E-mail: nschen@faculty.nsysu.edu.tw 
Assistant Professor Sheng-Wen Hsieh is the Department Chair of Management Information Systems at 
Far East University in Taiwan. He earned a Ph.D. in Management Information Systems of National Sun 
Yat-sen University. He has published journal papers in WSEAS Transactions on Advances in Engineering 
Education and Journal of Systems and Software.  
E-mail: onyx@cc.fec.edu.tw 
Kinshuk is Professor and Director of School of Computing and Information Systems at Athabasca 
University, Canada. He has been involved in large-scale research projects on adaptive educational 
environments and has published over 200 research papers in international refereed journals, conferences, 
and book chapters. He is Editor of the SSCI-indexed Journal of Educational Technology & Society.  
E-mail: kinshuk@athabascau.ca 
 
REFERENCES 
Abu-Rabia, S. (2003). The influence of working memory on reading and creative writing processes in a 
second language. Educational Psychology, 23(2), 209-222. 
Alavi, M., & Leidner, D. E. (2001). Research commentary: Technology-mediated learning - a call for 
greater depth and breadth of research. Information Systems Research, 12(1), 1-10. 
Al-Seghayer, K. (2001). The effect of multimedia annotation modes on L2 vocabulary acquisition: A 
comparative study. Language Learning & Technology, 5(1), 202-232. 
Atkinson, R. C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1968). Human memory: A proposed system and its control processes. 
In K. W. Spence and J. T. Spence (Eds.), The psychology of learning and motivation: Advances in 
research and theory (Vol. 2, pp. 89-195). NY: Academic Press. 
Baddeley, A. (2003). Working memory and language: An overview. Journal of Communication 
Disorders, 36(3), 189-206. 
Bauman, J. (1995). About the GSL. http://jbauman.com/aboutgsl.html. 
Cariana, R. B., & Lee, D. (2001). The effects of recognition and recall study tasks with feedback in a 
computer-based vocabulary lesson. Educational Technology Research & Development, 49(3), 23-36. 
Cermak, L. & Craik, F. (1979). Levels of processing in human memory. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Chen, C. M., Lee, H. M. & Chen, Y. H. (2005). Personalized e-learning system using item response 
theory. Computers and Education, 44(3), 237-255. 
Craik, F. I. M. (2002). Levels of processing: Past, present ... and future? Memory, 10(5/6), 305-318. 
Clark, R. E. (1994). Media will never influence learning. Education Technology Research and 
Development, 42(2), 21-29. 
Nian-Shing Chen, Sheng-Wen Hsieh, and Kinshuk Short-Term Memory and Content Representation Type 
 
Language Learning & Technology 112
Cohen, A. D., & Aphek, E. (1981). Basifying second language learning. Studies in Second Language 
Acquisition, 3(2), 221-236.  
Courtney, M. S. (1998). An area specialized for spatial working memory in human frontal cortex. Science, 
279(5355), 1347-1351. 
Fuster, J. M. (1994). The prefrontal cortex: Anatomy, physiology and neuropsychology of the frontal lobe. 
Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven. 
Gay, G., Stefanone, M., Grace-Martin, M., & Hembrooke, H. (2001). The effects of wireless computing 
in collaborative learning environments. International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction, 13(2), 
257-276. 
Geva, E., & Ryan, E. B. (1993). Linguistic and cognitive correlates of academic skills in first and second 
languages. Language Learning, 43(1), 5-42. 
Glover, J. A. (1989). The testing phenomenon: Not gone but nearly forgotten. Journal of Educational 
Psychology, 81(3), 392-399. 
Hair, J. F., Tatham, R. L., Anderson, R. E., & Black, W. C. (1998). Multivariate data analysis (5th ed.). 
NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc. 
Harrington, M., & Sawyer, M. (1992). L2 working memory capacity and L2 reading skill. Studies in 
Second Language Acquisition, 14(1), 25-38. 
Holzinger, A., Nischelwitzer, A. & Meisenberger, M. (2005, March). Mobile phones as a challenge for 
m-learning: examples for mobile interactive learning objects. Paper presented at the 3rd IEEE 
International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communication, Kauai Island, HI. 
Hsi, S. (2003). A study of user experiences mediated by nomadic web content in a museum. Journal of 
Computer Assisted Learning, 19(3), 308-319. 
Hsieh, S. W. (2006). Study on Adaptive Learning based on Short-term Memory Capacity in Mobile 
Learning Environment. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, National Sun Yat-sen University, Kaohsiung 
Taiwan. 
Jonassen, D., & Tessmer, M. (1996). An outcomes-based taxonomy for instructional systems design, 
evaluation and research. Training Research Journal, 2, 11-46. 
Jones, L. (2004). Testing L2 vocabulary recognition and recall using pictorial and written test items. 
Language Learning & Technology, 8(3), 122-143. 
Kaesshaefer, J. (2004), Austria Country Commercial Guide, International Market Research Reports, 
2004, Retrieved August 25, 2008, from http://http://strategis.ic.gc.ca/epic/site/imr-ri2.nsf/en/gr-
01297e.html 
Liu, T. C., Wang, H. Y., Liang, J. K., Chan, T. W., Ko, H. W., & Yang, J. C. (2003). Wireless & mobile 
technologies to enhance teaching & learning. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 19(3), 371-382. 
MacGregor, J. N. (1987). Short-term memory capacity: limitation or optimization?. Psychological Review, 
94(1), 107-108. 
Mayer, R. E. & Sims, K. (1994). For whom is a picture worth a thousand words? Extensions of a dual-
coding theory of multimedia learning. Journal of Educational Psychology, 86(3), 389-401. 
McDaniel, M. A., & Mason, M. E. J. (1985). Altering memory representations through retrieval. Journal 
of Experimental Psychology, Learning, Memory and Cognition, 11(2), 371-385. 
Nian-Shing Chen, Sheng-Wen Hsieh, and Kinshuk Short-Term Memory and Content Representation Type 
 
Language Learning & Technology 113
Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven plus or minus two: Some limits on our capacity for 
processing information. Psychological Review, 63, 81-97. 
Nation, I. S. P. (2001). Learning vocabulary in another language. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Nikolova, O. R. (2002). Effects of students' participation in authoring of multimedia materials on student 
acquisition of vocabulary. Language Learning & Technology, 6(1), 100-122. 
Plass, J. L., Chun, D. M., Mayer, R. E., & Leutner, D. (1998). Supporting visual and verbal learning 
preferences in a second language multimedia learning environment. Journal of Educational Psychology, 
90(1), 25-36. 
Pressley, M., Levin, J. R., & Miller, G. E. (1982). The keyword method compared to alternative 
vocabulary learning strategies. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 7, 50-60. 
Riffell, S., & Sibley, D. (2005). Using web-based instruction to improve large undergraduate biology 
courses: An evaluation of a hybrid course format. Computers and Education, 44(3), 217-235. 
Sharples, M. (2000). The design of personal mobile technologies for lifelong learning. Computers & 
Education, 34(3-4), 177-193. 
Sweller, J. (1994). Cognitive load theory, learning difficulty and instructional design. Learning and 
Instruction, 4(3), 295-312. 
Taylor, I., & Taylor, M. (1990). Psycholinguistics: Learning and using language. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice Hall. 
Wikipedia - Mobile phone. Retrieved August 25, 2008, from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mobile_phone 
Wiredu, G. (2005, August). The Reconstruction of Portable Computers: On the Flexibility of Mobile 
Computing in Mobile Activities. Paper presented at IFIP 8.2 Conference on Designing Ubiquitous 
Information Environments, Cleveland, OH. 
Wright, B. D. (1988). Rasch model from Campbell concatenation. Rasch Measurement Transactions, 2(1), 
16. 
