Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num3/blakeetal/ 
October 2008, Volume 12, Number 3
pp. 114-127 
 
Copyright © 2008, ISSN 1094-3501 114
MEASURING ORAL PROFICIENCY IN DISTANCE, FACE-TO-FACE, 
AND BLENDED CLASSROOMS 
Robert Blake, University of California – Davis 
Nicole L. Wilson, Pearson & University of California – Santa Cruz 
María Cetto, University of California – Davis 
Cristina Pardo-Ballester, Iowa State University 
Although the foreign-language profession routinely stresses the importance of technology 
for the curriculum, many teachers still harbor deep-seated doubts as to whether or not a 
hybrid course, much less a completely distance-learning class, could provide L2 learners 
with a way to reach linguistic proficiency, especially with respect to oral language skills. 
In this study, we examine the case of Spanish Without Walls (SWW), a first-year language 
course offered at the University of California - Davis in both hybrid and distance-learning 
formats. The SWW curriculum includes materials delivered via CD-ROM/DVD programs, 
online content-based web pages, and synchronous bimodal chat that includes sound and 
text.  The contribution of each of these components is evaluated in the context of a 
successful technologically assisted course. To address the issue of oral proficiency, we 
compare the results from both classroom and distance-learning students who took the 20-
minute Versant for Spanish test, delivered by phone and automatically graded. The data 
generated by this instrument shows that classroom, hybrid, and distance L2 learners reach 
comparable levels of oral proficiency during their first year of study. Reference is also 
made to two other ongoing efforts to provide distance-learning courses in Arabic and 
Punjabi, two languages where special difficulties in their writing systems have an impact 
on the design of the distant-learning format. The rationale for offering language courses in 
either a hybrid or distance-learning format is examined in light of increasing societal 
pressures to help L2 learners reach advanced proficiency, especially in less commonly 
taught languages (LCTLs). 
INTRODUCTION 
"Do you use technology in your foreign-language classroom?"  Few language teachers would dare to 
answer "no" to this question for fear of being classified as out of touch with best practices. Not 
surprisingly, most teachers routinely employ videos or CDs/DVDs, and many now take advantage of web 
pages to distribute syllabi, assignments, cultural material, and even lecture notes.  But when foreign-
language faculty are polled (at least in the case of faculty from U.S. research universities) about accepting 
credit for language courses delivered in a hybrid or completely distance-learning (DL) format, the 
positive sentiments toward technology begins to fade.1  Some foreign language (FL) teachers tend to 
harbor deep-seated doubts as to whether or not a DL course could ever provide L2 learners with a way to 
gain linguistic proficiency, especially when oral language skills are in question. Perhaps others secretly 
worry that these new DL classes might displace them. 
Reasons for Implementing DL or Hybrid Course Formats 
In all fairness, a DL format is not the appropriate learning environment for everyone; the format self-
selects for those who have both the ability and preference to work more independently. In particular, a 
completely virtual course appeals to people who work full-time and, therefore, need flexible access to 
instruction. The popularity of a hybrid course (which offers reduced face-to-face meetings along with 
other DL teaching techniques) stems from these factors, but this format also attracts students who want 
fewer days of class.  Many students belatedly find out that both hybrid and DL language classes require a 
Blake et al. Measuring Oral Proficiency 
 
high degree of self-motivation and independent work skills. This accounts for the routinely high dropout 
rate for the DL learning environment for all disciplines (Carr, 2000; Dreyer, Bangeni & Nel, 2005).  
Technologically enhanced formats are increasingly being explored as a means to meet student demands 
for less commonly taught languages (LCTLs) such as Arabic, Punjabi, or Farsi.  Frequently, there are no 
course offerings for these languages available locally, and the DL format may be the only way to fulfill 
both interest and demand. Nevertheless, no one would dispute that to reach ACTFL’s (American Council 
on the Teaching of Foreign Languages) level of superior proficiency (which corresponds to the U.S. 
government’s ILR (Interagency Language Roundtable) rating of 3+ or level C in the Common European 
Framework), L2 students need to interact face-to-face with native speakers, preferably in the target 
country. Davidson’s (2007) longitudinal study of Russian L2 learners shows quite conclusively that study 
abroad—and, preferably, a yearlong program as opposed to a semester program—is a sine qua non for 
reaching these more advanced levels.2 Likewise, the basic facts concerning L2 development have not 
changed: the road to advanced proficiency is arduous, requiring anywhere from 600 to 2,200 hours of 
instruction (Bialystok & Hakuta 1994, p. 34).  
In the present study we seek more data to evaluate whether DL courses can be a valid way to start down 
this long road without disadvantaging DL students with respect to oral proficiency.  Accordingly, this 
investigation addresses beginning and intermediate Spanish language instruction and poses the following 
question: Can the hybrid or distance-learning students keep pace in terms of oral proficiency with the 
outcomes normally found with traditional L2 classroom learners that meet five days a week?  Although 
researchers have frequently observed that DL courses help develop strong literacy skills because so much 
of this learning environment is text-based (Warschauer, 1997), we wanted to investigate the effect of DL 
courses on the development of oral proficiency. 
Previous DL studies 
In her thorough review of four decades of research in the DL language field, White (2006) points to the 
progress and promise that the DL environment holds for the FL profession.  She also cautions the field 
that small-scale studies need to be converted into fully implemented DL courses:  
The innovations reported in the literature owe much to the work of early adopters—who 
pursue those innovations, usually in small-scale pilot studies, find ways through the 
barriers that emerge, and report their findings.  An important area for inquiry and critical 
reflection concerns the process of migrating these innovations to contexts for mainstream 
course delivery.  (p. 259) 
Blake and Delforge (2007) have reported on several fully implemented DL courses (Cahill & Catanzaro, 
1997; Chenoweth & Murday, 2003; Soo & Ngeow, 1998), but none of these studies assessed the effects 
that the DL format itself might have had on fostering oral proficiency, a major concern of the FL field 
with its current emphasis on communicative competence.  A notable exception can be found in the DL 
courses in French, German, and Spanish offered through the Open University where researchers are 
investigating in earnest the issues concerning oral proficiency assessment and the effect of the DL format 
(Hampel, 2003; Hampel & Hauck, 2004; Lamy, 2004).  Lamy (2004), in particular, has tried to define 
what constitutes conversational (if not oral) proficiency in an online learning context.3  But only Volle 
(2005) in her implementation of a DL course in central Texas has actually attempted to measure online 
articulation (with drills, free conversation, and reading), grammatical accuracy (adapted from Weir’s, 
1990, protocol), and conversational competence or proficiency in response to a series of modified OPI 
(Oral Proficiency Interview) prompts (e.g., "greet someone, answer questions about school or routines, 
talk about the past, describe specific items about family or clothes").  Her study was designed to gauge 
student improvement in these three areas after having completed a one-semester online course.  However, 
lack of control over several variables makes the results uninformative. 
Language Learning & Technology 115
Blake et al. Measuring Oral Proficiency 
 
The relative dearth of mainstream DL language course offerings means relatively fewer students to 
sample from and, consequently, more difficulties in comparing DL student outcomes with those of 
students found in more traditional classroom formats.  Not only are there fewer fully implemented DL 
classes—and, therefore, students—to sample from, but, in our experience, DL students tended to respond 
only to emails that directly relate to their own progress or grade.  By way of contrast, classroom students 
can be cajoled in person to complete research questionnaires.  Finally, the burden of isolating the 
experimental treatment so as to enable comparisons between DL and classroom student outcomes 
presents formidable challenges, as will be discussed below in more detail. 
Not all of these issues can be resolved at once, but the need to provide more data on oral proficiency in 
the DL context looms first and foremost. The present study examines oral proficiency data from students 
in three types of first-year Spanish courses: 
• a hybrid course (two days instruction per week plus seven hours of study via technology) 
• a completely virtual DL course 
• a control group of traditional classroom students. 
Oral proficiency was measured in this study by using Versant for Spanish (Pearson), an instrument 
administered by phone and scored automatically by means of speech recognition and parser software (see 
description below).  Our intent is not to test whether the DL or hybrid format produces better results than 
the classroom format, but rather to ascertain if students in those technologically supported learning 
environments can keep pace with the oral progress demonstrated by students in face-to-face learning 
environments.  
METHODOLOGY 
During 2005-2007, the Versant for Spanish instrument was administered to 233 students enrolled in 
traditional Spanish classes and 85 students enrolled in non-traditional (hybrid, distance) course formats at 
the University of California - Davis. All students were enrolled in the first seven levels (ten-week quarters 
numbered here as 1 through 7) of Spanish language instruction, which comprises the first- and second-
year college Spanish curriculum.  All students took the Spanish test over the phone sometime during the 
final two weeks of the course in order to give a more accurate representation of their proficiency at that 
particular level.  The performances of the two groups, first-year Spanish (SPA 1-3) and second-year 
Spanish (SPA 4-7), were then compared.  It was predicted that course format (traditional, hybrid, or 
distance) would not affect outcomes at the lower-division level with respect to oral proficiency. 
In addition, 15 heritage learners (HL) who enrolled in a lower-division traditional course for native 
speakers also took the test.  HL students constitute an extremely heterogeneous group: while most HL 
students have distinct oral advantages over non-heritage learners, they also tend to lack competence in 
academic Spanish or the more formal registers (Blake & Zyzik, 2003). Nevertheless, it was predicted that 
the HL students would outperform the non-HL students on the Versant for Spanish, a prediction that was 
born out by our findings (see results below). Heritage learners were included in the study in order to test 
whether the Versant test was sensitive enough to differentiate between advanced learners and heritage or 
home language learners. Heritage learners are not the same as native speakers and represent a continuum 
of linguistic proficiency. Could Versant separate them successfully from advanced L2 learners? 
Spanish Without Walls and its Hybrid Cousin  
Spanish Without Walls is a first-year DL Spanish curriculum divided into three quarters. It combines 
multimedia language materials from three sources: 
• Tesoros, a five-disk CD-ROM or one-disk DVD detective story (Blake, Blasco & Hernández, 2001); 
Language Learning & Technology 116
Blake et al. Measuring Oral Proficiency 
 
• Content-based web readings and Flash activities4; 
• A collaborative CMC tool running on the Flash communications server that allows for both 
asynchronous and synchronous textual communication (both controlled character-by-character and by 
carriage return) in addition to Voice-over Internet protocol (VoIP) sound exchange. 
The CDs/DVD serve as the course textbook.5 The remaining online materials are packaged into a course 
management system (Moodle) designed to teach first-year Spanish grammar and vocabulary, provide 
exercises, conduct testing, present authentic Spanish-language readings, and enable oral communication 
with teachers and peers. 
Students alternate between use of the CD-ROMs/DVD and the SWW website in order to cover the scope 
and sequence of a normal university first-year Spanish language course. They are held accountable for the 
CD-ROM/DVD material by means of online exams that cover the vocabulary, storyline, and grammar 
presented in Tesoros (Blake & Delforge, 2007). Students are also required to chat live using both text and 
voice with their instructor in groups of no more than three at least once a week for one hour and several 
more times with their assigned partners, as their mutual schedules permit, in order to complete the 
collaborative content-based tasks. For example, one student might research the capital cities of four Latin 
American countries, while his/her partner would investigate the same type of information for four other 
countries. During the chat, the students share their results with each other in jigsaw fashion.  
The hybrid courses (SP2V and SP3V) are the equivalent of the last two thirds of an introductory college-
level Spanish curriculum (SP2-3) delivered in a hybrid course format. These courses utilize the same 
Spanish Without Walls curriculum, but students meet with their instructor only two days a week for three 
hours and then perform web activities, work with the CDs/DVD, and carry out CMC synchronous 
dialogues using Adobe’s Breeze (which provides text chat, Voice over IP, and whiteboard/character-by-
character text exchange). The course materials and exercises focus on developing the same array of skills 
promoted in the classroom courses, quarters 2 and 3, and provide students with exposure to a variety of 
Spanish accents from Spain and Latin America, as well as extensive reading of authentic texts, guided 
writing practice, the second part of a first-year grammar and vocabulary sequence, and cultural awareness 
of the Spanish-speaking world.  The DL and the hybrid formats of Spanish Without Walls differ only in a 
few respects.  The hybrid version has two regular class meetings per week, while the virtual course has no 
face-to-face encounters. The materials and the approximate number of hours the students are asked to 
invest studying are roughly equivalent, after making adjustments for the different formats. 
The hybrid format is designed for students with some limited high-school experience in Spanish, while 
the virtual course is targeted for pure beginners. In reality, both true beginners and false beginners (i.e., 
students who have studied Spanish in high school) routinely enroll in both traditional and DL/hybrid.  It is 
rare in California to find students without some previous formal exposure to Spanish in the schools.  
There is no reason to assume that these false beginners are not distributed normally in all delivery formats.  
The false beginners in the DL classes, however, given their slightly older age range, would have left off 
taking high school Spanish many years before the classroom student counterparts with all the implications 
concerning language attrition.  Eliminating these students would have drastically reduced the number of 
students in the sample.    
In contrast to the hybrid and DL students, the L2 learners in the traditional classroom environment attend 
class five days a week and use Dos Mundos (Terrell, Andrade, Egasse, & Muñoz, 2002) instead of 
Tesoros (Blake, Blasco, & Hernandez, 2001) as a textbook.  The scope and sequence for grammar and 
vocabulary topics found in both these language textbooks are approximately the same.  It is expected that 
traditional students will invest one additional hour of home study for every hour of class, bringing their 
weekly language study average to ten.  Hybrid students spend three hours in class per week and should 
also study at home or chat for an additional seven hours.  DL students have no class meetings, but are 
asked to work for ten hours with the combined curriculum of CD/DVD activities, web pages, and chat 
Language Learning & Technology 117
Blake et al. Measuring Oral Proficiency 
 
assignments.  There were no controls, however, for the actually amount of out-of-class time spent by each 
student studying Spanish in any of these formats, including the traditional one.  
Measuring Proficiency:  Versant for Spanish 
The Versant for Spanish test published by Pearson was designed utilizing principles from Levelt’s (1989) 
model of speech production and comprehension. In this model, there are many basic elements required to 
participate in a spoken conversation: a person must track what is being said, extract meaning as speech 
continues, and then formulate and produce a relevant and intelligible response. These component 
processes of listening and speaking are schematized in Figure 1, adapted from Levelt.  
hear utterance
extract words
get phrase structure
decode propositions
contextualize
infer demand (if any)
articulate response
build clause structure
select lexical items 
construct phrases
select register
decide on response
Adapted from Levelt, 1989
Listen  
Speak 
 
Figure 1. Conversational processing components in listening and speaking. 
Versant for Spanish requires participants to read aloud, listen and repeat, say the opposite, answer short 
questions, build sentences from jumbled-up word combinations, answer open-ended questions, and retell 
stories. Because the test is designed to elicit responses from the test-taker in real time, it estimates the 
test-taker’s level of automaticity with the language. Automaticity is the ability to access and retrieve 
lexical items, to build phrases and clause structures, and to articulate responses without conscious 
attention to the linguistic code (Cutler, 2003; Levelt, 1989). 
The responses from test-takers are scored automatically by means of a speech recognition and parser 
program based on a probabilistic grammar built from a large corpus of native speakers (n = 435) from a 
variety of Spanish-speaking countries as well as another corpus of L2 learners of Spanish (n = 579) 
(Bernstein, Barbier, Rosenfeld, & de Jong, 2004). The computer algorithm has been "trained" by expert 
human raters. Separate values for vocabulary, sentence mastery, pronunciation, and fluency are weighted 
and then combined in order to come up with an overall score on a scale from 20 to 80.  
Results from Versant for Spanish have high correlations with the ACTFL, ILR, and CEF proficiency tests 
(r=.86, r=.90, and r=.92, respectively; Wilson, Bernstein, & Rosenfeld, 2006). Because each item in 
Versant for Spanish contains multiple sources of information (e.g., pauses between and within words, 
response latency) that are fed into the scoring algorithm, a 20-minute phone sample provides sufficient 
data to identify the proficiency level of the speaker.  
The purpose of the present study, however, is not to argue for the merits or statistical validity of Versant 
for Spanish versus other human-scored oral proficiency tests (see Bernstein et al., 2004). Versant for 
Spanish is particularly advantageous for assessment research with DL students, who are only accessible 
by email contact, because they can take this test from anywhere in the world at any time using only a 
Language Learning & Technology 118
Blake et al. Measuring Oral Proficiency 
 
telephone. The fact that Versant for Spanish takes only 20 minutes to complete further heightens its 
attractiveness as a research instrument in the DL context. Consequently, in using this instrument, we were 
able to generate a large amount of data with minimal expense and effort in order to establish a reliable 
basis of comparison for any data generated by DL students. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Figure 2 below displays Versant for Spanish scores by level for 248 traditional classroom learners as a 
function of their respective cumulative densities: in other words, each Versant for Spanish test score is 
matched to the proportional number of students from that group who have reached that score or below. 
Given the range of language proficiency among these eight levels, any particular percentage value should 
theoretically correspond to radically different Versant for Spanish scores, which is exactly what a glance 
at Figure 2 will confirm.   
 
Figure 2. Cumulative density function for classroom students 
The results from plotting the cumulative density function suggest that certain language levels as defined 
by the number of quarters of language study should be clustered together. This visual impression was 
statistically tested by means of a Tukey Honestly Significant Difference (HSD) Test, the most appropriate 
statistical measure to employ when no a priori hypotheses exist with respect to groupings. The HSD 
results are displayed in Table 1. Three statistically distinct groups emerge:  (1) a first-year+ group that 
includes SP1, SP2, SP3 and, somewhat more weakly, SP4; (2) a second-year+ group consisting of SP5, 
SP6, SP7 (although note that quarter 7 is, technically speaking, the beginning of the third year); and (3) 
the heritage speakers group.  
The HSD values for the SP4 group deserve further comment. While from the point of view of the SP1 
students, the SP4 students were statistically different, there were no significant differences among the 
scores of the SP2, SP3, and SP4 students. Clearly, the SP4 group represents a transition class after which 
these L2 Spanish students experience a demonstrable jump in linguistic capabilities to the next plateau 
(SP5, SP6, SP7). The score ranges, eliminating the 10th and 90th percentiles, can be summarized as 
follows: 
 
Language Learning & Technology 119
Blake et al. Measuring Oral Proficiency 
 
Language Learning & Technology 120
Course Number  Versant for Spanish Score 
Courses 1, 2, & 3  25 - 40 
Course 4   31 – 49 
Courses 5, 6, & 7  37 - 68 
These facts are captured visually in Figure 3, where the cumulative density functions have been plotted 
after pooling the data into three levels in order to show the differences in oral proficiency that occur after 
the fourth quarter of language study.  In terms of oral proficiency, the heritage students, not unexpectedly, 
outperformed all of the non-heritage groups.  Figure 3, then, represents the normed values for placement 
scores for oral proficiency according to the Versant for Spanish instrument.   We then proceeded to test 
the hybrid and DL students and use their scores as a way of determining if they have met the normal 
expectations for oral proficiency as a function of time on task (i.e., quarters of language study). 
Table 1. Tukey Honestly Significant Difference (HSD) Test for Versant for Spanish scores by Quarter (p-
values) 
 
Figure 4 plots the cumulative density function for all DL learners in both hybrid (SP2V and SP3V, n = 
65) and virtual classes (SWW, n = 21) along with the scores from the traditional first- and second-year+ 
classroom learners (n = 233) and the heritage learners (n = 15) for comparative purposes (total n = 
334). Figure 4 shows hat the DL student performance clearly follows the trends set by the first-year+ 
group of classroom learners. The strongest hybrid learners (top 50% of the class) are performing slightly
poorer than the strongest students from the first-year+ group, but the latter group includes students from 
quarter 4 as well. The higher performing students from the purely DL group (SWW) scored slightly higher 
than the first-year+ control group (see 
 
ats.  
Table 1), but, again, in statistical terms, there are no aggregate 
group differences among students from all three form
Quarters 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 HL 
1 -- .97 1.0 .43 .00 .00 .00 .00 
2  -- 1.0 .97 .00 .00 .00 .00 
3   -- .71 .00 .00 .00 .00 
4    -- .09 .00 .00 .00 
5     -- .77 .36 .00 
6      -- 1.0 .00 
7       -- .00 
Blake et al. Measuring Oral Proficiency 
 
 
Figure 3. Cumulative density function for classroom student by clusters 
 
 
Figure 4. Cumulative density function for classroom and DL students 
More importantly, the individual t-tests given below in Table 2 reveal no significant differences among 
hybrid, DL or their classroom counterparts (i.e., DL 1 compared to classroom learners from level 1, DL 2 
compared to classroom 2, etc.).  
Language Learning & Technology 121
Blake et al. Measuring Oral Proficiency 
 
Table 2. t-Test Results Comparing the DL and Classroom Formats 
LEVEL 
(number of quarters) 
SP 1 
(n= 42) (mean=34.4, 
sd=5.3) 
SP 2 
(n = 17) (mean=37.6, 
sd=10.0) 
SP 3 
(n = 50) (mean=36.6, 
sd=7.6) 
SWW 1 
(n = 13) (mean=33.4, 
sd=8.7) 
t(53) = 
1.03 
p = 0.35 -- -- -- -- 
SWW 2 
(n = 7) (mean=41.1, 
sd=9) 
-- -- t(22) = 
0.96 
p = 0.35 -- -- 
Hybrid 2V 
(n = 37) (mean =34.9, 
sd=6.9) 
-- -- t(52) = 
1.63 
p = 0.11 -- -- 
Hybrid 3V 
(n = 28) (38.8, sd=6.9) 
-- -- -- -- t(76)= 
1.00 
p = 0.32 
 
The number of DL students (n = 21) who took Versant for Spanish exam is, again, limited for the reasons 
already discussed above; more data is being collected for a future study. This obvious shortcoming, 
however, is mitigated by the strength of the Versant baseline results.  In essence, the large number of 
baseline data points from traditional students establishes a placement norm against which each DL and 
hybrid score can be compared and situated in its own outcome space. Looked at from this relative 
perspective, both types of DL formats and curriculum have allowed students to develop a level of oral 
proficiency that is comparable with the outcomes for oral proficiency exhibited by classroom learners, 
allowing for individual differences.  In other words, DL students are not falling behind on oral proficiency, 
as judged from the Versant for Spanish results. 
Giving all 334 students a pre-test to establish their initial Spanish capacity would have been ideal, but 
difficult to manage during the add-drop period of each quarter’s beginning.  Again, we were not so much 
interested in this study in charting the gains (i.e., a comparison of pre- vs. post-test results) that the DL 
students might have made with respect to measures of oral proficiency after one quarter of instruction, but 
finding out whether or not they were falling behind their classroom counterparts.  In other words, do the 
DL students enjoy the same placement results?  Accordingly, we have used the large number of data 
points from the classroom learners as a way of establishing placement norms.  Future studies, however, 
should include a pre-test to verify that all students in these different learning formats are starting at 
approximately the same linguistic level.  Likewise, a pretest for working memory, such as that used by 
Payne and Whitney (2002) and Payne and Ross (2005), would be extremely useful to see if the strong 
text-based support and less pressured chat environment routinely cited as advantages of the DL learning 
environment have a positive effect on the weaker students.  These working memory scores might also be 
correlated with specific Versant items that focus either on vocabulary or on syntax in order to yield a new 
set of interesting comparisons. 
Actually pinpointing which factors are responsible for putting the DL students on an equal footing with 
their classroom counterparts with respect to oral proficiency is not an easy task. On the one hand, the 
SWW students were older, more mature, and more self-motivated than their younger classroom 
counterparts.  False beginners in the DL course, however, have had more time to forget whatever 
knowledge they had gleaned from high school courses.  More importantly, students who enjoy working in 
a virtual learning environment tend to self-select, as has been noted above. These learners appear to be, 
from our teaching experience, more efficient and responsible L2 learners since they pay tuition in advance 
for the DL course and have real career objectives tied to their learning of Spanish. One might expect that 
Language Learning & Technology 122
Blake et al. Measuring Oral Proficiency 
 
hybrid students should follow suit, but many students enrolled in the hybrid course appear to be looking 
for reduced class time and less work, according to our instructors’ direct observations and informal 
conversations with students.  On the other hand, the scope and sequence of the course materials is 
virtually the same in all formats.  The DL and hybrid environments principally differ from the classroom 
courses in terms of the nature of the chat activities, the amount of individual attention received from 
instructors during chat sessions, and the amount of out-of-class study time.  Again, administering a pre-
test to all students would have strengthened our ability to compare more effectively the effect of these 
different learning environments.  
No doubt, the required synchronous chat sessions for both DL and hybrid students, which offered both 
text and audio exchanges, make a major contribution to the level of individual practice and the extent of 
instructor attention, which might even exceed what can be found in traditional classrooms given their 
burden of 25 to 30 students in a 50-minute period. While the positive effects of audio practice on oral 
proficiency should be transparent, Payne & Whitney (2002) and Payne and Ross (2005) have also shown 
that keyboarding exerts a positive affect on oral proficiency as well. The present study is limited in not 
being able to tease out the differential effect of oral vs. text chatting.  
Whatever the case, the Breeze bimodal chat sessions for the DL and hybrid students appear to help them 
perform on the Versant for Spanish test at similar levels as students studying in the face-to-face 
classrooms. The FL profession is just beginning to study how to most effectively utilize these bimodal 
CMC tools (Blake 2005; Erben, 1999; Fleming, Hiple & Du, 2002; Hampel, 2003; Hampel & Hauck, 
2004; Holmberg, Shelley, & White, 2005; Jepson, 2005; Lamy, 2004; Thompson & Hiple, 2005; Thorne 
& Payne, 2005; White, 2006; Zähner, Fauverge & Wong, 2000).   
Finally, available oral-proficiency testing instruments (e.g., ACTFL OPI, ILR OPI, CEF, Versant) are not 
sensitive to the relatively small gains in speaking ability made by beginning learners. These gains consist 
mostly of learned material that learners can produce in predictable situations but are not yet able to adapt 
to "real life" use. Despite efforts to measure these gains by introducing "plus" sublevels (ILR), and "low," 
"mid," and "high" sublevels (ACTFL), tests of communicative proficiency are generally not well-suited 
for beginning L2 learners who do not yet possess speaking skills that could be described as 
communicative. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE PROSPECTS FOR DL LANGUAGE LEARNING 
The potential for instruction in LCTLs in places where face-to-face learning is not available has triggered 
great interest in DL recently. This interest in the DL format must be situated within a proper L2 
developmental context: the process of L2 acquisition will take students numerous hours of instruction and, 
eventually, will require study abroad. A DL course is only one piece in this equation, but a very viable 
means to afford students access to introductory instruction in LCTLs, especially when local classroom 
options are lacking or do not fit into personal schedules. The present study offers the FL profession some 
sense that adding the DL component to the foreign-language curriculum is a responsible and reasonable 
option, with palpable benefits for oral proficiency.  Clearly, more assessment studies from mainstreamed 
DL language courses are needed to overcome the limitations of the present study as discussed above.   
Nevertheless, we have shown that the Versant for Spanish instrument is capable of distinguishing 
different levels of oral proficiency that roughly correspond to first-year, second-year, and heritage 
students. Proponents of the face-to-face OPI may disagree with Levelt’s construct of oral proficiency as 
operationalized in the Versant for Spanish exam, while others might state the obvious that there still exists 
a need for more data from DL studies.  Although the findings presented here should, at the bare minimum, 
pique the interest of even the most cynical members of the FL profession, more evaluation studies are 
clearly needed from both a quantitative and qualitative approach.  Nevertheless, taking individual L2 
differences into account—which constitutes the true bane of all SLA studies--the first-year DL and hybrid 
students in this study approximate oral proficiency outcomes similar to those of first-year students 
Language Learning & Technology 123
Blake et al. Measuring Oral Proficiency 
 
working in traditional classrooms.  Most importantly, these students are not being disadvantaged by 
taking Spanish in a non-traditional format.  No doubt, students will continue to self-select for the type of 
language instruction they prefer whenever given the chance.  Accordingly, the profession should concern 
itself with providing legitimate options and increasing all avenues of access to language instruction, 
especially for the LCTLs.  To echo White (2006), once again, there is an urgent need for mainstreaming 
DL materials into fully implemented courses, especially in the case of LCTLs.  
The SWW project and its hybrid derivatives represent a successful experiment in providing the DL option 
for Spanish. The ten campuses that comprise the University of California system and the base for the UC 
Language Consortium (see http://uccllt.ucdavis.edu) are presently engaged in other ground-breaking 
projects for providing DL language instruction in Arabic (http://169.237.245.74/aww/info.html) from the 
Berkeley campus and Punjabi (http://uccllt.ucdavis.edu/distancelearning.cfm) from the Santa Barbara 
campus.6  Both projects have received funding from the Department of Education (the FIPSE and IRS 
programs, respectively). Unlike Spanish, both Arabic and Punjabi present writing challenges for students 
used to working only with Roman scripts.  L2 learners of Japanese, Chinese, and Korean face similar 
issues (Fleming, Hiple, & Du, 2002).  Using software and programming that utilize Unicode conventions 
simplifies most of the potential problems for conducting a DL course in languages with alternate scripts.7 
The real challenge, however, lies in implementing DL language instruction within a sound pedagogical 
and truly conversational framework (Laurillard, 2002) that seeks "… to persuade students to change the 
way they experience the world through an understanding of the insights of others… " (p. 23), blending 
both direct experiential and formal or academic knowledge. This formidable task is academic in nature 
and most properly the business of the FL profession.  The FL teacher, not the medium, will ultimately 
determine whether or not any given instantiation of a DL language course makes a positive contribution 
to the L2 student’s long march to advanced proficiency.  DL education is a worthy task for the FL 
profession. 
 
NOTES 
1. In the process of gaining acceptance from the UC Berkeley senate for credit for the DL format for 
Arabic Without Walls, the authors repeatedly encountered these skeptical attitudes from other language 
faculty, language departments, and course committees. 
2. For earlier work on this topic, also see Brecht, Davidson, & Ginsberg (1995). 
3. The way that Barr, Leakey & Ranchoux (2005) operationalized the notion of exposure to technology 
did not strike us as being comparable to the other DL studies reviewed above. 
4. The SWW web pages were produced by María Victoria González Pagani, co-PI of the FIPSE grant, 
P116B000315. 
5. Tesoros was first published in a five CD set; it has now been released as a single DVD. 
6. Other teleconference efforts are well along in Danish, Swedish, and Filipino (see UCLA’s World 
Language Center at http://www.international.ucla.edu/languages/). This study did not intend to address 
the teleconference model for DL. 
7. For a basic primer to Unicode, see the entry in Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unicode. 
 
 
 
Language Learning & Technology 124
Blake et al. Measuring Oral Proficiency 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Robert Blake (Ph.D. UTexas 1980) is professor of Spanish linguistics and director of the UC Language 
Consortium (http://uccllt.ucdavis.edu). 
E-mail: rjblake@ucdavis.edu 
Nicole Wilson (Ph.D. UC Santa Cruz 2005) is a research consultant for Pearson in Palo Alto, CA and a 
lecturer in psychology at UC Santa Cruz. 
E-mail: nlwilson@gmail.com 
Maria Cetto is a Ph.D. candidate in Spanish linguistics at UC Davis. 
E-mail: macitto@ucdavis.edu 
Cristina Pardo-Ballester (Ph.D. UC Davis 2006) is an assistant professor of Spanish linguistics at Iowa 
State University. 
E-mail: cpardo@iastate.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Barr, D., Leakey, J., & Ranchoux, A. (2005). TOLD like it is!  An evaluation of oral development pilot 
project. Language Learning & Technology, 9(3), 55-78. 
Bernstein, J., Barbier, I., Rosenfeld, E., & de Jong, J.. (2004). Development and validation of an 
automatic spoken Spanish test. In InSTIL/ICALL 2004 Symposium on Computer Assisted Learning, NLP 
and speech technologies in advanced language learning systems, Venice, Italy, June 17-19, 2004, ISCA 
Archive.  Retrieved May 22, 2007 from http://www.isca-speech.org/archive/icall2004. 
Bialystok, E., & Hakuta, K. (1994). In other words. New York: Basic Books. 
Blake R. (2005). Bimodal CMC: The glue of language learning at a distance. CALICO Journal, 22(3), 
497-511. 
Blake, R., Blasco J., & Hernández, C. (2001). Tesoros CD-ROM: A multi-media-based course. Boecillo, 
Valladolid: Boecillo Editorial Multimedia (BeM) and New York: McGraw-Hill Publishers, Inc. 
Blake, R., & Delforge, A. (2007). Online Language Learning:  The Case of Spanish Without Walls. In B. 
Lafford & R. Salaberry (Eds.), The art of teaching Spanish: Second language acquisition from research 
to praxis (pp. 127-147). Georgetown: Georgetown University Press. 
Blake, R., & Zyzik, E. (2003). Who's Helping Whom? NNS/NS Networked Conversations. Applied 
Linguistics, 24(4), 519-544.  
Blake, R., Blasco, J., & Hernández, C. (2001). Tesoros CD-ROM: A Multi-media-based Course. Boecillo, 
Valladolid: Boecillo Editorial Multimedia (BeM) and New York: McGraw-Hill Publishers, Inc. 
Brecht, R., Davidson, D., & Ginsberg, R. (1995). Predictors of Foreign Language Gain during Study 
Abroad. In B. F. Freed (Ed.), Second language acquisition in a study abroad context (pp. 37-66).  
Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins. 
Cahill, D., & Catanzaro, D. (1997). Teaching first-year Spanish on-line.  CALICO Journal, 14(2-4), 97-
114. 
Language Learning & Technology 125
Blake et al. Measuring Oral Proficiency 
 
Language Learning & Technology 126
Carr, S. (2000). As distance education comes of age, the challenge is keeping up with the students. The 
Chronicle of Higher Education, 46(23), A39-A41. Retrieved August 27, 2008, 
from http://chronicle.com/free/v46/i23/23a00101.htm. 
Chenoweth, N. A., & Murday, K. (2003). Measuring student learning in an online French course.   
CALICO Journal, 20(2), 284-314. 
Cutler, A. (2003). Lexical access. In L. Nadel (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science. Vol. 2, Epilepsy – 
Mental imagery, philosophical issues about (pp. 858-864). London: Nature Publishing Group. 
Davidson, D.  (2007). Study abroad and outcomes measurements: The case of Russian.  The Modern 
Language Journal, 91(2), 276-280.  
Dreyer, C., Bangeni, N., & Nel, C. (2005). A framework for supporting students studying English via a 
mixed-mode delivery system. In B. Holmberg, M. Shelley & C. White (Eds.), Distance education and 
languages:  Evolution and change (pp. 92-118).  Clevedon, U.K.:  Multilingual Matters. 
Erben, T. (1999). Constructing Learning in a Virtual Immersion Bath: LOTE Teacher Education through 
Audiographics. In R. Debski & M. Levy (Eds.), WORLDCALL: Global perspectives on Computer-
Assisted Language Learning (pp. 229–248). Lisse: Swets & Zeitlinger.  
Fleming, S., Hiple, D., & Du, Y. (2002). Foreign language distance education: The University of Hawai'i 
experience. In C. A. Spreen (Ed.), New technologies and language learning: Cases in the less commonly 
taught languages (Technical Report #25) (pp. 13-54). Honolulu, HI: Second Language Teaching & 
Curriculum Center. 
Hampel, R. (2003). Theoretical perspectives and new practices in audio-graphic conferencing for 
language learning. ReCALL, 15(1), 21-36.   
Hampel, R., & Hauck, M. (2004). Towards an effective use of audio conferencing in distance language 
courses. Language Learning & Technology, 8(1), 66-82. 
Holmberg, B., Shelley, M., & White, C. (Eds.). (2005). Distance education and languages:  Evolution 
and change. Clevedon, U.K.: Multilingual Matters. 
Jepson, K. (2005). Conversations—and negotiated interaction—in text and voice chat rooms. Language 
Learning & Technology, 9(3), 79-98. 
Lamy, M.-N.  (2004). Oral conversations online: Redefining oral competence in synchronous 
environments. ReCALL, 16(2), 520-538. 
Laurillard, D. (2002). Rethinking university teaching. London: Routledge. 
Levelt, W. (1989). Speaking: From intention to articulation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Payne, J. S., & Ross, B. (2005). Synchronous CMC, working memory, and L2 oral proficiency 
development. Language Learning & Technology, 9(3), 34-54.  
Payne, J. S., & Whitney, P. J. (2002). Developing L2 oral proficiency through synchronous CMC:  
Output, working memory, and interlanguage development. CALICO Journal, 20(1), 7-32.  
Soo, K., & Ngeow, Y. (1998). Effective English as a second language (ESL) instruction with interactive 
multimedia: The MCALL project. Journal of Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia, 7(1), 71-89. 
Terrell, T. D., Andrade, M., Egasse, J., & Muñoz, M. (2002). Dos mundos. New York: McGraw-Hill 
Publishing Company. 
Thompson, I., & Hiple, D. (Eds.).  (2005).  Selected papers from the 2004 NFLRC symposium: Distance 
Education, Distributed Learning and Language Instruction (NetWork#44) [HTML document]. Honolulu: 
Blake et al. Measuring Oral Proficiency 
 
Language Learning & Technology 127
44. 
p 
University of Hawai'i, National Foreign Language Resource Center. Retrieved March 6, 2006 
from http://nflrc.hawaii.edu/NetWorks/NW
Thorne, S., &Payne, J. S. (2005). Introduction to the special issue. CALICO Journal, 22(3), 369-370. 
Versant for Spanish [Computer software]. Available 
at http://www.ordinate.com/versant/business/professional/samples.js
Volle, L. M. (2005). Analyzing oral skills in voice e-mail and online interviews. Language Learning & 
Technology, 9(3), 146-163. 
Warschauer, M. (1997). Comparing face-to-face and electronic discussion in the second language 
classroom.  CALICO Journal, 13(2-3), 7-26. 
Weir, C. (1990). Communicative language testing. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:  Prentice-Hall. 
White, C. (2006). Distance learning of foreign languages. Language Teaching, 39, 247-264. 
Wilson, N.L., Bernstein, J.E., & Rosenfeld, E. (2006, November). Development and validation of an 
automatic spoken Spanish test. The 4th Joint Meeting of the Acoustical Society of America and The 
Acoustical Society of Japan, Honolulu, HI. 
Zähner, C., Fauverge, A., & Wong, J. (2000). Task-based language learning via audiovisual networks:  
The LEVERAGE project.  In M. Warschauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Network-based Language Teaching:  
Concepts and Practice (pp. 186-203). Cambridge:  Cambridge University Press. 
 
