Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num3/emerging/ 
October 2008, Volume 12, Number 3 
pp. 3-9 
 
Copyright © 2008, ISSN 1094-3501 3
EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES 
MOBILE-COMPUTING TRENDS: LIGHTER, FASTER, SMARTER 
Robert Godwin-Jones 
Virginia Commonwealth University 
We are moving into a new era of mobile computing, one that promises greater variety in applications, 
highly improved usability, and speedier networking. The 3G iPhone from Apple is the poster child for 
this trend, but there are plenty of other developments that point in this direction. The Google-led Android 
phone will make its appearance this year, offering a compelling open-source alternative to Apple's device. 
New, faster networking, particularly WiMax, is rolling out, allowing these devices connection speeds that 
approach wired broadband. This will also benefit the new crop of ultra-light laptops. The significant 
innovation in this area is the famous $100 XO computer (now $188; all prices are USD). Previous 
surveys, in LLT, and by researchers (PDF) at the UK's Open University, have highlighted recent projects 
in mobile assisted language learning. In this column I will be focusing primarily on the changing 
computing and networking environment and what it might portend for future language learning 
applications. 
ULTRA-MOBILE PCs 
When I last wrote a column dedicated to mobile computing, nearly 10 years ago, there were few 
lightweight laptops, and the existing models all had major drawbacks. Today there are many more models 
and sizes available, but not all the shortcomings have been addressed. In fact, in comparison with 
developments in the area of mobile phones, it might not seem that a great deal of progress has been made. 
With the exceptions of a faster processor, larger memory/hard drive, and a higher resolution display, the 
Toshiba Libretto of 1998 is not that different from the Sony Vaio UX of 2008. The size, weight, and, 
crucially, battery life are similar. There is, however, a different kind of portable computing device that 
was not available in 1998, the Tablet PC. 
The first Tablet PCs, announced with great fanfare in 2002, were not a runaway success, but in 2005 
Microsoft introduced the Origami Project with new software enhancements. Models like the Samsung Q1 
and the eo series from TabletKiosk feature smaller, more powerful Tablets. They use a 7-inch display and 
weigh just under 2 lbs. These ultra-mobile PCs are designed to be used for both work and entertainment 
but are best suited for note taking and editing. They offer multiple options for creating documents: voice 
recognition or handwriting recognition, a virtual keyboard or an external keyboard. They are not well 
adapted to intensive computing tasks such as graphic editing or gaming. A recent entrant in this field is 
the Nokia Internet Tablet, which runs Linux rather than Windows. The absence of a traditional keyboard 
in small Tablets has been an impediment for many users, making it awkward to use in situations such as 
instant messaging or entering text in Web forms. The latest Nokia Tablet (N810) addresses this issue by 
adding a physical keyboard. Chip manufacturer Intel is promoting what it is calling "Mobile Internet 
Devices", based on its low-power Atom microprocessor and aiming with partners to develop small 
Tablets for under $500. Actually, miniaturized laptops (complete with keyboards) have proven to be more 
popular than Tablets. Minis such as the Sony Vaio UX series or the OQO models are very compact, 
weighing 1.2 lbs, with 41/2 to 5 inch screens. They feature both WiFi and cellular data network 
connectivity. 
A device with a similar form factor (but no keyboard) that has proved to be surprisingly popular is 
Amazon's Kindle. It is not a full-featured computer, but rather a dedicated e-book reader. However, its 
networking capabilities (through a EVDO cellular network) allow it also to be used as an Internet device. 
It has a 6-inch screen, weighs 10.5 ounces, and is very thin. Its principal selling points are excellent 
readability (using e-paper display) and long battery life; drawbacks are its relative high cost ($359) and 
Robert Godwin-Jones Mobile Computing Trends 
 
limited format compatibility. Amazon recently purchased Audible.com, which has led to speculation over 
the opportunity for combining print and audio versions of texts. Of particular interest to language learners 
would be the possibility of simultaneously listening to and reading a text (as in selected texts on Loudlit) 
or working with interactive exercises that leverage the availability of both spoken and written versions. 
This is not possible on the Kindle (you can either read or listen, not both), but it could be done on other 
mobile devices, possibly through the Daisy Talking Book XML standard. 
The mini laptops such as the Sony Vaio are quite expensive, well over $1000. Even more expensive are 
the new full-featured, lightweight laptops from Apple (MacBook Air) and Dell (Latitude D430), which 
feature more power and larger screens than the ultra-mobile models. For less affluent consumers, a new 
crop of small portables has arrived that are much more affordable. These are bare bones models that 
typically run Linux rather than Windows and sport a 7-inch display. The best known are the Asus Eee PC 
and the Everex Cloudbook, currently available in the US from Wal-Mart for $299. They are designed to 
be starter computers for first-time users or as second, travel computers. They work well for Internet 
access (Web browsing, e-mail, VoIP) and general computing, using the OpenOffice Suite as an 
alternative to Microsoft Office. However, the fact that they run Linux limits software choices. Some 
models can be configured to run Windows, but this adds significantly to the cost. 
One of the more interesting computers in this group is a device designed for a special purpose and 
population, the XO from the OLPC (One Laptop Per Child) Foundation. It features a 7 1/2 inch screen 
with two different modes, either full-color for indoors or non-backlit, black and white for outdoors. It can 
be used as a regular laptop or swiveled to form a tablet. It is very rugged, with a rubber membrane 
keyboard, and features unique power-charging options including solar and pull-cord chargers. In 
additional to conventional WiFi networking, it also incorporates mesh networking, which allows XO 
users to connect to one another even in the absence of a WiFi connection. Its bundled software (running 
on Linux) is simple and easy to use, designed for first-time computer users. One of the more interesting 
features of the software is the ability to press a button in virtually any program to see the underlying code. 
The HTML of Web pages, for example, can be easily viewed, edited, and resaved. While the computer 
itself is designed for children (the keyboard especially), the innovative features it introduces are likely to 
spur widespread interest. 
MOBILE PHONES: THE iPHONE FACTOR 
The XO was designed to be used in developing countries to provide universal access to computing and 
networking services. For a variety of political and practical reasons, adoption has been slow, with few 
country-wide contracts so far. One obstacle to effective wide-spread usage of even inexpensive laptop 
computers is the absence of Internet access. On the other hand, in countries such as India, cell phone 
ownership is growing fast. As a result, many educational projects are taking advantage of that 
development to create applications that run on mobile phones. This includes programs for language study. 
A project out of the University of California at Berkeley, MILLEE (Mobile and Immersive Learning for 
Literacy in Emerging Economies), has designed e-learning games for mobile phones which deliver 
English language instruction in an engaging way in India. There are similar programs to teach Irish in the 
Dublin area (County Meath Project - PDF) or to provide English instruction to small children in Asia (the 
L-Mo project). Other projects using mobile phones prepare ESL students for the workplace (Athabasca 
University's mLearning pilot project) and bring basic language and literacy to unschooled Indians 
(TeachMe Akshara). In fact, there have been for some time quite a few language-related applications 
available for mobile phones and PDAs, principally for the Windows Mobile and Palm platforms. These 
range from dictionaries and phrasebooks to flashcards and full-fledged interactive lessons. Increasingly, 
such programs incorporate audio and, more recently, video. Fluenz Mandarin, originally developed for 
standard computer access, is now available in a Windows Mobile version that contains the same content, 
including high quality video segments. 
Language Learning & Technology 4
Robert Godwin-Jones Mobile Computing Trends 
 
In terms of application development, the Apple iPhone has recently opened up significant new 
opportunities. When the iPhone was first released the only third-party applications possible were AJAX-
based Web applications. Such programs need a network connection to run as there is no local file access. 
With the release of the 3G iPhone, Apple opened up the iPhone to regular third-party applications. A 
SDK (Software Development Kit) for the iPhone was released and Apple set up an "Apps" store for 
iPhone applications, accessible from the iPhone or through iTunes. While these applications appear as 
equals alongside Apple's built-in programs, they do not in fact have equal access to all components of the 
iPhone. They cannot access information from or interact with other applications. Most significantly, third-
party applications cannot run in the background but only when they are the currently active application. 
Apple's explanation to developers unhappy with this restriction is that running programs in background 
could cause memory problems and lead to crashes. As a solution Apple has recently added to the iPhone 
SDK "push notification", the ability for iPhone apps not currently running to get status updates, in the 
form of pop-up notices or through other means. 
Despite the limitations, there has been a flood of applications developed for the iPhone, from games 
(many of which build on the iPhone's tilt sensing capabilities) and utilities (including one that turns the 
iPhone into a flashlight) to instant messaging and word processing. Some applications offer integration 
with desktop applications. The Stanza e-book program, for example, allows iPhone users to browse both 
the library of e-books stored on their local computer and in public e-book repositories, then to add them to 
their iPhone for off-line reading. A few apps for language learning have been released, most similar to 
what is available on other mobile platforms including dictionaries, phrase books, and flash cards. 
AccelaStudy offers a variety of language flashcards, as does StudyCards and Flash My Brain. The latter 
two incorporate a version of the Leitner system, a repetition spacing method in which typically a card is 
deleted from an active stack after a number of right answers. This is true as well for Lexicon, which also 
takes advantage of the kind of network connectivity used in Stanza to link desktop and mobile databases. 
Innovative Language Learning has introduced vocabulary and pronunciation building tools (MyWords) 
for multiple languages that allow comparison of learner's pronunciation with that of a model native 
speaker using the iPhone's recording and playback functions. In addition to language reference and 
practice applications, there are also a number of applications in the travel category, which highlight 
cultural sites. 
One program which works well on the iPhone is ChinesePod, a popular Web-based application for 
learning Mandarin; there are also sites for French, Italian, and Spanish. ChinesePod began as a series of 
podcasts to which ancillary materials have been added. The podcasts are free; the other materials are not. 
When Praxis Language, which offers ChinesePod, created a special view of their Web offerings formatted 
for the iPhone, they received an interesting reaction. The new site was immediately popular with mobile 
users, but was also a hit with those accessing the site from desktop computers. Users praised the 
simplicity of the interface and the ease in finding resources, resulting from the simplified presentation 
needed for mobile phones. This is a phenomenon others have commented on. Powerset, for example, 
designed for use with the iPhone, offers an interesting alternative to regular access to Wikipedia, featuring 
an easy to navigate search. This is true as well for Google Translate for iPhone. In fact, many services and 
institutions have created simple, easy-to-use mobile views of their sites, spurred by the popularity of the 
iPhone. The ironic aspect of this development is Apple's bally-hoed insistence that the iPhone works with 
the "real" Web without the need for special mobile-oriented, alternative Web pages. Many Web users 
would probably agree that, if the iPhone has encouraged less cluttered Web page development, that is in 
itself a positive trend. 
ANDROID: THE FUTURE? 
We seem likely to see in the near future another mobile phone with considerable promise for the 
development of educational applications, the Android phone. While Android phones will also feature 
Language Learning & Technology 5
Robert Godwin-Jones Mobile Computing Trends 
 
advanced capabilities and encourage third-party applications, this is not a single phone offered by a 
particular company. Google, with a coalition of companies under the rubric of the Open Handset Alliance, 
is actually developing an entire mobile phone platform and operating system using embedded Linux. The 
phones themselves will come from a variety of manufacturers, including HTC and Motorola. The first 
Android phones in the US will be offered through T-Mobile, and possibly Sprint. There has been 
tremendous interest in Android, principally because of Google. The Android platform promises to be 
competitive in features with the iPhone and in some areas eclipse it. It will feature, for example, 
background access to networks, shared copy and paste, and support for Flash, all missing on the iPhone. 
Prototypes that have been demonstrated show an optimized user interface similar to the iPhone with 
added features such as home screen customization and an always-available pull-down window for access 
to newly received data. Development for the Android platform has been spurred by the $10 million that 
Google is making available through the Android Developer Challenge. 
There are some challenges facing Android. There have been a number of complaints from developers 
concerning missing elements in the Android SDK, frequently changing code parameters, and poor 
documentation. While these issues are likely to be fixed in the short term by Google, a deeper concern has 
to do with handset compatibility. In contrast to developing for the iPhone, Android developers do not 
know what the features of the phone will be for which they are developing applications. The handsets, for 
example, might have a touch screen like the iPhone or a traditional keypad. Of course this is an issue 
developers for Windows Mobile have had to face as well. The ambitions for Android, however, are higher 
than for Windows Mobile devices. The selling point for Windows Mobile has principally been the 
integration between desktop and mobile applications, particularly in the area of email synchronization and 
mobile access to MS Office documents. The vision for the Android phone is to become a full-fledged 
computing and networking device in its own right, not just an adjunct to a desktop computer. This adds a 
higher level of challenge to Android application development, and having application developers settle 
for the lowest common denominator among possible phones is probably not the most effective means to 
reach Google's lofty goals. In this sense, Apple has an advantage in controlling both software and 
hardware for the iPhone. On the other hand, this places limits on hardware features, which Android does 
not face. 
The Android platform is built on a version of Linux. This is true as well for a competing mobile phone 
platform, LiMo (for Linux Mobile), an open source project supported by a consortium that includes 
Mozilla/Firefox, Panasonic, Samsung, and others. There are already LiMo phones available from 
Motorola and Samsung. OpenMoko is another open source project for phones. Neither at this point can 
compete with the iPhone or Android in the sophistication of the user interface. For mobile phone carriers, 
open source operating systems and third party applications are a source of worry, as they threaten loss of 
control and loss of revenue. Cellular carriers want to continue to charge a monthly fee for photo transfers, 
for example, which is compromised if users are able to do so for free through a third party application. It's 
perhaps no surprise that the two largest carriers in the US passed on the Android phone. On the other 
hand, an operating system used by some 60% of phones worldwide is following the lead of Android in the 
direction of openness. The Symbian OS, recently purchased by Nokia, is to be unified into one platform 
(instead of the current three different versions) and is to become open source by 2010. Given 
Symbian/Nokia's large client base, this is likely to force carriers to accept the inevitability of users being 
able to customize their phone's functionality. Meanwhile, the other major smartphone manufacturer, 
Research in Motion, maker of the Blackberry, is pursuing a path similar to Apple's with the company 
controlling both hardware and software. 
EXPANDING NETWORKS AND OPPORTUNITIES 
In addition to the arrival of many more applications and services for mobile users, another major change 
is in network speed. 3G cellular networks, available for some time in Asia and Europe, are recent arrivals 
Language Learning & Technology 6
Robert Godwin-Jones Mobile Computing Trends 
 
in North America. 3G is the third generation of standards for mobile phones and features more efficient 
transmission of data than previous networks. 2G networks were designed for voice transmission and don't 
do a good job with data transmission. While 3G is an improvement on data speeds, the future 4G 
networks will be even faster and more reliable through sending data as IP packets. The change from 
reliance on the slower Edge network (a 2.5G network) to 3G has been a big boon for sales of the iPhone. 
The faster connection speeds do not just provide a quicker way to access existing services like browsing 
the Web; they also enable advanced services, such as high-quality video streaming. Ubiquitous, high-
speed access to the Internet through 3G or WiFi is becoming much more common in industrialized 
countries, and as prices fall with more sales, the new networking situation is likely to bring significant 
opportunities for educational uses. These could range from anywhere/anytime delivery of lectures and 
demonstrations to group video conferencing. For language learning, reliable, high quality audio and video 
delivery to user-friendly mobile devices can provide valuable (and enjoyable) language input to learners. 
Video clips could also be incorporated into learning programs such as simulations, practice dialogues, 
short biographies, subtitled music videos, or other language use scenarios. 
A new network protocol arriving in the US and other countries is WiMax (802.16). This may sound 
similar to the wireless networking standard known as WiFi (802.11) but in practice is quite different. It is 
designed to operate at long distances (several kilometers) and to provide reliable connectivity (so called 
Quality of Service), which is so important for demanding applications like two-way video. WiMax has 
been used in emergency situations in which traditional networks have become unavailable, such as after 
the tsunami in Indonesia or in the wake of hurricane Katrina in the U.S. gulf coast. It appears to be a 
standard well suited for deployment in rural areas and in countries lacking an infrastructure to support 
landline connections. In the US a consortium of companies has joined to offer WiMax service through 
Clearwire. The first commercial WiMax service in Europe is being offered by WorldMAX in the 
Amsterdam area. A partner in the Clearwire group is Google, which will support WiMax in selected 
Android handsets. WiMax will also be supported on some laptops as well as on other devices such as 
game consoles. 
Another change in the 3G iPhone is the inclusion of a GPS chip. This is a trend in both mobile phones 
and some laptops. GPS allows not only help in finding one's way but also provides an opportunity for 
location aware applications. Some of the more interesting applications for the iPhone are those which use 
GPS to enhance social networking. Apps such as Nearby, WhosHere, or Whrrl allow users to find nearby 
services, friends, or restaurants and also to view information on local sites. The popularity of Twitter (a 
continuous short-form diary) and sites such as Facebook or MySpace, along with their mobile versions, 
demonstrates how comfortable young people are with using technology for social interactions. Any such 
tools that enhance communication and human interaction can potentially be harnessed for language 
learning.  
In terms of language support, the 3G iPhone supports many more languages than the original phone. As 
the phone is marketed in more countries, more languages are likely to be added. Language support for 
Android is uncertain at this time, but given the investment Google is putting in its success, it seems highly 
likely that Android will eventually support major world languages and alphabets. For mobile devices to 
become optimally useful in language learning, this kind of language support needs to carry over as well 
into areas such as text entry, auto-correcting, and spell checking.  Currently, the functionality in these 
areas is limited but improving.  In the most recent upgrade to the iPhone software, for example, text entry 
is possible in non-Roman writing systems.  For Chinese, for instance, text can be entered in Pinyin with a 
pop-up showing possible characters (user's choice of simplified or traditional) or characters can be 
entered in a text entry window with one's finger, again with a pop-up showing possible intended 
characters.  In my experience, this works well with simple characters, but is a challenge with high stroke 
characters, for which a stylus would be more efficient. Switching language keyboards can be done easily 
on the iPhone, by tapping on the globe icon, which then cycles through keyboards the user has chosen to 
Language Learning & Technology 7
Robert Godwin-Jones Mobile Computing Trends 
 
make active.  Given sufficient language display and writing support, mobile devices can provide services 
such as text flagging for spelling or grammatical problems.  Since these devices typically have always-on 
network connections, it is also possible to incorporate word look-up in dual-language dictionaries.  The 
iPhone flashcard program Lexicon allows such dictionaries, once downloaded, to be stored locally for fast 
look-up. 
With robust language support, mobile devices may open up new vistas for language learning.  In 
particular, it would seem logical to leverage the current student generation's heavy reliance on social 
networking in support of language learning, with uses such as text messaging for language partners, 
language class linking through Facebook updates, or Twitter updates as part of a lesson on verbs 
describing ones daily routine.  Of course, all of these uses presuppose student access to mobile devices 
(and services) as well as compatibility among different mobile devices students may be using.  If Android 
becomes a popular platform, it may lead to more third-party application development for mobile phones, 
and perhaps encourage more use of open platforms by phone carriers. 
 
RESOURCE LIST 
Lightweight PC's 
• Internet appliance Wikipedia article 
• Mobile Internet Devices Wikipedia article 
• Ultra-Mobile PC Wikipedia article 
• Windows Ultra-Mobile PC Microsoft presentation 
• Do You Have That Portable in a Midsize? NY Times article 
• Slipstream - On a Small Screen, Just the Salient Stuff NY Times blog entry 
• ASUS Eee PC Wikipedia article 
• Asus Eee PC 701 Review of the Asus Eee PC 701 
• Everex CloudBook Review 
• Walmart.com: Everex 7" CloudBook 
• Samsung Q1 Ultra-Mobile PC (Origami) Review by BostonHerald 
• Samsung's 'Origami' Device Poorly Designed, Hard to Use Review from FOXNews.com 
• Review: the Samsung Q1 From livejournal 
• OQO Review of the OQO model 02 
• Origami: A Sum of Two Failures Columns by PC Magazine 
• Tablet PC and Ultra-Mobile PC Systems and Accessories From TabletKiosk 
• eo UMPC v7110e TabletKiosk computer 
• New Dell Latitudes claim 19-hour battery From Electronista 
• Gear Gallery: Shrinking Computers, DVR Expander and iPhone Competitors 
• Nokia N810 Wikipedia article 
• Hands-On with One Laptop Per Child's XO Laptop Review 
• FlipStart 1.0 Review by LAPTOP Magazine 
Kindle and E-Books 
• Warming to the Kindle From Time Magazine 
• Amazon Kindle From Technology Review 
Language Learning & Technology 8
Robert Godwin-Jones Mobile Computing Trends 
 
Language Learning & Technology 9
• FBReader: News E-book reader 
• The future of e-paper: The Kindle is only the beginning From Comupterworld 
• Kindle ... Or Is It Just Kindling? From Wired 
• Mobipocket announcements at IDPF conference MobileRead Forums 
• Kindleville Blog 
• Ganaxa GeR2 e-reader: Vizplex vs. non-Vizplex video MobileRead Forums 
• E-paper displays move a step closer to real paper From Infoworld 
• Joe Wikert's Publishing 2020 Blog: getAbstract Audio 
• Could Amazon and Audible Rewrite the Rules of Publishing? New York Times Blog 
Mobile Phone Projects and Operating Systems 
• Symbian OS Wikipedia aricle 
• Symbian OS: the open mobile operating system 
• All About Symbian Info about Symbian development 
• What does Nokia's Symbian move mean for Android? 
• Symbian forecasts the death of the PC 
• openmoko.com Open source Linux phone OS 
• Openmoko Wikipedia 
• Welcome to LiMo Open source Linux phone OS 
• PC World - 700-MHz Auction Draws Mixed Reaction 
• The Linux Mobile Phones Showcase 
• Android Wikipedia aricle 
• Android Demo YouTube video 
• Gphone May Really Happen, And Ammunition Group May Be Designing It 
• Android vs. iPhone: 'This is where the pain happens' From Washington Post 
• Analyzing Google's "Android" From Washington Post 
• Hello Android Android OS news, tutorials, downloads 
• A possible G phone, small screens vs. large From Teleread 
Language Related Projects 
• Putting the fun into language learning About the University of Nottingham mobile phone project 
• Use of Mobile Phones for Language Learning and Assessment for Learning Mobile County project 
using mobile phones (PDF) 
• Mobile Language-Learning Tools Help Pave the Way to Literacy ing for Literacy in Emerging 
Economies From Microsoft (PDF) 
• Learn Chinese ChinesePod 
• Mobile English language Learning Launched on 3G Phones From Franchisewire.com 
• Learn Spanish and Chinese with the iPhone at Praxis Language  
• MILLEE: Mobile and Immersive Learning for Literacy in Emerging Economies Berkeley project 
• MILLEE: Learning Languages Over Your Phone 
• Learning a Language on a Mobile Device From mLearnopedia.com 
• Google Translate now for iPhone From Google mobile blog 
