Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num3/review1/ 
October 2008, Volume 12, Number 3
pp. 14-22 
 
Copyright © 2008. ISSN 1094-3501 14
REVIEW OF CENTRO VIRTUAL CAMÕES – APRENDER PORTUGUÊS 
Site reviewed Centro Virtual Camões – Aprender Português 
URL: http://www.instituto-camoes.pt/cvc/aprender-portugues.html 
Platform Firefox 3, Flock 1.2, Internet Explorer 7, Opera 9, or Safari 3  
Minimum hardware 
requirements 
Not specified 
Support offered Website map, Contact options, Website search engine, Bilingual 
(Portuguese and English) "read me" presentation of the website 
Target language Portuguese 
Target audience Most activities aim at students at beginning and/or intermediate 
proficiency levels, regardless of age or purpose for learning Portuguese 
Price Free 
Review by Ricardo Vasconcelos, University of California, Santa Barbara  
The website Centro Virtual Camões – Aprender Português is supported by the Instituto Camões, a 
Portuguese national institute dedicated to promoting the teaching and learning of Portuguese around the 
world.1 This website focuses particularly on European Portuguese (EP) and does not address other 
variants, such as Brazilian Portuguese. The instructional goal of the website is to offer practice tools that 
learners, ranging from adolescents to adults, from beginning to advanced proficiency levels, can use as 
self-study or in conjunction with courses in Portuguese to improve mastery of the major skills: reading, 
listening, writing, and speaking. In fact, the website broadly defines its audience as "all those who seek to 
learn, teach or translate Portuguese, to get to know the Portuguese language and culture or to improve 
their Portuguese skills through a distance/e-learning training programme" (Centro Virtual Camões, 2008, 
para. 2). The Instituto Camões does offer online courses, but the use of Aprender Português is not 
dependent on them. In this review of Aprender Português, the organization, diversity, and creativity of its 
contents is addressed within the framework of multimedia-supported learning: short reading, extensive 
reading, listening, writing, speaking, games, grammar, and vocabulary.  
Reading 
The website offers reading comprehension activities based on sixteen short texts, Pequenos textos, most 
of which are authentic texts from newspapers and magazines, covering the topics of real estate, weather 
forecasts, horoscopes, recipes and diets. The activities associated with these texts involve the practice of 
specific vocabulary, such as food, parts of the house, means of transportation, the days of the week, and 
months of the year. These exercises are clearly intended for a beginner level and are, in general, very 
controlled, consisting of multiple-choice items, matching exercises, ordering sentences, and short 
answers. 
An example of a developed group of exercises based on a short reading is the one associated with the 
text Um horóscopo 'A horoscope', which allows learners to practice both reading comprehension and v
structures such as the imperative mood and commands. The text consists of twelve horoscopes and, in the 
first exercise, students are asked to match signs of the Zodiac with corresponding dates and to type the 
correct answer. While not requiring higher order cognitive skills, this activity does comply with Mayer’s 
Spatial Contiguity Principle, according to which "people learn more deeply from a multimedia message 
when corresponding words and pictures are presented near rather than far from each other on the page or 
screen" (Mayer, 2005b, p. 198), and this positive aspect of the activity allows for enhanced learning of the 
vocabulary used (the days and months). In the case of 'A Horoscope', by clicking on Exercício seguinte 
'Next exercise' on the bottom horizontal menu, learners are taken to another activity based on the same 
reading. Although this multiple-choice activity tests the understanding of the text, this new exercise does
erb 
Ricardo Vasconcelos Review of Aprender Português. 
 
not comply equally well with the Contiguity Principle as students have to scroll through the text to read 
the questions and scan for the answers. This shortcoming could be overcome by presenting the text in 
column format and showing the questions parallel to it. Other activities related to the text can be found 
under Consolidar 'Consolidation' on the top horizontal menu (e.g., grammar exercises about the future 
tense). The spatial layout of all the reading comprehension exercises based on the sixteen texts is 
diversified. Even if most of the activities offered in this section of the webpage are very controlled, they 
are nonetheless pedagogically useful as they require a thorough understanding of the authentic texts.  
Aprender Português also provides a number of activities based on extensive reading of short stories and 
narratives (Contos e pequenas narrativas), which are appropriate for learners at the intermediate level. 
These consist of nineteen short stories (two folk stories, fifteen short stories written by well-known 20th-
century Portuguese authors, and two others by 19th-century Portuguese authors) and a fragment of the epic 
poem Os Lusíadas (The Lusiads) by the 16th-century poet Luís de Camões. Students can listen to good 
quality recordings of the narratives either with or without simultaneously reading them. After clicking 
Para ouvir o texto 'To listen to the text', a pop-up window opens a media player application (a link to 
download Real Player is provided, but other applications, such as QuickTime, automatically open the 
file), allowing students to stop the recording, rewind it or fast-forward it in order to listen to specific 
passages or to skip them (Figure 1). This feature reflects Merriënboer and Kester’s Self-Pacing Principle, 
according to which "[g]iving learners control over the pace of instruction … has a positive effect on … 
learning and transfer" (2005, p. 89). From the twenty short stories presented, only one does not have an 
audio version (Trindade Coelho’s "A Choca" 'The Laying Hen'). 
 
Figure 1. Reading activity: Short story with multimedia tools. 
The oral reading of any short story represents one interpretation of a text typically intended to be read 
silently, with idiosyncrasies such as the speaker’s voice, pace of reading, and choices of stress and 
intonation. In that sense, the pedagogic usefulness of these recordings lies in the fact that, being 
interpretations of these short stories, they complement the learner’s own reading and interpretation. The 
Language Learning & Technology 15
Ricardo Vasconcelos Review of Aprender Português. 
 
website does not impose a simultaneous reading of and listening to the text, which arguably could create a 
conflict between the pace of the reader and the pace of the recording, but which allows students to 
contrast their own reading with another one, in this case a dramatized reading by a native speaker. The 
website indicates that the voices who recorded the readings of the short narratives belong to well-known 
Portuguese actors and actresses, such as Norberto Barroca, Filipe La Féria, Ruy de Carvalho, and 
Manuela Machado, all of whom participated in one dramatized reading. Unfortunately the only recordings 
actually available at the time of website access for this review were fifteen stories read by Luísa 
Fernanda, who, nonetheless, reads at a normal speed and in a very clear standard EP accent. The 
recordings that could not be downloaded were those of the short stories written by Sophia de Mello 
Breyner Andresen, Alice Vieira, José Cardoso Pires, and Manuel Alegre.  
Comprehension aids for the vocabulary in the narratives are provided on the website in the form of 
annotations with definitions that appear in pop-up windows after students click on underlined words. 
Studies of different types of comprehension aids (Chun & Plass, 1996; Plass & Jones, 2005) have shown 
that the combination of visual and verbal annotations are more effective than verbal annotations alone; 
therefore, vocabulary learning on Aprender Português could be improved by including visual annotations. 
Annotations with translations (Plass & Jones, 2005) are not applicable for this website since it is not 
aimed at learners of a specific language background.  
 
Figure 2. Reading activity: Virtual story with alternative paths. 
Another interesting section within the extensive reading activities, called Histórias virtuais 'Virtual 
Stories', exploits the Internet’s ability to establish connections through hyperlinks. These exercises consist 
of open-path stories of different lengths or even with different endings. Students read narrative sequences 
of stories and choose alternative story development paths that correspond to different outcomes (Figure 
2). The virtual stories are either investigation or mystery stories, such as a police investigation in "O Caso 
da Calçada do Jasmim" (The Case of Jasmin Walk) by Fernando Ribeiro and Regina Brasil, a historical 
Language Learning & Technology 16
Ricardo Vasconcelos Review of Aprender Português. 
 
exploration in "O Manuscrito Misterioso" (The Mysterious Manuscript) by Maria Bernardo and Luísa 
Grilo), or a love story, "Ao Encontro do Amor" (A Meeting with Love), in which dilemmas such as 
choosing which personal ads to reply to need to be solved. These topics lead readers through the kind of 
deductive reasoning and choice making that are necessary to rewrite the stories. The alternative paths link 
to different webpages corresponding to episodes of the stories which can put one "on the right track" in 
the case of an investigation, or to different stages of a relationship in the love story. Some of the stories 
have only one ending, which is eventually revealed, but during the reading activity readers are given 
optional paths corresponding to different deductions or hypotheses at the end of each chapter, so the more 
wrong choices readers make, the more episodes they have to read. 
These activities make full use of the hypertextual potentialities of the Internet. Hypertext, by definition, is 
"a nonlinear networked information structure with no predefined reading path" (Rouet & Potelle, 2005, p. 
300), and these open-path stories make good didactic use of this potential by requiring very close reading, 
during which comprehension is tested through the choices students make, arguably allowing for a more 
active interpretation than when reading a linear story. Still, the format of the activities can cause 
frustration. While in two of the four available stories the number of alternative paths is quite limited, in 
the two other stories learners have too many choices. This may lead to "getting ‘lost in space’" (Conklin, 
1987, p. 38), a problem that arises from not knowing "(1) where [one is] in the network and (2) how to get 
to some other place that [one] know[s] or think[s] exists in the network" (p. 38). The example of "O Caso 
da Calçada do Jasmim", which deals with a police investigation, is particularly striking in this regard as 
the readers do not only have to follow three testimonies of five witnesses for a total of fifteen texts, but 
also have to complete grammar activities. Eventually, they have to submit their solution to the story by 
identifying the perpetrator and typing their reasons. However, in one trial run completed for this review, 
the final screen warned that the activity was closed, which meant that users could not confirm their 
choices.  
Listening 
The listening activities available on Aprender Português are organized into three levels: beginner, 
intermediate, and advanced. Beginner activities focus on recognition of numbers and single words, 
intermediate activities focus on day-to-day situations and present short audio texts, and advanced 
activities make use of the recordings of the short stories mentioned above. In all beginner level exercises, 
students listen to a sequence of words and click on them or drag them to boxes in the order they heard 
them. All the beginner activities focus on the recognition of words with identical sequences of phonemes 
(e.g., blusão; bloqueio; bloco; blá-blá-blá; bloquear; blindado), or on the identification of numbers. This 
section lacks variety and challenge; in fact, no attention is paid to the meaning of the words, which could 
be done by including them in meaningful contexts. 
The activities at the intermediate level, however, are titled Em situação 'In context' and offer a variety of 
recorded texts, such as a recipe description, a phone call to reserve a hotel room, a dialogue simulating the 
beginning of a TV contest, and two monologues with the characters describing what they are 
doing/seeing, as if thinking aloud. The activities accompanying these recordings are more diversified than 
those at the beginner level and include true/false items, multiple-choice questions, sentence ordering, 
sentence completion, identifying words, and counting the occurrence of certain words. There are three 
activities per recording, and all of them require learners to pay attention to the meaning of the texts. In 
addition, these recordings are more balanced in the sense that different text types are presented, 
addressing different vocabulary. The shortcoming of this section, however, is that all recordings are 
dramatized readings of texts, resulting in unnaturally slow speed or mechanical dialogues.  
At the advanced level, the website re-uses some of the recorded readings of the short stories and offers 
listening activities based on them. All activities involve exercises in sequencing the text or restructuring 
it. In the sequencing activity, students listen to the text while they read short passages from it and choose 
Language Learning & Technology 17
Ricardo Vasconcelos Review of Aprender Português. 
 
Language Learning & Technology 18
which script corresponds to what they are hearing. If they answer correctly, the text is reconstructed in a 
text box. Students can pause the text to read it more deliberately, and this feature might reduce the 
cognitive load that builds when students listen to a text and read different answer options at the same time 
(Kirschner, 2002; Sweller, 2005). In the restructuring activities, users simply rewrite the text in a box as 
they listen to it. While listening to the recording, users identify words they hear and type them in a small 
box, below a box with a hidden script; if correct words are typed, the words will be shown in the box with 
the script in all passages in which they are used. A negative aspect of both activities is that students are 
not required to show a real understanding of what they listen to, but only to identify chunks of text. On 
the whole, the listening activities at the advanced level are not very challenging at all; in fact, the ones at 
the intermediate level seem pedagogically richer. The listening section on Aprender Português would 
benefit from integrating more activities that focus on comprehension of these short stories rather than 
mere recognition of words/passages. Also, this section would benefit from including more authentic 
dialogues of real life interactions with activities focusing clearly on comprehension. 
Writing 
At present, there is no section in Aprender Português dedicated to writing. Before the update of the 
website in June, 2008, some exercises were available to get users to write in Portuguese and communicate 
with other users of the website. It is unclear why the writing portion has been removed. Prior to June, the 
production of written output was stimulated through competitions in which any user of the website could 
participate, for example, by rewriting the endings of short stories. Additionally, written output occurred in 
the form of collaborative writing, in which users could post their version of a story to be continued by 
someone else. Also, the Instituto Camões provided a list of "pen-pals" with whom users could exchange 
(e-)mail. However, all of this material cannot be accessed through the Aprender Português website 
anymore. 
Speaking 
The Falar 'Speaking' section of Aprender Português offers three different subsections: a webpage 
with studies of the pronunciation of European Portuguese offering a contrast with Brazilian Portuguese, a
set of video recordings of the Portuguese TV show "
 
uese 
Cuidado com a língua!" (Watch what you are 
saying), and a conversation guide. The pronunciation studies, written by Portuguese linguist Maria Helena 
Mira Mateus, a Professor at the University of Lisbon, are in-depth descriptions of aspects of Portug
segmental and suprasegmental phonology, and dialectal divergence in EP. These studies include audio 
recordings to exemplify aspects of the pronunciation of European Portuguese and are accompanied by 
downloadable PDF worksheets with pronunciation practice exercises or general questions about the 
content of the studies. Although not stated, advanced learners are the likely audience of this subsection 
since these are in-depth studies that require a high level of proficiency. These studies might be 
particularly useful for instructors to integrate into their advanced Portuguese courses in order to call 
students’ attention to specific aspects of interest. However, it would be beneficial for students if more 
activities on this part of the website focused not so much on theory but on actual pronunciation practice. 
The TV video recordings showcase varied topics, such as popular expressions and phrases, or the origin 
of toponyms. While it seems that these video segments would make for useful listening tasks, they are 
included in the speaking section as they often address expressions or common mistakes typical of oral 
speech. The videos present dialogues in which speakers use expressions, words, or proverbs that are 
analyzed both by the actors and the narrator, the latter giving further information about the use and rules 
associated with those linguistic features. Relevant vocabulary is usually grouped by topics (e.g., Vestuário 
'Clothing'), and several words and expressions related to the topic are used in context (a clothing store). 
Many different aspects of the vocabulary are analyzed, such as multiple meanings, history and etymology, 
common mistakes, and differences in Portuguese variants. The information provided is thorough and the 
videos are quite lively due to well written texts, excellent acting, and good animation and sound effects. 
Ricardo Vasconcelos Review of Aprender Português. 
 
The only speaking practice activities available are associated with the pronunciation of specific 
words/phrases from a conversation guide called Guia de Bolso 'Pocket Guidebook'. Aprender Português 
does not use speech-recognition technology – possibly because these tools are still scarce in the area of 
Portuguese – and, therefore, there are no pronunciation exercises with feedback to students. Although this 
is not a major drawback, the incorporation of this technology would certainly prove useful as it would 
allow students to actually assess the outcome of their speaking practice in a more informed way. The 
"pocket dictionary" presents vocabulary organized mostly in terms of communicative language tasks, 
such as finding accommodations or meeting people. 
This exercise, formatted as a guide for tourists – hence the name Guia de Bolso – has two different 
versions, one in English and one in French, and students have to choose the one they prefer before 
accessing a list of vocabulary topics. After selecting a topic, such as "Health and Security", students 
encounter a list of typical tourist needs and select a relevant communicative situation, such as "Finding a 
hospital, a chemist [British English for pharmacist] or a police station", or "Describing your health 
condition". This opens a list of useful sentences and expressions with translations, such as Onde fica o 
hospital? 'Where is the hospital?', or Estou doente 'I feel ill'. Clicking on the sound icons allows users to 
hear a recording of these sentences/expressions; unfortunately, the quality of the audio files is not always 
very good, and certainly not as good as the other sound files available on the website. As pointed out 
above, a tool incorporating speech-recognition to help users evaluate their pronunciation through 
comparison to that of a native speaker would increase the usefulness of this activity. In fact, Plass and 
Jones (2005) predict that two of the main future research areas in computer-assisted language learning 
will be the enhancement of output possibilities and the development of tools for promoting and evaluating 
comprehensible output. 
 
Figure 3. The “Goose Game” with virtual game board and dice. 
Games, Grammar, and Vocabulary 
Since the last update of the website, the grammar section has become part of a broader section called A-
Brincar 'Playing', which presents games for grammar, vocabulary, and cultural topics. This section 
combines lively interactive games with excellent animations in activities such as Jogo da Glória Virtual 
'The Goose Game' (Figure 3) and Jogo da Forca 'Hangman'. However, the pedagogical outcome of these 
games is disproportionate to the time and steps involved in completing them. For example, in "The Goose 
Game", having to set up the virtual game board, rolling the virtual dice, and watching the pieces move 
across the board seems too time-consuming compared to the actual learning outcome, which might 
involve, for example, the practice of prepositions. Nevertheless, game-like exercises such as Hangman are 
Language Learning & Technology 19
Ricardo Vasconcelos Review of Aprender Português. 
 
Language Learning & Technology 20
often engaging for students in classrooms, and so it is plausible that, on the website, they can be equally 
engaging to users, partly because of their rich animation. Integrated into A-Brincar, the 
section Gramaticando 'Grammar-ing' presents activities on specific grammar structures. Even if they ten
to be very controlled, these exercises have a game-like presentation format and sometimes have a rich 
graphic design, although, at times, the use of images is more ornamental than h
d 
elpful. 
 
 
Figure 4. Vocabulary activity: The human body / the face. 
Ricardo Vasconcelos Review of Aprender Português. 
 
Centro Virtual Camões – Aprender Português offers several very interesting activities related to the 
learning of Portuguese vocabulary, some of which have been hinted at above. In an activity on vocabulary 
related to the human body (Corpo humano, Figure 4), the use of images is a good example of the potential 
of multimedia in computer-assisted language learning. Users have to complete a cloze passage using 
vocabulary related to the human face. The insertion of the words in the correct spaces automatically 
"reconstructs" a face in the image next to the text while simultaneously emphasizing specific collocations, 
such as escuro e comprido 'long and dark' and cabelo 'hair'. This is a good example of how a cloze 
exercise can make excellent use of the multimedia environment compared to the activities in 
Gramaticando 'Grammar-ing' mentioned earlier. The human face activity is more intrinsically rewarding 
as students receive both verbal and visual feedback on their answers, thus implementing Mayer’s (2005a) 
Multimedia Principle, according to which "people learn more deeply from words and pictures than from 
words alone" (p. 47). 
CONCLUSIONS 
If users of the website need help, they can refer to support tools that can be found in links displayed on 
the main portal; however, these tools refer not only to Aprender Português, but to the entire website of the 
Instituto Camões. For example, the FAQ section addresses applications for fellowships, courses, and 
lecturer positions. Aprender Português would benefit from listing support tools for learners, such as a 
Help menu and Contacts on its main page. The navigation on the website is, in general, clearly structured 
and transparent and should be easy for the targeted adolescent and adult users, even if they are lower level 
learners. Navigation between the different pages and exercises, with back/forward links as well as links to 
other parts of the platform, is easy.  
In conclusion, Aprender Português could benefit from improvement in the areas of providing feedback to 
users with regard to oral output and incorporating authentic texts in the listening section. All in all, 
though, the website’s usefulness and effectiveness lies in its generally well-structured and varied 
activities, which anyone interested in learning Portuguese can easily use for free, and which can also be 
incorporated by instructors into their own courses. Aprender Português, therefore, should be a welcome 
addition to the current dearth of multimedia resources for learning Portuguese.  
 
NOTES 
1. This review takes into consideration the latest update made to the website in June, 2008. 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Ricardo Vasconcelos is a Ph.D. candidate in Luso-Brazilian Literatures (with emphasis on Applied 
Linguistics) at the University of California, Santa Barbara. He holds a B.A. in Portuguese and English 
Literature and Language (emphasis in Education), and an M.A. in Modern and Contemporary Portuguese 
Literature, completed at the Faculdade de Letras da Universidade do Porto in Portugal. 
Email: ricardo_vasconcelos@umail.ucsb.edu 
Web: http://uweb.ucsb.edu/~ricardo_vasconcelos/index.html 
 
REFERENCES 
Centro Virtual Camões. Entrada. Retrieved July 26, 2008, from http://www.instituto-camoes.pt/cvc/  
Language Learning & Technology 21
Ricardo Vasconcelos Review of Aprender Português. 
 
Language Learning & Technology 22
Chun, D. M., & Plass, J. L (1996). Effects of multimedia annotations on vocabulary acquisition. The 
Modern Language Journal, 80(2), 183-198. 
Conklin, J. (1987). Hypertext: An introduction. Computer, 20(9), 17-41. 
Kirschner, P.A. (2002). Cognitive load theory: Implications of cognitive load theory on the design of 
learning. Learning and Instruction, 12(1), 1-10. 
Mayer, R. (2005a). Cognitive theory of multimedia learning. In R. Mayer (Ed.), The Cambridge 
handbook of multimedia learning (pp. 31-48). New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Mayer, R. (2005b). Principles for reducing extraneous processing in multimedia learning: Coherence, 
signaling, redundancy, spatial contiguity, and temporal contiguity principles. In R. Mayer (Ed.), The 
Cambridge handbook of multimedia learning (pp. 183-200). New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Merriënboer, J. G., & Kester, L. (2005). The four-component instructional design model: Multimedia 
principles in environments for complex learning. In R. Mayer (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of 
multimedia learning (pp. 71-93). New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Plass, J. L., & Jones, L. C. (2005). Multimedia learning in second language acquisition. In R. Mayer 
(Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of multimedia learning (pp. 467 – 488). New York: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Rouet, J.-F., & Potelle, H. (2005). Navigational principles in multimedia learning. In R. Mayer (Ed.), The 
Cambridge handbook of multimedia learning (pp. 297-312). New York. 
Sweller, J. (2005). Implications of cognitive load theory for multimedia learning. In R. Mayer (Ed.), The 
Cambridge handbook of multimedia learning (pp. 19-30). New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 
