Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num3/belzvyatkina/ 
October 2008, Volume 12, Number 3
pp. 33-52 
 
Copyright © 2008, ISSN 1094-3501 33
THE PEDAGOGICAL MEDIATION OF A DEVELOPMENTAL LEARNER 
CORPUS FOR CLASSROOM-BASED LANGUAGE INSTRUCTION 
Julie A. Belz 
Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis 
Nina Vyatkina 
University of Kansas 
Although corpora have been used in language teaching for some time, few empirical 
studies explore their impact on learning outcomes. We provide a microgenetic account of 
learners’ responses to corpus-driven instructional units for German modal particles and 
pronominal da-compounds. The units are based on developmental corpus data produced 
by native speakers during interactions with the very learners for whom the units are 
designed. Thus, we address the issue of authentication in corpus-driven language 
pedagogy. Finally, we illustrate how an ethnographically supplemented developmental 
learner corpus may contribute to second language acquisition research via dense 
documentation of micro-changes in learners’ language use over time. 
INTRODUCTION 
This article explores the pedagogically mediated application of a learner corpus in language teaching and 
in the developmental analysis of second language acquisition (SLA). We distinguish between longitudinal 
and developmental analyses with regard to the density of observation of learner performance over time. 
While ‘longitudinal’ may refer to analyses in which waves of data are elicited at more distant intervals 
(e.g., at the beginning and end of a semester), we reserve the term ‘developmental’ for those analyses in 
which learner performance is documented at close intervals or at all points of production. We refer to the 
learner corpus under study as a Developmental Learner Corpus (DLC)1 because it contains the complete 
record of all native speaker (NS) and non-native speaker (NNS) interactions during two-month 
telecollaborative partnerships (see Belz, 2002; Belz & Thorne, 2006; O’Dowd, 2007) The interlocutors 
are English NSs who are learning German and German NSs who are learning English. Because 
participants use both languages, our data are bilingual and consist of native (L1) English, second-
language (L2) English, L1 German, and L2 German.  
We begin with a review of the application of corpora in language teaching to date. Next, we describe in 
vivo classroom applications of our DLC wherein the very learners who produce the corpus data revisit it 
in the form of pedagogically mediated teaching materials. Thus, the learners in our experiments encounter 
their own productions (as well as the productions of their NS keypals and their US classmates) as a 
subsequent source of didacticized input (Swain & Lapkin, 1995). We further illustrate how the dense 
performance records archived in our DLC facilitate the close, corpus-driven2 tracking of micro-changes in 
learner language use over time. 
First, we report on a "developmental pedagogical intervention" (Belz & Vyatkina, 2005, p. 20) for four 
German modal particles (MPs): ja, denn, doch, and mal.3 We chose these four MPs in particular because 
the NSs in our corpus used them most frequently. The MPs in general were chosen for examination 
because they are important carriers of interpersonal meaning. As Weydt (1969) puts it, "[t]he German 
listener expects a particle. If it is absent, the sentence acquires a specific stylistic value: without a particle 
it sounds choppy, harsh, unfriendly, its utterance is apodictic, abrupt, blatantly noncommittal" (p. 20; our 
translation). Despite the communicative significance of the MPs, early in vivo contrastive analysis 
revealed a marked mismatch between learner and NS uses. Previous studies have shown that the MPs are 
difficult to master and that there are few robust materials for their instruction (Götze, 1993; Möllering, 
Julie A. Belz and Nina Vyatkina Pedagogical Mediation of a Developmental Learner Corpus 
 
2004). Our MP intervention is characterized by focused instruction based on corpus-enabled contrastive 
and developmental analyses. 
Next, we describe a developmental pedagogical intervention for the German da-compounds, which 
function as cohesive devices and  contribute  to textual coherence. They were chosen for instruction 
because early corpus-driven contrastive analysis revealed a mismatch between learner and NS uses. 
Previous studies have shown that learners under-use them with respect to frequency, range, and syntax; 
and they are often inadequately addressed in teaching materials (Belz, 2005). Again, the compound 
intervention was designed in response to contrastive and developmental analyses of learner performance 
that were enabled in vivo by our DLC and the materials were used with the same learners who 
participated in the interactions on which they are based.  
Finally, we illustrate how a richly annotated DLC can be utilized to address issues of SLA – in 
conjunction with ethnographic data and telecollaborative pedagogy – by facilitating developmental 
analyses of individual pathways of L2 use during specific learning events. In previous studies, we have 
exemplified the development of entire cohorts of learners in our experimental courses  (e.g., Belz, 2005; 
Belz & Kinginger, 2003; Belz & Vyatkina, 2005; Vyatkina, 2007; Vyatkina & Belz, 2006). One salient 
finding emerging from these studies is the idiosyncratic nature of learners’ development toward NS norms 
and the sensitivity of that development to sociocultural factors, including history, agency, and structure 
(Belz, 2002; Layder, 1993). In order to illustrate the ways in which we have utilized our DLC to mediate 
the elucidation of individual developmental pathways and their sensitivity to learners’ lives and 
(instructional) experiences, two focal learners, Christie and Jeremy (pseudonyms), are examined. Such 
dense examinations not only offer insight into SLA at the level of individual micro-changes in 
performance and awareness over time, but they also exemplify how a pedagogically mediated DLC may 
afford a tight synergy between classroom-based research and praxis. 
CORPORA AND LANGUAGE INSTRUCTION 
Johns (1986) introduced the term data-driven learning to describe the use of NS concordances in 
language teaching (Sinclair, 2003). To date, corpus-based teaching proposals primarily have focused on 
vocabulary (Coxhead, 2002; Römer, 2004) and grammar (Mindt, 2002), although a few studies target 
pragmatic and discourse features (Belz, 2008; Möllering, 2001, 2004). In most corpus-driven teaching 
proposals, learners examine teacher-prepared corpus excerpts, but are unable to explore the corpus on 
their own. In contrast, Bernardini (2002, 2004) advocates discovery learning wherein learners browse a 
NS corpus in order to discover patterns of use, establish meanings, and facilitate reading, writing, and 
translation (see also Aston, 2002, p. 10; Leech, 1997; St. John, 2001).  
Seidlhofer (2002) suggests learning-driven data in addition to Johns’ data-driven learning. In this 
method, learner productions are systematically archived for comparison with NS corpora in order to give 
learners an idea of "where they are…situated in their L2 learning context, and where they eventually 
(may) want to [go]" (Seidlhofer, 2002, p. 215). Granger (1998) refers to the comparison of NS and learner 
corpus data as contrastive interlanguage analysis (CIA).  
Although learner corpora are "a fairly recent phenomenon" (Nesselhauf, 2004, p. 125; Pravec, 2002), 
many researchers already have employed CIA (Granger & Tribble, 1998; Granger, Hung, & Petch-Tyson, 
2002). Notably, the research team associated with the International Corpus of Learner English has 
suggested corpus-driven teaching materials in the areas of lexicography (Rundell & Granger, 2007) and 
phraseology (De Cock, 2004; Nesselhauf, 2005). Nevertheless, "it is less clear how – and when – [such 
suggestions] can best be carried over into effective pedagogical practice" (Lee & Swales, 2006, p. 57); 
indeed, many corpus-driven materials are still awaiting empirical testing of their influence on learning 
outcomes. 
Language Learning & Technology 34
Julie A. Belz and Nina Vyatkina Pedagogical Mediation of a Developmental Learner Corpus 
 
There are a number of limitations connected with corpus-driven language pedagogy, including the small 
number of languages and text types represented in existing corpora and the lack of developmental corpora. 
Another major issue is the controversy over the authenticity of corpus data (see Seidlhofer, 2003, pp. 77-
123). On the one hand, proponents of corpus-driven language pedagogy suggest that a key advantage to 
this approach is the genuine nature of NS corpus data in contrast to "concocted" (McCarthy & Carter, 
1995, p. 370) textbook examples. On the other hand, Widdowson (1991, 2000) questions the alleged 
authenticity of corpus samples by claiming that authenticity is a function of text reception as well as text 
production. If learners are unable to authenticate or create an appropriate interpretive context for NS 
corpus samples, then they may fare no better than "concocted" texts as mediators of L2 learning. 
Prodromou (1996) supports Widdowson by pointing out that corpus language is "extremely context and 
culture-bound" and therefore "inappropriate to the needs and interests" of learners (p. 372). Although 
Bernardini (2002) advocates discovery learning, she nevertheless warns that it relies heavily on learners’ 
"unflagging curiosity and interest" which may quickly wane if learners become lost in the vast "unknown 
land" of large corpora (p. 167). In a similar vein, Thurston and Candlin (1998) warn that ‘‘[o]ver-
exposure to concordance lines can conceivably tire students’’ (p. 278). Indeed, Möllering (2004) reports 
that learners found working with concordances "slightly overwhelming" (p. 245). 
Although this controversy addresses the use of NS corpora, it is equally applicable to learner corpora. The 
latter are not more relevant to the interests of a particular group of learners than the former and therefore 
do not necessarily resolve the issue of authentication.  
THE STUDY 
The pedagogical interventions were implemented in the context of telecollaboration, a language learning 
configuration in which distally located learners use Internet communication tools for social interaction, 
dialogue, and debate with NS age peers (Belz & Thorne, 2006; O’Dowd, 2007). In the focal course, 
English-speaking learners of German at a large public university in the United States engaged in genuine 
interactions with German-speaking learners of English at a German teachers’ college for eight weeks 
during Fall 2005. These participants were divided into four transatlantic groups, each of which had both 
American and German members. Learners chatted and emailed with their other group members during 
class time. Some participants also chatted on their own time. All correspondence was archived in a web-
based teleconferencing program as they were produced. Each group had their own electronic folder in 
which all their correspondence was maintained, but all participants had access to all folders.  
Emails and chats were entered regularly into a locally designed DLC in association with 20 learner and 
task variables while the course under study progressed. When the focal learners were not 
chatting/emailing during class time, they explored the correspondence of other groups in both the folders 
and as DLC excerpts under the guidance of their instructor; therefore, all learners developed a level of 
familiarity with the telecollaborative correspondence during the semester. As a result, the learners in this 
study functioned as both participants and observers with respect to the DLC data (Gavioli & Aston, 2001). 
As participants, they engaged in the interactions that subsequently formed the DLC. As observers, they 
retrospectively examined these data and critically analyzed them under the guidance of the teacher. 
During non-telecollaborative class sessions, corpus-driven pedagogical interventions were delivered that 
were designed in response to the learners’ (emerging) use of the focal features as archived in the DLC. In 
general, the interventions were informed by the principles of form-focused instruction, which "involves 
attempts to intervene directly in the process of interlanguage construction by drawing learners’ attention 
to or providing opportunities for them to practice specific language features" (Ellis, Basturkmen, & 
Loewen, 2001, p. 407). In addition, however, our pedagogical approach combines the focus on specific 
linguistic forms with meaning-focused and task-based instruction because the focal forms are taught in 
the context of meaningful interactions (Kasper & Rose, 2002) and practiced by students in 
communicative tasks (Ellis, 2006) in the form of their on-going telecollaborative correspondence. 
Language Learning & Technology 35
Julie A. Belz and Nina Vyatkina Pedagogical Mediation of a Developmental Learner Corpus 
 
Moreover, the very need for the pedagogical interventions in this study was ascertained on the basis of 
students’ documented performance during meaningful language use, i.e., an under-use of the focal 
features by the learners in comparison with the NSs. Positive evaluative feedback constituted a part of the 
intervention in that learners were encouraged to practice the focal features after each interventional stage. 
When they did so, their uses were pointed out and praised in plenum in the form of DLC excerpts.  
The ethnographic component of the data set includes biographical and technological surveys, post-
telecollaboration interviews, formative and summative individual learner portfolios, and field notes based 
on exhaustive participant observation by both authors. The DLC was used to perform a microgenetic 
analysis of individual learners’ use of the focal features in relation to the pedagogical interventions, time, 
and the performance of their classmates and NS keypals. Microgenesis entails tracing the history (i.e., 
genesis) of processes over relatively short periods of time in order to understand "how the human mind 
functions as a consequence of its formation in cultural activity" (Lantolf & Thorne, 2006, p. 57). The 
dense documentation of learner performance in the DLC allows us to examine the process of SLA in 
blow-by-blow fashion for any searchable linguistic feature. The ethnographic data allow us to situate each 
micro-change in the developmental process within the cultural activity of its origin. 
THE MODAL PARTICLE INTERVENTION 
The four-stage MP intervention (Figure 1) follows Möllering and Nunan (1995; see Vyatkina & Johnson, 
2007, for examples of handouts used in the MP intervention); important procedural differences capitalize 
on the developmental nature of our DLC.  
     FIRST 
    EMAIL 
                                                
                         INV I 
                        
 
INV II 
 
               INV III 
 
INV IV 
LAST 
CHAT 
P R E - I N T E R V E N T I O N     BREAK   
WEEK 1 WEEK 2 WEEK 3 WEEK 4 WEEK 
5 
WEEK 6 WEEK 7 WEEK 8 
   OCT 18 NOV 8 NOV 15 NOV 29 DEC 06 DEC 13   
   DAY 01 DAY 22 DAY 29 DAY 43 DAY 50 DAY 57 
Figure 1. Modal particle intervention timeline. 
Pre-Intervention Stage 
The pre-intervention data enabled the establishment of a control and a comparative baseline (learner and 
NS productions, respectively) for the pedagogical experiment. Table 1 below reports NS and learner uses 
of the focal MPs prior to any intervention for the entire 2005 cohort. Only 2 learners used only 2 MPs one 
time each, while the NSs used 51 MPs. This result reinforces Möllering and Nunan’s (1995) finding that 
mere exposure to MP-rich texts "without focus on the particles [themselves] seems to have no influence 
on performance" (p. 58).  
Table 1. Pre-Intervention NS and Learner MP Uses. 
Category All NSs All Learners 
Total German Words Pre-Intervention 11,887 9,588 
Total MPs Pre-Intervention 51 2 
Rate per 1000 German Words Pre-Intervention 4.29 0.20 
Intervention Stage I 
The objectives of instruction module 1 were the collection of pre-test metapragmatic awareness data and 
awareness-raising focused instruction based on an enhanced condition (Robinson, 1997, p. 224), which 
Language Learning & Technology 36
Julie A. Belz and Nina Vyatkina Pedagogical Mediation of a Developmental Learner Corpus 
 
involved highlighting the focal features in the instructional materials without giving explanations about 
their use. This 40-minute module was administered at the start of Week 4.  
First, we defined "pragmatics" and "pragmatic competence." Next, learners filled out two metapragmatic 
awareness questionnaires. The first questionnaire presents two short dialogues in German (Weydt, Harden, 
Hentschel, & Rösler, 1983). Dialogue A contains MPs, while dialogue B does not. The learners 
underlined the words that were different in the two dialogues and ranked each dialogue with respect to its 
perceived expressive force. The second questionnaire was similar, but contained examples from the DLC 
(taken from all NSs in the given cohort). We bolded the MPs, projected the examples on a large screen, 
and told the learners that the bolded words carried expressive force. Finally, we gave the learners 
handouts with the DLC excerpts and advised them to observe the NSs’ use of the bolded words until the 
next instruction module in one week. They chatted with their keypals immediately after instruction 
module 1. 
The learners identified most of the MPs in dialogue A and in the DLC excerpts. Similar to NSs, they 
perceive dialogue A to be more natural, warmer, friendlier, more fluent, and more authentic than dialogue 
B. Despite these NS-like intuitions, however, the performance data show that only the most proficient 
learner, Christie, used the MP ja once during stage I (Table 2 below; see also Belz & Vyatkina, 2005). 
These results suggest that enhanced instruction alone does not trigger immediate performance.  
Table 2. NS and Learner MP Uses in Stage I. 
Category All NSs All Learners 
Total German Words after Intervention I 5,025 2,552 
Total MPs after Intervention I 38 1 
Rate per 1000 German Words after Intervention I 7.56 0.39 
Intervention Stage II 
The objectives of instruction module 2 were the collection of additional metapragmatic awareness data 
and explicit form-focused instruction, which involves directing the learners’ attention to both form and 
meaning while explaining the underlying rules of MP use (Robinson, 1997). This 40-minute module was 
administered at the start of Week 5.  
First, the learners answered questions related to meta-linguistic knowledge and meta-pragmatic awareness 
based on the DLC excerpts used in module 1. They were asked to name the word category of the MPs, list 
other words belonging to this category, select the functions that these words can fulfill from a given list, 
and list any words that they have used for the same functions. 
Only one learner, Saul, accurately used the term "modal particle"4. Six out of seven thought that MPs 
make communication more natural, while five wrote that MPs help create a friendly atmosphere and 
indicate colloquial/informal communication. These findings suggest that learners’ ‘feel’ for the pragmatic 
force of the MPs does not automatically translate into meta-linguistic knowledge and productive ability. 
After introducing the term "modal particle", we lectured briefly on the meanings, functions, syntactic 
restrictions, and homonyms of the four focal MPs. To illustrate, one homonym of the MP ja is the 
answering particle ja ‘yes’, while one homonym of the MP denn is the causal conjunction denn ‘because’. 
We gave the learners a summary of this information on a handout. Next, we showed the learners 
additional NS MP uses and their homonyms taken from the DLC. Then we examined Christie and Saul’s 
pre-intervention uses. Finally, we advised the learners to observe their keypals’ use of the MPs in pending 
correspondence and to use them themselves. The learners chatted with their keypals immediately after 
instruction module 2.  
Language Learning & Technology 37
Julie A. Belz and Nina Vyatkina Pedagogical Mediation of a Developmental Learner Corpus 
 
In this chat, a third learner, Jeremy, began using MPs. To illustrate, in turn (3) of example (1), Jeremy 
uses ja in a formulaic pattern ‘This + is + ja + attribute’ (Möllering, 2004, p. 234) for intensifying a 
positive appraisal. In turn (5), he uses the same MP in a free construction to mark reference to shared 
knowledge. Both uses are syntactically accurate and pragmatically appropriate. Although Jeremy’s 
German partners also use the MP ja later in the same chat, Jeremy’s uses precede their uses and thus 
cannot be attributed to direct imitation. 
Example (1) 
(1) Jeremy:  Ich bin gut. ‘I am good.’ 
(2) Carine:  Mir geht’s auch gut! ‘I am also good!’ 
(3) Jeremy:  Oh das ist ja gut. ‘Oh this is ja good.’ 
[...] 
(4) Alma-Lora: Genau, wir können auch die deutschen fragen, was sie über 
amerikanischen Patriotismus denken und umgekehrt. ‘Exactly, we can also ask the 
Germans what they think about American patriotism and the other way around.’ 
(5) Jeremy:  Ja, und wir konnen ja die Amerikanische Leute uber Deutsches Patriotismus. 
‘Yes, and we can ja [ask] American people about German patriotism.’ 
[...] 
(November 15) 
In a later email, Jeremy uses ja six times (once in a formulaic pattern and five times in free constructions) 
and denn once. All uses are pragmatically appropriate, although the syntax of ja is twice inaccurate. In 
comparison to the NSs, Jeremy overuses ja by a margin of 7. This initial overuse may indicate Jeremy’s 
desire to experiment actively with a new feature.  
Christie does not use any MPs in this stage. Our participant observation helps account for this finding. 
Christie and her American partner participated collaboratively in a chat during stage II, but the partner, a 
much less proficient learner, typed. Additionally, there are only 69 German words in this chat. Further, 
Christie wrote three emails between instruction modules 2 and 3, but two of these emails contain mostly 
project entries (argumentative, monologic writing), where MPs are not likely to occur. Therefore, the 
absence of MPs at this stage may be attributed to her lack of general correspondence in German. Learner 
and NS MP uses for stage II are summarized in Table 3. 
Table 3. NS and Learner MP Uses in Stage II. 
Category All NSs All Learners 
Total German Words after Intervention II 2,947 3,605 
Total MPs after Intervention II 26 9 
Rate per 1000 German Words after Intervention II 8.82 2.50 
Intervention Stage III 
The primary purpose of instruction module 3 was fine-tuned instruction on the meaning and syntax of the 
MPs. It was administered at the start of Week 7 and lasted for 40 minutes. First, we showed the learners 
new NS MP uses since instruction module 2. Importantly, we highlighted Jeremy’s new uses and offered 
recommendations for future use.  
Next, we gave learners four worksheets as a homework assignment. Each worksheet contained 
concordance lines of NS MP uses from the entire 2005 cohort to date plus questions that were designed to 
stimulate their discovery of patterns in the data. As in previous stages, the learners chatted with their 
Language Learning & Technology 38
Julie A. Belz and Nina Vyatkina Pedagogical Mediation of a Developmental Learner Corpus 
 
keypals immediately after instruction module 3. In the ensuing week, Jeremy used ja once in an appraisal 
pattern as seen below. 
Example (2) 
Jeremy: du hast ja besser Antworten ‘you have ja better answers’ 
(November 28) 
Christie used mal and ja once each in the chat immediately following instruction module 3. Both MPs 
occur in fixed patterns as exemplified on handouts: an appraisal pattern with ja and an informal singular 
imperative with mal. In a later email, Christie uses ja twice and denn once as seen in example (3). 
Example (3)  
An Thanksgiving habe ich bei meinem Onkel gegessen. Meine ganze Familie war dabei 
und wir haben alle ja viel gegessen! [...] wann habt ihr winterferien? wie lange habt ihr 
denn frei? wir haben ab 17.12 Ferien, bis 9.1. So ca. 3 Wochen haben wir frei. Hoffentlich 
arbeite ich zwischendurch und verdiene ein bisschen Geld! Ich brauche ja Geld um 
Buecher fuer die Universitaet zu kaufen. 
 ‘On Thanksgiving, I had dinner at my uncle’s. My whole family was there and we all ate 
ja a lot! [...] when do you have a winter break? How long are you denn free? We have a 
break from 12/17 to 1/9. So, we are free for about 3 weeks. Hopefully, I will work during 
this time and make a bit of money! I need ja money to buy books for he university.’  
(November 29) 
Notably, Christie uses ja in free constructions for the first time. The asynchronous nature of the email 
may have given Christie more time for monitoring her production and using new MP functions. All five 
of Christie’s MP uses during this stage are appropriate and accurate. All learner and NS MP uses during 
stage III are summarized in Table 4. 
Table 4. NS and Learner MP Uses in Stage III 
Category All NSs All Learners 
Total German Words after Intervention III 883 1,332 
Total MPs after Intervention III 9 6 
Rate per 1000 German Words after Intervention III 10.19 4.5 
Intervention Stage IV 
The fourth and final instruction module was administered at the start of Week 8. The primary purpose of 
this 30-minute unit was fine-tuned instruction on MP use. The session began with a concordancing task. 
We gave learners a handout containing a summary of demonstrated MP patterns and examples of 
conventionalized MP expressions. Then we showed them more DLC examples of emergent learner MP 
use taken from the whole cohort. We discussed accurate and inaccurate uses and related these uses to NS 
patterns encountered during the concordancing task. Finally, we encouraged learners to use MPs in their 
own writing. A chat session followed instruction module 4. The learners communicated with their keypals 
for one more week until the close of the American semester. 
During this week, the learners’ use of the MPs increased sharply, and quantitatively surpassed NS use in 
the same week as seen in Table 5 below. NS MP uses also increase during this stage. One explanation for 
the NS increase may lie in the nature of the task. At the beginning of the partnership, keypals were 
required to introduce themselves and their institutional contexts to their partners. Such descriptions entail 
a monologic narrative register in which fewer interpersonal features (e.g., MPs) occur. During the post-
intervention period, the learners were primarily completing the joint web-project that involved many 
Language Learning & Technology 39
Julie A. Belz and Nina Vyatkina Pedagogical Mediation of a Developmental Learner Corpus 
 
discussions carried out in an interactive, dialogic register. Interpersonal linguistic features cluster in such 
text types (Biber, 1988). 
Table 5. NS and Learner MP Uses in Stage IV. 
Category All NSs All Learners 
Total German Words after Intervention IV 3,317 3,704 
Total MPs after Intervention IV 44 55 
Rate of MP Uses per 1000 German Words after Intervention IV 13.26 14.85 
  
For example, Jeremy uses MPs 9 times in stage IV. His last chat is particularly rich in MPs: ja (5x), doch 
(1x), and denn (1x). All uses are pragmatically appropriate and structurally accurate except for the use of 
denn in a declarative sentence. ja occurs three times in the formulaic construction Das ist ja gut ‘That is 
ja good’. Although this phrase is pragmatically appropriate, it is not NS-like with regard to collocational 
patterns. NSs frequently use ja and doch in positive appraisal patterns with more emotionally loaded 
attributes such as super, cool, and echt lustig ‘really funny’. Additionally, NSs often use ja with inverted 
word order (e.g., in questions), whereas Jeremy uses only direct word order (e.g., in statements). Finally, 
Jeremy overuses the appraisal pattern with ja in comparison to NSs. 
Christie produces 8 focal MPs in chat: ja (5x), doch (1x), denn (1x), and mal (1x). All uses are 
pragmatically appropriate and syntactically accurate except for a word order mistake with denn. She also 
appropriately uses an additional MP (eigentlich). ja is used twice in free constructions and three times in 
the appraisal pattern. In contrast to Jeremy, Christie uses several variations of the fixed pattern Das + ist 
+ ja + attribute as seen in example (4). The verb sein is used in the past tense in (4a) in the subjunctive 
mood in (4b); additional constituents are added and the word order is reversed in (4c). This variation 
provides evidence of Christie’s developing ability to use ja not only idiomatically but also creatively. 
Example (4) 
a) das war ja ein bisschen weit! ‘this was ja a bit far!’ 
b) das waere ja cool!  ‘this would be ja cool!’ 
c) heute ist es hier ja ganz schoen kalt! ‘today is it here ja really very cold!’ 
(December 13) 
Post-intervention: Cumulative Portfolios 
Christie confirms in her cumulative, written course portfolio (which functions as a source of post-
intervention meta-pragmatic awareness data) that she was not aware of the MPs before the course and did 
not notice them in her partners’ pre-intervention writing. She noticed how frequently her partners used 
them "very soon" after the intervention and began using more of them in her own writing.5 Furthermore, 
Christie includes an email excerpt from a personal German friend in which she accurately highlights 11 of 
12 MPs. This application of her MP knowledge in a new context is an important piece of evidence for the 
development of Christie’s meta-pragmatic awareness.  
Jeremy reports in his portfolio that he previously noticed MPs, but did not know their meaning. He 
includes several emails from his keypals in which he highlighted sentences containing MPs and 
demonstrates his increased awareness  by commenting on one particular use of mal by his German 
partner: "Du solltest wirklich mal nach Deutschland kommen" ‘You should really mal come to Germany’. 
Jeremy explains that mal makes the sentence friendlier and less direct, transforming a command into an 
invitation. Finally, Jeremy aptly terms the MPs "small words with big meaning" that "make a big 
difference in a German sentence." 
Language Learning & Technology 40
Julie A. Belz and Nina Vyatkina Pedagogical Mediation of a Developmental Learner Corpus 
 
THE DA-COMPOUND INTERVENTION  
Semantically, the German da-compounds function as cohesive ties that link topics across phrases, clauses, 
larger units of text, and even turns-at-talk. Syntactically, they occur as both anaphoric and cataphoric 
proforms that index noun phrases as well as larger units of language. To illustrate, in example (5) dazu is 
used anaphorically to refer to the fact that the addressee swims, while, in example (6), dadurch is used 
cataphorically to refer to the fact that the speaker and his companions stayed away from areas where there 
were many tourists. (The da-compounds are underlined, while their referents are double underlined.) 
Example (5) 
Ah, du schwimmst. Wie oft machst du das denn? Machst du noch andere Sportarten? Wie 
bist du dazu gekommen? 
‘Oh, you swim. How often do you do that? Do you do other sports? How did you come to 
that [i.e., how did you get involved in that]? 
Example (6) 
Dadurch, dass wir uns von den touristischen Gebieten weitgehend ferngehalten haben, 
haben wir sehr viele Einheimische kennen gelernt und sind in Familien eingeladen worden 
zum Essen. 
‘By virtue of the fact that we kept away from the tourist areas we got to know a lot of 
locals and were invited to eat in the homes of families.’ 
Belz (2005) ascertained that learners under-use the da-compounds by a margin of 0.7 to 1 in comparison 
to NSs. She also found that NS uses indexed a unit larger than a noun phrase 65% of the time, while 
learner uses indexed a larger unit only 25% of the time. 21% of NS uses were in cataphoric constructions, 
while only 8% of learner uses fell in this category. Finally, just 12% of NS uses occurred in  verb-and-
preposition phrases (e.g., Ich freue mich darauf! ‘I’m looking forward to it!’), whereas 47% of learner 
uses occurred in these environments.  
Similar patterns emerged in an early contrastive interlanguage analysis of the current data set. Therefore, 
we determined that the da-compounds were an appropriate feature for intervention among this particular 
group of learners.  
Pre-Intervention Stage 
The timeline for the da-compound intervention is given in Figure 2. The pre-intervention phase lasted 31 
days, when instruction module 1 was delivered. The length of each intervention depended on the 
components of the overall syllabus and instructional schedules at both institutions, as well as the time 
required for data entry, feature analysis, and subsequent materials development.  
    FIRST 
    EMAIL 
                                                      
                                                                              INV I 
 
                        INV II 
 
 
LAST 
CHAT 
P R E - I N T E R V E N T I O N  S T A G E     
     
   OCT 18 NOV 17   DEC 01  DEC 13        
   DAY 01 DAY 31   DAY 45  DAY 57 
Figure 2. da-Compound intervention timeline. 
Table 6 lists aggregate, pre-intervention NS and learner uses of the compounds. Results show a 
normalized rate of 5.57 da-compounds per 1000 German words for the NSs and 1.71 for the learners. As 
with the MPs, the two most proficient learners in the group, Christie and Saul, used the most da-
compounds during the pre-intervention stage. Christie used a total of five different da-compounds seven 
Language Learning & Technology 41
Julie A. Belz and Nina Vyatkina Pedagogical Mediation of a Developmental Learner Corpus 
 
times, while Saul used six compounds 11 times. In the following subsections, we again provide a detailed 
report on the progression of our two focal learners, Christie and Jeremy. 
Table 6. Pre-Intervention NS and Learner da-compound Uses 
Category All NSs All Learners 
Total German Words Pre-Intervention 19,736 15,161 
Total da-compounds Pre-Intervention 106 26 
Rate per 1000 German Words Pre-Intervention 5.57 1.71 
Intervention Stage I 
Instruction module 1 consisted of four parts and lasted for 40 minutes. First, we explained that da-
compounds are similar to personal pronouns in that they can index full noun phrases as well as larger 
stretches of text. In part 2, we elicited awareness data via the following seven prompts: 1) Name as many 
da-compounds as you can; 2) Do you think that you have used da-compounds with your keypals? If so, 
which ones? 3) Do you think that your keypals have used da-compounds? If so, which ones? 4) How do 
you think your rate of da-compound use compares to your keypals’ rate of use? 5) Which da-compounds 
have your keypals used most frequently? least frequently? 7) Do you know any phrases in which da-
compounds occur? 
In response to the first prompt, Christie listed ten of 18 total possible da-compounds or 56%. She thought 
she used damit, danach, and davon, when, in fact, she had only used davon; however, she had also used 
dafür, dazu, dazwischen, and darüber. Syntactically, her uses represent anaphoric reference to either the 
object of a prepositional phrase (1x), a noun phrase (4x), or a larger unit (2x). In response to question 3, 
Christie accurately reported that the keypals had used damit, danach, davon, dazu, and dabei, but she 
failed to mention that they also had used 11 additional compounds, including the two most frequent, 
darauf and dazu. In response to question 6, Christie listed daraus and darin. daraus was indeed one of 
two compounds that was not used by the NSs and darin was used only once. In response to question 7, 
Christie wrote the following three sentences: 1) Ich bin dagegen/dafür ‘I am against/for that’; 2) Damit 
kann ich leben ‘I can live with that’; and 3) Darauf bin ich stolz ‘I am proud of that’.  
Jeremy, in contrast, listed only dafür, damit, and davon (17%). He also inaccurately listed dass (a 
subordinating conjunction) and da (a subordinating conjunction and adverb of place). In response to 
question 2, Jeremy stated that he had not used any da-compounds; in fact, he had once used dazu but 
inaccurately. Jeremy thought that the keypals had used many more compounds than he had, but the only 
one that he could remember was damit. He was not sure which compounds were used the least and he 
could not list any phrases containing them.  
During part 3, we showed the learners a table in which all NS and learner uses of the da-compounds 
during the first three weeks of the partnership were compared.6 The following points were emphasized: 1) 
the Germans used da-compounds 7 times as frequently as the Americans did; 2) the compounds that are 
used most frequently by the Germans are not the compounds that are used most frequently by the 
Americans; and 3) five learners each used at least one compound for a combined total of 11 uses (7 
accurate) in the pre-intervention stage, while two learners used no compounds. The goal of part 3 was to 
raise learners’ awareness of their own performance in comparison to both their NS keypals and their US 
classmates in order to allow them to direct their attention to those segments of the pending instruction that 
would be most relevant to their individual situation. 
In part 4, we gave the learners a handout that contained each NS da-compound use up to that point as well 
as their own 11 uses. We told them to read the handout thoroughly before the next module two weeks 
later. In addition, they were asked to note any differences between NS and NNS uses, to look for da-
Language Learning & Technology 42
Julie A. Belz and Nina Vyatkina Pedagogical Mediation of a Developmental Learner Corpus 
 
compounds in their partners’ future emails/chats, and to use the compounds in their own correspondence, 
where appropriate.  
Following instruction module 1, the learners met for just one more class session (the Tuesday before 
Thanksgiving). Consequently, there was little correspondence between modules 1 and 2. Further, the 
learners were not able to chat with their keypals following the individual modules of the da-compound 
intervention as they could for the MPs, because of scheduling.  
Nevertheless, all learners produced a total of 14 da-compounds between modules 1 and 2 (Table 7). The 
learners’ rate of da-compound use per 1000 German words increased threefold from 1.71 during the pre-
intervention stage to 5.12 during stage I, but still lagged behind German rates by a margin of about 1.7 to 
1 (see below for an explanation of the NSs’ increased rate of use). 
Table 7. NS and Learner Compound Uses in the Pre-Intervention Stage and in Stage I. 
Category All NSs All Learners 
Total German Words Pre-Intervention 19,736 15,161 
Total da-compounds Pre-Intervention 106 26 
Rate per 1000 German Words Pre-Intervention 5.57 1.71 
Total German Words After Intervention I up to Intervention II 4,109 2,734 
Total da-compounds After Intervention I up to Intervention II 35 14 
Rate per 1000 German Words After Intervention I up to Intervention II 8.52 5.12 
 
While Jeremy did not produce any compounds between modules 1 and 2, Christie used five different 
compounds (darüber, darauf, dabei, dazu, and darum) one time each, three of which (darauf, dabei, and 
darum) she did not use in the pre-intervention stage. From a structural perspective, Christie still uses da-
compounds only in anaphoric constructions in stage 1. 
Intervention Stage II 
Instruction module 2 was delivered on Day 45. It consisted of three parts and lasted 45 minutes. The main 
purpose of part 1 was to introduce the learners to the range of structures in which the da-compounds 
occur. First, we introduced learners to the concept of cataphoric reference. Next, we showed the learners 
examples in which da-compounds anaphorically index noun phrases and larger pieces of text. After that, 
we showed learners examples in which the da-compounds cataphorically index a subordinating dass-
clause, an infinitive phrase, or a subordinating wenn-clause. The given examples were drawn from the NS 
keypals’ telecollaborative discourse archived in the DLC. 
Part 2 was a whole-group recognition task during which we gave the learners a handout containing 10 da-
compound examples. First, the learners underlined the piece of text to which each da-compound refers. 
Then, they stated whether or not the given da-compound occurred in an anaphoric or cataphoric 
construction. 
Finally, we gave the learners a one-page summary of what they had learned about the da-compounds, 
including summary statements about da-compound use based on the results of the empirical analysis of 
the corpus data. We also offered suggestions for how the learners could improve with respect to da-
compound use (see Appendix for the full summary sheet).  
Table 8. NSs and Learners Use of da-Compounds after Intervention II. 
Category All NSs All Learners 
Total German Words After Intervention II to Semester Close 8,713 4,629 
Total da-compounds After Intervention II to Semester Close 64 36 
Rate per 1000 German Words After Intervention II to Semester Close 7.34 7.78 
Language Learning & Technology 43
Julie A. Belz and Nina Vyatkina Pedagogical Mediation of a Developmental Learner Corpus 
 
After instruction module 2, the learners’ rate of compound use increased from 1.71 in the pre-intervention 
stage to 7.78 (Table 8), which is actually greater that the NSs’ rate in the same period.  
Unlike stage I, Jeremy uses three da-compounds in stage II: dafür (2x) and dazu (1x). Each compound is 
used in an anaphoric construction and all uses are accurate with the exception of word order in one case. 
In his portfolio, Jeremy states that his German keypals used many da-compounds, but that he initially had 
"no idea" what they meant or how important they were. He then gives several examples from his NS 
partner’s emails and correctly labels them as anaphoric. Jeremy explains that he made a first conscious 
effort to use dafür and dazu in his final email on Day 50. Nevertheless, Jeremy characterizes the da-
compounds as difficult and attributes this difficulty to the fact that the compounds do not exist in English 
per se. Lastly, Jeremy explains that he has re-read his keypals’ email and now recognizes many uses of 
dafür, damit, dazu, and davon in them. He no longer finds the emails confusing because he better 
understands what the da-compounds mean and how they stitch pieces of text together. 
In contrast to Jeremy, Christie uses just one da-compound (darauf) in an anaphoric construction after 
instruction module 2. Thus, her telecollaborative performance data alone would seem to indicate that she 
does not develop much after this stage; however, her portfolio data present a different picture. In her final 
portfolio, Christie included an entry on the da-compounds which consists of a reflective commentary, a 
copy of the notes she took during instruction module 2, and a copy of an email she wrote to her German 
friend after instruction module 2.  
In her commentary, Christie states that she did not know much about da-compounds before discussing 
them in class. She further explains that she did not know that there were anaphoric and cataphoric 
compounds and that she did not really notice them in her partners’ emails. Christie remarks that she tried 
to use more da-compounds after the intervention. To illustrate, she notes that she used six da-compounds 
in the email to her German friend discussed above. In fact, Christie does indeed accurately use five 
different compounds six times. What is more important is the fact that three of these uses are cataphoric 
as seen in examples (7) to (9): 
Example (7) 
Freue mich schon darauf, eine Mail von dir zu bekommen! 
‘I am looking forward to getting an email from you!’ 
Example (8) 
Meine Mutter meinte, dass eure Paket schon angekommen ist. Habt ihr was dagegen, 
wenn ich es vor Weihnachten auspacke? 
‘My mother says that your package has already arrived. Do you have anything against it, 
if I open it before Christmas?’ 
Example (9) 
Hoffentlich bekommst du bald mein Paket! Freue mich schon darauf, wie dir deine 
Geschenke gefallen. 
‘Hopefully you will get my package soon! I am looking forward to [finding out about] 
how you like your presents.’ 
Examples (7) to (9), demonstrate considerable development not only because they are Christie’s first 
attested uses of cataphoric da-compounds, but also because of the range of structures in which they occur. 
In example (7), Christie uses darauf to refer ahead to the entire subsequent infinitive clause. This use 
closely mimics the example given during part 1 of instruction module 2. In example (8), Christie 
appropriately uses dagegen to cataphorically index the subsequent wenn-clause. This use marks her as an 
Language Learning & Technology 44
Julie A. Belz and Nina Vyatkina Pedagogical Mediation of a Developmental Learner Corpus 
 
advanced speaker because such constructions are numerically under-represented, even for NSs. In her 
final example, Christie appropriately uses darauf to cataphorically index the content of a subsequent 
subordinate clause introduced by the conjunction wie. This configuration is syntactically and semantically 
parallel to the cataphoric reference of the wenn-clause in example (8). Christie’s use in example (9) again 
marks her as an advanced user of German because she creatively varied a given model to produce an 
accurate structure that was not exemplified in the instructional materials. 
Table 9 offers an aggregate comparison of all NS and learners’ da-compound uses during the pre-
intervention and entire post-intervention stage.  
Table 9. Comparison of Pre- and Post-intervention NS and Learner da-Compound Uses 
Category All NSs All Learners 
Total German Words Pre-Intervention 19,736 15,161 
Total da-compounds Pre-Intervention 106 26 
Rate per 1000 German Words Pre-Intervention 5.57 1.71 
Total German Words After Intervention I to Semester Close 12,822 7,363 
Total da-compounds After Intervention I to Semester Close 98 49 
Rate per 1000 German Words After Intervention I to Semester Close 7.64 6.65 
 
On the whole, these data show that both NSs’ and learners’ rate of da-compound use increased from the 
pre- to post-intervention stage. One explanation for the increase in NS uses might be the changing nature 
of the task near the end of the telecollaborative partnership. In the final weeks, the participants were 
required to construct collaboratively a website that contained a jointly authored, bilingual essay. In the 
last weeks the learners often included excerpts of this essay in their emails for correction and discussion. 
We conjecture that one might find a higher rate of da-compounds in more formal written genres. Another 
reason why the rate of da-compound use increased is to be found in the intervention itself. Indeed, one 
might argue that learners were able to meet the demand for increased compound use in the written essay 
at the end of the semester precisely because they were exposed to the compound intervention prior to the 
completion of this task. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
Learner Corpus Research 
Our learner corpus differs from the majority of learner corpora with respect to language and text type. The 
data consist of conversational discourse in both English and German in contrast to argumentative essays 
in English only (e.g., Granger, Dagneaux, & Meunier, 2002). Furthermore, our corpus does not require an 
external NS corpus for contrastive interlanguage analysis because it is an integrated bilingual corpus, 
which results in a built-in NS comparative baseline. This configuration is an advantage in contrastive 
interlanguage analysis because learner productions are not separated in time and space from the baseline. 
In addition, our corpus data are supplemented by ethnographic data, which afford a degree of "pragmatic 
convergence" (Tao & McCarthy, 2001, p. 658) between the analyst and the analyzed data that is not 
possible in the case of large NS corpora such as the British National Corpus. In fact, Flowerdew (2005) 
notes that "recent studies of small, specialised corpora bear witness to the increasingly important role that 
the ethnographic dimension now plays in corpus analysis" (p. 329).  
The value of ethnographic data in the interpretation of quantitative corpus data is evident in the case of 
Saul, the only learner in our study to accurately name the modal particles in stage I. Our field notes 
indicate that Saul noticed the modal particle ja in his keypals’ writing in the pre-intervention stage and 
discussed their uses with the instructor. Moreover, our biographical survey data reveal that Saul is a 
highly motivated Classics major who has previously learned Latin and Greek and is therefore well 
Language Learning & Technology 45
Julie A. Belz and Nina Vyatkina Pedagogical Mediation of a Developmental Learner Corpus 
 
acquainted with meta-linguistic terminology. These ethnographic data help explain his single MP use 
during the pre-intervention stage.7 Finally, metapragmatic awareness data in the form of post-intervention 
portfolio entries allowed us to establish when and under what circumstances learners noticed (Schmidt, 
2001) the focal features in the course of the interventions. As a result, we employed all "three sources of 
fact about language" (Cook, 1998, p. 59), observation, introspection, and elicitation. 
Corpus-driven Language Pedagogy 
The initial corpus-driven pedagogical interventions were designed in response to the needs of specific 
learners as established via "empirical pedagogical enquiry" (Widdowson, 1991, p. 23) in the form of 
contrastive interlanguage analysis of their own pre-intervention productions archived in our DLC. 
Because all learner and NS interactions were entered into the DLC on a daily basis as the 
telecollaborative partnership unfolded, each subsequent instruction module was based on ongoing 
assessment of the students’ performance since the previous module. This type of dynamic assessment 
facilitated the production and modification of corpus-driven teaching materials according to individual 
developmental pathways at each particular point in time. For example, when we ascertained that learners 
overused MPs in formulaic patterns of appraisal, handouts containing concordance lines for each attested 
NS pattern were prepared and distributed to learners. Learners were thereby shown that most NS MP uses 
occurred in free constructions. Following these explanations, advanced learners like Christie 
experimented with more creative MP uses, whereas less advanced learners like Jeremy continued using 
more formulaic patterns but occasionally also tried out free constructions. Because the interventions under 
study were sensitive to particular learners’ emerging performance as well as other ethnographic data, they 
differ drastically from corpus-driven instructional proposals based on isolated excerpts from external 
corpora.  
The Authenticity and Authentication of Corpus Samples 
Many researchers have responded favorably to the application of NS corpora in language pedagogy 
because corpora are seen as an unprecedented source of authentic language samples. Widdowson (1991), 
however, points out that corpus excerpts may be genuine in the sense that they are produced by NSs in 
real-life contexts, but language learners do not perceive them as authentic unless they are able to interpret 
and understand them in a personally meaningful way.  
Our corpus-driven teaching materials side-step these issues, we argue, because they are comprised of NS-
NNS interactions in which the learners themselves have participated. We maintain that such materials are 
particularly salient because previous research on telecollaboration has indicated that learners may ‘try 
harder’ to speak accurately and appropriately because they may wish to maintain positive face in front of 
NS age peers with whom they have built personal relationships (e.g., Belz & Kinginger, 2003). In the 
course of the pedagogical interventions, learners were involved in an iterative cycle of observation and 
subsequent use of the focal features in keypal correspondence. Thus, they did not run the risk of 
"produc[ing] corpus-attested but contextually inappropriate language" (Cook, 1998, p. 60). As a result, 
learners engaged with the corpus data via observation as well as participation (Gavioli & Aston, 2001); 
we argue that these dual roles enabled our participants to authenticate the corpus excerpts with which they 
worked during the form-focused pedagogical interventions. 
Second Language Acquisition Research 
The great majority of learner corpus research to date has employed a cross-sectional design wherein a 
synchronic slice of learner productions at a single moment in time is compared to a synchronic slice of 
NS productions in order to ascertain learners’ mis-, over-, or under-use of particular L2 features (e.g., 
Granger, 1998; Granger, Hung, & Petch-Tyson, 2002). In contrast, this study addresses "the 
developmental course of instructed SLA" (Mellow, Reeder, & Forster, 1996, p. 326) because it is based 
on the full contingent of learner productions over a two-month period. Although ‘longitudinal’ analyses 
Language Learning & Technology 46
Julie A. Belz and Nina Vyatkina Pedagogical Mediation of a Developmental Learner Corpus 
 
have attracted more attention in recent publications (Ortega & Byrnes, 2008; Ortega & Iberri-Shea, 2005), 
they are still under-represented in SLA research in general and in corpus linguistics in particular. 
A richly documented, ethnographically supplemented DLC facilitates the ecological tracking of micro-
changes in learner performance over time. For example, our microgenetic analysis of Jeremy revealed that 
his first MP uses cannot be explained as imitations of his keypals because his productions preceded theirs. 
In this case, instruction appears to have triggered the noticing of features. This assumption is confirmed 
by numerous post-course portfolio entries (see also Vyatkina & Belz, 2006) such as the one by Christie 
who remarks that she began noticing MPs in NS writing "very soon" after the instruction. The 
pedagogical intervention thus functioned as an impetus for the learners to start working as explorers of the 
NS writing. We find much evidence of such "discovery learning" (Bernardini, 2002, p. 166) in post-
course portfolio entries such as Christie and Jeremy’s where learners included excerpts from their 
partners’ and their own writing with MPs highlighted and accompanied by meta-commentaries. Moreover, 
our findings show that all learners developed in the general direction of the NS MP use, but never simply 
‘copied and pasted’ NS phrases into their writing. Close comparisons of chat and email exchanges show 
that learner use always exhibits variations of patterns used by NSs (Vyatkina, 2007). This finding allows 
us to infer that learners "did not simply look for a model to imitate, […] but rather for patterns that [they] 
could adapt to [their] own text" (Gavioli & Aston, 2001, p. 242). 
 
NOTES 
1. The developmental learner corpus under study is The Telecollaborative Learner Corpus of English and 
German (Telekorp). The 1.5 million-token corpus consists of NS-NNS interactions between 
approximately 200 Americans and Germans collected during six different telecollaborative partnerships 
from 2000-2005. Thus, the corpus contains one cohort of learners for each of the six data collection 
cycles. The interactions comprise many different communicative situations, including requests, 
compliments, complaints, disagreement, flirting, comparison, explication, decision-making, negotiation of 
tasks, and information sharing. 
2. Tognini-Bonelli (2001) contrasts corpus-driven and corpus-based approaches to the description of 
language use. Corpus-driven accounts derive from the empirical analysis of large amounts of corpus data, 
while corpus-based accounts rely on corpus data in order to test pre-formulated theories of language use.  
3. Because there are no corresponding MPs in English, it is difficult to provide an accurate translation for 
them; nevertheless, the following glosses are representative of their expressive force in German. ja 
indicates: a) an intensification of positive appraisal; b) evidence of shared knowledge; c) presupposed 
agreement with the partner. denn: a) refers to the preceding context of the utterance or the situation; b) 
renders a question more natural and friendly; c) emphasizes the interest in the hearer’s response. doch 
signifies: a) shared knowledge, a slight disagreement and a wish to overcome it; b) awareness of a 
possible objection on the part of the hearer. mal: a) lends an element of temporariness to an action; b) 
makes commands unobtrusive and friendly; c) lowers the commitment to fulfill a promise. 
4. These responses are consistent with the responses given by the participants in Belz & Vyatkina (2005, 
p. 35). Lexical categories suggested by the learners in both studies included adverb, adjective, article, 
conjunction, and expletive.  
5. English translations are presented here for space considerations. 
6. Although the pre-intervention phase actually covered four weeks, learners were shown results for the 
first three weeks of their interaction only in part three of instruction module 1 because the 
researchers/instructors needed time to prepare the instructional materials.  
Language Learning & Technology 47
Julie A. Belz and Nina Vyatkina Pedagogical Mediation of a Developmental Learner Corpus 
 
7. Saul began his study of German in an intensive course in summer 2005, two months prior to the course 
under study. 
 
APPENDIX: Summary of da-Compounds 
Definition  
da-compounds are pronouns like personal pronouns such as er, sie, es, wir. Pronouns are used to address 
people or to refer to nouns that have already been mentioned in a text. Pronouns substitute for nouns. da-
compounds can refer to nouns but they also refer to larger pieces of a text such as clauses, sentences, or 
even bigger pieces such as scenes or ideas. 
Direction of Reference   
da-compounds can refer back to things that have already been mentioned or they can refer forward to 
things that have not yet been mentioned. When da-compounds refer back, they are called anaphoric. 
When da-compounds refer forward, they are called cataphoric. 
Anaphoric Reference 
da-compounds refer anaphorically to the following things: 
1. nouns 
2. objects of prepositions 
3. larger pieces of text such as clauses, whole sentences, paragraphs 
Cataphoric Reference 
da-compounds refer cataphorically to the following things 
1. dass-clauses 
2. infinitive clauses 
3. other subordinate clauses such as wenn-clauses 
da-compounds can be used both anaphorically and cataphorically in conjunction with verb-and-
preposition combinations such as sich freuen auf, sich interessiern für. 
Corpus-Driven Analysis of Native Speaker vs. Learner Use of da-Compounds 
1. NSs frequently use da-compounds. Learners rarely use da-compounds. 
2. The most common da-compounds used by NSs are dazu, davon, dafür, darauf, damit. Learners tend to 
use darüber the most.  They use dafür and dazu rarely. 
3. NSs use da-compounds cataphorically about 25% of the time.  Learners almost never use da-
compounds cataphorically. 
4. NSs use da-compounds to refer to bigger pieces of text more than 50% of the time.  Learners most 
frequently use da-compounds to refer to small pieces of text (nouns) or in conjunction with verb-and-
prepositions combinations. 
How Can Learners Improve? 
1. Use da-compounds more often. Use a greater variety of da-compounds. 
2. Use the da-compounds to refer to larger pieces of text. 
3. Use the da-compounds cataphorically. 
 
Language Learning & Technology 48
Julie A. Belz and Nina Vyatkina Pedagogical Mediation of a Developmental Learner Corpus 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors wish to acknowledge in alphabetical order Nathaniel Carney, Carolin Fuchs, Lisa Hundley, 
Jonathon Reinhardt, Emily F. Rine, Nathan Shrefler, and Mickey Wheeler for data entry. Special 
recognition goes to Lisa Hundley for her assistance with an early draft of this article. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Julie A. Belz (Ph.D., University of California at Berkeley) is Associate Professor of English/Applied 
Linguistics and World Languages and Cultures at Indiana University-Purdue University, Director of the 
TESOL Graduate Certificate Program, and Director of Research in the Division for Health 
Communication at the Indiana Center for Intercultural Communication. She specializes in Internet-
mediated language learning, intercultural communication, second language acquisition, pragmatics, 
learner corpus research, discourse analysis, learner identity, multilingual writing, and health discourse. 
She is the co-editor of Internet-Mediated Intercultural Foreign Language Education (Heinle & Heinle, 
2006) and guest editor of a special issue of Language Learning & Technology on telecollaboration. Julie 
serves on the editorial boards of Applied Linguistics and The American Association for University 
Supervisors and Coordinators of Foreign Language Programs (AAUSC). 
E-mail: jbelz@iupui.edu 
Nina Vyatkina (Ph.D., The Pennsylvania State University) is Assistant Professor of German/Applied 
Linguistics, Director of the German Language Program, and Co-Director of the Center for German 
Business Language at the University of Kansas. Her research interests include longitudinal learner corpus 
analysis, computer-assisted language learning, and pedagogical applications of developmental L2 
research.  
E-mail: vyatkina@ku.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Aston G. (2002). The learner as corpus designer. In B. Kettemann, & G. Marko (Eds.), Teaching and 
learning by doing corpus analysis (pp. 9–25). Amsterdam: Rodopi.  
Belz, J. A. (2002). Social dimensions of telecollaborative foreign language study. Language Learning & 
Technology, 6(1), 60–81. 
Belz, J. A. (2005). Corpus-driven characterizations of pronominal da-compound use by learners and 
native speakers of German. Die Unterrichtspraxis/Teaching German, 38(1), 43-59.  
Belz, J. A. (2008). The role of computer mediation in the instruction and development of L2 pragmatic 
competence. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 27, 45-75. 
Belz, J. A., & Kinginger, C. (2003). Discourse options and the development of pragmatic competence by 
classroom learners of German: The case of address forms. Language Learning, 53(4), 591-647. 
Belz, J. A., & Thorne, S. L. (Eds). (2006). Computer-mediated intercultural foreign language education. 
Boston, MA: Heinle & Heinle. 
Belz, J. A., & Vyatkina, N. (2005). Learner corpus analysis and the development of L2 pragmatic 
competence in networked inter-cultural language study: The case of German modal particles. Canadian 
Modern Language Review/Revue canadienne des langues vivantes, 62(1), 17-48. 
Language Learning & Technology 49
Julie A. Belz and Nina Vyatkina Pedagogical Mediation of a Developmental Learner Corpus 
 
Bernardini, S. (2002). Exploring new directions for discovery learning. In B. Kettemann, & G. Marko 
(Eds.), Teaching and learning by doing corpus analysis (pp. 165-181). Amsterdam: Rodopi. 
Bernardini, S. (2004). Corpora in the classroom: An overview and some reflections on future 
developments. In J. Sinclair (Ed.), How to use corpora in language teaching (pp. 15-36). Amsterdam: 
John Benjamins. 
Biber, D. (1988). Variation across speech and writing. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Cook, G. (1998). The uses of reality: A reply to Ronald Carter. ELT Journal, 52, 57-63. 
Coxhead, A. (2002). The academic wordlist: A corpus-based word list for academic purposes. In B. 
Kettemann, & G. Marko (Eds.), Teaching and learning by doing corpus analysis (pp. 73-89). Amsterdam: 
Rodopi. 
De Cock, S. (2004). Preferred sequences of words in NS and NNS speech. Belgian Journal of English 
Language and Literatures, 2, 225-246. 
Ellis, R. (2006). Current issues in the teaching of grammar: An SLA perspective. TESOL Quarterly, 40(1), 
83-107. 
Ellis, R., Basturkmen, H., & Loewen, S. (2001). Preemptive focus on form in the ESL classroom. TESOL 
Quarterly, 35(3), 407-432. 
Flowerdew, L. (2005). An integration of corpus-based and genre-based approaches to text analysis in 
EAP/ESP: Countering criticisms against corpus-based methodologies. English for Specific Purposes, 24, 
321-332.  
Gavioli, L., & Aston, G. (2001). Enriching reality: Language corpora in language pedagogy. ELT Journal, 
55(3), 238-246.  
Götze, L. (1993). Modalpartikeln aus der Sicht der Sprachlehr- und Sprachlernforschung. [Modal 
particles from the perspective of language teaching and learning research.] Deutsch als Fremdsprache, 4, 
227-232. 
Granger, S. (1998). The computer learner corpus: A versatile new source of data for SLA research. In S. 
Granger (Ed.), Learner English on computer (pp. 3-18). London: Longman. 
Granger S., Dagneaux, E., & Meunier F. (2002) The International Corpus of Learner English. Handbook 
and CD-ROM. Louvain-la-Neuve: Presses Universitaires de Louvain (162 pp.). 
Granger, S., Hung, J., & Petch-Tyson, S. (Eds.). (2002). Computer learner corpora, second language 
acquisition and foreign language teaching. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Granger S., & Tribble, C. (1998). Learner corpus data in the foreign language classroom: form-focused 
instruction and data-driven learning. In S. Granger (Ed.), Learner English on Computer (pp. 199-209). 
London: Longman. 
Johns, T. (1986). Microconcord: A language learner’s research tool. System, 14(2), 151-162. 
Kasper, G., & Rose, K. (2002). Pragmatic development in a second language. Malden, MA: Blackwell. 
Lantolf, J. P., & Thorne, S. (2006). Sociocultural theory and the genesis of second language development. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Layder, D. (1993). New strategies in social research. Cambridge, England: Polity Press.  
Lee, D., & Swales, J. (2006). A corpus-based EAP course for NNS doctoral students: Moving from 
available specialized corpora to self-compiled corpora. English for Specific Purposes, 25(1), 56-75. 
Language Learning & Technology 50
Julie A. Belz and Nina Vyatkina Pedagogical Mediation of a Developmental Learner Corpus 
 
Leech, G. (1997). Teaching and language corpora: A convergence. In A. Wichmann, S. Fligelstone, A. M. 
McEnery, & G. Knowles (Eds.), Teaching and language corpora (pp. 1-23). London: Longman. 
McCarthy, M., & Carter, R. (1995). Spoken grammar: What is it and how do we teach it? ELT Journal, 
49(3), 207-218. 
Mellow, D., Reeder, K., & Forster, E. (1996). Using time-series research designs to investigate the effects 
of instruction on SLA. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 18, 325-350. 
Mindt, D. (2002). A corpus-based grammar for ELT. In B. Kettemann, & G. Marko (Eds.), Teaching and 
learning by doing corpus analysis (pp. 91-105). Amsterdam: Rodopi. 
Möllering, M. (2001). Teaching German modal particles: A corpus-based approach. Language Learning 
& Technology, 5(3), 130-151. 
Möllering, M. (2004). The acquisition of German modal particles. Bern: Lang. 
Möllering, M., & Nunan, D. (1995). Pragmatics in interlanguage: German modal particles. Applied 
Language Learning, 6(1-2), 41-64. 
Nesselhauf, N. (2004). Learner corpora and their potential for language teaching.  In Sinclair, J. (Ed.), 
How to use corpora in language teaching (pp. 125-152).  Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Nesselhauf, N. (2005). Collocations in a learner corpus. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
O’Dowd, R. (Ed.) (2007). On-line intercultural exchange: A practical introduction for foreign language 
teachers. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Ortega, L., & Byrnes, H. (Eds.). (2008). The longitudinal study of advanced L2 capacities. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Ortega, L., & Iberri-Shea, G. (2005). Longitudinal research in second language acquisition: Recent trends 
and future directions. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 25, 26-45.  
Pravec, N. (2002). Survey of learner corpora. ICAME Journal, 26, 81-114. 
Prodromou, L. (1996). Correspondence. ELT Journal, 50(4), 371-373. 
Robinson, P. (1997). Generalizability and automaticity of second language learning under implicit, 
incidental, enhanced, and instructed conditions. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 19, 223-47. 
Römer, U. (2004). A corpus-driven approach to modal auxiliaries and their didactics. In Sinclair, J. (Ed.), 
How to use corpora in language teaching (pp. 185-199). Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Rundell, M., & Granger, S. (2007). From corpora to confidence. English Teaching Professional, 50, 15-
18. 
Schmidt, R. (2001). Attention. In P. Robinson (Ed.), Cognition and Second Language Instruction (pp. 3-
32). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Seidlhofer, B. (2002). Pedagogy and local learner corpora. In Granger, S., Hung, J., & Petch-Tyson, S. 
(Eds.), Computer learner corpora, second language acquisition and foreign language teaching (pp. 213-
234). Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Seidlhofer, B. (2003). Controversies in applied linguistics. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Sinclair, J. (2003). Reading concordances: An introduction. New York: Longman.  
St. John, E. (2001). A case for using a parallel corpus and concordancer for beginners of a foreign 
language. Language Learning & Technology, 5(3), 185-203. 
Language Learning & Technology 51
Julie A. Belz and Nina Vyatkina Pedagogical Mediation of a Developmental Learner Corpus 
 
Language Learning & Technology 52
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (1995). Problems in output and the cognitive processes they generate: A step 
towards second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 16(3), 371-391. 
Tao, H., & McCarthy, M. J. (2001). Understanding non-restrictive which-clauses in spoken English, 
which is not an easy thing. Language Sciences, 2, 651-677. 
Thurstun, J., & Candlin, C. N. (1998). Concordancing and the teaching of the vocabulary of academic 
English. English for Specific Purposes, 17, 267–280. 
Tognini-Bonelli, E. (2001). Corpus linguistics at work. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.  
Vyatkina, N. (2007). Development of second language pragmatic competence: the data-driven teaching of 
German modal particles based on a learner corpus. The Pennsylvania State University, Unpublished 
doctoral dissertation. 
Vyatkina, N., & Belz, J. A. (2006). A learner corpus-driven intervention for the development of L2 
pragmatic competence. In K. Bardovi-Harlig, C. Félix-Brasdefer, & A. S. Omar (Eds.), Pragmatics and 
language learning (pp. 315-357). University of Hawai’i at Manoa, National Foreign Language Resource 
Center.  
Vyatkina, N., & Johnson, K. E. (2007). Teaching German modal particles: A corpus-based approach. 
University Park, PA: CALPER Publications. Retrieved September 25, 2008, from 
http://calper.la.psu.edu/publications.php 
Weydt, H. (1969). Abtönungspartikel. Bad Homburg v.d.H., Berlin, Zürich: Verlag Gehlen. 
Weydt, H., Harden, T., Hentschel, H., & Rösler, D. (1983). Kleine deutsche Partikellehre. Ernst Klett: 
Stuttgart. 
Widdowson, H. G. (1991). Aspects of language teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Widdowson, H. G. (2000). On the limitations of linguistics applied. Applied Linguistics, 21(1), 3-25. 
 
