Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num2/kolschcolnik/ 
June 2008, Volume 12, Number 2
pp. 49-70 
 
Copyright © 2008, ISSN 1094-3501 
49
ASYNCHRONOUS FORUMS IN EAP: ASSESSMENT ISSUES 
Sara Kol and Miriam Schcolnik 
Tel Aviv University 
This paper reports on a pilot and a subsequent study that focused on the assessment of 
student writing in asynchronous text-stimulated forum discussions. The study, which was 
conducted in advanced English for Academic Purposes (EAP) courses, aimed at 
determining suitable assessment criteria for written academic discussions. In addition, the 
study tapped student attitudes toward forums, checked the effect of forum participation on 
student writing, and characterized the text-stimulated forum discussions. 
Based on a content analysis of the pilot data, the constructs of reflection and interaction 
were selected as assessment criteria to be evaluated in the main study. These criteria were 
found to be usable but insufficient for student assessment in the EAP courses. A 
questionnaire showed that the student attitudes were positive and that most students felt 
that their writing improved, even though an analysis of language complexity showed no 
significant improvement. A qualitative analysis of the transcripts revealed deep student 
involvement with the content and with their peers as well as an academic register 
interspersed with conversational interactions. 
INTRODUCTION 
Asynchronous online forums provide a venue for thoughtful discussion and as such have become a 
common component in both distance and blended courses (Cummings, Bonk, & Jacobs, 2002). These 
discussions allow for dynamic growth, development, and interchange of ideas among students, and 
therefore can play an important role in student learning (Barbour & Collins, 2005; Wu & Hiltz, 2004).  
Online discussions are not uniformly implemented in courses. In some courses, discussion participation is 
mandatory (e.g., Wu & Hiltz, 2004); in others, it is not required (Sullivan & Pratt, 1996). In some 
courses, the forum discussions are closely related in time and topic to class sessions (e.g., Biesenbach-
Lucas, 2004), while in others, the connection to the lectures is not direct and may be perceived negatively 
by students as a non-essential add-on to the course (Chong, 1998; Sherry, 2000). Some forum discussions 
are clearly structured by the instructor, who specifies the aspects of the topic or questions to be focused 
on (Black, 2005); other forums do not stipulate anything beyond the topic and allow students free range of 
exploration (Dougiamas & Taylor, 2003). In some forums, instructors are regular participants, responding 
to student questions and providing corrective feedback (Sotillo, 2000); in others, the instructor is an 
observer, whose presence is felt but not seen (Biesenbach-Lucas, 2004). In some cases, students get credit 
just for participating (Sotillo, 2000), while in others, forum participation is on a volunteer basis and no 
course credit is given (Althaus, 1996). In some online discussions, the groups are kept fairly small: 3–7 
students (Bohlke, 2003; Warschauer, 1996), while in others, the whole class participates (Sullivan & 
Pratt, 1996).  
In a discussion forum, students can brainstorm, disseminate information, role-play, and discuss course 
material, and the asynchronous nature of the discussion allows time for reflection (Althaus, 1996; 
Harasim, 1992; Warschauer, 1999). This reflection, labeled the "ripple effect" by Bernath and Rubin 
(1999), can lead to the deep thinking that is necessary to make connections between new and old 
information, integrate the two, and synthesize; that is, the reflection can give rise to a new perspective, 
which can engender the development of new ideas from existing information.  
By promoting student engagement, reflection, and critical thinking (Duffy, Dueber, & Hawley, 1998; 
Garrison, Anderson, & Archer, 2000; Jonassen, 1994; Sherry, 2000), forums can be used to enhance the 
Sara Kol & Miriam Schcolnik Asynchronous Forums in EAP: Assessment Issues 
 
learning experience (Bernath & Hulsmann, undated; Bhagyavati et al., 2005). When students struggle to 
organize their thoughts and put them in writing for an authentic audience, deeper cognitive processing 
may be at work, leading to more learning (Berge, 1997; Zamel, 1992). As Lapadat (2002) said, 
"Expressing oneself via a written medium holds the promise of writing one’s way into understanding". 
Lemke (1989) concurs that writing facilitates the construction of meaning. However, in practice, this does 
not always happen (McLoughlin & Luca, 2000); for example, in a study by Angeli, Bonk, and Hara 
(1998), many of the online interactions were superficial, and the claims made by the students were 
unsupported. Nevertheless, learners seem to feel that online discussions are useful (Harasim, 1992; Wu & 
Hiltz, 2004). 
If writing helps to clarify the learner’s understanding, then reading-based writing may be especially useful 
when reading texts in a second language. "Writing allows insights that may have been inaccessible . . . at 
the time the text was read" (Zamel, 1992, p. 472). Moreover, Pellettieri (2000) claimed that as learners 
attempt to formulate and support their ideas in the most exact language possible and organize the 
presentation of the ideas in a logical fashion, they could experience vocabulary acquisition as well as 
syntactic growth. 
In language courses, forums may serve the following purposes: encouraging thoughtful communication in 
the language, allowing for the development of writing skills, providing a framework for text discussion, 
and facilitating the acquisition of what Chun (1994) calls "interactive competence." Warschauer (1999) 
has described how computer-mediated communication facilitates the combination of the two language 
functions, interaction and reflection. Reflective interaction can promote language learning (Ellis, 2005; 
Lamy & Goodfellow, 1999; Ortega, 1997; Sauvignon, 2002; Warschauer, 2007) by motivating students 
"to stretch their linguistic resources in order to meet the demands of real communication in a social 
context" (Ortega, 1997, p. 83). Although some of this research refers to synchronous computer-mediated 
communication (CMC), interactive competence and social skills are relevant to both synchronous and 
asynchronous communication. 
A relevant issue in the use of asynchronous forums in education is the assessment of student contributions 
in the context of the level and objectives of the course. The following section begins with a short survey 
of writing assessment in general and proceeds to a review of the literature dealing with forum analysis 
and assessment.  
Assessing Forum Contributions 
In academic contexts, the quality of first-language papers is usually assessed by evaluating the accuracy 
of the content, the originality and development of thoughts and ideas, and the soundness of the writer’s 
logic (Weigle, 2002). When dealing with English as a second or foreign language, language elements 
(e.g., morphological, lexical, or syntactic accuracy) play an important role. Language elements are not 
only used to measure quality at a point in time, but also can be used as signs of language development 
over time.  
Language instructors may tend to favor fluency (often defined as writing easily and as much as possible 
in the time given) over language accuracy (defined as degree of correctness or avoidance of mistakes), but 
many feel that both deserve attention. Accuracy is especially important for writing in academic contexts 
(Weigle, 2002) and is assessed by analyzing the number and types of errors. Fluency in writing can be 
measured in many different ways, depending on how fluency is defined (Wolfe-Quintero, Inagaki, & 
Kim, 1998). In our study, given that the discussions were asynchronous, fluency was measured by the 
amount of writing that was produced (text length), rather than the amount of writing produced in a given 
amount of time. However, neither fluency nor accuracy was part of the student assessment. 
Another construct often used to measure second language development is language complexity, which 
may focus on lexical factors or syntactic factors. Lexical complexity is reflected in two dimensions: range 
Language Learning & Technology 
50
Sara Kol & Miriam Schcolnik Asynchronous Forums in EAP: Assessment Issues 
 
(lexical variation) and size (lexical sophistication) of a second language writer’s productive vocabulary 
(Wolfe-Quintero, Inagaki, & Kim, 1998). An analysis of lexical complexity looks at how many different 
words are used or how sophisticated the words are.  
Syntactic complexity reflects elements such as sentence length, amount of embedding, and range and 
sophistication of structures (Ortega, 2003). However, the relation between syntactic complexity measures 
and improved writing quality or linguistic ability is not clear (Grabe & Kaplan, 1996; Ortega, 2003). 
Moreover, the relationship between sentence-level complexity and overall quality as reflected in 
coherence, for example, is not well established either (Grabe & Kaplan, 1996). Despite these reservations, 
as part of the exploration, language complexity was measured so as to obtain a more detailed picture of 
student contributions. 
Computer Mediated Communication (CMC) is somewhere on the continuum between paper-based 
writing and speech (Kern, 2006). As a distinct form of writing, it therefore requires a customized form of 
assessment. When assessing forum contributions, in addition to the criteria normally used to evaluate 
compositions or essays, communicative parameters, such as the ability to participate in a written 
discussion, need to be taken into account. The realization of the difference between forum writing and the 
writing of traditional papers was a motivation to search for parameters that characterize quality in forum 
writing. These parameters could then serve as assessment criteria to grade student contributions. 
How can forum discussions be analyzed? Some studies focus on the nature of student messages or their 
length, depth, or purpose. Henri (1992) proposed a model for analyzing CMC messages tapping five 
aspects of the learning process as reflected in the messages: participative, interactive, social, cognitive, 
and metacognitive. This model focused on process rather than product and has been used by many other 
researchers of CMC (e.g., Angeli, Bonk, & Hara, 1998; Hara, Bonk, & Angeli, 2002; Schrire, 2003) as a 
basis for their work or the development of their own models. Oskoz (2005) and McLoughlin and Luca 
(2000) have also developed process-based systems for the analysis of online interactions. The latter traces 
knowledge construction as it moves through five phases from knowledge sharing to knowledge building. 
However, many systems for analyzing CMC messages are too tedious and time-consuming to serve as 
practical assessment tools (Dringus & Ellis, 2004; Ho, 2002). Practitioners need to assess student 
contributions fairly and efficiently and may not be able to go into all the details encompassed in the 
descriptive instruments used for research. In addition, instructors need to focus on the achievement of 
course objectives. To aid instructors in assessing forum contributions, Dringus and Ellis (2004) developed 
SCAFFOLD—Scale for Forums/Online Discussion Assessment, which used the following criteria: 
interaction, analysis, expansion of discussion scope, clarification, closure, comprehensiveness, accuracy 
of information, degree of evaluation, originality, reflection, synthesis, and summary. Bauer (2002) added 
the criteria of stimulating discussion and critiquing other students’ contributions.  
The aforementioned criteria were developed for content courses. Criteria need to be determined for 
assessing student forum writing in language courses. This paper reports on a study of the use of forums 
for text-stimulated discussions in advanced English for Academic Purposes (EAP) courses. The main 
aims of the study were to determine what constitutes quality in online discussions in EAP courses and 
then to find suitable criteria for assessing student forum contributions. In addition, the study attempted to 
tap student attitudes toward forums and check the effect of forum participation on student writing. 
Moreover, the extensive data available was used to characterize the text-stimulated forum discussions. It 
was hoped that through this kind of multi-focused investigation of forums, broader insights would emerge 
that could prove useful to professionals in the field. 
 
 
Language Learning & Technology 
51
Sara Kol & Miriam Schcolnik Asynchronous Forums in EAP: Assessment Issues 
 
FORUMS IN EAP: PILOT AND MAIN STUDY 
The goals for using forums in the EAP courses were to provide a framework for text discussion where 
every student in the class could participate, to encourage thoughtful communication in English, and to 
offer an authentic and relevant writing experience. 
The research was carried out at Tel Aviv University over two semesters. In the first semester, a pilot was 
conducted to determine criteria for assessing student forum contributions. The following semester, the 
main study evaluated whether the assessment criteria selected in the pilot study were usable and 
sufficient. An additional aim of the study was to learn more about text-stimulated forum discussions in 
EAP courses.  
The participants were freshmen taking one-semester advanced-level EAP courses, specific to different 
subject areas. The courses in the first semester (pilot) and the second semester (main study) were 
different, and so were the students. The students were mainly native speakers of Hebrew, with substantial 
numbers of native speakers of Arabic and Russian. The average student age was 23, and both genders 
were equally represented. In both semesters, the participants were required to participate in four text-
stimulated forum discussions and answer an attitude questionnaire at the end of the course. The courses 
were taught by the researchers. The software used for the threaded forum discussions is part of the 
learning management system used by the university (Britannica HighLearn). 
The Pilot 
The purpose of the pilot was to determine criteria for assessing student forum contributions. The 
participants were 94 undergraduate students in four advanced-level EAP courses. The courses, which met 
for 4 hours a week, were English for Mathematics and Computer Science, English for Physiotherapy, 
English for Occupational Therapy, and English for Chemistry. The first three forums were whole class 
discussions, and the last forum was used for small-group (3- to 5-student) discussions of texts in 
preparation for a class symposium. Each group selected a different topic for presentation to the class in 
the symposium, and the forum gave the groups an opportunity to collaborate outside of class. All forums 
had the same guidelines (see Figure 1), which was necessary because the students were assessed on how 
well they followed the generic guidelines. Each forum was kept open for approximately two weeks. 
1. a. Ask at least one question on the article about something that is not clear to you. 
b. Answer at least one question that someone asked. 
2. a. Express your thoughts on the articles you read. 
b. React to at least one other person's thoughts. 
Figure 1. Forum guidelines in pilot. 
Although the instructors observed the forum activity, they did not participate. It was hoped that the 
forums would provide a framework for free and fluent writing, unconstrained by teacher presence and not 
subject to the observer effect (Bogdan & Biklen, 1982). In an attempt to assess student contributions 
according to more than mere participation, the assessment was based on how well the students followed 
the guidelines. That is, the students received credit for following the forum instructions, including asking 
and answering questions about the article and listing interesting points. Language accuracy was not 
assessed because the focus of the advanced EAP courses is text comprehension and language is not 
explicitly taught. The forum grades constituted 15% of the final mark for the course. 
According to Warschauer (1999), reflection and interaction intersect in forum communication. Given that 
the main goal in the forums was thoughtful communication, the data analysis was focused on the presence 
of reflection as well as interaction. These two constructs seemed particularly relevant to text-stimulated 
forum discussions because the text discussions involved the expression of ideas—presupposing 
Language Learning & Technology 
52
Sara Kol & Miriam Schcolnik Asynchronous Forums in EAP: Assessment Issues 
 
reflection—and the exchange of ideas with others. The constructs seemed possible candidates for 
assessment criteria. Language accuracy, on the other hand, did not seem at the time a suitable criterion, 
given that the goal of the forums was not writing improvement. 
Data Analysis 
To use reflection and interaction in the assessment process, a list of identifiable signs of the two had to be 
developed. Therefore, the data were searched for instances of the two constructs, a taxonomy of the signs 
of reflection and interaction was developed, and a list of language markers was compiled (Tables 1 and 
2). Signs are the actions or deeds that show that an underlying event has occurred; for example, agreeing 
and disagreeing show that thought or reflection has occurred. Language markers are the words that signal 
the realization of the action; for example, the words I concur show that the writer has thought about a 
point and agrees with an idea that was expressed. 
Table 1. Signs and Markers of Reflection 
Signs of reflection Markers of reflection Data examples 
Critically analyzes content and 
form 
I think/believe/feel/see . . . 
I started wondering about . . . 
"In my opinion the article deals 
too much with the ridiculous 
claim that organs have the same 
status as a live human being." 
Agrees/disagrees with author’s 
views 
I agree/disagree/object . . . "I don't agree with the author 
because cloning is against 
religious law." 
Recapitulates and summarizes I now realize/understand/see that . 
. . 
"Now I realize just how important 
cloning is." 
Expresses insights/ideas After reading the article I think 
that . . . 
"I think humanity needs rules." 
Connects text to other sources I read an article about that . . . 
That reminds me of . . . 
"Here’s a link to something else 
about gene therapy." 
Expresses reactions, opinions, 
conclusions, implications 
I was surprised/angry/upset/in 
awe . . . 
It made me think about the issue 
seriously. 
"Is there any way to create a male 
baby without any help from 
men?" 
Supports views through facts, 
analogies, and examples 
Let me give an example. . . 
This is like. . . 
"I think all the mess began after 
the cloning of Dolly because 
before this people didn’t believe 
it would ever happen."  
 
At the end of the semester, the students completed a short questionnaire that tapped their attitudes toward 
the forums and their perceptions of the usefulness of the forums for text discussion and improving their 
English. Most questions required a yes-no response, and one required the students to check adjectives that 
they felt applied to the use of the forums for text discussion. The results of the attitude questionnaire are 
given in Table 3. 
As can be seen in Table 3, most students felt that the forum discussions were effective in both improving 
their English (63%) and understanding the texts (73%). The latter finding may reflect the forum 
instructions, which explicitly required students to ask about unclear points in the text and to answer 
classmates’ questions. Regarding the importance of the grade, the students were divided almost equally. 
However, only one third of the students chose the adjectives pleasant and motivating to describe how they 
felt about the use of the forums, and most students did not feel that participating in the forums was easy. 
Informal conversations with the students revealed that some felt that participation in the forums required 
Language Learning & Technology 
53
Sara Kol & Miriam Schcolnik Asynchronous Forums in EAP: Assessment Issues 
 
time and effort that they did not have, due to the already demanding curriculum and course requirements. 
In addition, those students living in dormitories complained about trouble finding available computers in 
the dorms at night. These factors may explain the low percentages. They may also explain why only 32% 
of the students chose the adjectives pleasant and motivating. 
Table 2. Signs and Markers of Interaction 
Signs of interaction Markers of interaction 
Asks and answers "real" questions related 
to the text 
In the text he talks about . . . /Is this related to . . . /Do you 
know of any other . . . /I think the answer you are looking 
for is in par. X 
Clarifies views/requests clarification I think you misunderstood my idea/What do you mean? 
Agrees/disagrees with peer/suggests 
modification 
As X said/There is a problem/I would like to sharpen X’s 
thoughts/I almost agree with you/I think you forgot 
something very important 
Tries to persuade Don’t you think that . . . /I think you should . . . 
Evaluates peer contributions Your question is very relevant/I think you wrote very 
important points 
Encourages interaction Please send me your opinions and feelings/Share your 
views with me 
 
Table 3. Student Attitudes: Pilot 
Question Yes Response (%) 
Did participation in the forum help you improve your English? 63 
Did writing your ideas and getting feedback from your friends help you 
understand the texts? 
73 
Should the grade for the forums be included in the course grade? 51 
Was it easy to participate in the forums? 35 
Were the forum discussions pleasant and motivating? 32 
 
The analysis of the pilot data guided the framing of the research questions for the main study. The 
taxonomy of signs of reflection and interaction developed in the pilot provided the basis for the checklist 
used as a tool for assessing student forum contributions the following semester. 
Main Study 
The research questions that guided the main study were 
     1. Are reflection and interaction usable and sufficient criteria to assess student contributions?  
     2. How do students feel about the use of forums? 
     3. Does forum participation over one semester affect student writing in terms of language complexity?  
Method 
In preparation for the study, four online tutorials were created to explain the nature of reflection and 
interaction and teach the language markers required for those functions. The tutorials explain how to 
agree and disagree, express an opinion, support an opinion, and interact with others. At the beginning of 
the semester, the markers of reflection and interaction were taught, and the tutorials were put online. 
The participants were 156 students in four advanced-level courses. The courses, which met for 4 hours a 
week for a semester, were English for Mathematics and Computer Science, English for Engineering, and 
Language Learning & Technology 
54
Sara Kol & Miriam Schcolnik Asynchronous Forums in EAP: Assessment Issues 
 
two sections of English for Biology. The courses followed a mixed-mode, blended learning approach, in 
which most of the lessons were conducted in the classroom and occasionally in the computer learning 
center. Each of the classes had a course site, and a number of the homework assignments required use of 
the site for Internet-based tasks. Instruction and practice in digital literacy skills, such as skimming a 
digital article or using an online dictionary, were part of the course curriculum. Forums were an integral, 
graded part of the courses and took the place of text-based homework questions. A grade, along with 
teacher feedback on the contributions, was e-mailed to each student after each forum was closed. 
The students wrote to a practice forum before receiving any instruction on forum writing. These messages 
constituted the baseline for comparison. In addition to the practice forum, students participated in three 
forums. All forums were whole class discussions, and guidelines were slightly adapted for each forum 
according to the needs of the specific course and readings. In general, students were asked to express their 
ideas on a topic related to texts that they had read and respond to others’ statements and questions (see 
Figure 2 for an example of forum instructions). The instructions used the word "discuss" without 
specifying exactly how the discussion should be conducted. This change from the pilot instructions was 
made to allow for a more spontaneous and natural exchange of ideas. Students were instructed to write 
their forum messages as academic exchanges and to avoid informal abbreviations (e.g., ur for "you are") 
and other informal usage. The length of forum messages was not specified because the focus was on the 
quality of the forum communication, rather than on the quantity. Each forum was open for about two 
weeks. 
1. Read the article on the new translation device. 
2. Discuss what you have read:  
 a. Comment on the features of the device, ask questions about points you didn't understand, or express 
your thoughts on additional applications of the device.  
 b. Read your classmates' contributions and react to them. 
Figure 2. Example of forum instructions in main study 
Students were informed that their contributions would be checked for evidence of reflection on both 
general and specific points in the text and for interaction with other students. As in the pilot, the 
instructors did not participate in the online discussions. Forum participation constituted 15% of the final 
mark. 
To assess the student forum contributions, the messages were checked for evidence of reflection and 
interaction. Equal weight was given to each of the two criteria. At first, an attempt was made to break 
down the grade into quality and quantity, but determining the quality of reflection was not only difficult 
but also possibly invalid in the context of an EAP course. The aim of the assessment of reflection was not 
to judge the breadth or depth of thought, but rather to determine whether the students comprehended the 
text, expressed their views, and supported them. 
Data Analysis 
To determine if reflection and interaction were usable criteria, a checklist based on the signs and markers 
(see Tables 1 and 2) was prepared and used for assessment. In practice, the signs, more so than the 
markers, guided the assessment. In addition, the time spent assessing student contributions was recorded. 
To determine if reflection and interaction were sufficient criteria, the quality of 20 forum contributions 
was holistically assessed by the authors using a six-point scale (inter-rater reliability = 0.72) and 
compared with the grades given on the basis of reflection and interaction. In cases of discrepancy between 
the two, the data were analyzed to clarify the cause. 
Language Learning & Technology 
55
Sara Kol & Miriam Schcolnik Asynchronous Forums in EAP: Assessment Issues 
 
To tap student attitudes towards the forums, an online survey was administered at the end of the semester. 
The survey checked how students felt about forum usefulness in advanced language courses and the 
contribution of forums to students’ reading, writing, and communicative skills.  
To check whether the forum participation had affected the student writing, a text analysis was performed 
comparing the first and last forums, using a random sample of 20 students. To perform the analysis, all 
contributions to a forum by each of the 20 students were put together and analyzed using the Textalyser 
program (http://textalyser.net/). The program taps four measures: number of words (reflecting quantity or 
fluency), lexical diversity (reflecting richness of vocabulary), word length (reflecting lexical 
sophistication), and average number of words per sentence (reflecting syntactic complexity). 
Even though the characterization of the forum communication was not one of the main goals of the study, 
the available transcripts were used for this purpose. Table 4 lists the forums included in the analysis for 
forum characterization and specifies their coding.  
The goal of the qualitative analysis of the forum transcripts was to develop a better understanding of the 
features of communication in our text-stimulated forum discussions, for which students were given 
specific guidelines and assessment criteria. Regularities or patterns, or what Tesch (1990, p. 113) calls 
"commonalities," were searched for in the data, through repetitive readings of the transcripts. The analysis 
involved extracting what seemed to be significant or key phrases/sentences and then clustering them by 
category or issue. In addition, the awareness of audience and the overall flow of the discussions were 
checked.  
The goal of the quantitative analysis was to check the amount of student writing (length of contributions), 
the presence or absence of audience awareness (explicit acknowledgment of others but not necessarily 
implying interaction), and the extent of interaction (number of replies to a thread-opening message).  
Table 4. Forum Coding 
Forum Class Forum topic 
1 Biology, Section 1 Extinctions 
2 Biology, Section 1 Cloning 
3 Biology, Section 2 Extinctions 
4 Biology, Section 2 Cloning 
5 Math & Computer Science Fermat 
6 Math & Computer Science Cloning 
7 Engineering Fermat 
8 Engineering Cloning 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Usability and Sufficiency of Assessment Criteria 
The instances of reflection and interaction were easily located, so the assessment criteria were deemed
 usable.
Assessing a student’s contributions to a forum took an average of 25 minutes, meaning that it could take 
two full days to mark one forum for a class of 30 students. The assessment involved reading each 
contribution in the context of the other students’ messages and checking for the presence of reflection and 
interaction, whether explicitly marked or not. However, because reading a student’s contributions often 
required "jumping" from page to page to find all of that student’s messages as well as remembering what 
the student had written on the previous page, the time involved may not be a function of the criteria but 
rather a result of the technical aspects of the application. In other words, grading using other criteria 
would probably have taken just as long. 
Language Learning & Technology 
56
Sara Kol & Miriam Schcolnik Asynchronous Forums in EAP: Assessment Issues 
 
Although interaction and reflection were found to be usable assessment criteria, they did not prove to be 
sufficient. The comparison of the holistic assessment with the criteria-based grades showed that the two 
did not always match. In the cases of discrepancy, the holistic assessment was always lower. A closer 
look at those contributions revealed that in some cases, although the students had received full credit for 
reflection and interaction, their English was poor. In other cases, the contributions did not refer 
specifically to information in the texts, meaning that the students may have written without having read 
the texts carefully. As a result of this comparison, the criteria of reflection and interaction were deemed 
insufficient for assessing text-stimulated forum discussions in the EAP courses.  
Student Attitudes Towards the EAP Forums 
The results of the student attitude questionnaire are presented in Table 5. 
Table 5. Student Attitudes 
Question Yes 
Were the tutorials helpful? 76% 
Should English courses include forums? 73% 
Did the grade motivate you to write better? 70% 
Did the forums help you improve your writing? 70% 
Should the teacher participate in the forums? 53% 
Did the forums help you learn new words? 44% 
Did the forums help you understand the texts? 40% 
Did the forum help you prepare for the quiz? 24% 
 
As shown in Table 5, even though writing in the forums was time consuming, a large percentage of the 
students felt that forums should be included in the English courses, that is, that the activity was 
worthwhile. Similarly, a large percentage of the students felt that their writing improved as a result of 
their forum writing experiences. However, less than half of the students said that the forums helped them 
understand the texts. This is probably a result of the fact that, in the forums, students discussed their 
reactions to the ideas that interested them rather than discuss what was unclear in the texts. As mentioned 
above, in the main study, the forum instructions did not explicitly require students to ask and answer 
questions about the text. 
The high percentage of positive answers to the question of whether forums should be included in the EAP 
courses may reflect the fact that the students appreciated the extra opportunity to communicate with their 
peers, as reflected in comments 3 and 5 below. Comment 1 probably represents the feelings of the 27% 
who felt that forums should not be part of the course. Comments 2 and 4 show a preference for this type 
of task over more traditional homework tasks.  
1) "Forum participation should not be required but optional. I usually just write something because I 
have to, and it weighs down on me." 
2) "Forum participation enriched the course. It forced me to use English to express thoughts and feelings 
. . . it improved my vocabulary and writing skills." 
3) "It allowed me to get to know my classmates better." 
4) "Forum text discussions are much better than answering questions on worksheets!" 
5) "It was interesting to read my classmates’ comments." 
The fact that 70% of the students felt that the grade was important to motivate them seems to indicate that 
forum participation should be assessed and graded. 
Language Learning & Technology 
57
Sara Kol & Miriam Schcolnik Asynchronous Forums in EAP: Assessment Issues 
 
Effect of Asynchronous Discussion on Writing 
The first and last forums were analyzed for language complexity. The text analysis comparing the two 
forums showed no significant differences in quantity, lexical diversity, word length, and number of words 
per sentence. In Table 6, number of words reflects quantity, which is also a sign of fluency; lexical 
diversity is the ratio of different words to the total number of words, reflecting lexical variation or 
richness of vocabulary, which is an indicator of textual quality; average number of syllables per word 
reflects word length, which indicates lexical sophistication; and average number of words per sentence is 
a measure of syntactic complexity (Ortega, 2003). 
Table 6. Language Complexity Means (N=20) 
 First Forum  Last Forum p 
Number of words 208 238 0.26 
Lexical diversity 63% 60% 0.15 
Mean Syllables per word 1.65 1.59 0.06 
Mean Words per sentence 19.4 18.4 0.30 
 
The fact that no significant differences were found between the language complexity in the first and last 
forums is not surprising for a number of reasons. First, in a short period of a few months, language 
development may not be observable with advanced students. An observation period of a year of college 
level instruction is probably needed for substantial changes in the syntactic complexity of L2 writing to be 
observed (Ortega, 2003). Second, although no significant improvement in language complexity was 
found, language improvement may have been evident had the criterion been other than language 
complexity, for example, grammatical accuracy. Thirdly, had the sample not been random but rather 
handpicked to include only the weaker students, improvement may have been apparent. Finally, the 
students probably had more time to devote to English assignments at the beginning of the semester, when 
they wrote for the first forum, than at the end of the semester, when they needed time to prepare for final 
exams in all their courses.  
Forum Characteristics  
A number of issues emerged from the qualitative and quantitative analyses of the forum transcripts. The 
results are discussed below and illustrative examples presented, unedited except for spelling corrections. 
The generalizability of these results is limited to forum discussions with similar contexts. 
Qualitative 
The qualitative analysis revealed the following characteristics: 
Academic register plus. Students were instructed to write their forum messages as academic exchanges 
and to avoid informal abbreviations and other informal usage. At the same time, they knew that one of the 
assessment criteria was interaction with their peers. The analysis of the transcripts showed the use of 
written academic register accompanied by informal conversational interactions, including expression of 
feelings through smileys and exclamation points. Linguistically, the forum writing was an amalgam, 
containing both informal conversational elements and formal academic discourse. The informal elements, 
common in spoken registers (Biber, 2006), included language indicating thought processes and the 
expression of stance, for example, I think, and the language used to express feelings, for example, I really 
don't have an answer, I wish I had. . . . The students used compound and complex sentences as well as 
simple sentences. They used rich academic vocabulary, including adjectives, adverbs, and sentence 
connectors, which are not common in oral discussions (Crystal, 2001). Whether the words came from the 
dictionary or from other resources used, the data show that the students were aware of these lexical items 
as they consciously incorporated them into their forum messages. Here are some examples: 
Language Learning & Technology 
58
Sara Kol & Miriam Schcolnik Asynchronous Forums in EAP: Assessment Issues 
 
"We don't hunt and destroy natural habitats of animals simply for survival, we do it mostly 
for our comfort, without taking into account the consequence of our actions." (Forum 3) 
"The inevitable question regarding the above facts is: How would human cloning affect 
the world population? Is it going to be a negligible factor? Is it going to extremely 
accelerate the overpopulation process?" (Forum 6) 
Involvement with source materials and peer messages. Reflection and interaction were apparent in the 
forum messages through the opinions and thoughts students expressed, evidencing deep involvement with 
source materials and with peer opinions, reflected in expressions of disagreement, thoughtful questions 
posed to peers, and rhetorical questions.  
The involvement with the source materials was evident in the claims students made and the support they 
provided. This type of writing can be assumed to be the product of a process of mindful reading of the 
resources. Here is an example:  
"Most people think that cloning is the victory of human over the nature. I want to refer to 
this issue by checking two points that in my opinion refute the sentence above. First of all 
scientists are using woman's egg, and need woman's womb for hosting…. Second, we 
can't promise that the clone will have the exact attributes like the source. He will be 
growing up in another environment and under different condition." (Forum 8) 
Involvement with peer opinions is reflected in the following example: 
"Let me tell you something. You think that Wiles sacrificed his life because he abandoned 
his friends and because he lived in total isolation. Well, maybe for normal people this is a 
life of sacrifice, but for him this wasn’t. For him, proving Fermat’s last theorem was his 
goal and quitting from his lifetime goal will be the real sacrifice." (Forum 7) 
At times, student involvement led to a sharing of their thought processes with the class (see the 
interactions in Appendix A, for example) and demonstrated how writing facilitates understanding 
(Lapadat, 2002). 
Student interactions in the forums were explicit and constructive, often including a positive statement 
before expressing criticism, for example, "I agree with you about how it is amazing to think about 
theorems when you are ten years old !!! But in the other hand, . . ." (Forum 7). The interaction often went 
back and forth a number of times as the students responded to the remarks of their classmates (see 
Appendix B for an example). Moreover, all forum discussions stayed on topic.  
The forum messages included many questions, as would be expected in authentic communicative 
exchanges, questions to which the writers genuinely seemed to be waiting for a reply. For example, in 
response to a student’s comment that she would permit the cloning of animals but not of humans, another 
asked: "Why do you believe that scientists should be allowed to clone animals and not humans? What is 
the difference?" (Forum 2). Students also used rhetorical questions as a means of expressing their ideas, 
for example, "What will happen to our lives if clones will be allowed? People will create their babies . . ." 
(Forum 2). 
Audience awareness was evident in almost all of the messages. Crystal (2001, p. 18) claimed, ". . . as the 
Internet is a medium almost entirely dependent on reactions to written messages, awareness of audience 
must hold a primary place in any discussion." Forum 7 (with 67 messages) was randomly selected, and 
the initial sentences in each message were read. In almost all of the initial sentences, the students 
indicated awareness of their audience at some point, for example, "Hi everyone" or a reference to "an 
article that WE read." 
Language Learning & Technology 
59
Sara Kol & Miriam Schcolnik Asynchronous Forums in EAP: Assessment Issues 
 
Forum messages also included references to peer contributions and required source materials, with 
occasional extension beyond the required readings and the classroom. Some messages showed that 
students chose to read several postings before contributing to the discussion. For example, "As many of 
you claimed, and I agree, biological diversity is tremendously important to humankind" (Forum 3). 
Moreover, students appreciated the new perspective gained from reading their classmates’ messages, for 
example, "You gave me a new point of view" (Forum 4). Whether the purpose of reading the messages 
was to decide to whom to respond, to see what their classmates thought, or simply to look over sample 
contributions, students were involved in this authentic reading experience as a side effect of the forum 
writing assignment. 
Not only did students discuss the forum topics with their classmates through the forums, but some also 
talked with their friends and families: "I came home and asked my family and friends what their opinion 
was, and as I expected they were all amazed" (Forum 8). Others connected the forum discussions to 
external knowledge resources: "In my opinion (and as we learned in ecology class ) . . ." (Forum 1). 
Quantitative 
Through the quantitative analysis of the data and the records, the following characteristics emerged: 
Characteristic length of contributions. A quantitative feature that can be used to characterize online 
messages is length. In a group discussion of a novel in a U.S. college, Crystal (2001) found an average 
message length of 8.1 lines (p. 145). In the analysis, great variance was found in the lengths of the 
contributions, ranging from extremes of only a few words to several hundred words. To estimate the 
amount of English students wrote, the words in each of the messages in Forum 1 were counted, and the 
other forums were searched for very short and very long messages. Forum 1 had an average of about 175 
words per student, per forum, but this average gives only a rough idea of the amount of student writing, as 
the values were widely distributed and included extremes of 431 and 63. The longest single message in all 
the forums contained 887 words (many more than necessary), and the shortest, a mere 22 words (many 
fewer than expected).  
Table 7. Unanswered Thread-Opening Messages 
Forum Unanswered thread-opening messages 
5 24% 
7 29% 
1 37% 
2 40% 
3 42% 
6 42% 
8 52% 
4 53% 
 
Extent of interaction. The extent of interaction varied across the forums. Two related aspects of the 
interaction were checked: the number of thread-opening messages that went unanswered and the average 
number of replies to a thread-opening message. A thread-opening message is an attempt to start a 
threaded discussion. If no one replies, the thread never materializes. The percentages of thread-opening 
messages that went unanswered in each of the eight forums are presented in Table 7, in ascending order. 
All the forums contained thread-opening messages that went unanswered. The range was from 24 to 53%. 
What may explain this variation? Four explanations seem plausible: time, topic, language, and social 
reasons. For example, if a message was posted close to the date when the forum was ‘locked,’ other 
students would not have had time to answer (i.e., time). This was observed in many instances of 
unanswered messages. If the topic of a given message was not interesting or motivating, other students 
Language Learning & Technology 
60
Sara Kol & Miriam Schcolnik Asynchronous Forums in EAP: Assessment Issues 
 
would not have replied (i.e., topic). An unclear message, instead of being followed by a question of 
clarification may have been left unanswered by busy peers (i.e., language). It was observed that students 
tended to reply to their friends, and therefore some messages remained unanswered (i.e., social). 
The interaction index (see Table 8), developed by the authors to measure the amount of interaction that 
took place, had a small range of values. This index was calculated by averaging the number of replies to 
each thread-opening message. The modified index is the average number of replies to those thread-
opening messages for which there were replies, that is, excluding those thread-opening messages that had 
no replies. The average number of replies (see modified index) ranged from 2 to 4. What may explain the 
variance? One possible explanation is the interest level of the topic itself, and another is the interest level 
of the thread-opening message. 
Table 8. Interaction Index 
Forum Interaction index Modified index 
6 2.53 4.36 
1 2.47 3.92 
7 2.24 3.13 
3 1.57 2.75 
8 1.21 2.50 
5 1.67 2.12 
2 1.24 2.07 
4 0.94 2.00 
 
The purpose of the analysis of the forum transcripts was to see how the students communicated in their 
asynchronous discussions. Did the forum guidelines and the assessment criteria affect student messages? 
They probably did because the guidelines and the criteria played a part in forming the context for the 
forum communication. In addition, assessment often has a backwash effect on what students pay attention 
to and how they perform. The analysis revealed that the students did indeed follow the guidelines, as was 
reflected in the characteristics of their writing. Interestingly, however, the analysis revealed an additional 
characteristic that was not part of the guidelines, namely, informal conversational style. 
FINAL THOUGHTS 
The insights that emerged from this study have deepened our understanding of the use of forums in EAP 
courses. Forums allow for written communication in English among students who would normally 
communicate in their native language. When language learners contribute to a forum discussion, they get 
experience in L2 communication, without slipping into their native language, as can occur in EFL class 
discussions. 
In this study, the forum discussions required students to write about academic topics and express and 
support their ideas, while communicating with their peers in English. The asynchronous nature of the 
discussions allowed the students to think before "speaking," and the permanence of the writing may have 
encouraged them to be responsible for what they wrote. Asynchronous CMC seemed to encourage a 
unique type of thoughtful interchange.  
Although the researchers originally thought that forum writing could substitute for text-based homework 
questions, the results of the study showed that the online discussions could not serve this purpose. 
Students were interested in discussing the ideas, especially the controversial ideas in a text, and not in 
checking to see if they were able to follow an argument correctly or understand a fine point. The students 
did not discuss the texts, as had been expected; rather, they used the forums to react to the ideas, the new 
information, and the authors’ arguments. The texts constituted the stimuli and provided the content, 
Language Learning & Technology 
61
Sara Kol & Miriam Schcolnik Asynchronous Forums in EAP: Assessment Issues 
 
vocabulary, issues, and ideas for discussion. This may explain the results of the attitude questionnaire, 
which showed that very few students felt that the forum discussion helped them prepare for the quizzes or 
understand the texts. It may also explain the fact that students did not ask for text clarification in the 
forums. 
Regarding the assessment criteria, reflection and interaction were found to be usable but insufficient. 
Based on this finding, two assessment criteria were added: a) language and b) reference to specific 
information in the text (see Figure 3 for the revised criteria). The former was added to encourage accuracy 
and clarity of expression and eventually to improve the quality of students’ academic writing even if this 
was not the main goal of the forum discussions. The latter was added to encourage "text-responsible" 
(Weigle, Boldt, & Valsecchi, 2003) contributions. As in a typical academic discussion, students need to 
point to (i.e., cite) the specific information in the text that provided the basis for their thoughts. Further 
research could test the suitability and usability of the new set of criteria. 
 
 
Figure 3. Revised assessment criteria now in use as guidelines for EAP forum writing. 
The fact that a large majority of the students felt that forums should be part of the courses and should be 
graded lends relevance to the quest for assessment criteria. Moreover, the apparent effect of the guidelines 
on forum communication shows the importance of sound assessment criteria. The addition of a language 
criterion may raise language awareness and impact the quality of student writing. A future study could 
investigate the effect of the addition of the language criterion on grammatical accuracy. 
Forum writing can now be assessed in a way that is suitable to context, medium, and purpose. The criteria 
of reflection and reference to information in the text make the assessment suitable to the academic 
context; the criterion of interaction makes the assessment suitable to the digital medium; and the criterion 
of language makes the assessment suitable to the purpose of language courses. The assessment criteria 
that emerged from this study may be used as a basis for guidelines for effective academic communication.  
The forums offered students the opportunity to write extensively and mindfully, to use the rich academic 
vocabulary encountered in their readings, to learn from teacher feedback and peer contributions, and to 
become aware of the criteria necessary to assess and improve their writing. Based on the positive attitudes 
of the students and their reflection and interaction in the forums, there seems to be a place for text-
stimulated forum discussions in EAP courses. 
 
Language Learning & Technology 
62
Sara Kol & Miriam Schcolnik Asynchronous Forums in EAP: Assessment Issues 
 
APPENDICES 
Appendix A. Example of Extensive Forum Interaction 
From the forum discussion on the proof of Fermat’s Last Theorem in the course, "English for 
Engineering" 
 
Message from S 
I think that Andrew Wiles donated a big part of his life for math. 
7 years he tried and succeed to prove Fermat Lest Theoren. 
As I see it, Wiles sacrificed a bit of his personal life. 
In the article, the author wrote that Wiles had abandoned any work, which was not directly relevant to 
Fermat Lest Theorem. 
In order to keep his work confidential, Wiles needed to insolate himself from his familiar society. 
My question for you is: dose it worth it? Dose the proof worth Wiles' sacrifice? 
I would like to read what you think about it. 
Sincerely yours 
S  
 
Reply from D 
Hi S…, 
 
I believe that all those years that Prof. Wiles devoted in order to prove Fermat's last theorem worth it. In 
retrospective it was worth even if he had failed to prove it. 
I think so, mainly because his work developed the mathematics in a unique way. In page 19 it is said: "I 
could try and prove results, which, even if they didn't get the whole thing, would be worthwhile 
mathematics. I didn't feel I'd be wasting my time". 
In order to show how he already contributed to the mathematics before he had completed his proof, I 
bring the following quotation from page 26: "After three years of non-stop effort Wiles had made series of 
breakthroughs. He had applied Galois groups to elliptic  
Equations, he had broken the elliptic equations into an infinite number of pieces, and then he had proved 
that the first piece of every elliptic equation had to be modular". 
In addition, he was awarded by the prize and glory that come with a successful proof of a 300 years 
problem, that great mathematicians had failed to prove. 
Yours, 
D  
 
Reply from S 
HEY S… 
Language Learning & Technology 
63
Sara Kol & Miriam Schcolnik Asynchronous Forums in EAP: Assessment Issues 
 
i read what you wrote, and i think that if someone has a dream, he should do everything to achieve it, 
even if he has to give up a lot. in WEILES'S case , he gave up his enviroment, but not his family that has 
ben their for him , so actually he succsseded achievung his dream, and yet having a supportive family, 
which in some cases is the best enviorment 
that someone can have-so in some way-he had it whole. 
sincerely yours, S 
 
Reply from M 
Regarding your question: 
I think it is a tough question and there is no obvious answer. 
Some would say that Wiles dedicared his life for proving a useless theorem. As we all know 'Fermat's 
Last Theorem' has no implementations. Furthermore it is almost insignificant as fr as the number theory is 
concerned.  
Others would say that Mathmatics is a philosophical science that does not always have to connected top 
the real world. It means that when a mathematician faces a problem, he/she tries to solve it no matter what 
the consequences are. The purity of Mathmatics depends on its completeness and integrity. Therefore 
mathematicians are commited to solve all the open problems left in Mathmatics. 
I belong to the second group. 
 
Reply from A G 
In the article we read about Wiles sacrificese. For 7 years he tried to prove a theory that cost him his life. 
It cost him his life because he abanded everything that was importent : his work ,his family and most 
important his friends. I think that when someone sacrifisied does things he sacrifice his life because that 
family and friends are some of the things that are the most important in life and nothing in the world do 
not worth this sacrifice, specially no math........ 
 
Sincerely yours, 
 
A G 
 
The cost of the research Reply from S 
In my opinion the cost he paid for the proving of the formula is not as high as you might think. It wasn’t 
said he was closed in his home for 7 years and tried to prove the formula, he had a social life and met with 
friends and even became a father. It might be the he had reduced the amount of the free time activities he 
participated in but still he wasn’t totally isolated from the society. Further more he tried to make his 
dream come true and he succeeded. Many people wasted their lives (literally) trying to make their dream 
come true so the 7 years he wasted for the research isn't very large amount of time and surely not time 
wasted for nothing. 
 
Put yourselves in this situation! Reply from H 
Language Learning & Technology 
64
Sara Kol & Miriam Schcolnik Asynchronous Forums in EAP: Assessment Issues 
 
When I read the article I had some thinking about sacrificing your life for your study; and not only in 
math but also in any research.  
 
Most of you said that the proof worth Wiles' sacrifices. Is it?! 
I had some problems thinking this way.  
Can you think about sacrificing your own life for your own research?  
What about Wiles' choices; he abandoned he's friends, he worked along (with out even tell his 
colleagues), and even publish some research in order not to arouse suspicion. 
Can you definitely sure you'll do the same?!  
What about you're studying today? Do you truly sacrifice your own life in order to succeed this year? 
If yes, do you feel ok with that, without any regrets? What about your friends, your family? 
If you'll try to put yourselves in this situation, I think you will have much more problem answering simply 
"yes".  
Sincerely yours,  
H 
 
Of course its worth it! Reply from Y 
Let me tell you something. 
You think that Wiles sacrificed his life, because he obendend his friends and because he lived in totall 
isoletion. 
Well maybe for normal peopel this is a life scrifice, but for him this was'nt. 
For him proving Fermat's last theorem was his goal, and quiting from his lifetime goal will be the real life 
sacrifice. 
In my opinion the true way to solve a problam (like Fermat's last theorem) is Wiles way. 
Furthermore I think that life are worth screficing for a limited time (7 years for example), for achieving 
your dream, think about it... 
Sincerely yours, 
Y 
 
you made me think about.... Reply from K 
As a student at a program that is specified for research, you made me think if that is what I want to do for 
living. On tha one hand, I'm very interested in the human body, and on the other hand, I want to live, to 
have life other than that. 
As much as I want to learn about our body, and discover thing (without isolating...)' I also want to hav 
fun, have family and live a fully life... 
Wiles chose to have one thing mainly. Without criticized him, I think that the favored way is to find the 
balance between them, and enjoy the both. 
Language Learning & Technology 
65
Sara Kol & Miriam Schcolnik Asynchronous Forums in EAP: Assessment Issues 
 
That's how i see it. 
K (Medical student who joined the English for Engineering course) 
 
childhood dreams... Reply from A 
In my opinion, the answer to this question is not conclusive. 
Andrew Wiles chose to fulfill his childhood dream, and realized that in order to do so, he would have to 
isolate himself for several years, until he would managed to work out the answer. There is no doubt that 
the height of mathematician's life is proving a theorem that no other mathematician in the last centuries 
has managed to prove. 
Furthermore, one can see that he didn't neglect his family, out of the understanding that they were helping 
him by supporting him fulfill his dream. 
Therefore I believe Andrew Wiles chose the way that was fit his dreams, instead of living normal boring 
mathematician life... 
Sincerely yours,  
 
S W 
 
Appendix B. Example of Thought Development Shared in Forum 
From forum discussion of cloning in the course English for Biology: 
About the couple who lost their only son-what if it took them years of fertility tests and treatment in order 
to give birth to this one son which they adore, admire and worship the ground he walks on...I think I got 
carried away. 
What I meant to say is: what if they can't have another child? 
Also, even if they can have more children, who is to say this specific child might not have grown up to 
become a great scientist that will find a cure for cancer? 
Then again, maybe he will become a bum or, if we consider the traumatic experience his parents have 
been through, a disturbed individual. 
You can't tell, and nobody else can either... so that is why I think it's a problem to decide whether or not it 
should be legal to clone human beings. 
I really don't have an answer, I wish I had ...  
I was thinking about a governmental committee to decide whether a person should be cloned or not. 
However, such a committee may be prone to corruption, resulting in a situation where only the rich and 
powerful will be able to have a second chance for a better life, only they will be able to revive their loved 
ones and only they will be able to become in a way immortal. 
Ergo I am not sure this is such a great idea. 
Does anyone else have other suggestions? 
 
 
Language Learning & Technology 
66
Sara Kol & Miriam Schcolnik Asynchronous Forums in EAP: Assessment Issues 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Sara Kol develops and teaches English for Academic Purposes science courses at Tel Aviv University. 
She develops online learning materials and course websites. She is also a teacher trainer in a national 
project preparing high school English teachers to develop materials and teach with cutting-edge 
technology. Her research interests are EAP curriculum development, digital text presentation and CMC in 
advanced EFL courses. 
Email: sarakol@post.tau.ac.il 
Miriam Schcolnik is Director of the Language Learning Center at Tel Aviv University. She develops and 
teaches advanced courses in English for Academic Purposes and Technology in Language Teaching. She 
designs multimedia programs and online learning environments, and has written many EFL textbooks and 
teachers' resource books. Her research interests are e-reading and computer mediated communication in 
language learning. 
Email: smiriam@post.tau.ac.il 
 
REFERENCES 
Althaus, S. (1996). Computer-mediated communication in the university classroom: An experiment with 
online discussions. Paper prepared for delivery at the annual meeting of the American Political Science 
Association. Retrieved May 10, 2008, from 
http://teachpol.tcnj.edu/conference_papers/_manuscripts/sal96a.pdf. 
Angeli, C., Bonk, C. J., & Hara, N. (1998). Content analysis of online discussion in an applied 
educational psychology course. CRLT Technical Report, No. 2–98. Retrieved from Ingenta Connect. 
 Bhagyavati, Kurkovsky, S., & Whitehead, C.C. (2005). Using Asynchronous Discussions to Enhance 
Student Participation in CS Courses. Proceedings of the 36th SIGCSE technical symposium on computer 
science education, St. Louis, Missouri, 111-115. Retrieved from ACM Digital Library. 
Barbour, M. K., & Collins, M. A. J. (2005). Online writing as an indicator of student performance. 
International Journal of Instructional Technology & Distance Learning, 2(8). Retrieved May 10, 2008, 
from http://www.itdl.org/Journal/Aug_05/article02.htm
. Bauer, J. F. (2002). Assessing student work from chatrooms and bulletin boards. New Directions for 
Teaching and Learning, 91, 31–36. 
Berge, Z. (1997). Computer conferencing and the on-line classroom. International Journal of Educational 
Telecommunications, 3(1), 3–21. 
Bernath, U., & Hulsmann, T. (undated). Asynchronous discussions in virtual seminars: Might they work? 
Retrieved May 10, 2008, from http://www.uni-oldenburg.de/zef/literat/eden0203.pdf
. Bernath, U., & Rubin, E. (1999). Final Report and Documentation of the Virtual Seminar for 
Professional Development in Distance Education. A project within the AT&T Global Distance Learning 
Initiative sponsored by the AT&T Foundation and the International Council for Open and Distance 
Education, BIS-Verlag: Oldenburg, Germany. 
Biber, D. (2006). University language: A corpus-based study of spoken and written registers. 
Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company. 
Language Learning & Technology 
67
Sara Kol & Miriam Schcolnik Asynchronous Forums in EAP: Assessment Issues 
 
Biesenbach-Lucas, S. (2004). Asynchronous web discussions in teacher training courses: Promoting 
collaborative learning—or not? AACE Journal, 12(2), 155–170.  
Black, A. (2005). The use of asynchronous discussion: Creating a text of talk. Contemporary Issues in 
Technology and Teacher Education, 5(1), 5–24. 
Bogdan, R. C., & Biklen, S. K. (1982). Qualitative research for education: An introduction to theory and 
methods. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, Inc. 
Bohlke, O. (2003). A comparison of student participation levels by group size and language stages during 
chatroom and face-to-face discussions in German. CALICO Journal, 21(1), 67–88. 
Chong, S. M. (1998). Models of asynchronous computer conferencing for collaborative learning in large 
college classes. In C. J. Bonk & K. S. King (Eds.), Electronic collaborators: Learner-centered 
technologies for literacy apprenticeship and discourse (pp. 157–182). New Jersey: L. Erlbaum 
Associates, Inc. 
Chun, D. (1994). Using computer networking to facilitate the acquisition of interactive competence. 
System, 22(1), 17–31. 
Crystal, D. (2001). Language and the Internet. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Cummings, J. A.; Bonk, C. J., & Jacobs, F. R. (2002). Twenty first century college syllabi: Options for 
online communication and interactivity. Internet and Higher Education, 5(1), 1–19.  
Dougiamas, M., & Taylor, P. C. (2003). Moodle: Using learning communities to create an open source 
course management system. Proceedings of the EDMEDIA 2003 Conference, Honolulu, HI. Retrieved 
May 10, 2008, from http://dougiamas.com/writing/edmedia2003/. 
Dringus, L. P., & Ellis, T. J. (2004). Building the SCAFFOLD for evaluating threaded discussion forum 
activity: Describing and categorizing contributions. 34th ASEE/IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference, 
October 20–23, Savannah, GA. 
Duffy, T. M., Dueber, B., & Hawley, C. L. (1998). Critical thinking in a distributed environment: A 
pedagogical base for the design of conferencing systems. In C. J. Bonk & K. S. King (Eds.), Electronic 
collaborators: Learner-centered technologies for literacy apprenticeship and discourse (pp. 51–77). New 
Jersey: L. Erlbaum Associates, Inc. 
Ellis, R. (2005). Principles of instructed language learning. System, 33(2), 209–224. 
Garrison, D. R., Anderson, T., & Archer, W. (2000). Critical inquiry in a text-based environment: 
Computer conferencing in higher education. The Internet and Higher Education, 2(2–3), 87–105. 
Grabe, W., & Kaplan, R. B. (1996). Theory & practice of writing. London: Addison Wesley Longman 
Ltd.  
Hara, N., Bonk, C. J., & Angeli, C. (2002). Content analysis of online discussion in an applied 
educational psychology course. Instructional Science, 28, 115–152. 
Harasim, L. (1992). Foreword: Towards the electronic university. In M. Paulsen's, From bulletin boards 
to electronic universities: Distance education, Computer-mediated communication, and online education. 
ACSDE Research Monograph, Pennsylvania State University. 
Henri, F. (1992). Computer conferencing and content analysis. In A. R. Kaye (Ed.), Collaborative 
learning through computer conferencing—The Najaden papers (pp. 117–136). Berlin, Germany: 
Springer-Verlag. 
Ho, S. (2002). Evaluating students' participation in on-line discussions. Retrieved May 10, 2008, from 
http://ausweb.scu.edu.au/aw02/papers/refereed/ho/paper.html. 
Language Learning & Technology 
68
Sara Kol & Miriam Schcolnik Asynchronous Forums in EAP: Assessment Issues 
 
Jonassen, D. (2001). Computers as mindtools for engaging learners in critical thinking. Paper presented at 
3rd Simposio Internacional de Informatica Educativa, Portugal. Retrieved May 10, 2008, from 
http://www.esev.ipv.pt/3siie/actas/actas/doc01.pdf. 
Kern, R. (2006). Perspectives on technology in learning and teaching languages. TESOL Quarterly, 40(1), 
183-210. 
Lamy, M. N., & Goodfellow, R. (1999). Reflective conversation in the virtual language classroom. 
Language Learning & Technology, 2(2), 43–61. Retrieved May 10, 2008, from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol2num2/article2/index.html.  
Lapadat, J. C. (2002). Written interaction: A key component in online learning. JCMC, 7(4). Retrieved 
May 10, 2008, from http://jcmc.indiana.edu/vol7/issue4/lapadat.html. 
Lemke, J. L. (1989). Making text talk. Theory-into-Practice, 28(2), 136–41. 
McLoughlin, C., & Luca, J. (2000). Cognitive engagement and higher order thinking through computer 
conferencing: We know why but do we know how? In A. Herrmann & M. M. Kulski (Eds.), Flexible 
futures in tertiary teaching. Proceedings of the 9th Annual Teaching Learning Forum, 2–4 February, 
2000. Perth, Australia: Curtin University of Technology. Retrieved May 10, 2008, from 
http://lsn.curtin.edu.au/tlf/tlf2000/mcloughlin.html. 
Ortega, L. (1997). Processes and outcomes in networked classroom interaction: Defining the research 
agenda for L2 computer-assisted classroom discussion. Language Learning & Technology, 1(1), 82-93. 
Retrieved May 10, 2008, from http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/ortega/default.html. 
Ortega, L. (2003). Syntactic complexity measures and their relationship to L2 proficiency: A research 
synthesis of college-level L2 writing. Applied Linguistics, 24(4), 492–518. 
Oskoz, A. (2005). Students’ dynamic assessment via online chat. CALICO Journal, 22(3), 512–136. 
Pellettieri, J. (2000). Negotiation in cyberspace: the role of chatting in the development of grammatical 
competence. In M. Warschauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Network-based language teaching: Concepts and 
practice (pp. 59–86). New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Sauvignon, S. (Ed.) (2002). Interpreting communicative language teaching: Contexts and concerns in 
teacher education. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 
Schrire, S. (2003). A model for evaluating the process of learning in asynchronous computer 
conferencing. Journal of Instruction Delivery Systems, 17(1), 6–12. 
Sherry, L. (2000). The nature and purpose of online discourse. International Journal of Educational 
Telecommunications, 6(1), 19–52. 
Sotillo, S. M. (2000). Discourse functions and syntactic complexity in synchronous and asynchronous 
communication. Language Learning & Technology, 4(1), 82–119. Retrieved May 10, 2008, from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/sotillo/default.html. 
Sullivan, N., & Pratt, E. (1996). A comparative study of two ESL writing environments: A computer-
assisted classroom and a traditional oral classroom. System, 24(4), 491–501. 
Tesch, R. (1990). Qualitative research: Analysis types and software tools. New York: The Falmer Press. 
Warschauer, M. (1996). Comparing face-to-face and electronic discussion in the second language 
classroom. CALICO Journal, 13(2–3), 7–26. 
Warschauer, M. (1999). Electronic literacies: Language, culture, and power in online education. 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Language Learning & Technology 
69
Sara Kol & Miriam Schcolnik Asynchronous Forums in EAP: Assessment Issues 
 
Language Learning & Technology 
70
Warschauer, M. (2007). Technology and writing. In C. Davison & J. Cummins (Eds.), The International 
Handbook of English Language Teaching (pp. 907-912). Norwell, MA: Springer. 
Weigle, S. C. (2002). Assessing writing. Cambridge Language Assessment Series. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Weigle, S. C., Boldt, H., & Valsecchi, M. I. (2003). Effects of task and rater background on the 
evaluation of ESL student writing: A pilot study. TESOL Quarterly, 37(2), 345–354.  
Wolfe-Quintero, K., Inagaki, S., & Kim, H. Y. (1998). Second language development in writing: 
Measures of fluency, accuracy, and complexity. Honolulu, HI: University of Hawaii Press. 
Wu, D., & Hiltz, R. S. (2004). Predicting learning from asynchronous online discussions, Journal of 
Asynchronous Learning Networks, 8(2), 139-152. 
Zamel, V. (1992). Writing one's way into reading. TESOL Quarterly, 26(3), 463-485. 
 
