Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num1/kitade/ 
February 2008, Volume 12, Number 1 
pp. 64-84 
 
Copyright © 2008, ISSN 1094-3501 64 
THE ROLE OF OFFLINE METALANGUAGE TALK IN 
ASYNCHRONOUS COMPUTER-MEDIATED COMMUNICATION 
Keiko Kitade 
Ritsumeikan University, Kyoto 
In order to demonstrate how learners utilize the text-based asynchronous attributes of the 
Bulletin Board System, this study explored Japanese-as-a-second-language learners' 
metalanguage episodes (Swain & Lapkin, 1995, 1998) in offline verbal peer speech and 
online asynchronous discussions with their Japanese key pals. The findings suggest the 
crucial role of offline collaborative dialogue, the interactional modes in which the episodes 
occur, and the unique discourse structure of metalanguage episodes concerning online and 
offline interactions. A high score on the posttest also suggests the high retention of 
linguistic knowledge constructed through offline peer dialogue. In the offline mode, the 
learners were able to collaboratively construct knowledge with peers in the stipulated time, 
while simultaneously focusing on task content in the online interaction. The retrospective 
interviews and questionnaires reveal the factors that could affect the benefits of the 
asynchronous computer-mediated communication medium for language learning. 
INTRODUCTION 
Asynchronous computer-mediated communication (ACMC) enables language learners to actively engage 
in interactions with a wider range of interlocutors because the interactions are both place-independent and 
time-independent. In addition to the accessibility for learners' engagement in real online communities, the 
unique interactional features of ACMC are considered to facilitate second language (L2) learning. By 
reexamining the potential of text-based interactions and the time interval between messages within a 
sociocultural perspective, this study attempts to investigate learners' behaviors in ACMC activities 
beyond the period of online interaction. 
Text-Mediated Interactive Features 
Studies of both SCMC (Synchronous CMC) and ACMC indicate the significant potential of text-based 
interaction within a sociocultural perspective, based on the work of Vygotsky (1978). Warschauer (1997) 
employs this framework in computer-mediated communication (CMC) to stress the role of text-mediation 
and the context for collaborative learning. From a sociocultural viewpoint, language is one of the semiotic 
tools that mediate both higher mental functioning and actions. Considering such cognitive and self-
regulative functions of language, text is viewed as a "thinking device," since the writer or reader is able to 
describe and reflect upon its immediate interpretation and extract new meanings on the basis of its written 
representation (Lotman, 1988). Chang-Wells and Wells (1992) observe children's engagement in writing 
activities and indicate that text-based activity fosters the development of "literate thinking." Through this 
engagement, children are required to explicitly posit their arguments, keep their arguments consistent 
with their own position, consider alternatives and justify them, and carefully evaluate the consequences of 
their stance. Text-based communication allows learners to store, edit, reevaluate, revise, and perform such 
activities that may enhance their reflective process. 
Additionally, CMC's interactive dimension promotes a collaborative context for learning. Vygotsky 
(1978) claims that in the process of higher cognitive development in an individual, knowledge is first 
constructed through social interaction and then internalized through private speech. According to this 
view, learning occurs in collaborative dialogues where learners, with their partners' assistance, are able to 
bridge the "zone of proximal development" (ZPD)—the gap between the level of development that 
learners are capable of independently attaining and the level that they can achieve with guidance or 
Keiko Kitade The Role of Offline Metalanguage Talk in Asyncrhonous CMC 
 
Language Learning & Technology 65 
collaborative assistance. Second language acquisition (SLA) studies based on a sociocultural perspective 
(e.g., Lantolf, 2000; Lantolf & Appel, 1994) agree with the significant role played by collaboration in 
expert-novice and peer interactions in the L2 learning context. By combining the text-based nature of 
communication with interactive attributes, CMC may enhance collaborative activities. Kitade (2000) and 
Darhower (2002) examined the text-based chat interactions of L2 learners in a discussion task. They 
indicate that the learners in online groups work collaboratively by providing guidance to each other and 
strategize ways in which to achieve intersubjectivity. Studies in telecollaboration (Belz & Kinginger, 
2002; Kinginger, 2000) also suggest that the pragmatic competence of French and German L2 learners 
develops through collaborative e-mail and chat exchanges with their French/German partners. ACMC 
provides opportunities for collaborative learning to some extent; however, the potential of collaborative 
learning in this context is more complex, given the time interval between messages. 
Time Interval as a Controversial Factor in L2 Learning 
The time interval between the interactions in ACMC is a controversial aspect in L2 learning. It prevents 
learners from receiving immediate feedback, which is a key element in collaborative learning. Studies on 
novice-expert dialogue describe how experts guide novices in task completion by adjusting the task 
difficulty (Radziszewska & Rogoff, 1991; Wertsch, Minick, & Arns, 1984). Rogoff and Gardner (1984) 
state that scaffolded assistance enables learners to grasp new task components that novices would be 
unable to complete without assistance. From this perspective, in order to address the needs of novices, 
feedback should be provided through dialogue. Describing the procedure of effective assistance in the 
Zone of Proximal Development (ZPD), Aljaafreh and Lantolf (1994) state, "First, intervention should be 
graduated. Help provided by a more experienced member in a joint activity is designed to discover the 
novice's ZPD in order to offer the appropriate level of assistance and to encourage the learner to function 
at his or her potential level of ability… Second, help should be contingent, meaning that it should be 
offered only when it is needed, and withdrawn as soon as the novice shows signs of self-control and the 
ability to function independently" (p. 468). 
Unlike synchronous interaction, exchanges in ACMC often have significant time delays between 
messages, reducing the opportunity of providing adjusted assistance. Kitade (2006) suggests that half of 
the initiation moves (i.e., requests for solving linguistic problems) in e-mail exchanges between learners 
of the Japanese language and Japanese students are ignored. Stockwell (2004) indicates that in L2 
contexts, learners of Japanese in Australia rarely surmount conversational breakdown with their online 
Japanese partners. Lamy and Goodfellow (1999) and Kitade (2006) suggest that the time intervals 
between messages in asynchronous conferences and e-mail exchanges may decrease the coherence of the 
discourse and lessen the pressure on participants to negotiate the meaning of written communication.  
On the other hand, the positive aspect of ACMC is that its asynchronous nature offers abundant time, 
which amplifies the abovementioned advantages of text-mediation. Lapadat (2002) emphasizes the 
similarities between the benefits of ACMC and those of conventional writing by stating that "online 
participants can and do take time to think, to polish what they say, and edit. Participants in asynchronous 
conferences produce less in total quantity (e.g., number of words), but their contributions to the 
discussion tend to be carefully crafted, adapted to the audience, dense with meaning, coherent, and 
complete" (p. 8). In order to assess the status of the interlocutors' knowledge and to frame their messages, 
participants in ACMC need to consider the perspectives and metalinguistic sensibilities of others. Lamy 
and Goodfellow (1999) propose that asynchronous conferences are particularly appropriate for "reflective 
conversations," in which the learners discuss metalinguistic and L2 learning issues, because of the time 
flexibility and access to previous texts. 
In sum, the asynchronous nature of interaction may reduce opportunities for scaffolding in the context of 
collaborative learning; however, it may enhance the reflective process. An and Frick (2006) examine 
college students' perceptions of ACMC and report that its biggest advantage in the L2 learning context is 
Keiko Kitade The Role of Offline Metalanguage Talk in Asyncrhonous CMC 
 
Language Learning & Technology 66 
the ample time available to the participants to reflect upon and develop ideas. At the same time, they also 
regard as a shortcoming the lack of immediate feedback. 
The Collaborative Context in ACMC In-Class Activity 
In order to amplify the benefits of ACMC and to compensate for its shortcomings, it is necessary to 
examine an ACMC in-class activity, paying close attention to the learners' total engagement, rather than 
limiting the attention to their online interaction. Learners engaging in ACMC in-class activities can 
undertake two types of activities: online interactions and offline interactions with peers, referring to the 
online texts they are attempting to write or comprehend. 
According to Wells (1999), combining the advantages of spoken and text-based communication helps 
expedite a child's learning process. The collaborative activity of "talk about text," where speech and text 
function interdependently within an activity, enables learners not only to engage in reflective thinking 
with text-based communication but also to receive assistance from their partners in the collaborative 
context. By observing children's talk in activities involving reading and composing texts, Wells (1999) 
discovers that the talk about text activity is successful in providing direct assistance to students when they 
are restricted by their individual knowledge. The offline peer interaction during ACMC activities emerges 
in the writing process and may have some functions in common with those in the collaborative talk-
about-text activity.  
Studies on L2 writing activities also explore the potential of collaborative talk about written text during 
the following activities: revision (de Guerrero & Villamil, 2000; Villamil & de Guerrero, 1998), joint 
writing of a story (Swain & Lapkin, 1998), and joint reflection with native speakers regarding the revised 
text (Swain & Lapkin, 2002; Tocalli-Beller & Swain, 2005). Peer collaboration during writing or revision 
has been recognized as an effective technique for enhancing the writing skills of L2 learners (Cumming, 
in press; Villamil & de Guerrero, 1998). Several studies discussed below claim that peer dialogue plays a 
crucial role in L2 learning, particularly when it involves metalanguage talk during writing activities. 
Collaborative Dialogue as a Medium for Observing Learning in an ACMC Activity 
As discussed above, dialogic interactions can play a significant role in student learning. Expanding on 
Vygotsky's original claim about expert-novice dialogic interactions, some studies examine the scaffolding 
behavior in peer interactions and illustrate how learners are capable of assisting each other in bridging 
their ZPDs (Brooks & Donato, 1994; Donato, 1994; Ohta, 1995; Platt & Brooks, 1994). These studies 
employ descriptive analyses to illustrate the learners' behaviors on a moment-to-moment basis and the 
changes that take place during collaborative dialogue. 
Vygotsky (1978) perceives learners' mental processes to be dynamic phenomena. Underlining Vygotsky's 
claim, Wertsch (1985, 1991) suggests that a microgenetic analysis is required to observe the development 
of such dynamic phenomena. De Guerrero and Villamil (2000) describe a microgenetic approach as "one 
in which moment-to-moment changes in participants' behavior were noted and examined" (p. 54). In their 
investigation of peer talk among intermediate ESL learners during the revision of writing, they show that 
learners provide each other with knowledge about language, and that the opportunity to exteriorize their 
thoughts allows students to reinforce and reconstruct their knowledge of the target language. 
Studies by Swain and others (Swain, 2000; Swain, 2006; Swain, Brooks, & Tacalli-Beller, 2002; Swain & 
Lapkin, 1998) propose that the observation of peer dialogue reveals learners' mental processes. Swain and 
Lapkin (1998) suggest that verbalization in a collaborative context not only enacts the thoughts 
constituting the mental process but also makes them observable, since "in a joint problem-solving 
activity, what normally remains hidden in individually internalized thought may manifest itself in 
dialogue" (Swain & Lapkin, 1998, p. 321).  
Keiko Kitade The Role of Offline Metalanguage Talk in Asyncrhonous CMC 
 
Language Learning & Technology 67 
In order to address the question of how learners solve their linguistic problems and the extent to which 
scaffolding may impact the knowledge of individual learners, Swain and Lapkin (1995, 1998) highlight 
the importance of metalinguistic episodes in dialogues. They refer to the episodes as "language related 
episodes (LREs), which are parts of a dialogue where the students talk about the language they are 
producing, question their language use, or correct themselves or others" (Swain, 1998, p. 70). Provided 
below is an example of a metalanguage episode from the offline data used in this study. B is looking for 
the word ataeru to state Warui eikyo: o ataeru 'have a bad influence' in B1. Then, B and W search for the 
word by listing candidates: agaru, ageru, ataeru, ataeteageru.  
B1: Warui eikyo: ga agaru? 
W2: Ageru? 
B3: Ageru? Ataeru? 
W4: Ataeteageru? 
B5: Ataeru. Ataeru. 
W6: Ataeru. 
B7: Un. 
By identifying the episodes that are related to linguistic aspects and included in a tailor-made test, the 
dyad-specific posttest may measure how the linguistic issues discussed were dialogically retained by the 
learners for at least a short period of time. The dyad-specific posttests are created on the basis of the 
metalanguage episodes, as determined by the audio recordings of the peer dialogue during the 
performance of the collaborative tasks. Swain (1998, 2000) states that in joint dictogloss tasks, the 
learners were able to remember the solutions they arrived at with respect to 70–80% of the items in the 
LREs on the posttest, which was held 7–10 days later. The high scores in the posttest suggest that 
metalanguage talk in collaborative peer dialogue may be important for L2 learning. 
In sum, the findings of the analysis of collaborative dialogue that occur during the writing and revising 
activities indicate the potential of offline interaction in ACMC to serve as a learning opportunity. 
Moreover, an analysis of the offline interaction may provide a verbal protocol that demonstrates a 
learner's status on a moment-to-moment basis. However, offline interaction in ACMC may differ from 
dialogues that emerge during other writing activities. In an ACMC activity, learners are required to 
comprehend the received online messages and compose text messages that are framed specially for their 
partners. In addition, they have two types of interlocutors who can provide assistance for both task-
oriented and linguistic needs: online partner(s) and offline peers. The incorporation of a descriptive 
approach should be effective in revealing the learners' actual behaviors beyond the domain of online 
interaction and the developmental process of learning that occurs in this context. 
Many previous studies on ACMC have examined only online interactions (e.g., Kinginger, 2000; Kitade, 
2006; Lamy & Goodfellow, 1999; Schwienhorst, 2003; Stockwell & Levy, 2001) without addressing the 
role of offline interactions or the learners' engagement in combined online and offline interactions. In 
order to fully understand how learners implement a task in the ACMC context and the potential of this 
task with regard to L2 learning, this study incorporates a sociocultural perspective and examines both 
online and offline interactions to reveal how each type of interaction—online, offline, or combined 
interactions—can provide learners with opportunities for collaborative learning. The study investigates 
learners' metalinguistic  talk in online and offline interactions in order to identify the types of knowledge 
used and to show how they are co-constructed from the two types of interaction. A posttest is also 
employed to investigate the extent to which learners retain the co-constructed knowledge, at least in the 
short term. The research questions are as follows: 
Keiko Kitade The Role of Offline Metalanguage Talk in Asyncrhonous CMC 
 
Language Learning & Technology 68 
RQ1: What kind of discourse structure do the learners engage in to construct metalinguistic episodes in 
the ACMC activity with respect to the following: (a) online versus offline interaction and (b) receptive 
versus productive modes? 
RQ2: What kinds of metalinguistic episodes are discussed by the learners to convey their intentions to 
their native key pals in terms of the linguistic focus (lexical-, syntactic-, phonological-, or discourse-
based)?  
RQ3: To what extent do learners retain the knowledge co-constructed with their peers in the 
metalinguistic episodes ?  
METHOD 
Participants 
In order to examine learners' interactions in a classroom environment rather than in an experimental 
context, this study was conducted in two content-based Japanese study classes held in two terms: Term 1 
(Fall, 2005) and Term 2 (Spring, 2006). In these classes, the learners and their classmates studied and 
discussed social problems and cultural aspects related to Japan through in-class discussions or using the 
bulletin board system (BBS). The participants comprised 36 exchange students (Term 1: 8 students; Term 
2: 28 students) studying Japanese in half- or one-year language programs at a Japanese college. They 
were enrolled in the advanced-low level Japanese course, comprising eight classes per week, the content-
based class being held once every week. During the data collection process, the students stayed in Japan 
for one month, immediately after learning Japanese in their own countries: Korea, China, Taiwan, France, 
Germany, Italy, Sweden, Denmark, England, the Philippines, Australia, Canada, and the U.S.A. They 
indicated in the questionnaire that they regularly wrote e-mails in Japanese and had no difficulty typing in 
Japanese. The 32 Japanese volunteers were all undergraduate students; during the data collection, 10 of 
them were attending the Japanese language teaching seminar class. 
Task and Procedures 
The participants were randomly paired with their classmates and engaged in a decision-making task with 
one or two Japanese partners; they could interact with their classmates only through the BBS. The 
participants engaged in the task during 60 minutes of a 90-minute class, which was held once a week for 
four weeks. To accomplish the task, the Japanese partners were also instructed to hold discussions with 
the participants through the BBS. 
During the first week of each term, the participants were given instructions on the use of the BBS and 
were introduced to the available online dictionaries. The students in both Terms 1 and 2 began comparing 
educational or job-hunting system in Japan with those of their own countries. In the subsequent three 
weeks, the participants in Term 1 were instructed to discuss their ideal school with the instruction: "If you 
were to start a school, what kind of school would you want to establish?" They had to answer this 
question with respect to the educational objectives, educational system, content covered, educational 
environment and facilities, and name of the school. The participants in Term 2 discussed their ideal job. 
They were provided with the following instruction: "When you look for a job, what kinds of conditions 
do you need?" They had to answer this question with respect to salary, holidays, working hours, interests, 
stability, and human relations. After discussing and arriving at an agreement in four weeks, all the 
participants were instructed to write a summary of their responses in Japanese. The Japanese learners 
were also required to submit a handwritten report about the linguistic and cultural aspects they had 
learned through the activity. 
 
 
Keiko Kitade The Role of Offline Metalanguage Talk in Asyncrhonous CMC 
 
Language Learning & Technology 69 
Data 
Data were obtained from three sources. The first was the interactions conducted during the task with two 
types of traceable interactions: text-based online interaction through the BBS and audio-recorded offline 
verbal interaction. A total of 16 recordings, each lasting an average of 59.0 minutes for Term 1, and 39 
recordings, each lasting an average of 51.5 minutes for Term 2, were transcribed in order to create the 
posttest and identify the metalinguistic episodes. The online BBS messages included 60 messages for 
Term 1 and 186 messages for Term 2. The type of BBS employed for the ACMC activity, termed 
"zoops," enabled registered participants to engage in discussions using a group thread. 
Secondly, two research assistants took notes on their observations in the classroom during all sessions in 
order to capture the learners' nonverbal behavior, including the use of dictionaries, which could not be 
captured by audio-recorded data. Finally, interviews were conducted and questionnaires were distributed 
for the purpose of documenting the behavior and perceptions of the Japanese-as-a-second-language 
participants. The questions focused primarily on three aspects: (a) the learners' behavior while they were 
reading and writing online messages (i.e., if and in what order they paid attention to the organization, 
content, or form of the messages); (b) their opinions of the pair work with their classmates; and (c) their 
impression of the ACMC interactions for language learning, compared to the other modes of interaction. 
In both terms, a research assistant conducted audio-recorded interviews with students; these lasted for an 
average of 13 minutes each. The interviews included more open-ended questions that were designed to 
extract more detailed answers.  
The audio-recorded offline data were transcribed and the metalinguistic episodes were identified based on 
the definition of LREs provided by Swain and Lapkin (1998). The discourse structure of the 
metalinguistic episodes in the ACMC activities was identified and then, the preferred types of 
metalinguistic episodes were determined with respect to linguistic focus on the metalinguistic episodes 
and their corresponding solutions. At the beginning, the interrater reliability of two raters—obtained 
through the identification and categorization of metalinguistic episodes—was found to be 90.6%. 
However, following the discussion of the items that differentiated the assessments (between the two 
categories), the disagreements were resolved and the interrater reliability reached 100%. Based on the 
identified metalinguistic episodes in the online and offline interactions, test items were individually 
developed for each L2 learning participant for the posttest; this test was administered during the sixth 
week. Similar to the dyad-specific posttest by Swain and Lapkin (1998), the format of the questions used 
in this study varied depending on how the test items were originally discussed in the metalinguistic 
episodes. Some examples of the posttest are provided in Appendix A.  
FINDINGS 
Discourse Structure of Metalinguistic Episodes 
One of the most salient structural features of the metalinguistic episodes was that they were conducted 
through a combination of online and offline interactions. Figure 1 illustrates the dual interactions in the 
ACMC activities: the online interaction between a learner and a Japanese student and the offline 
interaction between Learners A and B, peers. All the metalinguistic episodes were triggered either by a 
linguistic item in the Japanese partner's online message or a linguistic item that Learner A attempted to 
write in the online message to his/her Japanese partner. The metalinguistic episodes took place in both 
online and offline modes. After the learners discussed and agreed upon a certain linguistic form in the 
offline mode, as shown by the rectangles in Figure 1 (off1, off2, and off3), Learner A replied in an online 
message to his/her Japanese partner, using the agreed upon linguistic item. The time interval between the 
online messages enabled the learners to engage in offline peer interaction, while communicating with 
their online Japanese partners.  
Keiko Kitade The Role of Offline Metalanguage Talk in Asyncrhonous CMC 
 
Language Learning & Technology 70 
The metalinguistic episodes in the offline interaction are illustrated in a simplified structure in Figure 1 
(offline1, offline2, and offline 3), but the actual exchanges in the data are more complicated and varied, 
depending on each episode. In one of the more complicated structures, the learners asked the instructor or 
the teaching assistant to provide assistance when they were unable to solve the problem through 
discussions with their partners. 
 
Figure 1. Combination of online and offline interactions in the ACMC activity. J: Learner A's Japanese 
partner; LA: learner A; LB: Learner B (Learner A's peer partner); On: online interaction; Off: offline 
interaction. 
The unique functions of repetition in the collaborative dialogue and the evidence of written repetition 
constitute another significant feature of the metalinguistic episodes. From a sociocultural perspective, 
Dicamilla and Anton (1997), which examines L2 peer dialogue in a joint writing task, indicates the 
extensive use of repetition (32% of the total utterances) and demonstrates that repetition plays an essential 
role in establishing and maintaining intersubjectivity (Rommetveit, 1985) among peers. Repetition 
enables learners to indicate and maintain a mental space wherein they can confirm their agreement with 
what has been constructed thus far and add new information to it. 
The availability of written repetition also shapes the offline dialogue in a manner that differs from regular 
face-to-face interactions. After or while solving the linguistic problem in the peer dialogue, the learners 
returned to the online message (on2 in Figure 1) and replied to their online partners using the decided 
linguistic item. Therefore, the online texts frequently show traceable evidence of not only the learners' 
transferred knowledge but also the shared information obtained through peer collaboration. Moreover, the 
written repetition enabled the learners to establish and maintain intersubjectivity, as mentioned above, 
particularly in contexts in which the learners sat side-by-side and viewed text that was typed by another 
learner on his/her computer screen. 
Excerpt 1 illustrates how, when writing a response to their Japanese partners, spoken repetitions were 
used to collaboratively construct the learners' knowledge in the offline peer dialogue.  
Excerpt 1 (J & E, Session 3, 16:21–18:35): J and E are peers summarizing the group discussion on a 
young Japanese individual (Furi:ta:) who makes a living by working a part-time job. In the excerpt, they 
Off
1 
 
J 
L 
A 
L
B 
On5 On1 
On2 
On3 
On4 
Off
2 
2 
Off
3 
 
Off
1‘‘
’ 
 
Off
3 
 
Off
2‘ 
 
Keiko Kitade The Role of Offline Metalanguage Talk in Asyncrhonous CMC 
 
Language Learning & Technology 71 
are discussing and writing the reason why they do not support Furi:ta:. During the discussion, E is typing. 
In Excerpt 1, Learners J and E are negotiating the choice of the most appropriate particle (case marker) 
for the sentence they are creating. In Line 3, J is misusing o, an object marker particle; in Line 4, E 
suggests another particle, ni, a dative case marker particle. However, the verb haratta 'paid' sounds 
awkward, and in Line 7, J suggests the use of another particle, no. Finally, E suggests ni with the verb 
kakatta 'cost' instead of haratta. In Line 15, J repeats the complete sentence he uttered in line 1 with the 
appropriate particle (dative case marker), ni, and the verb, kakatta. 
The following (partial) notation system was used in the transcripts: 
(.), (..): pauses 
[brackets]: The contents within brackets are the transcriber's comments. 
*asterisk: The words/phrases marked with an asterisk are incorrect.  
Boldface: Boldface is used to highlight the grammatical aspects under discussion. 
 
1J: Nazeka to yu: to ano (..) kyo:iku kyo: 
   The reason is. Well (..) Education Edu 
2E: ((typing)) Kyo:iku ((typing)) 
   ((typing)) Education ((typing)) 
3J: Kyo:iku *o haratta okane no imi wa nai (.) kana? 
  The money paid for the education [with the wrong usage of the object marker particle o] 
would be meaningless (.) I wonder? 
4E: Kyo:iku ni ka. 
  For the education [with the correct usage of the dative marker particle ni], is it? 
5J: Kyo:iku ni haratta 
  Paid for the education [with the correct usage of the dative marker particle ni] 
6E: A a = 
  Ah a = 
7J:= No tame no kane da no imi da. tabun no. 
    It means money for the sake of it. It is probably no [with the particle no] 
8E: Kyo:iku ni 
  For the education [with the correct usage of the dative marker particle ni] 
9J: (Kyo:iku) 
   (Education) 
10E: Ah, kyo:iku NI: kakatta okane? 
  Ah, the cost of education? [Emphasis with the correct usage of the dative marker particle 
ni] 
 
Keiko Kitade The Role of Offline Metalanguage Talk in Asyncrhonous CMC 
 
Language Learning & Technology 72 
11J: A un kyo:iku 
  Ah, yeah. Education. 
12E: Kakatta okane? 
  The cost? 
13J: Un, kakatta okane. 
  Yes, the cost. 
14E: ((typing)) okane 
  ((typing)) The money 
15J: Kyo:iku ni kakatta okane no imi wa nai. 
  The cost for education would be meaningless. [with the correct usage of the dative 
marker particle ni] 
16E: ((typing)) 
This demonstrates that the learners pay attention to linguistic accuracy as well as the content of the 
message, and they co-construct the knowledge to produce the most grammatically appropriate sentence. 
Interestingly, the word kyo:iku 'education' first appears in Line 1 and is repeated in Lines 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9, 
10, 11, and 15. As J and E search for the appropriate particle following kyo:iku, they repeat the word to 
indicate the point of agreement, that is, the point at which their knowledge is shared to add new 
information. In other words, "kyo:iku strategically facilitates the scaffolding by indicating the momentary 
mental space and producing the correct particle. Repetition also functions as a confirmation check, as is 
the case in Line 12, and an acceptance, as in Line 13. After collaboratively solving the linguistic 
problems, J repeats the completed sentence to reconfirm its modified, completed version (Line 15), and E 
types the sentence. The BBS message typed by E is also confirmed to be identical to sentence J, which is 
uttered in Line 15.  
BBS messages, such as those composed during this discussion, provide noticeable written evidence of the 
knowledge gained through peer dialogue. However, in one case, the learners acquired non-target 
knowledge through the dialogue. Such an instance implies that learners can co-construct the knowledge 
gained and reproduce this knowledge in the subsequent text; however, the acquired knowledge may be 
non-target and, therefore, may require confirmation by experts. 
Preferred Modes for Metalinguistic Episodes  
With respect to the preferred mode of metalinguistic episodes, participants clearly selected the offline 
mode: As shown in Table 1, most of the metalinguistic episodes (Term 1: all episodes; Term 2: all 
episodes, except two online instances) were discussed during offline verbal interactions rather than online 
interactions.  There are two possible explanations for this finding. As previous studies suggest, learners 
are reluctant to ask their online partners for help with linguistic matters, due to the less frequent 
exchanges and lack of instant responses (Kitade, 2006). It is difficult to obtain extensive exchanges with 
repetitions in asynchronous interactions. Further, the act of soliciting linguistic help from online native 
partners may be threatening. However, the opportunity for offline collaborative dialogue through 
synchronous peer dialogue, where learners feel less threatened to ask for linguistic assistance, may avoid 
these disadvantages of ACMC. 
The other question regarding the preferred types of metalinguistic episodes is the manner in which these 
episodes are triggered. In comprehending their online partners' messages and in producing their own 
messages, learners may face linguistic problems. The data from both Terms 1 and 2 indicate that 91.7% 
Keiko Kitade The Role of Offline Metalanguage Talk in Asyncrhonous CMC 
 
Language Learning & Technology 73 
and 93.5% of the metalinguistic episodes, respectively, took place during the productive mode, where the 
learners were trying to compose messages. More complex cognitive processes are required during the 
productive mode than during the receptive mode and these processes may promote more metalinguistic 
episodes. In addition, the use of online dictionaries may reduce the burden of comprehending messages 
with unfamiliar words. Apart from the metalinguistic episodes in the audio-recorded data, the class 
observations and learners' interviews suggested that there were more instances in which the learners faced 
linguistic problems. In these instances, the learners solved the linguistic challenges by consulting online 
or electronic dictionaries. More possible explanations will be discussed in the following section, which 
will deal with the learners' perceptions. 
Table 1. Frequency of Metalinguistic Episodes in Different Modes 
 Term 1 Term 2 Total (%) 
Online metalinguistic episodes 0 2 2 (0.6) 
Offline metalinguistic episodes 85 203 288 (99.3) 
Productive mode 78 190 268(93.0) 
Receptive mode 7 10+3* 20(6.9) 
Note. Three metalinguistic episodes were triggered when the learners attempted to write a response, but the resources are 
originally from the online partners' messages. 
The other noteworthy finding is that the number of metalinguistic episodes among the pairs indicate a 
variation, as shown in Tables 1-a and 1-b. For instance, pairs 2 and 6 were able to engage in more than 30 
metalinguistic episodes; this accounts for five times the number of episodes engaged in by pairs 4 and 15, 
that is, 6. Thus, the factors affecting the number of metalinguistic episodes in pairs should be investigated 
using a larger population. 
Table 1-a. Frequency of Metalinguistic episodes (offline) among pairs -Term1- 
Pair (Gender) Metalinguistic episodes (%) 
Pair 1 (M-F) 22 (25.8) 
Pair 2 (F-F) 33 (38.8) 
Pair 3 (M-F) 24 (28.2) 
Pair 4 (M-F) 6 (7.0) 
Total 85 (100) 
 
Table 1-b. Frequency of Metalinguistic episodes (offline) among pairs –Term2- 
Pair (Gender) Metalinguistic episodes (%) 
Pair 5 (M-F) 15 (7.3) 
Pair 6 (F-F) 32 (15.7) 
Pair 7 (M-F) 9 (4.4) 
Pair 8 (F-F) 13 (6.4) 
Pair 9 (M-F) 8 (3.9) 
Pair 10 (F-F) 8 (3.9) 
Pair 11 (M-F) 14 (6.8) 
Pair 12 (M-F) 8 (3.9) 
Pair 13 (M-F) 26 (12.8) 
Pair 14 (M-F) 29 (14.2) 
Pair 15 (M-F) 6 (2.9) 
Pair 16 (M-F) 8 (3.9) 
Pair 17 (M-M) 15 (7.3) 
Pair 18 (M-M) 12 (5.9) 
Total 203 (100) 
Keiko Kitade The Role of Offline Metalanguage Talk in Asyncrhonous CMC 
 
Language Learning & Technology 74 
Linguistic Focus of Metalinguistic Episodes in the ACMC Activity 
All the metalinguistic episodes are categorized as lexis-based, form-based, discourse-based, phonological- 
or orthographic-based, a combination of lexical and syntactic, or a combination of phonological and lexis-
based. The categorization is modified from the classification suggested by Swain and Lapkin (1998, 
2002) because some aspects, such as the phonological and orthographic focus, are salient in CMC. In 
lexis-based metalinguistic episodes, the learners search for and confirm or select the appropriate 
vocabulary from alternative Japanese vocabulary items. In form-based metalinguistic episodes, the 
learners address one aspect of Japanese syntax or morphology. The orthography (i.e., spelling and Kanji) 
and phonological focus (e.g., voiced or voiceless sounds) are categorized in the independent group. 
However, in discourse-based metalinguistic episodes, the learners focus on aspects such as discourse 
markers, logical sequencing, stylistics including the degree of politeness, or text structure. Some 
metalinguistic episodes pertain to more than one linguistic focus and are categorized in the combined 
groups (see Appendix B for examples.)  
As shown in Table 2, the results of both Terms 1 and 2 were similar with regard to the linguistic focus of 
the metalinguistic episodes, although the different topics of the task may have affected the number and 
types of metalinguistic episodes that occurred. Out of a total of 288 metalinguistic episodes, 142 (49.3%) 
were lexis-based, 74 (25.6%) were form-based, 36 (12.5%) were phonological and orthographic-based, 
and 16 (5.5%) were discourse-based. The metalinguistic episodes involving a combination of the lexical 
and syntactic and the lexical and phonological focus account for less than 5% each. 
Table 2. Linguistic Focus of Metalinguistic Episodes 
 Term1 (%) Term 2 (%) Total (%) 
Lexis 43 (50.5) 99 (48.7) 142 (49.3) 
Form 27 (31.7) 47 (23.1) 74 (25.6) 
Phonological & orthographic 8 (9.4) 28 (13.7) 36 (12.5) 
Discourse 5 (5.8) 11 (5.4) 16 (5.5) 
Lexical & form 0 (0) 13 (6.4) 13 (4.5) 
Phonological & lexical 2 (2.3) 5 (2.4) 7 (2.4) 
Total 85 (100) 203 (100) 288(100) 
 
Approximately half the metalinguistic episodes had a lexical focus, but the percentage of form-related 
episodes (approximately 31% in Term 1 and Term 2 with the combination of lexical and form aspects, 
6.4%) was quite significant. Due to the availability of both online and electronic dictionaries, many 
metalinguistic episodes involved more than just vocabulary searching. Most metalinguistic episodes were 
classified into three conditions. The first is when learners lack confidence about their knowledge or 
hypothesis and request quick verbal assurance from their peers or the instructor. The second is when 
learners are unable to choose the appropriate item from those known to them or in the list suggested in the 
dictionary. The last condition is when the problem encountered by learners is beyond the scope of the 
dictionary. For example, when a learner seeks an expression to describe a highly abstract concept, he/she 
would be unable to find a suitable expression even in his/her L1. On these occasions, learners are unable 
to solve the problem using dictionaries and need to ask their partners or instructors for further assistance. 
The last two conditions, in particular, often lead learners to engage in more complex metalinguistic 
explanations (i.e., why one is more appropriate/inappropriate than the other) where learners need to 
verbalize their moment-to-moment state of knowledge.  
Excerpt 2 illustrates the metalinguistic episodes in which pair Y and D engages in a dialogue to co-
construct grammatical knowledge. In order to formulate the educational objective suggested by Y and D 
for their ideal school, Y suggests the use of the expression they have just learned in the other class, A to 
Keiko Kitade The Role of Offline Metalanguage Talk in Asyncrhonous CMC 
 
Language Learning & Technology 75 
yu: no wa B no koto de aru [Noun A is to Noun B], as seen in Lines 3, 11, and 13. However, E explains to 
Y that the use of the expression is inappropriate in the sentence due to the following reasons: (a) the 
structure suggested by Y contains a verb, but the expression requires a noun, as observed in Lines 14–18 
and (b) the expression is suitable for a more general definition, when in reality, they are attempting to pen 
their opinions, as in Lines 18–22. Y understands D's explanations and suggests a different expression, 
Verb koto da to omoimasu [we think it is to Verb] in Line 23.  
Excerpt 2 (Y & D, Session 2): After the discussion on the educational objectives of their ideal school, Y 
and D begin noting down their ideas. Based on their discussion, D is typing the message. 
1Y: Tabun kyo:iku mokuhyo: to yu: no wa (.) 
  The educational objective is to probably (.) 
2D: U:n. Kyo:iku mokuhyo: ((typing)) nn. 
  Yeah:. The educational objective ((typing)) mm. 
3Y: Tabun to yu: no wa naninani no koto de aru toka kakeba i: ka? (.) un etto:  
  Would it be okay to write something like to yu: no wa naninani no koto de aru?? [a 
structure to express it is to such and such] (.) mnn well: 
4D: Etto: 
  Well: 
5Y: Ki-ho-n-te-ki-na  
  The basic 
6D: Kihonteki na? ((typing)) 
  The basic (.) un (.) things ((typing)) 
7Y: Kihonteki na (.) un. (.) koto-o 
  The basic (.) un (.) things 
8D: Koto-o ((typing)) 
  Things [with the objective case marker o'] ((typing)) 
9Y: Benkyo: saseru, benkyo: suru? benkyo: saseru? ...saseru kana? sase 
Benkyo: saseru [Let them study, using causative form for study], benkyo: suru [study]? 
...Benkyo: saseru, I wonder? (.) sase. [the use of the causative form (study or let them 
study)] 
10D: Benkyo:suru 
    (benkyo: suru)[study without the causative form] 
11Y: *Saseru no koto de aru* (.) *no koto* ((typing)) 
   *Saseru no koto de aru [*it is to let them study]* (.) *no koto ((typing)) [the wrong 
usage of the structure] 
12D: (Demo)  
   (But) 
13Y: Demo nanka to yu: no wa naninani no koto de aru desho? kono hyo:gen dakara: 
Keiko Kitade The Role of Offline Metalanguage Talk in Asyncrhonous CMC 
 
Language Learning & Technology 76 
   But nanka to yu: no wa naninani no koto de aru [a structure something is to such and 
such], isn't it? Because of this expression: 
14D: mnn. Ano:: (..) no no nai ho: ga i: to omo: kedo 
   mnn. well:: (.) but I think it would be better without no [a nominalizer] 
15Y: Demo nanka= 
   But somehow= 
16D: =Demo saseru wa do:shi de meishi ja nai 
   =But saseru [the causative verb suffix] is a verb, but not a noun. 
17Y: Demo etto getsuyo:bi kana? kono iroiro na hyo:gen yatta desho? renshu: shita dakara 
sono hyo:gen wa naninani to yu: nowa naninani no koto de aru kara. 
   But I wonder if it was Monday? We learned these kinds of expressions, didn't we? We 
practiced it, and the expression was naninani to yu: nowa naninani no koto de aru 
[something is to such and such.] 
18D: Tabun me:shi, me:shi no ho: ga tekito: to omo: n da ne. sore wa hyakkajiten ja 
nakute=  
   I think probably a noun; a noun is more appropriate. This is not an encyclopedia, but=  
19Y: =Un, so so hai wakatta nanka (.) minna to= 
   =Yeah. Right right. Yes, I understand. Some (.) Everyone and= 
20D: =Jijitsu no yo:na   
   =Like a fact 
21Y: Un un wakatta hai= 
   Yeah. I got it. Yes = 
22D: =Watashitachi no iken  
   =Our opinion. 
23Y: Un. so so so ka. da to omoimasu tte kaita ho: ga i: desho? ((typing)) ja saseru koto 
da to omoimasu. 
   Yeah. Right right right. It would be better to write, da to omoimasu [we think it is], 
wouldn't it? ((typing)) Well, saseru koto da to omoimasu [we think it is to let them study]. 
24D: Ano: ((unintelligible)) un. 
   Well: ((unintelligible)) yeah 
The feedback provided by D contains a metalinguistic explanation addressing what Y had overlooked. 
Metalinguistic feedback is claimed to promote a particular type of learners' repair that engages the 
learners in deeper cognitive processing (Lyster & Ranta, 1997). Furthermore, D's feedback matches Y's 
requirement because D and Y share the same knowledge of the expression learnt in the same class. Such 
instances of metalinguistic episodes indicate that if the learners conduct the ACMC task by themselves at 
home or individually, they will not be able to solve many of the challenges they will encounter. They may 
miss the opportunities for metalinguistic episodes where learning may take place. 
 
Keiko Kitade The Role of Offline Metalanguage Talk in Asyncrhonous CMC 
 
Language Learning & Technology 77 
Results of the Individually Tailored Posttest 
The individually tailored posttest was developed on the basis of the metalinguistic episodes identified in 
the audio-recorded offline dialogue in Term 2. The multiple-choice questions were created to include the 
choices of both the correct and incorrect items discussed (and not discussed) in the metalinguistic 
episodes (see Appendix A for examples). The posttest was administered six weeks after the last ACMC 
session; the learners were told not to use any assistance during this test and that the result would not affect 
their grades. 
From the 180 questions developed from the metalinguistic episodes, 132 (73.3%) were correctly resolved 
during the posttest, as shown in Table 3. This finding confirms the results of dyad-specific posttests by 
LaPierre (1994) and Swain (1998), which were conducted one week to ten days after the task session and 
indicate a 70-80% correspondence. Although this study does not ignore the possibility of any change in 
the effect of language learning subsequent to the metalinguistic episodes and prior to the posttests, it 
suggests that a high rate of linguistic knowledge constructed through dialogue can remain in memory for 
a minimum of 6 weeks. The self-reported lexical items that the learners indicated they had learned 
through the ACMC activities were tested in the same exam sheet; 28 (49.1%) out of 57 were correctly 
resolved. Compared to the results for the self-reported lexical items, the lexical items in the metalinguistic 
episodes indicate a higher rate of resolution (68.8%). Interestingly, most newly learned lexical items 
reported by the learners were originally from the online partner's messages and not the item discussed in 
the metalinguistic episodes. However, the posttest result demonstrates that the lexical items discussed in 
the peer dialogue had a higher rate of resolution than those that the learners believed they had learned. 
The other significant finding in the posttest is the high rate of resolution (79.5%) of syntactic items. 
Selecting the correct syntactic items in the posttest may not necessarily imply that the learners completely 
understand the syntactic aspect and are capable of applying it to any given context. However, the data 
demonstrate that the learners were at least able to choose the correct syntactic item from the alternatives 
they listed in the metalinguistic episodes and could do so by themselves—something they were unable to 
accomplish before. 
Table 3. Posttest Result 
 Total number of 
items in posttest 
Items answered 
correctly 
Resolution rate 
(%) 
Lexical 90 62 68.8 
Phonological & orthographic 27 20 74.0 
Form 44 35 79.5 
Discourse 2a 2 100.0 
Lexical & form 12 8 66.6 
Phonological & lexical 5 5 100.0 
Total 180b 132 73.3 
 
DISCUSSION 
Significance of Offline Metalanguage Talk 
The analysis of the metalinguistic episodes during the offline talk demonstrated the unique discourse 
structure of such episodes and suggested the possibility of high retention (73.3%) of linguistic knowledge 
when it was discussed among peers. The high scores on the posttest imply that the opportunities to 
discuss linguistic aspects with peers and instructors not only reflect the linguistic challenges encountered 
by the learners but also have the potential to promote longer maintenance of the item in their individual 
Keiko Kitade The Role of Offline Metalanguage Talk in Asyncrhonous CMC 
 
Language Learning & Technology 78 
memories. The unique structural features of the metalinguistic episodes also demonstrate opportunities for 
the learners to enhance their knowledge. 
One major finding is that the learners' metalanguage talk did not occur in the online interaction with the 
Japanese speakers but rather in the offline verbal interaction. The retrospective interviews and 
questionnaires indicate that the learners are highly motivated to interact with online Japanese partners, but 
preferred the offline mode for metalanguage talk because of the availability of prompt and 
comprehensible responses. The offline context—in which extensive exchanges with repetitions are 
available—helps learners to establish and maintain intersubjectivity and obtain graduated and contingent 
assistance. Unlike offline peer dialogues, asynchronous online interactions lack the exchanges that are 
needed to create and maintain such discourse. The other explanation for the preference of offline 
interactions is related to the interlocutors' effect. In offline modes, the assistance provided by peers who 
share similar background knowledge is more comprehensible. Further, it is less face-threatening to 
request linguistic help from offline peers than to request assistance from online Japanese partners that the 
learners have never met.  
The other crucial feature of the structure of metalinguistic episodes is the written and spoken repetition 
discussed by the peers. The learners had the opportunity to incorporate the linguistic solution discussed in 
the offline interaction into the online messages they subsequently wrote to their Japanese partners. The 
learners' written repetition of what was already discussed in offline metalinguistic dialogues functions not 
only as a message to the online Japanese partners but also as visualized evidence indicating the 
intersubjectivity agreed upon by the peers in their offline interaction. By viewing the repeated written 
words/phrases on the shared computer screen and listening to the spoken repetition, the learners are able 
to indicate their stance to one another and be acknowledged for it. Further studies examining the role and 
effect of written repetition may explore the potential of the distinguishable discourse structures of 
metalinguistic episodes during an ACMC activity. 
Although ACMC activities are frequently conducted as outside-the-classroom assignments, the findings 
in this study indicate the significance of the in-class ACMC activity, since this entails the beneficial 
aspects of offline talk. Although reference to online dictionaries is useful, the learners' retrospective 
interviews suggest that there are limitations in the scope of these dictionaries. Unlike the receptive mode 
(reading), which requires only comprehension, the productive mode requires the selection of the correct 
linguistic knowledge and awareness of how to apply that knowledge in a particular context. Collaborative 
peer context is able to meet such complicated demands that cannot be solved using dictionaries. 
Factors Affecting Opportunities for Learning: Pair Work and Task Activities 
Although most learners indicated in the questionnaires that they took advantage of the allotted time and 
peers' help between the online asynchronous messages to write more complex and accurate texts, some 
learners are more self-directed and hesitate to ask for assistance frequently. Such individual differences 
are also apparent in the learners' perception of pair work. Previous studies based on the sociocultural 
perspective, particularly in classroom-based research (Foster, 1993; Swain & Lapkin, 1998), suggest that 
the manner in which the learners perceive, interact, and conduct pair work varies depending on the pair. 
The responses to the question regarding the perception of pair work indicate that 61% of learners 
considered it to be helpful, 30.5% perceived no difference between pair and individual work, and 8% 
experienced difficulties working in a pair.  
As indicated by previous studies examining pair interactions (Storch, 2002; Storch & Wigglesworth, in 
press; Swain & Lapkin, 1998), the amount and pattern of metalinguistic episodes observed in each pair 
and the manner in which the tasks were approached varied. The learners' perceptions of pair work may be 
related to the congeniality of the two learners and may affect the amount and pattern of metalinguistic 
episodes in the pair. Learners' reasons for disliking pair work were a preference for an independent 
learning style and an inability to get along with their partners. The pairs who had more metalinguistic 
Keiko Kitade The Role of Offline Metalanguage Talk in Asyncrhonous CMC 
 
Language Learning & Technology 79 
episodes indicated that they enjoyed pair work and gained significant knowledge from their peers in terms 
of the language and content of the discussion. On the other hand, the peers who had fewer metalinguistic 
episodes tended to perceive offline peer interactions as an ineffective context for language learning. As 
some studies suggest (Berg, 1999; Swain, Brooks, & Tocalli-Beller, 2002; Tang & Tithecott, 1999), 
providing explicit instructions about the rationale of employing peer collaboration and training on 
collaboration may promote a positive perception and increase collaborative work.  
The type, complexity, and operationalization of the task also moderate the benefits of offline interaction. 
The learners were instructed to collaboratively write more than one online message in each session, but 
how they collaborated to carry out the task (write the messages) varied between the pairs. The 
metalinguistic episodes seemed to consistently take place in the coauthoring (i.e., joint writing) context, 
where the pair, using the same computer screen, collaboratively discussed and decided how and with what 
content they should respond to their online Japanese partners. However, the pairs who discussed ideas and 
decided who would write what, and then individually wrote a message, tended to have relatively fewer 
metalinguistic episodes. The nature of the task may vary depending on how the learners construct the task 
up to the final outcome (Coughlan & Duff, 1994), and a more qualitative analysis examining the 
operationalization of the writing task in each process (e.g., prewriting discussion, composition, and 
revision) and the pattern of collaboration (Storch, 2002) should be incorporated in order to address the 
tasks involving collaborative writing in CMC. In particular, the effect of coauthoring, in which both 
learners are equally responsible for online messages, may be one area of investigation for future research. 
Another factor that may reduce the opportunity for learning through peer collaboration is the restrictive 
nature of peer assistance. In one episode, a pair reached a non-target solution during the metalinguistic 
talk. In another episode, a pair was unsuccessful in finding the correct grammatical form and instead used 
an easier, alternative word in its place. This pair was attempting to find a subjunctive form of the word 
yokereba 'good' (yokereba is conjugated rather uniquely in Japanese). After listing the incorrect forms, the 
pair agreed instead to employ the more well-known word ok. Most of the episodes in the data indicate that 
the learners solicited the instructor or the assistant for help when they were unsure about their linguistic 
solution or unable to arrive at one. Such instances suggest that the availability of assistance from an 
instructor or expert is crucial during peer collaboration.  
Methodological Suggestions for Future Studies 
Unlike other studies that focus on the effect of planning time in experimental settings, this study 
incorporated a microgenetic approach to examine the learners' actual behaviors in an offline setting in 
which there is a time stipulation and where peer collaboration occurs naturally. Although offline 
behaviors are not stored in the scripts and are not as easy to observe as online behaviors, the analysis of 
offline data reveals some of the learners' actual behavior while executing ACMC tasks, such as 
collaborative knowledge-buildings during the asynchronous exchanges. The incorporation of audio and 
visual recordings may capture the non-verbal cues and demonstrate further details of the peer 
collaborative process. The findings from the observation of the learners' offline behaviors suggest that the 
planning time of ACMC is not an independent factor. On the other hand, the availability of external 
resources during the time interval between the messages (dictionaries and metalanguage talk with peers 
and the instructor) is advantageous for L2 learning. While an experimental study is useful in addressing 
the general and statistical significance of the effect of planning time on the quality of production, a more 
naturalistic and microgenetic approach that takes into account the availability of external resources, 
learners' actual behaviors in executing tasks, and their long-term development should also be considered 
when studying the effective practical application of ACMC in L2 contexts. 
Besides the variety in the amount and quality of pair work and the actual activity carried out in a task, it is 
necessary to improve the methods of measuring the transfer of knowledge obtained in peer collaborative 
dialogue. This study employed a tailor-made test based on items that were resolved during peer-to-peer 
Keiko Kitade The Role of Offline Metalanguage Talk in Asyncrhonous CMC 
 
Language Learning & Technology 80 
dialogue; therefore, it addressed the extent to which the knowledge obtained through collaborative 
dialogue was individually transferred and maintained. The items in the posttest posed questions in a new 
context; however, each item was asked in varied contexts in order to examine whether the learner had 
truly acquired the encountered knowledge item in question and was capable of applying it. A follow-up 
posttest to study long-term effects should also be useful. 
Although the tailor-made posttest is a relatively new method that requires some modification and is 
difficult to apply to larger data, Swain (2000) indicates that this method directly demonstrates the dual 
role of a language, suggested in the Vygotskian perspective: language as a mediation tool of cognition 
("saying as a cognitive activity") and the construction of knowledge that reflects itself ("what they said 
becomes an outcome of that activity.") At the same time, traditional pre-experimental and post-
experimental studies examining the quality of the production (i.e., accuracy, complexity, and fluency) 
with statistical evidence using a larger data sample should also contribute to the exploration of the effect 
of collaboration and planning time. A study with a combination of methodologies and varied approaches 
should suggest the effective pedagogical application of ACMC where learners engage in different modes 
of interaction. 
CONCLUSION 
This study examined the benefits of offline dialogue in an ACMC activity. Since the size of the sample 
was small, further research considering factors such as the proficiency levels of learners and online 
partners, the use of the L1 (in the context of foreign language learning), and the goal of the activity is 
necessary for generalizing the findings. Addressing the preferred type of metalinguistic episodes, the 
points at which they occur, and their relationship with language learning in an ACMC activity, this study 
demonstrates how ACMC tasks can be structured to allow learners to take advantage of text-mediated 
reflective processes that are amplified with sufficient time stipulations and peer collaboration. More so 
than SCMC, ACMC provides greater access to real interactions with expert speakers (i.e., without the 
difficulty posed by time differences), particularly for learning intercultural communication and pragmatic 
competence. However, the asynchronous nature of ACMC can be perceived as unfavorable for L2 
learning because it reduces the opportunity for instant and tailored feedback. This study suggests that 
offline dialogue may compensate for this shortcoming and serve as an occasion for L2 learning and 
knowledge building. The offline verbal peer dialogue data demonstrates that knowledge of the target 
language may be collaboratively constructed, and the tailored posttests suggest that learners retain this 
knowledge for at least a short period of time.  
The findings related to the role of offline peer dialogue in the ACMC activity suggest a need for the 
reexamination of CMC and the alternative pedagogical application of ACMC activities. The 
methodological implication raised for future studies on CMC is the incorporation of a more detailed 
analysis examining the learners' actual behaviors in carrying out CMC activities. Previous studies on 
CMC have paid less attention to the role of offline interaction in language learning; however, the potential 
of offline interactions to create a collaborative context, not only among online interlocutors but also 
among offline peers, should be investigated in future studies. The collaborative peer relationship enables 
learners to engage in interactions whereby they deepen their knowledge not only in terms of the content 
but also linguistic aspects and at a level higher than they would have achieved individually. To effectively 
incorporate collaborative learning in a CMC context, more pedagogical techniques (e.g., encouraging co-
authoring activities, taking careful consideration when matching pairs, guiding the learners in pairing 
activities) should be carefully considered. 
 
 
Keiko Kitade The Role of Offline Metalanguage Talk in Asyncrhonous CMC 
 
Language Learning & Technology 81 
APPENDICES 
Appendix A 
Examples of Posttest Questions 
｛  ｝の中から一番適切なものを選んでください。Please choose the most appropriate one from {  
}. 
Lexical: 
仕事を選ぶ時、どんな国や町にあるかという会社の｛位置・職場・立場｝が大事だ。 
 
Form: 
関西弁を使うと、日本人から｛わらわせる・わらわれる・わらわられる｝かな。 
Appendix B 
Examples of Each Metalinguistic episodes Category 
<Lexis>: 
To choose one from two Japanese words for "every": daigaku "goto-ni" vs. daigaku "*tabi-ni" 
To choose one from two Japanese words for "position": daigaku no "*tachiba" vs. daigaku no "ichi" (for 
location) 
<Form>: 
The potential verb form for "tsukuru (to make)":"*tsuku-rareru" vs. "tsukur-eru" 
The use of the causative form: Kodomo ni "asonde-hoshii" vs. "asobasete-hoshii"  
<Discourse>: 
Inserting "tatoeba" (for example) to create cohesion. 
"-yo: dearu (sentence final expression)" is too formal and change it to "yo:-desu"  
<Lexis and form> Searching for both the lexical item(s) and structure together. 
Discussing to find the expression "he got fired" in Japanese. 
<Phonological and lexical> 
To choose one from two phonologically similar words: "seikaku (personality)"or "seikatsu (life)" 
<Phonological & orthographic> 
The spelling of "message" in Japanese is "messe:gi," but the learner wrote as "*mesegi." 
 
 
Keiko Kitade The Role of Offline Metalanguage Talk in Asyncrhonous CMC 
 
Language Learning & Technology 82 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This research is supported in part by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research of the Ministry of Education, 
Culture, Sports, Science and Technology. I would like to acknowledge and thank Maiko Ikeda for 
transcribing the data, as well as the reviewers and editors of LLT for the helpful comments and feedback. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Keiko Kitade (Ph.D., University of Hawaii at Manoa) is Associate Professor of Japanese at Ritsumeikan 
University, Japan. She teaches Japanese language, Japanese linguistics, and Japanese language pedagogy. 
Her research interests are second language (L2) learning, computer-mediated communication (CMC), 
discourse analysis, and technology and learning. 
Email: kitade@lt.ritsumei.ac.jp 
 
REFERENCES 
Aljaafreh, A., & Lantolf, J. P. (1994). Negative feedback as regulation and second language learning in 
the zone of proximal development. The Modern Language Journal, 78, 465-487. 
An, Y.-J., & Frick, T. (2006). Student perceptions of asynchronous computer-mediated communication in 
face-to-face courses. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 11(2), 5. Retrieved December 27, 
2007, from http://jcmc.indiana.edu/vol11/issue2/an.html. 
Belz, A. J., & Kinginger, C. (2002). The cross-linguistic development of address form use in 
telecollaborative language learning: Two case studies. The Canadian Modern Language Review, 59(2), 
189-214. 
Berg, E. C. (1999). The effects of trained peer response on ESL students' revision types and writing 
quality. Journal of Second Language Writing, 8(3) 215-241. 
Brooks, F. B., & Donato, R. (1994). Vygotskian approaches to understanding foreign language learner 
discourse during communicative tasks. Hispania, 77, 261-274. 
Chang-Wells, G.L., & Wells, G. (1992). Constructing knowledge together. Portmouth, NH: Heinemann. 
Coughlan, P., & Duff, P. (1994). Same task, different activities: Analysis of a second language 
acquisition task from an activity theory perspective. In J. P. Lantolf and G. Appel (Eds.): Vygotskian 
approaches to second language research (pp. 183-193). Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
Cumming, A. (in press). Writing in the L2 classroom: Issues in research and pedagogy. In R. Manchon 
(Ed.), International Journal of English Studies, 1, 2 [special issue]. 
Darhower, M. (2002). Interactional features of synchronous computer-mediated communication in the 
intermediate L2 class: A sociocultural case study. CALICO Journal, 19(2), 249-277. 
de Guerrero, M. & Villamil, O. S. (2000). Activating the ZPD: Mutual scaffolding in L2 peer revision. 
The Modern Language Journal, 84(1), 51-68. 
Dicamilla, F. J., & Anton, M. (1997). Repetition in the collaborative discourse of L2 learners: A 
Vygotskian perspective. The Canadian Modern Language Review, 53, 609-633. 
Donato, R. (1994). Collective scaffolding in second language learning. In J. P. Lantolf & G. Appel (Eds.), 
Vygotskian approaches to second language research (pp. 33-56). Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
Keiko Kitade The Role of Offline Metalanguage Talk in Asyncrhonous CMC 
 
Language Learning & Technology 83 
Foster, P. (1993). Discoursal outcomes of small group work in an EFL classroom: A look at the 
interaction of non-native speakers. Thames Valley University Working Papers in English Language 
Teaching, 2, 1-30. 
Kinginger, C. (2000). Learning the pragmatics of solidarity in the networked foreign classroom. In J. K. 
Hall & L. S. Verplaetse (Eds.), Second and foreign language learning through classroom interaction (pp. 
23-46). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Kitade, K. (2000). L2 learners' discourse and SLA theories in CMC: Collaborative interaction in internet 
chat. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 13(2), 143-166. 
Kitade, K. (2006). The negotiation model in asynchronous computer-mediated communication. Computer 
Assisted Language Instruction Consortium (CALICO) Journal, 23(2), 319-348 
Lamy, M. & Goodfellow, R. (1999). "Reflective conversation" in the virtual language classroom. 
Language Learning & Technology, 2(2), 43-61. 
Lantolf, P. J. (Ed.) (2000). Sociocultural theory and second language learning. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Lantolf, J., & Appel, G. (1994). Vygotskian approaches to second language research. Norwood, NJ: 
Ablex. 
Lapadat, J. C. (2002). Written interaction: A key component in online learning. Journal of Computer 
Mediated Communication, 7(4). Retrieved January 31, 2008, from 
http://jcmc.indiana.edu/vol7/issue4/lapadat.html. 
LaPierre, D. (1994). Language output in a cooperative learning setting: Determining its effects on second 
language learning. M.A. thesis, University of Toronto. 
Lotman, Y. M. (1998). Text within a text. Soviet Psychology, 26(3), 32-51. 
Lyster, R. & Ranta, L. (1997). Corrective feedback and learner uptake: Negotiation of form in 
communicative classrooms. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 19, 37-66. 
Ohta, A. (1995). Applying sociocultural theory to an analysis of learner discourse: Learner-learner 
collaborative interaction in the zone of proximal development. Issues in Applied Linguistics, 6(2), 93-121. 
Platt, E. & Brooks, F. B. (1994). The ‘acquisition rich environment' revised. The Modern Language 
Journal, 78 (4), 497-511. 
Radziszewska, B., & Rogoff, B. (1991). Children's guided participation in planning imaginary errands 
with skilled adult or peer partners. Developmental Psychology, 27, 381-397. 
Rogoff, B., & Gardner, W. (1984). Adult guidance of cognitive development. In B. Rogoff & J. Lave 
(Eds.), Everyday cognition: Its development in social context (pp. 95-116). Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 
Rommetveit, R. (1985). Language acquisition as increasing linguistic structuring of experience and 
symbolic behavior control. In J. V. Wertch (Ed.), Culture, communication, and cognition (pp. 183-204). 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Schwienhorst, K. (2003). Learner autonomy and tandem learning: Putting principles into practice in 
synchronous and asynchronous telecommunications environments. Computer Assisted Language 
Learning, 16(5), 427-443. 
Stockwell, G. (2004). Communication breakdown in asynchronous computer-mediated communication 
(CMC). Australian Language and Literacy Matters, 1(3), 7-31. 
Keiko Kitade The Role of Offline Metalanguage Talk in Asyncrhonous CMC 
 
Language Learning & Technology 84 
Stockwell, G., & Levy, M. (2001). Sustainability of e-mail interaction between native speaker and 
nonnative speakers. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 14(5), 419-442. 
Storch, N. (2002). Patterns of interaction in ESL pair work. Language Learning, 52(1), 119-158. 
Storch, N. & G. Wigglesworth. In press. Writing tasks: comparing individual and collaborative writing. In 
Mar del Pilar Garcia-Mayo (Ed.), Investigating tasks in formal language settings. Clevedon, UK: 
Multilingual Matters. 
Swain, M. (1998). Focus on form through conscious reflection. In C. Doughty & J. Williams (Eds.), 
Focus on form in classroom second language acquisition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Swain, M. (2000). The output hypothesis and beyond: Mediating acquisition through collaborative 
dialogue. In J. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 97-114). Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
Swain, M. (2006). Verbal protocols: What does it mean for research to use speaking as a data collection 
tool? In M. Chalhoub-Deville, C. Chapelle, & P. Duff (Eds.), Inference and generalizability in applied 
linguistics: Multiple perspectives (pp. 97-113). Amsterdam: John Benjamin Publishing Company. 
Swain, M., Brooks, L., and Tocalli-Beller, A. (2002). Peer-peer dialogue as a means of second language 
learning. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 22, 171-185.  
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (1995). Problems in output and the cognitive processes they generate: A step 
towards second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 16(3), 371-391. 
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (1998). Interaction and second language learning: Two adolescent French 
immersion students working together. The Modern Language Journal, 82(3), 320-337. 
Swain, M. & Lapkin, S. (2002). Talking it through: Two French immersion learners' response to 
reformulation. International Journal of Educational Research, 37(3-4), 285-304. 
Tang, G. M., & Tithecott, J. (1999). Peer response in ESL writing. TESL Canada Journal, 16(2), 20-38. 
Tocalli-Beller, A. & Swain, M. (2005). Reformation: The cognitive conflict and L2 learning it generates. 
International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 15(1), 5-28. 
Villamil, O. S., & de Guerrero, M. C. M. (1998). Assessing the impact of peer revision on L2 writing. 
Applied Linguistics, 19(4), 491-514. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press. 
Warschauer, M. (1997). Computer-mediated collaborative learning: Theory and practice. The Modern 
Language Journal, 81(3), 470-481. 
Wells, G. (1999). Dialogic inquiry: Toward a sociocultural practice and theory of education. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Wertsch, J. (1985). Vygotsky and the social formation of mind. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press. 
Wertsch, J. (1991). Voices of the mind: A sociocultural approach to mediated action. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press. 
Wertsch, J. V., Minick, N., & Arns, F. J. (1984). The creation of context in joint problem-solving. In B. 
Rogoff & J. Lave (Eds.), Everyday cognition: Its development in social context (pp. 151-171). 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
 
