Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num3/lee/ 
October 2008, Volume 12, Number 3
pp. 53-72 
 
Copyright © 2008, ISSN 1094-3501 53
FOCUS-ON-FORM THROUGH COLLABORATIVE SCAFFOLDING IN 
EXPERT-TO-NOVICE ONLINE INTERACTION 
Lina Lee 
University of New Hampshire 
Synchronous Computer-mediated communication (CMC) creates affordable learning 
conditions to support both meaning-oriented communication and focus-on-form reflection 
that play an essential role in the development of language competence. This paper reports 
how corrective feedback was negotiated through expert-to-novice collaborative efforts and 
scaffolding with 30 subjects working on three different tasks—jigsaw, spot-the-differences 
and open-ended question. The findings reveal that text chats supported the focus-on-form 
procedure through collaborative engagement. Despite the fact that the experts were able to 
provide step-by-step scaffolding at the right moment to call learners’ attention to non-
target-like-forms that resulted in error corrections, they needed to be made aware of not 
over-intervening as students reported interference between the expert's goals and the 
learner's. To maintain intersubjectivity, the use of both L2 and L1 shaped the route taken 
by experts and learners alike to negotiate L2 forms for both syntactic and lexical errors. 
The study concluded that it was not easy to provide corrective feedback and to attend to 
linguistic errors in a timely fashion during the meaning-based interaction. The long-term 
effect of focus-on-form procedures on L2 development through CMC remain to be 
explored in future studies. 
INTRODUCTION 
Synchronous computer-mediated communication (CMC) has been increasingly incorporated into second 
language (L2) instruction to expand learners’ exposure to the target language through real-time 
interaction. When learners engage in interaction, they receive input, feedback, and opportunities to 
produce modified output, all of which facilitate the development of learners’ interlanguage (Long & 
Robinson, 1998; Swain & Lapkin, 1995). According to Schmidt (2001), conscious noticing of linguistic 
forms is necessary in order for learning to take place. Text-based CMC creates affordable learning 
conditions to support both meaning-oriented communication and form-focus reflection (Lee, 2002a; 
Meskill & Anthony, 2005; O’Rourke, 2005; Pellettieri, 2000; Sotillo, 2005; Ware & O’Dowd, 2008). The 
absence of nonverbal cues in text chats (e.g., facial expressions) affects the way corrective feedback is 
generated. The visual salience of written discourse and the self-paced setting in a text-based medium 
increase learners’ opportunities to take notice of errors and make output modifications including self-
repairs (Blake & Zyzik, 2003; Dussias, 2006; Lai & Zhao, 2006; Smith, 2008; Sotillo, 2000; Warschauer 
& Kern, 2000).  
To date, the CMC studies grounded in Long’s Interaction Hypothesis (1996) have focused on how 
negotiation of meaning elicits corrective feedback using various types of negotiation moves (e.g., 
clarification requests, recasts) to attain mutual comprehension (Lee, 2001, 2002b, 2006; Smith, 2003; 
Tudini, 2003). Despite the fact that a limited number of studies showed that CMC enhanced the 
development of grammatical competence through noticing errors in certain syntactical features (Dussias, 
2006; Fiori, 2005; Salaberry, 2000), other reports revealed that lexical errors were the main triggers for 
negotiation of meaning, whereas syntactical errors were largely ignored (Blake & Zyzik, 2003; Lee, 2006; 
Sotillo, 2000; Smith, 2003). Lee (2002b) concluded that synchronous CMC encouraged fluency rather 
than accuracy. From a pedagogical point of view, grammatical accuracy and lexical growth should be 
equally important for the development of L2 language competence. How can we find an effective means 
to provide learners with meaningful interaction that goes beyond lexical problems to include negotiation 
of grammatical forms as well?  
Lina Lee Expert-to-Novice Synchronous Online Interaction 
 
Using a sociocultural perspective1 as the theoretical framework, this study explores how corrective 
feedback is negotiated through a joint social activity in which the experts provided moment-by-moment 
scaffolded help to engage learners in various types of error correction. The study involved 15 expert-to-
novice pairs (N = 30) who carried out six two-way information exchange tasks in a chat room. The expert 
speakers were 15 advanced proficiency level students, whereas the novices were 15 students from a 
fourth-semester Intermediate Spanish class. Focus on form engagement assisted by the expert was 
examined. The extent to which the expert scaffolding afforded L2 learners the opportunity to notice 
linguistic problems that led to error correction, including self-repair, was explored.   
Feedback Negotiation: Focus on Form and Collaborative Scaffolding  
Researchers have claimed that input and interaction alone are not sufficient for L2 development. There is 
a general consensus that focus on form through corrective feedback within a communicative context 
contributes to language acquisition (Skehan, 2003). From the Vygotskyan sociocultural point of view, 
corrective feedback is embedded within a social context through which learners work collaboratively to 
solve linguistic problems (Nassaji & Swain, 2000). Collaborative dialogue centers on how learners assist 
one another in reconstructing linguistic forms rather than engaging in negotiation of meaning caused by a 
communication breakdown (Donato, 1994; Foster & Ohta, 2005; Lee, 2004b; Swain, 2001). Scaffolding 
occurs when an individual who has knowledge at a higher level provides guidance to assist a person who 
is less capable or knowledgeable. Expert assistance fosters the development of learners’ interlanguage by 
activating their zone of proximal development (ZPD)—the distance between what they can achieve by 
themselves and what they can achieve with assistance from others. Lee (2004b) notes that scaffolding is a 
joint and reciprocal task that demands collaborative effort. To collaborate successfully, both the expert 
and the novice must maintain an intersubjectivity (a shared understanding among individuals who 
establish reciprocal and equal perspective to accomplish a joint activity through socially negotiated 
interaction) by means of which they establish common goals within a shared communicative context 
(Darhower, 2002; De Guerrero & Villamil, 2000).  
According to Aljaafreh and Lantolf (1994), scaffolding should start with minimal help and then gradually 
offer more specific assistance as needed. Learners first rely on the assistance of experts to make error 
corrections (other-regulation) and eventually gain increased independence and become self-regulated, 
reconstructing their erroneous forms with little or no intervention (DiCamilla & Antón, 2004). It should 
be noted that learners’ self-regulation in a given task does not necessarily imply that they can 
independently perform all types of tasks (Aljaafreh & Lantolf, 1994). During the scaffolding process, the 
nature of the task may affect the amount of feedback negotiation. For instance, spot-the-difference tasks 
require the use of precise lexical items and grammar points (e.g., description of specific objects or scenes 
in the picture) to reach a convergent outcome, whereas open-ended questions are less structured and 
contain unanticipated accounts that may lead to a variety of responses. From this perspective, open-ended 
questions may be conducive to feedback negotiation that prompts less on the form than on the meaning as 
the use of specific vocabulary may not be necessary to complete the task.  Other contributing factors 
including learners’ language proficiency and motives for language learning also influence the process of 
feedback negotiation (Lantolf, 2000; Lee, 2004b).  
To evaluate effective scaffolding within the ZPD, Aljaafreh and Lantolf (1994) developed five 
transitional levels of scaffolding strategies to track learners from other-regulated to self-regulated 
performance within a given task. The five levels of strategy intervention have been implemented in recent 
synchronous CMC studies to assess learners’ language development (Oskoz, 2005). Table 1 highlights the 
main points of each level. These five levels were adapted for the current study2.  
 
 
Language Learning & Technology 54
Lina Lee Expert-to-Novice Synchronous Online Interaction 
 
Table 1. Five-Level Collaborative Scaffolding (adapted from Aljaafreh & Lantolf, 1994) 
Level 1: The learner is not aware of the errors or does not have the knowledge to correct them even with 
intervention. The expert is responsible for providing help by bringing attention to errors. The co-
constructing process starts within the ZPD. The expert initiates the sentences, such as "Did you see any 
errors here?" after noticing several errors made by the learner.    
 
Level 2: The learner notices the error but is not able to correct it. The assistance is provided to involve 
feedback negotiation. The learner begins to understand the information but still relies heavily on the 
expert to perform. For instance, after the learner fails to make the first attempt to correct the error, the 
expert provides more specific feedback, such as "Something is wrong in the first sentence."  
 
Level 3: The learner notices and corrects the error only with the expert’s help. The expert utilizes a 
specific strategy for intervention. The learner understands the help, reacts to the feedback and begins to 
advance toward the self-regulated stage. The expert uses sentences, such as "Good try but pay attention 
to the verb." or "Use the third person not the first person." to point out the linguistic problem. 
 
Level 4: The learner notices the error and corrects it with a minimum of help. However, the learner has 
not yet fully progressed toward self-regulation. The learner still produces the non-target-like form and 
may need to confirm the correct form with the expert using sentences, such as "Is this correct?" or "Let 
me try it again."  
 
Level 5: The learner notices and corrects errors without the expert’s help (e.g., self-repair). The learner 
does not rely on the expert’s scaffolding and becomes fully self-regulated.  
 
In this study, these stages are examined through a microgenetic analysis3 to observe moment-by-moment 
scaffolding to help the learner notice and correct the error (levels 1-3). Gradually, the assistance is 
removed from the learner (level 4) and the learner becomes self-regulated in error correction (level 5).  
L2 research on the examination of feedback negotiation through collaborative dialogue is limited to the 
written or oral interaction within formal traditional classroom settings (Aljaafreh & Lantolf, 1994; Antón 
& DiCamilla, 1999; De Guerrero & Villamil, 2000; DiCamilla & Antón, 2004; Donato, 2000; Nassaji & 
Swain, 2000; Ohta, 2000). These studies analyze the manner in which L2 learners co-construct meaning 
and support each other to produce accurate linguistic forms. For instance, in her study of two Japanese 
learners’ collaborative interaction, Ohta (2000) found that the more proficient learner was able to assist 
the less proficient learner in a form-focused procedure. Other studies report that learners use their native 
language (L1) as the mediating tool for the establishment of mutual engagement and support for a shared 
task (Antón & DiCamilla, 1999; Brooks, Donato & McGlone, 1997; DiCamilla & Antón, 1997). While 
the use of L1 should not be encouraged for L2 learning, it enables learners to comment on their own 
output as metatalk that facilitates cognitive processing (Swain & Lapkin, 2000; Thoms, Liao & Szustak, 
2005). L1 use mediates the feedback negotiation process through which learners work collaboratively to 
solve linguistic problems and keep communication flowing. According to Lee (2006), the occurrence of 
L1 use is related to learners’ language proficiency and personal learning style.  
As mentioned previously, studies of CMC in the interactionist tradition center on the relationships among 
error types, feedback types, and immediate responses (Blake and Zyzik 2003; González-Lloret, 2003; 
Smith, 2003). The relationship between corrective feedback and attention to linguistic form in the CMC 
context has not been fully explored from a sociocultural perspective. Oskoz’s (2005) CMC study shows 
that it is possible to use dynamic assessment techniques drawn from Aljaafreh and Lantolf’s five-level 
scale of scaffolding to measure learners’ developmental stages within the ZPD. Examining the 
Language Learning & Technology 55
Lina Lee Expert-to-Novice Synchronous Online Interaction 
 
collaborative process rather than the immediate product offers a closer look at how feedback is negotiated 
and how learners’ interlanguage is developed via CMC.  
The purpose of the present study was to expand on Lee’s (2004b) examination of native speaker – non-
native speaker networked collaborative interaction. The analysis centered on a focus-on-form procedure 
attained through expert scaffolding, a process that may result in reconstructing learners’ interlanguage. 
The micro-nature of interactions examined in this study attempted to answer three research questions:  
1. Does collaborative interaction between expert and novice speakers of Spanish foster a focus-on-form 
procedure during synchronous CMC?   
2. If so, how do expert speakers provide timely corrective feedback to draw learners’ attention to L2 
forms that lead to learner-generated corrections? 
3. From the learners’ perspectives, how does expert scaffolding affect the way corrective feedback is 
negotiated?   
METHOD  
Participants 
This research project was conducted throughout the fall semester of 2006 involving 30 students of 
Spanish (22 females and 8 males) at a large public university in the northeastern United States. In order to 
create expert-novice partners, 15 native speakers of English who enrolled in a fourth-semester Spanish 
class were the target population for the novice speaker group4. The majority of these students (N =12) had 
studied Spanish for a minimum of three years in high school. They were placed in the fourth-semester 
Spanish course through a standardized placement test5. The remaining students had completed the 
previous three semesters of coursework at the university. The expert speaker group consisted of 15 
students who scored at the Advanced level of proficiency based on the results of the Spanish Oral 
Proficiency Test—SOPT (Lee, 2000). Ten students were native speakers of English and five were native 
speakers of Spanish (Spain = 1, Mexico =1, Columbia = 2, Puerto Rico = 1). The majority of these 
students (N = 12) had studied abroad for a minimum of one semester; some were taking (N = 6) or had 
taken (N = 5) a graduate seminar in Spanish. Fifteen pairs were formed, each consisting of one expert 
speaker and one novice speaker. They were asked to carry out six two-way information exchange tasks by 
means of a chat room in Blackboard. All participants had used Blackboard for other classes on campus. 
They were familiar and comfortable with Internet technologies including chatting online. Therefore, no 
training was necessary prior to the study.  
Tasks  
Three types of two-way exchange tasks that elicited collaborative interaction were chosen for the current 
study (Table 2).  
Table 2. Topic, Task Type, and Description of Task   
Topic    Task type  *Description of Task  
Chat #1: Movie making   
Chat #2: Buying a pet  
Jigsaw  Information gap; convergent; one 
closed outcome 
 
Chat #3: Bus ride 
Chat #4: Luisa’s messy room  
Spot-the-differences  Goal-oriented; convergent; one 
closed outcome 
 
Chat #5: Role of technology  
Chat #6: Immigrants in the United States 
Open-ended question  Opinion exchange; divergent; 
multiple outcomes 
*Description of each task is based on Pica, Kanagy, and Falodum (1993) 
Language Learning & Technology 56
Lina Lee Expert-to-Novice Synchronous Online Interaction 
 
Information gap (jigsaw) and goal-oriented (spot-the-differences) activities are closed tasks with one 
possible outcome. These two-way exchanges promote negotiation of meaning and form because learners 
need to exchange information in order to complete the task (Skehan, 2003). For instance, one of the goal-
oriented activities was for the participants to work together to identify 15 differences between two 
drawings of Luisa’s messy room. It is likely that specific lexical items or grammar points would be 
required to achieve mutual comprehension. In contrast, open-ended questions allow free responses that 
may not necessarily require precise information to complete the task. Task type influences the amount of 
corrective feedback received from the expert during synchronous CMC.  
Procedures  
As part of the course requirement, students were required to participate in six chats using the "Virtual 
Classroom" of Blackboard. Chat activities were course assignments outlined in the syllabus. To support 
form-focus reflection during meaning-oriented communication, the expert speakers were instructed to 
apply the five-level scaffolding procedure (Table 1) to provide feedback as needed. A brief two-hour 
training session familiarized the experts with the five-level scaffolding. When linguistic problems arose, 
the expert speakers were instructed to intervene by providing assistance to draw learners’ attention to 
focus on form. While no specific aspects of grammatical features were targeted for this study, the experts 
were asked to pay attention to concordance (e.g., noun and adjective agreement), the copulas ser and estar, 
and morphosyntax (e.g., verb conjugations and tenses) because these are common linguistic problems6 at 
the intermediate level. The novice speakers (intermediate level at the research institution) were told that 
their expert partners would assist them in error correction when necessary.  
All participants were encouraged to focus on the topic, share ideas with each other, and allow their 
partners to contribute as much as possible. Each task lasted approximately 45 minutes. Exchanges were 
automatically saved in Blackboard’s archives and were retrieved later for data analysis. In addition, the 
novice members wrote a reflective log to report their overall observations on online feedback negotiations 
and error corrections upon the completion of this project. The following instructions were provided to 
guide their writing:  
1. Describe your overall experience of online exchanges with your partner.   
2. Explain how your partner provided feedback to you and whether you found error correction beneficial 
for your learning of Spanish.  
3. Tell me the moments during the online exchanges you felt were particularly helpful or confused. 
4. Write additional comments on your view of expert feedback and error correction. 
Data Analysis  
According to Darhower (2002) data reduction is necessary to maintain consistent and systematic data 
analysis. Reduction is achieved by selection of relevant episodes. Therefore, chat logs were selected from 
the second, fourth, and sixth chat sessions; they included three tasks, one of each task type: one jigsaw, 
one spot-the-differences, and one open-ended question. These episodes7 were chosen because they 
illustrated a fair amount of attention to linguistic forms during expert-to-novice feedback negotiation. The 
microgenetic analysis allows for selected chat logs to be organized into collaborative episodes. These 
episodes contained linguistic problems that provided a record of the observation of moment-by-moment 
scaffolding within the ZPD. Students’ reflective essays were used to assist the interpretation of chat data 
and to make additional observations to support the findings.  
FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION  
The findings showed that the experts assisted their partners linguistically and cognitively in the process of 
feedback negotiation. In many instances, corrective feedback displayed visually on a computer screen 
Language Learning & Technology 57
Lina Lee Expert-to-Novice Synchronous Online Interaction 
 
facilitated error corrections in the use of temporal and aspectual morphosyntax: the use of pido ‘I ask for’ 
versus pedí ‘I asked for’ and caminé, ‘I walked’ versus caminó ‘he walked.’ The type of linguistic 
scaffolding, however, affected the way corrective feedback was negotiated through a focus-on-form 
procedure. As the result of feedback negotiation, the novice students were able to self-repair their errors8 
and incorporate correct forms into their follow-up turns9 (Table 3).  
Table 3. Frequency of Self-Repair Moves and Follow-Up Turns in Each Task Type  
Task Type Self-Repair Moves  Follow-Up Turns 
Chat #2: Jigsaw  44 (38%)  18 (45%) 
Chat #4: Spot-the-differences  23 (20%) 7 (18%) 
Chat #6: Open-ended question  48 (42%)  15 (37%) 
Total  115 (100%)  40 (100%)  
 
The results suggest that the task type affected the amount of self-repair generated by the novice speakers. 
Open-ended question resulted in the highest rate of self-repairs (42%), whereas spot-the-differences 
received the lowest rate (20%). Unlike open-ended questions, spot-the-differences tasks require L2 
learners to use specific lexical items to express meaning. It is likely that learners would solve semantic 
problems that cause communication breakdowns before they attended to syntactic errors. Cognitively, it 
may not be possible for the novices to pay attention to the meaning and the form simultaneously. Thus, 
they might not have the opportunity to attend to form and make error corrections during the meaning-
oriented exchange.  
35% of self-repair moves were incorporated into the follow-up turns (Table 4). It is interesting to note that 
the jigsaw task generated the highest frequency of follow-up turns (41%), whereas spot-the-differences 
(30%) and open-ended question (31%) resulted in a similar rate of follow- up turns.  
Table 4. Rate of Follow-Up Turns per Self-Repair Move in Each Task Type  
Task Type Rate 
Chat #2: Jigsaw  18/44 (41%)  
Chat #4: Spot-the-differences  7/23 (30%) 
Chat #6: Open-ended question  15/48 (31%)  
Total  40/115 (35%)  
 
The focus-on-form is more salient in CMC than in face-to-face interaction as the learner reads the correct 
written text on the screen. Moreover, written discourse can easily be retrieved by the use of the vertical 
scroll bar. The fact that the novices were told that they would engage in error correction may have 
affected the high rate of self-repair moves. While this study makes no claim on the long-term effect of 
feedback negotiation via expert scaffolding for L2 development, the data suggests that corrective 
feedback provided by the expert had a positive effect on drawing learners’ attention to form that led to 
self-repair. These results corroborate those found in the CMC study conducted by Lai and Zhao (2006) 
and Lee (2006).  
A close-up data analysis of selective episodes as well as information gathered from the participants’ 
reflective essays provided confirmation of the hypothesis that synchronous CMC supported the focus-on-
form procedure through collaborative engagement in expert-to-novice exchange. To facilitate the 
discussion, Table 5 illustrates the episodes that correspond to the topic and the task type.  
 
 
Language Learning & Technology 58
Lina Lee Expert-to-Novice Synchronous Online Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 59
Table 5. Topic, Task Type, and Corresponding Episode 
Topic    Task Type  Corresponding Episode  
Chat #2:  Buying a pet  Jigsaw  Episode 5, Episode 6, Episode 8  
Chat #4:  Luisa’s messy room   Spot-the-differences  Episode 3, Episode 4, Episode 9 
Chat #6:  Immigrants in the United States Open-ended question  Episode 1, Episode 2, Episode 7 
 
As can be seen in Table 6, nine Episodes in three types of tasks prompted various types of expert 
scaffolding that led to the acceptance or the rejection of feedback negotiation by the novice speakers. 
Table 6. Task Type, Corresponding Episode, and Scaffolding Strategies 
Task type  Corresponding 
Episode   
Feedback Negotiation from Indirect to Direct 
Scaffolding  
Jigsaw   Episode 5  Use of L1 for lexical problem  
Jigsaw Episode 6 Use of L2 for step-by-step scaffolding on grammar  
Jigsaw  Episode 8  Direct scaffolding on grammar; unsuccessful feedback 
negotiation on form  
Spot-the-differences    Episode 3  Use of L1 for grammar explanation 
Spot-the-differences  Episode 4 Use of L1 for grammar explanation 
Spot-the-differences  Episode 9 Initial scaffolding; unsuccessful feedback negotiation 
on form  
Open-ended question  Episode 1  Use of L2 for scaffolding on grammar error  
Open-ended question  Episode 2 Use of L2 for scaffolding on grammar error  
Open-ended question  Episode 7  Use of L2 for lexical problem  
 
7 of the 9 Episodes show the collaborative engagement of feedback negotiation across three types of tasks. 
Only 2 Episodes (Episodes 8 and 9) did not generate feedback negotiation. The results reveal that the 
open-ended question resulted in the use of the target language (L2) for feedback negotiation on both 
lexical and grammar problems, whereas the spot-the-differences prompted the use of L1 for grammar 
explanations. The little evidence available seems to suggest that open-ended questions promoted L2 use 
in the scaffolding process. Lee (2006) remarks that it is fairly difficult to explain an advanced 
grammatical concept in the target language. Therefore, the use of L1 is a good choice to solve linguistic 
problems and to keep the flow of conversation going, as shown in Episode 4.  
The following discussion highlights the amount of scaffolding, the use of L1, the role of the expert that 
affected how the learners socially co-constructed L2 knowledge with their expert partners during 
synchronous CMC. To facilitate the data interpretation, throughout the episodes, words in boldface 
indicate the words in the wrong verb forms targeted for corrective feedback. Italicized words enclosed in 
brackets are explanations provided by the researcher.  
Corrective Feedback via Expert Scaffolding10  
Feedback negotiation was made through collaborative scaffolding between the expert and the 
novice. Episode 1 below demonstrates how the student (Grant = G) self-repaired the syntactical error 
from esquí to esquié ‘skied’ (line 4) immediately after receiving the confirmation check (line 3) from
expert partner (Amanda = A). All episodes are provided as they occurred with the students. No 
typographical or other errors h
 his 
ave been fixed. 
 
 
Lina Lee Expert-to-Novice Synchronous Online Interaction 
 
Episode 111 
1. G: me gusta a esquiar. (I like to ski.) 
2. G: esquí solamente tres veces en montanas. (I only skied three times on mountains.) 
3. A: ¿esquí? (skied?) [Confirmation check to indicate the wrong form] 
4. G: Esquiar, yo esquié. si, esquié. Lo siento. Cuando esquié, usar, usé mi snowboard. ¿Como se dice 
"snowboard"? (To ski. I skied. yes, I skied. I’m sorry. When I skied, to use, I used my snowboard. 
How do you say "snowboard"?) [Use of metatalk to solve linguistic problem]  
5. A: Snowboard. Así se dice en español. A mí me gusta esquiar también. (Snowboard. This is how you 
say it in Spanish.  I like to ski too.) 
6. A: Muy bien. ¿Qué haces para proteger el medio ambiente? (Very good. What do you do to protect 
the natural environment?)  
After receiving initial corrective feedback from Amanda, Grant was able to make the error correction 
without further assistance from Amanda (line 4). The confirmation check used by Amanda in line 3 made 
Grant notice the feedback that drew his attention to a specific linguistic form. It is possible that the word 
esquí displayed on the screen may have reduced the cognitive burden on Grant and further caught his 
attention to notice the gap between his incorrect verb form esquí (line 2) and the target form esquié (line 
4). The scaffolding provided by Amanda occurred at the right moment to push Grant to stretch his ZPD 
and solve his own linguistic problem by the use of metatalk that engaged him in mental work to arrive at 
the correct form esquié. The finding corroborates the results of Lee’s CMC (2004b) study that 
demonstrated that scaffolding from the experts in native-to-nonnative speaker collaborative interaction 
assisted students in reconstructing L2 forms, a process that involved both linguistic and cognitive skills.  
The evidence presented in Episode 2 below further reveals how Amanda and Grant worked 
collaboratively in a process of reconstruction of a L2 form.  
Episode 2 
1. A: ¿Qué opina de los inmigrantes en este país? (What do you think about the immigrants in this 
country?) 
2. G: Muchos son Mexicanos. En mi puebla ellos trabajan a Dunkin Donuts. No son contentos. (Many 
are Mexicans. In my town they work at Dunkin Donuts. They are not happy.) 
3. A: De acuerdo. Algo no está bien en los verbos. (I agree. Something is not right in the verbs)  [Use of 
hint]  
4. G: No se. Mi gramatica es mal. (I don’t know. My grammar is bad). [Need for further assistance] 
5. A: Fijese en los verbos ‘ser’ (Look at the verbs ‘ser’)  [Prompt to L2 Form]  
6. G: Hay dos. Cual? (There are two. Which one?)  [Ask for more help]  
7. A: el segundo verbo (the second one)  [Specific help to point out the problem] 
8. G: estan? Ellos no estan contentos. (they are? They are not happy.)   
9. A: Ahora si está bien. (Now, yes now it is right).  
In the above episode, Amanda’s step-by-step scaffolding using different levels of feedback strategies 
highlights the collaborative interaction in which Amanda gradually increased the amount of assistance to 
guide Grant accordingly. After receiving the initial scaffolding from Amanda (line 3), Grant admitted his 
inability to identify the error (line 2). In line 4, Amanda increased her assistance by asking Grant to pay 
attention to the verb ser (line 5) but she did not yet point out the exact error. By asking Amanda a specific 
Language Learning & Technology 60
Lina Lee Expert-to-Novice Synchronous Online Interaction 
 
question Cual? 'Which one?' (line 6), it is clear that Grant continued to need further direction. Finally, 
after Amanda directly pointed out the location of the error (line 7), Grant made the error correction 
despite the fact that he was not fully confident. He asked the question estan? 'they are?' in line 8 to 
confirm his attempt. In his reflective essay, Grant praised the scaffolding techniques that Amanda used to 
help him make error corrections. In particular, he viewed Amanda as a non-threatening figure with whom 
he felt comfortable expressing his thoughts. Grant also admitted that he needed more help from Amanda. 
He remarked, "I really enjoyed working with Amanda who is not a teacher but someone who knows more 
than I do to help me out when I got stuck."  
Both Episode 1 and Episode 2 provided evidence of mechanisms of effective collaborative scaffolding 
within the ZPD during the feedback negotiation process. In many cases, the experts began with the 
minimum scaffolding (level 1) using sentences like "Do you see something wrong in the sentence?" and 
gradually increased the help when the partners failed to notice the non-target-like form using proper hints, 
such as "Pay attention to the gender and the number." (level 3). With proper assistance on the part of the 
experts, learners may over time increase their awareness of incorrect forms, make self-repairs, and in 
other ways improve their language accuracy. The outcomes of studies that focus on specific linguistic 
forms involving learners at a certain level of language proficiency would undoubtedly contribute to our 
understanding of the effectiveness of collaborative scaffolding with the ZPD.  
Use of L1 
Successful scaffolding relies on collaborative efforts on the part of both parties. The data yielded a total of 
13 instances of the use of L1 for both lexical and syntactical explanations. The findings indicated that the 
L1 deployed as a mediating tool facilitated the feedback negotiation process through which both experts 
and novices searched for effective strategies to achieve the mutual goal of task completion. The L1 was 
used to explain complex grammatical structures, such as the use of the aspectual problem (Episode 3) as 
well as the subjunctive structure (Episode 4). Episode 3 highlights how the expert (Melissa = M) helped 
the novice (Hannah = H) understand the difference between the two temporal aspects of the preterit and 
the imperfect. 
Episode 3 
1. H: Fueron las diez cuando Luisa llegaba a la casa.  (It was ten o’clock when Luisa was arriving at 
the house.) 
2. M: Hmm… algo no está bien en su oración.  (Hmm… something is not right in your sentence.)  [Use 
of indirect hint] 
3. H: Pienso que no uso los verbos bien.  (I think I don’t use the verbs well.) [Noticing of problem but 
needs more help] 
4. M: Si, ¿puede corregirlos?  (Yes, can you correct them?)  [To encourage self-repair] 
5. H: Should I use "llegó" instead of  "llegaba"? It should be "she arrived" not "she was arriving"  [L1 to 
re-orient herself] 
6. M: Correcto. ¿Qué tal el primer verbo?  (Correct. How about the first verb?)  [To draw attention to a 
specific form] 
7. H: Creo que está bien pero no se. (I think it is right but I don’t know.) [Need for more help] 
8. M: Remember that the imperfect is used to describe a scene including the use of time in the past.  
[Use of L1 to explain L2 grammar rule]  
9. H: But it is a specific time; ten o’clock.  
10. M: In Spanish the imperfect is used to describe the time in the past.  
Language Learning & Technology 61
Lina Lee Expert-to-Novice Synchronous Online Interaction 
 
11. H: O.K. Eran las diez. I have to remember this rule. (O.K. It was ten o’clock.)  [Self-repair]  
The above example illustrates that both the expert and the novice used the L1 to solve linguistic problems. 
The occurrence of the use of L1 might be related to learners’ language proficiency. Another example of 
the use of L1 can be seen in Episode 4. The expert (Julia = J) employed the L1 to help her partner (Kris = 
K) understand the advanced grammar point, keep him on task, stimulate his curiosity, and further support 
his cognitive processing to maintain the shared communicative context.   
Episode 4 
1. K: Espero que la nina recibe regalos. (I hope the child receives gifts.)  
2. J: Recibe?  [Confirmation check to provide hint]  
3. K: si la nina recibe regalos. Should it be in the past tense, recibio? (yes the child receives gifts. … she 
received?)  [L1 for self-orientation] 
4. J: Your first verb is "esperar" so you need to say "espero que reciba regalos" "Recibir" should be in 
the subjunctive form. [Use of L1 as scaffolding to explain L2 grammar] 
5. K: Can that mean "I hope that she has received the money"? Recibir in the past tense.  [L1 for 
negotiation of L2 form]  
6. J: O.K. then it should be "Espero que ella haya recibido …" (O.K. then it should be "I hope that she 
has received …")   
7. K: Que es "haya"? (What is "haya"?)  
8. J: The present subjunctive of "haber" like haya, hayas, haya, hayamos, etc. You use "haber + ado/ido" 
like "haya recibido" means that I have received.  [L1 for further explanation of L2 form]  
9. K: O.K. Gracias. Es muy dificil. Necesito estudiar mas el subjunctive. (O.K. Thanks. It is very 
difficult. I need to study the subjunctive more.) 
The above episode shows how Julia exposed Kris to the subjunctive structure through the use of the L1 to 
facilitate an on-the-spot explanation of L2 grammar. She immediately used L1 rather than L2 to provide 
direct help to Kris (line 4). Upon receiving the help, Kris remained curious about the subjunctive structure 
asking for further assistance from Julia (lines 5, 7). Julia’s linguistic scaffolding used confirmation check 
(line 2) and L1 with examples in L2 (lines 4, 8) which allowed both parties to move the task along, 
maintain the feedback negotiation, and focus the learner’s attention on the use of a non-target-like form. 
In his reflective log, Kris maintained that Julia’s scaffolding was useful and effective in helping him 
better understand the subjunctive structure despite the fact that they used the L1 to negotiate.  
In addition to syntactic problems, the results revealed that the L1 was also used to solve lexical problems 
because intermediate students have insufficient L2 lexical knowledge and they are often confused by the 
similarities of two words. In most cases, the L1 was used to explain the semantic distinction between two 
lexical items, such as preguntar ‘to ask a question’ versus pedir ‘to ask for something’, derecho ‘straight 
or right’ versus derecha ‘right-hand side’, pintura ‘painting’ versus dibujo ‘picture or drawing’. Episode 
5 illustrates how the expert Vanessa (V) used the L1 to help Cara (C) notice her inappropriate use of a 
lexical item.  
Episode 5 
1. C: En mi pintura tengo un perro y dos lamps. No se como se dice lamp. (In my painting I have a dog 
and two lamps. I don’t know how to say lamp.) 
2. V: Lámpara = lamp. Do you mean dibujo not pintura? [L1 for clarification check]  
3. C: Is dibujo picture? [L1 for confirmation check]  
Language Learning & Technology 62
Lina Lee Expert-to-Novice Synchronous Online Interaction 
 
4. V: Correcto. Pintura = painting pero dibujo = drawing or picture.  
5. C: O.K. dibujo. Que tienes en tu dibujo? (O.K. drawing. What do you have in your drawing?) 
[Repetition of correct form]  
The example illustrates how both parties used the L1 for a clarification check (line 2) and a confirmation 
check (line 3) to solve a lexical problem. Lexical correction demands learners’ knowledge beyond their 
current level (Donato, 1994; Lee, 2006). The expert opted to use the L1 to explain the semantic difference 
between pintura ‘painting’ and dibujo ‘drawing or picture’ (line 4). Cara was able to incorporate the 
correct form into her follow-up turn (line 5). Cara’s comment given in her essay further confirms the 
observations: "It would be impossible for Vanessa to help me without using English because of 
insufficient knowledge of lexical items. I thought that was the best option she had at the moment." In this 
case, the lexical error did not impede mutual comprehension. Rather, the expert drew the novice’s 
attention to lexical inappropriateness. In spite of the fact that Vanessa was instructed to provide feedback 
on grammar errors, she might have felt obligated to make lexical correction and considered it as part of 
language accuracy.  
L1 shaped the route taken by experts and novices alike to negotiate L2 forms for both syntactic and 
lexical errors. It is possible that the nature of the problem-solving task (i.e., jigsaw) pushed learners to 
focus on particular forms because they needed to describe drawings in a sequence, using specific L2 
words or structures. More importantly, L1 allowed both parties to maintain their intersubjectivity, which 
involved both social and cognitive functions of interaction (Antón & DiCamilla, 1999; Darhower, 2002; 
Thoms, Liao & Szustak, 2005). The question remains whether the amount of L1 decreases as learners 
advance within their ZPD. The long-term effect of L1 on feedback negotiation in relation to learners’ 
performance through the ZPD is an issue worthy of further research.  
From Other-Regulation to Self-Regulation within the ZPD  
The ultimate goal of collaborative scaffolding is for learners to become independent enough to make error 
corrections on their own. Furthermore, effective feedback should allow learners to "move into the zone of 
the next development" (Williams & Burden, 1997, p. 136). Episode 6 from the third week and Episode 7 
from the seventh week illustrate how Mike (M) made the improvement from other-regulation to self-
regulation performance in the use of the preterit verb forms with the assistance of Kerry (K) during online 
collaborative interaction.  
Episode 6 
1. M: Sí, es un mess12. El perro rompo los lampos. La madre era furioso y decida sacar el perro de la 
casa. (Yes. It is a mess. The dog breaks the lamps. The mother was furious and she decides to take the 
dog out of the house.)  
2. K: Qué lío! Obviamente la mamá no estaba contenta. O.K. Algo no está bien en tus oraciones. (What 
a mess! Obviously the mother was not happy. O.K. Something is not right in your sentences). [Hint to 
draw the attention to form]  
3. M: Es "rompo"? (Is it "rompo"?) [Attempt to locate the error]  
4. K: Si. ¿Qué tipo del verbo es? (Yes. What type of the verb is it?) [Narrowing down to specific type of 
verb form]  
5. M: Romper. Is it "rompo" for the dog? [Use of L1]  
6. K: No. Es –er no –ar. Piénselo otra vez. (No. It is –er not –ar. Think about it again.) [Metalinguistic 
hint to prompt error correction]  
Language Learning & Technology 63
Lina Lee Expert-to-Novice Synchronous Online Interaction 
 
7. M: Mis verbos en el pasado son mal. Es ‘rompi’? (My verbs in the past are bad. Is it I broke?) 
[Second attempt to identify the error]  
8. K: Rompí es para ‘yo’ ¿Cuál es la forma correcta para ‘el perro’? (Rompí is for ‘I’ Which form is 
correct for ‘the dog’?)   
9. M: No sé. Los verbos son difícil. (I don’t know. Verbs are difficult.)  
10. K: De acuerdo. Primero, vamos a repasar las conjugaciones. Son í, iste, ió, imos, ieron. Entonces, es 
recibió. Ahora puede corregir el verbo ‘decida’? (I agree. First, let’s review the conjugations. They 
are í, iste, ió, imos, ieron. So, it is recibió. Now can you correct the verb ‘decida’?) [Provision of a 
verb model with explanation]  
11. M: Rompio, rompio. Decidir, decidio. Esta bien? (He broke, he broke. To decide, she decided. Is it 
O.K.?) [metatalk]  
12. K: Sí. ‘Decidió’ es correcto. Seguimos el cuento. Me toca? (Yes. ‘Decidió’ is correct. We’ll continue 
the story. Is it my turn?) 
As shown in the above episode, Mike experienced difficulty in using the correct verb forms in the preterit. 
It is only with Kerry’s help that he was able to correct his error. Kerry’s scaffolding provided support 
needed to draw Mike’s attention to the verb and help him become aware of what he could do on his own 
and what he could do with assistance. By the seventh week, Mike performed at the self-regulated stage by 
using both verbs "recibieron" (line 2) and "decidió" correctly (line 3) without Kerry’s intervention as 
shown in Episode 7.  
Episode 7 
1. K: Muchos inmigrantes vinieron a este país a buscar trabajos. (Many immigrants came to this country 
to look for jobs.)  
2. M: Si. Pienso es muy triste. Ellos recibieron mal trabajos. (Si. I think it is very sad. They received bad 
jobs.) 
3. M: El papa de mi amigo es Mexicano. El decidio venir aqui porque puede hacer mas dinero. (My 
friend’s father is Mexican. He decided to come here because he can make more money.) 
4. K: Es ‘hacer dinero’ correcto? (Is ‘to make money’ correct?) [Hint to draw attention to form]  
5. M: Se que hay otra palabra pero no se. (I know there is another word but I don’t know.) [Noticing of 
error but needs help to make correction]  
6. K: Es mejor usar ‘ganar’ (It is better to use ‘to earn’) [Direct assistance]  
The findings confirm the crucial role of the expert in the feedback negotiation process (Lee, 2004b; Swain, 
2000). In Episode 6, it is evident that Kerry’s supportive role in collaborative scaffolding guided Mike at 
the right level of help from minimum to maximum (lines 4, 6, 8, 10). The use of both L1 (line 5) and 
metatalk (line 11) are facilitative of the dialogic interaction of Mike’s error correction. After several 
attempts, Mike gave up and admitted that he did not know the answer (lines 3, 5, 7). Mike may have felt 
frustrated by not being able to detect his own errors. Kerry offered affective support by saying "I agree" 
and "Let’s review the conjugations" (line10). The collaborative effort on her part as mediator influenced 
Mike’s performance. Kerry was able to provide more direct help to Mike, whereby the explanation of the 
verb forms and the correct form decidió were provided (line 10). At the end, metatalk helped Mike make 
the connection between form and function (line 11). Kerry was able to provide just enough scaffolding to 
guide Mike in eliciting the correct verb form in his follow-up response.  
 
Language Learning & Technology 64
Lina Lee Expert-to-Novice Synchronous Online Interaction 
 
Role of the Expert Speaker  
Despite the fact that CMC allows L2 learners to express themselves without feeling as intense a pressure 
as they would in a live classroom (Lee, 2005), the expert plays a crucial role during the collaborative 
engagement. Episode 8 shows how the expert (Marie=M) provided direct assistance to a weak student 
(Andrew=A) in his error corrections.  
Episode 8 
1. M: En mi dibujo veo que los criminales entraron la casa y robaron muchas cosas. (In my drawing I 
see that criminals entered the house and stole many things).  
2. A: Si, ellos salgan de la ventana. La mujer tome un bolsa grande y el hombre lleve dinero con un gun. 
Como se dice gun? (Yes, they leave from the window. The woman takes a big bag and the man 
carries the money with a gun. How do you say gun?)  
3. M: Veo los problemas en los verbos. Primero, salir es –ir no –ar. Los verbos deben estar en el pasado. 
Salieron. (I see the problems in the verbs. First, salir is –ir not –ar. The verbs should be in the past. 
They left.) [Direct assistance with explanation]   
4. M: Ahora puedes corregir los verbos? (Now can you correct the verbs?)  
5. A: O.K. Salieron. Tomar es tomio. (O.K. They left. To take is took.) 
6. M: Tomar no es –ir. Es –ar. Yo tomé, tú tomaste y él tomó. (To take is not –ir.  It is –ar. I took, you 
took and he took.) [Scaffolding with explanation]  
7. A: No se. Tomo y llevo13. Esta bien? (I don’t know. I take and I bring, right?) 
8. M: Debes poner los acentos en ‘o’ (You should put the accent marks on ‘o’) 
9. A: No se los acentos. No me gusta verbos. Que mas tienes? (I don’t know the accents. I don’t like 
verbs. What else do you have?) 
10. A: Como se dice "gun" en español? (How do you say "gun" in Spanish?) 
11. M: Pistola. (Gun.)  
It is evident that Marie’s intervention did not provide Andrew with affordable opportunities to detect his 
own errors because the corrective feedback was not negotiated between Marie (the expert) and Andrew 
(the novice). Although Andrew made an attempt to figure out the correct form of tomar on his own after 
repeating salieron in line 5, he did not correct the error. Only after he received help from Marie in line 6, 
he wrote tomo and llevo without accent marks14 in line 7. In this case, it is difficult to determine whether 
explicit feedback provided by the expert peer led to the error correction that promoted learning. Expert 
scaffolding did not seem to motivate Andrew to pursue further understanding of the verb forms as he 
responded to Marie "I don’t know … I don’t like verbs. What else do you have?" in line 9. Andrew 
appeared to be more interested in a lexical item rather than in making corrections of syntactical errors as 
he asked for help twice for the unfamiliar word for"gun" from Marie (line 2 and 10).  
This finding indicates that Marie and Andrew did not maintain intersubjectivity. While Marie’s intention 
was to assist Andrew in the error correction process, Andrew viewed the task as an opportunity for 
meaning exchange. Disappointed, Andrew wrote in his reflective essay: "I did not like the way Marie 
corrected my mistakes. We were chatting not learning Spanish grammar." Andrew’s comments further 
revealed that it was not easy to attend to linguistic errors in a timely fashion during the meaning-based 
interaction. He further remarked: "I don’t think it is a good idea to correct someone’s mistakes during the 
conversation." It is logical that learners solve semantic problems before they attend to syntactic errors 
Language Learning & Technology 65
Lina Lee Expert-to-Novice Synchronous Online Interaction 
 
because lexical items are meaning-oriented and have more communicative value than syntactic forms 
(VanPatten, 1996).  
On a few occasions, students appeared to be more interested in making meaning (communication) rather 
than form (grammar) as illustrated in Episode 9, carried out by the novice Tina (T) and the expert Lori 
(L):  
Episode 9 
1. T: La casa es muy sucio. Hay muchos papeles en el floor. El perro duerme en la cama. (The house is 
very dirty. There are many papers on the floor. The dog is sleeping on the bed.) 
2. L: O.K. Algo no está bien en la primera oración. (O.K. Something is not right in the first sentence.)  
[Hint to indicate linguistic problem]  
3. T: Que ves en tu pintura? Hay animales? (What do you have in your painting? Are there animals?)  
[No response to feedback]  
4. L: Primero, puedes corregir el verbo incorrecto? (First, can you correct the wrong verb?)  [Draw 
attention to form]  
5. T: Que verbo? No me gusta gramatica. Hablamos la historia, si? (What verb? I don’t like grammar. 
Let’s talk about the story, o.k.?)   
Despite the fact that Tina acknowledged Lori’s intervention (lines 2, 5), the scaffolding did not motivate 
her to resolve her linguistic problem. It is evident that both parties did not maintain intersubjectivity due 
to unwillingness on Tina’s part. Instead, she suggested that they continue the story (line 6). It is possible 
that Tina did not know the answer to the expert’s question. Therefore, feedback was outside of her ZPD. 
Further, Tina stated in her reflective log that making error corrections during the CMC was not a good 
idea because it interrupted her thoughts and the flow of conversation. The findings suggest that the 
negotiation of intersubjectivity to reestablish new common goals is an important step toward the 
continuation of focus-on-form. Furthermore, it is challenging for L2 learners at the intermediate level to 
focus on meaning and form simultaneously.  
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION  
The findings showed that CMC provided favorable conditions for feedback negotiation between the 
expert-to-novice pairs and also focused learners’ attention on their linguistic errors. Without access to 
verbal cues, CMC feedback negotiation made great demands on the experts as they sought to provide 
more guided assistance. The findings revealed that in general, the experts were able to provide step-by-
step scaffolding at key moments to call learners’ attention to focus on non-target-like-forms that resulted 
in error corrections. Moreover, the visually displayed written discourse made both the error and the 
feedback highly salient and pushed learners to focus on form and to use their cognitive skills and 
metalinguistic awareness to solve language problems (Lee, 2004b; Meskill & Anthony, 2005; O’Rourke, 
2005). Both lexical and syntactic items were negotiated through collaborative scaffolding within a social 
context. In some cases, the evidence showed that the students were able to self-repair their errors and 
further incorporate correct forms into their follow-up turns. However, the long-term effect of focus-on-
form procedure on L2 development through CMC still remains to be explored in future studies.   
During the feedback negotiation, L1 was used to reduce the learners’ cognitive burden, to keep the flow 
of feedback negotiation, and to bring learners’ attention to form within a shared communicative context. 
In most cases, sufficient scaffolding by the experts that stretched learners’ ZPD to focus on linguistic 
forms was complemented and facilitated by the text displayed on the computer screen. As a result, the 
expert scaffolding allowed students to resolve linguistic problems including syntactic and lexical items. 
More important, through collaborative scaffolding, students gained confidence in correcting their 
Language Learning & Technology 66
Lina Lee Expert-to-Novice Synchronous Online Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 67
linguistic errors from dependent performance (other-regulation) where they received the most explicit 
feedback to independent performance (self-regulation) where almost no collaborative help was needed.  
In the co-construction context, the role of the expert, however, affected the ways that the students 
responded to their corrective feedback. Some of the learners expressed their discomfort and discontent 
with the way their expert partners intervened during the communicatively oriented interaction. Despite the 
fact that some students agreed on the importance of using the target language correctly, they did not view 
focus-on-form feedback scaffolding effective. Some of the students preferred to use the session as an 
opportunity for communication rather than a chance to fix errors in grammar. Some seemed to be more 
interested in gaining lexical knowledge than learning correct forms as is shown in Episode 8. On the other 
hand, the students viewed online interaction as less stressful, allowing them more time to reflect on 
linguistic forms (Lee, 2004a; 2006; Sotillo, 2005). Moreover, the students were less reluctant to indicate 
their linguistic problems and were frank about the need for help from the expert partners as is shown 
in Episode 2 (Grant’s comments). The experts played a double role as both teachers and peers during th
feedback negotiation process. The fact that students viewed them less as authority figures and more as 
facilitators helped them resolve their linguistic problems in a timely fashion (
e 
Episode 2). This aligns with 
the findings reported by Lee (2004b) that the role of the expert is to monitor, not to lead the discussion.  
From a pedagogical point of view, the study leads to the following observations concerning preparation 
for online interaction involving feedback negotiation. 
1. Students should be advised to focus on form when the opportunity arises. 
2. Appropriate training for effective scaffolding is necessary to maximize the potential impact of 
corrective feedback via CMC. 
3. It is important for instructors to create appropriate awareness-raising activities through which focus-
on-form is guaranteed while meaning-oriented interaction is shared during the CMC. 
4. The use of L1 as mediating tool may be necessary for cognitively demanding tasks, as shown in 
Episode 3 and 4. While the L2 is used as the primary means of communication, the L1 for 
metalinguistic and metatask talk should not be a major concern for language educators (Antón, 
DiCamilla & Lantolf, 2003). 
5. Instructors need to offer additional opportunities to encourage students to reflect on their linguistic 
problems, such as asynchronous CMC via e-mails or discussion boards. 
Although the findings provide language professionals with new insights into the role of corrective 
feedback, additional studies are needed to determine its effect via expert scaffolding by comparing the 
differences between focus-on-form and. focus-on-meaning conditions in CMC. Different settings, such as 
face-to-face interaction and CMC, within different levels of learners’ language proficiency should be 
studied to permit comparison of the efficacy of one setting with the other. Another area clearly deserving 
investigation is to compare the differences in the expert-to-novice feedback negotiation process using two 
instructional conditions:  one that focuses on meaning exchange, and the other one that involves 
negotiation of both meaning and form.  
In conclusion, the study suggests that text-based CMC has the potential to expand learners’ 
communicative-focus interaction to focus-on-form. The goal is to incorporate focus-on-form without 
sacrificing lexical growth and vice versa. Synchronous CMC supports focus-on-form through expert-to-
novice collaborative engagement. Effective feedback negotiation affords learners the opportunity to 
advance within their ZPD from other-regulated to self-regulated performance. Without an understanding 
of how feedback functions, it would be difficult for language professionals to incorporate focus-on-form 
procedures into a network-based instructional setting. 
Lina Lee Expert-to-Novice Synchronous Online Interaction 
 
NOTES 
1. From a sociocultural point of view, language learning cannot be viewed as an immediate product of the 
individual; rather, it is the process by which learners engage in co-constructing their L2 knowledge. 
Through social engagement, both the expert and the learner work collaboratively to solve linguistic 
problems. 
2. Aljaafreh and Lantolf’s 5-level scale of feedback strategies was adapted by Ohta (2000) for her study 
of two Japanese learners’ collaborative interaction and their potential developmental stages. 
3. Microgenetic analysis guided by the sociocultural theory allows the researcher to closely observe 
processes of change in a collaborative task in short periods of time. The observed instances are analyzed 
to justify the findings of the study (Lantolf, 2000). 
4. It should be noted that although the students were in the fourth-semester intermediate Spanish course, it 
does not mean that they had attained language skills at the Intermediate level on the ACTFL (American 
Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages) proficiency scale prior to the study. 
5. S-CAPE (Spanish Computerized Adaptive Placement Exam) developed at Brigham Young University 
was used to assist in placing students into appropriate lower-division Spanish courses at the researcher’s 
institution. 
6. It should be noted that during the focus-on-form procedure not all linguistic errors were to be corrected 
by the experts including pronouns, articles, and prepositions. 
7. Nine episodes introduced as examples were drawn from the data sets as evidence to support and justify 
the findings. 
8. Self-repair is defined as the correction made by the novice speakers during the collaborative 
scaffolding. The majority of the self-corrections were made after receiving initial help from the expert 
using the confirmation check (see Episode 1). In some cases, linguistic feedback was negotiated through 
several turns (see Episode 2) based on the five levels of collaborative scaffolding (see Table 1). 
9. Follow-up turns were defined as the use of the correct forms that appeared after the self-repairs were 
made. They demonstrated learners’ self-regulated performances within a given context (see Episodes 6 
and 7). 
10. Given the fact that the experts were briefly trained to use the 5-stage scaffolding procedure and did 
not have a list of feedback techniques that corresponded with specific stages, some expert speakers did 
not provide step-by-step feedback to their novice partners. While the current study makes no claim on the 
consistency of using the 5-stage scaffolding procedure, the findings provided evidence of the 
effectiveness of expert scaffolding for error corrections. 
11. This pair of students shared their experiences with the natural environment before they discussed the 
immigration issues. 
12. The learner used the English word mess to express the meaning. 
13. The missing accent mark on the second vowel "o" for both verbs tomo and llevo change their 
meanings from the present tense to the past tense (e.g., tomo 'I take' vs. tomó 'I took'). 
14. Despite the fact that this version of Blackboard supports use of foreign language characters, the 
majority of the students did not use the accents throughout the chat sessions. 
Language Learning & Technology 68
Lina Lee Expert-to-Novice Synchronous Online Interaction 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Lina Lee (PhD, University of Texas, Austin) is Associate Professor of Spanish at the University of New 
Hampshire where she teaches courses in second language acquisition, applied linguistics and foreign 
language methodology. She has conducted research and published articles on language pedagogy, 
computer-mediated communication and discourse analysis.   
E-mail: llee@unh.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Aljaafreh, A., & Lantolf, J. P. (1994). Negative feedback as regulation and second language learning in 
the zone of proximal development. The Modern Language Journal, 78(4), 465-483.  
Antón, M., & DiCamilla, F. (1999). Socio-cognitive functions of L1 collaborative interaction in the L2 
classroom. The Modern Language Journal, 83(2), 233-247. 
Antón, M., DiCamilla, F., & Lantolf, J. (2003). Sociocultural theory and the acquisition of Spanish as a 
second language. In B. Lafford, & R. Salaberry (Eds.), Spanish second language acquisition. State of the 
science (pp. 262-284). Washington D.C.: Georgetown University Press. 
Blake, R., & Zyzik, E. (2003). Who’s helping whom? Learner/heritage-speakers’ networked discussions 
in Spanish. Applied Linguistics, 24(4), 519-544.  
Brooks, F., Donato, R., & McGlone, J. V. (1997). When are they going to say "it" right? Understanding 
learner talk during pair-work activity. Foreign Language Annals, 30(4), 524-541. 
Darhower, M. (2002). Interactional features of synchronous computer-mediated communication in the 
intermediate L2 class: A sociocultural case study. CALICO Journal, 19(2), 249-277.  
De Guerrero, M., & Villamil, O. S. (2000). Activating the ZPD: Mutual scaffolding in L2 peer revision. 
The Modern Language Journal, 84(1), 51-68.  
DiCamilla, F. J., & Antón, M. (1997). Repetition in the collaborative discourse of L2 learners: A 
Vygotskian perspective. Canadian Modern Language Review, 53(4), 609-633. 
DiCamilla, F. J., & Antón, M. (2004). Private speech: A study of language for thought in the 
collaborative interaction of language learners. International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 14(1), 36-69. 
Donato, R. (1994). A sociocultural perspective on language learning strategies: The role of mediation. 
Modern Language Journal, 78(4), 453-464. 
Donato, R. (2000). Sociocultural contributions to understanding the foreign and second language 
classroom. In J. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 27-50). Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
Dussias, P. E. (2006). Morphological development in Spanish-American telecollaboration. In J. Belz & S. 
Thorne (Eds.), Internet-mediated intercultural foreign language education (pp. 121-146). Boston, MA: 
Thomsen & Heinle.  
Fiori, M. (2005). The development of grammatical competence through synchronous computer-mediated 
communication. CALICO Journal, 22(3), 567-602.  
Foster, P., & Ohta, A. (2005). Negotiation for meaning and peer assistance in second language classrooms. 
Applied Linguistics, 26(3), 402-430.  
Language Learning & Technology 69
Lina Lee Expert-to-Novice Synchronous Online Interaction 
 
González-Lloret, M. (2003). Designing task-based CALL to promote interaction: En busca de esmeraldas. 
Language Learning & Technology, 7(1), 86-104.  
Lai, C., & Zhao, Y. (2006). Noticing and text-based chat. Language Learning & Technology, 10(3), 102-
120.  
Lantolf, J. P. (2000). Sociocultural theory and second language learning. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
Lee, L. (2000). Evaluating intermediate Spanish students' speaking skills through a taped test: A pilot 
study. Hispania, 83(2), 127-138. 
Lee, L. (2001). Online interaction: Negotiation of meaning and strategies used among learners of Spanish. 
ReCALL, 13(2), 232-244.  
Lee, L. (2002a). Enhancing learners’ communication skills through synchronous electronic interaction 
and task-based instruction. Foreign Language Annuals, 35(1), 16-23. 
Lee, L. (2002b). Synchronous online exchanges: A study of modification devices on nonnative discourse 
interaction. System, 30(3), 275-288. 
Lee, L. (2004a). Perspectives of nonnative speakers of Spanish on two types of online collaborative 
exchanges: Promises and challenges. In L. Lomicka & J. Cooke-Plagwitz (Eds.), Teaching with 
technology (pp. 221-248). Boston: Thomsen & Heinle.  
Lee, L. (2004b). Learners’ perspectives on networked collaborative interaction with native speakers of 
Spanish in the U.S. Language Learning & Technology, 8(1), 83-100. 
Lee, L. (2005). Using web-based instruction to promote active learning: Learners’ perspectives. CALICO 
Journal, 23(1), 139-156.  
Lee, L. (2006). A study of native and nonnative speakers’ feedback and responses in Spanish-American 
networked collaborative interaction.  In J. Belz & S. Thorne (Eds.), Internet-mediated intercultural 
foreign language education (pp. 147-176). Boston: Thomsen & Heinle. 
Long, M. H. (1996). The role of linguistic environment in second language acquisition. In W. Richie & T. 
Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 413-478). San Diego: Academic Press.  
Long, M. H., & Robinson, P. (1998). Focus on form: Theory, research and practice. In C. Doughty & J. 
Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in second language acquisition (pp. 15-41). Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Meskill, C., & Anthony, N. (2005). Foreign language learning with CMC: Forms of online instructional 
discourse in a hybrid Russian class. System, 33(1), 89–105. 
Nassaji, H., & Swain, M. (2000). A Vygotskian perspective on corrective feedback in L2: The effect of 
random versus negotiated help on the learning of English articles. Language Awareness, 1(1), 34-52. 
Ohta, A. (2000). Rethinking interaction in SLA: Developmentally appropriate assistance in the zone of 
proximal development and the acquisition and L2 grammar. In J. L. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory 
and second language learning (pp. 51-78). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
O'Rourke, B. (2005). Form-focused interaction in online tandem learning. CALICO Journal, 22(3), 433-
466. 
Oskoz, A. (2005). Students’ dynamic assessment via online chat. CALICO Journal, 22(3), 513-536.  
Language Learning & Technology 70
Lina Lee Expert-to-Novice Synchronous Online Interaction 
 
Pellettieri, J. (2000). Negotiation in cyberspace: The role of chatting in the development of grammatical 
competence. In M. Warschauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Network-based language teaching: Concepts and 
practice (pp. 59-86). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Pica, T., Kanagy, R., & Falodun, J. (1993). Choosing and using communication tasks for second language 
instruction. In G. Crookes & S. Gass (Eds.), Tasks and language learning: Integrating theory and 
practice (pp. 9–34). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Salaberry, M. R. (2000). L2 morphosyntactic development in text based computer mediated 
communication. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 13(1), 5-27. 
Schmidt, R. (2001). Attention. In P. Robinson (Ed.), Cognition and second language instruction (pp. 3-
32). New York: Cambridge University Press.  
Skehan, P. (2003). Focus on form, task and technology. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 16(5), 
391-411.  
Smith, D. B. (2003). Computer-mediated negotiated interaction: An expanded model. The Modern 
Language Journal, 87(1): 38–57. 
Smith, D. B (2008). Methodological hurdles in captures CMC data: The case of the missing self-repair. 
Language Learning & Technology, 12(1), 85-103.  
Sotillo, M. S. (2000). Discourse functions and syntactic complexity in synchronous and asynchronous 
communication. Language Learning & Technology, 4(1), 82-119.  
Sotillo, M. S. (2005). Corrective feedback via instant messenger learning activities in NS-NNS and NNS-
NNS dyads. CALICO Journal, 22(3), 467-496.  
Swain, M. (2000). The output hypothesis and beyond: Mediating acquisition through collaborative 
dialogue. In J. P. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 97-114). Oxford 
University Press.  
Swain, M. (2001). Examining dialogue: Another approach to content specification and to validating 
inferences drawn from test scores. Language Testing, 18(3), 275-302. 
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (1995). Problems in output and the cognitive processes they generate: A step 
towards second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 16(3), 371–391. 
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (2000). Focus on form through collaborative dialogue: Exploring task effects. In 
M. Bygate, P. Skehan, & M. Swain (Eds.), Researching pedagogic tasks: Second language learning, 
teaching and testing. Harlow, UK: Longman. 
Thoms, J., Liao, J., & Szustak, A. (2005). The use of L1 in an L2 on-line chat activity. Canadian Modern 
Language Review, 62(1), 161-182. 
Tudini, V. (2003). Using native speakers in chat. Language Learning & Technology, 7(3), 141-159. 
VanPatten, B. (1996). Input processing and grammar instruction in second language acquisition. 
Westport,CT:Ablex. 
Ware, P., & O’Dowd, R. (2008). Peer feedback on language form in telecollaboration. Language 
Learning & Technology, 12(1), 43-63.  
Warschauer, M., & Kern, R. (2000). On-line learning in second language classroom: An ethnographic 
study. In M. Warschauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Network-based language teaching: Concepts and practice (pp. 
41-58). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Language Learning & Technology 71
Lina Lee Expert-to-Novice Synchronous Online Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 72
Williams, M., & Burden, R. L. (1997). Psychology for teachers: A social constructivist approach. New 
York: Cambridge University Press.  
 
