Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num3/editors/ 
October 2008, Volume 12, Number 3
pp. 1-2 
 
Copyright © 2008, ISSN 1094-3501 1
 
 
FROM THE EDITORS 
We are pleased to introduce Volume 12, Number 3, of Language Learning & 
Technology, a regular issue of our journal. We hope all our readers had a pleasant 
summer and are prepared for the challenges of the academic year ahead. We have 
assembled five articles, one column, and two reviews covering a wide range of CALL 
topics and languages (Chinese, English, German, Portuguese, and Spanish).  
"The pedagogical mediation of a developmental learner corpus for classroom-based 
language instruction" by Julie A. Belz and Nina Vyatkina explores the impact of corpora 
on language teaching and learning by describing individual learners' language 
development in reaction to corpus-driven instructional units for German modal particles 
and pronominal da-compounds. The authors show how a developmental learner corpus 
can contribute to L2 research by providing a detailed documentation of changes in 
learners’ L2 use over time.  
"Focus-on-form through collaborative scaffolding in expert-to-novice online interaction" 
by Lina Lee reports on how corrective feedback was negotiated through expert-to-novice 
collaborative scaffolding with subjects working on three different tasks – jigsaw, spot-
the-differences, and open-ended questions. Her findings suggest that text chats 
supported the focus-on-form procedure through collaborative engagement. The study 
concludes that it is not easy to provide corrective feedback while attending to linguistic 
errors in a timely manner during meaning-based interactions. The author suggests that 
the long-term effect of focus-on-form procedures in CMC should be explored in future 
studies.  
"Evaluating automatic detection of misspellings in German" by Anne Rimrott and Trude 
Heift investigates the correction rate of the Microsoft Word® spell checker on 
misspellings of learners of German. Their study classifies misspellings of Anglophone 
learners of German into different error categories that influence correction rates. The 
study concludes with computational and pedagogical recommendations for enhancing 
spell checking in CALL.  
"Effects of short-term memory and content representation type on mobile language 
learning" by Nian-Shing Chen, Sheng-Wen Hsieh, and Kinshuk addresses the issue of 
content adaptation in mobile language learning environments. Their study suggests that 
providing learning content with pictorial annotation in a mobile language learning 
environment can help learners with lower verbal ability and higher visual ability because 
such learners find it easier to learn content presented in a visual rather than in a verbal 
form. Their findings also suggest that providing just the basic learning materials is more 
helpful to learners with low verbal and visual abilities. 
 "Measuring oral proficiency in distance, face-to-face, and blended classrooms" by 
Robert Blake, Nicole L. Wilson, María Cetto, and Cristina Pardo Ballester examines the 
case of Spanish Without Walls, a first-year language course in hybrid and distance-
learning formats. The results from classroom and distance-learning students indicate that 
classroom, hybrid, and distance L2 learners reach comparable levels of oral proficiency 
during their first year of study, evaluated by the 20-minute Versant for Spanish test, 
delivered by phone and automatically graded. The article concludes with an examination 
of the rationale for offering language courses in either hybrid or distance formats. 
 From the Special Issue Editor 
 
Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
In addition, this issue includes our regular "Emerging Technologies" column by Bob 
Godwin-Jones entitled "Mobile-computing trends: Lighter, faster, smarter." Godwin-
Jones presents a fascinating survey of the fast evolving field of mobile technologies that 
promises to add to the growing arsenal of useful tools for language learning and 
teaching. 
We would like to offer our heartfelt thanks to Jean LeLoup and Bob Ponterio for their 
excellent column, "On the Net," which has been a staple of LLT since the journal's 
inception in 1997. While the column is being discontinued as of this issue, we know that 
many scholars and teachers have benefitted from "On the Net" over the years. 
Two software reviews edited by Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas round out this full issue. In 
the first review, Ricardo Vasconcelos evaluates Aprender Português – Centro Virtual 
Camões, a website that offers practice tools in speaking, listening, and reading for 
adolescent to adult learners of Portuguese at different proficiency levels, tools that can 
be used for independent study or in conjunction with classroom-based instruction. In the 
second review, Scott Chien-Hsiung Chiu describes Active Chinese, a commercial 
Internet-based language learning environment aimed at beginning and low-intermediate 
adult learners of Chinese interested in acquiring some Chinese language skills and 
cultural knowledge for business purposes. 
We would also like to share some good news with our contributors, reviewers, and 
readers. The Social Science Citation Index (SSCI) ranks Language Learning & 
Technology #13 among 55 international journals classified under “Linguistics” with an 
Impact Factor of 1.22. The 12 journals ranked above LLT are all hard-copy, 
subscription-based publications, and none of them are available for free on the World 
Wide Web.  
If you are not already a subscriber, please take a few minutes to fill out our free 
subscription form. This enables us to compile useful statistics about the readership of 
our journal.  
The editors of LLT wish you a productive year and look forward to continuing to receive 
quality contributions.  
 
Sincerely, 
Irene Thompson and Dorothy Chun 
Editors 
 
 
2
