Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num1/sauro.pdf 
February 2009, Volume 13, Number 1
pp. 96-120 
 
Copyright © 2009, ISSN 1094-3501 96
COMPUTER-MEDIATED CORRECTIVE FEEDBACK AND THE 
DEVELOPMENT OF L2 GRAMMAR 
Shannon Sauro 
University of Texas at San Antonio 
This paper reports on a study that investigated the impact of two types of computer-
mediated corrective feedback on the development of adult learners’ L2 knowledge: (1) 
corrective feedback that reformulates the error in the form of recasts, and (2) corrective 
feedback that supplies the learner with metalinguistic information about the nature of the 
error. High intermediate and advanced adult learners of English (n=23) from an intact 
class at a Swedish university were randomly assigned to one of three conditions (two 
feedback conditions and one control) and were randomly paired with English native 
speakers. During task-based interaction via text-chat, the learners received focused 
corrective feedback on omission of the zero article with abstract noncount nouns (e.g., 
employment, global warming, culture). Computer-delivered pretests, posttests and delayed 
posttests of knowledge (acceptability judgments) measured learning outcomes. Results 
showed no significant advantage for either feedback type on immediate or sustained gains 
in target form knowledge, although the metalinguistic group showed significant immediate 
gains relative to the control condition. 
INTRODUCTION 
A growing body of research has begun to illuminate an emerging relationship between types of corrective 
feedback and second language learning in face-to-face interaction (e.g., Ammar & Spada, 2006; Carroll, 
2001; Ellis, Loewen & Erlam, 2006; Hino, 2006; Loewen & Nabei, 2007; Lyster, 2004; McDonough, 
2005). With the tools of technology making their way into the L2 classroom, corrective feedback 
delivered via written synchronous computer-mediated communication (SCMC) holds particular promise 
for the learning of especially complex or low salient forms due to the visual saliency of certain forms 
during written interaction, the amount of processing and planning time afforded by synchronous chat, and 
the enduring as opposed to ephemeral nature of the turns. Despite the potential advantages of SCMC for 
facilitating the noticing and learning of these low salient and difficult forms, research on learning 
outcomes following computer-mediated corrective feedback is still limited (e.g., Loewen & Erlam, 2006; 
Sachs & Suh, 2007). Accordingly, this present study explores learning outcomes following two computer-
mediated corrective feedback treatments (recasts and metalinguistic prompts).  
CORRECTIVE FEEDBACK AND SLA 
It has been argued that corrective feedback plays a beneficial role in facilitating the acquisition of certain 
L2 forms, which may be difficult to learn through input alone, including forms that are rare, low in 
perceptual salience, semantically redundant, do not typically lead to communication breakdown (Long & 
Robinson, 1998), or that lack a clear form-meaning relationship (DeKeyser, 2005).  
Corrective feedback, however, can be used to draw learners' attention to mismatches between the learners' 
production and the target-like realization of these hard-to-learn forms. For instance, a teacher may 
correctly reformulate the difficult form in a recast of the learner's initial utterance, in a sense juxtaposing 
input and output. By drawing a learner's attention to mismatches between input and output or between 
learner output and the target-like norm, corrective feedback can facilitate the occurrence of noticing, 
which Schmidt (2001) claims is "the first step in language building" (p. 31). According to Schmidt's 
(1990) Noticing Hypothesis, for learning to occur, second language learners must attend to and notice 
details and differences between the target language and their interlanguage and its representation in their 
Shannon Sauro Corrective Feedback and the Development of L2 Grammar 
 
production of output. Corrective feedback, by juxtaposing learning output with input, can assist the 
acquisition of certain hard-to-learn forms by increasing the likelihood that they will be noticed. 
However, beyond facilitating the noticing of hard-to-learn forms, it has also been suggested that certain 
types of corrective feedback may also promote L2 processing. Panova and Lyster (2002) argue, for 
instance, that corrective feedback which contains positive evidence about the target language (e.g., 
recasts) may be useful in the internalization of new forms, while corrective feedback which does not 
contain a full reformulation but instead requires that learners attempt self-repair or output modification 
may require deeper processing and thereby enhance control of already internalized L2 forms. 
Research on Corrective Feedback and SLA Processes and Outcome 
Three strands of research have investigated the effects of corrective feedback on second language process 
and outcomes: (1) the noticing of target language forms, (2) learner responses such as pushed output, and 
(3) the learning of L2 forms, as evidenced by improvement in L2 form knowledge and production. In this 
first strand of research, laboratory (Mackey, Gass & McDonough, 2000; Philp, 2003) and classroom-
based studies (Lyster & Ranta, 1997; Nabei & Swain, 2002) have documented learner responses to 
feedback or the ability to recall the corrective feedback as indicators of noticing. In the second strand of 
research, classroom studies have found that certain approaches to feedback are more likely to result in 
pushed output, seen for example, in learners' self or other repair (Lyster & Ranta, 1997; Panova & Lyster, 
2002), output modification (Pica, Holliday, Lewis & Morgenthaler, 1989) or accuracy in repair (Nassaji, 
2007). And the third strand of research, outcomes-based studies, has attempted to document the benefits 
of corrective feedback targeted at specific L2 forms when provided for a variety of learners and 
interactional contexts (e.g., Doughty & Varela, 1998, for middle school aged children in a science class; 
Han, 2002 for adult learners in small group interaction). Of this third strand of research, there is a 
growing subset of comparison studies that have begun to examine the relative effectiveness of different 
types of corrective feedback on the acquisition of L2 forms. 
Comparison Studies of Corrective Feedback 
As has been noted in recent meta-analyses on corrective feedback (Mackey & Goo, 2007; Russell & 
Spada, 2006), the number of comparison studies examining certain types of corrective feedback (e.g., 
metalinguistic, elicitation) is still too limited to argue for the efficacy of one type of corrective feedback 
over another. Results from a number of comparison studies, however, have found advantages for certain 
types of corrective feedback for certain forms and for certain learners. This includes feedback that 
enhances the salience of positive evidence, feedback that provides learners the opportunity to produce 
pushed output and feedback that directly or indirectly supplies learners with metalinguistic information 
concerning the correct formulation of the target form.  
Among studies that suggest a benefit for feedback which contains positive evidence is Leeman’s (2003) 
investigation of two components of recasts (negative evidence and the enhanced salience of positive 
evidence), which found an advantage for feedback that contained only positive evidence over feedback 
that contained only negative evidence.  
Research that suggests a superior benefit for corrective feedback that generates modified or pushed output 
(Swain, 1985) or repair includes Lyster's (2004) study of French immersion classes. Written posttest 
results showed a significant advantage for students receiving prompts (written feedback which prompts 
learners to attempt self-repair) while students in the recast condition performed similarly to students in the 
no feedback condition. Similarly, McDonough’s (2005) study of four feedback combinations included 
two groups that received types of feedback that allowed them to modify output and two groups that did 
not. The results indicated that the number of learners who progressed to a more advanced level of 
question formation was greater for the first two groups than for the latter. 
Language Learning & Technology 97
Shannon Sauro Corrective Feedback and the Development of L2 Grammar 
 
However, support for the relative advantage of corrective feedback that elicits self-repair or pushed output 
is not clear cut (Mackey & Philp, 1998). Results of a recent comparison study that examined recasts and 
prompts suggested that proficiency might be a key factor underlying the relative effectiveness of feedback 
that elicits repair (Ammar & Spada, 2006). While low proficiency learners who received prompts 
significantly outperformed those who received recasts, no significant difference was found for either type 
of feedback among high proficiency learners. This suggests that corrective feedback that provides learners 
the opportunity to produce pushed output may be beneficial for only certain types of learners. 
Two further comparison studies of feedback found evidence suggesting that feedback containing 
metalinguistic information on the targeted form helps learners generalize the form to new contexts. 
Carroll (2001) examined the formation of English nouns from verb stems produced by learners in 4 
feedback conditions and a control group. Though all treatment groups significantly outperformed the 
comparison group on immediate and delayed posttests of L2 form knowledge on items for which they had 
received feedback, only participants in the two groups that supplied the learners with either direct or 
indirect metalinguistic information concerning the target form error significantly outperformed the control 
group in new contexts.  
The second of these two studies also investigated whether corrective feedback facilitated the development 
of implicit and explicit knowledge. Ellis, Loewen and Erlam (2006) examined learners' use of the English 
past tense marker –ed following exposure to either explicit corrective feedback (metalinguistic 
information) or implicit corrective feedback (recasts). Findings indicated that learners who received 
corrective feedback containing metalinguistic information significantly outperformed learners in the 
recast and control groups on tests of both implicit (oral elicited information) and explicit (grammaticality 
judgments) L2 knowledge. Furthermore, similar to the results of Carroll's (2001) study, metalinguistic 
corrective feedback and not recasts also seemed to promote generalization of the –ed form to new 
contexts.  
Though these studies suggest advantages for corrective feedback that enhances the salience of positive 
evidence, provides learners the opportunity to produce pushed output, or supplies metalinguistic 
information concerning the target-form, the findings of other comparison studies of feedback do not 
support these trends. For instance, though all three feedback groups (clarification requests, recasts and 
metalinguistic feedback) in Loewen and Nabei’s (2007) study improved more than their non-feedback 
comparison groups, no feedback group significantly outperformed the others. In their discussion of this 
lack of comparative advantage, Loewen and Nabei suggest that the brevity of the treatment (30 minutes) 
may have limited the ability for their study to elicit sufficient differential effects. Furthermore, 
institutional constraints, which prevented the administration of a delayed posttest, also meant that there 
was no opportunity to observe comparative advantages that may have emerged over time. 
While face-to-face comparison studies have found advantages for certain types of corrective feedback 
over others, the limited number of outcomes-based studies on corrective feedback in CMC has found no 
such advantage. Loewen and Erlam’s (2006) study, which investigated the relative effectiveness of 
recasts and metalinguistic prompts administered during small group text-chat interaction, found no 
significant advantage for either feedback type over the control condition and no significant advantage for 
one corrective feedback type over the other. Analysis of their participants’ pre-tests suggested that these 
findings may have been influenced by the learners’ low proficiency with the target form (English past 
tense –ed), an indicator that they may not have been at a high enough level to internalize and demonstrate 
gains resulting from the feedback during the short duration of the study. Similarly, a second CMC 
comparison study of corrective feedback found no significant difference in gains following two different 
types of corrective feedback: enhanced and non-enhanced recasts (Sachs & Suh, 2007).  In this study, 
Sachs and Suh incorporated underlining and bolding of key elements of the recast that were related to the 
targeted form (backshifting of verbs from simple past to present perfect in reported speech). Despite a 
Language Learning & Technology 98
Shannon Sauro Corrective Feedback and the Development of L2 Grammar 
 
higher level of form awareness reported by participants in the enhanced condition, no significant 
difference in target form accuracy was found between the groups.  
Table 1. Characteristics of Lyster & Ranta's (1997) Categories of Corrective Feedback* 
Corrective 
Feedback 
Type 
Definition Example(s)** 
Nature of 
Error 
Indicated 
Targetlike 
Reformulation 
Provided 
Elicited Output 
 
Explicit Error 
Correction 
Explicit provision of 
the targetlike 
reformulation 
You should say 
visited. 
Yes Provided directly None  
or 
repetition 
Metalinguistic 
Feedback 
Comments, 
information or 
questions (that may 
or may not contain 
metalanguage but 
do not include the 
reformulation) 
related to the ill-
formedness of the 
utterance 
There's a 
mistake. 
 
 
It's past tense. 
 
 
 
 
 
Did you use the 
past tense? 
No 
 
 
 
Yes 
 
 
 
 
 
Yes 
No 
 
 
 
Provided indirectly 
through 
metalinguistic hint 
at correct 
reformulation 
 
Provided indirectly 
through 
metalinguistic 
question 
concerning rule 
governing 
reformulation 
Identification of 
error and/or 
reformulation 
 
Reformulation 
 
 
 
 
 
Metalinguistic 
response, yes/no 
response, or 
reformulation 
 
Elicitations A prompt for the 
learner to 
reformulate 
Try that again. 
 
How do we say 
that in the past 
tense? 
 
Yesterday we … 
No 
 
Yes 
 
 
 
Sometimes 
No 
 
No 
 
 
 
No 
Reformulation 
 
Reformulation 
 
 
 
Reformulation 
 
Repetitions Repetition of all or 
part of the utterance 
containing the error, 
often accompanied 
by a change in 
intonation 
Yesterday we 
visit my aunt. 
Sometimes No None 
or  
repetition 
 
Recasts Implicit 
reformulation of all 
or part of the 
learner's utterance 
Yesterday we 
visited my aunt. 
 
I visited my aunt 
last week. 
Yes 
 
 
Yes 
Reformulation 
provided 
 
Reformulation 
provided 
Repetition 
 
 
Repetition 
Translations Target language 
translation of 
unsolicited use of 
the L1.  
*** Yes Reformulation 
provided 
 
Repetition 
Clarification 
Requests 
An utterance 
indicating a problem 
in comprehension, 
accuracy or both. 
Pardon? No No Repetition, 
reformulation, or 
meaning 
elaboration 
Language Learning & Technology 99
Shannon Sauro Corrective Feedback and the Development of L2 Grammar 
 
* The feedback types, definitions, examples, and elicited output for recasts are based upon the typology and examples set out by 
Lyster and Ranta (1997) and expanded upon in Lyster (1998) and Panova and Lyster (2002). The remaining categories represent 
my attempt to further flesh out the characteristics of each feedback type with respect to whether each indicates the nature of the 
error, provides the learner with a target-like reformulation of the initial error, and the type of output likely to be elicited. 
**The examples for each category of feedback are in response to the following non-target-like utterance: "Yesterday we visit my 
aunt." 
***Translation is not applicable for this particular type of error.  
Corrective Feedback and Depth of Processing 
It has been argued that certain types of feedback may benefit grammar development due to the type of 
information the corrective feedback provides the learner and the depth of processing this information may 
promote (Panova & Lyster, 2002). According to the categories of feedback observed in classroom 
interaction and described by Lyster and Ranta (1997), corrective feedback types vary with respect to the 
kind of information they supply the learner regarding the target-form error as well as to the type of output 
elicited in response to the feedback. These differences are illustrated in Table 1. 
Panova and Lyster (2002) argue that the nature of the response elicited by different types of feedback may 
elicit different levels of processing. They contend that the type of processing entailed by the production of 
modified output (the type of output elicited by elicitations and some types of metalinguistic feedback) 
demands a deeper level of processing than that required by simple repetition (the type of output that may 
be elicited by recasts). That is to say, the provision of positive evidence potentially eliminates the need for 
learners to call upon their own mental resources to retrieve (not merely parrot) target language forms, 
such that new connections in memory are not being developed (de Bot, 1996). Thus, one would expect 
that learners who received corrective feedback that precluded the requirement to produce pushed output 
(e.g., recasts) would not demonstrate gains in target form knowledge comparable to those seen in learners 
who received feedback that required them to modify their own output.  
It is also possible, however, that the nature of face-to-face interaction may also influence the potential 
usefulness or success of less explicit corrective feedback such as recasts. In face-to-face spoken 
interaction, the ambiguity of the corrective intent of recasts, limited within-task processing time, and 
limitations in working memory capacity may impede the learners' ability to use recasts in ways that 
enable them to make effective cognitive comparisons. It is these limitations of what are otherwise 
effective properties of recasts delivered during face-to-face interaction that put SCMC in the form of text 
chat at an advantage for encoding recasts in ways that facilitate cognitive comparison. 
SCMC as a Context for Research on Corrective Feedback 
The features of text-chat that may make SCMC (text-chat) an ideal context for investigating second 
language acquisition processes (i.e., noticing, noticing the gap, pushed output) and outcomes from 
corrective feedback include the visual saliency of forms that are typically low in perceptual salience in 
oral interaction, the greater processing and planning time than that afforded by face-to-face oral 
interaction and the enduring as opposed to ephemeral nature of written turns that are recorded in the chat 
window on the computer screen.  
According to Gass (1997), "salience can be said to help ensure that particular forms are noticed by the 
learner and hence lead to rule strengthening" (p. 19). Certain forms, however, because they are brief and 
unstressed in rapid spoken interaction, are low in perceptual salience and appear to be particularly 
difficult for learners to notice. However, written interaction, such as that afforded by text-chat, may 
increase the visual saliency of linguistic forms (Chapelle, 2001), including, for instance, English articles, 
third person singular –s, and the past tense-ed morpheme.1 Thus, the visual saliency of linguistic forms 
Language Learning & Technology 100
Shannon Sauro Corrective Feedback and the Development of L2 Grammar 
 
during text-chat may help learners to either confirm or disconfirm currently held hypotheses about the 
target language (TL).  
In addition, the slower turn taking in a written conversation allows interlocutors both increased processing 
time (Payne & Whitney, 2002) and increased online planning time. The pace of a text-chat conversation is 
slower than that of a spoken conversation: humans cannot type as quickly as they can speak even in their 
L1. Furthermore, increased processing and planning time results from the delay between turns, as most 
text-chat applications do not allow users to read their interlocutor's responses until the full message has 
been typed and transmitted.  This protracted wait for the completed message contrasts with the immediate 
unfolding of a spoken utterance in real-time.  
The increased time of text-chat may also be particularly beneficial for promoting noticing and production 
of TL forms that typically require greater control. Williams (2005) points out that one factor affecting 
what elements of input learners notice is time pressure. Thus the reduced time pressure to process 
incoming messages during text-chat may allow learners the opportunity to notice a broader range of 
linguistic forms in the input than they might notice in real-time spoken input. Furthermore, the reduced 
speed of text-chat (compared to face-to-face oral conversation) also affords language learners increased 
planning time to compose their own messages. Thus, the increased online planning time afforded by text-
chat may be particularly beneficial for promoting not only attention to target language forms in the input 
but also closer attention to and monitoring of target language output.  
The third feature of text-chat that may be beneficial for learners is the enduring as opposed to ephemeral 
record of the interaction. As regards face-to-face spoken interaction, Williams (2005) argues that noticing 
the gap may be a challenging process for language learners because they must compare interlanguage 
forms with memory traces that may have already degraded. In contrast to the highly ephemeral nature of 
most face-to-face oral interaction one of the key features of interaction via text-chat is an enduring visual 
record of the exchange in the chat window. This chat window, Smith (2005) suggests, functions as an 
accessible record that may mirror the benefits of repetition and redundancy by allowing chatters to 
continually "refresh memory traces"(Payne & Whitney, 2002, p. 14).  
Thus, L2 learners who struggle to notice the gap or recognize the nuances of corrective feedback may 
benefit from renewed opportunities to review and compare their initial utterance with their interlocutor's 
more target-like reformulation, particularly when the reformulation is complex or especially low in 
perceptual salience. The enduring accessibility of prior turns preserved in the chat window means learners 
can scroll-back through the interaction to review and reuse TL forms available in the input, the correct 
formulation of which they may be uncertain of or have already forgotten. Accordingly, the enduring 
nature of text-chat permits quick hypothesis confirmation and may promote the reuse of TL forms. 
THE CURRENT STUDY 
This study builds upon the body of face-to-face comparison studies of corrective feedback outlined above 
and incorporates written SCMC and its potential benefits for facilitating noticing of form. The purpose of 
the current study is to examine and compare the immediate and sustained effects of two different types of 
corrective feedback (metalinguistic feedback and recasts) delivered via written SCMC on the 
development of L2 grammar among intermediate and advanced learners of English who possess prior 
knowledge of the target form. 
Research Questions 
The following two research questions were posed: 
Which type of corrective feedback delivered via written SCMC is more effective for immediate gains in 
L2 target form knowledge: corrective feedback which reformulates learners' errors or corrective feedback 
which informs learners of the nature of their errors? 
Language Learning & Technology 101
Shannon Sauro Corrective Feedback and the Development of L2 Grammar 
 
Language Learning & Technology 102
Which type of corrective feedback delivered via written SCMC is more effective for gains in L2 
knowledge over time: corrective feedback which reformulates learners' errors or corrective feedback 
which informs learners of the nature of their errors? 
The effects of corrective feedback on learning were assessed in both familiar repeated contexts (i.e., noun 
phrases that occurred during the treatment and on prior tests) and unique unrepeated contexts (i.e,. noun 
phrases that did not occur during the treatment or prior tests). 
METHODOLOGY 
Participants 
The informants in this study (n=23) were volunteers from a first year undergraduate English grammar and 
translation course at Malmö University College in Malmö, Sweden. The participants’ mean age was 24, 
and the average number of years of prior formal English instruction was 11. Most participants reported 
Swedish as their native language. The remaining five participants were L1 speakers of Arabic, Bosnian or 
Spanish. Regardless of L1, however, all participants were long-term residents of Sweden and all but one 
had received the majority of their formal English instruction in Sweden. The participants’ communicative 
English proficiency could be characterized as intermediate to advanced as determined by their passing 
of English A, the compulsory upper secondary level English course offered in Sweden, a requirement fo
enrollment in their program of study. In addition, participants who completed the grammar component of 
the English language version of DIALANG, a low-stakes, Web-based diagnostic test of language skills 
(Chapelle & Douglas, 2006), received scores ranging from B1 to C2 (low intermediate to high advanced). 
Participants were randomly assigned to one of three feedback conditions. A one-way ANOVA run on pre-
test scores found no statistically significant difference among the three groups, F(2,20) = .141, p=.87, 
indicating that despite variation on grammar proficiency scores on the DIALANG, all three groups began 
with similar levels of knowledge of the target form. Details on each group’s participants are indicated 
in 
r 
. Appendix A
In addition, 9 native English-speaking interlocutors were recruited from graduate programs at the 
University of Pennsylvania Graduate School of Education to interact with and provide corrective 
feedback to the Swedish participants via synchronous written CMC. These participants were familiarized 
with the target form and trained in the provision of the different types of corrective feedback as well as 
strategies to avoid supplying the learners with positive evidence of the target form. 
Target Form 
The target form used in this study was the English zero article with abstract noncount nouns (Holmes & 
Hinchliffe, 2003). This is a form which is low in perceptual salience (e.g., Ø Unemployment is considered 
a serious problem; Can Ø culture be taught?) and tends not to lead to communication breakdown when 
errors occur. As such, it represents a particularly challenging feature for Swedish learners of English to 
master. The difficulty of applying the zero article in these contexts may stem from the only partial 
correspondence between the English and Swedish article systems. Whereas use of the zero article does 
occur in shared contexts in both languages to express general meaning (e.g. Ø Tid är Ø pengar 'Ø Time is 
Ø money'.), in other contexts Swedish uses instead the definite article (the end particles –et and –en) to 
express general meaning, as the following examples illustrate: 
Svenskarna älskar naturen. 
Swedes love nature. 
Han fruktake döden och helvetet. 
He feared death and hell. 
Shannon Sauro Corrective Feedback and the Development of L2 Grammar 
 
(From Holmes & Hinchliffe, 2003, p. 49) 
Thus, a typical error with the target form can be seen in the following example sentence produced by a 
Swedish learner of English, where the definite article has been substituted for the zero article before the 
noncount noun unemployment: 
* A typical problem in Sweden is the unemployment. 
(Köhlmyr, 2003, p. 254) 
Materials 
The materials used in this study included two computer-mediated collaborative writing activities 
completed by participants when paired with their native English-speaking interlocutors, as well as 
computer-delivered acceptability judgment pre-, post- and delayed posttests used to measure learning of 
target form knowledge. 
Collaborative writing activities 
In order to receive corrective feedback on the target form, participants engaged in open-ended computer-
mediated collaborative writing activities (see Appendixes B-E) with their native English speaking chat 
partners. These collaborative writing activities consisted of a writing prompt on one of two themes 
(Swedish culture or global warming) and a bank of related words that needed to be incorporated into 
sentences that participants wrote each other. To ensure that the English language learners in each dyad 
received sufficient opportunity to produce the target form, they were supplied with word banks that 
contained only noun phrases, among which were 10 abstract noncount nouns.  
 
Figure 1. Screen capture of an acceptability judgment test item 
 
 
103Language Learning & Technology 
Shannon Sauro Corrective Feedback and the Development of L2 Grammar 
 
Acceptability judgment tests 
The computer-delivered acceptability judgment tests consisted of 35 questions each, of which 15 targeted 
the zero article. Of these 15 items, 10 contained noun phrases found in the word banks of the writing 
activities. The remaining 5 target items were unique or unrepeated items that did not appear on any other 
test or as part of the writing activities. The use of a combination of repeated and unrepeated items was 
intended to measure knowledge of the target form in both previously encountered and unique contexts. 
Acceptability judgment test scores were calculated using a percentage accuracy score for the 15 items 
targeting the zero article. Each correct judgment received one point; incorrect judgments received a zero. 
Internal consistency estimates of reliability were calculated for each acceptability judgment test; 
Cronbach’s alpha was .86 for the pretest, .89 for the posttest, and .82 for the delayed posttest. The 
remaining 20 items targeted the definite or indefinite article or verb tense and mood. 
Participants completed the acceptability judgment tests using Blackboard's test management system, 
which automatically randomized test items and displayed each item one at a time. Limitations on the 
interactivity and test item types Blackboard supported meant that the acceptability judgment items were 
designed using a multiple-choice format. Each test item consisted of three sentences that differed only 
with respect to the article placed before the abstract noncount nouns (definite, indefinite or zero article.) 
Participants were instructed to read all three sentences and then to select the sentence that seemed the 
most acceptable, as illustrated in Figure 1. 
Procedure 
In order not to conflate the effects of instruction with the effects of feedback on development of target 
form knowledge, the study was conducted near the early part of the course term and concluded one week 
prior to the unit on English article systems, which included a lesson on the zero article2. The study took 
place over four weeks with the pretest administered during the first week, the intervention and immediate 
posttest administered during the second week, and the delayed posttest administered two weeks later 
during the fourth week. The corrective feedback treatment sessions, utilizing the collaborative writing 
activities, were completed on two separate days during the second week. Up to 9 Swedish participants at a 
time were scheduled to chat with their respective American chat partners in individual chat rooms using 
the Virtual Classroom chat tool of Blackboard. For each activity, partners had 20 minutes to work 
together to complete the writing activity. During this collaborative period, the native English-speaking 
chat partners supplied corrective feedback when an error was made with the target form. Table 2 
illustrates how each type of corrective feedback was operationalized for each of the three groups.  
Table 2. Responses to Errors* 
CMCF Condition Operationalization of Response 
to Target Form Error 
Example 
   
Recast Reformulation of the full sentence 
containing the error. 
S: In Sweden the global warming is a problem. 
 
A: In Sweden global warming is a problem. 
 
Metalinguistic prompt A scripted meta statement reminding 
the student to use the zero article. 
 
S: In Sweden the global warming is a problem.
 
A: Be sure to use the zero article. 
 
Control  Topic relevant response that does not 
contain the target form in the same 
context.  
S:  In Sweden the global warming is a problem.
 
A: Many people believe it's a problem everywhere.
*S stands for Swedish chat partner while A stands for American chat partner. 
Language Learning & Technology 104
Shannon Sauro Corrective Feedback and the Development of L2 Grammar 
 
In the recast condition, the full sentence containing the error was recast. Full as opposed to partial recasts 
were used due to the nature of the zero article, which lacks an orthographic representation. Thus, the 
inclusion of surrounding discourse was necessary to demonstrate that a reformulation of an error, and not 
merely a repetition of a particular noun, had occurred. 
In the metalinguistic condition, the meta statement, “Be sure to use the zero article” was selected because 
it directly identified the nature of the error, incorporated meta-language (the zero article) that was to be 
covered later in the course, and avoided the inadvertent provision of positive evidence that other formulae 
might introduce (e.g., Don’t use the before culture). The frequency of errors and feedback generated 
during the treatment sessions is presented in Table 3.3 
Table 3. Frequency of Errors and Feedback 
 Total Errors Mean Errors Total Feedback Mean Feedback 
 
Recasts * 
 
21 
 
3.23 
 
18 
 
2.77 
 
Metalinguistic ** 
 
33 
 
4.4 
 
27 
 
3.6 
 
Control 
 
30 
 
3.75 
 
0 
 
0 
* The data for this group do not include the errors and feedback generated on day 2 of the treatment for one participant whose 
chatscript was corrupted and unrecoverable for post-treatment analysis. 
** The data for this group do not include the errors and feedback generated on day 1 of the treatment for one participant, whose 
chatscript was corrupted and unrecoverable for post-treatment analysis. 
Data Analysis 
This study employed a mixed design with one between-subjects factor – feedback type (control, 
metalinguistic, recast) and one within-subjects factor – time (pretest, posttest, delayed posttest). To 
evaluate the effectiveness of the different feedback types, descriptive statistics for the pre-, post- and 
delayed posttests were computed. Then, a two-way repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) 4 
was performed followed by post hoc pairwise contrasts for mean differences of the treatment conditions 
between tests.  
RESULTS 
All Items 
Table 4 presents the descriptive statistics for all three tests. From pretest to immediate posttest, only the 
metalinguistic group demonstrated a mean gain (6.7%). In contrast, both the recast and control groups’ 
mean scores declined from pre to posttest, falling 3.8% and 11.6% respectively.  
The delayed posttest mean score of the metalinguistic group, though still 5.9% higher than the pretest 
dipped slightly (.8%) from immediate posttest to delayed posttest. In contrast, the mean score of the recast 
group increased 8.5% from immediate to delayed posttest for a 4.7% increase from pre to delayed posttest. 
Though the control group’s mean score increased slightly from immediate to delayed posttest (.8%), the 
mean score on the delayed posttest was 10.8% lower than the pretest. Changes in group means over time 
are plotted on the graph in Figure 2. 
 
 
Language Learning & Technology 105
Shannon Sauro Corrective Feedback and the Development of L2 Grammar 
 
Table 4. Mean and Standard Deviation for All Items 
Condition Statistic Pretest 
(Week1) 
Immediate 
Posttest (Week 2) 
Delayed Posttest 
(Week 4) 
Recast 
N=7 
Mean Raw Score 
Mean % 
SD 
 
10.857 
    .724 
    .202 
 
10.286 
    .686 
    .179 
 
11.571 
    .771 
    .256 
 
Metalinguistic 
N=8 
Mean Raw Score 
Mean % 
SD 
 
11.375 
    .758 
    .107 
 
12.375 
    .825 
    .147 
 
12.250 
    .817 
    .154 
 
Control 
N=8 
Mean Raw Score 
Mean % 
SD 
10.625 
    .708 
    .244 
  8.875 
    .592 
    .253 
  9.000 
    .600 
    .244 
 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Pretest Immediate
Posttest
Delayed
Posttest
Time of Test Administration
%
 C
or
re
ct Recast
Metalinguistic
Control
 
Figure 2. Group means for all items in pre-, post-, and delayed posttests 
Results of the two-way repeated measures ANOVA found no significant main effect for group (F(2,20) = 
1.571, p=.23, partial η2 = .14) or time (F(2,20) = .679, p = .51, partial η2 = .03) indicating that overall, 
the groups did not differ, nor was there significant change over time. Results did find a significant 
interaction between group and time (F(2,20) = 2.750, p = .04, partial η2 = .22), indicating that changes in 
scores over time varied among the groups. Post hoc analysis showed that the metalinguistic group’s score 
increased significantly more from pre to immediate posttest than did the control group’s (p = .03). 
However, post hoc analysis did not find significant difference in score gains over time for the 
metalinguistic group over the recast group. 
Language Learning & Technology 106
Shannon Sauro Corrective Feedback and the Development of L2 Grammar 
 
Thus, results showed that metalinguistic feedback was significantly more effective than no feedback for 
immediate gains in target form knowledge but that neither feedback type was significantly more effective 
than the other for either immediate or sustained gains in target form knowledge on all test items. As 
mentioned above, the acceptability judgment tests consisted of two types of items, repeated items and 
unrepeated items. Findings for these two groups are discussed below. 
Repeated Items 
Table 5 presents the descriptive statistics for repeated test items on all three tests. From pre-test to 
immediate posttest, both feedback groups improved, with the recast group improving 5.8% and the 
metalinguistic group improving 16.2%. The recast group continued to improve from immediate to 
delayed posttest resulting in an 11.5% higher score on the delayed posttest than on the pretest, narrowing 
in on the delayed posttest score of the metalinguistic group, which though 12.5% higher than the pretest, 
was 3.7% lower than the immediate posttest. 
In contrast to the gain in mean scores for both feedback groups, the control group’s mean score decreased 
7.5% from pre- to immediate posttest, and increased only 5% from immediate to delayed posttest, which 
was 2.5% lower than the pretest mean score. Changes in group means over time for repeated items are 
plotted on the graph in Figure 3. 
Results of the two-way repeated measures ANOVA found no significant main effect for group (F(2,20) = 
1.150, p=.34, partial η2 = .1) and a trend toward significance for time (F(2,20) = 3.186, p = .05, partial η2 
= .137). However, a significant interaction was found between group and time (F(2,20) = 3.317, p = .02, 
partial η2 = .249), indicating that changes in scores over time varied among the groups. Post hoc analysis 
showed that the metalinguistic group’s score increased significantly more from pre to immediate posttest 
than did the control group (p = .02). However, post hoc analysis did not find significant difference in 
score gains over time for the metalinguistic group over the recast group. 
Thus, results showed that metalinguistic feedback was significantly more effective than no feedback for 
immediate gains in target form knowledge with familiar items but that neither feedback type was 
significantly more effective than the other for either immediate or sustained gains in target form 
knowledge with familiar items.  
Table 5. Mean and Standard Deviation for Repeated Items  
Condition Statistic Pretest 
(Week1) 
Immediate Posttest 
(Week 2) 
Delayed Posttest 
(Week 4) 
Recast 
N=7 
Mean Raw Score 
Mean 
SD 
 
6.714 
  .671 
  .214 
 
7.286 
  .729 
  .206 
 
7.857 
  .786 
  .261 
 
Metalinguistic 
N=8 
Mean Raw Score 
Mean 
SD 
 
6.875 
  .688 
  .113 
 
8.500 
  .850 
  .120 
 
8.125 
  .813 
  .164 
 
Control 
N=8 
Mean Raw Score 
Mean 
SD 
6.750 
  .675 
  .238 
6.000 
  .600 
  .239 
6.500 
  .650 
  .239 
 
Language Learning & Technology 107
Shannon Sauro Corrective Feedback and the Development of L2 Grammar 
 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Pretest Immediate
Posttest
Delayed Posttest
Time of Test Administration
%
 C
or
re
ct Recast
Metalinguistic
Control
 
Figure 3. Group means for repeated items 
Unrepeated Items 
Table 6 presents the descriptive statistics for repeated test items on all three tests. Immediate posttest 
mean scores for unrepeated items for all three groups showed an immediate decrease from pretest scores, 
dropping 22.9%, 12.5% and 20% for the recast, metalinguistic and control groups respectively. From 
immediate to delayed posttest, both feedback groups' means scores increased, 14.3% for the recast group 
and 5% for the metalinguistic group, though never achieving the initial pretest score mean. The control 
group’s mean continued to decrease, dropping 7.5%. Changes in group means over time for repeated 
items are plotted on the graph in Figure 4. 
Table 6. Mean and Standard Deviation for Unrepeated Items 
Condition Statistic Pretest 
(Week1) 
Immediate 
Posttest (Week 2)     Posttest (Week 4)
Delayed  
Recast 
N=7 
Mean Raw Score 
Mean 
SD 
 
4.143 
  .829 
  .243 
 
3.000 
  .600 
  .200 
 
3.714 
  .743 
  .378 
 
Metalinguistic 
N=8 
Mean Raw Score 
Mean 
SD 
 
4.500 
  .900 
  .151 
 
3.875 
  .775 
  .225 
 
4.125 
  .825 
  .167 
 
Control 
N=8 
Mean Raw Score 
Mean 
SD 
3.875 
  .775 
  .311 
2.875 
  .575 
  .311 
2.500 
  .500 
  .283 
 
Language Learning & Technology 108
Shannon Sauro Corrective Feedback and the Development of L2 Grammar 
 
Results of the two-way repeated measures ANOVA found no significant main effect for group (F(2,20) = 
2.152, p=.14, partial η2 = .18) nor a significant interaction effect for group and time (F(2,20) = .969, p 
= .44, partial η2 = .09). However, a significant main effect was found for time (F(2,20) = 5.957, p = .005, 
partial η2 = .23). Thus, these results offer no indication that either type of feedback had an immediate or 
sustained positive effect on participants’ knowledge of the target form with nouns that had not been 
encountered on prior tests or during the collaborative writing activity. 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Pretest Immediate Posttest Delayed Posttest
Time of Test Administration
%
 C
or
re
ct
Recast
Metalinguistic
Control
 
Figure 4. Group means for unrepeated items 
Summary 
Research Question 1 asked which type of computer-mediated corrective feedback would be significantly 
more effective for immediate gains in L2 target form knowledge. While metalinguistic feedback resulted 
in greater gains from pre- to immediate posttest for familiar items than did recasts, these differences were 
not significant. Thus, neither feedback type had a significantly greater effect on immediate target form 
knowledge. 
Research Question 2 asked which type of computer-mediated corrective feedback would be significantly 
more effective for sustained gains in L2 target form knowledge. Results showed that, over time, the recast 
and metalinguistic group demonstrated similar levels of target form knowledge when applied to familiar 
items. Thus, neither feedback type had a significantly greater effect on target form knowledge over time. 
DISCUSSION 
From pre- to immediate posttest, the improvement in mean scores on repeated items for both feedback 
groups compared to the lack of improvement of the control group suggests that at least in a chat 
environment, recasts and metalinguistic feedback were helpful, albeit only statistically significantly so in 
the case of the metalinguistic feedback, for these intermediate and advanced learners. Though both kinds 
Language Learning & Technology 109
Shannon Sauro Corrective Feedback and the Development of L2 Grammar 
 
of corrective feedback resulted in gains in immediate knowledge of the target form with repeated items, 
metalinguistic feedback may have had a greater effect than did recasts for several reasons. First, the 
ambiguity of the corrective intent of recasts in several cases may have persisted despite the use of text-
chat. As Ellis et al. (2006) point out, full recasts, that is, recasts which consist of reformulations of the 
entire utterance containing the initial error, may not be as helpful in pointing learners to the location of 
the error as are partial recasts, which consist only of reformulations of the error minus the rest of the 
initial utterance.  
In other words, the more information the learner is confronted with, the more difficult it may be for the 
learner to locate and identify the portion that is reformulated. This may have been the case in this study, 
in which, as a result of the high level of proficiency of the learners, some of the recasts were potentially 
too long to be immediately effective5. This can be seen in Excerpt A in which the reformulation of the 
target form comes at the very end of a 26-word sentence.6  
Excerpt A7 
Rikke6 Malmo: getting to know about the problem at a young age also makes us respect 
and in that way reduce for example industrial waste and stop the pollution Feb 28, 2007 10:56:57 
AM EST 
Natalie Penn: Okay, good. Feb 28, 2007 10:57:03 AM EST 
Natalie Penn: getting to know about the problem at a young age also makes us respect 
and in that way reduce for example industrial waste and stop pollution Feb 28, 2007 10:57:21 AM 
EST 
In addition to length, two other characteristics of the recasts may have also mitigated their saliency: the 
location of the reformulation within the turn being recast and the lack of adjacency to the initial error. In 
Excerpt B, Roland7, following the recast, notices and reformulates another error, which was not 
reformulated but was in the initial position in the sentence. However, Roland7 neither acknowledges nor 
reuses the reformulation of industry at the end of the recast. Thus, the position of the reformulated target 
form within the full recast may have further influenced the degree to which it was noticed and identified 
by the learner. Despite the protracted processing time the written SCMC environment afforded 
participants, reformulations that occurred at the very end of a long sentence may still have been less likely 
to be noticed.  
Excerpt B 
Roland7 Malmo: perhaps that win energy will become a more efficient enegy souce for 
the industry.. Feb 28, 2007 10:14:35 AM EST 
Roland7 Malmo: damm my spell is so off Feb 28, 2007 10:14:48 AM EST 
Shadow Penn: win energy will become a more efficient enegy souce for industry. Feb 28, 
2007 10:14:54 AM EST 
Roland7 Malmo: Wind Feb 28, 2007 10:15:01 AM EST 
The third factor influencing the effectiveness of the recasts in this study is the lack of adjacency of the 
recast to the initial utterance, a characteristic more commonly found in CMC as opposed to face-to-face 
recasts (Loewen & Erlam, 2006). As both Excerpts A and B show, it was not uncommon for additional 
turns to separate the recast from the initial utterance. In fact, the longer the initial sentence containing the 
error, the more likely it was for the recast to occur multiple turns later due to the length of time it took for 
the American informant to copy, modify and transmit the revised sentence. Thus, this lack of adjacency, 
coupled with the length of the recast, may have limited opportunities for the learner to recognize the 
recasts as corrective feedback and make comparisons between their own output in the initial utterance and 
the more target-like reformulation. 
Language Learning & Technology 110
Shannon Sauro Corrective Feedback and the Development of L2 Grammar 
 
In contrast, metalinguistic feedback, in part due to its overtly corrective nature tended not to go unnoticed 
by the participants. This is particularly evident in the amount of uptake, a learner's utterance immediately 
following corrective feedback, "that constitutes a reaction in some way to the [interlocutor's] intention to 
draw attention to some aspect of the [learner's] initial utterance" (Lyster & Ranta, 1997, p. 49). Whereas 
21% of the recasts elicited some form of uptake, 44% of the metalinguistic feedback elicited uptake, a 
third of which entailed application of the feedback, what Smith (2005) labels an apply response. This can 
be seen in Excerpt C. In this exchange, Monika9 responds initially to Christie’s feedback with a question. 
Despite Christie’s follow-up response8, Monika9’s next turn indicates that she had unsuccessfully asked 
the teacher (the onsite researcher) for an explanation. Over the next few minutes, Christie and Monika9 
resume the task before Monika9 supplies a turn articulating her understanding of the concept of the 
corrective feedback she had received and successfully applies it to the repair of an error with the target 
form in the initial turn.  
Excerpt C 
Monika9 Malmo: I'm thinking about what I know about the Swedish culture. It's in many 
ways not very different from the American culture I think. Feb 26, 2007 10:21:56 AM EST 
Christie Penn: Monika9, be sure to use the zero artice. Feb 26, 2007 10:22:18 AM EST 
Monika9 Malmo: What is the zero artice? Feb 26, 2007 10:22:31 AM EST 
Christie Penn: It means no article. Feb 26, 2007 10:22:43 AM EST 
Monika9 Malmo: Hmm, I asked my teacher what it means, but she said I had to ask you 
again. Can you explain what it means to me? Feb 26, 2007 10:23:27 AM EST 
Christie Penn: That's okay. Don't worry about it for now. Can you write the next 
sentence? Feb 26, 2007 10:23:55 AM EST 
Monika9 Malmo: Okay, I'll continue. Feb 26, 2007 10:24:11 AM EST 
Monika9 Malmo: I think some Swedish literature is known in other countries. Feb 26, 2007 
10:24:43 AM EST 
Monika9 Malmo: Do you know anything about Swedish literature? Feb 26, 2007 10:24:56 AM EST 
Christie Penn: Good. I don't know much I'm afraid. What can you tell me about it? Feb 26, 
2007 10:25:24 AM EST 
Monika9 Malmo: Ah, I think I know what you mean with zero article now. You meant I 
shouldn't write "The American culture", it should be only "American culture", right?" Feb 26, 
2007 10:25:47 AM EST 
What is also revealed in this excerpt is that Monika9’s application occurred nearly three and a half 
minutes after the feedback was provided, suggesting that the slower and more deliberate nature of the 
written SCMC interaction enabled the feedback to remain in play for an extended period of time. Thus, 
the deliberate and slower nature of the chat interaction may have afforded Monika9 sufficient time to both 
process the metalinguistic hint encoded in the feedback and to produce a modified response. It is also 
possible that the enduring nature of the written turns also facilitated the application of the corrective 
feedback to the initial noun phrase even after 9 intervening turns. Thus, these features of the text-chat 
medium together with higher rates of uptake following metalinguistic feedback compared to recasts may 
have given the participants in the metalinguistic group the time and opportunity to notice, analyze and 
internalize the corrective feedback. 
The beneficial effects stemming from greater processing time that was afforded learners to produce 
modified output may have therefore had a positive effect on orienting their attention to the target form 
and on stimulating their actual production of the target form, thereby enhancing learners’ knowledge and 
control over the zero article (at least with repeated abstract noncount nouns). Analysis of pretest and 
posttest acceptability judgment scores for all items revealed that all three participants who produced 
modified output in the form of repair of the target form (Markus4, Martina5, Monika9) improved from 
pre- to posttest with two achieving perfect scores on the immediate posttest (100% accuracy for both 
Language Learning & Technology 111
Shannon Sauro Corrective Feedback and the Development of L2 Grammar 
 
repeated and unrepeated items) and the third scoring 13 out of 15 (90% accuracy for repeated items and 
80% accuracy for unrepeated items). These results corroborate findings from other studies that found a 
positive relationship between output and language development (Izumi, 2002; Lyster, 2004; Paninos, 
2005). 
Limitations 
In addition to the small sample size and its short duration, several limitations were present in this study. 
The first concerns the design and the sensitivity of the acceptability judgment test. As mentioned 
previously, the Blackboard interface limited the format of the acceptability judgment items, so that 
participants were presented with multiple variations of each sentence and asked to select the most 
acceptable. By simultaneously providing participants both acceptable and unacceptable versions of the 
same sentence, the instrument may have simplified the decision-making process required of acceptability 
judgment tests and potentially triggered recognition of the most acceptable sentence. Without being 
presented with these three options, it is possible, that participants may have achieved slightly lower and 
more varied scores.  
The second limitation concerns the nature of the target form itself. Results for unrepeated items for all 
groups indicated a drop from pretest to posttests, suggesting that neither type of corrective feedback 
enabled learners to generalize application of the zero article to new abstract non-count nouns. This finding 
may not be surprising considering the fact that most unrepeated nouns on the immediate and delayed 
posttests (e.g., adolescence, adulthood, vision) were not semantically or orthographically related to the 
nouns used in the writing activities to elicit opportunities for corrective feedback.  
Findings may also indicate that corrective feedback on the application of the zero article to abstract 
noncount nouns does not easily lend itself to generalization for most learners. The improvement of both 
feedback groups relative to the control group with only familiar items may also be evidence that what 
most participants experienced was item-based and not rule-based learning (Skehan, 1998). That is to say, 
during this short term study, the limited amount of corrective feedback participants received may have 
allowed for the noticing and recall of the zero article with specific lexical items (a memorized sequence). 
However, it may not have been sufficient to facilitate elaboration and comparison of new input with 
previous language input and hypotheses to derive a rule (Williams, 1999) connecting the zero article with 
abstract noncount nouns in English. Furthermore, as has been observed in studies examining the 
acquisition of artificial languages, the use of acceptability judgment items may have served to tap in to 
item-based learning by merely requiring participants to recall and compare a memorized sequence with 
each test item as opposed to evaluating each item in light of an abstract rule system (Ellis, 1996).  
In addition, the complexity of the English article system and its partial overlap with the Swedish article 
system may indicate that, in the absence of additional target-form instruction or consciousness-raising 
activities regarding differences and overlap in the two article systems, short-term intervention in the form 
of corrective feedback may have at best a limited ephemeral effect on learning. Feedback studies on 
similarly complex or difficult to learn forms may therefore best be carried out in conjunction with 
instruction. 
Also of note is the very limited amount of corrective feedback participants received, approximately 2-3 
total feedback episodes on average. This may have been an artifact of the relatively open nature of the 
task which meant participants could use certain items in the word bank in a non general sense, eliminating 
potential errors with the target form and reducing opportunities for feedback (e.g., Monika9 Malmo: And 
the world effects space, because of all the pollution.) Providing the native English-speaking interlocutors 
with partial sentences intended to elicit general meaning from the Swedish participants might help 
increase the amount of feedback to levels that might more likely facilitate the noticing and learning of a 
particularly low salient and difficult to generalize form.  
Language Learning & Technology 112
Shannon Sauro Corrective Feedback and the Development of L2 Grammar 
 
CONCLUSION 
This study has examined the relative effectiveness of two different types of computer-mediated corrective 
feedback on the immediate and sustained development of L2 target form knowledge. Despite the fairly 
limited amount of feedback generated, the results indicated that both types of corrective feedback 
supported gains in target form knowledge in familiar contexts but that neither type was significantly more 
effective than the other in either the immediate term or over time. That the metalinguistic group showed 
significant immediate gains relative to the control condition also provides evidence regarding the 
effectiveness of computer-mediated corrective feedback that alerts learners to the nature of their errors for 
developing short-term knowledge of L2 grammar. Results suggest potential directions for further studies 
of computer-mediated corrective feedback to add to the growing body of feedback research that can help 
us understand what kinds of feedback work best for which learners and which forms, whether this 
feedback be oral or written, face-to-face or computer-mediated. 
 
APPENDIXES 
Appendix A: Participant Profiles 
 ID Group L1(s) Dialang Gender Age Number 
of 
Years 
English 
Studied 
1 Co1 Control Swedish C2 F 22 12.5 
2 Co2  Swedish C2 F 25 9.5 
3 Co3  Swedish C1 F 47 9.5 
4 Co4  Swedish B1 F 28 8 
5 Co5  Swedish B2 F 21 9.5 
6 Co6  Spanish - F 22 8 
7 Co9  Swedish - M 21 10 
8 Co10  Swedish/Spanish - F 20 12 
9 Re2 Recast Swedish C2 F 29 15 
10 Re6  Swedish - F 24 9 
11 Re7  Swedish - M 20 9 
12 Re8  Bosnian - M 20 10 
13 Re9  Swedish C1 F 23 10 
14 Re12  Swedish/Filipino - F 19 13 
15 Re13  Bosnian - F 21 8 
16 Me1 Metalinguistic Swedish - F 22 10.5 
17 Me2  Swedish C2 F 23 10 
18 Me3  Bosnian/Swedish/German/Italian - F 20 9 
19 Me4  Swedish - M 25 10 
20 Me5  Swedish C1 F 21 10 
21 Me6  Arabic B1 F 34 27 
22 Me9  Swedish - F 20 10 
23 Me11  Swedish - F 24 11 
 
 
Language Learning & Technology 113
Shannon Sauro Corrective Feedback and the Development of L2 Grammar 
 
Appendix B 
Activity 1: Instructions for Swedish Participants 
Intro to Sweden for Americans 
You will be writing sentences about the mentality, the values, and the culture of Sweden for an American 
audience. (Think of it as writing an essay sentence by sentence.) Your partner will be helping you. You 
each have a different word bank of 10 words (10 verb phrases or 10 noun phrases) which you must use in 
your sentences. First share your words with your partner; then begin writing. 
You will have 20 minutes to complete this activity: 
Word Bank 
 
 
unemployment    Swedish architecture 
 
Swedish culture   alcohol 
 
Swedish history   immigration to Sweden 
 
Swedish literature  education in Sweden 
 
nationalism in Sweden  Swedish society 
 
 
Appendix C 
Activity 1: Instructions for American Participants  
Intro to Sweden for Americans 
You will be writing sentences about the mentality, the values, and the culture of Sweden for an American 
audience. (Think of it as writing an essay sentence by sentence.) Your partner will be helping you. You 
each have a different word bank of 10 words (10 verb phrases or 10 noun phrases) which you must use in 
your sentences. First share your words with your partner; then begin writing. 
You will have 20 minutes to complete this activity: 
Word Bank 
 
 
travel     visit 
 
experience    appreciate 
 
understand    believe 
 
drink     become 
 
increase    decrease 
 
 
Language Learning & Technology 114
Shannon Sauro Corrective Feedback and the Development of L2 Grammar 
 
Appendix D 
Activity 2: Instructions for Swedish Participants 
Environmental Issues 
You will be writing sentences about the environment. (Think of it as writing an essay sentence by 
sentence.) Your partner will be helping you. You each have a different word bank of 10 words (10 verb 
phrases or 10 noun phrases) which you must use in your sentences. First share your words with your 
partner; then begin writing. 
You will have 20 minutes to complete this activity: 
Word Bank 
 
 
nature     global warming 
 
space     nuclear power 
 
mankind    industrial waste 
 
carbon dioxide    pollution 
 
wind energy    industry 
 
 
 
Appendix E 
Activity 2: Instructions for American Participants 
Environmental Issues 
You will be writing sentences about the environment. (Think of it as writing an essay sentence by 
sentence.) Your partner will be helping you. You each have a different word bank of 10 words (10 verb 
phrases or 10 noun phrases) which you must use in your sentences. First share your words with your 
partner; then begin writing. 
You will have 20 minutes to complete this activity: 
Word Bank 
 
 
threaten    allow 
 
cause     reduce 
 
increase    respect 
 
preserve    produce 
 
require     become 
 
 
Language Learning & Technology 115
Shannon Sauro Corrective Feedback and the Development of L2 Grammar 
 
Appendix F: Repair and Responses to Recasts 
Noun Types Recast Nouns Recast Recasts Eliciting 
Responses but not Repair  
Recasts Eliciting 
Repair 
    
Exclusively 
Uncountable Nouns 
(n=7) 
 
architecture (1) 
unemployment (2) 
immigration (1)  
global warming (2) 
pollution (1) 
 
 
 
immigration (1) 
 
Nouns with Countable 
and Uncountable Uses 
(n=12) 
 
society (2)  
power 
nature(2)  
industry (2) 
energy (1) 
education (4)  
 
 
society (1) 
nature (1) 
education (1) 
 
 19 4 0 
 
 
NOTES 
1. This is not to say that the perceptual salience of difficult to notice L2 forms cannot be manipulated in 
oral feedback. Indeed, research on oral treatments that utilizes enhancement techniques (Doughty & 
Varela, 1998; Loewen & Philp, 2006; Nassaji, 2007) has found evidence supporting the positive effect of 
enhancement techniques on promoting form noticing. However, without the aid of enhancement 
techniques, certain morphemes that may be unstressed or elided in non-enhanced speech (e.g., Er hat den 
Ball ‘He has the ball’.) may prove more challenging for L2 learners to notice or accurately distinguish 
than in written interaction, in which orally unstressed and elided morphemes receive distinct orthographic 
representations. 
2. Responses on a post-treatment survey regarding prior target form knowledge and instruction indicated 
that only one participant, a member of the control group, recalled ever receiving prior direct instruction on 
the English zero article several years earlier. However, almost all participants indicated a partial degree of 
familiarity and partial confidence in their use of the English zero article with noncount nouns to express 
general meaning prior to the study. 
3. Chatscripts of all interactions were stored electronically and searched for occurrences of targeted 
abstract noncount nouns and accompanying feedback episodes, which were highlighted. To identify 
feedback episodes, chatscripts were reviewed for reformulations of prior turns and searched electronically 
for occurrences of scripted meta-statements that referenced the zero article. Printouts of each chatscript 
were further analyzed for production of non-targeted abstract noncount nouns. 
4. Diagnostic tests were run on the data to verify that the assumptions of normality and homogeneity of 
variance were met. The Shapiro-Wilk test was used to determine whether the distribution of each sample 
differed significantly from a normal distribution. Results showed that only one sample differed 
significantly from a normal distribution. The results of the Shapiro-Wilk test for the metalinguistic 
group’s delayed posttest indicated that this sample’s distribution was significantly different from normal. 
However, the kurtosis and skewness of this population were also calculated and found to be small: -1.5 
Language Learning & Technology 116
Shannon Sauro Corrective Feedback and the Development of L2 Grammar 
 
and 0.7 respectively. The Levene Test for homogeneity of variances also revealed no significant 
difference in the variances among the samples. See Sauro, 2007, for detailed results. 
5. One anonymous reviewer pointed out, though not necessarily the case in this study, that it is worth 
considering that full recasts in a chat environment may still enable learners to identify the reformulation. 
Because the chat window makes lengthy repetition of a prior utterance unusual in chat, particularly when 
the prior turn is still visible, it is possible that learners could find full recasts more noticeable in a chat 
environment than in spoken interaction. 
6. As one anonymous reviewer pointed out, another factor possibly limiting the learner’s ability to attend 
to recasts concerns the perceived countable or uncountable nature of the focal noun. Though all nouns 
included in the word banks have uncountable uses, some are exclusively uncountable (e.g., 
unemployment), while others are primarily uncountable with countable uses (e.g. education) (Biber, 
Johansson, Leech, Conrad & Finegan, 1999). As a result, if participants perceived certain nouns as 
countable and therefore not likely candidates to take the zero article, they may have been less inclined to 
attend to recasts. However, comparison of participants’ responses to recasts of nouns that are exclusively 
uncountable (n=7) and those that have both countable and uncountable uses (n=12) revealed that 
participants were as unlikely to respond to either, and neither type resulted in self-repair (see Appendix F). 
7. Errors and feedback are highlighted here though no such highlighting occurred during the actual 
interaction. 
8. Results from the preliminary study had indicated that not all participants were likely to be familiar with 
the term zero article though they were familiar with the concept. As a result, the native English-speaking 
interlocutors were instructed to define the zero article with “It means no article” when asked and to guide 
the conversation immediately back to the task. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Shannon Sauro is Assistant Professor of Applied Linguistics in the department of Bicultural-Bilingual 
Studies at the University of Texas at San Antonio. Her research explores second language acquisition 
processes within the context of computer-mediated communication. 
E-mail: shannon.sauro@utsa.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Ammar, A., & Spada, N. (2006). One size fits all? Recasts, prompts and L2 learning. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition, 28, 543-574. 
Biber, D., Johansson, S., Leech, J., Conrad, S., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman grammar of spoken and 
written English. Essex, UK: Pearson Education Limited. 
Carroll, S. (2001). Input and evidence: The raw material of second language acquisition. Amsterdam: 
John Benjamins. 
Chapelle, C.A. (2001). Computer applications in second language acquisition: Foundations for teaching, 
testing and research. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Chapelle, C.A., & Douglas, D. (2006). Assessing language through computer technology. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
de Bot, K. (1996). The psycholinguistics of the output hypothesis. Language Learning, 46(3), 529-555. 
Language Learning & Technology 117
Shannon Sauro Corrective Feedback and the Development of L2 Grammar 
 
DeKeyser, R. M. (2005). What makes learning second language grammar difficult? A review of issues. 
Language Learning, 55(No. Supplement 1), 1-25. 
Doughty, C., & Varela, E. (1998). Communicative focus on form. In C. Doughty & J. Williams (Eds.), 
Focus on form in classroom second language acquisition (pp. 114-38). Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Ellis, N.C. (1996). Sequencing in SLA: Phonological memory, chunking, and points of order. Studies in 
Second Language Acquisition, 18, 91-126. 
Ellis, R., Loewen, S., & Erlam, R. (2006). Implicit and explict corrective feedback and the acquisition of 
L2 grammar. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 28(2), 339-368. 
Gass, S.M. (1997). Input, interaction, and the second language learner. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates. 
Han, Z. (2002). A study of the impact of recasts on tense consistency in L2 output. TESOL Quarterly, 
36(4), 543-572. 
Hino, J. (2006). Linguistic information supplied by negative feedback: A study of its contribution to the 
process of second language acquisition (Doctoral dissertation, University of Pennsylvania, 2006). 
Dissertation Abstracts International, A 67/03, 872. 
Holmes, P., & Hinchliffe, I. (2003). Swedish: A comprehensive grammar (2nd ed.). London: Routledge. 
Izumi, S. (2002). Output, input enhancement, and the noticing hypothesis: An experimental study on ESL 
relativization. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 24, 541-577. 
Köhlmyr, P. (2003). "To err is human…": An investigation of grammatical errors in Swedish 16-year-old 
learners' written production in English. Gothenburg, Sweden: University of Gothenburg. 
Leeman, J. (2003). Recasts and second language development: Beyond negative evidence. Studies in 
Second Language Acquisition, 25, 37-63. 
Loewen, S., & Erlam, R. (2006). Corrective feedback in the chatroom: An experimental study. Computer 
Assisted Language Learning 19(1), 1-14. 
Loewen, S., & Nabei, T. (2007). Measuring the effects of oral corrective feedback on L2 knowledge. In A. 
Mackey (Ed.), Conversational interaction in second language acquisition: A collection of empirical 
studies (pp. 361-377). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Loewen, S., & Philp, J. (2006). Recasts in the adult English L2 classroom: Characteristics, explicitness, 
and effectiveness. The Modern Language Journal, 90, 536-556. 
Long, M. H., & Robinson, P. (1998). Focus on form: Theory, research and practice. In C. Doughty & J. 
Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in second language acquisition (pp. 15-41). Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.  
Lyster, R. (1998). Negotiation of form, recasts, and explicit correction in relation to error types and 
learner repair in immersion classrooms. Language Learning, 48, 183-218. 
Lyster, R. (2004). Differential effects of prompts and recasts in form-focused instruction. Studies in 
Second Language Acquisition, 26, 399-426. 
Lyster, R., & Ranta, L. (1997). Corrective feedback and learner uptake: Negotiation of form in 
communicative classrooms. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 19, 37-66. 
Mackey, A., Gass, S., & McDonough, K. (2000). How do learners perceive interactional feedback? 
Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 22, 471-497. 
Language Learning & Technology 118
Shannon Sauro Corrective Feedback and the Development of L2 Grammar 
 
Mackey, A., & Goo, J. (2007). Interaction research in SLA: A meta-analysis and research synthesis. In A. 
Mackey (Ed.), Conversational interaction in second language acquisition: A collection of empirical 
studies (pp. 407-452). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Mackey, A., & Philp, J. (1998). Conversational interaction and second language development: Recasts, 
responses, and red herrings. The Modern Language Journal, 82(3), 338-356. 
McDonough, K. (2005). Identifying the impact of negative feedback and learners' responses to ESL 
question development. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 27, 79-103. 
Nabei, T., & Swain, M. (2002). Learner awareness of recasts in classroom interaction: A case study of an 
adult EFL student's second language learning. Language Awareness, 11(1), 43-63. 
Nassaji, H. (2007). Elicitation and reformulation and their relationship with learner repair in dyadic 
interaction. Language Learning, 57(4), 511-548. 
Paninos, D. (2005). The role of output for learner attention to input in second language acquisition. 
(Doctoral dissertation, University of Pennsylvania, 2005). Dissertation Abstracts International, A 66/06, 
2139. 
Panova, I., & Lyster, R. (2002). Patterns of corrective feedback and uptake in an adult ESL classroom. 
TESOL Quarterly, 36(4), 573-595. 
Payne, J.S., & Whitney, P.J. (2002). Developing L2 oral proficiency through synchronous CMC: Output, 
working memory, and interlanguage development. CALICO Journal, 20(1), 7-32. 
Philp, J. (2003). Constraints on "noticing the gap": Nonnative speakers' noticing of recasts in NS-NNS 
interaction. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 25, 991-26. 
Pica, T., Holliday, L., Lewis, N., & Morgenthaler, L. (1989). Comprehensible input as an outcome of 
linguistic demands on the learner. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 11(1), 63-90. 
Russell, J., & Spada, N. (2006). The effectiveness of corrective feedback for the acquisition of L2 
grammar: A meta-analysis of the research. In J. Norris & L. Ortega (Eds.), Synthesizing research on 
language learning and teaching (pp. 133-164). Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing. 
Sachs, R., & Suh, B., (2007). Textually enhanced recasts, learner awareness, and L2 outcomes in 
synchronous computer-mediated interaction. In. A. Mackey (Ed.), Conversational interaction in second 
language acquisition:  A collection of empirical studies (pp. 197-227). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Sauro, S. (2007). A comparative study of recasts and metalinguistic feedback through computer mediated 
communication on the development of L2 knowledge and production accuracy. (Doctoral dissertation, 
University of Pennsylvania, 2007). Dissertation Abstracts International, A 68/07. 
Schmidt, R. (1990). The role of consciousness in second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 11(2), 
129-158. 
Schmidt, R. (2001). Attention. In P. Robinson (Ed.), Cognition and second language instruction (pp. 3-
32). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Skehan, P. (1998). A cognitive approach to language learning. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Smith, B. (2005). The relationship between negotiated interaction, learner uptake, and lexical acquisition 
in task-based computer-mediated communication. TESOL Quarterly, 39(1), 33-58. 
Swain, M. K. (1985). Communicative competence: Some roles of comprehensible input and 
comprehensible output in its development. In S. M. Gass & C. G. Madden (Eds.), Input in second 
language acquisition (pp. 235–253). Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
Language Learning & Technology 119
Shannon Sauro Corrective Feedback and the Development of L2 Grammar 
 
Language Learning & Technology 120
Williams, J. (2005). Form-focused instruction. In E. Hinkel (Ed.), Handbook of research in second 
language teaching and learning (pp. 671-691). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Williams, J.N. (1999). Memory, attention, and inductive learning. Studies in Second Language 
Acquisition, 21, 1-48. 
 
