Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num2/collentine.pdf 
June 2009, Volume 13, Number 2
pp. 68-87 
 
LEARNER USE OF HOLISTIC LANGUAGE UNITS IN MULTIMODAL, 
TASK-BASED SYNCHRONOUS COMPUTER-MEDIATED 
COMMUNICATION  
Dr. Karina Collentine 
Northern Arizona University 
Second language acquisition (SLA) researchers strive to understand the language and 
exchanges that learners generate in synchronous computer-mediated communication 
(SCMC). Doughty and Long (2003) advocate replacing open-ended SCMC with task-
based language teaching (TBLT) design principles. Since most task-based SCMC (TB-
SCMC) research addresses an interactionist view (e.g., whether uptake occurs), we know 
little about holistic language units generated by learners even though research suggests 
that task demands make TB-SCMC communication notably different from general SCMC 
communication. This study documents and accounts for discourse-pragmatic and 
sociocultural behaviors learners exhibit in TB-SCMC. To capture a variety of such 
behaviors, it documents holistic language units produced by intermediate and advanced 
learners of Spanish during two multimodal, TB-SCMC activities. The study found that 
simple assertions were most prevalent (a) with dyads at the lower level of instruction and 
(b) when dyads had a relatively short amount of time to chat. Additionally, interpersonal, 
sociocultural behaviors (e.g., joking, off-task discussions) were more likely to occur (a) 
amongst dyads at the advanced level and (b) when they had relatively more time to chat. 
Implications explain how tasks might mitigate the potential processing overload that 
multimodal materials could incur. 
INTRODUCTION 
A significant amount of second language acquisition (SLA) research has sought to understand whether 
and how students acquire a second language in computer-mediated interactions (Belz & Reinhardt, 2004; 
Chapelle, 1998; Kinginger & Belz, 2005; Payne & Whitney, 2002; Smith, 2003; Thorne, 2008). This 
study responds to calls to complement highly focused analyses of learner behaviors1 such as studying 
moves that constitute negotiation of meaning with a broad analysis that considers social, linguistic, and 
developmental factors (Tarone, 2007). It seeks to add to the growing knowledge about how to understand 
learners’ communicative goals according to phrases’ functions with respect to immediately surrounding 
words and phrases (i.e., the parts) and with respect to holistic language units (i.e., the whole: discourse 
functions, pragmatic intent, and social roles; Fetzer, 2007). This understanding is especially important 
since SCMC in the L2 classroom is changing, as it is increasingly used alongside task-based activities 
(Doughty & Long, 2003) and in rich multimedia experience (Collentine & Collentine, 1997). Yet, a 
review of the modest amount of research on TB-SCMC suggests that it leads to communicative behaviors 
that are different from general SCMC activities. Additionally, little SCMC research documents how 
learners communicate in task-based, multimodal, interactive environments (Blake, 2000 and Keller-Lally, 
2006 represent notable exceptions), so that it is especially important to understand the holistic language 
units learners generate in TB-SCMC. After expanding on these issues, this study describes the holistic 
language behaviors exhibited by intermediate and advanced learners of Spanish in two Flash, task-based 
SCMC activities. 
Copyright © 2009, ISSN 1094-3501 68
Karina Collentine Multimodal, Task-based SCMC 
 
REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE 
SCMC Background  
There are various approaches to understanding how SCMC contributes to a theory of SLA. Some studies 
focus on the amount of language produced, who produces it and why, learner attitudes, and whether 
adequate interaction occurs in SCMC (Abrams, 2003; Beauvois, 1997; Blake, 2000; Chun, 1994; 
Freiermuth, 1998, 2001; Kern, 1995; Salaberry, 2000; Vandergriff, 2006; Warschauer, 1996). These 
studies generally show that SCMC engages learners in collaborative knowledge construction (Beauvois, 
1997; Berge & Collins, 1995; Meunier, 1994; Warschauer, 1996, 1997) and that it provides an even 
playing field for all learners (Bruce, Peyton, & Batson, 1993; Kiesler, Siegel, & McGuire, 1984). Some 
research specifically investigates whether there is an intake of form (Blake 2000; de la Fuente, 2003; 
Smith 2003, 2005) or whether lexical acquisition takes place (de la Fuente, 2003). Other researchers have 
focused on documenting learners’ macro language units (Abrams, 2003; Keller-Lally 2006; Sotillo, 
2000)—the focus of the present study. 
An important premise that underlies much of SCMC research is Chapelle’s (1998) concern that 
researchers should not assume that frameworks intended to explain face-to-face (FTF) interactions can 
adequately describe what occurs in SCMC. This has helped researchers to better understand SCMC’s 
unique aspects. A noteworthy recent example is Smith (2003), who modified Varonis and Gass’s (1985) 
longstanding model of negotiation routines to include discourse-pragmatic interactions typical of TB-
SCMC interactions. While the present study is not motivated by the question that Smith (2003) asks, 
(namely how negotiations in SCMC lead to intake) it does seek to contribute to our understanding of how 
learners generate meaning and interact at the level of holistic language units in TB-SCMC.  
Documenting these holistic language units has been a focus of general SCMC research, perhaps because it 
informs practitioners about the overall types of behaviors they can expect from students in SCMC, 
resulting in a better coherence between activities and curricular goals. While this research comprises 
different theoretical perspectives such as sociocultural and interactionist views, this research has the goal 
of delineating the types of communicative behaviors that occur in this still new communication channel. 
Although a detailed description of the types of categories used in this study and their theoretical geneses 
is explained below (see Categorizing learner behaviors in TB-SCMC), it is important to describe some 
notable contributions to understanding the important holistic language units found in SCMC in general. 
Subsequently, the motivation for narrowing the present analysis to TB-SCMC within a multimodal 
learning environment is delineated.  
Studies by Chun (1994) and Kern (1995) represent the first important contributions in this area, 
identifying the types of discourse elements and pragmatic features of SCMC. Similarly, Werry (1996) 
seeks to identify unique interactions within SCMC, finding a high degree of addressivity (i.e., the typing 
of a speaker’s name at the beginning of a turn to clarify to whom that turn is directed), short turns, use of 
greetings unique to SCMC (e.g., re = hello, after re-entering a chat), a variety of mechanical conventions, 
and various behaviors that are clearly social in nature, such as register variability, verbal play, and 
spontaneous role-playing. Recently, Simpson (2005) explains how interaction is affected by CMC, 
documenting that SCMC yields disrupted turn adjacency and is characterized by topic drifts and shifts. 
Sociocultural researchers have also made recent important contributions. For instance, Warner (2004) 
emphasizes that SCMC involves a great deal of playful language, and Darhower (2002) demonstrates how 
learners develop their sociolinguistic competence while at the same time creating a social community. 
Finally, research on telecollaboration has identified important pragmatic motivations for how learners 
structure CMC and learn from it (Thorne, 2008), especially with respect to intercultural communication. 
In a notable contribution to our understanding of the language units found in SCMC, Belz and Reinhardt 
(2004) document L2 language play that leads to linguistic creativity, building of relationships, and 
keeping of a positive face. 
Language Learning & Technology 69
Karina Collentine Multimodal, Task-based SCMC 
 
TB-SCMC 
Doughty and Long (2003)—and similarly Lafford and Lafford (2005)—argue for the avoidance of highly 
open-ended CMC tasks such as scavenger hunts and even guided SCMC discussions, recommending 
instead to follow task-based language teaching (TBLT) design principles in which “meaning is primary; 
there is a relationship to the real world; task completion has some priority; and the assessment of task 
performance is in terms of task outcome” (Skehan, 1996, p. 38). 
TB-SCMC research has largely been focused on discovering the ways in which negotiation of meaning 
occurs. Although some of this research speaks largely to the effects of task conditions on learner 
behaviors, investigators are finding that communication in TB-SCMC is quite different from that in other 
types of SCMC. For example, Pellettieri (1999) found more negotiation of meaning in single-outcome 
than in multiple-outcome tasks, and more in form-focused tasks, e.g., writing a note, telling a story, than 
in non-form focused ones. Pellettieri concluded that the more focused students are on a task, the more 
negotiation occurs. On the other hand, Keller-Lally (2006), who looked at jigsaw-saw, decision-making, 
and opinion-exchange tasks, found no effect for group or task in terms of how frequently negotiated 
interactions occurred. Smith (2003) presented evidence that when TB-SCMC activities are seeded with 
novel lexical items, a good amount of negotiation, and therefore opportunities for intake, occur. 
Additionally, he reported that in TB-SCMC learner reactions to the response phase of negotiation 
routines reflect a high degree of focus on task completion since they often skip over explicit reactions like 
I (don’t) understand, implicitly acknowledging their comprehension (or lack thereof) by making 
statements reflecting that they are reverting back to a task-completion mode. Smith’s (2003) findings 
motivated him to modify the long-standing Varonis and Gass (1985) model of negotiation routines to 
include the aforementioned implicit reaction behaviors (holistic language units with discourse-pragmatic 
functions) that may be unique to TB-SCMC. 
There exists additional evidence that TB-SCMC leads to distinctive SCMC language behaviors. Some 
TB-SCMC research suggests that students are likely to de-prioritize metalinguistic processing in favor of 
conveying meaning fluently and efficiently. First, Smith (2005) argues that task conditions and learners’ 
tendency to attend to task demands do not allow them to fully internalize data from form-focused 
episodes. Lee (2002) conjectures that TB-SCMC prevents learners from reflecting on accuracy, 
concentrating instead on fluency and expressing meaning, much like they do in the face-to-face mode. 
Under task-based conditions, learners need to focus even more on being fluent and not accurate as they 
have an overriding goal to achieve: the completion of the task. Sotillo (2000) adds that SCMC in general 
is considered by students to be an informal mode of communication, where being fluent rather than 
accurate) is of primary concern. Second, larger language units may not always be the focus of negotiated 
interactions in TB-SCMC. Blake (2000) notes that in a study using jigsaw and information gap tasks, the 
amount of syntactic negotiations was very small compared to that involving individual words. Smith 
(2005) notes that since there is little need for coherence, and thus for complexity, because the chat log is 
available at any time, TB-SCMC may not lead to morphosyntactically-sophisticated negotiations. Chen, 
Belkada and Okamoto (2004) concluded that negotiation occurs in TB-SCMC, but question whether 
greater “listening comprehension or L2 development” (p. 47) occurs since they found that few syntactic 
miscommunications motivated negotiation.  
Nonetheless, there appears to be much to learn about the types of holistic language units learners generate 
under TB-SCMC. If, in TB-SCMC, distinctive modes of interaction occur and learners attend less to 
metalinguistic issues, whether or not this is due to the task demands, then it is especially important to 
study the types of holistic language units that learners might generate in TB-SCMC. The overriding non-
linguistic need to accomplish some task in TB-SCMC may induce learners to exhibit language behaviors 
and approach communication in general in ways that are unique to what has been documented to date 
about learner behaviors in SCMC.  
Language Learning & Technology 70
Karina Collentine Multimodal, Task-based SCMC 
 
The Need for Studying SCMC in a Multimodal, Task-Based Experience 
Current language-learning technologies, such as Flash, can provide a multimodal experience that is highly 
contextualized (or even real-world like) and that engages learners with graphic, visual, and auditory 
information (Collentine & Collentine, 1997; Purushotma, 2005). These relatively inexpensive commercial 
authoring environments deliver content efficiently from a bandwidth perspective, allow for the creation of 
rich multimodal learning experiences, and will surely have an important role in Web 2.0 SCMC 
applications. Despite these advantages, most SCMC experiments employ only chat technologies. Of 
course, it may be unwise to combine SCMC with a sensory rich experience without considering the 
ramifications. Spiro, Feltovich, Jacobson, Coulson (1991) suggest that multimodal experiences may 
overload learners if they are ill structured; such materials need to be embedded in a structured fashion. 
Coupling SCMC with multimodal, task-based experiences will provide an understanding of SCMC’s 
potential within a rich interactive learner/user experience. In the study reported below, learners interacted 
with two Flash-based TBLT activities requiring them to uncover clues about a mystery and then discuss 
them in an SCMC environment. There is scant SCMC research set within a task-based, multimodal, 
interactive experience, although constructivist perspectives of learning support the use of multimodal 
technologies (Chun & Plass, 2000). Blake (2000) studied SCMC using jigsaw, information gap, and 
decision-making activities combined with Web-based graphical information. Warner (2004) coupled 
some chats with tasks that required researching travel destination details on the Web. However, most of 
her activities were role-plays. Some research has employed TBLT elements where SCMC was the sole 
technology. Smith (2003, 2005) as well as Keller-Lally (2006) used jigsaw and decision-making tasks. 
Freiermuth (1998, 2001) and Freiermuth and Jarrell (2006) asked learners to chat about how they would 
spend a sum of money, make plans for an international trip, and discuss where to start a new business, 
while Vandergriff (2006) asked learners to achieve a consensus on a moral dilemma. All told, we are only 
beginning to understand how learners use language in SCMC when their primary motivation for 
interacting entails task-based learning principles.  
Categorizing Learner Behaviors in TB-SCMC 
The study presented below attempts to add to our understanding of the holistic language units of learners 
in TB-SCMC, focusing not on the role of words/phrases with respect to their immediately surrounding 
words and phrases (i.e., the parts), but rather on their discourse, pragmatic, and social roles, (i.e., the 
whole (Fetzer, 2007)) to understand learners’ macro-communicative behaviors. To assess these holistic 
language units learners use in TB-SCMC, and to compile a potential typology, it is important to consider 
the categories SCMC research has used to date, and their underlying theoretical premises. This study 
takes into account Ellis’ (2003) suggestion that TBLT researchers and practitioners consider employing a 
“pluralistic approach” (p. 202) to the data-analysis process, such as providing readers with both 
psycholinguistic and sociolinguistic perspectives on the data set. Tarone (2007) asserts that a 
comprehensive SLA theory should consider both linguistic context, often referred to as the co-text, and 
the learner’s social mindset (p. 845). From a theoretical linguistic perspective, Fetzer (2007) emphasizes 
that language units are normally situated in either a linguistic context or a social context. For instance, the 
Spanish sentence Hace frío (‘It’s cold’) can be an indirect request with an imperative interpretation to turn 
up the heat. Under different circumstances Hace frío can be motivated by social variables where a person 
attempts to establish interpersonal contact with a stranger while waiting at a bus stop. 
Three types of macro-communicative, holistic language units have been examined in the SCMC 
literature: general, discourse-pragmatic language units largely rooted in models of communicative 
competence, those associated with interactionist perspectives which tend to classify discourse-pragmatic 
units into even broader cause-effect chains, and ones primarily associated with a sociocultural 
perspective. Chun (1994) uses various categories of discourse inspired by models of communicative 
competence and pragmatics following Koike’s (1989) definition of pragmatics, which is primarily 
Language Learning & Technology 71
Karina Collentine Multimodal, Task-based SCMC 
 
concerned with appropriateness and politeness of speech acts. Kern (1995) uses a general set of categories 
reflecting discourse functions such as assertions, greetings, narratives, questions, commands, delegation 
of floor, recapitulation of another’s comment. Blake (2000) and Smith (2003, 2005) use an interactionist 
perspective to describe TB-SCMC behaviors that constitute learner negotiations, such as exchanges in 
which miscommunications relating to vocabulary and syntax are resolved. In these analyses, holistic 
languages units are categorized as corrections, triggers, responses, and task-appropriate reactions to the 
responses in miscommunication chains. Many have subdivisions that relate to the larger discourse-
pragmatic units focused on here, e.g., rephrasals, inferences, elaborations, metalinguistic talk (Smith, 
2003, p. 43) as well as syntactic and lexical categories that lie at the root of miscommunications. 
Sociocultural analyses have documented holistic language units that reflect learners’ orientation to the 
task and goals, e.g., intersubjectivity, private speech, self-regulated language episodes, and interpersonal 
mentoring (Darhower, 2002; Warner, 2004; Warschauer, 1999). Finally, Sotillo (2000) and Werry (1996) 
use hybrid approaches, documenting assertions, turn-taking strategies, as well as a number of SCMC-
specific strategies, which represent what Kasper (2001) terms pragmatic “interactional practice” (p. 515). 
Sotillo (2000) and Werry (1996) also demonstrate the use of various sociocultural SCMC features, such 
as sarcasm, flaming, humor, insults, and language play (see also Belz & Reinhardt, 2004). 
It is critical to understand that there is considerable overlap in the taxonomies used in these approaches 
even though their respective explanations of learner behaviors are rooted in different epistemologies 
(Kasper, 2001). General, discourse-pragmatic taxonomies employing categories such as assertions, 
commands, agreement indicators (Kern, 1995; Sotillo, 2000) are informed by definitions of pragmatics 
that emphasize the role of discourse markers, implicature in the interpretation of utterances which is as 
likely to be tied to the surrounding linguistic context as it is to the social context, as well as interactional 
practices/routines, and speech acts (Bardovi-Harlig, 1998). 2 Sociocultural perspectives focus on how 
learners’ personal histories, motives, goals, and institutional perspectives shape general L2 abilities. Much 
of this research details L2 pragmatic development defined as “the study of communicative language use 
in a sociocultural context” (Belz, 2007, p. 45) and how these abilities develop as a result of and in the 
context of intercultural contexts (Kinginger & Belz, 2005).  
In accordance with the preceding considerations, the analysis of the chat logs/corpus of the TB-SCMC 
experiment presented here employs the categories given in the Appendix. The typology includes all three 
types of language units that have been reported in the general literature but is more narrowly focused on 
those described in TB-SCMC literature. 3 This approach is consistent with the call to consider, when 
feasible, both the linguistic and the social context of learners’ behaviors when examining the general 
discourse-pragmatic nature of TB-SCMC (Ellis, 2003; Fetzer, 2007; Tarone, 2007). This will allow a 
broad-based analysis of the dataset without biasing it toward any particular analytical framework 
described above.  
RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
The present study asks the following research questions:  
1. What holistic language units occur most frequently in multimodal TB-SCMC tasks? 
2. What holistic language units occur at different instructional levels, in different task types? 
3. Is there an interaction between instructional level and task type in terms of the holistic language units 
that occur?  
Participants 
Thirty students from intact classes participated in the study: 12 second-year university-level learners and 
18 third-year, university-level learners. The second-year (‘intermediate level’) learners were enrolled in 
fourth-semester Spanish classes at a medium-sized university and at a community college whose courses 
Language Learning & Technology 72
Karina Collentine Multimodal, Task-based SCMC 
 
are articulated with those of the university such that the course content is virtually alike. The third-year 
(‘advanced level’) learners were students from a 300-level composition course at the university with an 
emphasis on the written production of narrations, descriptions, and expository writing. All students had 
met or exceeded the learning outcomes from the previous course, i.e., the intermediate-level learners had 
successfully completed a third semester Spanish course and the advanced learners had successfully 
completed another 300-level course, e.g., advanced oral expression. The intact classes were traditional, 
FTF classes that employed a variety of multimedia activities, such as watching videos, and Internet 
exploration/research. While both levels of learners engaged in writing activities as mandated by the 
course objectives, no activities involved instant messaging and no other chat sessions were embedded into 
these courses. The researcher was not an instructor in these classes and did not participate in the 
experimental tasks. The tasks were integrated into one day’s lesson plans, lasted an entire class period of 
one and one-half hours, and all students present that day participated in the tasks. No grades were 
awarded for participation as learners were expected to work with the class materials for that day just as 
they did during any other class.  
Tasks 
Learners participated in two Flash-based tasks (http://london-underground.modlang.nau.edu/collenti/ 
actividades/tareas.html) and then discussed what they had discovered in a local area network via iChat, a 
synchronous conference application. The laboratory was equipped with individual Mac laptops placed on 
conference tables arranged in a semicircle. After being randomly assigned a partner and logging on, 
learners viewed a short, Flash-based introduction describing the activities in which they were to 
participate as well as instructions on how to use the technologies to accomplish the tasks  
Interrupted Task Chatting Activity (ITCA)  
In the first task, dyads worked for a detective agency to solve a murder. The interactive Flash piece 
introduced them to characters living in an apartment building where a murder occurred. Learners 
navigated through scenes to interview the characters. To query characters in a scene, e.g., about alibis, the 
timing of events, learners clicked on any of the five questions—written in Spanish—in a textbox, 
whereupon they received a text-based answer, such as the following.  
 
Figure 1. Sample ITCA screen 
Language Learning & Technology 73
Karina Collentine Multimodal, Task-based SCMC 
 
To ensure that the learners carefully explored information about each character, questions were phrased in 
different ways. For example, to ask about the time of the character’s actions, the following questions were 
randomly presented throughout the two tasks:  
¿A qué hora lo hizo usted? What time did you do it? 
¿A qué hora? At what time? 
¿Qué hora era? What time was it? 
To encourage exploratory information gathering, learners could ask each character three questions before 
the five displayed questions and the character disappeared. Students would then have to either exit the 
room to interview a previous character or move through a new door to interview a new one. They could 
later return to a room to pose any unanswered questions or even reread answers. The Flash program 
directed the learners at three intervals, to switch to iChat where the preassigned dyads were to chat about 
the information they gathered and hypothesize about the identity of the culprit. Each of the three 
exploratory intervals lasted 7 minutes, for a total of 21 minutes. The three chatting phases lasted 5 
minutes, for a total of 15 minutes. 
Posttask Chatting Activity (PTCA)  
In the second task, dyads pretended to be upscale apartment tenants attempting to locate a safety deposit 
box key by interviewing various personnel (e.g., a window washer, a cook) to find out who might have 
the key. Again, to encourage exploration they were limited to asking only three of the five questions 
during any single visit to a room. The students interviewed the personnel for 21 minutes and then moved 
to iChat to chat about their hypotheses for 15 minutes. For technical reasons, one of the 6 intermediate-
level dyads did not complete this task. This is taken into account in the quantitative analysis of the data. 
The first task required learners to chat at predetermined intervals; the second task had learners gather all 
relevant information before chatting. Although both tasks allowed learners the same amount of time to 
interview characters and chat about their discoveries, the first forced learners to chat in 3 five-minute 
intervals, and the second eased the time pressure by giving participants 1 fifteen-minute chat interval. 
Following Robinson (2001), longer time intervals to solve tasks lead to more planning and use of more 
structurally and semantically complex utterances. 
DATA ANALYSIS 
A mixed-method analysis was employed for data analysis. It combined qualitative and quantitative 
perspectives to triangulate the data (Green & Caracelli, 1997). The unit of analysis was the 
communicative unit (c-unit): words, phrases, sentences, onomatopoetic formulations, or abbreviations 
with a communicative value (Abrams, 2003; Keller-Lally, 2006). The c-unit also encompasses multiple 
pieces of information within a turn, such as an entire proposition (Abrams, 2003). Because this study 
examined the function or purpose of learner utterances, the term move was used instead of c-unit.  
Each dyad’s iChat transcript was converted to a text document, and each exchange was divided into 
individual c-units. The coding categories are given in the Appendix. After the researcher manually coded 
each c-unit in each document for one of the coding categories, Python scripts were written to tabulate 
the frequency of any given category per dyad transcript for the statistical analyses presented in the next 
section. An inter-rater reliability analysis was employed to check the construct validity of the researcher’s 
coding. Specifically, three random samples from each category were selected (along with the preceding 
and following c-unit). Two raters and the researcher, who served as the model rater, provided judgments 
of each sample’s categorization. Fleiss kappa, which calculates the degree of agreement in classification 
over that which would be expected by chance, was used to measure agreement among the three raters. 
Language Learning & Technology 74
Karina Collentine Multimodal, Task-based SCMC 
 
Language Learning & Technology 
Results showed that there was a high degree of agreement, with Fleiss kappa being .96. A kappa higher 
than .80 is considered almost perfect agreement. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Table 1 presents the average frequency of each category per dyad by learner level and task. 4, 5  
Table 1. Mean Frequency Per Dyad by Category, Learner Level, and Task Type 
 
The quantitative portion of the analysis assessed whether category frequencies differed significantly 
overall (Research Question 1) and whether category frequencies depended on instructional level and/or 
the task type (Research Questions 2 and 3) by submitting the data to a repeated-measures analysis of 
variance (ANOVA). There were three independent variables (Table 2). The between-subjects variables 
were task (ITCA and PTCA) and instructional level (intermediate- and advanced-level groups). The 
within-subjects variable was category, e.g., assertions, humor, containing thirteen levels as per 
Appendix). It should be noted, however, that not every dyad produced more than one instance of each of 
the categories. Since some cells contained zero values and others relatively high numbers, the distribution 
did not meet the assumption of normality, showing substantial positive skewness. A standard 
transformation of these types of data sets to allow for the use of ANOVA procedures is the rank 
correlation transformation (Conover, 1999). Accordingly, the ANOVA reports main effects and 
interactions based on the transformed data set.6 
75
Karina Collentine Multimodal, Task-based SCMC 
 
Table 2. Repeated-Measures ANOVA for Category, Level, and Task  
Source Sum of Squares df Mean Square F p 
  Tests of within-subjects effects 
Category 1313259.7 12 109438.3 21.4 0.00 
Category X Task 163967.7 12 13664.0 2.7 0.00 
Category X Level 170514.5 12 14209.5 2.8 0.00 
Category X Level 
X Task 
55071.0 12 4589.2 0.9 0.55 
Error 1534644.6 300 5115.5   
 
Tests of between-subjects effects 
Intercept 11877039.6 1 11877039.6 637.8 0.00 
Task 99646.2 1 99646.2 5.4 0.03 
Level 139858.7 1 139858.7 7.5 0.01 
Level X Task 17547.9 1 17547.9 0.9 0.34 
Error 465582.2 25 18623.3   
With respect to the first research question, ANOVA showed that there was a significant within-subjects 
effect for category (F=21.4; df =12,300; p = 0.00), indicating that the thirteen categories were not equally 
represented across all conditions of the experiment. Post hoc Tukey’s comparisons on the ranked data 
means (with an overall alpha of .05) revealed the following. Assertions ranked significantly higher than 
all other categories. Humor, off-task discussion, interpersonal discourse, intersubjectivity, greeting-leave 
taking, knowledge gaps, and agreement indicators had equal ranking. Finally, use of English, sarcasm-
insults, self-regulated language episodes, flaming, and interpersonal language episodes ranked lower than 
the preceding group of categories. 
Regarding the second and third research questions, the results indicate that the categories used were a 
function of task and of level, but not a combination of the two factors. The repeated measures ANOVA 
showed a within-subjects interaction between category and task (F=2.7; df= 12,300; p = 0.00), implying 
that learner behaviors differed by task. It also showed a within-subjects interaction between category and 
level (F=2.8; df= 12,300; p = 0.00), suggesting that learners at different proficiency levels engaged in 
different behaviors. However, the analysis did not show a within-subjects interaction between category, 
task, and level (F=0.09; df= 12,300; p = 0.55). All two-way comparisons are derived from the Tukey post 
hoc test on the ranked data (with separate alpha adjustments for the task and learner-level analyses; α = 
.05).  
Differences by Tasks  
The post hoc analyses indicated that there were significant differences in six of the thirteen categories, 
with the ITCA containing higher ranks for assertions, interpersonal discourse, greetings-leave takings, 
knowledge gap, agreement indicators, and use of English. In general, the learners stated their hypotheses, 
summarized their discoveries, and evaluated each other’s statements by using a large number of assertions 
and engaging in interpersonal discourse, especially in the ITCA, where time was of the essence. In the 
chatscript below, CJ and JL, both intermediate-level learners, discuss many details, and JL engages in 
interpersonal discourse by asking CJ which character(s) he had interviewed. They add increasing amounts 
of information to culminate with a conclusion.  
Language Learning & Technology 76
Karina Collentine Multimodal, Task-based SCMC 
 
Table 3. Assertive and Interpersonal Discourse in the ITCA 
5:45 PM 
jl: Hablo con paco y dora, Chris. Quie’n 
hablas? 
5:50 PM 
cj: Hablé con Paco, el oio algo sobre 10:30 
jl: Dora oio alguien afuera la puerta de Paco 
o ??? No sea 
5:55 PM 
jl: Tina dijo que mire’ la televisio’n con 
Paco, mire’n CSI a la once. 
cj: Dora me dijo que oye algo sobre 11:00 
jl: Dora dijo que tomo’ mucho vino y no 
recuerdo’ anda. 
6:00 PM 
jl: Cuando Paco volvio a su apartamento, 
ella dormio’ en el sofa 
cj: Tina, in me opinion es una suspecho, 
mucho tiemop sola 
5:45 PM 
jl: I spoke with paco and dora, Chris. Who did you 
speak with? 
5:50 PM 
cj: I spoke with Paco, he heard something at about 10:30 
jl: Dora heard someone outside Paco’s door or ??? I 
don’t know 
5:55 PM 
jl: Tina said that she watched television with Paco, they 
watched CSI at eleven. 
cj: Dora told me that she heard something at about 11:00 
jl: Dora said that she drank a lot of wine and didn’t 
remember anything. 
6:00 PM 
jl: When Paco returned to his apartment, she was 
sleeping on the sofa 
cj: Tina, in my opinion is a suspect, a lot of time alone 
Although this analysis uses ranked scores, an examination of the mean frequencies in Table 1 indicates 
that the differences in off-task discussions and humor were greater than several of these 6 categories. 
Specifically, 5 of the 15 advanced-level dyads accounted for 86% of the off-task and humor instances 
across the two tasks. Ranked averages for these two categories were lower than the mean average because 
the categories were produced by a restricted set of advanced-level learners. 
As reported above, the ITCA elicited more instances of greetings-leave takings than the PTCA most 
likely because the ITCA involved interruptions in the activity. Some dyads greeted each other each time 
they returned to the chat, possibly accounting for why the data showed a significantly greater number of 
greetings-leave takings in the ITCA than in the PTCA. The PTCA forced learners to complete all of the 
exploration phase before chatting about their hypotheses; thus dyads would have greeted each other only 
once. 
Even though the analysis showed no significant differences for off-task discussion, during the ITCA 
learners engaged in these kinds of moves (M=5.8; sd=10.7) about three times as often (M=1.9; sd=3.8), 
possibly because, as discussed below, the advanced learners found both tasks to be less than challenging. 
The greater use of teasing and joking in the PTCA (M=6.2; sd=9.7) than in the ITCA (M=3.3; sd=6) may 
relate to the fact that there was more time to chat, or it may be due to the nature of the PTCA’s content. In 
some instances, the learners blamed each other for the lost keys, as evidenced by the following exchange 
between these advanced-level learners.  
Table 4. Humor in the PTCA 
sep: es tu 
sep: eres un criminal 
sep: voy a ponerte en la carcel 
sep: no importa 
bd: si pero trabajo para el carcel, por eso 
tengo unos conneciones que tu no tienes 
sep: it’s you 
sep: you are a criminal 
sep: I’m going to put you in jail 
sep: it doesn’t matter 
bd: yes, but I work for the jail, that’s why I 
have connections that you don’t have 
Societal conventions allow people to joke about losing or taking keys, but the lack of humor in the ITCA 
may signify that humor about murder is not acceptable and that such discussions should be conducted 
objectively, as in the following exchange: 
Language Learning & Technology 77
Karina Collentine Multimodal, Task-based SCMC 
 
Table 5. Objective Exchanges in the ITCA by Advanced-Level Learners 
la: tina dijo que estaba con paco 
md: ooo es posible que era los dos? 
md: ellos estan anamorados y quieren el dinero 
la: si , es muy posible 
la: tina said that she was with paco 
md: ooo is it possible that it was the both of them? 
md: they are in love and want the money 
la: yes , it’s very possible 
The qualitative analysis suggests that the ITCA’s topic may have forced learners to use more English for 
lack of lexical knowledge in Spanish. Useful lexical items for the ITCA such as Spanish equivalents for 
culprit, blame, murder, or guilty were probably unfamiliar to the learners, especially to the intermediate-
level ones. On the other hand, most of the learners had been exposed to the word keys (llaves) and had 
learned how to say I lost the keys (e.g., se me perdieron las llaves). 
Differences by Learner Level  
The post hoc analyses indicated that there were significant differences in five of the thirteen categories, 
with the advanced-level learners using more humor, off-task discussion, intersubjectivity, sarcasm-insults, 
and self-regulated language episodes. However, sarcasm-insults and self-regulated language episodes 
were very infrequent overall, and the significant differences were most likely due to the intermediate-
level learners’ use of mere five instances of these two behaviors. 
Both tasks were harder for the intermediate-level students. In line with Robinson’s (2001) predictions 
about task difficulty as a function of overall proficiency, in both the ITCA and the PTCA, the 
intermediate-level learners were less proactive in nominating non-task-related topics, teasing or joking. 
They combined interpersonal discourse and assertions, which altogether comprised 51.8% (127 of 245 
tokens) of their moves. Further evidence of the tasks’ difficulty comes from the large number of 
knowledge gap moves, comprising 14.3% (35 of 245 tokens) of the intermediate learners’ total moves. In 
a typical exchange given below, ADV expresses her frustration and confusion in two separate moves, and 
then provides a detail about her discoveries. 
Table 6. Intermediate-Level Learners’ Interactions (from the ITCA)  
aw: y Tina durmio en la sofa despues Jorge 
salio 
adv: no tengo no idea que pasa 
adv: muchas personas hay 
adv: jorge le gusta rifles 
aw: el Dr. Torres es “sketchy”...haha 
adv: de acuerdo si 
aw: and Tina was sleeping on the sofa then 
Jorge left 
adv: I have no idea what’s happening 
adv: there are a lot of people 
adv: jorge likes rifles 
aw: Dr. Torres is “sketchy”…haha 
adv: I agree yes 
The lesser difficulty of the tasks for the advanced-level learners allowed them the luxury to engage in 
humor and off-task discussions. Recall that humor and off-task discussions accounted for half of the 
advanced-level learner dyads. Likewise, the advanced level learners’ intersubjectivity behaviors 
correlated significantly with the combined humor and off-task discussion counts (r = 0.55; df=17; p = 
0.02).  
In contrast to Antón and DiCamilla’s (1998) conclusions that the L1 was the primary means to establish 
intersubjectivity, this study supports Darhower’s (2002) findings that SCMC intersubjective moves occur 
in the L2. This may depend on one’s developmental level, since these learners were beyond the beginning 
level, the level of Antón and DiCamilla’s participants. The following sample exchange between 
advanced-level learners is illustrative of humor and off-task discussions followed by intersubjective 
moves. They begin the ITCA with greetings and then tease one another about their physical qualities and 
what is correct Spanish. One participant gets the dyad on track by establishing intersubjectivity with a 
task-related question. 
Language Learning & Technology 78
Karina Collentine Multimodal, Task-based SCMC 
 
Table 7. Non-Task-Related Moves Followed by Intersubjective Moves  
rt: hola compañera 
rt: eres tan bonita hoy 
lh: no quiero ser tu companera 
lh: ahh, gracias 
lh: ok, ok 
rt: ¿porque? 
lh: me gustan tus ojos de perrito 
rt: BLAH 
lh: “blah” no es una palabra en espannol 
lh: emoticon: winking face 
rt: quién quieres preguntar primero? 
rt: hi partner 
rt: you look so pretty today 
lh: i don’t want to be your partner 
lh: ohh, thanks 
lh: ok, ok 
rt: why? 
lh: i like your puppy dog eyes 
rt: BLAH 
lh: “blah” is not a word in spanish 
lh: emoticon: winking face 
rt: who do you want to ask first? 
Of course, many of the advanced learners’ exchanges involved assertions and attempts to solve the task, 
as evidenced in the following exchange from the ITCA.  
Table 8. Advanced Learners’ Use of Assertions  
11:50 AM 
nrb: pensamos que jorge es la persona que 
mata la mujer 
nrb: el es parte del NRA 
kmp: haha...si tienes razon 
kmp: y tambien no es muy specifico en sus 
repuestas 
nrb: si y estaba solo 
nrb: cuado ella se murio 
kmp: si...estoy de acuerdo 
11:50 AM 
nrb: we think that Jorge is the person who kills 
the woman 
nrb: he’s part of the NRA 
kmp: haha…yes you’re right 
kmp: and also he’s not very specific in his 
answers 
nrb: and he was alone 
nrb: when she died 
kmp: yes…I agree 
CONCLUSIONS 
The analysis indicates that assertions are the single most common holistic language units produced in 
multimodal, TB-SCMC activities. Yet, these are accompanied by numerous behaviors that have a social 
purpose, such as humor, interpersonal discourse, and expressions of knowledge gaps, which keep 
individuals engaged with each other. The analysis of the four conditions reported here, however, suggests 
that this conclusion must be qualified, since the types of holistic language units learners generate in TB-
SCMC depends on the developmental level and on task conditions. This study shows that lower-level 
learners in TB-SCMC use a restricted repertoire of holistic language moves. At the same time, TB-SCMC 
requires higher levels of proficiency for learners to generate an expanded repertoire of moves. 
Furthermore, attention to metalinguistic issues seems to have a low priority in TB-SCMC regardless of 
one’s L2 developmental level. 
When learners generate moves whose interpretation most readily derives from the linguistic context, most 
are declarative in nature (i.e., assertions), with interpersonal discourse (such as asking questions) being 
less common. This highly assertive pattern may occur most when learners are linguistically challenged by 
a task, since the intermediate-level learners favored this move over all others. Overall assertive discourse 
may also characterize TB-SCMC activities that allow little time for dyads to interact, as the ITCA saw a 
greater proportion of assertions than the PTCA. In either case, when processing mechanisms are stressed, 
TB-SCMC language tends to take the form of statements of fact. 
Regarding the learners’ moves whose interpretation most readily derives from the social context, as other 
researchers have noted, learners produce a considerable variety of relevant behaviors in TB-SCMC. It 
appears that these behaviors are more prevalent among learners at higher levels of proficiency, since the 
Language Learning & Technology 79
Karina Collentine Multimodal, Task-based SCMC 
 
advanced learners produced relatively more instances of humor and even off-task discussions, which may 
have led them to see the need to produce intersubjective moves. There is some evidence that the topic, 
such as death, also influences the nature of the social behaviors in TB-SCMC.  
 It is also necessary to mention what did not occur. First, there was very little use of self-regulated 
language episodes. It may be that these occurred orally or during the chat (Smith, 2008), and if so, their 
absence may indicate an important difference between SCMC and FTF learning. Recall, however, that the 
research to date indicates that learners demonstrate few moves that suggest that they concern themselves 
with metalinguistic issues in TB-SCMC (Lee, 2002). Thus, it may be that an important distinctive 
characteristic of TB-SCMC is that task demands detract learners from attending to metalinguistic issues, 
especially with less-advanced L2 learners. Second, as in Darhower (2002), learners did not employ 
English to establish intersubjectivity; they probably used L1 in the ITCA due to lexical deficiencies. This 
was especially true of intermediate learners. SCMC seems to be particularly effective in promoting the 
use of L2 to accomplish these tasks. One reason may be that the written mode offered by SCMC allows 
learners to more easily formulate responses because of the extra time allotted to access the lexicon and to 
hold L2 linguistic information in short term memory (Payne & Ross, 2005). 
What advice is there for teachers and technology experts? The research to date has tended only to 
examine learner behaviors generated in SCMC without coupling such tasks with multimodal materials 
(Blake, 2000 and Keller-Lally, 2006 are notable exceptions). There is little evidence that coupling SCMC 
with other multimedia technologies inhibited or overloaded the learning process, possibly because the 
multimodal experience was couched in structured tasks. Spiro et al. (1991) advise that multiple 
representations of information (such as those in a multimodal experience) should be contextualized within 
a case-based setting, a condition that TBLT meets (Blake, 2000). It would be interesting to investigate at 
what point the multimodal experience becomes an overload. Would learners engaged in a gaming 
experience where they communicated in SCMC while interacting with highly multimodal gaming 
materials exhibit overload? 
Although this study is comparable in terms of sample size and task order to other experiments of a similar 
nature, including Warner (2004) and de la Fuente (2003), it suffers from two main limitations both 
common to mixed-method designs with intact classes. First, the generalizability of the results would be 
greater with larger samples. Second, although sample size and experimental logistics prevented as much, 
randomizing the dyads to both possible orderings of the tasks would control for ordering effects.  
The present study adds to the understanding of the holistic language units that characterize the TB-SCMC 
learning environment. Future research should address several questions stemming from this research. 
First, what is the threshold of task difficulty that would achieve a balance between assertive and affective 
discourse? The types of moves reported in the research vary widely, probably due to the variety of task 
and experimental designs employed. The relationship between types of moves and task type will require a 
great deal more study for pedagogues to make predictions about the types of utterances learners will use 
in SCMC. Nevertheless, this study adds to our understanding of the language behaviors that occur in the 
language-learning classroom when learners engage in TB-SCMC with multimodal materials. 
 
NOTES 
1. Learner behaviors are defined here as electronic messages generated in chat. 
2. Bardovi-Harlig (1998) details the extent to which traditional pragmatics studies, especially as they 
relate to speech acts, have been studied in SLA. She details how this research has studied such themes as 
mitigators and downgraders, modals could/would, appropriate prosody, socially relevant inflexional and 
pronominal morphology (T/V), embedding (creo que... I think that), and learning formulaic expressions. 
It is important to emphasize, nonetheless, that these themes are also treated by sociocultural perspectives, 
Language Learning & Technology 80
Karina Collentine Multimodal, Task-based SCMC 
 
and that themes such as socially relevant inflexional and pronominal morphology can be treated from 
different theoretical perspectives. 
3. Since this study’s research questions are not framed within the interactionist framework, the researcher 
does not employ categories such as trigger, response, etc. This is not to say that relevant exchanges are 
not counted in the present study. Rather, they would be coded differently. Smith (2003) details, for 
example, how response instances constitute rephrasals or elaborations at the level of discourse. Such 
instances in the present study might fall into the category of self-regulated language episodes. The 
difference in coding schemes represents a difference in research questions and theoretical perspectives. 
4. The author wishes to thank Dr. Roy St. Laurent at the Northern Arizona University Statistical 
Consulting Lab for his assistance with the statistical analysis for this article. Any errors are attributable 
solely to the present author.  
5. Upon consultation with a statistician, it was determined that the basis upon which to compute 
frequencies should be the number of tokens (per category) per dyad rather than per individual participant, 
so as not to risk issues of co-linearity. The occurrence of an instance of many of the categories resulted 
because of (communicative) factors that were dependent on a dyad’s interaction (e.g., the number of 
greetings that one participant produced would probably influence the number produced by his/her 
partner); the amount of variation between two participants of a dyad was most likely not independent. 
6. This transformation entails ranking each cell’s frequency (e.g., the frequency of assertions for dyad X 
within task A) from highest to lowest. The lowest cells do not generally receive ranks of zero because so-
called ties receive the same ranking. Since a large data set like this has several ties, the minimum 
frequency scored a rank of 86.5 out of 377 (the total number of cells ranked). Conover (1999) notes that 
rank transformations produce sufficiently robust normal distributions so as to submit the resulting data set 
to the “usual analysis of variance” (p. 419). 
7. These utterances were categorized differently from humor and from intersubjectivity because they were 
not humorous nor were they uttered to try to establish a shared perspective; they did not pertain to the 
content or to the completion of the task. 
8. In the data set these exclusively represented gaps in lexical knowledge (cf. Chun, 1994; Keller-Lally, 
2006; Kern, 1995). 
9. There were no instances in the data set where English was used to establish intersubjectivity. 
 
APPENDIX: Larger language unit categories used in the analysis 
Category Definition Original chatscript Translation 
Agreement 
indicators 
moves expressing 
agreement about 
hypotheses to complete 
the task (cf. Sotillo, 2000) 
kmp: oh, ok. entonces 
victoria se parece la más 
cupable 
nrb: estamos de acuerdo  
kmp: oh, ok. then victoria 
seems to be the most 
guilty 
nrb: we agree 
Assertive 
discourse 
moves where an utterance 
provides information in a 
declarative fashion (cf. 
Chun, 1994; Kern, 1995; 
Sotillo, 2000) 
ac: Investiga jorge  
ac: porque el dijo que no 
hablaba con nadie, pero 
nora dijo que ella 
hablaba con el 
ac: e el tieno una arma  
ac: investigate jorge 
ac: because he said that 
he didn’t speak with 
anyone, but nora said 
she spoke with him 
ac: he didn’t have a 
weapon 
Language Learning & Technology 81
Karina Collentine Multimodal, Task-based SCMC 
 
Flaming expressions of aggression, 
exaggerated emotions, 
bluntness, or hostility in 
excess of FTF 
conversational 
appropriateness (cf. 
Sotillo, 2000) 
kf: que pienso?  
kf: ERA TU???  
la: ladrona sucia!  
kf: what do I think? 
kf: WAS IT YOU??? 
la: dirty thief! 
Greetings and 
leave takings 
expressions of greeting 
and leave taking (cf. 
Chun, 1994; Darhower, 
2002; Kern, 1995; Sotillo, 
2000;) 
cj: Hola; yo soy Chris. 
jl: Hola; soy Janet.  
cj:Hi; I’m Chris. 
jl: Hi; I’m Janet. 
Humor moves involving or 
reacting to teasing and 
joking (cf. Darhower, 
2002; Sotillo, 2000) 
bd: voy a estudiar con 
ellos este verano  
bd: es la verdad  
sep: quien  
sep: los miembros del rifle 
association? 
bd: si  
bd: necesito practicar  
bd: i’m going to study 
with them this summer. 
bd: really 
sep: who 
sep: the members of the 
rifle association? 
bd: yes 
bd: i need to practice 
Self-regulated 
language 
episodes 
self-made corrections, a 
type of private speech (cf. 
Sotillo, 2000; Kern, 1995) 
cp: estas mi companero en 
este juago 
cp: juego* 
cp: you are my classmate 
in this game [misspelled] 
cp: game* [spelled 
correctly] 
Interpersonal 
discourse 
instances where learners 
query each other or 
evaluate each other’s 
hypotheses towards 
solving an immediate goal 
 
 
mk: Pienso que es el 
hombre del refrigerador  
mec: si, pero tenemos que 
investigar mas 
mec: piensas que es 
demasiado sospechoso?  
mk: mm si sabes much 
sobre antonio? 
mk: i think it’s the 
refrigerator man 
mec: yes, but we have to 
investigate some more 
mec: do you think he is 
too suspicious? 
mk: mm yes do you 
know much about 
antonio? 
Intersubjectivity moves where learners 
orient themselves to the 
task (or “huddle up”) to 
determine how to get 
started (e.g., What do we 
have to do?), what to do 
next (e.g., What else do 
we have to do?), or to 
refocus on the task (e.g., 
So... who do you think it 
was?) (cf. Darhower, 
2002) 
ac: Creo que es e’l.  
jm: ok  
ac: el fin  
jm: pues necesitamos un 
reporte en un documento 
o solo en ichat? 
ac: solomente nuestras 
ideas en ichat 
ac: i think that it’s him. 
jm: ok 
ac: the end 
jm: well do we need a 
report in a document or 
only in ichat? 
ac: only our ideas in 
ichat 
 
Language Learning & Technology 82
Karina Collentine Multimodal, Task-based SCMC 
 
Knowledge gap recurring moves not 
previously documented in 
the literature that reflected 
students’ state of mind 
about their (in)ability to 
provide information in 
these tasks, e.g., “No sé” 
(‘I don’t know’) or “Hay 
muchas personas” (‘There 
are many 
people/characters’) - a 
conciliatory response to a 
question asking for a 
specific hypothesis 
la: no se quien es la 
persona tampoco  
kam: me [no] recuerdo 
la: quien piensas?  
kam: no se. no soy 
terminar 
la: i don’t know who the 
person is either 
kam: i do [not] 
remember 
la: what do you think? 
kam: i don’t know. i’m 
not finished. 
Off-task 
discussion 
deviations from the task, 
e.g., discussions about the 
value of Macs over PCs, 
video games, and points 
for the final exam7 (cf. 
Chun, 1994; Darhower, 
2002; Keller-Lally, 2006; 
Sotillo, 2000) 
jm: si’ es muy bien’ para 
mi’  
ac: actualmente es cinco 
puntos de % para su 
ensayo mas peor  
jm: oh es ma’s bie’n  
jm: tenemos un respaso 
hoy?  
jm: para el final?  
jm: yes it is very good 
for me 
ac: actually it is five 
percentage points 
towards your worse 
essay 
jm: oh that’s better 
jm: do we have a review 
today? 
jm: for the final? 
Sarcasm-insults moves where learners 
blame each other or call 
each other names (cf. 
Darhower, 2002; Sotillo, 
2000; Warner, 2004) 
tr: dejame en paz  
tr: vete ya  
tr: leave me alone 
tr: leave 
Use of English English words or phrases8,
9 
 
jm: si’ es posible, porque 
e’l no tiene un “alibi” 
ac: y e’l dijo estaba 
tratando a “blame” a los 
otros  
ac: si 
jm: yes it’s possible, 
because he doesn’t have 
an “alibi” 
ac: and he said that he 
was trying to “blame” 
the others 
ac: yes 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Dr. Karina Collentine is Assistant Professor of Spanish and Secondary Spanish Education at Northern 
Arizona University.  
Email: karina.collentine@nau.edu 
 
Language Learning & Technology 83
Karina Collentine Multimodal, Task-based SCMC 
 
REFERENCES 
Abrams, Z. (2003). The effect of synchronous and asynchronous CMC on oral performance in German. 
The Modern Language Journal, 87, 157-167.  
Antón, M., & DiCamilla, F. (1998). Socio-cognitive functions of L1 collaborative interaction in the L2 
classroom. The Canadian Modern Language Review, 54(3), 314-342. 
Bardovi-Harlig, K. (1998). Narrative structure and lexical aspect: Conspiring factors in second language 
acquisition of tense-aspect morphology. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 20, 471-508. 
Beauvois, M. (1997). High tech, high touch: From discussion to composition in the networked classroom. 
Computer-Assisted Language Learning, 10, 57-69. 
Belz, J. (2007). The role of computer mediation in the instruction and development of L2 pragmatic 
competence. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 27, 45-75. 
Belz, J. A., & Reinhardt, J. (2004). Aspects of advanced foreign language proficiency: Internet-mediated 
German language play. International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 14(3), 324–362.  
Berge, Z., & Collins, M. (Eds.), (1995). Computer mediated communication and the on-line classroom in 
distance learning. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press. 
Blake, R. (2000). Computer-mediated communication: A window on L2 Spanish interlanguage. 
Language Learning & Technology, 4, 120-136. 
Bruce, B., Peyton, J., & Batson, T. (Eds.), (1993). Network-based classrooms: Promises and realities. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Chapelle, C. (1998). Multimedia CALL: Lessons to be learned from research on instructed SLA. 
Language Learning & Technology, 2(1), 21-39. Retrieved December 11, 2007 from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol2num1/article1/index.html. 
Chen, J., Belkada, S., & Okamoto, T. (2004). How a Web-based course facilitates acquisition of English 
for academic purposes. Language Learning & Technology, 8(2), 33-49. Retrieved December 11, 2007 
from http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num2/chen/default.html. 
Chun, D. (1994). Using computer networking to facilitate the acquisition of interactive competence. 
System, 22, 17-31. 
Chun, D., & Plass, J. (2000). Networked multimedia environments for second language acquisition. In M. 
Warschauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Network-based language teaching: Concepts and practice (pp. 151-170). 
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. 
Collentine, J. & Collentine, K. (1997). The compatibility of computer-mediated communication solutions 
with beginning-level foreign language curricula. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 10(5), 411-426. 
Conover, W. (1999). Practical Nonparametric Statistics. Wiley: New York. 
Darhower, M. (2002). Interactional features of synchronous computer-mediated communication in the 
intermediate L2 class: A sociocultural case study. CALICO Journal, 19, 249-277. 
de la Fuente, M. (2003). Is SLA interactionist theory relevant to CALL? A study on the effects of 
computer-mediated interaction in L2 vocabulary acquisition. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 16, 
47-81. 
Doughty, C., & Long, M. (2003). Optimal psycholinguistic environments for distance foreign language 
learning. Language Learning & Technology, 7(3), 50-80. Retrieved December 11, 2007 from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num3/doughty/default.html. 
Language Learning & Technology 84
Karina Collentine Multimodal, Task-based SCMC 
 
Ellis, R. (2003). Task-based language learning and teaching. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. 
Fetzer, A. (2007). (Ed.) Context and appropriateness: Micro meets macro. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Freiermuth, M. (1998). Using a chat program to promote group equity. CAELL Journal, 8, 16-24. 
Freiermuth, M. (2001). Native speakers or non-native speakers: Who has the floor? Online and face-to-
face interaction in culturally mixed small groups. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 14, 169-199. 
Freiermuth, M. and Jarrell, D. (2006). Willingness to communicate: Can online chat help? International 
Journal of Applied Linguistics, 16(2), 189-212. 
Greene, J. & Caracelli, V. (1997). Defining and describing the paradigm issue in mixed-method 
evaluation. In J. Greene & V. Caracelli (Eds.), Advances in mixed-method evaluation: The challenges and 
benefits of integrating diverse paradigms (pp. 5-18). New Directions for Program Evaluation, No. 74. San 
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 
Kasper, G. (2001). Four perspectives on L2 pragmatic development. Applied Linguistics, 22, 502-530. 
Keller-Lally, A. (2006). Effect of task-type and group size on foreign language learner output in 
synchronous computer-mediated communication. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. University of Texas, 
Austin. 
Kern, R. (1995). Restructuring classroom interaction with networked computers: Effects on quantity and 
characteristics of language production. The Modern Language Journal, 79, 457-476.  
Kiesler, S., Siegel, J., & McGuire, T. (1984). Social psychological aspects of computer-mediated 
communication. American Psychologist, 39, 1123-1134. 
Kinginger, C., & Belz, J.A. (2005). Socio-cultural perspectives on pragmatic development in foreign 
language learning: Microgenetic case studies from telecollaboration and residence abroad. Intercultural 
Pragmatics, 2(4), 369–421. 
Koike, D. (1989). Pragmatic competence and adult L2 acquisition: Speech acts in interlanguage. Modern 
Language Journal, 73, 279-289. 
Lafford, P., & Lafford, B. (2005). CMC technologies for teaching foreign languages: What’s on the 
horizon? CALICO Journal, 22(3), 679-709. 
Lee, L. (2002). Enhancing learners’ communication skills through synchronous electronic interaction and 
task-based instruction. Foreign Language Annuals, 35, 16-23. 
Meunier, L. (1994). Computer-assisted language instruction in cooperative learning. Applied Language 
Learning, 5, 31-56. 
Payne, J., & Ross, B. (2005). Synchronous CMC, working memory, and L2 oral proficiency 
development. Language Learning & Technology, 9(3), 35-54.  
Payne, J., & Whitney, P. (2002). Developing L2 oral proficiency through synchronous CMC: Output, 
working memory and interlanguage development. CALICO Journal, 20(1), 7-32. 
Pellettieri, J. (1999). Why-talk? Investigating the role of task-based interaction through synchronous 
network-based communication among classroom learners of Spanish. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, 
University of California-Davis. 
Purushotma, R. (2005). Commentary: You’re not studying, you’re just... Language Learning & 
Technology, 9(1), 80-96. Retrieved December 11, 2007 from http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num1/purushotma 
/default.html. 
Language Learning & Technology 85
Karina Collentine Multimodal, Task-based SCMC 
 
 Robinson, P. (2001). Task complexity, task difficulty, and task production: Exploring interactions in a 
componential framework. Applied Linguistics, 22, 27-57. 
Salaberry, R. M. (2000). L2 morphosyntactic development in text-based computer-mediated 
communication. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 13, 5-27. 
Simpson, J. (2005). Conversational floors in synchronous text-based CMC discourse. Discourse Studies, 
7, 337-361. 
Skehan, P. (1996). A framework for the implementation of task-based instruction. Applied Linguistics, 17, 
38-62. 
Smith, B. (2003). Computer-mediated negotiated interaction: An expanded model. The Modern Language 
Journal, 87, 38-57. 
Smith, B. (2005). The relationship between negotiated interaction, learner uptake, and lexical acquisition 
in task-based computer-mediated communication. TESOL Quarterly, 39, 33-58. 
Smith, B. (2008). Methodological hurdles in capturing CMC data: The case of the missing self-repair. 
Language Learning & Technology, 12(1), 85-103. Retrieved December 11, 2007 from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num1/smith/default.html. 
Sotillo, S. (2000). Discourse functions and syntactic complexity in synchronous and asynchronous 
communication. Language Learning & Technology, 4, 82-119. Retrieved December 11, 2007 from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/sotillo/default.html. 
Spiro, R., Feltovich, P., Jacobson, M., & Coulson, R. (1991). Cognitive flexibility, constructivism, and 
hypertext: Random access instruction for advanced knowledge acquisition in ill-structured domains. 
Education Technology, 3, 24-33. 
Tarone, E. (2007). Sociolinguistic approaches to second language acquisition research 1997–2007. 
Modern Language Journal, 91, 837–848. 
Thorne, S. (2008). Mediating technologies and second language learning. In J. Coiro, M. Knobel, C. 
Lankshear, and D. Leu (Eds.), Handbook of research on new literacies (pp. 417-450). Mahwah, NJ: 
Erlbaum. 
Vandergriff, I. (2006). Negotiating common ground in computer-mediated versus face-to-face 
discussions. Language Learning & Technology, 10(1), 110-138. Retrieved December 11, 2007 from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num1/vandergriff/default.html. 
Varonis, E., & Gass, S. (1985). Non-native/non-native conversations: A model for negotiation of 
meaning. Applied Linguistics, 6(1), 71-90. 
Warner, C. (2004). It’s just a game, right? Types of play in foreign language CMC. Language Learning & 
Technology, 8(2), 69-87. Retrieved December 11, 2007 from http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num2/warner 
/default.html. 
Warschauer, M. (1996). Motivational aspects of using computers for writing and communication. In M. 
Warschauer (Ed.), Telecollaboration in foreign language learning: Proceedings of the Hawai‘i 
Symposium (29-46). Honolulu, HI: University of Hawai‘i, Second Language Teaching & Curriculum 
Center. 
Warschauer, M. (1997). Computer-mediated collaborative learning: Theory and practice. Modern 
Language Journal, 81, 470-481. 
Warschauer, M. (1999). Electronic literacies: Language, culture, and power in online education. 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Language Learning & Technology 86
Karina Collentine Multimodal, Task-based SCMC 
 
Language Learning & Technology 87
Werry, C. (1996). Linguistic and interactional features of Internet relay chat. In S. Herring (Ed.), 
Computer-mediated communication: Linguistic, social and cross-cultural perspectives (pp. 47-63). 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
 
