Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num3/editors.pdf 
October 2009, Volume 13, Number 3 
p. 1 
 
Copyright © 2009, ISSN 1094-3501 1 
 
FROM THE EDITORS 
Welcome to Volume 13, Number 3 of Language Learning & Technology, a special issue 
on Technology and Teaching Pronunciation. We hope you had a good summer and have 
renewed energy for the new academic year.  It was a productive summer for many of 
you:  LL&T received over 50 submissions! 
This special issue is guest edited by Debra Hardison, and we wish to thank her for an 
outstanding job throughout the process of identifying, selecting, and editing four 
excellent articles.  In his Emerging Technologies column, Bob Godwin-Jones 
complements the articles with a superb summary of current speech analysis tools and 
technologies. 
We are pleased to present two excellent review articles, edited by Sigrun Biesenbach-
Lucas, who has been indefatigable as our Reviews Editor.  First, Ching-Ni Hsieh and Fei 
Fei review Multimedia Learning Suite: Chinese Characters, one of the most easily 
customizable flashcard programs for learning vocabulary.  Second, Heather Weger 
examines Academic Interactions: Communicating on Campus, a book with an 
accompanying DVD, designed to raise ESL learners’ awareness about norms of 
academic discourse in the US and provide them with authentic examples of such 
discourse as well as practice in academic communication skills. 
Our CALL Theses page has been updated with the most recent CALL dissertations and 
we wish to thank Anne Rimrott (Simon Fraser University, Canada) for compiling the 
current list of Canadian dissertations and Jason Vickers (University at Albany, State 
University of New York) for updating the list of U.S. dissertations. 
During the last several years, LL&T has received 150 submissions per year on average, 
and with a growing readership as well, we have decided to implement a new content 
management system, ScholarOne (formerly Manuscript Central) from Thomson Reuters.  
Submissions will continue to be online, and the review process will also remain entirely 
online, though automated and streamlined.  Full details will be given in our next issue in 
February 2010 when the system has been officially rolled out. 
LL&T continues to be a free journal, and we invite you to show monetary support 
by making a tax-deductible contribution directly to the “Language Learning and Tech 
Special Fund” through the University of Hawai‘i Foundation. This may be done online 
by clicking here or on the Contribute button on our homepage. Thank you for your 
support! 
 
Sincerely, 
Dorothy Chun & Irene Thompson 
 
