Language Learning & Technology 
http:/llt.msu.edu/vol13num2/review2.pdf 
June 2009, Volume 13, Number 2 
pp. 22-28 
 
Copyright © 2009, ISSN 1094-3501 22
REVIEW OF BRAVE NEW DIGITAL CLASSROOM:  
TECHNOLOGY AND FOREIGN LANGUAGE LEARNING 
Brave New Digital Classroom: Technology and 
Foreign Language Learning 
 
Robert J. Blake 
 
2008 
ISBN 978-1-58901-212-7 
US $24.95 (paperback) 
189 pp. 
 
Georgetown University Press 
Washington, DC, USA 
 
 
Review by Ching-Ni Hsieh, Michigan State University 
As new technological tools continue to emerge and impact foreign language (FL) learning, language 
teachers and researchers are facing the question of how to best utilize the vast array of technological tools 
in the language classroom while keeping abreast of the rapid changes in the computer-assisted language 
learning (CALL) world (Chapelle, 2003; Chapelle & Douglas, 2006). Brave New Digital Classroom: 
Technology and Foreign Language Learning grounds its advocacy of technology-enhanced FL curricula 
in second language acquisition (SLA) research and theoretical frameworks and addresses the pivotal issue 
of how technology can be effectively implemented in the service of language teaching and learning in a 
reader-friendly and informative fashion. 
The target audience of this book includes not only language teachers but also experienced CALL 
researchers and instructors. Brave New Digital Classroom brings insights into the potential of CALL for 
language teachers venturing into the field and succinctly explains different technology options that 
teachers can employ in their classrooms, such as the Web and computer-mediated communication (CMC) 
tools. The book also provides accessible explanations of and rationales for the use of technology in 
language teaching for readers with varying degrees of computer literacy or experience in teaching 
language with technology. The author, Robert J. Blake, encourages seasoned practitioners to reflect on his 
standpoints by engaging them in discussion questions and activities at the end of each chapter. Instructors 
who use this book in graduate seminars, such as Computer-Assisted Language Learning or Technology 
and SLA, may find the list of questions useful and challenging for their students; additionally, graduate 
students who are looking for research topics in CALL may find some questions worthy of further 
investigation.  
Brave New Digital Classroom comprises six chapters and addresses wide-ranging topics. Chapter One 
opens with an overview of the misconceptions about using technology in the FL curriculum and suggests 
a theoretical framework that underpins the practices of CALL. Blake advocates a realistic assessment of 
what technology can do in the language classroom. He stresses that successful teaching practices should 
be informed by SLA theories and emphasizes an interactionist approach. Blake’s argument is that “ [t]he 
technology is theoretically and methodologically neutral. But how technology is used—its particular 
culture of practice—is not neutral; it responds to what the practitioners understand or believe to be true 
about SLA” (p. 11). 
Ching-Ni Hsieh Review of Brave New Digital Classroom 
 
Language Learning & Technology 23
This argument is a critical reminder for CALL practitioners that technology-enhanced instruction alone 
cannot guarantee success unless it is based on a sound theoretical underpinning. Following the 
interactionist stance (Gass, 1997; Long, 1991), Blake claims “a second language is best learned and 
taught through interaction” (p. 3). He reviews Krashen’s SLA model of comprehensible input (Krashen, 
1985), the social aspects of the SLA process (Doughty, 1998; Gass, 1997), and the practical approach of 
focus on form (Doughty & Williams, 1998; Long & Robinson, 1998). This concise review of SLA 
theories and the theoretical implications for the use of technology in the FL classroom provide seasoned 
CALL practitioners with a good foundation before delving into the digital classroom.  
Chapter Two focuses on the applications of the Web in the language classroom. In the “Internet Basics” 
section, Blake explains technical terms, such as HTTP, HTML, and URLs to help language teachers 
understand the basic notions about the Internet and Web page design. For language teachers who are 
interested in creating their own Web pages, Blake suggests the use of JavaScript or DHTML because they 
are easier to learn. Teachers are encouraged to use more interaction-oriented Web sites to facilitate 
language acquisition. While this is a valid point, interested language teachers may want to know specific 
Web sites they can use in their own teaching. Unfortunately, Blake does not provide any concrete Web 
sites that teachers can refer to.  
Blake argues that a clear pedagogy for Web-based language learning is vital. He advocates the Content-
Based Instruction (CBI) approach to the teaching of target language culture and grammar points within a 
Web-based learning environment. A CBI lesson starts with identifying a topic consistent with the goals of 
the curriculum and the learners, and is followed by finding Web passages that deal with the topic, and 
guiding students to carry out additional Web searches collaboratively to enhance their learning. Novice 
language teachers who favor this approach will find the step-by-step instruction easy to follow; 
nonetheless, experienced teachers might find these suggestions customary and conventional.  
Chapter Three begins with a brief history of CALL with respect to technological innovations, and is 
followed by the introduction of the professional acceptance of CALL as a sub-field of SLA. While 
Blake’s introduction to the history of CALL is rather concise and informative, its placement in the third 
chapter following the discussion of the Web applications in Chapter Two seems somewhat out of order. It 
would have been better if this information were provided in Chapter One, along with the introduction of 
SLA theories, because readers would be better able to relate the development of CALL to specific 
references of different approaches to SLA over time.  
In the second half of Chapter Three, Blake introduces tutorial CALL, a concept that implies that 
computers can function as language tutors to enhance language learning with little or no real language 
instructor present. Although this idea sounds daunting, Blake introduces several programs to showcase 
how the tutorial CALL works. For example, the online program WordChamp allows language learners to 
paste a reading passage into a text box on the Web site. The program then automatically analyzes the 
passage and provides a gloss of vocabulary words upon cursor rollover in the user specified languages. 
Complete Web pages can be translated simply by specifying their URLs. Learners may find this 
translation function fascinating because of its comprehensive coverage of languages and ease of use. 
Teachers may find the free online tutorial programs useful in enhancing learners’ reading comprehension 
and extending learners’ word inventories, but learners may neglect to develop relevant guessing-meaning-
from-context-clues strategies.  
Blake suggests that language teachers who are interested in creating their own tutorial CALL programs as 
a supplement to their technology-enhanced classroom can employ Web-based authoring tools, such as 
the Interactive Language Learning Authoring Package developed by the Department of Language Studies
at London Guildhall University, 
 
e ExTemplate developed by the Language Resource Center at Ric
University, SMILE developed by CLEAR at Michigan State University, and Hot Potatoes initially 
developed at the University of Victoria, Canada. These tools are user-friendly and cost-effective.  
Ching-Ni Hsieh Review of Brave New Digital Classroom 
 
Language Learning & Technology 24
However, teachers need to be aware that most of the current tutorial CALL programs are not able to 
provide learners with context-sensitive or error-specific feedback as a human tutor could. To tackle the 
issue of how to make computer programs more adaptive and responsive, iCALL (i.e., intelligent CALL) 
and automatic speech recognition (ASR) have been developed, with the help of recent development in 
artificial intelligence. Free online iCALL programs, such as E-Tutor for German and Robo-Sensei for 
Japanese, are parser-based programs that can provide feedback on learners’ syntactic and sometimes 
semantic input. ASR applications, such as Tell Me More Pro, can recognize production of individual 
sounds and give learners visual feedback, such as pitch contours.  
Chapter Three ends with a “CALL Evaluation” section. Blake refers to some commonly used techniques 
for evaluating CALL programs and activities; examples are the CALL evaluation checklist provided by 
the Information and Communications Technology for Language Teachers Project, downloadable from 
its Web site; an evaluation framework that CALICO Journal formulated; Hubbard’s framework (2006
which is concerned with the fit between CALL software and a teacher’s teaching methods; and Chapelle’s 
(2001) interactionist theory driven framework.  
), 
Chapter Four introduces two different modes of CMC: real time (synchronous, SCMC) and deferred time 
(asynchronous, ACMC). The ACMC tools include e-mail, electronic mailing lists (listservs), discussion 
forums, blogs, and wikis. The discussion forums, such as the use of course management systems like 
WebCT, Blackboard, and Moodle, and collaborative Web sites, such as Wikis, can provide language 
learners with a semipublic writing area where they can chat and interact with others using the target 
languages. Personal blogs can be incorporated in the FL curriculum to encourage learners to keep a 
journal of their experience learning a FL language.  
Turning to SCMC, Blake introduces text-based chat programs, such as ICQ, MSN Messenger, and AOL’s 
Instant Messenger, and voice chatting programs such as Breeze, Skype, and YackPack. These tools 
provide learners with opportunities not only to increase the quantity of their written and oral output, but 
also to engage in real interactions with other learners as well as the target language culture and 
community.  
Blake presents a case study to illustrate an ideal SCMC implementation within a psycholinguistic 
framework that focuses on negotiations of meaning and corrective feedback (Doughty & Long, 2003). He 
details the exchange of both text and audio messages between a first-year Spanish L2 student and her 
instructor and discusses how this type of bimodal chatting scaffolds the learner’s linguistic development 
through the instructor’s provision for elaborate input and error correction. For language teachers who are 
experimenting with adding SCMC components to their teaching practices, this case study highlights some 
principal points for consideration, such as the importance of involving learners in the process of message 
exchanges and providing timely feedback orally or in written form to raise learners’ metalinguistic 
awareness. While these points are important, language teachers need to be mindful that the use of SCMC 
tools may incur daunting extra workload; therefore, the teacher’s realistic assessment of the availability of 
time resources is needed.  
Blake moves on to discuss the potential of using CMC tools to additionally foster intercultural 
communicative competence (ICC) within the sociocultural approach to SLA. This method is more 
commonly known as telecollaboration, in which online communication is used to involve language 
learners from different countries to work together on projects or to undertake intercultural exchanges. 
Blake presents the Cultura Project developed at MIT in the late 1990s to showcase how the 
implementation of telecollaboration improved the language ability and ICC of a group of intermediate and 
advanced L2 learners. This project engaged students from France and the United States in exchanges of 
opinions about their own cultural values through different modes of telecollaboration, such as the use of 
online surveys and videoconferences. Blake suggests that successful implementation of telecollaboration 
requires teachers’ active participation in and organization of the activities; additionally, learners’ culture 
Ching-Ni Hsieh Review of Brave New Digital Classroom 
 
and age backgrounds, and the design of the curriculum also need to be taken into consideration. 
Experienced teachers, however, may find these suggestions not drastically different from the 
implementation of non-Web based activities.  
Chapter Five introduces different formats of Distance Learning (DL) language courses, including 
teleconferences, hybrid/blended, and virtual courses. DL refers to the instructional systems that use 
different modes of technologies to deliver language courses online. Teleconferencing involves the use of 
two-way interactive TV that allows teachers to reach students at a remote site; hybrid or blended courses 
combine both classroom instruction and students’ individual work through a technology component while 
in virtual language courses, teachers and students interact with each other entirely online.  
Although DL courses are growing in popularity, little is known about the efficacy of these courses as 
compared to face-to-face courses (Winke & Goertler, 2008).  Blake’s critical review of existing studies 
about hybrid courses, such as Adair-Hauck, Willingham-McLain, and Earnest-Youngs (1999), 
Chenoweth, Jones, and Tucker (2006), Chenoweth and  Murday (2003) and Scida and Saury (2006), 
yields contradictory findings with regard to the value of hybrid courses. He argues that the interpretation 
of these research findings may have been complicated by respective research design and specific learning 
contexts in each study. In contrast, Blake’s review of three studies focusing on courses taught entirely 
online (Blake & Delforge, 2005; Cahill & Catanzaro, 1997; Soo & Ngeow, 1998) brings more uniform 
results. Overall, the improvement in language skills of students who participated in the virtual courses 
was found to be significantly greater than that of students who were in traditional classes. Going beyond 
the scope of previous studies, Blake suggests that future research on the effectiveness of online courses 
needs to consider the effects of other intervening factors on the experimental treatment design, such as 
learner characteristics, teaching methods, and media attributes. Taken together, the exhaustive list of 
literature reviewed provides readers with a better understanding of the capabilities of DL language 
courses and the usefulness of different types of DL formats. The review is also a good source of 
references for interested readers to look for gaps in the effectiveness of DL courses in relation to learner 
variables and instructional methods for further investigation.  
The chapter continues with a discussion of the critical issue of whether DL classes can provide language 
learners with adequate practice in speaking or not. A case study, Spanish Without Walls (SWW), is 
presented to show how DL contributed to learners’ oral proficiency development, making a case for DL 
courses as a possible format of language instruction that enhances oral performance. Drawing upon the 
experience from the SWW project and the divergent findings from previous studies, Blake concludes the 
chapter by stating the real challenge that DL is facing now is how to implement DL courses within a 
sound pedagogical framework, a central theme throughout the book.   
Chapter Six synthesizes the common themes addressed explicitly or implicitly throughout the book. Blake 
re-emphasizes that the cornerstone of the brave new digital classroom is not what but how technology is 
used. A successful technology-enhanced FL curriculum is student-centered, carefully planned, technically 
well-supported, and most importantly, pedagogically well-constructed. To this end, Blake, following 
Selber’s (2004) three types of computer literacy, suggests that teachers and students alike should develop 
not only functional computer literacy, but also critical literacy, which shows their capability to reflect on 
what they are doing, and rhetorical literacy, which refers to users’ ability to put their thoughts about the 
use of technology into practice.  
Blake outlines a specific pedagogy for a rhetorically-based digital classroom with reference to 
Laurillard’s (2002) iterative conversational framework. This framework proposes that after teachers 
initiate or start out certain classroom activities, specific lesson plans need to be formulated based on a 
dialogic process in response to students’ respective ideas and reflections about their own learning. Blake 
suggests that language teachers activate this iterative learning process by using different technological 
tools, such as the Web or CMC tools. Nevertheless, it needs to be pointed out that more concrete 
Language Learning & Technology 25
Ching-Ni Hsieh Review of Brave New Digital Classroom 
 
examples or activities as to how to incorporate the theoretical concepts into actual classroom instruction 
are not provided. Readers may find this framework conceptually sound; however, without more specific 
instruction on the set-up procedure, it may be practically difficult for novice teachers to adopt such an 
approach. Blake ends the chapter by emphasizing the responsibility for the CALL field to train new 
teachers and re-train seasoned educators in the use of technology and to promote teachers’ willingness to 
move toward a more student-centered, technology-enhanced language classroom.  
At the end of the book, an appendix and a glossary are provided. The appendix supplements Chapter Five 
and gives statistical explanations of the learning outcomes in the Spanish Without Walls project. 
Language teachers who are not familiar with basic inferential statistics such as t-tests and p-values will 
find the explanation helpful. The concise glossary that defines technical terms, such as ACMC, ARS, and 
MOO, provides those who are new to the field with a quick and easy way to find definitions.  
Overall, Brave New Digital Classroom: Technology and Foreign Language Learning is a concise, well-
written, and accessible book that will appeal to language teachers, educators, and researchers who are 
interested in learning more about CALL research and best practices in the FL classroom. The organization 
and presentation of the content and the breadth of the discussion in this book reflect Blake’s insightful 
and thorough concerns about the different aspects of technology-enhanced FL curricula. Graduate 
students interested in the field of CALL will find a good deal of references and informed discussion on 
the use of technology in language instruction. One major strength of the book is its emphasis on 
grounding CALL practices within a sound theoretical framework. To this end, Blake dexterously 
interweaves and draws upon interactionist perspectives throughout the book.  
However, the introduction of the theoretical framework is relatively brief and not as in depth as it could 
be. A more thorough discussion of the concepts of input, interaction, different types of corrective 
feedback, implicit and explicit form-focused instruction in relation to SLA development should have been 
added to scaffold readers’ understanding of the relationship between the theoretical underpinning and the 
efficacy of different technological tools. Additionally, while Blake covers a wide range of best practices 
of technological tools in the FL language classroom, hands-on information regarding how to design 
CALL activities and explicit language classroom applications are noticeably absent in the book. For 
example, language teachers may want to know how to design engaging classroom activities using specific 
Web sites, or how to form well-structured CMC-facilitated pair work. More step-by-step procedures as to 
how to set up these activities in the language classrooms would be appreciated by interested language 
teachers who are seeking practical guidance in creating their own teaching materials. Nevertheless, with 
these caveats in mind, readers will find this book a timely contribution to the CALL world and an 
excellent reference on the bookshelf or in the library.  
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER  
Ching-Ni Hsieh is a Ph.D. candidate in the Second Language Studies Program at Michigan State 
University. Her research interests include second language testing and the application of technology in 
performance assessments. She is also interested in using technology to teach culture concepts to language 
learners.  
E-mail: hsiehc12@msu.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Adair-Hauck, B., Willingham-McLain, L., & Earnest-Youngs, B. (1999). Evaluating the integration of 
technology and second language learning. CALICO Journal, 17(2), 269-396. 
Language Learning & Technology 26
Ching-Ni Hsieh Review of Brave New Digital Classroom 
 
Language Learning & Technology 27
Blake, R. J., & Delforge, A. (2005). Language learning at a distance: Spanish without walls [Electronic 
Version]. Selected papers from the 2004 NFLRC Symposium: Distance education, distributed learning 
and language instruction. Retrieved February 21, 2009 from http://nflrc.hawaii.edu/NetWorks 
/NW44/Blake.htm. 
Cahill, D., & Catanzaro, D. (1997). Teaching first-year Spanish on-line. CALICO Journal, 14(2), 97-114. 
Chapelle, C. A. (2001). Computer applications in second language acquisition: Foundations for teaching, 
testing, and research. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Chapelle, C. A. (2003). English language learning and technology: Lectures on applied linguistics in the 
age of information and communication technology. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.  
Chapelle, C. A., & Douglas, D. (2006). Assessing language through computer technology. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Chenoweth, N. A., Jones, C. M., & Tucker, G. R. (2006). Language online: Principles of design and 
methods of assessment. In R. P. Donaldson & M. A. Haggstrom (Eds.), Changing language education 
through CALL (pp. 146-167). Abingdon, VA: Routledge. 
Chenoweth, N. A., & Murday, K. (2003). Measuring student learning in an online French course. 
CALICO Journal, 20(2), 284-314. 
Doughty, C. (1998). Acquiring competence in a second language: Form and function. In H. Byrnes (Ed.), 
Learning foreign and second languages (pp. 128-156). New York: Modern Language Association. 
Doughty, C., & Long, M. (2003). Optimal psycholinguistic environments for distance foreign language 
learning. Language Learning & Technology, 7(3), 50-80. Retrieved February 21, 2009 
from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num3/doughty/default.html. 
Doughty, C., & Williams, J. (Eds.) (1998). Focus on form in classroom second language acquisition. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  
Gass, S. M. (1997). Input, interaction, and the second language learner. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates. 
Hubbard, P. (2006). Evaluating CALL software. In L. Ducate & N. Arnold (Eds.), Calling on CALL: 
From theory and research to new directions in foreign language teaching (pp. 313-318). San Marcos, 
TX: CALICO. 
Krashen, S. (1985). The input hypothesis: Issues and implications. London: Longman. 
Laurillard, D. (2002). Rethinking university teaching: A framework for the effective use of learning 
technologies (2nd Ed.). London: Routledge. 
Long, M. (1991). Focus on form: A design feature in language teaching methodology. In C. Kramsch & 
R. Ginsberg (Eds.), Foreign language research in cross-cultural perspective (pp. 39-52). Amsterdam: 
Benjamins. 
Long, M., & Robinson, P. (1998). Focus on form: Theory, research, and practice. In C. Doughty & J. 
Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in classroom second language acquisition (pp. 15-41). Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Scida, E., & Saury, R. E. (2006). Hybrid courses and their impact on student and classroom performance: 
A case study at the University of Virginia. CALICO Journal, 23(3), 517-531. 
Selber, S. (2004). Multiliteracies for a digital age. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press. 
Soo, K., & Ngeow, Y. (1998). Effective English as a second language (ESL) instruction with interactive 
Ching-Ni Hsieh Review of Brave New Digital Classroom 
 
Language Learning & Technology 28
multimedia: The MCALL project. Journal of Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia, 7(1), 71-89. 
Winke, P., & Goertler, S. (2008). An introduction to distance language learning. In P. Winke & S. 
Goertler (Eds.), Opening doors through distance language education: Principles, perspectives, and 
practices (pp. 1-10). San Marcos, TX: CALICO. 
