 News From Our Sponsors 
 
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS 
Sponsors 
University of Hawai`i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR) 
Co-Sponsor 
Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL) 
 
University of Hawai'i National Foreign Language Resource 
Center (NFLRC) 
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials 
development projects and conducts workshops and conferences for language professionals among its 
many activities. 
2008 SECOND LANGUAGE RESEARCH FORUM 
With the theme, Exploring SLA: Perspectives, Positions, and Practices, the Second Language Research 
Forum (SLRF) returns to the University of Hawai‘i at Manoa for the third time on October 17-19, 2008 
(with the NFLRC serving as co-sponsor). Highlights include plenary talks by Harald Clahsen (University 
of Essex), Alan Firth (Newcastle University), Carmen Muñoz (Universitat de Barcelona), & Richard 
Schmidt (University of Hawai‘i at Manoa); 4 colloquia; and over 150 paper and poster sessions. Visit our 
website for more information. 
1ST INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON LANGUAGE DOCUMENTATION & 
CONSERVATION: SUPPORTING SMALL LANGUAGES 
The 1st International Conference on Language Documentation and Conservation (ICLDC) will be held at 
the University of Hawai‘i at Manoa from March 12-14, 2009. There will also be an optional opportunity 
to visit Hilo, on the Big Island of Hawai'i, in an extension of the conference that will focus on the 
Hawaiian language revitalization program, March 16-17.  Conference sponsors include the UH National 
Foreign Language Resource Center, National Resource Center East Asia, and Center for Pacific Island 
Studies. 
It has been a decade since Himmelmann's article on language documentation appeared and focused the 
field into thinking in terms of creating a lasting record of a language that could be used by speakers as 
well as by academics. This conference aims to assess what has been achieved in the past decade and what 
the practice of language documentation within linguistics has been and can be. It has become apparent 
that there is too much for a linguist alone to achieve and that language documentation requires 
collaboration. This conference will focus on the theme of collaboration in language documentation and 
revitalization and will include sessions on interdisciplinary topics. 
Plenary speakers include Nikolaus Himmelmann (University of Münster), Leanne Hinton (UC Berkeley), 
Paul Newman (Indiana University & University of Michigan), and Phil Cash Cash (University of 
Arizona). 
CALL FOR PROPOSALS: Abstracts are due by September 15, 2008, with notification of acceptance  
by October 17, 2008.  We ask for abstracts of 400 words and a 50-word summary for inclusion in the 
conference program. All abstracts will be submitted to blind peer review by international experts on the 
topic.  See conference website for more details. 
Language Learning & Technology  13
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
NEW NFLRC PUBLICATIONS 
Documenting and Revitalizing Austronesian Languages 
The most recent addition to our group of online journals, Language Documentation and Conservation, 
released this, its first Special Publication. Also available online, the case studies found in this volume lead 
to a discussion of changes in the field of linguistics and the alliances which are being built between 
linguists and community language activists. The 11 chapters in the book touch upon the key themes of 
international capacity building initiatives, documentation and revitalization activities, and computational 
methods and tools for language documentation.  
Check out our many other publications. 
OUR ONLINE JOURNALS SOLICIT SUBMISSIONS 
Language Learning & Technology is a refereed online journal, jointly sponsored by the University of 
Hawai`i NFLRC and the Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research 
(CLEAR). LLT focuses on issues related to technology and language education. For more information on 
submission guidelines, visit the LLT submissions page. 
Language Documentation & Conservation is a fully refereed, open-access journal sponsored by NFLRC 
and published exclusively in electronic form by the University of Hawai‘i Press. LD&C publishes papers 
on all topics related to language documentation and conservation. For more information on submission 
guidelines, visit the LD&C submissions page. 
Reading in a Foreign Language is a refereed online journal, jointly sponsored by the University of 
Hawai`i NFLRC and the Department of Second Language Studies. RFL serves as an excellent source for 
the latest developments in the field, both theoretical and pedagogic, including improving standards for 
foreign language reading. For more information on submission guidelines, visit the RFL submissions 
page. 
 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education 
and Research (CLEAR) 
CLEAR's mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States.  
Projects focus on materials development, professional development training, and foreign language 
research. 
MATERIALS DEVELOPMENT 
Selected Products 
The list below comprises just some of our free and low-cost materials for language educators.  Be sure to 
visit our website occasionally for updates and announcements on new products: http://clear.msu.edu. 
• NEW!  Introductory Business German (CD-ROM) – This CD-ROM provides a condensed, 
highly-focused set of activities intended for use by business professionals who conduct business 
with Germans and German companies and wish to learn more about the German business and 
economics environment. 
• NEW!  Celebrating the World’s Languages: A Guide to Creating a World Languages Day Event 
(guide) – This publication provides a step-by-step guide to planning "World Languages Day," a 
university event for high school students designed to stimulate interest in learning languages and 
to highlight the importance of cultural awareness. 
Language Learning & Technology  14
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
• La phonétique française (CD-ROM) – This cross-platform multimedia program consists of 
interactive lessons that can be used by French teachers to learn how to teach pronunciation, or by 
advanced students working independently. 
• CLEAR’s Rich Internet Applications initiative has been underway for over a year.  RIA is a 
research and development lab where our programmers are working on free tools that language 
teachers can use to create online language teaching materials – or have their students create 
activities themselves! 
o NEW!  Broadcasts (create your own podcasts) 
o Audio Dropboxes (put a dropbox in any web page; students’ recordings get put into your 
dropbox automatically) 
o Conversations (record prompts for students to do virtual interviews and conversations) 
o Mashups (combine media elements to create a new resource for language teaching) 
o Viewpoint (record or upload videos to link from other sites or embed inside your own 
web pages) 
o SMILE (tool for creating interactive online exercises) 
• MIMEA: Multimedia Interactive Modules for Education and Assessment (German, Chinese, 
Arabic, Vietnamese, Korean, Russian; online video clips and activities) 
 
Coming Soon! • More Rich Internet Applications 
• Introductory Business Chinese 
 
CONFERENCES 
CLEAR exhibits at local, regional, and national conferences year-round. We hope to see you at ACTFL, 
CALICO, Central States, MiWLA, NCOLCTL and other conferences. 
 
UPCOMING CONFERENCE PRESENTATIONS 
• MiWLA: Lansing, MI, October 23-24, 2008  
• Session: World Languages Day: Five Years of Free Fun! 
• Session: Online Language Portfolios: A Dynamic Display of Learning 
• ACTFL: Orlando, FL, November 21-23, 2008 
• Session: The Technologies Your Students Use (and that you should, too) 
• Session: Teaching Culture in FL Classrooms: Video Interviews and Critical Incidents 
• Session: Opening Minds to the World through a ‘World Languages Day’ 
NEWSLETTER 
CLEAR News is a biyearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. Contact 
the CLEAR office to join the mailing list or check it out on the Web at http://clear.msu.edu/clear/newsletter/.  
 
The Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL) 
The Center for Applied Linguistics is a private, nonprofit organization that promotes and improves the 
teaching and learning of languages, identifies and solves problems related to language and culture, and 
serves as a resource for information about language and culture. CAL carries out a wide range of 
activities in the fields of English as a second language, foreign languages, testing and assessment, cultural 
education, and linguistics.  
Language Learning & Technology  15
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology  16
Featured Resources: 
• CAL News 
CAL News is our electronic newsletter created to provide periodic updates about our projects and 
research as well as information about new publications, online resources, products, and services of 
interest to our readers. Visit our Web site to sign up. 
• Alliance for the Advancement of Heritage Languages 
The Alliance for the Advancement of Heritage Languages (the Alliance) consists of individuals and 
organizations who share a commitment to advancing language development for heritage language 
speakers in the United States. The Alliance is committed to fostering the development of the heritage 
language proficiencies of individuals in this country as part of a larger effort to educate members of 
our society who can function professionally in English and other languages. The Alliance has 
revamped its Web site to offer expanded content and improved navigation. 
 
• National K-12 Foreign Language Survey Underway 
CAL conducts a national survey of foreign language instruction in elementary and secondary schools 
every decade to gain greater understanding of current patterns and shifts over time in enrollments, the 
number of schools offering foreign language classes, the types of foreign language offerings, foreign 
language curricula and methodologies, teacher qualifications and training, and the effects of NCLB, 
among other issues. We are currently conducting the third survey to be able to show trends in foreign 
language education at three points in time (1987, 1997, 2007). For further details, visit the foreign 
language survey Web page. 
 
• Center for Research on the Educational Achievement and Teaching of English Language 
Learners (CREATE) 
Visit the CREATE Web site to learn more about CREATE, its research, and upcoming events. To 
keep current on CREATE activities, sign up to receive an electronic newsletter and periodic 
announcements.  
• Spotlight on Language Series 
In support of the Discover Languages campaign led by ACTFL, CAL has developed a regular Web 
series to provide information about specific languages. These language spotlights are introductory in 
nature and are intended to encourage readers to explore these languages and CAL’s work with them 
in more detail. Different languages will be highlighted periodically.  
• CAL Services 
CAL provides a variety of professional development and technical assistance services related to 
language education and assessment needs.  
 
Featured Publications: 
• An Insider’s Guide to SIOP Coaching 
• Developing Reading and Writing in Second Language Learners 
• Guiding Principles for Dual Language Education, Second Edition 
• Practitioner’s Toolkit: Working With Adult English Language Learners 
• What’s Different About Teaching Reading to Students Learning English? 
 
Visit CAL’s Web site to learn more about our projects, resources, and services. 
