Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num2/editors.pdf 
June 2009, Volume 13, Number 2
pp. 1-2 
 
Copyright © 2009, ISSN 1094-3501 1
 
FROM THE EDITORS 
We are pleased to present Volume 13, Number 2 of Language Learning & Technology, 
a regular issue of our journal. We hope that your 2008-2009 school year is coming to a 
successful conclusion, and that you are looking forward to a relaxing summer. We have 
assembled four articles, one column, and two reviews covering a wide range of CALL 
topics and languages (Japanese, Spanish, and English).  
“Acquisition of L2 Japanese geminates: Training with waveform displays” by Miki 
Motohashi-Saigo and Debra Hardison presents the results of a training study involving 
perception and production of L2 Japanese by beginning-level English speakers. Results 
showed a significant improvement in geminate identification, especially following 
auditory-visual as compared to auditory-only training. The results support the 
effectiveness of auditory-visual input in L2 perception training with transfer of learning 
to novel stimuli, as well as improved production.  
“Multimedia glosses and their effect on L2 text comprehension and vocabulary learning” 
by Iñigo Yanguas uses the theoretical framework of attention to investigate the effects of 
textual, pictorial, and textual + pictorial glosses on text comprehension and vocabulary 
learning. Results showed that all multimedia gloss groups noticed and recognized 
significantly more target Spanish words than the control (no gloss) group but there were 
no significant differences among the groups in the production of the target words. In 
addition, the study demonstrated that the combination gloss group significantly 
outperformed all other groups in text comprehension. The author concludes that 
combination textual + pictorial glosses are more beneficial than textual or pictorial 
glosses alone for comprehension but not for production of target words. 
“Learner use of holistic language units in multimodal, task-based synchronous 
computer-mediated communication” by Karina Collentine investigates discourse-
pragmatic and sociocultural behaviors in task-based SCMC by documenting holistic 
language use exhibited by intermediate and advanced learners of Spanish in two Flash, 
task-based SCMC activities. She found that while simple assertions were most prevalent 
in dyads at the lower proficiency level, and when chat time was limited, interpersonal, 
sociocultural behaviors were more likely to occur in dyads at higher proficiency levels 
and when there was more time to chat. The study adds to the understanding of the types 
of holistic language units that characterize learner output in a TB-SCMC environment. 
“Voice blog: An exploratory study of language learning”  by Yu-Chih Sun shows that 
students go through a series of blogging stages and use a wide variety of strategies to 
cope with blogging-related difficulties. The study demonstrates that students perceived 
blogging not only as a means of learning a language, but also as a means of self-
presentation, information exchange, and social networking. The findings suggest that 
blogs constitute a dynamic forum that fosters extensive practice, enhances learning 
motivation, and promotes the development of learning strategies. 
Our popular Emerging Technologies column by Bob Godwin-Jones describes a wide 
array of resources that allow instructors and learners to create flexible personal learning 
environments that are better suited to the student-centered approach of modern language 
classrooms and the collaborative environment of Web 2.0 than centralized instructor-
designated, top-down approaches represented by major learning management systems in 
use today. 
 From the Editors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 
 
Two book reviews assembled by Sigrun Besenbach-Lucas, our Reviews Editor, 
complete this issue. Both books are seen by the reviewers as making a timely 
contribution to the growing literature on CALL and deserving of a place on individual 
and library bookshelves. In the first review, Jesús García Laborda evaluates Tips for 
Teaching with CALL: Practical Approaches to Computer-Assisted Language Learning 
[with CD] by Carole Chapelle and Joan Jamieson. The review notes that Tips for 
Teaching with CALL provides a rich source of ideas for implementing a variety of 
CALL-based activities that will be useful to novice and veteran language teachers 
seeking to implement CALL activities in their classrooms.  
In the second review, Ching-Ni Hsieh provides a detailed description and evaluation of 
Brave New Digital Classroom: Technology and Foreign Language Learning by Robert 
Blake. The reviewer notes that Blake bases his advocacy of technology-enhanced FL 
curricula on second language acquisition research and that the book addresses pivotal 
issues regarding the effective implementation of technology in language teaching and 
learning. 
If you are not already a subscriber, please take a few minutes to fill out our free 
subscription form. This enables us to compile useful statistics about the readership of 
our journal.  
We wish you a restful summer and look forward to receiving contributions from all over 
the world and especially those dealing with L2s other than English.  
 
Sincerely, 
Irene Thompson and Dorothy Chun 
Editors 
 
 
2
