Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num1/kessler.pdf 
February 2009, Volume 13, Number 1
pp. 79-95 
 
Copyright © 2009, ISSN 1094-3501 79
STUDENT-INITIATED ATTENTION TO FORM IN WIKI-BASED 
COLLABORATIVE WRITING 
Greg Kessler 
Ohio University 
This study reports on student initiated attention to form within the collaborative 
construction of a wiki among pre-service Non-Native Speaker (NNS) English teachers. 
Forty NNS pre-service teachers from a large Mexican university were observed over a 
period of a sixteen week semester in an online content-based course aimed at improving 
their language skills while studying about the cultures of the English-speaking world. A 
core element of the course was a wiki that was collaboratively created, developed, and 
revised throughout the course. Students were encouraged to focus on language accuracy 
while actively participating and interacting with their peers in varied ways. This article 
explores the degree to which these NNS EFL teacher candidates attempt to correct their 
own and others’ grammar errors in a long-term collaborative task. The article also 
addresses the level of accuracy these participants achieve and the attention they pay to 
grammar revision versus content revision. Follow-up interviews with participants provided 
insight into the perception of the importance of grammar in the context of collaborative 
technologies among these NNS pre-service teachers. 
INTRODUCTION 
One obvious benefit of technology for language learning is the creation of opportunities for students to 
use language in authentic contexts. Such activities encourage students to strive for autonomy in the target 
language. This study investigates student behavior within a long-term autonomous interactive task. The 
primary purpose of this paper is to identify students’ autonomous language learning ability, specifically 
focusing on their attention to grammatical accuracy throughout the task. Their performance is evaluated 
with respect to an autonomy framework (Littlewood, 1996) to identify the degree to which these teacher 
candidates are able to correct their own and others’ grammar errors in a long-term collaborative task. 
Such observation provides us with an understanding of student behavior when engaged in these kinds of 
tasks and environments.  
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Student Attention to Form and Content Based Instruction 
While there is general agreement that some attention to grammar is necessary in language teaching, some 
have argued that inductive, or student-initiated, attention to grammar may be most effective (Long, 1996). 
Stryker (1997) found that the elimination of grammar from content-based instruction (CBI) resulted in 
students’ demanding formal grammar instruction. In the same article, Stryker concludes that the use of 
CBI does not preclude grammar instruction; rather it requires that teachers make informed decisions about 
how and when to teach grammar and encourage the use of self-correcting techniques, thus allowing 
students to develop responsibility for their learning and use of the target language. 
Factors that have been shown to influence students’ attention to form include nature of collaboration 
(Swain, 2000; Swain & Lapkin, 1998), type of task (Storch, 2001; Williams, 1999), student proficiency 
level (Leeser, 2004), and length of task discourse (Williams, 1999). These few studies have investigated 
student-initiated attention to form in classrooms where teachers are present to respond to requests. There 
seems to be no research regarding observation of student-initiated attention to form when working in a 
“student-only” online environment. Further, there has been little discussion over the role that student-only 
tasks may play in students’ autonomous attention to form. 
Greg Kessler Wiki-Based Collaborative Writing 
 
Such tasks may be most relevant for advanced learners. Ellis (2006) concludes that when dealing with 
explicit understanding of grammar it may be best to rely upon deduction for simple rules and induction 
for more advanced rules. While not explicitly addressing CBI, Ellis (2006) states that “focus on form can 
be incidental, where attention to form in the context of a communicative activity is not predetermined but 
rather occurs in accordance with the participants’ linguistic needs as the activity proceeds” (p. 100-1). 
This flexible approach to addressing grammar concerns would alleviate problems of inappropriate 
matching between the grammatical focus of lessons and the needs and interests of students (Garcia Mayo, 
2002). One approach to introducing such flexibility into the language classroom is to employ 
collaborative practices and principles into the learning process.  
Collaboration 
Many have argued for the promotion of collaboration among learners (Bruce, Peyton, & Batson, 1993; 
Storch, 1999). Arnold & Ducate (2006) observed that the context, tools, and participants of a learning 
environment help to mediate collaborative learning. Swain concluded that collaborative activities, “lead 
learners to reflect on their own language production as they attempt to create meaning” (1995, p. 141). 
Researchers have found that collaborative writing contributes to an increased complexity in writing and 
willingness to utilize peer feedback (Sotillo, 2002) as well as increased grammatical accuracy and overall 
quality of writing (Storch, 2005). Some have identified that students are likely to actively engage in 
online collaborative activities due to the public nature of the information and sense of accountability 
(Sengupta, 2001). Through the act of collaboration, students are exposed to valuable input from others 
(Vygotsky, 1962), encouraged to produce enhanced output (Oxford, 1997), given more opportunity for 
practice (Ortega, 2007), and provide effective linguistic feedback for themselves and peers (Vygotsky, 
1978). The evolution of collaborative writing may be intrinsically connected with iterations of technology 
since new developments provide new opportunities for collaboration. Unlike most previous research on 
collaboration, which has focused upon pair and small group work, the current study incorporates wiki 
technology which supports a many-to-many form of collaboration. 
Wikis and Language Learning 
Levy and Stockwell (2006) provide an overview of the distinctions between various types of Computer-
Mediated Communication (CMC), including suggestions that asynchronous CMC may allow for more 
focus on form due to the additional time available for reflection. However, wikis are not included in this 
otherwise comprehensive overview. The literature contains no evidence of research into the use of wikis 
in the context of language learning. Therefore, it may be necessary to provide some background. 
Wikis are unique among CMC tools. CMC tools such as discussion forums, synchronous CMC, email, 
and conferencing tools accommodate the collaborative discussion of ideas well, but students are typically 
expected to produce or perform some task outside the context of the CMC itself. The permanent retention 
of each iteration of posts in a wiki provides users the opportunity to explore the evolution of any wiki 
page, and, if deemed appropriate, replace the current version with a previous iteration. Wikis allow for the 
complete revision of text by any user. Thus, a contribution is not a comment or response (as it might be in 
a blog), but an alteration to the previous contribution. This means that a wiki-based text is in a constant 
state of potential collaborative change. Wikis have been described by the creator of the first wiki 
(wikiwikiweb), Ward Cunningham, as “the simplest online database that could possibly work” (Leuf & 
Cunningham, 2001, p. 4). In addition, they are also very fast. In fact, Cunningham adopted the term wiki 
(intended to be pronounced weekee) from a Hawaiian word for “quick.” 
As Godwin-Jones (2003, p. 15) states, “Wikis are intensely collaborative.” In fact, it is precisely the 
accessibly and extensively open nature of wikis that results in much of the public scrutiny of the 
legitimacy of Wikipedia as a source of academic information. The mere ease with which contributors can 
alter information may be too much of a temptation for those interested in constructing misleading 
information. However, this openness to collaboration may also result in the rapid correction of such 
Language Learning & Technology 80
Greg Kessler Wiki-Based Collaborative Writing 
 
erroneous information. Discussing the emerging technology of wikis, Godwin-Jones states, “Such a 
system only works with users serious about collaborating and willing to follow the group conventions and 
practices” (p. 15). Such responsibility is representative of characteristics associated with autonomy among 
language learners. 
Autonomy in Language Learning 
Learner autonomy is obviously important in SLA. Successful autonomous use of the target language 
should be the ultimate goal of language instruction. As students progress toward autonomy, it is important 
that they develop the ability to self assess their own accuracy (Little, 1999). However, some have 
suggested that the risk of losing control over the classroom may actually deter teachers from helping 
students strive for autonomy (Cotterall, 1995). Research has investigated a number of factors that can 
affect autonomy. Kupetz and Zeigenmeyer (2006) argue that autonomous learning can be achieved by 
encouraging students to “take responsibility and make informed choices” (p. 63). Spratt, Humphreys, and 
Chan (2002) suggest that motivation may be a precursor to autonomy. Benson (1997, 2001) recognizes 
the enormous potential for the development of autonomy through the use of technology, as well as the 
reliance upon autonomy in order to effectively utilize the potential of technology-based learning 
environments. 
The current study contributes to the literature by examining student-initiated attention to form in an 
autonomous collaborative writing environment. Its goals are to determine the degree to which students 
will initiate attempts to correct their own and peer contributions as well as the degree of accuracy that 
they achieve. The current study also seeks to understand students’ perceptions of the autonomous 
collaborative task. It is based on Littlewood’s framework of autonomy which identifies “autonomy as a 
learner” as including “(a) the ability to engage in independent work (e.g., self-directed learning); and (b) 
the ability to use appropriate learning strategies, both inside and outside the classroom” (1996, p. 431). 
The framework divides autonomy into ability and willingness with ability subdivided into knowledge and 
skills and willingness comprised of motivation and confidence.  
METHODOLOGY 
Background information 
The current study was conducted over the course of a sixteen-week semester in an online content-based 
instruction course for Non-Native Speaker (NNS) pre-service English teachers. The course, Cultures of 
the English Speaking World, is an academic course with a secondary function of providing students with 
meaningful target language exposure. The course is a required component of a teacher preparation course 
at a large Mexican university.  The course was delivered through a Moodle-based course management 
system with additional features of Adobe Acrobat Connect and Gong voice board for synchronous and 
asynchronous video and voice interaction, respectively. Students were required to participate at least three 
times a week to stay on top of the required tasks, including weekly discussion forum exchanges, access to 
static and dynamic web-based content, live video lectures, student video presentations, and an ongoing 
collaboration on a wiki. The wiki, intended to serve as a final product of the class, allowed students to 
collectively define the rather abstract term culture throughout the 15-week long course. While there may 
be myriad benefits for this kind of collaboration, this study is concerned with student-initiated attention to 
grammar.  
Research Questions 
The following research questions guided this study: 
1. To what degree will NNS EFL teacher candidates perform autonomously as they attempt to 
correct their own and others’ grammar errors in a long-term collaborative writing task? 
Language Learning & Technology 81
Greg Kessler Wiki-Based Collaborative Writing 
 
2. How accurate will they be in making these peer and self corrections? 
3. What can these postings tell us about students and long-term web-based collaborative writing? 
Students and Instructor 
The 40 students in this class were all in their final year of a BA program in English Language Teaching in 
Mexico. They ranged in age from 21-23 years old. They all received passing grades and participated 
extensively throughout the class. All of the students in this class were at the same level of second 
language proficiency according to a series of inhouse English proficiency exams. The students 
demonstrated comfort and familiarity with the technology. They were required to complete an integrated 
online orientation to the course management system that provided the researcher a detailed (mouse click 
by mouse click) record of their performance through the students’ automated orientation to the course site, 
course expectations, and varieties of media and links they would be expected to utilize. Records of their 
progress illustrated a high level of user capability. However, there were a small number of students who 
demonstrated slight difficulty accessing some resources. These students participated in a videoconference 
learner training session with the instructor that guided them in the use of these resources. Learner training 
is important for successful use of instructional technology (Hubbard, 2004). 
This study introduced wiki technology in the first week and required students to locate and report on 
information related to culture, the class' area focus, that they had found through Wikipedia. Students 
collected data and reflected on the accuracy of this information by referring to external sources of 
information. All of them were familiar with wikis (in the form of Wikipedia) before it was introduced in 
the class. The instructor (who is also the researcher) teaches in an intensive English program with 20 
years of experience teaching ESL and EFL in varied settings, including numerous experiences using 
technology in the language classroom and at a distance. 
The Task 
The Wiki collaboration task was treated very differently from other tasks in the course. Other tasks 
included an extensive amount of presentation, feedback, and interaction between students and the teacher, 
including feedback regarding grammatical accuracy. It was not unusual for discussions to reach eight 
layers of embedding, suggesting active ongoing interaction. The wiki task was initiated by the teacher and 
left up to the students. It was their responsibility to collaboratively construct the wiki as a reflection of 
what they had learned in the class as a community. There was no intervention from the teacher. This was 
intentional to determine if the autonomous constructivist activity would enable students to establish a 
sense of responsibility for the ongoing maintenance and revision of the document. The wiki itself was 
constructed within the content management system, resulting in a safe password-protected environment 
for students to share ideas and take risks with their language. The intent of this study was for this group of 
students to be solely responsible for the construction of knowledge. They would not receive feedback, 
updates, revisions, or elaborations from anyone other than their immediate peers, thus encouraging a 
sense of responsibility. 
Students were encouraged to cull what they perceived to be the highlights of the other activities into the 
collaborative construction of this wiki. Four times throughout the quarter (Weeks 1, 5, 9, and 13) they 
were sent a simple set of instructions to guide them to participate:  
Please remember to contribute to our wiki. This wiki belongs only to our course and will 
allow us to collaboratively integrate all of our various thoughts on the meaning of culture 
into a cohesive idea. You can edit, delete, add and alter information. Remember there will 
be a record of the changes you make so try to be constructive. You should also strive for 
accuracy both in content and language. 
Language Learning & Technology 82
Greg Kessler Wiki-Based Collaborative Writing 
 
These instructions were intentionally left brief and free of information related to the topic in order to 
allow for the observation of student behavior without undue influence from the prompt. 
Data & Analysis 
Most previous studies of collaborative writing have focused on the face-to-face, or CMC-based, metatalk 
of students as they progressed through collaborative writing tasks. The present study relies upon the data 
provided by the wiki itself rather than face-to-face observations. When a student chooses to alter a portion 
of the wiki text, she must select the portion that she will work with. Portions are typically divided into 
sentences, paragraphs, or a series of paragraphs in a particular subtopic. In this study only the portion of 
the text that the student demonstrates attention toward at the editing level is taken into consideration. 
Thus, an error that is overlooked at the beginning of a portion chosen for editing is counted, but an error 
in a previous sentence or paragraph is not. This approach only holds students accountable for the portion 
of the test they choose to edit, ignoring the interaction with any peripheral text. Language related episodes 
(LREs; Swain & Lapkin, 1995) were used to identify learner attention to form throughout the 
construction of the wiki. Typically LREs refer to the metalinguistic attention to discourse between 
students rather than actual language use. For the purposes of this study an LRE is defined as any language 
oriented contribution to the wiki. Alterations that were not considered germane include alteration of 
visual style and inclusion of hypertext links, images, and other media. LREs were coded according to the 
following: 
• Form Only, Content Only, Form/Content, Content/Form 
• Accurate, Not Accurate 
For the purposes of this coding, Form/Content was used to refer to revisions that seemed to focus on form 
with some additional, often minor or extraneous, alteration to the content of the text. The label 
Content/Form was used to refer to revisions that seemed to focus on the content with a minor contribution 
to the form. Data analysis was conducted independently by two trained raters. These raters both hold 
Masters degrees in Linguistics. Both were given the basic preceding LRE categorization and told to 
identify error types as they emerged. Thus, coding was established in an ongoing manner as the raters 
interacted with the data. The raters negotiated three isolated LREs where they did not initially agree about 
coding. Thus, inter-rater reliability was (0.99). The error categories that emerged during the analysis 
included: 
• Articles 
• Coordination 
• Fragment 
• Part of speech 
• Punctuation 
• Run on sentence 
• Spelling 
• Subject/Verb agreement 
• Word choice 
Follow-up interviews were conducted with the students to gain insight into their decision-making process 
and develop an understanding of their willingness and ability to attend to the form errors observed in the 
wiki. As the autonomy framework establishes, there is a distinction between ability and willingness in the 
demonstration of autonomy (Littlewood, 1996). All of the participants were invited to participate in the 
interviews. A total of twenty interviews were conducted. Each of these was between ten and twenty 
minutes in length. These were done individually with the participants after the completion of the course 
by the instructor and were guided by the questions in Appendix. Each interview also provided an 
opportunity to ask students about their individual contributions and any changes they might have 
overlooked. Interviews were conducted using desktop video conferencing software.  
Language Learning & Technology 83
Greg Kessler Wiki-Based Collaborative Writing 
 
FINDINGS 
The overall tendency among participants was to focus on meaning rather than form. When form was 
central to a revision, it was nearly always accompanied by some additional contribution to the content 
rather than an isolated incidence of error-correction. Although the students were capable of achieving a 
level of grammatical accuracy in their more formal writing, they seem to consider a web-based 
collaborative activity to be less form demanding. They tended to defer to meaning, and often even design 
and style, rather than attend to grammatical concerns. In many cases they were willing to devote a great 
deal of time altering font and adding links to support the content of sentences that contained numerous 
grammatical errors. When asked about this observation, some responded that they had no problem 
understanding the meaning of the sentences in question and, thus, they did not bother to correct these 
errors. 
A total of 233 edits were made by the students in an overall history of 160 total iterations of the wiki. 
This indicates that some iterations involved multiple contributions. Among these 233 edits, 169 (73%) 
involved LREs while 64 (27%) of the total contributions involved no LREs. These 64 contributions 
addressed formatting, font, or other design issues. An overview of all contributions is given in Table 1.  
Table 1. Focus of LRE Wiki Contributions 
 Form Content Form / 
Content 
Content / 
Form 
Total (LRE) Other (non-LRE) 
 
Total Number 29 92 6 42 64 64 
Percent of LREs 17% 54% 3% 25%   
Percent of Total 12% 39% 3% 18% 73%* 27% 
*Total does not match summation of categories due to rounding. 
Of the 169 contributions that involved LREs, twenty-nine (17%) were form-only. Ninety-two (54%) were 
content-only. Six (3%) were form-focused with some additional contribution to content. Forty-two (25%) 
were content focused with some attention to form. Seventy-seven (45%) of the LREs included some 
element of attention to form (Form + Form/Content + Content/Form). These are the contributions upon 
which these findings will focus.  First we will take a look at the types of errors which students were most 
likely to attend to. 
Table 2. Error Type and Student-Initiated Attention to Form 
Error Type Number of Student Initiated LREs (%) 
Word Choice 25 (32) 
Spelling 19 (25) 
Coordination 8 (10) 
Subject/Verb 
Agreement 
8 (10) 
Word Form 6 (8) 
Article  3 (4) 
Run on Sentence 2 (3) 
Style 2 (3) 
Punctuation 2 (3) 
Fragment 1 (1) 
Preposition 1 (1) 
Total 77 (100) 
 
 
Language Learning & Technology 84
Greg Kessler Wiki-Based Collaborative Writing 
 
Error Type and Attention 
Student initiated attention to form was divided into ten categories. The breakdown of these ten error types 
is presented in Table 2.  
Students initiated an attempt to correct word choice and spelling errors much more than anything else. In 
fact, these two error types combined accounted for 39 (51%) of the 77 revisions that attended to form. 
Individually, word choice accounted for 25 (32%) and spelling accounted for 19 (25%) of the 77 attempts. 
Coordination and Subject/Verb agreement each accounted for 8 (10%) of the LREs primarily or 
secondarily focused on form.   
Accuracy  
Among all 77 LREs that were primarily or secondarily focused on form, 41 (53%) were accurate. Among 
the 35 form-focused LREs, 22 (63%) were accurate. The breakdown of accuracy across incidents is 
presented in Table 3. 
Table 3. Error Type and Accuracy 
Error Type Accuracy Percentage Correct 
Word Choice 13 of 25 52% 
Spelling 10 of 19 53% 
Coordination 4 of 8 50% 
Subject/Verb Agreement 4 of 8 50% 
Word Form 4 of 6 50% 
Article Problem 3 of 3  100% 
Style 1 of 2  50% 
Fragment 1 of 1 100% 
Preposition 1 of 1 100% 
 
Among the 41 accurately identified and addressed corrections, 13 dealt with word choice. Most of these 
changes were justified by students as attempts to achieve enhanced academic register. The following 
example illustrates an acceptable sentence altered for this purpose: 
(Note for all the following examples the [ – ] indicates text omitted in the LRE and the [ + ] indicates the 
replacement text. Errors are identified by bold text) 
-Culture means that we can do many things that are different from other societies. 
+Culture means that we can do many things that distinguish us from other societies. 
The second most frequently addressed form was spelling. 10 (25%) of the 41 accurate corrections were 
devoted to spelling. The final wiki still included more spelling mistakes than any other error type (7 of 
18). This example illustrates an adherence to North American English spelling conventions while striving 
for concision. 
-In other words we can summarize that culture is a system of shared beliefs, values 
customs, behaviours, and artifacts that the members of society use to cope with their 
world and with one another and that are transmitted form generation to generation through 
learning. 
+In other words we can summarize that culture is a the totality of socially transmitted 
behavior patterns, arts, beliefs, institutions, and all other products of human work and 
thought. 
Language Learning & Technology 85
Greg Kessler Wiki-Based Collaborative Writing 
 
Attention to coordination errors was initiated a total of 8 times. Four (50%) of these were performed 
accurately. One such attempt combined attention to coordination with what is often deemed to be a 
stylistic preference in academic writing. 
-So far we have mentioned what “culture” is, but I consider it is important to mention what 
it is NOT. “Culture” is NOT something we can touch or something we can see. It is a 
belief, it is in our minds, it is part of us.  
+So far we have mentioned what “culture” is, but I consider it is important to mention 
what it is NOT. “Culture” is NOT something we can touch or something we can see. It is a 
belief, it is in our minds, and it is part of us. 
A total of 4 (10%) of the accurately addressed revisions dealt with subject and verb agreement issues.  
-One important thing that really enrich every culture is the use of body language and 
gestures because they express the traditions of a country.  
+One important thing that really enriches every culture is the use of body language and 
gestures because they express the traditions of a country. In the same way, idioms show 
the popular way in which speaker represent their country because each idiom expresses an 
idea which is understood by certain people.  
In addition to addressing the issue of subject/verb agreement, the student adds a new contribution, albeit 
one offering opportunities for others to further identify and correct errors. By the end of the course this 
portion was completely rewritten and elaborated upon to result in the following: 
In addition, nonverbal communication or the use of gestures and body language are also 
part of a culture and they can be interpreted as having communication without words. 
There is not only an oral way of communicating and gestures and body language are also 
amazing human creations in each culture. We can communicate with gestures, clothing, 
eye contact, and some intentional phrases which are not literal. The use of gestures as a 
mean of communication is different in some countries because of history and cultural 
characteristics. In other words, using gestures and body language vary among different 
cultures. In the same way that languages vary in all the cultures, the different codes we 
have to communicate vary in signs and meanings. 
A total of 8 attempts were made to correct what seemed to be previously accurate discourse, including 
one discussed in word choice. While it is obvious that students demonstrated an interest in addressing 
issues of word choice, 48% of word choice attempts resulted in error. This example illustrates a student’s 
preference for the word begins over starts. Yet, the student misspells begins: 
-We have to take into consideration that we belong to a society and there is where 
“culture” starts.  
+We have to remember that we are part and belong to a society and there is where 
“culture” beguines.  
In a follow-up interview this student explained this word choice as more academic. However, the 
misspelling of the word and introduction of new words defeats this intention.  
In some cases errors were simply deleted from a passage with no other content change or attempt to 
otherwise alter the sentence. Further, there was often no attempt to address other errors present in the 
portion of text selected. 
 
 
Language Learning & Technology 86
Greg Kessler Wiki-Based Collaborative Writing 
 
-I read something related to the use of space and gestures in different countries. For 
example, there are high. In other words, using gestures and body language vary among 
different cultures. In the same way that languages vary in all the cultures, the different 
codes we have to communicate vary in signs and meanings 
+I read something related to the use of space and gestures in different countries. In other 
words, using gestures and body language vary among different cultures. In the same way 
that languages vary in all the cultures, the different codes we have to communicate vary in 
signs and meanings 
In follow up interviews with students, they demonstrated the ability to quickly correct all of the errors in 
question. In most cases they considered them to be (as one of the students said) “minor annoyances that 
did not distract from meaning.” An example of such an error includes the wrong verb form in the initial 
sentence: 
As it is stated before, each country has its own culture, but we may find some differences among 
people. From these differences, other groups come out, which are named subcultures 
This easily overlooked type of error was typical throughout the LREs. However, many others are quite 
obvious to the trained observer. None of the errors produced during the process of the wiki collaboration 
were identified by raters as potentially confusing. The low severity of the errors may have contributed to 
the fact that they were overlooked. Some specific errors were overlooked repeatedly and a total of 18 
remained in the final document. Many of these were not overlooked as they were in portions of the text 
that were never revised. The nature and extent of overlooked errors may be the most interesting aspect of 
this study. 
Overlooked Errors 
Throughout the sixteen weeks there were 46 overlooked errors. These are extant errors that students failed 
to address while contributing to the same sentence. This total includes errors that were repeatedly 
overlooked. The total of distinct overlooked errors was 18. To reiterate the methodology, these errors 
were only counted if they existed within the units of the contribution in question. Table 4 provides an 
overview of the nature of overlooked errors. 
Table 4. Overlooked Errors 
Error Type Overlooked  Percentage of Total 
Punctuation 10  22% 
Word Form 8 17% 
Coordination 7 15% 
Word Choice 7 15% 
Spelling 6 13% 
Article Problem 3 6% 
Run-on Sentence 2 4% 
Preposition 2 4% 
Subject/Verb Agreement 2 4% 
Total 46 100% 
 
Among 46 LREs, students elaborated upon content without attending to the pre-existing error. Perhaps 
due to the advanced level of the students in this class, sentence-level errors were rather limited compared 
to word-level errors. Due to the higher frequency of word-level errors there appears to be a higher rate of 
these being overlooked, but proportionally there is negligible difference. 
Language Learning & Technology 87
Greg Kessler Wiki-Based Collaborative Writing 
 
The vast majority of postings dealt primarily with content. In many cases content was addressed while 
overlooking form. Many of the content-only contributions overlooked multiple errors in a passage while 
adding content. This example illustrates spelling errors, missing verbs, and awkward word choices: 
(Note, some overlooked potential corrections are indicated between brackets) 
-Culture, a very common word used by most of the people. But do we really know what it 
means? Most of the people have a wrong idea about what culture is. We tend to associate 
this concept to the kwoldge that a person has. However, knowledge is just part of a big 
group of elements that conform Culture. 
+Culture, [is] a very common word used by most [of the] people. But do we really know 
what it means? Most of the people have a wrong idea about what culture is. We tend to 
associate this concept to the kwoldge that a person has. However, knowledge is just part 
of a big group of elements that conform Culture. However it is an essential element that 
defines a person. 
In some cases, errors were overlooked while students were attending to rather minor design conventions, 
such as color of font, placement of quotation marks for emphasis, or elimination of redundant spacing. 
This is illustrated below: 
-Culture  "is the full range of learned human behavior patterns". This means that culture is 
the way a person acts according to where he/she lives and the environment that sorrounds 
him/her. 
+Culture "is the full range of learned human behavior patterns". This means that culture is 
the way a person acts according to where he/she lives and the environment that sorrounds 
him/her. 
The redundant space after the first word in this paragraph is removed while the spelling of “surrounds” is 
unaddressed.  
In a number of examples there is an addition of information without any attention to numerous errors in 
the extant text. 
-From all of the above, I can say that culture is the set of characteristics acquired and that 
tell who we are, where we are from, and whom we are with and that culture goes hand to 
hand with society [Runon]. 
+From all of the above, I can say that culture is the set of characteristics acquired and that 
tell who we are, where we are from, and whom we are with and that culture goes hand to 
hand with society [Runon intact]. It also involves how people behave in a society. 
Besides that, it allows us to know its customs, values, beliefs and so on. 
While students obviously overlooked slightly more errors than they chose to accurately correct, they 
demonstrated a willingness to participate in the collaborative activity. They engaged in both peer- and 
self-editing throughout the semester. 
Peer- and Self-Editing 
Students were not hesitant to edit their peers’ postings. In fact, they demonstrated more willingness to edit 
their peers’ writing than their own. A total of 130 of the iterations were devoted to contributing to others’ 
previous contributions. Table 5 shows comparisons between peer- and self-editing across individuals.  
 
 
Language Learning & Technology 88
Greg Kessler Wiki-Based Collaborative Writing 
 
Table 5. Summary of Peer- and Self-Edits 
Student Form Content Form/Content Content/Form Other  
(non LRE) 
Total 
1  P2, S2 P1 P1 S1 P4, S3 
2 P2 S3  S1 S3 P2, S7 
3  P1, S2  S2 S1 P1, S5 
4 P1 S2   P1, S2 P2, S4 
5  P1, S1 P1 S2  P2, S3 
6 P1 S1  P1 S1 P2, S2 
7 P1 P2, S2  S2 S2 P3, S6 
8 P1 S2   S1 P1, S3 
9  P3, S3  S2  P3, S5 
10  S1 P1 S1 P1, S1 P2, S3 
11  P3, S2    P3, S2 
12 P2 S1  S1 S1 P2, S3 
13 P1 P1, S2   S1 P2, S3 
14 P1 S2  P1 S3 P2, S5 
15 P2 S3  S1  P2, S4 
16 P1 S2   S3 P1, S5 
17  P1, S2  P1, S1 S1 P2, S4 
18 P1 S2   S1 P1, S3 
19  P1, S1  S1 P1, S5 P2, S7 
20 P1 S2   S1 P1, S3 
21 P1 S2  P2, S1 S1 P3, S4 
22 P1 P2, S1   S4 P3, S5 
23  P1, S1  S1  P1, S2 
24 P1 S3  S1 S1 P1, S5 
25 P1 P1   S3 P2, S3 
26 P1 S2  S1  P1, S3 
27 P1 S1   P1, S1 P2, S2 
28  P1, S1  S2 S2 P1, S5 
29 P1 S2    P1, S2 
30  S3  P2, S2 S3 P2, S8 
31 P2 S1   S1 P2, S2 
32  S2 P1 P1 S1 P2, S3 
33 P1 S2   P1 P2, S2 
34  P1, S3  S2 S3 P1, S8 
35 P1 S2   S1 P1, S3 
36  S2 P2 P1, S2  P3, S4 
37 P1    S4 P1, S4 
38 P1 S1  P1, S2  P2, S3 
39 P1 S1  P1, S2 P1, S1 P3, S4 
40  P2   S5 P2, S5 
Total P29 P23,S69 P6 P12, S30 P6, S58  
Note: S=Self-edit and P=Peer-edit (for example, P2 indicates that a student performed two peer-edits 
while S3 indicates a student performed three self-edits) 
These totals reflect LREs and other contributions to illustrate the focus students placed upon the latter. 
When addressing issues of formatting and other non-LRE related contributions, students were primarily 
self-editing. In fact, students engaged in much more self-editing overall, but the form-focused edits were 
Language Learning & Technology 89
Greg Kessler Wiki-Based Collaborative Writing 
 
primarily peer-focused. Peer-editing contributions included 72 of the 77 form-oriented LREs. All of the 
35 form-focused contributions were peer revisions. This supports the notion that students were willing 
and able to work collaboratively in the autonomous environment. Thirty iterations were devoted to self-
correcting. 25 of these involved corrections of content or style while five involved issues of accuracy. 
Although this number may be small, the overall peer- and self-editing activity seems to be spread broadly 
across the students. All of the 40 students demonstrated at least one incident of self-correction of some 
sort. 26 of the occurrences of self-correction happened within ten minutes of a previous contribution. 
Self-correcting in such an environment may be support for the notion that public display of texts instills a 
sense of responsibility and obligation.   
DISCUSSION 
The first research question addresses students’ autonomous performance in a long-term collaborative 
writing task. The results suggest that students were able to meet the knowledge and skills subcomponents 
of ability within Littlewood’s (1996) autonomy framework, but lacked the motivation and/or confidence 
subcomponents of willingness. Considering the high frequency of peer-edits, the students appear 
confident in their collaboration. The nature of peer-edits also suggests that students were not afraid to 
critique one another. It appears that they lacked the willingness to attend to form issues that they were 
quite capable of correcting. It appears that there is a contextualized willingness and an associated 
continuum of tolerance regarding form; students simply did not address issues of form that did not 
impede meaning. In the interviews, students expressed surprise that there would be any focus on grammar 
following this activity despite the fact that the prompt explicitly encouraged them to strive for accuracy 
both in content and language. Two astute observers mentioned that since they hadn’t been corrected 
explicitly they didn’t bother to focus on the form of their contributions. In fact, these same two 
individuals found this activity to be “extremely liberating” and “a lot of fun” due to the lack of explicit 
attention to grammar. These students both explained that they teach grammar explicitly because that is 
how they were taught, but they would reconsider this approach in their future teaching. This response runs 
counter to Stryker’s (1997) suggestion that the lack of grammar in a Content-Based Instruction context 
may result in students demanding explicit grammar instruction. Perhaps a limited amount of teacher 
intervention, or some external incentive, would encourage more attention to issues of accuracy.  
The second research question concerns level of accuracy in peer- and self-editing. Participants in this 
study were willing to contribute to the collaborative task in the form of peer- and self-editing. Self-editing 
was primarily focused on revisions unrelated to form while peer-editing addressed form more frequently. 
The students demonstrated an ability to perform autonomously but did not demonstrate an equivalent 
willingness to strive for perfect grammatical accuracy. When presented with grammatical errors they had 
made in the autonomous task, they were able to quickly resolve them in the follow-up interviews. These 
findings are consistent with those of Williams (1999) in regard to the nature of students’ initiation of 
attention to form: students will focus on form when engaged in meaning-based tasks, albeit infrequently. 
It also supports Storch’s (2001) findings that writing tasks result in less student-initiated attention to form. 
However, this experiment with many-to-many collaborative writing did not appear to contribute to an 
increased grammatical accuracy as previous studies have found in pair or small group peer collaborative 
tasks (Storch, 2005). 
Question 3 regards the overall nature of student long-term collaborative writing. Other observations 
indicate that students were more likely to be accurate when focusing on grammar rather than correcting 
grammar as a secondary act while focusing on meaning. Since the primary focus of their contributions 
leaned toward content, the accuracy of their self-initiated attention to form may have suffered. In fact, 
students frequently overlooked glaring grammatical issues that they later demonstrated ability to correct, 
while attending to rather insignificant issues of formatting, font, and other personal stylistic preferences. 
In spite of this lack of accuracy, interviews revealed that students seemed to be satisfied with the level of 
Language Learning & Technology 90
Greg Kessler Wiki-Based Collaborative Writing 
 
accuracy for the context of this task. Based upon information gathered in follow up interviews, this lack 
of attention to form is the result of two factors: the informal context of the collaborative writing 
environment and the perceived low-impact nature of the errors themselves. While this may be enhanced 
by an increased priority upon the role of form, it may simply indicate that this level of grammatical 
accuracy was acceptable for the context of this task. Students were not distracted by the errors due to the 
lack of severity, and they were much more focused on addressing issues of meaning and design. An 
acceptable level of tolerance for errors may play an important role in the development of autonomy 
through autonomous tasks.  
Pedagogical Implications 
Autonomous environments may encourage participation and enhance collaborative creation of 
information, but it may be necessary that the teacher experiment with a variety of roles (including no role 
at all) in order to allow competent advanced students to explore topics extensively. Such extensive self-
guided exploration encourages the autonomy that learners need to acquire language (Little, 2007). While 
many tasks in a content-based class may involve elements of, or even a focus on, form, it may be equally 
important to provide students with tasks that do not introduce the power dynamics of the teachers’ 
presence. In fact, there may be an unseen benefit for the advanced-level students in the form of greater 
output (Oxford, 1997), more opportunity for practice (Ortega, 2007), or a greater sense of autonomy 
(Benson, 1997). Each of these characteristics may contribute to linguistic development, particularly for 
more advanced language learners. The task and environment may influence these fluency building 
practices as well as their attention to accuracy.  
Students may benefit from a carefully created and controlled environment that encourages autonomous 
collaboration without the teacher playing a strong presence or any presence at all once the collaboration is 
underway. It may be fruitful to provide a variety of collaborative tasks in order to find optimal conditions 
for particular groups of language learners and their unique needs. With a limited body of research on the 
use of wikis in the language classroom, language teachers should embrace the opportunity to experiment 
and observe students’ use in varied collaborative tasks with varied teacher content and form-focused 
intervention.  
Limitations and Recommendations for Future Research 
With the increased use of collaborative tools such as wikis it is inevitable that more research will provide 
insight into the ways these tools can best serve the needs of teachers and students. This study explores the 
potential of student-centered autonomous collaborative writing tasks used by NNS EFL teacher 
candidates in Mexico. While the results of this study may be valuable for a variety of contexts, there are 
certainly student populations who do not have much in common with the participants in this study. 
Replicating this study with other groups of language students from a variety of language backgrounds and 
contexts would enhance the conclusions of this study. Future research may also examine the students’ 
interaction with the text in varied ways.  
Unlike previous studies, which have taken place in face-to-face classrooms and focused on tasks or 
number of turns necessary to resolve issues of form (Storch, 2001; Williams, 1999), this task took place 
in an autonomous web based teacherless environment. The attention to form was comparable to these 
previous studies. While it may be disappointing that students did not demonstrate the willingness to 
correct form in an autonomous task, there may be much to learn from this observation. It seems that 
students in this study achieved an acceptable threshold of accuracy for the context in which they were 
working. In fact, it seems that they may establish different thresholds for different settings and tasks. 
Perhaps the very nature of the teacherless space encourages a more relaxed attitude toward accuracy.  
Follow up interviews indicated that students considered the discussion forums and wiki to be very 
different environments due to the intervention of the teacher in the discussion forums. This may provide 
Language Learning & Technology 91
Greg Kessler Wiki-Based Collaborative Writing 
 
interesting opportunities for future research. Future researchers may also consider holding students 
accountable for the whole of a text, rather than the small portions they choose to edit, since each alteration 
essentially creates an entirely new iteration of the text as a whole. The limited amount of form correction 
overall, and self-correction in particular, suggests that even students at this advanced level of proficiency 
may need more teacher intervention or grading incentive when working in autonomous environments. 
Constructing alternate wiki-based tasks with varying degrees of teacher intervention while maintaining a 
modicum of autonomy for students may also contribute to a better understanding of the optimal role of a 
teacher in creating and maintaining autonomous learning environments. 
CONCLUSION 
The notion of an autonomous environment in which students can collaboratively construct meaning 
without any teacher intervention is appealing and may contribute to autonomy through increased 
opportunities for practice. However, the use of autonomous space may require some additional 
management in order for students to reap all potential benefits. It appears that students are willing to 
collaborate in such autonomous environments, but they may not have the inherent willingness to strive for 
total accuracy. It may be important to provide students with varied contexts in which they can interact. 
They may benefit simultaneously from autonomous contexts in which they do not feel compelled to strive 
for accuracy as well as contexts that provide explicit demands for accuracy. Students in this study 
demonstrated the ability to correct and learn from their own and classmates’ form errors, but not the 
willingness to do so when working in an online context, engaged in a task that they recognized as 
primarily focused on the creation of meaning. In fact, it appears that the degree of accuracy that 
participants achieved was acceptable for their purposes in this task. This may indicate that certain tasks 
and environments require more explicit practices and related expectations. 
The teacher candidates felt that they would like to utilize similar tasks in their own teaching with perhaps 
a slight inclusion of teacher intervention. If an increased level of accuracy were determined to be 
necessary, perhaps students could be encouraged to attend more to accuracy. Perhaps the inclusion of 
non-Spanish speakers, or even native English speakers, would motivate students to strive for greater 
accuracy. Perhaps a sequence of regularly scheduled activities alternating between a focus on content and 
accuracy would accomplish this goal. Future research will certainly contribute to interesting variations of 
this collaborative construction task, including the degree of intervention by teachers. 
 
APPENDIX 
Questions that Guided Interviews 
• What did you think were the merits and weaknesses of the different forms of computer-based 
communication used in the course? 
• Discussions   Chat  Wiki  Skype 
• What was your preferred form of computer-based communication used in the course? 
• What was you impression of the weekly discussions? 
• Did you benefit from the exchange of ideas with your peers? 
• If so, can you think of one example? 
• Do you think your peers benefited from your contributions to the discussions? 
• If so, can you think of one example? 
• What did you think of the use of Wikipedia as a source for content? 
• Do you think your peers benefited from your contributions to the wiki? 
• Did you benefit from your peers contributions to the wiki? 
• What was your overall impression of the collaborative wiki writing task? 
Language Learning & Technology 92
Greg Kessler Wiki-Based Collaborative Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 93
• What was your overall impression of the Moodle site? 
• What was your favorite aspect of the site? 
• Did you enjoy using the Moodle site as a student? 
• Would you consider using a system like Moodle as a teacher? 
• Would you consider using online discussions as a teacher? 
• Would you consider using a collaborative wiki as a teacher? 
• What do you think about this contribution that you made to the wiki? 
• Is there anything else about the class that you would like to share? 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The author wishes to express his gratitude to Dr. Dawn Bikowski and Mike Dombroski for their 
contributions to this study. The author also greatly appreciates the editors and reviewers for their valuable 
insights and careful consideration. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Greg Kessler is an assistant professor of CALL and interim director of the Language Resource Center at 
Ohio University. His research interests include CALL teacher preparation, CALL use in innovative 
pedagogical contexts and student and teacher autonomy in CALL contexts. 
E-mail: kessler@ohio.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Arnold, N., & Ducate, L. (2006). Future foreign language teachers’ social and cognitive collaboration in 
an online environment. Language Learning & Technology, 10(1), 42-66. Retrieved March 4, 2008, 
from http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num1/arnoldducate/default.html. 
tml. 
Benson, P. (1997). The philosophy and politics of learner autonomy. In P. Benson, & P. Voller (Eds.), 
Autonomy and independence in language learning (pp. 18-34). London: Longman. 
Benson, P. (2001). Teaching and researching autonomy in language learning. London: Longman. 
Bruce, B., Peyton, J.K., & Batson, T. (1993). Network-based classrooms: Promises and realities. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Cotterall, S. (1995). Developing a course strategy for learner autonomy. ELT Journal, 49(3), 219-227. 
Ellis, R. (2006). Current issues in the teaching of grammar: An SLA perspective. TESOL Quarterly, 40(1), 
83–107. 
Garcia Mayo, M.P. (2002). The effectiveness of two form-focused tasks in advanced EFL pedagogy. 
International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 12(2), 156-175. 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2003). Blogs and wikis: Environments for on-line collaboration. Language Learning 
& Technology, 7(2), 12-16. Retrieved March 4, 2008 
from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/emerging/default.h
Hubbard, P. (2004). Learner training for effective use of CALL. In S. Fotos, & C. Browne (Eds.), New 
perspectives on CALL for second language classrooms (pp. 3-14). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates. 
Greg Kessler Wiki-Based Collaborative Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 94
Kupetz, R., & Zeigenmeyer, B. (2006). Flexible learning activities fostering autonomy in teaching 
training. ReCALL, 18(1), 63-82. 
Leeser, M. (2004). Learner proficiency and focus on form during collaborative dialogue. Language 
Teaching Research, 8(1), 55-81. 
Leuf, B., & Cunningham, W. (2001). The wiki way: Quick collaboration on the web. Boston: Addison 
Wesley. 
Levy, M., & Stockwell, G. (2006). CALL dimensions: Options and issues in computer-assisted language 
learning. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Little, D. (1999). Developing learner autonomy in the foreign language classroom: A social-interactive 
view of learning and three fundamental pedagogical principles. Revista Canaria De Estudios Ingleses, 38, 
77-88.  
Little, D. (2007). Language learner autonomy: Some fundamental considerations revisited. Innovation in 
Language Learning and Teaching, 1(1), 14–29. 
Littlewood, W. (1996) Autonomy: An anatomy and a framework. System, 24(4), 427- 435.  
Long, M. (1996). The role of linguistic environment in second language acquisition. In W. C. Ritchie & T. 
K. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 413-468). San Diego, CA: Academic 
Press. 
Ortega, L. (2007). Meaningful L2 practice in foreign language classrooms: A cognitive-interactionist 
SLA perspective. In R. DeKeyser (Ed.), Practice in a second language: Perspectives from applied 
linguistics and cognitive psychology (pp. 180-207). New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Oxford, R. (1997). Cooperative learning, collaborative learning, and interaction: Three communicative 
strands in the language classroom. The Modern Language Journal, 81(6), 443-457. 
Sengupta, S. (2001). Exchanging ideas with peers in network-based classrooms: An aid or a pain? 
Language Learning & Technology, 5(1), 103-134. Retrieved November 21, 2008, 
from http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num1/sengupta/. 
Sotillo, S. (2002). Constructivist and collaborative learning in a wireless environment. TESOL Journal, 
11(3), 16-20. 
Spratt, M., Humphreys, G., & Chan, V. (2002). Autonomy and motivation: Which comes first? Language 
Teaching Research, 6(3), 245-266. 
Storch, N. (1999). Are two heads better than one? Pair work and grammatical accuracy. System, 27(3), 
363-374. 
Storch, N. (2001). Comparing ESL learners’ attention to grammar on three different classroom tasks. 
RELC Journal, 32(2), 104-124. 
Storch, N. (2005). Collaborative writing: Product, process, and students’ reflections. Journal of Second 
Language Writing, 14(3), 153–173. 
Stryker, S. B. (1997). The Mexico experiment at the Foreign Service Institute. In S. B. Stryker, & B. L. 
Leaver (Eds.), Content-based instruction in foreign language education: Models and methods (pp. 177-
202). Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press. 
Swain, M. (1995) Three functions of output in second language learning. In G. Cook & B. Seidlhofer 
(Eds.), Principle and practice in applied linguistics: Studies in honor of H.G. Widdowson (pp. 125-144). 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Greg Kessler Wiki-Based Collaborative Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 95
Swain, M. (2000). The output hypothesis and beyond: Mediating acquisition through collaborative 
dialogue. In J. P. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 97-114). Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (1995). Problems in output and the cognitive processes they generate: A step 
towards second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 16(3), 371-391. 
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (1998). Interaction and second language learning: Two adolescent French 
immersion students working together. The Modern Language Journal, 82(3), 320-337. 
Vygotsky, L.S. (1962). Thought and language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Vygotsky, L.S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Williams, J. (1999). Learner-generated attention to form. Language Learning, 49(4), 583-625. 
 
