Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num1/call.pdf 
February 2009, Volume 13, Number 1
p. 121 
 
Copyright © 2009, ISSN 1094-3501 121
 
Call for Papers for Special Issue of LLT 
 
Theme: Multilateral Online Exchanges for Language and Culture Learning 
 
Guest Editors: Tim Lewis, Thierry Chanier, and Bonnie Youngs 
 
Telecollaborative partnerships for language and culture learning have evolved rapidly in the past decade. 
Recent years have witnessed a number of multi-partner exchanges, known as Tridems, or Multidems. 
Multilateral exchanges reflect the changing needs of language learners in globalized societies, where 
prolonged and intensive face-to-face contact with a second -often geographically proximate- culture has 
been replaced by more fleeting encounters with a range of world languages and cultures, which may well 
take place in a virtual environment. 
For this special issue, we are seeking papers that address issues of language and culture learning in 
multilateral exchanges.  Papers should be grounded in a theoretical framework that formulates research 
hypotheses and then seeks to confirm or disconfirm them by following an appropriate research 
methodology (http://llt.msu.edu/resguide.html).  Papers should also present data on actual language- 
and culture-learning outcomes. 
Possible topics for submissions include but are not limited to: 
• Language- and culture-learning outcomes of online exchanges between learners and institutions from 
outside traditional areas such as Europe and North America. 
• Investigations of the sociolinguistic impact of exchanges involving differences of status between 
partner languages. 
• Evidence of learners’ reflection on themselves and their own culture that addresses questions such as 
the intra-cultural and intercultural relationships between participants and how culture is negotiated. 
• Impact of technology on language or culture learning, e.g., in monomodal vs. multimodal exchanges, 
roles of synchronous vs. asynchronous media, etc. 
• Studies of different types of data from multilateral intercultural learning partnerships that can be used 
to analyse the nature of online intercultural competence and, most importantly, to measure gains in 
intercultural competence. 
• Studies of the impact of participants’ prior intercultural learning experiences and possible benefits of 
post-exchange follow-up. 
• Studies of the influence of different patterns of learning, teaching styles, and combinations of media 
use in multilateral online exchanges. 
• Evidence of peer tutoring in multilateral intercultural partnerships. 
• Development of learner corpora based on data from multilateral exchanges. 
 
Please send an email of intent with a 250-word abstract by 31st May 2009 to llt-editors@hawaii.edu. 
 
 
