Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num1/perezllantada.pdf 
February 2009, Volume 13, Number 1
pp. 40-58 
 
Copyright © 2009, ISSN 1094-3501 40
TEXTUAL, GENRE AND SOCIAL FEATURES OF SPOKEN GRAMMAR: 
A CORPUS-BASED APPROACH 
Carmen Pérez-Llantada 
Universidad de Zaragoza 
This paper describes a corpus-based approach to teaching and learning spoken grammar 
for English for Academic Purposes with reference to Bhatia’s (2002) multi-perspective 
model for discourse analysis: a textual perspective, a genre perspective and a social 
perspective. From a textual perspective, corpus-informed instruction helps students 
identify grammar items through statistical frequencies, collocational patterns, context-
sensitive meanings and discoursal uses of words. From a genre perspective, corpus 
observation provides students with exposure to recurrent lexico-grammatical patterns 
across different academic text types (genres). From a social perspective, corpus models 
can be used to raise learners’ awareness of how speakers’ different discourse roles, 
discourse privileges and power statuses are enacted in their grammar choices. The paper 
describes corpus-based instructional procedures, gives samples of learners’ linguistic 
output, and provides comments on the students’ response to this method of instruction. 
Data resulting from the assessment process and student production suggest that corpus-
informed instruction grounded in Bhatia’s multi-perspective model can constitute a 
pedagogical approach in order to i) obtain positive student responses from input and 
authentic samples of grammar use, ii) help students identify and understand the textual, 
genre and social aspects of grammar in real contexts of use, and therefore iii) help develop 
students’ ability to use grammar accurately and appropriately. 
INTRODUCTION 
As in any other communicative situation, in English for Academic Purposes (EAP) contexts learners need 
to know what to say and how to say things with words – to echo Austin’s (1962) well-known postulates. 
For these learners, knowledge of English grammar is necessary in order to communicate accurately, 
meaningfully and appropriately, taking into consideration the specific purposes, participants and 
situations involved in the communication. As Johns (1994) argues, one effective way of developing 
accurate and appropriate uses of a language is through learners’ exposure to authentic corpus-based 
materials. With the advance of the new technologies, corpora and concordances have become a valuable 
source for retrieving genuine examples of language use for both research and pedagogy. 
Corpora have made a significant impact on language description and research. Structural and functional 
aspects of academic written and spoken discourse have been described in Biber, Johansson, Leech, 
Conrad, and Finegan’s (1999) exhaustive description of English grammar, based on corpus evidence and 
contrasting usage across registers. Theoretically-oriented research also suggests that linguistic analysis 
benefits from evidence of language used in real contexts. Using multidimensional analysis, Biber (2003, 
2006) describes systematic differences in the co-occurrence of linguistic patterns in university speech and 
writing in order to provide accurate descriptions of EAP-specific phraseology. The development of 
specialized genre-based corpora has enabled significant EAP research to be carried out involving analyses 
of discoursal, pragmatic, rhetorical and genre features of both academic writing (Breivega, Dalh, & 
Fløttum, 2002; Hewings, 2001; Hyland, 1998; Reppen, Fitzmaurice, & Biber, 2002) and academic speech 
(Ädel, 2006; Pérez-Llantada & Ferguson, 2006; Poos & Simpson, 2002; Simpson & Swales, 2001). These 
studies have implicitly or explicitly indicated that the structure and functions of grammar patterns in 
specialized discourses should represent a “fundamentally important part of writers’ and speakers’ 
communicative repertoire” (Biber, Conrad. & Cortes, 2004, p. 400), and hence require pedagogical 
attention in EAP courses. 
Carmen Pérez-Llantada Textual, Genre and Social Features of Spoken Grammar 
 
Corpora have been reported as being particularly helpful to materials and textbook writers as they allow 
easy access to authentic contextualized examples of language (Johns, 1994; Stevens, 1991). In fact, 
corpus researchers have been prolific in developing pedagogical materials and guidelines for EAP courses 
(Simpson & Leicher, 2006; see also Michigan Corpus of Academic Spoken English website’s section of 
pedagogical materials). Corpora have also been heavily exploited in the study of non-native learner 
language acquisition (Charles, 2007; Cortes, 2004; Granger, 1998; Granger & Petch-Tyson, 2003; Hadley, 
2004; Neff, Ballesteros, Dafouz, Martínez, & Rica, 2004, 2007) as well as for the implementation of data-
driven learning (DDL) in English as a Foreign Language (EFL) and EAP courses. Although DDL 
literature has reported positive responses to corpus-based tasks involving students’ direct use of 
concordance lines, a number of limitations have been acknowledged, including the need for training 
students in the use of corpora, the absence of information on discoursal and pragmatic features of 
grammar usage in the KWIC method1, and other learning problems ranging from loss of motivation for 
the method to learners’ tendency to overgeneralize about grammar usage (Hadley, 2004; Charles, 2007).  
In an attempt to contribute to the study of corpora and concordances in EAP pedagogy, this paper reports 
on the combination of corpus-informed grammar instruction and corpus-based materials used in an 
academic spoken English course at university level. In this approach, the teacher, who is expected to have 
a high degree of familiarity with both the corpus data and discourse analysis, chooses corpus 
concordances and contextualized extracts to provide students with input and to focus attention on 
structural and functional aspects of academic spoken discourse. The approach as reported here did not 
involve direct handling of the corpus by students because the necessary computer facilities were 
unavailable.  
The novelty of the approach lies in the fact that it is grounded in Bhatia’s multi-perspective model for 
discourse analysis and seeks to facilitate the students’ identification and interpretation of lexico-
grammatical items from textual, genre and social perspectives. Specifically, this study addressed the 
following research questions: 
1. Can corpus-based instruction and materials lead to enhanced understanding of the textual, genre 
and social aspects of grammar in real contexts of use? 
2. Can corpus-informed instruction and materials help students develop the ability to put into 
practice their understanding of grammar in context within a range of academic situations? 
Gilquin, Granger and Paquot (2007, p. 324) have pointed to the limited development of corpus-informed 
materials in EAP contexts. To our knowledge, no descriptive account of a corpus-based EAP course 
grounded in a multi-perspective analysis of discourse has been reported to date. To fill this gap, this paper 
describes classroom procedures using corpus-based instruction and materials and reports on the students’ 
linguistic output and their responses to the approach. 
COURSE DESCRIPTION 
The pedagogical approach presented in this paper seeks to address grammar problems encountered in an 
upper-intermediate academic spoken English course for third year Electronic Engineering students at the 
University of Zaragoza, Spain. The traditional approach to teaching grammar had been identified as a 
source of ineffective learning processes (Pérez-Llantada, 2006). Under the traditional approach, learners 
were taught grammar items and patterns but were unable to use them accurately, meaningfully or 
appropriately in context. This learning problem, termed the “inert knowledge problem”, refers to those 
situations in which “students are taught grammar as a set of rules, but even if they can apply the rules to 
exercises successfully during the lesson, they don’t seem to be able to activate their knowledge of the 
rules when they are communicating during another part of the lesson or in another context” (Larsen-
Freeman in Pérez-Llantada, 2007, p. 158).  
Language Learning & Technology 41
Carmen Pérez-Llantada Textual, Genre and Social Features of Spoken Grammar 
 
The aim of the EAP course discussed here was to prepare students linguistically in order to participate 
successfully in European international student exchange programs. All the students had previously 
received instruction in academic written English in the first and second years of their degree courses, and 
in this course they were expected to learn oral communication that was both effective (e.g., able to define 
terms, describe objects and procedures, give reasons and express opinions) and appropriate (i.e., attending 
lectures, participating in seminars and discussions, giving presentations, expressing opinions in laboratory 
sessions, interacting with teachers and students, etc., while taking into account the specific 
communicative situation). 
Theory sessions involved the use of corpus-informed instruction and corpus-derived materials in order to 
elicit inductive grammar learning and raise the students’ awareness of the structural and functional roles 
of lexico-grammatical patterns in real contexts. These theory sessions were always followed by practical 
sessions, centred on tasks intended to consolidate the grammar input received in the theory sessions and 
elicit oral production. The practical sessions were designed in the form of mini-projects involving 
activities such as information search, information analysis and synthesis and information transfer, as well 
as role plays, case studies, problem-solving tasks and simulations (cf. Pérez-Llantada, 2006) and were 
followed by feedback sessions. The course was comprised of a total of 90 teaching/learning hours, 60 
hours for theory instruction and a 30-hour workload of practical assignments. 
The free-online Michigan Corpus of Academic Spoken English (MICASE; Simpson, Briggs, Ovens, & 
Swales, 1999) was selected as being representative of academic speech and therefore matching the 
students’ specific learning needs. Some other advantages were envisaged in the use of this corpus. Its 
software design enabled the teacher to search the corpus for words and phrases across different academic 
events, returning concordance results with references to files, full utterances, and speakers2. In the theory 
sessions, students were given frequency data and concordance lines in the form of printouts in order that 
they should identify lexico-grammatical patterns of English in academic spoken settings. In the practical 
sessions, the teacher used contextualized corpus extracts to prepare consolidation exercises and language 
production tasks for the students. 
The theoretical framework chosen as the basis for the new approach to teaching/learning grammar was 
Bhatia’s (2002) “multi-perspective analysis of discourse”. This framework distinguishes between a 
textual perspective (discourse is regarded as text), a genre perspective (discourse is regarded as genre) and 
a social perspective (discourse is regarded as social practice). Bhatia’s model was specifically applied to 
the EAP grammar course as follows. In the analysis conducted from a textual perspective, the observation 
of corpus examples helped students view grammar items through statistical frequencies, collocational 
patterns, context-sensitive meanings and specific discoursal uses of words. This perspective of analysis 
sought to elicit recognition of lexico-grammatical variation across different communicative events, 
purposes and participants. In line with Bhatia’s second perspective, the genre perspective, corpus-derived 
materials were used to provide students with exposure to recurring academic speech phraseology across 
academic genres or text types with specific purposes, participants and rules for communication. From this 
perspective, students were expected to develop ‘genre awareness’ (Johns, 1999; Paltridge 2002), that is, to 
become acquainted with the appropriate linguistic and rhetorical conventions for each specific speech 
event type (or genre type). Bhatia’s third perspective of analysis was used to approach the social and 
institutional aspects of grammar usage in specialized communication. This perspective was targeted at 
raising learners’ awareness of how the speakers’ discourse roles, discourse privileges and power statuses 
are enacted through different lexico-grammatical choices.  
 
 
 
Language Learning & Technology 42
Carmen Pérez-Llantada Textual, Genre and Social Features of Spoken Grammar 
 
CLASSROOM PROCEDURES AND STUDENT RESPONSE 
1st Perspective of Analysis: Academic Spoken Discourse as Text  
Various theories of language acquisition state that learning grammar should not be done in an isolated 
way, but rather through context, looking at structural patterns and specific uses of words in discourse 
(Larsen-Freeman, 2003). The MICASE online search facility allows the teacher to obtain frequency data 
across a broad range of speech events and speakers, to see concordance lines for any word or phrase used 
by specific speakers in all transcripts, and to view the entire utterance in which the search term appears 
using the “View Context”. This corpus information helps the teacher obtain contextualized language 
models for use as the basis for the students’ identification of the specific forms, meanings and functions 
of lexico-grammar items at a textual level.  
The selection of lexico-grammatical items took into account several factors: (i) the results of the students’ 
needs analysis according to their specific academic profile, (ii) the possible transferable knowledge of 
academic written grammar that the students had acquired in previous academic years and (iii) the 
language acquisition problems that had been detected among the students in previous years. For reasons 
of space, this paper only discusses a selection of grammar items of academic spoken English that the 
course approached from textual, genre and social perspectives.  
One of the linguistic elements that had proved to be problematic for learners using a traditional grammar 
approach in previous years was the use of referential items in discourse. Referential nouns, also called 
‘phoric nouns’ or ‘signalling nouns’, are widely used in academic speech to provide cohesion to discourse 
(Swales, 2001; Flowerdew, 2003). Pedagogically, these items are important to look at because, although 
they represent a lexical category, they need to be framed grammatically to be fully meaningful. As for 
language production, referential nouns are also important in order to train students in the language of 
reporting – informing about a given topic – a communication skill extensively used in academic spoken 
contexts. For these reasons, they were conceived of as suitable input for integrating grammar and lexis in 
the classroom, as Tucker (1998) and Hunston (2002) proposed.  
During the course, the teacher first focused on corpus information relating to the items matter(s), fact(s) 
and issue(s). Table 1 was used to show the students the frequency distribution of these words and elicited 
a warm-up discussion on some formal aspects of these nouns. Students noted that fact and matter were far 
more recurrent in the singular than in the plural form, while the singular and plural forms of issue showed 
relatively similar frequencies in the corpus. 
Table 1. Frequency Rank of matter(s), fact(s) and issue(s) in MICASE 
Phoric nouns Raw counts Frequency per 10,000 words 
Fact 436 25.71 
Issue 335 19.75 
Issues 274 16.16 
Matter 93 5.4 
Facts 44 2.59 
Matters 13 0.76 
 
Relying on MICASE concordance lines, the teacher then developed a formal taxonomy of common 
collocations with referential nouns in order to elicit recognition of the lexico-grammatical patterns 
Language Learning & Technology 43
Carmen Pérez-Llantada Textual, Genre and Social Features of Spoken Grammar 
 
containing these lexical items. Table 2 below was designed to encourage students’ identification of some 
common patterns containing the word issues and discussion on its co-occurring phraseology. 
Table 2. Some Combinations Including issues From MICASE Concordance Lines 
Verbal combinations Noun combinations Adjectival combinations 
to talk about several issues 
to write about these issues 
to bear on scientific issues 
to care about certain issues 
to start looking into the issues  
to bring up a lot of issues 
to focus on issues of 
to come up with the issues that 
to refer to major issues in 
to be interested in the issues of 
to sum up some of the issues 
a response to issues of 
commitment to the broader issues of 
little concern for certain issues 
a grip on specific issues 
different issues 
very specific issues 
one of the big issues 
one of the key issues 
those ongoing issues 
fundamental issues 
central issues 
as separate issues 
all kinds of issues 
issues of concern 
Using the MICASE search facility, the teacher also provided exemplification of a broader range of phoric 
nouns (thing(s), idea(s), point(s), question(s), concern(s), aspect(s), problem(s) and reason(s)) with the 
purpose of raising students’ awareness of how each communicative situation determines the speaker’s 
formal vs. informal choices. On the basis of the MICASE speech event attributes, the teacher asked the 
students to practice phoric nouns in a range of academic situations such as delivering a lecture to a large 
class of students, participating as an expert in a panel discussion, taking part in one-on-one discussions 
between a student and an instructor, or interacting in student-led study groups. Students practiced 
adapting their speech to each situation using the appropriate contextualized utterances with considerable 
success: while they chose matter(s), fact(s), and issue(s) in simulations of formal speech events, the nouns 
thing(s), idea(s), point(s) or question(s) were more likely to occur in those tasks involving simulations of 
informal situations. For example, the following excerpts show the same student performs successfully in 
formal and informal contexts. Of note, excerpt 1 also includes one of the combinations from Table 2, i.e., 
“refer to major issues”: 
1. In this presentation I will refer to two major issues related to renewable energies. (student #34 
simulating that he is delivering a paper at an international conference on renewable energies) 
2. We will discuss all these things at the students’ group meeting. (student #34 talking to his colleagues 
about arranging the weekly student meeting)  
In the following MICASE examples decide whether the words in italics refer to forthcoming information 
or to previous information. Then, specify the referent (the actual meaning) of each of these words. 
(1) there are concerns that it, um infringes on, um citizen rights, when um uh endangered species occur 
on private land, uh that’s a very big issue (LES 175SU028) 
(2) if morality is a matter of sentiment it is so for the whole [...] (COLL475MX082) 
(3) there’s still the issue of how does that policy change by the firm change the expectation of the 
workers (LES280JG138) 
(4) you’ve been talking about the fact that we need the supply -side strategies (SEM 340JG072) 
(5) the fact is that the tyrosine kinase activity is heavily phosphorilated (LE3c92)  
Figure 1. Example of classroom exercise 
Language Learning & Technology 44
Carmen Pérez-Llantada Textual, Genre and Social Features of Spoken Grammar 
 
To make students aware of the discourse functions performed by lexico-grammatical items, 
contextualized utterances containing matter(s), fact(s) and issue(s) were retrieved by the teacher from the 
“View Context” column of the MICASE search interface. With these concordance lines, learners could 
identify the discoursal effects of phoric nouns in real language instances. They realised that phoric nouns 
need to be filled out or lexicalized with information so that the discourse can make sense. Doing the 
MICASE-based exercise (Figure 1), they also seemed to understand the anaphoric (referring to previous 
statements, as in sentences 1 and 2) and cataphoric functions (anticipating clarifications or qualifications 
of information, as in sentences 3, 4 & 5) of phoric nouns.  
Such observation was the first step leading to the learners’ subsequent use of these items in role-plays and 
simulations. By way of illustration, student #19 was able to produce utterances using both anaphoric and 
cataphoric referential nouns correctly.  
1. Wind energy is one of the most valuable alternative energies for the reasons I have explained 
before. These are very important reasons that we should take into account for the future. (student 
#19) 
2. In my opinion, the main problem with mini hydraulic stations is its relatively low production 
output. (student #19) 
After the students had practiced these grammar items, the teacher used a feedback session to consolidate 
students’ acquired knowledge of phoric nouns and to correct other inappropriate grammar uses. For 
instance, the student who produced extract 1 below noticed that the phoric noun aspects combined with 
chronological discourse markers (firstly, secondly, finally, to summarize) and that it performed a 
cataphoric function as aspects anticipated a list of ideas that the student used to recapitulate what he said 
before. The student further commented that he “filled out” –lexicalized– the word aspects using parallel 
anticipatory-it structures (it is important to […], it is very important to […]) when summarizing and 
giving his opinion.  
Extract 1 
The following aspects are important in negotiations. Firstly, it is very important to 
carefully prepare the negotiation by researching information, preparing sticking points, 
planning your negotiation strategy, etc. Secondly, it is also important to be careful with the 
attitude, the rapport, to be flexible and confirm and write the points agreed on during the 
negotiation. Finally it is important to use a simple and clear language and to use short 
words and sentences that you are comfortable with. To summarize, it is very important to 
prepare the negotiation and to use a clear language to negotiate successfully. (student #1)  
Extract 2, which was also discussed in the feedback session, illustrates the beginning and end of a 
student’s oral presentation. The student acknowledged that his selection of phoric nouns (topic, reason, 
things, fact, objective, points) served to provide cohesion to discourse and to indicate to the audience the 
organization of the speech. He also realized that the informal things might not be appropriate for the 
formal slant of his presentation. The student’s observation that phoric nouns combined with chronological 
markers (first, secondly, finally) at the beginning and end of his oral presentation encouraged the teacher 
to anticipate the discoursal functions of textual metadiscourse phraseology in monologic speech which 
was one of the grammar aspects dealt with in the second level of analysis.  
Extract 2 
The topic of my presentation today is magnetic levitation trains. The reason that this topic 
is useful for you is because these trains are going to be the trains of the future. We are 
going to talk about three things. These are first, the fact that these trains are more 
economical because they don’t contaminate, and secondly the performance of these trains. 
Language Learning & Technology 45
Carmen Pérez-Llantada Textual, Genre and Social Features of Spoken Grammar 
 
Finally we are going to look at the advantages that these trains offer compared to ordinary 
trains.  
[…] 
In conclusion, in this presentation my objective was to know the advantages of this type of 
trains. I have covered three main points: first, the fact that these trains are more ecological. 
Secondly, the performance of these trains and finally I highlighted the advantages of these 
trains. (student #29) 
Analysing the student’s use of grammar in this feedback session was particularly useful in creating future 
practice. The teacher noted that, in extract 2, firstly and secondly were followed by nominal constructions, 
whereas finally was followed by a main clause, although his instruction had only provided models of the 
second type of construction. The teacher therefore decided to search in the future for a broader range of 
corpus examples – even longer extracts – in order to fine-tune classroom input and foster more accurate 
grammar usage perceptions. 
Overall, the students’ language production suggested that combining Bhatia’s first perspective of 
discourse analysis with corpus-based instruction helped to develop students’ awareness of grammar 
patterns in academic speech. Being able to use recurrent lexico-grammatical patterns in specific 
communicative contexts paved the way towards considering academic spoken discourse as genre.  
2nd Perspective of Analysis: Academic Spoken Discourse as Genre  
An important issue when exploring grammar patterns in academic genres is the consideration that all 
genres are constructed “within a frame of social action” (Bhatia, 2002). Through MICASE-informed 
contextualized models, corpus-based instruction and practice seemed to develop student awareness of 
how grammar patterns perform a transactional function (to convey information) and an interactional 
function (to build up and maintain social relationships).  
To demonstrate recurrent grammar patterns across academic genres, the teacher initially provided some 
corpus samples for the analysis of monologic speech events (lectures, colloquia, and discussion sections). 
Special attention was paid to academic lecturing since, according to the needs analysis carried out prior to 
the course, this was the genre to which learners needed most exposure. Textual metadiscourse expressions, 
also called text-referencing expressions (Hyland, 1998; Mauranen, 2001), were one of the lexico-
grammatical patterns selected for instruction. Such expressions were pedagogically important in order to 
prepare students to be competent listeners/speakers in foreign universities in socially acceptable terms 
(i.e., knowing how to interpret a speaker’s relationship with an audience and how to establish comfortable 
interpersonal relationships with listeners). 
The teacher used the MICASE search mode to search concordance lines for the desired speech event type, 
type of audience and academic role of the speaker (in the “Transcript Attributes” and “Speaker 
Attributes” columns, respectively). With this information, the teacher then prepared a theory handout with 
contextualized extracts from MICASE lectures. In the handout, textual metadiscourse expressions were 
presented to students as those expressions used by university professors in monologic speech in order to 
tell the audience what the text itself is going to do. Through corpus examples (see Figure 2), students 
were encouraged to identify recurrent grammar patterns of textual metadiscourse expressions in lecture 
talk. After correcting the exercise, the teacher briefly commented on the discourse functions of these 
different patterns.  
Later, in the practical sessions, the students were given a list of MICASE metadiscourse expressions for 
use in their presentations. The analysis of their oral production suggested that the students became 
conscious of the textual and interpersonal effects of metadiscourse: alerting listeners to the information to 
come (we’re going to talk about; I’d like to look at), and establishing a rapport with the audience (as you 
Language Learning & Technology 46
Carmen Pérez-Llantada Textual, Genre and Social Features of Spoken Grammar 
 
can see; you’ll notice). The extracts below may illustrate how the MICASE-based list of expressions 
became a useful source of consultation; all the expressions underlined in the extract appeared in the list.  
Extract 3 
In this presentation we’re going to talk about four things. These are, firstly, the location of 
hydroelectric power stations all over the world, and secondly the location of hydroelectric 
power stations in Spain and Aragon. Next we’re going to talk about advantages and 
disadvantages of hydroelectric energy. Finally we’re going to look at the future and 
development of hydroelectric power stations and mini-hydraulic power. (student #15) 
 
Extract 4  
Here we can see a flow chart that explains the process of producing hydropower. If you 
look at it more closely, you’ll notice that we are talking about a renewable energy because 
water on earth is continuously replenishing and as long as this continues we won’t run out 
of this energy source. (student #17) 
 
Extract 5 
Here we can see a flow chart about nuclear energy, in particular, uranium’s fusion and the 
next electricity generation. I’d like to look at this flow chart about uranium’s fusion. As 
you can see it begins with the uranium atom, it is fissioned in a controlled chain reaction 
and creates heat. After, this heat in turn heats the water and produces steam. (student #11) 
 
Identify the grammar patterns of the following textual metadiscourse expressions from 
MICASE. Match the two columns accordingly. 
MICASE EXAMPLES GRAMMATICAL PATTERNS  
(A) Today we’re going to talk about 
the theory of relativity […]  
(B) Let’s look at metabolism […]  
(i) we + verb + complement /let’s + verb + complement 
(teacher’s comments: both grammar patterns are formed 
by short subject-verb-complement sentences which create 
a very simplified, easy-to-grasp speaking style) 
(C) I’m going to summarize and 
give an example of how we compute 
the probability. 
 
(ii) I + verb + and + verb + complement 
(teacher’s comments: paratactic structures forming 
parallel, simple-to-process and simple-to-produce 
constructions which facilitate lecture understanding) 
(D) So now we’ll start so today 
what I’m gonna talk to you about is 
the middle to late Miocene 
environment of southern Ecuador. 
(iii) wh-clause + is + subject predicative  
(teacher’s comments: grammar pattern collocating with 
transition markers for discourse cohesion purposes; also 
note that important/new information is placed at the end 
of the clause) 
(E) Okay, uh let’s get moving, um, 
we are going to talk today about 
sentencing policy and the war on 
drugs 
(iv) let’s + verbal signpost + we + verb + complement  
(teacher’s comments: these grammar patterns co-occur 
with the typical features of improvised speech, i.e. 
transition signposts, retrace-and-repairs, pauses, 
hesitations and repetitions) 
 
Figure 2. Answer-key for a matching exercise on grammar patterns of textual metadiscourse expressions 
Language Learning & Technology 47
Carmen Pérez-Llantada Textual, Genre and Social Features of Spoken Grammar 
 
Students’ observations in a feedback session confirmed their awareness of recurring phraseology in 
lecture talk. The student who produced extract 3 explained that he prefaced his presentation with a list of 
the main points to facilitate understanding (we’re going to talk about, we’re going to look at). Students 
#11 and #17 remarked that they used these expressions in order to “approach” the audience when 
highlighting relevant information using visuals (here we can see, as you can see, you’ll notice in extracts 
4 and 5). Their comments served to confirm to the teacher that they were able to recognize the cognitive 
and pragmatic effects of metadiscourse units in this particular genre and use them appropriately. 
Although, in general, the students’ production illustrates a good mastery of grammar patterns in terms of 
linguistic accuracy and appropriateness, several limitations should be pointed out. This second level of 
analysis mostly covered the lecture genre and, therefore, only monologic speech production was practiced. 
Also, an analysis of the extracts revealed some transfer from the students’ knowledge of academic written 
grammar, probably because linguistic performance had been pre-planned at this stage. Perhaps some 
attention to dialogic speech events such as research group meetings, seminars, or office hours would have 
smoothed the transition from the second to the third level of academic spoken discourse analysis and, at 
the same time, prepared students for the practice of improvised or unplanned speech, which was one of 
the main targets of the third level of analysis. In spite of these observations, combining Bhatia’s second 
perspective of analysis with MICASE-based models and materials raised students’ awareness of the genre 
as well as context-sensitive aspects of spoken grammar.  
3rd Perspective of Analysis: Academic Spoken Discourse as Social Practice  
Bhatia’s third perspective of analysis seeks to raise awareness of the social and institutional factors of 
academic spoken genres. The teacher first retrieved entire transcripts from MICASE by clicking on the 
hypertext at the end of the file information header and selected extracts of grammar usage in several 
dialogic speech events like research group meetings, seminars, and lab sessions. With this material, 
instruction focused on those lexico-grammatical realizations in discourse that entail the projection of the 
speaker’s intellectual identity as well as differences in power status among participants.  
One aspect of grammar approached from this third perspective was the use of pragmatic devices that help 
the speaker project an identity and manifest his/her institutional role in socially acceptable terms. Native 
speakers commonly use pragmatic devices such as hedging for mitigating the force of their statements 
when there are power status differences between participants, and boosting for showing that one is 
intellectually able to express an opinion. However, these devices seem to be particularly problematic for 
non-native students. Neumann (2006) reports that EAP Spanish students tend to underuse these pragmatic 
devices and, as a result, their language is unlikely to be regarded as socially acceptable by the members of 
a foreign institution. To overcome this sociolinguistic and strategic problem, the teacher used the 
MICASE search mode to develop awareness-raising exercises that provided students with exposure to 
different shades of commitment towards propositional content.  
After the students had practiced sentence mitigation and emphasis, the teacher elicited discussion on the 
institutional aspects affecting grammar choices. Students recognized that in sentence 7 of the first 
exercise (Figure 3; [i]t's kind of almost a philosophical question) the professor uses the hedges kind of 
and almost to tone down his otherwise categorical remark when addressing a lower-ranking audience of 
junior undergraduates. Learners also observed that, in contrast, the professor’s use of emphatic markers in 
sentences 6 and 7 of the second exercise (Figure 4) was institutionally acceptable because he played the 
role of a higher-ranking expert-speaker in a colloquium.  
 
 
 
Language Learning & Technology 48
Carmen Pérez-Llantada Textual, Genre and Social Features of Spoken Grammar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
You can make your speech more polite by using hedges. In the following sentences from 
MICASE hedging expressions have been deleted. Decide where to include the words in brackets 
to retrieve the original hedged sentence. The first one has been done for you as an example. 
1. It’s not quite what we wanted, but it’s a little better than the original proposal. (quite, a 
little) 
2. It's too close for somebody to be entirely separated from the architect.  (just a little) 
3. The reward from staying this extra year, doesn't repay the extreme cost.  (probably, rather) 
4. So typically the dilute is less than about point-oh-five to point-one. (quote unquote) 
5. If all the cells in a tumor, were attached to each other, it would be impossible. (virtually) 
6. […] approaching it with this brute force and I would say naive reductionist approach that 
many scientists approach it with […] (sort of, rather) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
You can make your speech more persuasive by using intensifying words to emphasize your 
points. In the following sentences from MICASE intensifiers have been deleted. Decide where 
to include the words in brackets to retrieve the original emphasized sentence. The first one has 
been done for you as an example. 
1. We’re working extremely well now. But how can we work even better?  (extremely, even) 
2. Many organisms become well specialized for a particular place and time.  (extremely) 
3. They've done well in urban areas. (actually, very)  
4. They're badly paying service jobs. (pretty) 
5. The text was terrible like written badly, it's boring and it repeats itself. (really) 
6. [...] and from the viewpoint of rain forest once every hundred years is frequent. (of course, 
actually, quite) 
7. The landscape itself is, is heterogeneous. (very, really, quite) 
Figures 3 and 4. Examples of classroom exercises 
Once students seemed to understand the functions of hedging and boosting mechanisms, the teacher 
focused on the pragmatic effects of grammar choices in dialogic speech events. The following passage 
from MICASE (adapted from Neumann, 2006, p. 31) was used to raise awareness of how the status of the 
participants in a research group meeting affects the speakers’ lexico-grammatical choices. Using this 
extract, students were asked to identify the grammar choices of the professor (i.e., the sentences 
underlined), compare them with those of the students, and discuss their pragmatic effects.  
Learners inferred that some of the linguistic resources employed by the professor (S1) – direct questions, 
directives and reprimands – are “discursive privileges” (Neumann, 2006, p. 31) of a high-ranking member 
of the university. Learners also commented that, unlike the professor, the students (S3 and S4) only made 
tentative observations using probability modals (i i, i might have to) and attribution (he said […] he said 
it's […]) because, as lower-ranking group members, they were not expected to control the communicative 
situation or project their intellectual identities.  
Language Learning & Technology 49
Carmen Pérez-Llantada Textual, Genre and Social Features of Spoken Grammar 
 
This is an abbreviated passage from a physics research group meeting (crossed-out words signal 
overlaps). Discuss the use of the sentences underlined considering the role of the speakers in this 
academic situation. 
S1: [. . .] so then the question is, what are the capabilities of the new thing? so for example, how 
far out in the I-R can it go? how far out in the U-V can it go?  
S3: uh the, what i told ‘em we wanted, um is it’s gonna be three-fifty to ten-fifty nanometers, all 
at once.  
S1: three-fifty? is that enough for you? [. . .] he’d like three-twenty-three  
S4: w- we want three-two- three-twenty [. . .] 
[. . .] 
S3: you can’t, he said you can go below three fifty, but it’s gonna have to be a different grating 
than this one [. . .]  
S1: uhh mm if it’s only the grating, then i'm not worried at all because we can always replace the 
grating. [. . .] if it’s the C-C-D, then we should wa- get one that really is that has broader [SU-M: 
sure ] spectral coverage so find out what the spectral coverage of the C-C-D is.  
S3: i i, i might have to talk to somebody else. i asked him [. . .] what’s the low end from? and he 
said well in this case he said it's from the grating [. . .] so, he said if you wanna go below you’d 
have to get a different grating.  
S1: right [. . .] but if you also have to get a different C-C-D then, [. . .] then you should just have 
bought that C-C-D to begin with. 
Figure 5. Example of a classroom observation task 
Students put into practice this corpus-based observation of the pragmatic effects of grammar through 
tasks in which they had to simulate dialogic speech events. In these tasks, the teacher asked the students 
to express their opinions while establishing a suitable social distance from their interlocutor(s). For 
carrying out the tasks, the teacher prepared a MICASE-based context-sensitive list of lexico-grammatical 
expressions of stance containing hedges and boosters. The list sought to provide students with a corpus-
informed selection of high-frequency pragmatic formulas. Each example also contained context-sensitive 
information on the speaker’s academic position/role (junior faculty, senior faculty, graduate student, 
undergraduate student, etc.) so that learners could recognize how particular lexico-grammatical choices 
relate to specific discourse roles and privileges. As shown in the extracts below, the students appeared to 
integrate these expressions in their speech either for mitigating or highlighting their stance following 
politeness rules. In a feedback session, the students who produced extracts 6 and 7 commented that the 
use of an epistemic lexical verb co-occurring with a first person pronoun (I think), evaluative lexis 
(important, definitely) and certainty and possibility modals (will, can) served to express an opinion or 
contest a point of view. The students added that these lexico-grammatical choices were appropriate – or 
socially acceptable – because they were acting as speakers with a higher-ranking institutional role (see 
contextualization of examples in parentheses). A similar degree of awareness was shown by the students 
who produced extracts 8 and 9. They explained that they had used lexico-grammar expressions conveying 
tentative commitment such as probability adverbs (perhaps), impersonal stance expressions (it would be 
better to; it seems to me) probability modals (may), hedged expressions with epistemic verbs (I tend to 
think) and conversational hedges (a bit) in order to express reservation or disagreement in polite terms 
since they were playing the roles of lower – or less powerful – ranking speakers.  
Extracts 6 and 7: Strong commitment 
(6) Definitely I think that the use of hydrogen cars instead of petrol ones will be an 
important environmentally-friendly advance. (Student #4 playing the role of an expert in a 
colloquium and giving his opinion about alternative energy sources)  
Language Learning & Technology 50
Carmen Pérez-Llantada Textual, Genre and Social Features of Spoken Grammar 
 
(7) I think the best advantage of wind power is that it is a clean and renewable energy that 
mitigates global warming. However, it can be dangerous for the land and for wildlife. 
(Student #32 simulating that he is presenting and defending a poster at an engineering 
conference) 
 
Extracts 8 and 9: Tentative commitment 
(8) Perhaps it would be better to use one of these alternative energies that do not run out 
rather than making use of non renewable sources which may eventually disappear in the 
near future. (Student #11 addresses a group of experts and gives his opinion about the 
advantages of alternative energies in an international meeting) 
 (9) I tend to think that the design of the electronic is a bit too complex and perhaps not 
very cost-effective. It seems to me that we need to decide on an alternative design. 
(Student #22 acting as a student in a computer design lab session and addressing the 
professor) 
As had occurred in the previous levels of analysis, students showed no difficulties in understanding 
corpus-based instruction, performing corpus-based tasks and identifying socially acceptable uses of 
grammar in their own linguistic production. Also, the teacher was able to identify some language learning 
problems in the students’ speech. First, consistent with Neumann (2006), students found it relatively easy 
to emphasize their statements, but particularly difficult to hedge the discourse for conveying tentativeness 
and politeness, probably because Spanish is less hedged than English. Secondly, although learners 
acquired the patterns, they performed less accurately and fluently than in previous tasks. This might be 
attributed to the fact that, at this stage, the students practiced using improvised speech, which entails 
greater complexity of production than pre-planned speech. Thirdly, the teacher noted that the students at 
times transferred their knowledge of their L1 to their oral production. If we take, for instance, the use of 
definitely in sentence-initial position in extract 6 above, this adverbial position scores just one occurrence 
out of 292 matches in MICASE, which indicates that it is a very unusual sentence position. Therefore, the 
student’s use of sentence-initial position was attributed to an L1 to L2 transfer, as this is a more common 
position for stance adverbs in Spanish (Alarcos-Llorac, 1994). By contrasting students’ production with 
corpus-based samples of specific linguistic items or expressions, the teacher was able to identify linguistic 
transfers and provide corpus-informed feedback to the students in order to solve these language 
acquisition problems.  
Assessment process 
Along with the collection of examples illustrating the students’ responses and actual speech production, a 
systematic evaluation process was undertaken to validate the extent to which the corpus-based instruction 
and materials led to an enhanced understanding of grammar in real contexts of use and helped students 
develop the ability to apply that understanding when learning academic spoken skills. Following the 
guidelines of the European Convergence in Higher Education, ongoing assessment was implemented to 
evaluate student performance. The teacher assessed language production at the end of each practical 
session of the course. When reviewing the student work (names on, non-randomized), performance of the 
40 students in the course was rated from 1 to 10 using an assessment scale which covered the four 
competences described by Canale and Swain (1980): grammatical competence, discourse competence, 
sociolinguistic competence and strategic competence. Though very time-consuming, the assessment 
process provided the teacher with detailed information on the proficiency level of the students as well as 
an accurate picture of how learners progressed throughout the course. To ensure reliability of data, a 
formal survey of other English-related activities was carried out, and only 5% of the students reported that 
Language Learning & Technology 51
Carmen Pérez-Llantada Textual, Genre and Social Features of Spoken Grammar 
 
they had been taking other concurrent study of English that might have significantly contributed to this 
improvement.  
The data resulting from this assessment process give promising signs that the students might be benefiting 
from this type of corpus-based instruction. Quantitatively, the results indicated that they had considerably 
improved their linguistic proficiency by the end of the course. Figure 6 shows the group proficiency 
levels at the beginning, mid-term, and at the end of the course. Initially, 60% of the students had A levels, 
35% were B levels and only 5% of the students scored C levels. Midterm, 62.5% of the students reached 
B1 and B2 levels and students with A levels decreased to 32.5%. At the end of the course, B and C 
proficiency levels scored highest, while A levels only accounted for 7.5% of all the students. The group 
scored highest in the B2 level (35% of the students) and, significantly, 30% of the students reached C1 
and C2 levels. 
17.5
42.5
20 15
5
0
7.5
25.0
50.0
12.5
2.5 2.5 0
7.5
27.5
35.0
22.5
7.5
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Pe
rc
en
ta
ge
 o
f s
tu
de
nt
s
Miniproject 1 Miniproject 5 Miniproject 10
A1 level
A2 level
B1 level
B2 level
C1 level
C2 level
 
Figure 6. Progression of the group’s proficiency levels according to the Common European Reference 
Levels3 
Students also showed a gradual improvement in the four language competences, which scored a range of 
4.9-5.1 out of 10 points at the beginning of the course, 5.8-6.3 at midterm, and 7.3-7.8 at the end of the 
course. Grammatical and discourse competences showed the greatest improvement, each of them scoring 
a total increase of 2.7 points at the end of the course. Similarly, sociolinguistic and strategic competences 
scored a total increase of 2.6 and 2.4 points respectively at the end of the course. This might indicate that 
students acquired an enhanced understanding of grammar in real contexts of use and were able to apply 
that understanding of grammar usage in practical communicative tasks. 
Following the European Convergence protocols established for Higher Education4, students were asked to 
rank a list of specific competences from 1 to 45, indicating whether they had achieved a significant 
development in each competence. The list of competences included a range of skills developed during the 
course: analysing, synthesising and summarising information critically; applying knowledge and 
understanding to address problems; communicating appropriately for a variety of purposes to a variety of 
audiences; developing a flexible approach to study and work; developing the skills necessary for working 
and learning independently; preparing, processing, interpreting and presenting data using appropriate 
communication techniques; using the internet critically as a source of information, etc.). According to the 
students’ opinions, first in the rank of competences was “communicating appropriately for a variety of 
purposes to a variety of audiences”, which scored a group mean of 3.45 out of 4. 
Language Learning & Technology 52
Carmen Pérez-Llantada Textual, Genre and Social Features of Spoken Grammar 
 
In the light of the assessment results and of the students’ perceptions of their competence development, 
corpus-based instruction appears to have been successful in resolving the inert knowledge problem 
described at the beginning of this paper. Although future work is needed to systematically evaluate the 
instructional approach in terms of how it improves proficiency and or linguistic competences, both 
learners’ grammar knowledge and their ability to use that knowledge accurately and appropriately in a 
range of academic situations seemed to be fostered through this multi-perspective corpus-based 
instruction. 
DISCUSSION 
The main purpose of this study was to describe and report on a new corpus-based teaching/learning 
approach to grammar trialled in an EAP course with reference to Bhatia’s multi-perspective model of 
discourse analysis. The initial assumption was that corpus-based instruction and materials containing 
examples of real language use would improve grammar proficiency. A brief discussion of findings 
pertaining to the research questions is provided below. 
As regards the first research question, ‘Can corpus-based instruction and materials lead to enhanced 
understanding of the textual, genre and social aspects of grammar?’, the experience suggested that 
providing exposure to authentic examples of grammar offered students a view of how grammatical 
patterns work at textual, genre and social levels. Through the analysis and interpretation of corpus 
samples, students seemed to be able to relate the structural aspects of grammar at a textual level to its 
functional aspects at the genre and social levels. Corpus-informed instruction provided students with rich 
input (a) on context-sensitive uses and frequencies of words, (b) on the integration of grammar and lexis 
in discourse, (c) on the way communicative purposes determine lexico-grammatical choices in both 
monologic and dialogic genres, and (d) on the way grammar patterns vary among discourse participants 
and power status positions. As described above, students seemed to acquire knowledge of the form, 
meaning and function of grammar items by using their analytical skills and inductive reasoning. 
Observation by the teacher and feedback sessions appeared to confirm the students’ awareness of how 
genre and social aspects help to determine the textual realizations of grammar in real language production. 
This learning process certainly appeared to help students interpret grammar patterns in relation to specific 
contextual restrictions, such as different communicative purposes, relationship between participants and 
communicative settings.  Further, this approach may have helped the students put into practice their 
knowledge of grammar usage, thus contributing to overcoming the inert knowledge problem associated 
with the traditional approach to teaching grammar. 
The second research question was ‘Can corpus-informed instruction and materials help students develop 
the ability to put into practice their understanding of grammar in context within a range of academic 
situations?’ MICASE-informed exercises and tasks proved to be a useful source for students to practice 
grammar skills in context and learn how to make appropriate lexico-grammatical choices when presenting 
data, providing reasons, and expressing opinions to different audiences and for different communicative 
purposes. The students’ appropriate linguistic performances in the classroom assignments, of which 
illustrative examples have been presented above, suggest that they learned to recognize not only the 
transactional but also the interactional function of grammar within a context of use. 
From the sessions it was also clear that the students did not have difficulties in comprehending the corpus 
examples they worked with, nor did they tend to make overgeneralizations in relation to the use of 
grammar in context. This suggested that the teacher’s approach of controlling the corpus-based input 
through selection of examples to present to the students had been successful in preventing two problems 
commonly reported in the DDL literature (Granger, 1998; Granger & Petch-Tyson, 2003; Hadley, 2004). 
An added advantage commented on above was that, by examining whether the linguistic production of the 
students matched the input received, the teacher was able to identify other grammar problems and solve 
them appropriately. As corroborated by the results of the assessment process, the students showed 
Language Learning & Technology 53
Carmen Pérez-Llantada Textual, Genre and Social Features of Spoken Grammar 
 
significant improvements in the four linguistic competences over the duration of the course. Although no 
control group was used and no comparison was made with similar cohorts of students completing the 
more traditional EAP course in the past, the fact that, for almost all the students concerned this was the 
only source of English study and practice in that period, suggests that the approach taken in the course 
can be considered a major factor in that significant proficiency improvement. 
Moreover, the students showed positive attitudes towards corpus-based work and no signs of 
demotivation were observed. Although no formal record of students’ opinions was kept in the form of a 
questionnaire, in informal conversations held with the teacher, the students commented that the corpus-
based materials were very appealing to them because of their authenticity and contextualization within a 
real academic setting. They also observed that, while the analysis of isolated samples of grammar usage 
had been particularly problematic for them when exposed to traditional English-grammar 
teaching/learning approaches, the contextualization of grammatical uses based on MICASE gave them a 
clearer understanding of the discoursal functions of grammar in context. Students also reported that they 
had become aware of the practical nature of the corpus-based instruction and of the fact that the 
specificity of the materials matched their real language needs. They noted that both the instruction and the 
materials were extremely valuable for their successful participation in European international exchange 
programmes and that this, in turn, encouraged them to practice their grammar knowledge in the classroom 
assignments. For all these reasons, the approach trialled in this course might be considered as an 
alternative pedagogical method of solving some of the learning problems reported in DDL approaches to 
EFL and EAP courses. 
In addition to the limitations previously explained, the following issues should be considered for 
improving the course. As regards the design, the approach described in this paper lends itself particularly 
to lexico-grammar, but its applicability to sentence grammar would need to be validated in the future. 
Another limitation, partly due to course time constraints, is that only a limited range of monologic and 
dialogic genres were targeted in the course, which somewhat restricted the students’ view of academic 
speech with respect to the broader range of speech events in real university settings. Future experiences 
should assess the need for focusing on all the academic spoken genres represented in MICASE, as this 
might lead to greater awareness of genre-based grammar variability in university speech. 
The corpus-based approach to grammar learning presented in this paper can be extended in several ways. 
It would be most useful to implement systematic methods (e.g., by means of a control group) to 
rigorously evaluate the effectiveness of the approach in improving learners’ language proficiency. Since 
students did not have access to the corpus, future research should also assess whether learners’ direct 
access to MICASE data outside the classroom may enhance accurate and appropriate uses of spoken 
grammar. A further important extension to the present study would be to investigate the way this 
approach to grammar learning helps diagnose students’ weaknesses and track the students’ improvement 
both qualitatively and quantitatively. In the future, the construction of a learner corpus would also be 
advisable in order to obtain reliable information on syntactic, semantic and pragmatic features of learner 
texts as well as to develop a more thorough error analysis of the students’ language.  
CONCLUSION  
This paper has described and illustrated a particular approach to the utilization of a corpus as an aid to 
improving grammar proficiency in academic spoken English courses. In the case under study, Bhatia’s 
multi-perspective model for discourse analysis provided a pedagogically appropriate framework for 
corpus-based grammar exploration and supported effective grammar acquisition.  
Relying on the advantages of the MICASE online corpus and its browsing and searching facilities, the 
teacher was able to retrieve both frequency and context-sensitive data across a broad range of speech 
events and speaker attributes to obtain authentic models for analysis, to design corpus-based instructional 
Language Learning & Technology 54
Carmen Pérez-Llantada Textual, Genre and Social Features of Spoken Grammar 
 
Language Learning & Technology 55
materials which matched learners’ specific target needs, and to raise students’ consciousness of their real 
needs for learning academic spoken grammar. In addition, the use of corpus-based instruction allowed 
contextualization of grammar usage across university speech events and seemed to foster appropriate 
grammar uses. From a textual perspective lexico-grammatical items were observed and later used by the 
students to form syntactic constructions “that extend beyond the boundaries of a word and incorporate 
elements of their environment” (Tognini-Bonelli, 2001. p. 131). From a genre perspective, grammar 
constructions were recognized by the students as being closely linked to the communicative conventions 
established by disciplinary communities for each university genre or speech event type. From a social 
perspective, grammar – both that of the corpus models and that of the students’ actual linguistic 
production – was specifically shaped by the social dynamics of academic communication.  
As evidenced by the students’ accurate and appropriate grammar production within a small repertoire of 
genres, discursive conventions, institutional roles and communicative settings, the corpus-based approach 
grounded in Bhatia’s framework improved learner awareness of context-sensitive features of academic 
speech and encouraged students to integrate these features in their own spoken skills. It helped prepare 
students to become linguistically competent so as to participate in university life in an English-speaking 
country. Although much remains to be done, it seems that receiving language instruction through corpus 
data might help EAP students learn to communicate effectively and understand “the full realities of the 
world of discourse” (Bhatia 2002. p. 15). 
 
NOTES 
1. A KWIC (Key Word In Context) concordance is a set of examples of a given word retrieved from an 
electronic corpus. By using these concordance lines students can see different examples of a word used in 
context, learn the patterns within which this particular word occurs, and learn how to use the word 
appropriately. 
2. See search facility interface at http://quod.lib.umich.edu/cgi/c/corpus/corpus?c=micase;page=simple. 
For further details on search tips see http://www.lsa.umich.edu/eli/micase/searchtips.html. In the present 
study, the researcher was also the teacher in charge of instructing the group of students and the one who 
conducted the classroom-research experience. 
3. The scheme proposed in the "Common European Framework of Reference: Learning, Teaching, 
Assessment" starts from an initial division into three broad levels: Basic User: A1 and A2, Independent 
User: B1 and B2, Proficient User: C1 and C2. A more detailed Self-Assessment Grid showing major 
categories of language use at each of the six levels can be found 
at http://www.coe.int/T/DG4/Portfolio/?L=E&M=/main_pages/levels.html. 
4. See http://ec.europa.eu/education/policies/2010/objectives_en.html#basic 
5. 1=none, 2=slight, 3=some, 4=significant development. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I would like to thank the reviewers of this manuscript as well as the editors for their insightful comments 
and suggestions for improving previous drafts of this paper. 
Carmen Pérez-Llantada Textual, Genre and Social Features of Spoken Grammar 
 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Carmen Pérez-Llantada (PhD) is a Senior Lecturer at the University of Zaragoza, where she teaches in the 
Degree of English Studies. She is currently engaged in intercultural research on academic writing and in 
the use of linguistic corpora for the study of the discourse practices of multilingual academic writers. 
E-mail: llantada@unizar.es 
 
REFERENCES 
Ädel, A. (2006). Metadiscourse in L1 and L2. Amsterdam, Philadelphia: John Benjamins. 
Alarcos-Llorac, E. (1994). Gramática de la lengua española. Madrid: Espasa. 
Austin, J. L. (1962). How to do things with words. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Bhatia, V. (2002). Applied genre analysis: A multi-perspective model. Ibérica, 4, 3-19. 
Biber, D. (2003). Variation among university spoken and written registers: A new multi-dimensional 
analysis. In Leistyna P. & C.F. Meyer (Eds.), Corpus analysis: Language structure and language use (pp. 
47-70). Amsterdam and New York: Rodopi. 
Biber, D. (2006). University language: A corpus-based study of spoken and written registers. Amsterdam 
and Philadelphia: John Benjamins.  
Biber, D., Conrad, S., & Cortes, V. (2004). If you look at: Lexical bundles in university teaching and 
textbooks. Applied Linguistics, 25(3), 371-405. 
Biber, D., Johansson, S., Leech, G., Conrad, S., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman grammar of spoken and 
written English. Harlow, UK: Longman.  
Breivega, K.R., Dalh, T., & Fløttum, K. (2002). Traces of self and others in research articles: A 
comparative pilot study of English, French and Norwegian research articles in medicine, economics and 
linguistics. Applied Linguistics, 12(2), 218-239.  
Canale, M. & Swain, M. (1980). Theoretical bases of communicative approaches to second language 
teaching and testing. Applied Linguistics, 1(1), 1-47. 
Charles, M. (2007). Reconciling top-down and bottom-up approaches to graduate writing: Using a corpus 
to teach rhetorical functions. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 6, 289-302. 
 Cortes V. (2004). Lexical bundles in published and student disciplinary writing: Examples from history 
and biology. English for Specific Purposes, 23(4), 397-423.  
Flowerdew, J. (2003). Signalling nouns in discourse. English for Specific Purposes, 22(4), 329-346. 
Gilquin, G., Granger, S. & Paquot, M. (2007). Learner corpora: The missing link in EAP pedagogy. 
Journal of English for Academic Purposes. 6(4), 319-335. 
Granger, S. (Ed.) (1998). Learner English on computer. New York: Longman. 
Granger, S. and Petch-Tyson, S. (Eds.) (2003). Extending the scope of corpus-based research: New 
applications, new challenges. Amsterdam, New York: Rodopi. 
Hadley, G. (2004). Sensing the winds of change: An introduction to data-driven learning. Retrieved 
December 17, 2008, from http://www.nuis.ac.jp/~hadley/publication/windofchange/windsofchange.htm.  
Language Learning & Technology 56
Carmen Pérez-Llantada Textual, Genre and Social Features of Spoken Grammar 
 
Hewings, M. (Ed.) (2001). Academic writing in context: Implications and applications. Birmingham, UK: 
University of Birmingham Press. 
Hunston, S. (2002). Pattern grammar, language teaching, and linguistic variation: Applications of a 
corpus-driven grammar. In R. Reppen, S.M. Fitzmaurice, & D. Biber (Eds.), Using corpora to explore 
linguistic variation (pp. 167-183). Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins.  
Hyland, K. (1998). Persuasion and context: The pragmatics of academic metadiscourse. Journal of 
Pragmatics, 30, 437-455. 
Johns, A.M. (1997). Text, role and context: Developing academic literacies. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Johns, T. (1994). From printout to handout: Grammar and vocabulary teaching in the context of data-
driven learning. In T. Odlin (Ed.), Perspectives on pedagogical grammar (pp. 293-313). Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2003). Teaching language: From grammar to grammaring. Boston: Thomson 
Heinle. 
Mauranen, A. (2001). Reflexive academic talk: Observations from MICASE. In R. C. Simpson, & J. M. 
Swales (Eds.), Corpus linguistics in North America: Selections from the 1999 symposium (pp. 165-178). 
Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press. 
Neff, J., Ballesteros, F., Dafouz, E., Martínez, F. & Rica, J.P. (2004). The expression of writer stance in 
native and non-native argumentative texts. In R. Facchinetti & F. Palmer (Eds.), English modality in 
perspective (pp. 141-161). Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.  
Neff, J., Ballesteros, F., Dafouz, E., Martínez, F. & Rica, J.P. (2007). A contrastive functional analysis of 
errors in Spanish EFL university writers’ argumentative texts: Corpus-based study. In E. Fitzpatrick (Ed.), 
Corpus linguistics beyond the word: Corpus research from phrase to discourse (pp. 203-225). 
Amsterdam: Rodopi. 
Neumann, C.P. (2006). The complex dynamics of faculty-student relations in dialogic academic speech 
events: The research group meeting. In C. Pérez-Llantada, & G. Ferguson (Eds.), English as a 
gloCalization phenomenon. Observations from a linguistic microcosm (pp. 25-44). Valencia: Prensas 
Universitarias.  
Paltridge, B. (2002). Academic literacies and changing university communities. Revista Canaria de 
Estudios Ingleses, 44, 15-28. 
Pérez-Llantada, C. (2006). Learning to speak. Speaking to learn. Research perspectives on learner 
autonomy through collaborative work in ELT. In S. Borg (Ed.), Language teacher research in Europe (pp. 
81-94). Alexandria, VA: TESOL (Language Teacher Research Series). 
Pérez-Llantada, C. (2007). New trends in grammar teaching: Issues and applications. An interview with 
Prof. Diane Larsen-Freeman. Atlantis, 29(1), 157-163.  
Pérez-Llantada, C. & Ferguson, G.R. (2006). English as a gloCalization phenomenon. Observations from 
a linguistic microcosm. Valencia: Prensas Universitarias. 
Poos, D., & Simpson, R. (2002). Cross-disciplinary comparisons of hedging: Some findings from the 
Michigan Corpus of Academic Spoken English. In R. Reppen, S. M. Fitzmaurice, & D. Biber (Eds.), 
Using corpora to explore linguistic variation (pp. 3-23). Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins.  
Reppen, R., Fitzmaurice, S.M., & Biber, D. (Eds.) (2002) Using corpora to explore linguistic variation 
(pp. 3-23). Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins.  
Language Learning & Technology 57
Carmen Pérez-Llantada Textual, Genre and Social Features of Spoken Grammar 
 
Language Learning & Technology 58
Simpson, R.C., Briggs, S.L., Ovens, J., & Swales, J.M. (1999). The Michigan Corpus of Academic 
Spoken English. Ann Arbor, MI: The Regents of the University of Michigan.  
Simpson, R.C., & Leicher, S. (2006). The MICASE handbook. Ann Arbor, MI: Michigan University Press. 
Simpson, R.C., & Swales, J.M. (2001). Corpus linguistics in North America. Ann Arbor, MI: Michigan 
University Press. 
Stevens, V. (1991). Concordance-based vocabulary exercises. A viable alternative to gap-filling. English 
Language Research Journal, 4, 47-61. 
Swales, J.M. (2001). Metatalk in American academic talk: The cases of point and thing. Journal of 
English Linguistics, 29, 34-54. 
Tognini-Bonelli, E. (2001). Corpus linguistics at work. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins. 
Tucker, G.H. (1998). The lexicogrammar of adjectives: A systemic functional approach to lexis. London 
and New York: Cassell. 
 
