Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num1/review2.pdf 
February 2009, Volume 13, Number 1
pp. 27-32 
 
Copyright © 2009. ISSN 1094-3501 27
REVIEW OF TEACHER EDUCATION IN CALL 
Teacher Education in CALL  
 
Philip Hubbard & Mike Levy (Eds.) 
 
2006 
ISBN 90–272–1968–0 
US $54.00 (paperback) 
XI, 354 pp 
 
John Benjamins Publishing Co. 
Philadelphia, PA, USA  
 
 
Review by Fei Fei, Michigan State University  
The use of technology has become increasingly important in language teaching and learning. The 
successful use of technology, however, requires that language teachers have the necessary technical 
competence and pedagogical knowledge. The volume Teacher Education in CALL, edited by Philip 
Hubbard and Mike Levy, appears at a critical time when the issue of how to prepare current and future 
language teachers for effective use of technology in their profession is a serious and growing concern. As 
the editors point out in the introduction to the volume, “both pre-service and in-service language teachers 
will find themselves at a disadvantage if they are not adequately proficient in computer-assisted language 
learning” (p. ix). Although the International Society for Technology in Education (ISTE) has produced a 
set of guidelines to increase technological competence among teachers (ISTE, 2000), CALL teacher 
education presents a number of unique challenges and opportunities that have not yet been fully explored. 
For example, several chapters in the volume report that many teachers do not have access to solid 
professional development or lack institutional support, and that it is often unclear whether CALL training 
will lead to subsequent changes in teaching practice. It is also unclear what types of teacher education 
work best in which situations, and how teachers perceive and respond to different professional 
development opportunities that involve learning about and using technology. 
Teacher Education in CALL opens a much-needed discussion of these concerns. The volume brings 
together twenty chapters that link the theory of CALL teacher education with available options in pre-
service, in-service, and informal professional development. Each chapter begins with a short preface 
written by the editors that summarizes how the chapter is connected to the rest of the volume. The volume 
captures the complexities involved in training teachers in CALL, such as the frequent lack of human and 
technological resources and the lack of support at some institutions. Classroom teachers, CALL 
professionals, teacher trainers, and program administrators will benefit from reading the examples and 
reflective stories of other teachers and teacher educators working in diverse contexts and communities. 
Chapters in the volume are divided into five sections: Foundations of CALL, CALL Degree Programs, 
CALL Pre-Service Courses, CALL In-Service Projects and Workshops, and  Alternatives to Formal 
CALL Training. Three central themes emerge from these chapters: existing problems and complexities in 
CALL teacher education, current practice in diverse contexts, and the impact of technology training on 
teachers’ roles and identities. 
Fei Fei Review of Teacher Education in CALL 
 
Theme 1: Existing Problems and Complexitites in CALL Teacher Education 
The first theme addresses the realities and complexities of teacher education and technology, topics 
discussed in Chapters 2, 3, and 12. For example, in Chapter 2, Greg Kessler provides results for a survey 
of 240 graduates of North American TESOL master’s degree programs after asking them how satisfied 
they were with the technology training they had received in their degree programs. As the author points 
out, “it seemed that formal language teacher education programs have largely neglected to equip their 
graduates with the related knowledge and skills they need to enter today’s technologically advanced 
language classroom” (p.23), and many teachers have been engaged in consulting alternative resources, 
such as conference workshops, websites, colleagues, and personal readings to compensate for this deficit. 
Kessler thus makes a number of recommendations, such as involving both a CALL specialist in teacher 
education programs and stakeholders (i.e., “all teacher preparation faculty,” p. 34), providing incentives 
to language teachers (such as “release time, financial compensation and recognition,” p.35), and keeping 
technological use relevant to teaching. It should be noted that keeping technological use relevant or “real” 
(p. 101) is key to project and situated learning. Several other chapters, such as in chapter 6 written by 
Robert Debski), in this volume also address this point.  
In Chapter 3, Kathryn Murphy-Judy and Bonnie Youngs describe the history and development of 
technology standards for CALL in the Unites States and their implementation in the United States, 
Colombia, and the European Union. In Columbia, national priority is given to promote multi-lingual 
competence and information technology. Similarly, the Council of Europe has articulated its Common 
European Framework of Reference for Languages, whose goal is “a plurilingual and interculturally adept 
European Union” (Murphy-Judy & Youngs, 2006, p. 56) with technology competence as an important 
component of the framework. The US seems to lack any similar objective on a national level, and so the 
authors conclude that, although the US may be a global forerunner in developing and applying new 
technology, it lags other countries in “articulating a national policy on the need and support of foreign 
language education” (p. 58). 
Of equal importance are the conflicts teachers encounter in working with situational constraints. For 
example, chapter 12 by Angela Rickard, Francoise Blin, and Chrsiting Appel offers a report on a large-
scale initiative of in-service training for technology education in the Republic of Ireland. Their pilot 
program consisted of two phases. In the initial Training for Trainers phase (Phase 1), a group of teachers 
were selected from a range of educational contexts (e.g., rural and urban; primary, secondary and further 
education schools) across Ireland. They attended five one-day CALL training sessions, which cover, for 
example, how to “use word-processing and presentation software, source web-based materials, create 
web-based exercises and activities, use email or chat to set up collaborative projects, and utilize online 
dictionaries and corpora” (Rickard, Blin, & Appel, 2006, p. 207). In Phase 2, the teacher trainees of Phase 
1 became trainers and run CALL courses for their colleagues in local contexts. The courses developed by 
the Phase 1 participants largely mirrored the themes covered in Phase 1 and were also evaluated by their 
own trainees. 
However, as the authors indicate, there are a number of practical issues that need to be taken into 
consideration before implementing any training program, such as the extensive preparation time, adequate 
hardware and software support, and trainers’ expertise. This two-phase training program should be of 
interest to government or professional entities attempting CALL education on a large scale because the 
pilot program “[brought] together actors from every sector of the Irish education system, from national 
agencies to representatives of schools, further education colleges and universities” (p. 215). As such, it 
formed the basis for a network of professionals working together toward the development of CALL 
teacher education. 
 
 
Language Learning & Technology 28
Fei Fei Review of Teacher Education in CALL 
 
Theme 2: Current Practices in Teacher Developmment with CALL 
The second theme unifying the chapters in Teacher Education in CALL is the focus on current practice 
and the contexts characterizing teacher development in the use of CALL. These chapters explore a variety 
of approaches, including project learning, situated learning, online courses, collaborative development, 
computer-mediated communication, collaborative online learning, integration of CALL education 
throughout degree programs, communities of practice in CALL education, expert-novice mentoring, and 
learner autonomy. All these approaches can be adapted and used in diverse contexts, such as pre-service, 
in-service, and informal professional development, depending on the availability of human and 
technological resources and institutional support. These approaches represent recent developments in 
pedagogical theories, such as the theory of project-based teaching (Beckett & Millers, 2006). 
Project-based learning 
Project-based learning has made its way into the second and foreign language classroom over the past two 
decades (Beckett & Millers, 2006). This approach involves the use of project work or project-driven 
curricula and is often characterized by experiential learning, a focus on problem-solving, a tangible end 
product, and reflection upon both product and process by the learners. In Chapter 6, Robert Debski 
regards project learning as a pillar in constructivist approaches and introduces the rationale and 
implementation of a CALL course project at the University of Melbourne. The project aimed at 
developing a website that prepares students from Japan for their cultural experience in Australia. The 
author makes it clear that project-based learning is useful in evoking learners’ awareness of audience, 
promoting the use of authentic materials, fostering learners’ collaboration, and helping to practice a 
number of computer skills, such as graphic and web design. 
Successful examples of employing projects in CALL teacher education can also be found in other 
chapters within the volume; for instance, Chin-Chi Chao (Chapter 13) describes the use of WebQuests as 
a collaborative project in CALL education in Taiwan. 
Situated learning 
In Chapter 10, Joy Egbert talks about situated contexts in CALL teacher education. Situated learning 
refers to learning through participation in instructional experiences in actual classrooms. However, when 
field experience in classrooms is not available, distance learning can be an effective alternative. The 
author introduces various real-world cases related to language teaching. For example, in one case, a 
teacher was trying to use technology to help migrant students with their pronunciation by encouraging 
them to use audio emails. Other teachers were asked to analyze the case to determine if the teacher had 
used an appropriate pedagogical approach to teaching pronunciation and then propose solutions to any 
problems they observed. Situated learning seems especially useful in preparing pre-service teachers to 
apply what they have learned to real-life cases. 
Online courses and computer-mediated communication 
Christine Bauer-Ramazani’s chapter 11 presents the design and application of asynchronous and 
synchronous computer-mediated communication (CMC) in online CALL courses. According to the 
author, CMC provides an effective community for students’ interaction, feedback exchange, and 
collaboration. Bauer-Ramazani makes it clear that in addition to the content to be taught, the “human 
factor” (p. 191) is also critical in online CALL course design. For example, the design of a user-friendly 
“virtual café” (p. 191) allows course participants to discuss issues not directly related to the course. 
Similarly, Christopher Jones and Bonnie Youngs (Chapter 16) stress the importance of an online 
component and the application of CMC in a hybrid CALL training course at Carnegie Mellon University. 
The authors consider such courses especially useful for in-service teacher training because they are 
Language Learning & Technology 29
Fei Fei Review of Teacher Education in CALL 
 
flexible and affordable compared to regular degree programs, and because teachers have full control of 
their own CALL learning processes, depending on time available. 
Collaborative development 
A collaborative Internet project for students at Yakutsk State University, Siberia, is introduced by Larissa 
Olesova and Christine Meloni in Chapter 14. As the authors note, their case presents a context in which 
political, social, economic, and cultural situations pose challenges to CALL education, given that Yakutsk 
is located in a particularly remote area of Russia. In the collaborative Internet project described in the 
chapter, students were asked to find articles or websites on collaborative Internet projects, work with 
other students to evaluate these projects, and design their own collaborative projects which would make 
use of email, the web, Nicenet (a discussion board), and Tapped-In (an online chatting platform). 
Collaborative development was found to be useful as it promoted understanding among teachers and 
helped bridge gaps between participants. 
Integration of CALL education throughout degree programs 
Martine Peters (Chapter 9) discusses the development of computer competencies for pre-service language 
teachers in Quebec, Canada, and concludes with survey results indicating that a single course on 
technology in a teacher education program is not sufficient in preparing technologically competent 
teachers. While such a course produced quick results, it did not guarantee the development of 
technological competence over time. Thus, CALL courses should be integrated throughout a teacher 
education program. 
Volker Hegelheimer addresses this same concern in Chapter 7 by describing the integration of technology 
components into students’ coursework throughout the curriculum of the MA TESL program at Iowa State 
University. For example, the concept of learner corpora and computer analysis of texts is introduced when 
students are taking courses in English Grammar and Second Language Acquisition. Also, data analysis is 
integrated into the courses Teaching Methods and Language Testing. The author quotes Chapelle’s (2003) 
remark that “the way that students will learn to do applied linguistics with technology is by learning 
applied linguistics through technology” (p. 31). Hegelheimer’s approach is refreshing and engaging in 
that he sees computer competency not merely as a single component of the MA program, but as woven 
into every aspect of the learning process. 
Communities of Practice in CALL education and learner autonomy 
In addition to the approaches mentioned above, the concepts of self-learning and group learning are also 
proposed in the volume. Lave and Wenger (1991) describe Communities of Practice (CoPs) as occurring 
in a variety of settings where social groups naturally form to solve problems, share knowledge, mentor or 
assist apprentices, and collaborate to practice the skills of a domain. Elizabeth Hanson-Smith, in Chapter 
18, concludes that the idea of promoting virtual communities (one type of CoP) among language teachers 
is promising because it allows teachers to interact with like-minded peers, adding the advantage of 
building their experience and confidence in using CMC. 
Marinna Kolaitis and her colleagues also suggest that CALL teacher education is more likely to be 
successful if it is teacher-initiated (Chapter 19). Both pre- and in-service teachers, when participating in 
CALL training courses as learners, will benefit if they draw on support networks such as CMC and CoPs 
and develop learner autonomy. Learner autonomy is especially important for teachers’ professional 
development in the long run after a training course is complete. 
Theme 3: The Impact of Technology Education on Teacher Roles 
The impact of technology and technology education on teachers’ roles and identities serves as the final 
theme of the volume. Several chapters discuss how teachers experience changes in terms of their 
perceptions of their roles, and how teacher educators can prepare teachers for these changes. William 
Language Learning & Technology 30
Fei Fei Review of Teacher Education in CALL 
 
Wong and Phil Benson (Chapter 15) report on an 18-month case study in which they compare the 
performances of two experienced EFL teachers in Hong Kong after these teachers completed an in-
service CALL training course. The authors conclude that individual differences, such as the awareness of 
teachers’ roles and identities, lead to differences in long-term outcomes; specifically, the teacher who was 
more comfortable with a student-centered and communicative approach to language teaching seemed to 
be the most successful in integrating technology into the class. 
Another interesting point is made about teachers as producers rather than consumers of knowledge 
(Freeman, 1998). Hubbard and Levy argue that teachers have “the potential to be much more than 
consumers, and we want them to be regarded as having the capacity for research and development in 
CALL and performing in functional roles beyond practitioners” (p.12). In fact, a very similar view is put 
forth by Kessler in Chapter Two: “Teachers and developers of teacher training programs should approach 
development not in terms of what a computer can do, but in terms of what a human can do” (p.26).  
As far as teachers’ roles and identities are concerned, Chapter 5 by Diane Slaouti and Gary Motteram 
exemplifies the reconstructive processes of how teachers changed their roles in the classroom. The study 
was conducted at Manchester University in the UK. The key component in reconstructive processes, as 
indicated by the authors, is to raise teachers’ awareness of the changing role of teachers with technology 
integration into the classroom. In their study, teachers were asked to reflect on their teaching practices and 
report how their perceived roles in the language classroom changed over a period of time. In this way, the 
authors expect to trace the cognitive and psychological development of teachers as technology is 
integrated into daily classroom activity. As Biggs (1999) pointed out, learning is a process that allows 
people to explore their understanding of the knowledge they have gained and to develop a layer of 
knowledge that allows for transformation of learning-at-a-time into learning-over-time. Once again, 
readers are reminded of the potential of language teachers to be much more than technology consumers; 
rather, teachers participate actively in the transformation of learning, weaving their background, 
experiences, goals, and expectations into the process. 
Final Thoughts 
This volume consists of twenty chapters which are further divided into five sections, and the bulk deals 
with the first two central themes, that is, the existing problems and complexities in CALL teacher 
education and current practice in diverse contexts. Questions such as “What courses are appropriate for 
CALL training programs?” and “Is there a best practice for CALL teacher training?” have been puzzles 
for CALL teacher educators for a long time. Zhao and Tella (2002) also pointed out that the issue of what 
organizational arrangements promote technology use by teachers needs to be addressed. This volume is 
the first attempt to address these questions. It provides practical information by reporting the authors’ 
experiences in a wide range of educational environments and contexts. Most chapters are written as 
personal or institutional stories. In addition, the complexities that have been or still need to be addressed 
in teacher education in CALL, such as the lack of human and technological resources and institutional 
support, are also given considerable discussion. It introduces a variety of CALL training frameworks 
(e.g., integration of CALL across the language teacher curriculum, project learning, situated learning, and 
online courses) that will fit the needs of a particular institutional environment and is therefore a useful 
handbook for language teachers, teacher educators, and program administrators. 
Particularly interesting about this volume is the discussion of the third theme: cognitive and psychological 
development of teachers as technology is integrated into the language classroom. Zhao and Tella (2002) 
note that the relationship between teachers and technology has been a long-standing issue that is yet to be 
resolved. Some argue that technology will replace teachers, while others contend that there is no need for 
technology. Hubbard and Levy’s volume indicates that the truth lies somewhere in between. The 
volume’s discussion of the changing roles, self-perception, and motivation of language teachers will 
Language Learning & Technology 31
Fei Fei Review of Teacher Education in CALL 
 
Language Learning & Technology 32
contribute to defining the different roles that technology and teachers should play in the language 
classroom. 
However, the volume is lacking any type of comparison study of other critical issues such as the 
differences and similarities between different training modes (e.g., on-line versus face-to-face teaching). 
For instance, one possible question in this line of research could be “Since online discussions are 
completely text-based, are we expecting more critical thinking from discussions that take place in the 
forums than we do from verbal classroom discussions in residential classrooms?” (Pawan, Paulus, Yalcin, 
& Chang, 2003) In a nutshell, Teacher Education in CALL addresses existing problems and complexities 
in CALL teacher education, current practice in diverse contexts, and the impact of technology training on 
teachers’ roles and identities. The intertwining of policies, research, theoretical frameworks, and practical 
experiences makes this edited volume a valuable reference. It presents the status quo of CALL teacher 
education and informs future research.  
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Fei Fei is a Ph. D. candidate in the Second Language Studies Program at Michigan State University. She 
has been working on language projects at the Center of Language Education and Research (CLEAR), 
including Multimedia Interactive Modules of Education and Assessment, Online Chinese Pragmatics 
Tests, and a Business Chinese CD series. 
E-mail: feifei@msu.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Beckett, G. H., & Millers, P. C. (2006). Project-based second and foreign language education: Past, 
present and future. Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing. 
Biggs, J. (1999). Teaching for quality learning at university. London: SRHE and Open University Press. 
Chapelle, C. A. (2003). English language learning and technology: Lectures on teaching and research in 
the age of information and communication. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Freeman, D. (1998). Doing teacher research: From inquiry to understanding. Pacific Grove, CA: Heinle 
& Heinle. 
ISTE. (2000). National educational technology standards for teachers. Eugene, OR: International Society 
for Technology in Education.  
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Pawan, F., Paulus, T. M., Yalcin, S. A., & Chang. C.-F. (2003). Online learning: Patterns of engagement 
and interaction among in-service teachers. Language Learning & Technology, 7(3), 119-140.  
Zhao, Y. & Tella, S. (2002). From the special issue editors. Language Learning & Technology, 6(3), 2-5. 
 
