Language Learning & Technology 
http:/llt.msu.edu/vol13num3/review2.pdf 
October 2009, Volume 13, Number 3 
pp. 26–31 
 
Copyright © 2009, ISSN 1094-3501 26 
 
REVIEW OF ACADEMIC INTERACTIONS:  
COMMUNICATING ON CAMPUS 
Academic Interactions: Communicating on 
Campus [with DVD] 
 
Christine B. Feak 
Susan M. Reinhart 
Theresa N. Rohlck 
 
2009 
ISBN: 978-0-472-03332-4 
US $29.50 (paperback) 
216 pp. 
 
Michigan University Press 
Ann Arbor, MI 
 
 
 
 
 
Review by Heather Weger, Georgetown University 
The internationalization of higher education has seen an increasing number of students pursuing academic 
interests in the U.S. (deWit, 2002). Such learners will likely face a variety of challenges—including not 
only the need to participate in the academic discourse of a particular discipline, such as the natural 
sciences, marketing, or legal studies (Bhatia, 2002), but also the need to manage social adjustment (Ward, 
Bochner, & Furnham, 2001). Moreover, the U.S. academic context itself is a particular community of 
practice (Belcher, 1994; Lave & Wenger, 1991), characterized by norms of engagement and classroom 
expectations that may differ widely from the experiences international students bring with them 
(Casanave & Li, 2008; Shiraev & Boyd, 2008). Designed to raise ESL learners’ awareness about such 
norms of engagement, Academic Interactions seeks to equip prospective U.S.-based students with “some 
of the basic communication skills they need to be successful in a college or university setting” (p. vii).  
The target audience of the book is high-intermediate to advanced level ESL learners. Its explicit academic 
focus means that it is best suited for college-preparatory programs. In fact, some activities presuppose 
access to professors and matriculated university students, further indicating that the book is intended for 
learners “who are either in an intensive academic English program or have newly begun their academic 
careers at a U.S. community college, college, or university at either the undergraduate or graduate level” 
(p. vii). The greatest strength of the book is its carefully designed textual analysis tasks drawn largely 
from the MICASE database (http://quod.lib.umich.edu/m/micase), a publicly available resource of 
authentic “academic speech from across the University of Michigan campus” (p. vii). While the use of 
authentic speech samples does not inherently make an approach pedagogically sound (Gilmore, 2007), the 
book is successful because of the tasks that accompany each excerpt and draw ESL learners’ attention 
below the surface theme of the unit to consider and practice specific language points—including mining 
the authentic transcripts to study functional grammar features (e.g., use of ellipsis), new vocabulary, and 
pragmatic appropriateness (e.g., how to politely decline advice from an authority figure). Though the 
book includes other authentic sources, the MICASE transcripts are the backbone of the book; they 
constitute a majority of the tasks in the five units that focus on oral interactions. (One unit focuses on 
email correspondence and includes authentic sample emails to professors from non-native English 
speakers.) 
Heather Weger Review of Academic Interactions 
 
Language Learning & Technology 27 
 
Accompanying the text is a DVD that offers content-based illustrations of the themes of a given unit. The 
DVD is based on role-playing, and thus is not entirely authentic. However, the actors were not given pre-
determined scripts; instead a situation was outlined for them (e.g., the need to visit one’s advisor during 
office hours to discuss changing majors), and the actors improvised the scene. At first glance, some of the 
scenes seem overly simplistic for the target audience of “high-intermediate to advanced students” (p. vii), 
but they may serve as useful homework or independent activities that can supplement the core lessons. 
Substantial suggestions for ways learners might use the DVD to examine specific language functions 
(including transcripts and lesson ideas) are accessible online 
(http://www.press.umich.edu/esl/tm/academicinteractions/).  
Additionally, these DVD scenes also provide the source for most of the book’s pronunciation foci that are 
found at the end of each unit (only the email unit includes a pronunciation focus not based on the DVD). 
For example, one DVD scene introduced in Unit 2 shows students (actors who are improvising) 
discussing dorm life. To reinforce the interview genre introduced in the chapter, the pronunciation task 
involves transcribing a segment of this scene and analyzing it for question intonation. In Unit 4, which 
includes a focus on accepting and rejecting advice, recommendations, or suggestions, students analyze 
another DVD scene and focus on the phoneme /T/, which is particularly relevant for distinguishing a 
negative expression (can’t) from a positive one (can). The pronunciation foci of the other four units, 
however, seem less inherently linked to the communicative target of the unit. For example, Unit 3 focuses 
on email correspondence, a written communicative event, yet the authors include a pronunciation focus 
that asks learners to consider how to pronounce acronyms. The final unit targets class discussions and 
presentations, and it is unclear how the pronunciation focus on consonant clusters is particularly relevant 
for that theme. 
Each unit is comprised of multiple tasks that will take varying amounts of time to complete. Though there 
are no explicit timing guidelines in the book, individual tasks will likely take between 5 minutes and an 
hour, depending on the task type. For example, the initial tasks of each unit, focusing on brainstorming or 
schema activation, may take only 5 minutes of class time; however, the MICASE transcript analysis tasks 
will probably take 30 minutes or more. Other tasks include grammar practice (5-10 minutes) and planning 
and conducting interviews (30-60 minutes). Though the DVD scenes are short (all but one are less than 6 
minutes), transcribing and analyzing them for each unit’s pronunciation task will take considerably 
longer; this task lends itself to independent work or homework. 
Unit 1 contains 14 tasks and focuses on common American surnames (tasks 1-8), places (task 9), and 
locations and directions (tasks 10-14). Though these themes seem to be at a level too low for the target 
audience of high-intermediate to advanced learners, the tasks of the unit can be exploited for three major 
purposes: first, the opening tasks may serve as good ice-breakers for a new class of learners who might 
use them as a means of getting to know each other; second, once the unit shifts to “Locations and 
Directions,” the unit introduces learners to working with the MICASE transcripts via close textual 
analyses (since such close textual analysis may be an unfamiliar task for many learners, it may be useful 
to train learners by using the familiar theme of locations and directions); and third, the final task of the 
unit allows learners to explore the campus or community in which they are currently living and studying 
through a group project and informal presentation.  
The 21 tasks of Unit 2 deal with raising learners’ awareness about life as college/university students in the 
U.S. Learners consider such issues as housing, homework, and means of contacting their professor. The 
viewpoint of the college/university professor is also present in this unit through MICASE transcript 
analysis and DVD scenes intended to broadly describe what a “typical” day for a professor might entail. 
The unit also introduces standards of email protocol (although this is covered in depth in Unit 3). 
Students’ expectations regarding homework and grading are also raised. As in Unit 1, many tasks again 
focus on unpacking MICASE transcripts in terms of several language foci—including understanding 
idiomatic expressions and interpreting speaker intent. Building on the work of Boxer (1993), one 
Heather Weger Review of Academic Interactions 
 
Language Learning & Technology 28 
 
pragmatic language focus of the unit concerns how students can use complaining about homework as a 
means “to establish rapport or connections with other students” (p. 41). This unit also introduces learners 
to the interview genre, which prepares them to complete two interview tasks: interviewing a matriculated 
college/university student and someone who works in a student service office on their campus. 
With a focus on email protocol, Unit 3 is the only unit in the book solely targeting a written mode of 
communication. The unit addresses mechanics of email, such as appropriate subject headings, greetings, 
and closings. The strength of the unit, however, is that it addresses the complexities that arise from the 
hybrid nature of email correspondence. As noted by the authors, “email correspondence has features of 
both spoken and more formal written English, which sometimes poses a challenge when it comes to 
vocabulary and grammar choices” (p. 58; see also Biesenbach-Lucas, 2005). The authors outline two 
pragmatic heuristics to help learners manage these challenges: Grice’s Conversational Maxims (1975) and 
Leech’s Maxims of Politeness (1983). The unit avoids the pitfall of being overly theoretical because the 
theories are succinctly presented, and the accompanying 19 tasks of the unit guide learners in applying the 
theories’ principles to the evaluation and construction of emails. Specific pragmatic foci include how to 
ask for letters of recommendation, set up appointments, and apologize for absences or missed 
assignments. In short, the treatment of the linguistic theories is reasonably positioned within the learners’ 
zone of proximal development (Brophy, 1999; Vygotsky, 1986) and provides useful tools for learning 
how to manage the balance of formal and informal tenor (Halliday & Matthiessen, 2004) that characterize 
student-instructor email correspondence. Participating in online course discussions is briefly mentioned, 
yet no tasks are designed around this potentially important area of course participation. As online 
education grows in popularity, this lacuna may need greater attention in future editions of the book.  
Unit 4 consists of 17 tasks and focuses on how students interact appropriately with professors and 
advisors during office hours. As in Units 1 and 2, MICASE transcripts are used to illustrate specific 
language points. For example, in task 7, students are presented with three examples of office hour 
interactions. They are asked to evaluate the three in terms of content (why are learners visiting office 
hours), idiomatic expressions (e.g., ‘alright’ versus ‘alrighty’ versus ‘all right’), and discourse markers 
(e.g., the functions of words of such as ‘mhm’ and ‘yep’). Other tasks in the unit focus on different means 
of explaining the need for help with homework assignments and the use of modal verbs and quasi-modals 
in asking for and receiving advice; each language point is supported by a MICASE example. 
Additionally, this unit has several particularly useful DVD scenes. For example, the three scenes for 
“Appointments with an Advisor” might be mined for useful vocabulary (e.g., credits, prerequisite, 
elective, have space, off track).  
The 14 tasks of Unit 5 concern classroom interactions and focus specifically on the functions of questions 
(asked by both instructors and students) and narratives in classroom lectures. For example, in task 3, 
students examine MICASE transcripts to identify instructor questions and consider whether they are 
rhetorical; students then evaluate different strategies for asking questions when they have not understood 
part of a lecture—including brainstorming expressions for interrupting. Other tasks in the unit focus on 
how to hedge a response, how a wh-cleft functions, and how to understand ellipsis; MICASE transcripts 
illustrate each of these language features. Also, this unit contains a particularly useful DVD scene, 
“Gestures, Facial Expressions, and Body Language.” This scene shows three speakers discussing cross-
cultural variations in non-verbal cues—including different meanings conveyed through the use of 
eyebrows, pointing, and other hand gestures. Since nonverbal cues are of critical importance in 
interpreting face-to-face discourse, which is the focus of units 1, 2, 4, 5, and 6, it might be useful to begin 
the course with this task.  
The final unit focuses on two speech events: formal discussions (part 1, tasks 1-11) and panel 
presentations (part 2, tasks 12-27). Again MICASE transcripts illustrate language cues that might be 
useful for accomplishing both speech events. In part 1, learners are introduced to the structure of a 
discussion—including summarizing a topic, developing discussion questions, controlling turn-taking, and 
Heather Weger Review of Academic Interactions 
 
Language Learning & Technology 29 
 
listening actively. Part 1 ends with each learner taking on the role of a discussion leader. In part 2, 
learners are scaffolded through the process of developing their own panel presentations. This includes the 
planning stages (e.g., how to develop a topic and determine presenter roles) and the execution stages (e.g., 
how to transition between presenters, how to manage question-answer sessions, and how to develop 
visual aids). Two sets of comparisons in the DVD scenes of this unit may provide good discussion 
starters: one set contrasts how a group of students negotiates the division of labor for a group project; the 
other set contrasts more/less successful uses of visual aids.  
Academic Interactions has many strong features. First, the approach is grounded in authentic speech 
samples, whose use has long been considered a cornerstone of sound pedagogy (Brown, 2001). However, 
the mere inclusion of authentic materials does not account for the success of the textbook. Rather, it is the 
carefully constructed tasks which guide learners to consider and practice the organizational structure, 
language features, and pragmatic appropriateness of each authentic excerpt. Another strong point is that 
the book is fairly comprehensive in addressing likely modes of interaction in a student’s academic life: 
addressing both in class and out of class interactions with professors and classmates, as well as informal 
and formal media of communication. A third strength is that the text is highly interactive. Questions 
instructing students to consider language usage or to link the examples in the book to their own 
experiences are embedded within the descriptive paragraphs of each unit, and almost every task assumes 
pair or group discussion. Another strength of the book is that the authors “have attempted to use 
published research as much as possible to inform [their] materials development” (p. vii). Accordingly, 
units 2-6 explicitly cite published research or statistics to prove the relevance of the units’ themes to 
successful academic interactions. Finally, teaching aids (Instructor’s Notes and supplemental suggestions 
for using the DVD) are available online (http://www.press.umich.edu/esl/tm/academicinteractions/). 
Though this text might well serve as the foundational text for a general academic preparation class, there 
are two caveats to consider in planning how to use the book with a class. First, there are a large number of 
tasks in each unit (from 14-27). While each individual task may not be particularly time consuming, 
almost every task assumes pair or group discussion. Thus, it seems best that the vast majority of the work 
be done during class time, with the exceptions of preparing for major projects (e.g., Units 1 and 6) and 
working through each unit’s pronunciation focus. Although learners can be assigned a set of tasks to 
complete with a partner outside of class, instructors must then determine how to assess the completion of 
the assignments, most of which are oral (the only unit that produces a substantive amount of written 
reflection is the unit on email correspondence). Second, and more importantly, the close textual analysis 
of transcripts will likely be a new skill for most students, further problematizing the assignment of many 
of the tasks as homework, at least until learners have been trained. Working with the transcripts during 
class time is one caveat the authors themselves are fully aware of as they note that careful planning is 
necessary in order to avoid not being able to complete the analysis of a transcript by the end of a class: 
“Because momentum is hard to regain, we plan strategic stopping points in the unit rather than find 
ourselves with a lengthy transcript only ‘half-done’ [at the end of a class period]” (p. x). The book does 
not provide a guideline of how much time each transcript analysis is expected to take, presumably 
because this may vary greatly depending on a particular class.  
To address these practical timing parameters, an instructor may need to carefully select a subset of tasks 
for each unit, or consider teaching only some units. Unit 1, for example, has a focus on American 
surnames, places, and locations/directions; these themes may not be as relevant as the need to understand 
email or office hour protocols for the target audience of high-intermediate to advanced students. Timing 
constraints also suggest that prudent use of the DVD during class time is warranted; viewing the DVD 
scenes might best be assigned as homework or independent study. Careful consideration of these caveats 
will help instructors unlock the benefits of this book for their learners. Specifically, ESL learners will gain 
not only awareness of, but also practice in how language functions to accomplish academic needs (such as 
participating in class and preparing for group work with classmates). Although finding the right balance 
Heather Weger Review of Academic Interactions 
 
Language Learning & Technology 30 
 
for one’s class might be a challenge when using the book for the first time, it will be worth the effort for 
both student and instructor. 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Heather D. Weger received her Ph.D. in Applied Linguistics from Georgetown University. Her research 
interests include individual differences and SLA, identity construction in the adult learner, and teacher 
training. She is currently researching classroom motivation and teaching English in the Intensive English 
Language Program at Georgetown University.  
Email: hdw2@georgetown.edu  
 
REFERENCES 
Belcher, D. (1994). The apprenticeship approach to advanced academic literacy: Graduate students and 
their mentors. English for Specific Purposes, 13(1), 23-34. 
Bhatia, V. (2002). A generic view of academic discourse. In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic discourse (pp. 
21-39). London: Longman. 
Biesenbach-Lucas, S. (2005). Communication topics and strategies in e-mail consultation: Comparison 
between American and international university students. Language Learning & Technology, 9(2), 24-46. 
Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu 
Boxer, D. (1993). Complaining and commiserating: A speech act view of solidarity in spoken American 
English. New York: Peter Lang. 
Brophy, J. (1999). Teaching. Geneva: International Bureau of Education. 
Brown, H. (2001). Teaching by principles: An interactive approach to language pedagogy. London: 
Longman. 
Casanave, C., & Li, X. (Eds.) (2008). Learning the literacy practices of graduate school: Insiders’ 
reflections on academic enculturation. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press. 
de Wit, H. (2002). Internationalization of higher education in the United States of America and Europe. 
Westport, CT: Greenwood. 
Gilmore, A. (2007). Authentic materials and authenticity in foreign language learning. Language 
Teaching, 40, 97-118. 
Grice, H. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J. Morgan (Eds.), Speech acts (pp. 41-58). New 
York: Academic Press. 
Halliday, M., & Matthiessen, C. (2004). An introduction to functional grammar. London: Hodder Arnold. 
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Leech, G. (1983). Principles of pragmatics. London: Longman. 
Shiraev, E., & Boyd, G. (Eds.) (2008). The accent of success. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan 
Press. 
Vygotsky, L. (1986). Thought and language. Cambridge: MIT Press. 
Heather Weger Review of Academic Interactions 
 
Language Learning & Technology 31 
 
Ward, C., Bochner, S., & Furnham, A. (2001). The psychology of culture shock. Philadelphia, PA: Taylor 
& Francis. 
 
 
