Language Learning & Technology 
http:/llt.msu.edu/vol13num2/review1.pdf 
June 2009, Volume 13, Number 2 
pp. 15-21 
 
Copyright © 2009. ISSN 1094-3501 15
REVIEW OF TIPS FOR TEACHING WITH CALL: PRACTICAL 
APPROACHES TO COMPUTER-ASSISTED LANGUAGE LEARNING 
Tips for Teaching with CALL: Practical 
Approaches to Computer-Assisted Language 
Learning [with CD] 
 
Carol A. Chapelle and Joan Jamieson  
 
2008  
ISBN 0132404281 
US $52.00 (paperback)  
240 pp. 
 
Pearson-Longman 
White Plains, NY, USA  
Review by Jesús García Laborda, Universidad Politécnica de Valencia  
Tips for Teaching with CALL: Practical Approaches to Computer-Assisted Language Learning [with CD] 
is one of the latest additions to Pearson-Longman’s professional development series. Since the mid-
1980s, a number of publications have tried to introduce, teach, support, and provide ideas to foreign 
language instructors on the use of computers in the classroom (Hardisty & Windeatt, 1989).  Some of 
these volumes are intended to encourage language teachers to use computers (Axtell, 2007; Gooden, 
1996; Szendeffy, 2005) while others suggest specific ways of implementing Internet-based language 
teaching (e.g., Clarke, 2000; Griffin, 2006; Lee, Jor, & Lai, 2005; Sperling, 1998; Windeatt, Hardisty, & 
Eastment, 2000). In contrast to these titles, Tips for Teaching with CALL largely deals with Web sites that 
could be valuable for ESL/EFL teachers who are either beginning to implement CALL in their classes or 
who want to improve their teaching skills through computer based practice.  In this sense, the book bears 
a certain resemblance to Sperling’s (1998) volume on Internet-based CALL, but, in contrast, Chapelle and 
Jamieson’s book also includes screenshots of the Web sites mentioned by the authors, and the authors 
relate the use of these Web sites to current language acquisition theory.  Overall, the book will mostly 
benefit general practitioners, teachers who may be familiar with computers but are just beginning to use 
CALL in their classes, and expert teachers who may be looking for new materials.  
For Chapelle and Jamieson, teachers play a decisive role in providing opportunities for learning and 
balancing online, in-class, and out-of-class activities. The authors also believe in the value of Internet-
based resources, such as dictionaries, tutorials, and online libraries (Loucky, 2005).  In their opinion, Web 
sites and technology “perform functions similar to what many teachers do in class and through textbooks” 
(p. 6) in serving as teaching tools and providing opportunities for language learning, and multimedia 
software is an excellent source of input at each student’s proficiency level.  
Chapelle and Jamieson place special emphasis on the following ideas: (1) language learners should 
proceed steadily by learning structures and vocabulary that is just a little above their current knowledge 
(cf. Krashen, 1982); (2) language needs to be noticed in order to be learned (Hegelheimer & Chapelle, 
2000); (3) interaction with peers is essential to developing learners’ communicative competence; and (4) 
learning strategies are necessary for language learning (Vinther, 2005). Besides, according to the authors, 
“teachers can guide students to be more autonomous” (p. 207).   
Tips for Teaching with CALL consists of a book and an interactive CD-ROM.  While the book presents 
Jesús García Laborda Review of Tips For Teaching With Call 
 
the content, “tips and their rationale and examples” (p. 9), the CD provides examples of what is presented 
in the book. The book is divided into eight chapters with corresponding units on the CD, plus a preface, 
an introduction titled “What is CALL?” and a conclusion called “After Class.” The topics addressed in 
the chapters focus on the following language skills and content areas: vocabulary, grammar, reading, 
writing, listening, speaking, communication skills, and Content-Based Language. Each chapter follows 
exactly the same structure: an introduction, between five and six teaching tips to develop the activities 
suggested in each section of the chapter, a description of the intended outcomes of the chapter called 
“What It Means,” a research review that links practical cases to research literature called “What the 
Literature Says,” and suggestions for the utilization of the content in the classroom “What Teachers Can 
Do.”  The chapters are illustrated with color screenshots of existing CALL software programs, along with 
descriptions, the minimum proficiency level of the students for whom each activity is designed, and notes 
for implementing the activity, with a total of more than 100 examples of Web sites and software programs 
across the eight chapters.  The authors also mention how students will need to interact with the computer 
and other students in each activity, how teachers should proceed with the ELT/ESL pedagogical 
assessment and feedback provision, and finally, how they can teach and reinforce both language learning 
and strategic computer competence.  
The CD-ROM uses images and video clips to illustrate the contents of the book through demonstrations 
of learners using CALL software and simulations that guide them through authentic CALL materials. 
According to the authors, the demonstration “is a real-time video that shows how a learner might perform 
an activity” (p. 9), while the simulation “guides teachers through an activity as if they were students” (p. 
9). Both demonstrations and simulations are divided into the same units (or chapters) as presented in the 
book (Figure 1). 
 
Figure 1: CD ROM main menu 
The CD can be motivating and helpful for teachers who may want to see applications of what has been 
presented in the book. Each activity on the CD is connected with the tips presented in the book (either 
Language Learning & Technology 16
Jesús García Laborda Review of Tips For Teaching With Call 
 
through a demonstration or simulation) and has three main parts: goals and instructions for an activity, the 
activity itself, and a summary and description of the purpose of the activity. 
The book begins with a nine-page introduction that provides a definition of CALL, a basic notion of 
language learning theory emphasizing the importance of the communicative approach in CALL, and the 
role of computers in ELT/ESL pedagogy. In addition, the authors introduce three basic principles of 
language that guide their selection of activities in the book: 
a) Learners need guidance in learning English. 
b) There are many styles of English used for many different purposes. 
c) Teachers should provide guidance by selecting appropriate language and structuring learning 
activities. (p. 3)  
A fourth principle, although not explicitly mentioned is that computers trigger communication between 
teachers and students and among students by providing appropriate input, especially in listening, reading, 
and vocabulary, and by facilitating oral communication. 
Chapter one focuses on vocabulary, which, in the authors’ words, “is the most important aspect of 
language for students to learn” (p. 11), and that it is worth “spend[ing] time and effort studying 
vocabulary” (p. 11). According to Chapelle and Jamieson, the Internet gives “sufficient exposure to words 
in English that [students] hear or read” (p. 11). In the section “Tips for teaching vocabulary with CALL,” 
Chapelle and Jamieson stress that vocabulary is best taught when words have the appropriate level of 
difficulty, which can be identified by examining a word’s frequency, but missing for the reader are other 
criteria to support this condition. The authors remind readers of “including vocabulary illustration, 
explanation and practice…in [a] meaningful context” (p. 17), “looking at sentences from a corpus that 
contains key words” (p. 24), and using Web sites that can promote autonomous learning.  Additionally, 
the CD ROM demonstrates how to foster communication among learners while building vocabulary 
skills. For instance, in the demonstration, two learners help each other to solve a puzzle. The CD 
reproduces the conversation between two students and shows how they solve the vocabulary task. The 
simulation section shows how the learners implement Tip Number Six (“Help students to develop 
strategies for explicit online vocabulary learning through the use of online dictionaries and 
concordancers” by using Compleat Lexical Tutor (http://www.lextutor.ca/). This chapter offers some 
motivating activities to approach vocabulary learning. While some of these interesting activities (such as 
crosswords or image identification) rarely take place in the classroom, students may do them individually 
through the Web sites presented in this chapter.  This chapter clearly supports the importance of lexis in 
language learning. The authors even mention that “vocabulary is the most important aspect of language 
for students to learn” (p. 11) but they do not clearly establish whether computer based vocabulary 
learning is an explicit or implicit process or just even why they consider such importance. Readers will 
see that although Chapelle and Jamieson believe that “most students believe that they need to study 
vocabulary” (p. 11), little support is given to demonstrate this idea or even the implications of learning 
vocabulary through CALL.  Nevertheless, this chapter is potentially key for understanding the rest of the 
book because the authors go on to emphasize the importance of vocabulary teaching in the following 
chapters.  
Chapter two deals with grammar and follows the same structure as Chapter One. Although many teachers 
and students consider grammar important, the authors recommend “not to plan a syllabus around 
grammatical points” (p. 39). When presenting their tips, Chapelle and Jamieson assert that grammar 
activities presented on many Web sites are numerous, but many “are rather limited, as context is often at 
sentence level and practice is often in the form of recognition [instead of meaningful production]” (p. 41). 
They recommend CALL software with discourse-level activities, such as listening “to a part of a dialogue 
and then producing the target form orally” (p. 43). Chapter Two also includes suggestions for using 
Language Learning & Technology 17
Jesús García Laborda Review of Tips For Teaching With Call 
 
cartoons or movies for grammar learning which are available online. For example, a very attractive 
exercise suggested in the CD Rom is completing sentences with Understanding and Using Grammar-
Interactive (http://www.pearsonlongman.com/ae/multimedia/programs/uuegi.htm), but the program offers 
a larger variety of grammar exercises.  Additionally, the authors give examples of Web-based activities 
that provide “grammar assessment and feedback about correctness both before and after instruction” (p. 
53), as well as ideas for developing students’ learning strategies. The CD-Rom demonstrates Tip Four, 
“Include evaluation of students’ regular responses and regular summaries of their responses,” by using 
Understanding and Using English Grammar – Interactive software 
(http://www.pearsonlongman.com/ae/multimedia/programs/uuegi.htm). In this demonstration, a learner 
completes a grammar test, looks at the scores, and accesses a tutorial with grammar explanations. In the 
simulation of Tip Five, “Help learners to develop strategies for learning grammar from texts on the Web 
through explicit grammar and inductive learning,” students can learn how to search for a structure in an 
online corpus, compare its distribution across genres, and see example sentences in the View Web site 
(http://view.byu.edu/).  
Chapter three, focusing on reading, begins by stating that reading is difficult for “unskilled” (p. 63) 
learners, so it is important to familiarize students with the different contexts, genres, and texts that they 
are likely to read on the Internet. One of the most obvious, yet important, tips is for teachers to choose 
appropriate Web sites and reading texts (a few examples are provided), emphasize the vocabulary, and 
help students to understand the salient lexical and grammatical forms in online texts. Chapelle and 
Jamieson also stress the importance of using online support resources, such as glossaries, corpora, 
tutorials, and dictionaries. Finally, the authors add that “explicit teaching is better than simply letting the 
students sink or swim in their own reading” (p. 79), a criticism of those approaches that emphasize textual 
input alone may be sufficient to learn a language (e.g., Krashen, 2006). The CD-ROM demonstrates Tip 
Six, “Include evaluation of learners’ comprehension and language knowledge,” with Longman English 
Interactive 3 (www.esl.net/englishinteractive_34.html) by showing how a learner completes a reading 
quiz, submits responses, and checks the score. In the simulation of Tip One, “Select CALL materials with 
appropriate reading texts,” with Adult Learning Activities (www.cdlponline.org/), the user chooses a 
reading topic and a story, looks at two versions of the story, and tries a variety of grammar learning 
activities, games, writing short answers and so on. One of the positive aspects of this chapter is that many 
of the described activities might have been difficult for teachers to design on their own. One of the 
aspects that Chapelle and Jamieson fail to give the relevant importance in this chapter is to the use of real 
materials. Certainly, it is not difficult to understand the importance of free reading in language learning—
and the Internet is an abundant source of reading input that usually may or may not require direct 
instruction, which appears to be the key aspect of teaching and learning in this chapter. As the authors 
say: “Call activities make it easy to find texts that are at the appropriate level of difficulty” (p. 65). 
Perhaps it is the texts that make the CALL activities valid and valuable for learning.  
Chapter four deals with writing. It emphasizes how important writing has become in our daily lives for 
professional and non-professional communication, for example, through e-mail. The chapter presents a 
list of software and online programs that help students write and contextualize their work according to 
genre, purpose, and audience. The CD-ROM demonstration addresses Tip Six, “Help learners to develop 
their writing strategies,” using the Daedalus Integrated Writing Environment (DIWE 7) 
(www.daedalus.com), in which a learner chooses a topic to write about, answers questions about the 
topic, and begins an essay with a pre-writing activity. The simulation on the CD-Rom of Tip One asks a 
student to “select appropriate writing texts as models” with WriteFix (www.writefix.com/), explores 
arguments for an essay, examines organization and paragraphing, and “look[s] at a complete model essay 
for transition words or phrases”(CD-ROM). A positive aspect of this chapter is the presentation of Web 
sites that can assist learners in the process of editing and monitoring their writing. Overall, this may be 
one of the most useful chapters in the book because these Web sites can make students more aware of the 
Language Learning & Technology 18
Jesús García Laborda Review of Tips For Teaching With Call 
 
importance of editing and monitoring their own language production.    
Chapter five deals with listening. The authors see listening as a constructive process that “involves 
decoding, comprehension and interpretation” (p. 125) and requires the speaker’s attention and knowledge 
to achieve understanding in real time. According to the authors, to select appropriate listening materials, 
teachers should look for those that have “already been categorized by level [and that have] relevance to 
the ESL learner, and that [have] pre-listening activities intended to activate [the] student’s background 
knowledge” (p. 127), as well as top-down and bottom-up activities. Teachers should also help students to 
develop autonomy in choosing materials themselves. The authors recommend using videos to enrich 
listening activities and provide examples to help improve the quality of teaching listening. On the CD-
Rom, Tip Three suggests teachers “[p]rovide learners with opportunities for selective listening activities 
based on what they are hearing,” and offers a demonstration of Planet English 
(http://www.planetenglish.com/ in which a student reads the instructions for a listening activity while 
paying attention to a specific piece of information, and then writes a personal note using that information. 
The simulation shows a cultural activity from Longman English Interactive 3 
(http://www.esl.net/englishinteractive_34.html) video and writing a personal note. In this chapter, 
Chapelle and Jamieson present resources, most of them free that can be accessed by teachers worldwide 
making this chapter an excellent resource for teachers in multinational environments. This chapter is 
valuable for many teachers who may struggle to find listening materials, although podcasts are 
increasingly becoming a common source of different recordings with different accents and registers. In 
this sense the section “help learners develop their strategies for listening online” (p. 145) gives some ideas 
that teachers should emphasize in their classes.  
Chapter six deals with speaking and pronunciation. Chapelle and Jamieson state that the Internet is a 
convenient tool for obtaining speaking and pronunciation input because language learners can use it 
autonomously. The authors also suggest that the Internet makes students more confident about their 
speaking skills because practice is not subject to in-classroom anxiety from which some less confident 
students may suffer. Computers can also be used to complete dialogues, thereby possibly increasing 
fluency because “automaticity of oral language [will develop] through oral practice” (p. 159) and 
interaction with the computer. In the evaluation section, Chapelle and Jamieson recommend “software 
that provides visual feedback that plots the learner’s speech signal on the screen” (p. 162).   Using Tell 
Me More (www.tellmemore.com/) for the demonstration of Tip 3, “Provide opportunities for oral practice 
through interaction with the computer,” a student simulates a chat with a computer program (with answer 
recognition). More interesting practice is presented in Tip Four, “Evaluate learners’ performance and 
provide feedback” (Connected Speech, http://www.masterspokenenglish.com/index.html); in this 
software program for phonology development, the user listens to a video monologue, segments the pauses 
in a text, checks the answers, records his/her voice, and obtains feedback from the computer. In short, 
teachers who want to place special emphasis on pronunciation, or those non-native speakers who feel that 
that their speech is not a good source of accurate pronunciation input, may find excellent ideas on the 
teaching of pronunciation, which often tends to be neglected. The main problem with pronunciation, 
which is not mentioned by the authors, is that the current software tends to adopt one accent at the time 
(say, British, American, or Australian). Certainly pronunciation can be improved through listening, but 
this was not addressed by the authors at all. A key concern is that the authors fail to recognize that there is 
still some empirical work necessary to be done in the area of pronunciation before we can make 
assumptions regarding the productive potential of CALL applications to improve pronunciation. On the 
other hand, the authors propose the interesting idea that using CALL to obtain “formulaic sequences” (p. 
159) can become a valuable drive to memorize chains of words that eventually become a part of the 
learner’s speaking repertoire. In this sense, it is relevant to mention their support of using computers to 
trigger the speaker’s “automaticity” (p. 159), which is relevant to speaking as it is to the communication 
skills referred to in the following chapter. 
Language Learning & Technology 19
Jesús García Laborda Review of Tips For Teaching With Call 
 
Chapter seven, focusing on communication skills, conveys that “technology is an important part of 
normal communication for students” today (p. 171), and those students learn to communicate through 
communicating. Among the pros of Internet communication, the authors consider the ability to speak to 
people in distant locations, which can give students extra motivation. The authors see the challenge for 
teachers to design activities that promote both synchronous and asynchronous communication and 
reflective conversations that go beyond mere social interaction. Chapelle and Jamieson suggest that pen 
pal Web sites, messenger forums, or chat spaces can fulfill this goal, supported by online tutorials, 
dictionaries, and other resources. The CD-Rom demonstration presents online chat (using Microsoft 
Windows Live Player) while the practice-yourself section deals with how to contact and work with e-pals 
(online pen pals) through Web sites like Linguistic Funland TESL Pen Pal Center (www.linguistic-
funland.com). This chapter provides good examples of effective use of synchronous and asynchronous 
communication devices and software to develop the students’ communication abilities in controlled 
classroom environments.   
The final chapter addresses expected learning outcomes when CALL is used as an additional component 
to enhance language teaching. According to Chapelle and Jamieson “students who have experienced the 
CALL activities described […] while studying English are likely to develop the types of strategies and 
habits […] demonstrated [in this book]” (p. 212). Chapter Eight also addresses possible risks of using the 
Internet, such as plagiarism, criminal uses of the Web, technical problems with equipment and software, 
and varying levels of teacher familiarity with computers. In addition, this chapter also reviews the 
benefits of using the Internet as a source of readings, podcasts, and contextualized materials to obtain 
specific information for teaching languages for the professions, as well as English for Specific Purposes 
(ESP). This approach to online materials can be seen on the CD-ROM. The CD-ROM demonstration for 
Chapter Eight provides an example of an activity “that explicitly teach[es] field-specific language [in this 
case, medicine]” (Tip Two): a cartoon of a doctor-patient interaction at Englishmed.com 
(www.englishmed.com/). In the CD simulation, the user listens to a conversation between two business 
people, fills in a sales chart, and consults the conversation transcript and a glossary, followed by a cloze 
test activity using Talking Business Intermediate 
(http://www.pearsonlongman.com/ae/multimedia/programs/TB.htm). 
Chapelle and Jamieson have written a reader-friendly volume that is free of technical jargon that is 
accessible to most teachers. The book is a well planned source of teaching ideas,with a well defined 
structure and plan for class implementation. The best aspect of the book is the variety of activities for 
teachers to choose from. Although the book has numerous valuable attributes, it also suffers from some 
shortcomings. For instance, the authors might have included a section on language assessment and free 
language tests, such as TOEFL (http://toeflpractice.ets.org/) or some others (e.g., 
http://www.examenglish.com). It would also have been useful to refer readers to free online journals, such 
as TESL EJ (http://tesl-ej.org/), The Internet TESL Journal (http://iteslj.org/), CALL EJ (http://www.tell. 
is.ritsumei.ac.jp/callejonline/), or Language Learning & Technology (http://llt.msu.edu/) for additional 
teaching ideas. Another potential weak point is that 65% of the websites referred to charge a user fee. 
Consequently, although the book is a great source of ideas, many teachers may have to browse free 
websites like Isabel’s ESL Site (http://www.isabelperez.com/) or About.com (http://esl.about.com) to find 
similar sources. However, although the emphasis on commercial websites is a flaw, the authors  do 
emphasize that it is important for teachers to find, select, and adapt appropriate materials for their students 
(Doering, 2006). Finally, it is important to note that all the materials mentioned in the book are designed 
for teaching ESL. There is no mention of materials for the teaching of any other languages. All in all, 
Chapelle and Jamieson’s volume combines SLA and teaching with Internet activities. The book is an 
valuable contribution to the field and will be a useful resource for both novice and expert teachers. 
 
Language Learning & Technology 20
Jesús García Laborda Review of Tips For Teaching With Call 
 
Language Learning & Technology 21
ABOUT THE REVIEWER  
Jesús García Laborda received his Ph.D. in English Linguistics from Complutense University (Madrid, 
Spain), an M.A. in TESOL from the University of Georgia, and an M.A.F.L.L. from the University of 
Wisconsin. His research interests include low-stakes computer based language testing. He has reviewed 
materials for TESOL Quarterly, Educational Technology and Society, Language Teaching Research, ELT 
Journal, and ESP Journal.  
E-mail: jgarcial@upvnet.upv.es  
 
REFERENCES 
Axtell, K. (2007). Teaching teachers to use technology. New York: Routledge. 
Clarke, S. (2000). Using the Internet: Modern languages. New York: Pearson Publishing. 
Doering, A. (2006). Adventure learning: Transformative hybrid online education. Distance Education, 
27(2), 197-215. Retrieved April 14, 2009 from http://www.polarhusky.com/ceu/transformative.pdf. 
Gooden, A. R. (1996). Computers in the classroom: How teachers and students are using technology to 
transform learning. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 
Griffin, R. (2006). The Net works for language learners: Exploring the Internet for high-beginning ESL. 
Dubuque, IA: Kendal / Hunt Publishing Company. 
Hardisty, D., & Windeatt, S. (1989). CALL: Resource books for teachers. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
Hegelheimer, V., & Chapelle, C. A (2000). Methodological issues in research on learner-computer 
interactions in CALL. Language Learning & Technology, 4(1), 41-59. Retrieved April 14, 2009 from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/hegchap/default.html. 
Krashen, S. (1982). Principles and practice in second language acquisition. Oxford: Pergamon. 
Krashen, S. (2006). Free reading: Is it the only way to make kids more literate? School Library Journal, 
52(9), 42-46. Retrieved April 14, 2009 from http://www.schoollibraryjournal.com/article 
/ca6367048.html?q=krashen.  
Lee, C., Jor, J., & Lai, E. (2005). Web based teaching and English language teaching: A Hong-Kong 
experience. Beijing: The Chinese University Press. 
Loucky, J. P. (2005). Combining the benefits of electronic and online dictionaries with CALL websites to 
produce effective and enjoyable vocabulary and language learning lessons. Computer Assisted Language 
Learning, 18(5), 389-416. 
Sperling, D. (1998). Dave Sperling’s Internet guide. New York: Pearson Education. 
Szendeffy, J. de (2005). A practical guide to using computers in language teaching. Ann Arbor, MI: 
University of Michigan Press 
Vinther, J. (2005). Cognitive processes at work in CALL. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 18(4), 
251-271. 
Windeatt, S., Hardisty, D., & Eastment, D. (2000). The Internet: Resource books for teachers. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
 
