Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num3/speced.pdf 
October 2009, Volume 13, Number 3 
pp. 2–3 
 
Copyright © 2009, ISSN 1094-3501 2 
 
FROM THE SPECIAL ISSUE EDITOR 
In the field of language learning, the teaching of pronunciation has undergone many 
changes. It has progressed from the early days of drills and strict error correction, 
through periods of disappearance from the classroom, to contemporary approaches that 
address the segmental and suprasegmental features within their discourse contexts. 
Technological advances have provided a range of tools to assist learners in the 
development of pronunciation skills in a variety of target languages. Visual displays of 
some features of speech production such as pitch are user-friendly and valuable sources 
of feedback. Increasing numbers of learners can avail themselves of such tools to 
practice the sounds of another language as a complement to classroom instruction or for 
self study. The four articles in this special issue highlight several of these important 
elements: creating meaningful visual displays, developing self-directed computer-
assisted pronunciation practice, assessing learners’ attitudes toward the use of 
technology in pronunciation improvement, and rating the components of second-
language speech. 
In the first article, “Promoting Increased Pitch Variation in Oral Presentations with 
Transient Visual Feedback,” Rebecca Hincks and Jens Edlund addressed the effect of a 
different type of intonation feedback generated from speech analysis. Instead of pitch 
contours, their system produced flashing lights of different colors, which showed users 
how much pitch variation they produced. Results of a training study revealed that 
learners of English as a foreign language showed a significant increase in pitch variation 
in giving an oral presentation and improvement in naturalness, and that they were 
satisfied with their training.  
In “The Effects of Computer-assisted Pronunciation Readings on ESL Learners’ Use of 
Pausing, Stress, Intonation, and Overall Comprehensibility,” Mark Tanner and Melissa 
Landon explored the effects of self-directed computer-assisted practice involving cued 
pronunciation readings by learners of English as a second language. Of interest were the 
learners’ perception and production of pausing, word stress, and sentence-final 
intonation. Results indicated a significant reduction in the number of instances where 
they were unable to perceive pauses and stressed syllables. Participants also improved in 
their ability to use word stress appropriately in a controlled production task. 
Learners’ use of technology outside the classroom was investigated by Lara Ducate and 
Lara Lomicka in “Podcasting: An Effective Tool for Honing Language Students’ 
Pronunciation?” Learners of French and German engaged in both scripted and 
extemporaneous podcasting of texts in their respective target languages over a period of 
a semester. Improvement was noted for some learners in terms of comprehensibility and 
accentedness. Overall perception of the podcasting project by learners was positive, and 
suggested a way to address pronunciation as a companion to classroom instruction. 
In the final paper, “Comprehensibility and Prosody Ratings for Pronunciation Software 
Development,” Paul Warren, Irina Elgort, and David Crabbe addressed the issue of 
identifying the parameters to be used in establishing automated feedback systems for 
pronunciation. Native-speaking raters evaluated the comprehensibility of learners’ 
recorded utterances, noting areas of difficulty. The segmental information in these 
utterances was then filtered out, and they were rated for nativeness. Findings pointed to 
important roles for sentence prosody (stress, intonation, and rhythm), word stress, and 
consonant and vowel pronunciation in the assessment of comprehensibility. In addition, 
Debra M. Hardison From the Special Issue Editor 
 
Language Learning & Technology 3 
 
 
the authors found no significant differences between naïve and experienced raters on 
either task.  
This special issue would not have been possible without the contributions of LLT Editor 
Dorothy Chun, and Managing Editors Hunter Hatfield and Matthew Prior. I am very 
grateful to the many reviewers who offered extensive comments on the submissions. 
 
Debra M. Hardison 
Special Issue Editor 
 
 
