Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num1/review1.pdf 
February 2009, Volume 13, Number 1
pp. 17-26 
 
Copyright © 2009. ISSN 1094-3501 17
REVIEW OF THE HOCKEY SWEATER CD-ROM 
CD-ROM The Hockey Sweater
Platform Windows 2000 and XP 
Mac OS X 10.3 or higher 
CD drive 
Software and hardware 
requirements 
QuickTime V.7 
Designed for 1024 x 768 resolution  
Publisher  3D courseware/ Les Éditions 3D http://www.editions3d.ca/hockey 
Support offered Website: http://editions3d/hockey (in English) or http://www.editions3d.ca/hockey/fr/Depannage.shtml (in French) 
Target language English 
Target audience Learners of English as a second language  (intermediate to advanced level) especially Canadian English language learners 
Price 
 $34.95 - CD-ROM 
Teacher’s Guide (172 pp.) - $34.95 
CD-ROM + Teacher’s Guide - $60.00 (special offer) 
Review by Lily Sorenson, Georgetown University  
The Hockey Sweater CD-ROM is intended for young English language learners ages 11 and up and adult 
literacy learners whose English proficiency ranges from high beginning to advanced.  The CD is meant to 
be used in an English language classroom or for self-study.  A 172-page teacher’s guide provides a 
transcript of the video on the CD, notes and information about each of the activities, and teaching ideas.  
The activities on the CD-ROM focus on the theme of hockey and the classic Canadian story The Hockey 
Sweater: A Childhood Recollection by Roch Carrier.  This story, set in the winter of 1946 in a small city 
in Quebec, Canada, is about a young boy whose life centers around hockey.  The boy and his friends 
idolize the Montreal Canadiens star player Maurice Richard and wear sweaters like his.  One day, the 
young boy receives a new sweater in the mail, but it is from the Toronto Maple Leafs instead of the one 
he was hoping for, namely that of Maurice Richard.  His mother forces him to wear the new sweater.  He 
feels deeply embarrassed wearing the sweater when he plays hockey with his friends.  He loses his temper 
and is sent to church to pray for forgiveness; instead, he prays for moths to eat up his new sweater.  A 
review of Le Chandail de Hockey CD-ROM, the French version of The Hockey Sweater, was published 
recently (Caws, 2007) in Language Learning & Technology.  Here, the English version of The Hockey 
Sweater is reviewed to evaluate the relevance this CD might have for teaching and learning English as a 
second language.  
The English version of the CD-ROM, like its French counterpart, is divided into three “periods” to 
represent the divisions of a hockey game.  There are two other sections, “Zone” and “Encounters”, both of 
which provide expanded writing activities and opportunities to learn about the creators of the the CD-
ROM and the writer of the original story, Roch Carrier. The interactive activities on the CD-ROM are 
geared toward three specific proficiency levels:  advanced beginner, called “Peewee”; intermediate, called 
“Junior”; and advanced, called “Pro” (for professional), reminiscent of levels in hockey. The levels of the 
interactive activities are indicated with hockey sticks; one hockey stick is used for Peewee, two for Junior, 
and three for the Pro level.  The addition of the hockey sticks makes the CD-ROM appealing to young 
English language learners and also provides a quick way to identify the level for which an activity is 
intended. 
Overall, The Hockey Sweater provides good interactive listening, reading, vocabulary, and culture 
activities. Caws states that “[a]t first glance, Le chandail de hockey CD-ROM seems to require
Lily Sorenson Review of The Hockey Sweater CD-Rom 
 
a fairly good understanding of the [target] language.” At the same time, she also suggests that “because 
all the functions can be repeated more than once (including the exercises), and because the help functions 
offer both French and English explanations, Le chandail de hockey offers a good balance of autonomy 
and guided activity” (Caws, 2007, p. 36). The Hockey Sweater similarly fosters autonomy by allowing 
students to repeat activities; however, it falls a bit short in offering a good balance of guided practice.  
There is a lack of adequate progression and scaffolding from level to level for all activities, as described 
in more detail below.  Xu (2004) states that an important criterion to consider when choosing ESL 
materials is to make sure that the materials show “evidence of a developmental progression of content” 
(p. 3). 
The Hockey Sweater is set up in the same manner as described by Caws (2007) for the French version.  
Both include the same animated film The Sweater as well as similar activities.  One difference between 
the English and the French versions can be found in the 2nd Period Peewee listening/reading 
comprehension activity:  the English version contains 12 questions about the story content whereas the 
French version contains almost twice as many, 22 questions.  Another difference surfaces in the Help 
Menu; Caws (2007) states that in Le Chandail de Hockey the Help Menu is available in both English and 
French.  In The Hockey Sweater, it is available only in English.  
 
Figure 1. Sample listening and vocabulary activity.  
First Period 
The 1st Period in both The Hockey Sweater and Le Chandail de Hockey focuses on listening activities.  In 
The Hockey Sweater, this section consists of segments labeled “The Sweater”, “Video Clips”, “Hockey”, 
“Oral Questions”, and “Highlights”.  “The Sweater” is an animated, 10-minute video of Roch Carrier’s 
Language Learning & Technology 18
Lily Sorenson Review of The Hockey Sweater CD-Rom 
 
classic story.  It is the main feature of the entire CD-ROM in that all of the activities either use parts of 
the story or focus on Canadian culture or hockey with the story used as a basis for developing listening 
comprehension.  The story on the video is narrated by Roch Carrier, who has a fairly strong French 
accent.  A benefit of having Roch Carrier tell the story is that it makes the material on the CD quite 
authentic as Carrier is also the author of the story.  It may be difficult for some students to understand 
some words due to Carrier’s French accent; however, the authors of the CD-ROM have partially solved 
this problem in the 2nd Period in the activity “Exploring the Story,” where a button labeled “Coach” 
allows learners to replay the video while listening to a male native speaker narrating the story.  In several 
of the lower level listening activities, parts of the recording are Carrier telling the story; however, no 
“Coach” is provided.  As a result, these activities may be somewhat difficult for lower level students.  
The “Video Clips” section is helpful in that it provides a place where students can replay eight different 
segments of the video to gain a deeper understanding of the story’s content.  These segments summarize 
the main points of the story and allow students to focus on capturing parts of the story they may not have 
understood before going on to comprehension activities.  If students forget a part of the story, they can 
come back to this section and repeat it.   
The section entitled “Hockey” is a listening and vocabulary activity geared towards Peewee-level 
students.  In this activity, students click on the listening icon and listen to a spoken word. All of the 
vocabulary is related to hockey and in fact comes from the video.  Students match what they hear to the 
appropriate picture (Figure 1).  This activity can help students learn the vocabulary items and improve 
their listening skills. 
In the “Oral Questions” activity, students listen to twelve different questions.  With each question, they 
also listen to and choose the correct answer about the story, spoken in standard English by a native 
English-speaking female voice.  The activity is geared toward the Peewee level; however, the questions 
become progressively more difficult.  Questions 1-7 are easier, and often the answer can be found in the 
picture on the screen, but the answers may not necessarily be related to hockey or to the story. For 
example, Question 7 asks, “What is that blue figure on the table?”  The answer is “a cookie jar,” which is 
not mentioned at all in the story. The Teacher’s Guide suggests that Questions 8-12 may be too 
challenging for the Peewee level but could be more appropriate for the Junior level (The National Film 
Board of Canada, 2007).  Indeed, questions 8-12 are more difficult, but the answers can be found in the 
story.  For example, Question 11 asks, “Why does Roch get a penalty?”  The answer, “There are too 
many players on the ice,” is provided in the story as “He gave me a penalty because there were already 
five players on the ice.”  For this reason, question 11 may in fact be easier for students to answer than 
question 7.    
The “Highlights” section is geared toward the Junior level.  In this activity, students listen to short parts 
of the video and match these to appropriate pictures. For example, in one listening segment, students hear, 
“That was too much!  It was too unfair! ‘This is persecution!  It’s just because of my blue sweater!’”  The 
student has to match these words to the picture of a yelling boy (Figure 2). Some of these sentences have 
more to do with remembering the order of events in the story than creating a match between what students 
hear and what they see. These short listening segments are parts of the video narrated by Roch Carrier, so, 
due to his French accent, they may be a little difficult for some students to understand as no “Coach” is 
provided.  
Language Learning & Technology 19
Lily Sorenson Review of The Hockey Sweater CD-Rom 
 
 
Figure 2.  Sample activity with listening highlights of the video. 
Second Period 
The 2nd Period of The Hockey Sweater consists of reading and listening activities for each of the different 
levels. The first activity, entitled “Exploring the Story”, is not marked for any level.  As Roch Carrier tells 
the story The Hockey Sweater: A Childhood Recollection, a video labeled The Hockey Sweater is shown 
on the screen.  The video contains pictures that correspond with the story. While listening to the story the 
text can be followed along on the left side of the screen. This allows students to build sound-word 
relationships and provides input in English, both visually and auditorily.  In addition, short paragraphs 
about 18 different Canadian culture topics related to the story can be accessed on the right.  Some of the 
cultural topics include the Montreal Canadiens, Hockey Night in Canada, the Ancient Craft of Recycling, 
the Skating Rink, Anatomy of a Wood Stove, and the Rocking Chair. Students can choose to make this 
information visible or hide it if it is distracting.  In this activity, students can also fast forward or rewind 
the video.  If they want to focus on reading the short cultural paragraphs on the right, it is necessary to 
pause the video, read the paragraph, and then fast-forward the video to the next cultural topic.  It is 
helpful for students to see how these cultural topics relate to and provide background to the story, but it 
would also have been helpful for students and teachers if these cultural paragraphs could have been 
viewed separately.  This would have allowed them to read and discuss these cultural topics in more depth 
and in any order. More information about many of these topics is located in the “Heritage” and “Hockey” 
sections in the 3rd Period; however, the information in the 3rd Period is much longer and would be harder 
for a lower level student to understand. 
In addition, several different types of listening and reading activities are available in the 2nd Period.  First, 
the CD offers interactive vocabulary exercises.  At the Peewee level, these include hockey-related 
vocabulary and clothing, such as skates, ice, hockey stick, cap, coat, and tie.  In these activities, students 
Language Learning & Technology 20
Lily Sorenson Review of The Hockey Sweater CD-Rom 
 
drag and drop words to match with pictures.  At the Junior level, the words relate to hockey and home, 
such as gloves, team, referee, sink, tablecloth, rug, and chest of drawers.  Finally, at the Pro level, the 
vocabulary is related to hockey and clothing, such as the names of famous Canadian hockey players, in 
addition to plaid skirt, pleated skirt, felt hat, and overalls.  In the vocabulary activities at the Junior and 
Pro levels, students match words to definitions instead of pictures.  Overall, the words seem to have been 
selected randomly.  While many are related to hockey, or an item or event from the story, many words, 
such as jar and tablecloth at the Junior level, are not mentioned in the story.  In addition, consistent 
progression from level to level is missing.  For example, nine of the ten hockey-related words for the 
Peewee and Junior levels are the same.  At the Pro level, the hockey vocabulary activity requires students 
to know about specific famous Canadian hockey players, such as Abby Hoffman and Frank Boucher, 
about whom students read in the 3rd Period.  This task is more a comprehension than a vocabulary 
activity.  The majority of English language learners are likely to be familiar with neither hockey nor the 
players, so this activity is difficult to perform without reading about these players first.  The instructions 
in the Help Menu tell students that the answers to the vocabulary questions for the Pro level can be found 
in the 3rd Period, but the Help Menu does not instruct students to read about the players in the 3rd Period 
before doing this activity.   It would have been better to include the Pro level vocabulary activity in the 3rd 
Period instead of in the 2nd Period.  
The second type of interactive activity included in the 2nd Period is a listening/reading comprehension 
activity.  In this activity, students can read and/or listen to questions about the story spoken in standard 
English.  Students choose the appropriate answer by clicking on one of four answer choices and are given 
feedback about why their choice is correct or not.  Overall, there are twelve comprehension questions for 
each level, and the questions progress in difficulty from level to level.   
The third kind of listening and reading activity available in the 2nd Period is cloze dictation, in which 
students listen to a short passage from the story and type in missing words on the screen.  The Junior level 
includes two additional cloze activities: one is based on a poem located in the cultural section of the CD, 
and the other focuses on grammar in which students can choose to practice filling in either verbs, nouns, 
prounouns, prepositions, adjectives, adverbs, or conjunctions in a passage from the story.  However, the 
words that students are required to supply and the passages that are chosen for the different levels do not 
seem to progress in difficulty from level to level.  For example, at the Junior level, punishment is one of 
the words needed in the cloze activity, and the much more basic write is one at the Pro level.  Both the 
spelling and meaning of punishment are more complex than those of write.  One difference between 
levels is that the number of cloze blanks increases, albeit inconsistently: the longest passages can, 
interestingly, be found at the Junior level, not, as might be expected, at the Pro level.  Another difference 
between the levels is that, at both the Peewee and Junior levels, students have the option of hearing the 
missing words in isolation, but this option is not available at the Pro level.  Overall, the Junior level offers 
the most cloze activity choices as well as the most challenging ones.  This may require teachers to provide 
students at the Junior level with additional support on those activities that are more challenging.  Teachers 
may also need to create additional appropriate activities for the Peewee and Pro levels.  
The final type of listening and reading activities included in the 2nd Period consists of two plot puzzles for 
each proficiency level. These puzzles invite students to listen again to the same short passages of the story 
that were used in the cloze activities, as well as an additional passage from the story.  Students arrange 
sentences and phrases from the listening passages in the correct sequence, thus demonstrating 
comprehension.  The difference between proficiency levels is that, at the Peewee level (Figure 3), 
students arrange words and short phrases in sequential order whereas at the Junior and Pro levels there is 
no focus on words, but only on phrases.  However, again there is no clear progression in difficulty from 
the Junior level to the Pro level.  
 
Language Learning & Technology 21
Lily Sorenson Review of The Hockey Sweater CD-Rom 
 
 
Figure 3.  Sample Peewee level plot puzzle. 
Third Period 
The 3rd Period on the CD-ROM contains information about Canadian culture and the sport of hockey. The 
first section, labeled simply “Hockey,” includes fourteen reading passages related to hockey.  These 
passages, written by the authors of the CD-ROM, require students to have a fairly good understanding of 
English because of the advanced vocabulary that is used.  Most of the passages take up about one to two 
pages on the screen.  While the texts are not accompanied by comprehension questions, the Teacher’s 
Guide does provide a few suggestions for accompanying activities that can be done in the classroom.  For 
example, one of the passages, “Forever Rivals,” provides information about the rivalry between the 
Montreal Canadiens and the Toronto Maple Leafs.  The Teacher’s Guide gives the following suggestions:  
ESL learners are usually not familiar with the history of Canada and not aware of the roots of the 
rivalry between English-speaking and French-speaking Canadians.  This essential background 
knowledge is outside of the scope of the CD and has to be introduced in ways appropriate to the 
learners. 
In every country there are rivalries between groups of different backgrounds, and ESL learners 
can be engaged in discussions by sharing their knowledge about rivalries in their own countries 
(The National Film Board of Canada, 2007, p. 71). 
The activities in the “Hockey” section are not specified for any particular level, but the passages provide 
information about hockey that might help students understand the story of The Hockey Sweater better. For 
example, there is a brief history of hockey, information about rule development, the hockey hall of fame, 
and the Toronto Maple Leafs.  
Language Learning & Technology 22
Lily Sorenson Review of The Hockey Sweater CD-Rom 
 
The next section includes two short activities related to The Hockey Song, which was judged to be the 
song that “best capture[s] the spirit of hockey” (The National Film Board of Canada, 2007, p. 82).  This 
song would probably be very familiar to Canadians but unfamiliar to ESL students.  The first activity 
allows students to read the words to the song as they listen to it; the tune is catchy and students could 
enjoy learning the words as well as more about hockey. The other activity is a cloze dictation for the 
Junior level using words that occurred in the song.  However, neither activity stresses comprehension of 
the song, only recognition and memorization of vocabulary items. 
The third section available in the 3rd Period is entitled “The Stars”.  This section includes biographies, 
about three or four paragraphs in length, of 31 famous Canadian hockey players, mostly from the past, 
and a hockey card (or trading card) for each.  A link to brief recorded, although inauthentic, fan 
comments gives students opportunities for more listening practice. However, some of the vocabulary, 
including adjectives and idioms in these comments, would require teacher explanations for most ESL 
learners.  For example, fan comments include “Howe is a timeless, goal-scoring machine” and “He was a 
shooter’s worst nightmare!”  A “Who Am I?” quiz about the 31 hockey players can be accessed at any 
time by clicking on the “Who Am I?” icon at the bottom of the page.  The quiz could be a useful 
comprehension activity after students have read the information about the individual players; 
nevertheless, some students may not find this activity interesting unless they are hockey fans.   
The fourth section in the 3rd Period is “Eaton’s Catalogue,” an interactive activity which uses some of the 
actual pages from the department store Eaton’s Fall-Winter 1946-47 mail-order Catalogue and which 
allows students to browse the catalogue and search for different items.  This section of the CD-ROM 
includes two different types of interactive activities.  The first one is a reading activity of the Top Ten 
Uses of the Catalogue.  Students can learn about how people used the catalogue in 1946-47.  Students 
may find the Top Ten Uses interesting because people do not use catalogues in the same way today.  For 
example, the number 10 use claims that the catalogue was used to decorate the walls of outhouses and 
also as toilet paper, which students may find unbelievable.  Due to the high level of vocabulary needed for 
comprehension, such as outhouse, strap, paper dolls, scrapbooks, and homesteaders, this section of the 
CD would be most appropriate for advanced-level students.  The second interactive activity includes an 
Eaton’s Catalogue order form, which students can use for simulated catalogue ordering. Three different 
order requests are presented for each level; these differ in the amount and type of detail that students have 
to find in the catalogue and keep track of.  For example, at the Peewee level students are asked to order 
the most expensive sweater, whereas at the Pro level they are asked to order the most expensive item in 
the catalogue.  This activity requires students to practice the skills of skimming and scanning.  A teacher 
will have to check this assignment to see if students filled out their order forms correctly as no feedback is 
provided by the computer, perhaps a minor shortcoming. Two links connect Eaton’s Catalogue to the 
clothing vocabulary activities in the 2nd Period.  Potentially well intended, these links are, however, a little 
confusing because they seem to take students to new activities when in fact they are just links to what 
students have already completed.   
The last section in the 3rd Period is entitled “Heritage”.  It includes nine readings (seven of which were 
written by the authors of the CD–ROM) about different aspects of Canadian culture and is similar to the 
first section, “Hockey.”  Just like the Hockey texts, these passages require students to have a fairly 
extensive English vocabulary.  While they do not include comprehension activities, they do provide 
helpful and interesting cultural information about Canada that could help students understand the 
background and context for The Hockey Sweater.  A good time for teachers to include these reading 
passages in classroom discussion would be while students are discussing the cultural notes from the 
“Explore the Story” activity in the 2nd Period.   
 
 
Language Learning & Technology 23
Lily Sorenson Review of The Hockey Sweater CD-Rom 
 
Overtime 
Further interactive activities on the CD-ROM are located under the heading “Zone,”  which includes one 
new section, “Dream Team,” as well as a link to the Eaton’s Order Form activity in the 3rd Period.  The 
“Dream Team” activity allows students to choose six of the different players they have read about in the 
the “Stars” section in the 3rd Period and write, by typing into a window, why they would want to have 
these players on the same imaginary team. Writing guidance will need to be provided by the teacher. This 
activity might be difficult for the Peewee and Junior levels and might in fact fit better in the “Stars” 
activity than here by itself.  Additionally, the “Zone” includes a link to Eaton’s Order Form; this also 
seems to be randomly placed since students are likely to have completed the order form activity in the 3rd 
Period. 
Finally, “Encounter” provides an opportunity for students to listen to an interview with Roch Carrier, the 
author of The Hockey Sweater; to read about him; to view an art gallery of pictures by Marcel Dargis, 
who created the pictures for the animated video; and to learn more about several of the other artists who 
helped with the creation of the CD-ROM. The interviews could be used for more listening practice, but 
they are not accompanied by any activities; thus, a teacher would have to create activities for the students 
and decide upon areas of focus.  Students can choose to read the transcript of the interviews while 
listening to them; however, at times, the video of the interviews is confusing because the interviewer’s 
question, while written in the transcript, is absent in the video.  The “Encounter” videos will, therefore, be 
most appropriate for higher level learners who want more listening practice. 
 
Figure 4.  Sample screen of the Dictionary feature.  
Language Learning & Technology 24
Lily Sorenson Review of The Hockey Sweater CD-Rom 
 
In addition to the activities, the CD-ROM offers two other helpful features:  a “Notebook” and  a 
“Dictionary”.  The Notebook consists of a pop-up screen that allows students to take notes electronically 
on the screen by typing directly into the pop-up window.  Students can save their notes and print them out 
later.  However, as Caw (2007) mentions in her review of Le Chandail de Hockey, it would be better if 
the File function keys (new, open, print, close, save, delete) were “more accessible as buttons either at the 
top or bottom of the notebook because at present they are hidden behind the notebook” (p. 35).  The 
Dictionary allows students to look up any word from the story, but it does not contain all of the words 
used in other texts or activities on the CD-ROM, such as the vocabulary activities, cultural sections, or the 
hockey cards.   This may prevent students, especially those at lower proficiency levels,  from 
understanding the reading passages presented on the CD-ROM.  Students can, however, look up words 
from the story either by clicking on the individual words in the transcript of the story (located in 
“Exploring the Story” in the 2nd Period) or by clicking on the link to the Dictionary, which can be found 
easily at the bottom of the main interface (Figure 4).  
Wrapping Things Up 
Overall, The Hockey Sweater CD-ROM has a number of positive features. One of the greatest benefits is 
that it is based on a classic story.  Authentic materials provide high interest and create natural 
opportunties for cultural awareness. Spelleri (2002) states that ESL learners benefit from the use of 
authentic materials because they provide opportunities for the learners to connect what they are learning 
to real life situations.  In The Hockey Sweater, the authors achieve this goal by having students make 
connections between the story and their everyday lives.  One area which students may, nevertheless, find 
difficult in English as a Second Language classes is the fact that the story is read by the author, Roch 
Carrier, in his fairly strong French accent; however, in the 2nd Period teachers can guide students to listen 
to the story being retold by a native English speaker, or, alternatively, a teacher might begin with this 
standard version before they have students listen to Roch Carrier’s rendition.   
The CD-ROM could be very beneficial for English language learners interested in Canadian culture. 
Dominey (2006) states that, “the language we speak is directly related to the culture the language lives in” 
(para. 1).  With increasing numbers of non-English speaking people immigrating to Canada (Canada 
Immigrant Job Issues, 2008), the need for the teaching of English as a second language has increased 
since English is one of the official languages of Canada. This CD-ROM could be quite useful in teaching 
this group of students. 
Another plus of The Hockey Sweater is that its interface makes it very easy to navigate from activity to 
activity.  Many of the activities are fairly easy to figure out for someone who has used computer software 
before, but it would have been helpful if there were instructions on the screen/pages. Learners on their 
own can get help by clicking on the Help button.  Those at low levels of proficiency or with little 
computer experience may initially need additional assistance from the teacher to understand how to 
complete the activities.    
The shortcomings of the CD-ROM have been mentioned throughout the review and can be summarized 
as follows: a lack of adequate progression in activities from level to level and of appropriate 
accompanying activities for the reading passages. For students to get the full benefit of this CD-ROM at 
all levels, the teacher will need to create comprehension support for the reading passages in the 3rd Period 
for lower level students through appropriate activities.  Teachers also need to fill in the gaps where there 
is a lack of scaffolding or progression of difficulty from one level to the next. All in all, however, many 
activities on The Hockey Sweater CD-ROM could be very beneficial to students learning English and 
specifically those with an interest in hockey and Canadian culture.   
Language Learning & Technology 25
Lily Sorenson Review of The Hockey Sweater CD-Rom 
 
Language Learning & Technology 26
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Lily Sorenson is currently an instructor of English as a Foreign Language at Georgetown University. She 
has taught English as a second language at a number of universities, including Harvard, Northeastern, 
Boston, and Brigham Young. In addition to being a teacher, she was the Assistant Director of 
International Academic Programs at Northeastern University. She is interested in curriculum/program 
development and the use of technology in the classroom.  She is currently pursuing a Doctoral Degree for 
Special Education-Bilingual Education at The George Washington University. 
Email: las222@georgetown.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Caws, C. (2007).  Review of Le chandail de hockey CD-ROM.  Language Learning & Technology, 11(3), 
29-37.   
Canada Immigrant Job Issues. (2008). Canadian Immigration Statistics. Retrieved Aug. 9, 2008, 
from http://www.canadaimmigrants.com/statistics2.asp. 
Dominey, T. (2006). Strategies for assisting third culture children in the TEYL classroom. The 
International TEYL Journal.  Retrieved March 24, 2008, from http://www.teyl.org/article18.html. 
The National Film Board of Canada. (2007). Teacher’s guide: The hockey sweater CD-Rom.  Calgary, 
Alberta: Les Éditions 3D. 
Spelleri, M. (2002). From lessons to life: Authentic materials bridge the gap.  ESL Magazine. Retrieved 
March 10, 2008, from http://www.eslmag.com/modules.php?name=News&file=article&sid=18. 
Xu, I. H. (2004). Investigating criteria for assessing ESL testbooks (Doctoral dissertation, University of 
Alberta, Canada, 2004).  Retrieved May 22, 2008, from ProQuest Dissertations & Theses. (AAT 
NQ96339). 
 
