Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num1/speced.pdf 
February 2009, Volume 13, Number 1
pp. 3-4 
 
Copyright © 2009, ISSN 1094-3501 3
 
 
FROM THE SPECIAL ISSUE EDITOR 
There was a time, not so long ago, when the teaching of grammar was strongly 
associated with endless drill and kill exercises that were performed in isolation from 
meaningful and authentic contexts. Grammar was most commonly taught as a discrete 
set of rigid rules to be memorized, practiced, and followed. However, newer 
technologies that lend themselves more easily to collaborative and explorative learning 
environments, particularly when combined with constructivist theories of second 
language acquisition, have drastically changed the approach to teaching and learning 
grammar. With this in mind, I am very pleased to introduce you to this special issue on 
technology and learning grammar that highlights and reflects some of these changes that 
have taken place.  
The four articles that are part of this special issue consider theoretical, pedagogical, and 
technological issues that come into play when teaching grammar to adults in 
collaborative and explorative learning environments. They highlight the innovations and 
vast possibilities for teaching grammar in the realm of computer-assisted language 
learning by reminding us of the diversity of research that still needs to be accomplished 
in order to gain a better understanding of grammar instruction in computer-based 
learning environments.  
The issue begins with Carmen Pérez-Llantada’s article, “Enhancing Textual, Genre and 
Social Features of Spoken Grammar: A Corpus-based Approach,” that discusses 
teaching and learning spoken grammar for English for Academic Purposes with 
reference to Bhatia’s (2002) multi-perspective model for discourse analysis. The article 
describes corpus-based instructional procedures, gives samples of learners’ linguistic 
output, and provides comments on the students’ response to this method of instruction. 
Data resulting from the assessment process and student production suggest that corpus-
informed instruction grounded in Bhatia’s multi-perspective model can constitute a 
useful pedagogic approach to developing students’ understanding of grammar and their 
ability to use it accurately and appropriately. 
The second paper, “The Design of an Online Concordancing Program for Teaching 
about Reporting Verbs,” by Joel Bloch, describes the use of a web-based concordancing 
program to help students appropriately choose reporting verbs. Its interface has been 
designed for students to make lexical, syntactic, and rhetorical choices based on a preset 
number of criteria related to the decisions writers make in choosing reporting verbs. The 
article discusses design features of the interface for the teaching of reporting verbs as 
well as the implementation of a concordancing site that has been integrated with the 
teaching of grammar and vocabulary in an L2 academic writing class. 
The third article, entitled “Student–initiated Attention to Form in Wiki-based 
Collaborative Writing,” by Greg Kessler, provides insights into student-initiated 
attention to form within the collaborative construction of a wiki among pre-service 
nonnative teachers of English while learning about the cultures of the English-speaking 
world. The article explores the degree to which these nonnative EFL teacher candidates 
attempt to correct their own grammar errors as well as those of their peers in a 
collaborative task. It also discusses the level of attention learners pay to grammar versus 
content revision and sheds light on the perception of the importance of grammar in the 
context of collaborative technologies.  
Trude Heift From the Special Issue Editor 
 
Language Learning & Technology 
 
 
The final paper, Shannon Sauro’s “Computer-mediated Corrective Feedback and the 
Development of L2 Grammar,” reports on a study that investigated the impact of two 
types of computer-mediated corrective feedback on the development of high 
intermediate and advanced adult learners of English. The study focuses on omission of 
the zero article with abstract noncount nouns during task-based interaction in the form of 
text-chat. Results indicate no significant advantage for either feedback type on 
immediate or sustained gains in target form knowledge, although significant immediate 
gains relative to the control condition are found. 
This special issue was a truly collaborative effort and I owe deep gratitude to LLT Editor 
Dorothy Chun and Managing Editor Hunter Hatfield for their contributions. I would also 
like to thank the many reviewers who provided invaluable feedback on the article 
submissions by generously contributing their time and expertise to this issue. 
 
Trude Heift  
Special Issue Editor 
 
REFERENCES 
Bhatia, V. (2002). Applied genre analysis: A multi-perspective model. Ibérica, 4, 3-19. 
 
 
 
4
