Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num2/motohashisaigohardison.pdf 
June 2009, Volume 13, Number  2 
pp. 29-47 
 
Copyright © 2009, ISSN 1094-3501 29 
ACQUISITION OF L2 JAPANESE GEMINATES:  
TRAINING WITH WAVEFORM DISPLAYS1 
 
Miki Motohashi-Saigo, Kansai Gaidai University 
Debra M. Hardison, Michigan State University 
The value of waveform display s as visual feedback was explored in a training study 
involving perception and production of L2 Japanese by beginning-level L1 English 
learners. A pretest-posttest design compared auditory-visual (AV) and auditory-only (A-
only) Web-based training. Stimuli were sin gleton and geminate /t ,k,s/ followed by /a,u/ in 
two conditions (isolated words, carrier sentences). Fillers with long vowels were included. 
Participants completed a forced-choice identification task involving minimal triplets: 
singletons, geminates, long vowels (e.g., sa su, sassu, saasu). Results revealed a) 
significant improvement in geminate identification following training, especially for AV; 
b) significant effect of geminate (lowest scores for /s/); c) no significant effect of 
condition; and d) no significant improvement for the control group. Most errors were 
misperceptions of geminates as long vowels. Test of generalization revealed 5% decline in 
accuracy for AV an d 14% for A-only. Geminate production improved significantly 
(especially for AV) based on rater judgments; improvement was greatest for /k/ and 
smallest for /s/. Most production errors involved substitution of a singleton for a geminate. 
Post-study interviews produced positive comments on Web-based training. Waveforms 
increased awareness of durational differences. Results support the effectiveness of 
auditory-visual input in L2 perception training with transfer to novel stimuli and improved 
production. 
INTRO DUCTIO N 
The duration of vowels and consonants is a contrastive feature in Japanese unlike English. In Japanese, 
singleton consonants contrast with their longer geminate counterparts, which are a special type of mora. 
Accurate perception and production of morae are important for comprehension; however, they can be 
problematic elements for second-language (L2) learners. Training studies to date have not addressed this 
particular issue. 
Briefly, a mora is a unit  of t iming, which plays a role in the temporal organization of speech in production 
(e.g., Kubozono, 1999). Neighboring moraic units tend to show equal duration (Port, Dalby, & O’Dell, 
1987). As a unit  of rhythm, the mora also plays a role in the segmentation of speech sounds for lexical 
recognition (e.g., Cutler & Otake, 2002). Special morae, such as geminates, do not constitute syllables by 
themselves as shown in the following examples, where the moraic units are separated by a dot and 
syllables by a hyphen: a) moraic obstruent: /ki.t.te/, /kit-te/ “postage stamp,” and b) the second half of a 
long vowel: /ki.i.te/, /kii-te / “ listening.”2
An important acoustic cue for geminate obstruent perception by native speakers of Japanese is stop 
closure duration (e.g., for /p/, /t /, /k/) or period of frication (e.g., for /s/) (e.g., Fukui, 1978). However, 
perception is influenced by other factors such as pitch accent, which is also contrastive in Japanese 
(Ofuka, 2003). For example, kata produced with a H(igh)-L(ow) pattern means “shoulder,” while katta 
(HLL) with a geminate stop means “won.” In contrast, kata with a LH pattern means “form” and katta 
(LHH) means “bought.” Using synthesized stimuli to alter the closure duration of /t / along a kata – katta 
continuum for both pitch accent patterns, Ofuka found native speakers required a lon ger closure duration 
to perceive a geminate in the LHH pattern in contrast to the HLL. In addition, Hirata (1990) found that for 
stimuli embedded in carrier sentences, a singleton was perceived as a geminate if postconsonantal 
elements were spoken quickly, and geminates were perceived as sin gletons if these elements were spoken 
  
Miki Motohashi-Saigo and Debra Hardison Acquisition of L2 Japanese Geminates 
 
Language Learning & Technology 30 
more slowly. The duration of the vowel precedin g the consonant also influenced native perception of a 
geminate (Hirata, 1990). Vo wels are longer before geminates than before singletons (Han, 1994). 
Several studies have suggested some acoustic cues L2 learners may be usin g in geminate perception. A 
study by R. Hayes (2002) suggested consonant duration may play a role for learners as well as native 
speakers. She found significantly better singleton-geminate discrimination accuracy for /t / versus /k/, and 
/t/ versus /s/ by L1 English learners in the U.S. at different levels of proficiency. The duration difference 
between singleton and geminate /t / in her stimuli was the greatest (180 ms) compared to that for /k/ (142 
ms) and /s/ (134 ms). Korean and Chinese speakers learning Japanese in Minagawa and Kiritani’s (1996) 
study sho wed effects of pitch accent type on singleton and geminate identification. Learners made 
significantly more errors involving misperceptions of singletons as geminates (vs. geminates as 
singletons) in HL accent contexts; however, there was no difference in error types in LH contexts. The 
average postconsonantal vowel was significantly shorter in the HL context compared to that in the LH 
context. In contrast, L1 English and Spanish speakers showed no significant difference in errors according 
to pitch pattern. 
Some research has suggested that L1 English learners of Japanese are able to detect moraic weight but 
may not attribute it  to the correct segment. When learners were asked to write (usin g Roman letters) 
English loan words in Japanese that were produced by a Japanese speaker, their errors generally involved 
lengthening the vowel in words that native listeners spelled with geminates (Yamagata & Preston, 1999). 
In a recent study, Hardison and Motohashi-Saigo (in press) found that L1 English learners in the first  and 
third semesters of Japanese study in the US also misperceived geminates more often as long vowels. 
More advanced learners who had studied for one to two semesters in Japan made significantly fewer 
errors overall. Participants in that study were presented with an identification task involving minimal 
triplets: singleton (e.g., sasu), geminate (e.g., sassu), and long vowel (e.g., saasu). Results revealed 
significantly higher accuracy for targets in isolated words compared to carrier sentences, for geminate /k/ 
versus /s/, and contexts where the postconsonantal vowel was /a/ versus /u/.3 
Sonority is an inherent property of a segment, which reflects its degree of acoustic energy and its 
robustness as an acoustic cue (e.g., Wright, 2004). Values generally range from 0 to 10; for example, in 
Selkirk’s (1984) sonority index, stops (e.g., /t /, /k/) are the lowest in value at 0.5, followed by fricatives 
(e.g., /s/ at  4), nasals, liquids, and then vowels. High vowels are less sonorous than low ones; therefore, 
/a/ has greater sonority (value of 10) than /u/ (8).
The most difficult  context 
was gem inate /s/ followed by /u/ in a word em bedded in a carrier sentence. Duration differences alone did 
not account for all findings. Results suggested the sonority difference between consonant and vowel 
might be a factor in establishing perceptual distance between segments.  
4 The sonority difference between geminate /s/ and /u/ 
(e.g., sassu), the problematic context noted above, is smaller than the difference between /s/ an d /a/, or in 
a stop-vowel sequence. Results of the study pointed to a complex interplay of factors in L2 geminate 
identification accuracy. The identification process may be facilitated by a larger sonority difference and 
thus perceptual distance between consonant and vowel. The findings suggested several challenges for 
learners: a) to develop an attention-weighting perceptual mechanism for the detection of moraic 
boun daries as the units of rhythm for speech segmentation (e.g., Cutler, 1997); b) to perceive the longer 
duration of the preconsonantal vowel as a cue to the following geminate, and identify it  as one mora; and 
c) to perceive the following consonant’s duration.  
In the present study, we so ught a user-friendly Web-based training program that could enhance perception 
of geminates for L2 learners by providing a visual display of the duration of segments in the speech 
stream. Other types of visual displays, such as those for pitch, have been effective tools in speech training 
for L2 learners (e.g., Chun, 2002; Chun, Hardison, & Pennington, 2008; Hardison, 2004, 2005; Levis & 
Pickering, 2004). To emphasize segmental duration in the current study, speech waveform displays were 
chosen. The waveform is a representation of rapid variations in air pressure caused by actions of a 
Miki Motohashi-Saigo and Debra Hardison Acquisition of L2 Japanese Geminates 
 
Language Learning & Technology 31 
speaker’s vocal organs superimposed on the outgoing airflow. Sample waveforms from the current study 
are shown in Figures 1 and 2.  
 
 
 
       
            singleton /s/ begins  
                                              /s/ ends 
 
 
 
 
    
          geminate /s/ begins 
                                               /s/ ends 
 
(a) asu (nonword)  (b) assu ‘dominate’ 
Figure 1. Waveform displays for singleton and geminate /s/ 
 
 
 
 
period of closure 
begins for singleton /k/ 
                                         release burst for /k/ 
 
 
 
 
period of closure 
begins for geminat e /k/ 
                                            release bu rst for /k/ 
 
(a) aka ‘red’ (b) akka ‘money of poor quality’ 
Figure 2. Waveform displays for singleton and geminate /k/ 
The vertical lines in the waveform represent pulses produced by vibrating vocal cords. Figure 1 shows the 
singleton-geminate contrast for the fricative /s/, where duration is indicated by the period of 
Miki Motohashi-Saigo and Debra Hardison Acquisition of L2 Japanese Geminates 
 
Language Learning & Technology 32 
frication. Figure 2 shows this contrast for the stop /k/, where duration is indicated by the period of closure 
prior to the release burst for the stop. Arrows are drawn to show approximately where the singleton and 
geminate consonants begin and en d.  
Previous studies demonstrating successful L2 perception training at the segmental level have shown the 
advantages of auditory-visual over auditory-only input (Hardison, 2003), and been characterized by 
findings that support the ability of learners to generalize improved perceptual abilit ies to novel stimuli 
and new talkers, with transfer to improved production (e.g., Bradlo w, Pisoni, Akahane-Yamada, & 
Tohkura, 1997; Hardison, 2003; Lively, Logan, & Pisoni, 1993). The nature of the relationship between 
perception and production continues to be somewhat elusive. In an intensive auditory training study 
involving L1 Japanese learners of English /r/ and /l/, Bradlo w et al. (1997) found no significant Spearman 
rank-order correlation between rates of improvement for perception and production. However, analysis 
did reveal a significant positive rank-order correlation between the learners’ pretest perception accuracy 
scores and the effectiveness of the perception training for them. The pretest performance was considered 
to be a fairly good predictor of training effectiveness although there was considerable variation across 
individual learners. 
To evaluate the potential of waveform displays as a training tool, the current study was guided by the 
followin g research questions: 
1. Is auditory-visual (AV) perception training usin g a waveform display better than auditory-only (A-
only) training for the improvement of geminate perception? As noted in previous studies, input from 
both modalities (i.e., auditory and visual) is more benefic ial for learners; therefore, we hypothesized 
that AV training involving waveform displays wo uld produce greater accuracy than A-only training. 
2. Are there dominant perception and production error patterns? Based on previous research (Hardison 
& Motohashi-Saigo, in press; Yamagata & Preston, 1999), more misperceptions of geminates as long 
vowels were anticipated; however, this pattern may not hold for incorrect production of geminates. 
3. Is accuracy better for stimuli in words presented in isolation compared to those in short carrier 
sentences? We hypothesized that identification accuracy might be greater for the isolated word 
condition. Stimuli embedded in carrier sentences require the listener to segment a longer stretch of 
speech, creating a greater challenge in the detection of moraic units.  
4. Does training generalize to novel stimuli, and transfer to improved production of geminates? 
Generalization and transfer have emerged over the past 15 years as two of the hallmarks of successful 
perception training. Both suggest the potential for improved perceptual capabilit ies to extend beyond 
the training session to the natural language environment, which is the ultimate learning objective. 
5. What is the relationship between rates of improvement for perception and production? Consistent 
with previous research, learners’ production of geminates was expected to improve as their perception 
improved with training; however, variation in rates of improvement in these two domains was also 
expected.  
The current study employed a pretest-posttest design with a control group to compare the effects of AV 
versus A-only training in L2 Japanese geminate perception, and investigate the possible generalization to 
novel stimuli and transfer to production improvement. Data collection followed this sequence: production 
pretest, perception pretest, perception training, production posttest, perception posttest, test of 
generalization of training, and interviews with individual participants. The between-subjects variable was 
group (AV, A-only, control); within-subjects variables were time (pretest, posttest), condition (isolated 
words, carrier sentences), consonant (/t /, /k/, /s/), and vowel (/a/, /u/). The dependent variable was 
identification accuracy scores. 
 
Miki Motohashi-Saigo and Debra Hardison Acquisition of L2 Japanese Geminates 
 
Language Learning & Technology 33 
METHO D 
Participants 
A total of 40 learners participated in this study: 15 received AV training, 15 received A-only training, and 
10 formed the control group, which participated in the pre- and posttest production and perception testing 
but did not receive any training. All participants were native speakers of American English; there were no 
heritage learners of Japanese. All were enrolled in an elementary Japanese language course at a university 
in Japan as part of a study abroad program. They had been learning Japanese for about 2 months when 
this study began. They had not received any prior Japanese instruction. The course met 5 days per week 
for 50 minutes each day. It  emphasized oral communication skills; however, there was no specific focus 
on segmental perception or production. The instructor was a native speaker of Japanese (Tokyo dialect). 
The students also took lecture courses in their major areas of study (e.g., economics) taught in English by 
native speakers of English. They resided in an international student dormitory where communication 
among students was generally in English.  
Materials 
Production Testing Stim uli 
There were 30 tokens: 24 involving medial consonants (12 singletons, 12 geminate counterparts) and 6 
fillers with long vowels /a, e, u, i/ (see Appendix A). Of the 24 tokens involving consonants, half began 
with /a/ (e.g., akka ‘money of poor quality’), and half with /sa/ (e.g., sakka ‘last summer’). Most were real 
words of relatively low pedagogical frequency, which were not likely to have been known to beginning 
learners. For example, itta is more commonly taught than satta to express ‘went’. Some nonwords were 
used to complete the singleton-geminate contrasts.5 These stimuli involved a balanced n umber of 
singletons (bisyllabic and bimoraic) and their geminate counterparts (bisyllabic an d trimoraic). The 
tokens with long vowels were also bisyllabic an d trimoraic, and were included to reduce the biasing of 
learner attention toward the consonants. The consonants were /t /, /k/, /s/, followed by /a/ or /u/, and were 
chosen for their sonority values. Each token was produced in isolation and then in one of two possible 
short carrier sentences. In the sentence condition, half of the tokens were produced in one sentence and 
half in the other. The matching of token to carrier sentence was counterbalanced across participants. The 
two carrier sentences were written out for the participants as follows: watashi wa _____ toiimashita ‘I 
said _____’; kore wa ______ desu ‘This is ______.’ The total number of productions by each participant 
was 120 (2 x 30 tokens x 2 conditions).  
Perception Testing Stim uli 
Materials for perception testing were the same as those for production. The stimuli with long vowels were 
included in the perception tasks to avoid response bias. In addition, previous studies indicated that 
geminates are often misperceived as long vo wels (Yamagata & Preston, 1999). 
Stimuli were recorded by a female native speaker of Japanese (Tokyo dialect) using a SONY digital 
minidisc recorder/player (44.1 kHz sampling rate) with a SONY microphone. Each word was recorded 
twice in a quiet room in the university’s language lab usin g a HL accent pattern (HLL for geminates): 
once in isolation and then in one of the two possible carrier sentences noted above. The talker was 
instructed to use a natural and consistent rate of speech, which was monitored by the researcher using a 
digital metronome (flashing lights on the computer screen). Waveforms, generated in Praat6, were 
examined to ensure that /u/ had not devoiced. In the Tokyo dialect, /u/ can be devoiced when it  follows a 
voiceless consonant and either precedes a voiceless consonant or occurs in word-final position, unless the 
vowel is in a position to receive an accent (Tsujimura, 1996). No devoicing was noted. Stimuli were 
tested with native speakers of Japanese for auditory intelligibility, and then randomized for auditory 
presentation to participants. The auditory-only presentation of testing stimuli provided a basis for 
comparison of the scores from the AV and A-only training groups as the auditory modality was the one 
Miki Motohashi-Saigo and Debra Hardison Acquisition of L2 Japanese Geminates 
 
Language Learning & Technology 34 
they shared. Each stimulus was presented three times in each of the above two conditions (isolated word, 
carrier sentence). Total testing stimuli were 180 (3 presentations x 30 tokens x 2 conditions). 
Perception Training Stim uli.  
Due to a limited number of possible tokens (i.e., in order to control the preconsonantal phonetic material), 
the pre- and posttest stimuli were also used for perception training. Recording details were the same as 
described above. The waveforms for the AV gro up in training were created in Praat and converted to 
SW F files usin g Macromedia Flash MX 2004 for Web presentation. This allowed the learners to listen to 
the sound and view the entire waveform display as the cursor moved through the word. The A-only group 
had access to auditory input only. For both groups, the order of presentation of stimuli was randomized 
and changed daily although all stimuli were presented with equal frequency every day for a total of 120 (2 
presentations x 30 tokens x 2 conditions). 
Test of Generalization Stimuli 
Following the posttest, a test of generalization (TG) was conducted to determine whether the results from 
the perception training could be generalized to unfamiliar tokens produced by a new talker, who was also 
a female native speaker of the Tokyo dialect.7 Stimuli included sin gleton and geminate /s/, /t /, /k/ from 
training, and /p/, which had not been presented before in this study. Postconsonantal vowels were /i / and 
/e/, which can occur in postconsonantal position with these consonants, but constituted untrained contexts. 
The vowel /i/, a high vo wel, has the same sonority value as /u/ (8), and /e/ has the value of 9. There were 
16 stimuli beginning with /sa/ that included either a singleton or a geminate (See Appendix B), and 6 
fillers (nonwords) with long vowels. These were recorded in a quiet room in the language lab follo win g 
the same procedure used for the preparation of the testing and training materials. This talker was also 
instructed to use a natural and consistent rate of speech, which was monitored by the researcher using a 
digital metronome. As with the other phases of the study, these stimuli were checked for auditory 
intelligibility, and were randomized for auditory presentation within two conditions: words in isolation 
and carrier sentences. Each stimulus was presented three times in each condition. Total stimuli were 132 
(3 presentations x 22 tokens x 2 conditions). 
Duration Mea surements 
Duration measurements for the stimuli used in the perception testing and training are given in Table 1. 
Duration was measured in the expanded waveform display using the SUGI Speech Analyzer by Animo8, 
and confirmed with synchronized spectrogram display. Standard segmentation procedures were applied 
(e.g., Johnson, 1997; Ladefoged, 2003). To measure the duration of a vowel, the beginning was marked at 
the onset of complex voicing with higher frequency components, and the end at the offset of these 
components. The beginning of the stops was marked at the offset of all higher frequency elements 
showin g the mouth was closed, and the end was marked at the release burst. The beginning and end of the 
fricative were marked at the onset and offset of clear frication noise. Followin g previous studies (e.g., 
Han, 1994), VOT (voice onset t ime) was not included in the duration measurements. The consonants of 
interest in the present study were in medial position where VOT is generally smaller than in initial 
position (Han, 1992). Japanese stops are considered weakly aspirated or unaspirated even in initial 
position. Han (1992) further notes that VOT does not play a significant role in the perception of the 
geminate-singleton contrast. As shown in Table 1, the duration of the preconsonantal vowel in this study 
covaried with that of the following consonant; therefore, as expected, the vowels were longer preceding 
geminates than singletons (Han, 1994). Measurements also confirmed the consistently shorter duration of 
postconsonantal /u/ versus /a/ (Yoshida, 2006). The duration of all singletons was shorter than that of the 
corresponding geminates.  
 
 
Miki Motohashi-Saigo and Debra Hardison Acquisition of L2 Japanese Geminates 
 
Language Learning & Technology 35 
Table 1. Perception Testing and Training Stimuli: Duration of Singletons, Geminates, Pre- and Post-
consonantal Vo wels (in milliseconds)  
 Singleton   Geminate   
a t a a tt a 
68 90 144 76 210 139 
Singleton-Geminate Duration Difference: 120; Ratio of 2.3:1.0 
 
a t u a tt u 
72 100 120 94 208 114 
Singleton-Geminate Duration Difference: 108; Ratio of 2.1:1.0 
 
a k a a kk a 
69 94 127 94 196 119 
Singleton-Geminate Duration Difference: 102; Ratio of 2.1:1.0 
 
a k u a kk u 
75 97 122 96 212 88 
Singleton-Geminate Duration Difference: 110; Ratio of 2.1:1.0 
 
a s a a ss a 
78 111 144 102 212 115 
Singleton-Geminate Duration Difference: 101; Ratio of 1.9:1.0 
 
a s u a ss u 
81 135 125 100 223 87 
Singleton-Geminate Duration Difference: 88; Ratio of 1.7:1.0 
Note. Measurements are fro m stimuli beginning with /sa/ produced in the isolated word condition. Comparisons with the sentence 
condition stimuli revealed differences o f 1-13 ms. The duration of the preconsonantal vowel in stimuli beginning with /a/ differed 
by 0-12 ms fro m those shown above. Measurements were co mparable for the stimuli used in the test of generalization. 
Procedure (chronological order) 
Production Testing 
All productions were recorded in a quiet room in the university’s language lab with the same recording 
equipment used in the preparation of the perception testing and training stimuli. Participants were given a 
word list  using Roman letters so they could look over the words before recording them. They were 
instructed to use a HL(L) accent pattern, with which they were familiar. Each word was produced in 
isolation and then in one of the two possible short carrier sentences, which were written out for them as 
follows: watashi wa ____ toiimashita ‘I said ____’; kore wa ____ desu ‘This is ____.’ Data were stored 
in WAV format on a CD-ROM, and copies were made for the native-speaker raters. 
Perception Testing 
The perception pretest and posttest were administered in a soun d-attenuated classroom prior to and 
immediately followin g the two-week training period. Stimuli were presented via centrally-located ceiling-
mounted speakers. Participants completed a three-alternative forced-choice identification task for both the 
carrier sentence and isolated word con ditions, which were presented in that order. Response options were 
minimal triplets: singleton, geminate, and long vowel (e.g., sasu, sa ssu, saasu). Participants were 
instructed to circle the word on their response sheets that represented what they heard. Interstimulus 
interval for all testing was determined through pilot testing and was set at 3 seconds. No feedback was 
given during testing. 
Miki Motohashi-Saigo and Debra Hardison Acquisition of L2 Japanese Geminates 
 
Language Learning & Technology 36 
Perception Training 
Assignment of participants to the AV training, A-only training, or control group was made based on their 
pretest performance to create comparable group s prior to training. Comparison of pretest scores across 
groups usin g a one-way ANOVA revealed no statistically significant difference in the pretest scores for 
these groups, F(2,42) = .464, p > .05; therefore, learners in each group represented a range of abilit ies. 
Both training groups (AV and A-only) participated in separate trial sessions with one of the researchers to 
ensure participants understood how to access the materials on the Web site for training, respond, and 
receive feedback. The content of this session differed for the two training groups. The AV gro up received 
information about geminates, and a demonstration of speech waveforms comparing singletons and 
geminates although none of the stimuli from the study was used in the demonstration. The A-only group 
received the same information about geminates, but was not given a waveform demonstration. 
During training, after each stimulus (AV or A-only) was presented, participants could proceed to the next 
screen where they were sho wn three response options: singleton (e.g., sasu), geminate (e.g., sassu), and 
long vowel (e.g., saasu).9 These options appeared in a dialog box created with a Web quiz creating 
tool.10 
The students participated in the training sessions outside of class time. They were instructed to complete 
10 training sessions, one per day. These sessions were self-paced. Although students were instructed to 
report any problems they encountered during training, no reports were received.  
The task for each stimulus was “Click the word that you heard.” After selecting an option, feedback 
was provided. If the response was incorrect, participants had a second chance to listen to the stimulus an d 
respond before the correct answer was sho wn. 
Test of Generalization 
Following the posttest, both training groups took a perception test of generalization in a classroom setting. 
This was also a forced-choice three-alternative task in which participants were instructed to circle the 
word on their response sheets that matched what they heard. Interstimulus interval was 3 seconds. As with 
the other perception tests, response options involved a singleton, geminate, and long vowel. No feedback 
was provided.  
Post-Study Interviews 
A follow-up interview was conducted with each of the participants. Each interview lasted about 10 
minutes. Participants were asked to comment on areas of difficulty for them in the perception and 
production of Japanese, and the effectiveness of the training with regard to geminates. They were also 
asked for overall comments on the training procedure, especially the Web-delivery format. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIO N 
The pretest and posttest scores were tabulated for each of the three groups (AV, A-only, control). Recall 
that a one-way ANOVA revealed no significant difference in the pretest scores for these groups. A paired 
t-test was conducted to compare the overall pretest and posttest perception scores for the control group. 
This revealed no significant difference, t(14) = -.807, p > .05; therefore, this group’s data were excluded 
from further analyses. Comparison of data from the training groups for the stimuli beginning with /sa/ and 
those beginning with /a/ revealed no significant difference; therefore, these data were combined for 
further analyses. 
The remainder of the discussion of results follo ws this order: a) overall effectiveness of perception 
training on geminate identification accuracy and comparison of training type (AV vs. A-only); b) in-depth 
analysis within each training group, includin g the effects of geminate and vowel type, and comments on 
singleton and long vowel identification accuracy; c) analysis of perception errors; d) test of 
generalization; e) effect of perception training on production; f) analysis of production errors; g) 
Miki Motohashi-Saigo and Debra Hardison Acquisition of L2 Japanese Geminates 
 
Language Learning & Technology 37 
investigation of the perception-production relationship; and h) a brief summary of the post-study 
interview comments. An alpha level of .05 was used for all statistical tests. 
Effectiveness of Perception Training 
Participants completed the perception training sessions as instructed with an average duration of about 25 
minutes per session. To evaluate the effectiveness of this training on geminate identification and compare 
training types, accuracy scores were subm itted to a mixed ANOVA. The between-subjects variable was 
group (AV, A-only). The within-subjects variables were time (pretest, posttest) and presentation condition 
(isolated word, carrier sentence). There was a significant effect of t ime, F(1,28) = 50.114, p < .001; 
posttest scores were higher than those of the pretest. There was a significant effect of group, F(1,28) = 
6.986, p < .05; and a significant T ime x Group interaction, F(1,28) = 9.380, p = .005. The group receiving 
AV training showed greater improvement. Although there was no statistically significant effect of 
condition, F(1,28) = 1.388, p > .05, Figure 3 sho ws the pre- and posttest scores for both training groups, 
for both the isolated words and words in carrier sentences. As sho wn in the graph, mean scores improved 
the most for the AV group (from 65% to 88% for the word condition; 54% to 87% for the sentence 
condition), and the least for the A-only group (58% to 70% for the word condition; 53% to 63% for the 
sentence condition). Given the lack of a significant effect of condition or interactions involving this factor, 
its levels were collapsed for subsequent analyses within each training group. 
Figure 3. Effectiveness of perception training on identification accuracy of L2 Japanese geminates: 
Comparison of training type (AV vs. A-only) and condition (isolated words, carrier sentences) 
AV Training Group  
For a more in-depth analysis, a three-way within-subjects ANOVA was conducted on the scores from the 
AV training group. Variables were time (pretest, posttest), geminate type (/t /, /k/, /s/), and vowel type (/a/, 
/u/). The time factor was included again in this analysis in order to explore possible interactions with 
geminate and/or vowel type. There was a significant effect of t ime, F(1,14) = 28.00, p < .001, and a 
significant effect of geminate type, F(2,28) = 10.858, p < .001. Pairwise comparisons (with Sidak 
adjustment for multiple comparisons) revealed the significant differences were bet ween geminate /t / and 
/s/, and geminate /k/ and /s/, but not between the two geminate stops. There was a significant T ime x 
Geminate interaction, F(2,28) = 3.512, p < .05. Although perception of all geminates improved in both 
vowel contexts, /s/ showed more improvement than the stops for which the pretest scores were higher.  
Miki Motohashi-Saigo and Debra Hardison Acquisition of L2 Japanese Geminates 
 
Language Learning & Technology 38 
Identification accuracy for singletons in the pretest was high at an average (across singleton-vowel 
contexts) of 92% for the isolated word condition and 89% for the carrier sentence condition. Posttest 
accuracy increased to an average of 96% in both conditions. Pretest accuracy for the long vowels in the 
filler items was 88% in isolated words and 87% in carrier sentences. This rose to 92% in the posttest for 
both conditions. Because of the high pretest scores and minimal variation across contexts, no further 
analyses were warranted for these data.  
A-only Training Group  
A three-way within-subjects ANOVA was conducted on the geminate identification accuracy scores from 
the A-only training group. Variables were time (pretest, posttest), geminate type (/t /, /k/, /s/), and vowel 
type (/a/, /u/). Again, there was a significant effect of t ime, F(1,14) = 34.017, p < .001. There was also a 
significant effect of geminate type for this group, F(2,28) = 5.888, p < .01. Pairwise comparisons (with 
Sidak adjustment) revealed the significant differences were bet ween geminate /t / and /s/, and /k/ and /s/. A 
significant T ime x Geminate interaction, F(2,28) = 7.304, p < .05 indicated a difference in the rate of 
improvement per geminate, with /s/ showin g the greatest amount of improvement. There was also a 
significant T ime x Geminate x Vowel interaction, F(2,28) = 12.157, p < .01. Pretest scores were lo west 
for geminate /s/ followed by /u/ (e.g., sassu); over the course of training, this geminate-vowel sequence 
showed the greatest improvement.  
Perceptual accuracy of singletons in the pretest, averaged across singleton-vowel contexts, was 92% in 
both conditions and rose to 95% in the posttest. Pretest identification accuracy of the long vowels in the 
filler items was 86% in the isolated word condition, and 85% in the carrier sentences. Posttest accuracy 
was 90% and 88% respectively. As with the AV training group, these data did not warrant further analysis.  
Analysis of Perception Errors 
Both the AV and A-only training groups sho wed a similar pattern of perception errors when trying to 
identify geminates. Chi-square analysis was used to compare the frequency with which each error type 
occurred (i.e., misperception of a geminate as a singleton or as a long vowel). In the perception pretest, 
there was a significantly greater number of misperceptions of a geminate as a long vowel (e.g., χ2
Test of Generalization 
 = 12.24, 
df = 1, p < .001 for the AV group). This pattern held across all geminate-vowel sequences. Far fewer 
errors occurred in the posttest; however, their distribution followed the same pattern, favoring 
misperception of the geminate as a long vowel. 
A mixed ANOVA compared the scores of both training groups for geminate identification accuracy from 
the posttest and the test of generalization (TG). The between-subjects variable was group (AV, A-only); 
the within-subject variables were test (posttest, TG), and condition (words, sentences). There was a 
significant main effect of group, F(1,28) = 48.91, p < .001. As shown in Figure 4, the AV group’s mean 
scores for both conditions in the posttest and TG were higher than those for the A-only group. There was 
no significant effect of or interactions involving condition. There was a significant effect of test, F(1,28) 
= 7.255, p < .05; however, there was also a significant Test x Group interaction, F(1,28) = 48.910, p 
< .001. The decline in accuracy between the posttest and TG averaged 5% across both conditions for the 
AV group an d 14% for the A-only group. Some of the decline may be attributable to the challenging TG 
stimulus set. Although it  included /s, t , k/ from the testing and training materials there was a new 
consonant /p/, and new postconsonantal vowels /i, e/. In addition, the TG stimuli were produced by an 
unfamiliar voice, requiring generalization ability for both voice and segment type simultaneously. Given 
the role of the postconsonantal vowel and its relationship to the consonant in geminate perception 
(Hardison & Motohashi-Saigo, in press), the TG stimulus set wo uld likely have been a challengin g one.  
 
Miki Motohashi-Saigo and Debra Hardison Acquisition of L2 Japanese Geminates 
 
Language Learning & Technology 39 
Figure 4. Generalization of perception training: Comparison of geminate identification accuracy in the 
posttest and test of generalization for the AV and A-only training groups in both conditions (isolated 
words, carrier sentences) 
To investigate the effects of geminate and vowel type, accuracy data were submitted to a two-factor 
within-subjects ANOVA for each training group. For the AV group, there was no significant effect of 
geminate type, F(3,42) = .574, p > .05, or vowel type, F(1,14) = 1.909, p > .05, and no significant 
interaction between these factors, F(3,42) = .412, p > .05. Despite the lack of statistical significance, the 
trend in identification accuracy shown by the TG data was similar to that shown by the pretest-posttest 
analysis. The greatest accuracy was noted for all geminates when follo wed by /e/ versus /i /, the highest 
score being for /te/ (satte) (93.5 %) followed by /ke/ (sakke) (90%). For contexts with /i/, the highest 
accuracy was for /t i/ (satti) and /pi/ (sappi) (each 80%) and the lowest was for /si/ (sa ssi) (73.5%). As a 
high vowel, /i/ has the same sonority value (8) as /u/. The lower accuracy in the generalization test for 
geminate /s/ followed by /i/ parallels the lower accuracy for geminate /s/ followed by /u/ in the analysis of 
the pretest-posttest data.  
A two-factor within-subjects ANOVA was also carried o ut for the geminate accuracy data from the A-
only group. There was a significant effect of geminate type, F(3,42) = 6.357, p = .001; pairwise 
comparisons (with Sidak adjustment) revealed the difference was between perception of geminate /k/ and 
/s/, and geminate /p/ and /s/. Ho wever, there was no significant effect of vowel type or interaction 
between geminate and vowel type. As with the AV training group, the A-only group’s data revealed that 
the highest scores were for contexts where the geminate was follo wed by /e/ versus /i /. The highest score 
was for /te/ (satte) at  63.5% and the lowest for /si/ (sassi) at  20%. 
Effect of Perception Training on Production  
Learner productions were rated by 5 native speakers of Japanese (Tokyo dialect) who reported no 
sustained experience with English speakers. Ratings were carried out in a quiet room in the university’s 
language lab where each rater was given a headset. Productions were blocked by learner. For the carrier 
sentence condition, raters were given the sentences on a piece of paper with a blank for the target word. 
For both conditions, their task was to “write the word you think you heard in standard Japanese 
orthography.” For each correct identification by a rater, 1 point was assigned. Inter-rater reliability of .84 
(Pearson r) was considered satisfactory.  
Miki Motohashi-Saigo and Debra Hardison Acquisition of L2 Japanese Geminates 
 
Language Learning & Technology 40 
Scores were tabulated for each training group and the control group. As with the perception results, a 
comparison of scores for tokens beginning with /sa/ and those beginning with /a/ sho wed no significant 
difference in terms of production accuracy; therefore, these data were combined for analysis. A paired t-
test comparing the pretest and posttest production scores for the control group revealed no significant 
improvement, t(-.713), df = 14, p > .05. Scores for the training groups were submitted to a mixed 
ANOVA. The between-subjects variable was group (AV, A-only); the within-subject variables were time 
(pretest, posttest) and condition (isolated word, carrier sentence). There was a significant effect of t ime, 
F(1,28) = 91.260, p < .001. A significant T ime x Group interaction, F(1,28) = 9.554, p < .01, indicated 
that although both groups had improved as a result  of perception training, the AV training group 
improved more. There was no significant effect of or interactions involving the condition factor; therefore, 
this factor’s levels were collapsed. Further analyses explored the effect of geminate and vowel type within 
each training group. 
AV Training Group  
A three-factor within-subjects ANOVA was carried out on the production scores for geminates for the 
AV training group. Variables were time (pretest, posttest), geminate type (/t, /k, /s/), and vowel type (/a/, 
/u/). As with the perception analyses, the time factor was included here in order to detect any interactions. 
There was a significant effect of t ime, F(1,14) = 47.888, p < .001, geminate type F(2,28) = 22.423, p 
< .001, and vowel type F(1,14) = 8.267, p = .01. There were no significant interactions. As shown 
in Figure 5, pretest accuracy for both conditions improved with training to a comparable degree (31% to 
67% for isolated words, 31% to 66% for carrier sentences). Mean scores for geminates were highest for 
/k/ and lo west for /s/. Pairwise comparisons (with Sidak adjustment) of geminate productions revealed the 
significant differences were between geminate /t / and /s/, and bet ween /k/ and /s/. Scores were higher for 
stimuli involving postconsonantal /a/ versus /u/.  
Accuracy of singleton production in the pretest was an average of 88% across singleton-vowel contexts in 
the isolated word condition, and 86% for the carrier sentences. These figures rose to 93% and 94% 
respectively in the posttest. As with the scores for singleton perception, those for singleton production 
showed very lit t le variation across contexts; therefore, no further analyses were conducted.  
Figure 5. Effect of perception training on production: Percent accuracy of geminate production in the 
pretest and posttest for AV and A-only training groups in both conditions (isolated words, carrier 
sentences) 
Miki Motohashi-Saigo and Debra Hardison Acquisition of L2 Japanese Geminates 
 
Language Learning & Technology 41 
A-only Training Group  
A three-factor within-subjects ANOVA was also carried o ut on the geminate production scores for the A-
only training group. Variables were time (pretest, posttest), geminate type (/t , /k, /s/), and vowel type (/a/, 
/u/). There was a significant main effect of t ime, F(1,14) = 54.743, p < .001 and of geminate type, F(2,28) 
= 21.094, p < .001. As shown in Figure 5, posttest scores (49% for isolated words an d 48% for carrier 
sentences) were higher than those in the pretest (30% in both conditions). Pairwise comparisons (with 
Sidak adjustment) of geminate productions revealed the highest overall mean was for geminate /k/, 
followed by /t/, and then /s/. Significant differences were found between geminate /t / and /s/, and between 
/k/ and /s/, as was the case for the AV group. There was a significant T ime x Geminate x Vo wel 
interaction, F(2,28) = 12.324, p < .001. All geminate-vowel sequences improved from pretest to posttest, 
but to varying degrees. The largest improvement was for geminate /k/ when followed by /u/, and the 
smallest improvement was for geminate /s/ follo wed by /u/.  
Singleton production accuracy for the A-only group in the pretest was 87% in the isolated word condition, 
which rose to 91% in the posttest, and 85% in the carrier sentence condition, which increased to 89% in 
the posttest. Again, there was very lit t le variation in scores across contexts; therefore, no further analyses 
were conducted.  
Analysis of Production Errors 
Similar production errors were noted for the AV and A-only groups. Chi-square analysis of the pretest 
data revealed a significantly greater frequency of production inaccuracies involving the substitution of a 
singleton (vs. a long vowel) for a geminate (e.g., χ2 = 1,009.0, df = 1, p < .001 for the AV group). This is 
in contrast to the pattern of perception errors, which favored misperceptions of geminates as long vowels. 
In the production posttest, the number of inaccuracies was much lo wer; ho wever, the pattern of producin g 
more singletons than long vowels was retained, (e.g., χ2
Perception-Production Relationship 
 = 378.6, df = 1, p < .001 for the AV group).  
In both perception and production of geminates, each participant showed some degree of improvement 
from pretest to posttest; however, individual variation was evident, which is consistent with the findings 
of previous training studies (e.g., Bradlo w et al., 1997; Hardison, 2003). The relative perception and 
production improvement rates were compared for the learners in the current study. This effectiveness was 
expressed as the relative perceptual improvement as a result  of training. Following Bradlo w et al., relative 
improvement was defined as the measure of improvement as a proportion of the room for improvement; 
that is, it  takes into account that a higher pretest score leaves less room for improvement than a lower one. 
In this approach, relative improvement for each learner is the result  of posttest accuracy minus pretest 
accuracy divided by 100 minus the pretest accuracy; in other words, posttest-pretest/100-pretest. 
Spearman rank-order correlation revealed no significant relationship between relative perception and 
production improvement of geminates for learners in either training group, Spearman rho (rs ) = .136, p 
> .05 (AV), and rs
We also investigated whether the pretest perception or production scores were in dicators of how effective 
the training would be for these participants. For this analysis, data were collap sed across gem inate-vowel 
sequences an d conditions. For both the AV and A-only groups, there was a significant negative rank-
order correlation between the learners’ pretest perceptual accuracy and their relative perceptual 
improvement as a result  of training, r
 = -.071, p > .05 (A-only). Although a link was observed bet ween perception and 
production based on the finding that perceptual learning transferred to improved production in the 
absence of explicit  production instruction, there was no significant relationship between degrees of 
learning in these two domains due to individual variation.  
s  = -.837, p = .001 (AV gro up); and rs  = -.612, p < .05 (A-only 
group). This negative correlation indicates that participants with the lowest pretest scores showed the 
highest rates of improvement. This is the opposite of the pattern found by Bradlo w et al. (1997) whose 
Miki Motohashi-Saigo and Debra Hardison Acquisition of L2 Japanese Geminates 
 
Language Learning & Technology 42 
results indicated that the higher pretest scores predicted greater effectiveness of their training. However, 
the two studies are difficult  to compare. Bradlo w et al. conducted an auditory training study of American 
English /r/ and /l/ with L1 Japanese speakers. Perceptual accuracy of sounds involving spectral 
differences such as /r/ an d /l/ is usually more challenging for L2 learners than perception of contrasts 
involving temporal differences, which is the case in the current study, and has been found for other 
similar phenomena such as VOT differences (e.g., Bohn, 1995). In terms of the relationship between the 
production pretest results and production improvement after training, the Spearman rank-order correlation 
coefficient for both groups was negative and did not reach significance, rs = -.170, p > .05 (AV group), 
and rs 
Post-Study Interview Comments 
= -.038, p > .05 (A-only group). 
Each participant was interviewed by one of the researchers at the conclusion of the study. The primary 
objective was to determine how effective they perceived this type of training to be, and the ease of use of 
the Web-based format. Followin g are the predominant comments from the participants in both the AV 
and A-only training groups: 
• Geminate /s/ was the most difficult  of the geminates to identify. 
• Training increased their awareness of the singleton-geminate difference. For those who received AV 
training, waveform displays sho wed them where to focus their attention. 
• Participants liked the flexibility of the Web-based format. 
• Most of them indicated they took the training using their computers in their dorm rooms in the 
evening after dinner. 
• Several participants recommended the development of additional training programs usin g a similar 
Web-based format to address other areas of language learnin g. 
G ENERAL DISCUSSIO N 
This study investigated the effectiveness of auditory-visual training using waveform displays for the 
improvement of L2 geminate perception by beginning learners of Japanese. Consistent with previous 
studies, results of the current investigation demonstrate that perception training is effective, generalizes to 
novel stimuli, and transfers to improvement in production. AV training provided significantly better 
results compared to A-only training. Findings emphasize that visual cues can be a valuable so urce of 
input in L2 learning. With minimal instruction, learners were able to benefit  from waveform displays to 
focus their attention on critical duration cues.  
The AV and A-only training group results sho wed several similarities. The most difficult  geminate-vowel 
sequence for both groups in perception and production was geminate /s/ followed by /u/, which supports 
the findings of previous research (Hardison & Motohashi-Saigo, in press). Geminate /s/ was also the 
consonant that showed the greatest amount of improvement in perceptual accuracy by both groups. 
Neither group had difficulty perceiving or producing sin gletons. Scores in the pretest showed lit t le 
variation across singleton-vowel sequences or conditions. In addition, contrary to one of our hypotheses, 
their identification accuracy of geminates did not differ significantly according to presentation condition 
(isolated words vs. carrier sentences). The sentences may not have been long enough to be sufficiently 
challenging to the speech segmentation process. 
Although perception training resulted in improved production based on native-speaker rater judgments, 
the dominant error patterns differed bet ween these skills. The majority of misperceptions of geminates for 
both groups favored the response option with the long vowel (vs. singleton consonant). These findings 
suggest that even beginning-level learners are able to perceive moraic weight but may have difficulty 
attributing it  to the correct segment. Learners may have detected the longer duration of the vowel 
Miki Motohashi-Saigo and Debra Hardison Acquisition of L2 Japanese Geminates 
 
Language Learning & Technology 43 
preceding the geminate and misidentified it  as two morae instead of one. They may have treated this point 
as the identification point of the word, and failed to attend to the duration of the consonant. This 
consonant would then have been syllabified as a singleton to the second syllable of the word. For L1 
English learners, vo wel length is a strong cue that is compatible with a segmentation strategy that 
syllabifies the consonant as the singleton onset of the second syllable, lengthening the preceding vowel in 
the resulting open syllable. On the other hand, in terms of production, when learners in both groups failed 
to produce a geminate, the majority of their errors involved a singleton, suggesting they were not yet 
consistently producing the necessary duration difference. 
 The above findings support hypotheses put forth in earlier studies that learning in perception and 
production are linked (e.g., Bradlo w et al., 1997; Hardison, 2003; Lively et al., 1993), and add to the 
gro wing body of literature on the performance variability between these domains across individual 
learners. Similar to the findings of Bradlo w et al. (1997), the relative perception and production rates of 
improvement in the current study sho wed no significant relationship. This suggests that degree of learning 
in one domain is, to some extent, separate from that in the other. In contrast to the Bradlow et al. (1997) 
study, we found a negative rank-order correlation between learners’ pretest perceptual accuracy and their 
relative perceptual improvement as a result  of training. Those learners with the lowest pretest scores 
showed the greatest amount of improvement. 
It  may be somewhat difficult  to generalize performance by the participants in the current study to other 
language learners. The learners in this study chose to participate in a study abroad program in Japan, and 
were not language majors. Although English was the language of the majority of their classes and of the 
interactions in the dormitory, they were motivated to improve their perception and production of the 
language. These factors may place them towards the high end of a motivation scale. 
The data suggest that easily accessible Web-based tools that utilize auditory-visual input provide a boost 
for learners. Interview results confirmed that these students enjoyed being able to access this type of 
information at their convenience and to receive immediate feedback on their judgments. Although the 
researcher forfeits some control over this process, the user-friendly approach encourages participation and 
satisfaction. These types of tools are recommended as additional sources of learning for students to 
supplement classroom instruction and interaction opportunities with native speakers of the target language.  
 
Miki Motohashi-Saigo and Debra Hardison Acquisition of L2 Japanese Geminates 
 
Language Learning & Technology 44 
APPENDIXES  
Appendix A: Stimuli (Tokyo dialect): Pretest, Posttest, Training 
Singletons Translation Geminates Translation 
sasu 
asu 
stab 
(nonword) 
sassu  
assu 
guess 
dominate 
saku 
aku 
tear (verb) 
evil 
sakku 
akku 
sack 
bad mouth (saying something  
one shouldn’t) 
satu 
atu 
volume 
pressure  
sattu 
attu 
(nonword) 
(nonword) 
sasa 
asa 
(nonword) 
morning 
sassa  
assa 
quickly 
(nonword) 
saka 
aka 
refreshments 
red 
sakka 
akka 
last summer  
money of poor quality 
sata 
ata 
trouble 
(nonword) 
satta 
atta 
went 
existed 
Note. All stimuli have a H(igh)-L(ow) accent pattern (HLL in the case of geminates). Filler items with long vowels (nonwords): 
kaaze, tachuu, kaate, seechi, kiike, kaaki. 
 
Appendix B: Stimuli (Tokyo dialect): Test of Generalization 
Singletons Translation Geminates Translation 
sati/sachi*  happiness; products from nature 
(e.g., fish) 
satti/sacchi*  
 
to know by guessing 
sate by the way; and then; a word that is 
said when one moves on to the next 
activity 
satte  conjugated form (te form) of the 
verb saru ‘to leave’ 
saki the part of writing that is added later 
to show more detailed explanations 
sakki Meaning varies accordin g to kanji 
used. Options: a lit t le while ago; to 
record one’s opinion/reaction from 
reading books; unhappiness 
sake salmon sake (nonword) 
sasi/sa shi* a bite; truncation of sashimi ‘to eat 
raw fish’  
sassi/sasshi* a thin book; blush; paper for 
printing 
sase imperative form of sasu ‘to bite or 
pierce’ 
sasse (nonword) 
sapi (nonword) sappi (nonword) 
sape (nonword) sappe (nonword) 
Note. All stimuli have a H(igh)-L(ow) accent pattern (HLL in the case of geminates). Filler items with long vowels (nonwords): 
saatsu, kazee, keeta, taatsu, kuute, taachu. 
* = spelling depends on the Romanization alphabet that is used; the second form represents the palatalized pronunciation of /t/ 
and /s/ in these contexts (Tsujimura, 1996). 
 
Miki Motohashi-Saigo and Debra Hardison Acquisition of L2 Japanese Geminates 
 
Language Learning & Technology 45 
NO TES  
1. Portions of this study were presented at the American Association for Applied Linguistics Conference, 
Costa Mesa, California in April, 2007. 
2. There are other types of special morae such as a moraic nasal, and the second half of a diphthongal 
vowel sequence. See Kubozono (1999) and Tsujimura (1996) for detailed discussions of the mora and 
syllable in Japanese and the mora’s role in phonological processes. See also B. Hayes (1989) for a 
discussion of the status of the geminate in moraic phonology. 
3. For the sake of simplicity, and following the practice in the literature, the symbol /u/ is used in this 
paper to represent the unrounded high back vowel [ɯ ] (‘a turned m’) in Japanese. 
4. There are different sonority scales, which sho w slight variation in some values (e.g., Blevins, 1995; 
Parker, 2002); however, there is consensus that vowels (voiced) are the most sonorous and stops are the 
least. 
5. Previous research demonstrated that word status (i.e., real word vs. non word) did not significantly 
influence segmental perception by L2 learners in a forced-choice identification task (e.g., Lively, Logan, 
& Pisoni, 1993). In such a task, the word serves as a carrier of phonetic context. 
6. Created by Boersma (2001) and Weenink. Available free of cost at http://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/praat. 
7. Usually in tests of generalization, researchers manipulate one of these variables at a t ime (i.e., a test 
involving novel stimuli, and a separate one involving familiar stimuli with a new talker). Due to time 
constraints, we decided to challenge the learners’ perception abilit ies with a test of generalization 
involving both novel stimuli and a new voice.  
8. Available at http://www.animo.co.jp/EN/products/analyze/index.jsp.  
9. A forced-choice task (vs. an open-response task) was preferred in order to avoid the issue of 
participants’ spelling not accurately representing their perception. 
10. This tool was from a Web site in Japanese http://www.fureai.or.jp/~irie/webquiz. There are several 
Web quiz creating tools available in English.  
 
ABO UT TH E AUTHO RS 
Miki Motohashi-Saigo, Japanese Lan guage Department, Kansai Gaidai University, Japan; Debra M. 
Hardison, Department of Linguistics and Lan guages, Michigan State University. Correspondence 
concerning this article should be addressed to Debra M. Hardison, Michigan State University, A-714 
Wells Hall, East Lansing, MI 48824.  
E-mail: hardiso2@m su.edu 
REFERENC ES 
Blevins, J. (1995). The syllable in phonological theory. In J. Goldsmith (Ed.), The handbook of 
phonological theory (pp. 206-224). Cambridge, MA: Black well. 
Boersma, P. (2001). PRAAT: A system for doing phonetics by computer. Glot International 5, 341-345. 
Bohn, O.-S. (1995). Cross-language perception in adults: First  language transfer doesn’t tell it all. In W. 
Strange (Ed.), Speech perception and linguistic experience: Theoretical and methodological issues (pp. 
370-410). T imonium, MD: York Press. 
Miki Motohashi-Saigo and Debra Hardison Acquisition of L2 Japanese Geminates 
 
Language Learning & Technology 46 
Bradlo w, A. R., Pisoni, D. B., Akahane-Yamada, R. A., & Tohkura, Y. (1997). Training Japanese 
listeners to identify English /r/ and /l/: IV. Some effects of perceptual learning on speech production. 
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 101, 2299-2310. 
Chun, D. M. (2002). Discourse intonation in L2: From theory and research to practice. Amsterdam: 
Benjamins.  
Chun, D. M., Hardison, D.M., & Pennington, M. C. (2008). Technologies for prosody in context: Past and 
future of L2 research and practice. In J. G. Hansen Edwards & M. L. Zampini (Eds.), Phonology and 
second language acquisition (pp. 323-346). Amsterdam: Benjamins.  
Cutler, A. (1997). The comparative perspective on spoken-language processing. Speech Communication, 
21, 3-15. 
Cutler, A., & Otake, T . (2002). Rhythmic categories in spoken-word recognition. Journal of Memory and 
Language, 46, 296-322. 
Fuk ui, S. (1978). Perception for the Japanese stop consonants with reduced an d extended durations. The 
Bulletin of the Phonetic Society of Japan, 159, 9-12. 
Han, M. S. (1992). The timing control of geminate and single stop consonants in Japanese: A challenge 
for nonnative speakers. Phonetica, 49, 102-127. 
Han, M. S. (1994). Acoustic manifestations of mora timing in Japanese. Journal of the Acoustical Society 
of America, 96, 73-82. 
Hardison, D. M. (2003). Acquisition of second-language speech: Effects of visual cues, context and talker 
variability. Applied Psycholinguistics, 24, 495-522. 
Hardison, D. M. (2004). Generalization of computer assisted prosody training: Quantitative and 
qualitative findings. Language Learning & Technology, 8, 34-52. Retrieved January 13, 2009 
from http://llt .msu.edu/vol8num1/hardison.  
Hardison, D. M. (2005). Contextualized computer-based L2 prosody training: Evaluating the effects of 
disco urse context and video input. CALICO Journal, 22, 175-190. 
Hardison, D. M., & Motohashi-Saigo, M. (in press). Development of perception of L2 Japanese 
geminates: Role of duration, sonority, and segmentation strategy. Applied Psycholinguistics. 
Hayes, B. (1989). Compensatory lengthening in moraic phonology. Linguistic Inquiry, 20, 253-306. 
Hayes, R. L. (2002). The perception of novel phoneme contrasts in a second language: A developmental 
study of native speakers of English learning Japanese singleton and geminate consonant contrasts. Coyote 
Papers, 12, 28-41. Retrieved January 13, 2009, from http://coyotepapers.sbs.arizona.edu/CPXII.htm. 
Hirata, Y. (1990). Perception of geminated stops in Japanese word and sentence levels. Journal of the 
Phonetic Society of Japan, 194, 23-28. 
Johnson, K. (1997). Acoustic & auditory phonetics. Cambridge, MA: Black well.  
Kubozono, H. (1999). Mora and syllable. In N. Tsujim ura (Ed.), The handbook of Japanese linguistics 
(pp. 31-61). Malden, MA: Black well.  
Ladefoged, P. (2003). Phonetic data analysis: An introduction to fieldwork and instrumental techniques. 
Malden, MA: Black well. 
Levis, J., M., & Pickering, L. (2004). Teaching intonation in discourse usin g speech visualization 
technology. System, 32, 505-524.  
Miki Motohashi-Saigo and Debra Hardison Acquisition of L2 Japanese Geminates 
 
Language Learning & Technology 47 
Lively, S. E., Logan, J. S., & Pisoni, D. B. (1993). Training Japanese listeners to identify English /r/ and 
/l/. II: The role of phonetic environment and talker variability in learning new perceptual categories. 
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 94, 1242-1255. 
Minagawa, Y., & Kiritani, S. (1996). Discrimination of the single and geminate stop consonant in 
Japanese by five different language groups. Annual Bulletin, Research Institute of Logopedics and 
Phoniatrics (RIPL), 30, 23-28. Retrieved January 13, 2009 from http://www.umin.ac.jp/memorial/rilp-
tokyo/R30/R30_023.pdf. 
Ofuka, E. (2003). Perception of a Japanese geminate stop /tt /: The effect of pitch type and acoustic 
characteristics of preceding/follo win g vowels. Journal of the Phonetic Society of Japan, 7, 70-76. 
Parker, S. G. (2002). Quantifying the sonority hierarchy. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of 
Massach usetts, Amherst. 
Port, R. R., Dalby, J., & O’Dell, M. (1987). Evidence for mora timing in Japanese. Journal of the 
Acoustical Society of America, 81, 1574-1585. 
Selkirk, E. (1984). On the major class features and syllable theory. In M. Aronoff & R. T . Oehrle (Eds.), 
Language sound structure (pp. 107-136). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Tsujimura, N. (1996). An introduction to Japanese linguistics. Cambridge, MA: Black well.  
Wright, R. (2004). A review of perceptual cues an d cue ro bustness. In B. Hayes, R. Kirchner, & D. 
Steriade (Eds.), Phonetically based phonology (pp. 34-57). Cambridge: Cam bridge University Press. 
Yamagata, A., & Preston, D. (1999). English learners’ acquisition of the katakana spelling of English 
loanwords in Japanese. In M. Wysocka (Ed.), On language theory and practice. In honor of Janusz 
Arabski on the occasion of his 60th
Yoshida, Y. A. (2006). Accents in Tokyo and Kyoto Japanese vowel quality in terms of duration and 
licensing potency. SOAS (School of Oriental and African Studies) Working Papers in Linguistics, 14, 
249-264.  
 birthday (pp. 276-292). Katowice, Poland: University of Silesia.  
