 News From Our Sponsors 
 
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS 
Sponsors 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR) 
Co-Sponsor 
Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL) 
 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource 
Center (NFLRC) 
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials 
development projects and conducts workshops and conferences for language professionals among its 
many activities. 
CULTURA: WEB-BASED INTERCULTURAL EXCHANGES (OCTOBER 10-11, 2009) 
The Cultura project, pioneered at MIT by Gilberte Furstenberg and her colleagues, has inspired a variety 
of online cultural exchanges based on a set of principles and best practices. The Cultura: Web-Based 
Intercultural Exchanges pre-conference event will feature presentations by a variety of educators who 
have created exchanges based on the Cultura model. 
LANGUAGE LEARNING IN COMPUTER MEDIATED COMMUNITIES (LLCMC) 
CONFERENCE (OCTOBER 11-13, 2009) 
Once, computers were seen as thinking machines or electronic tutors. Now the computer has become one 
of many devices that people use to form virtual communities of all kinds. In the field of language 
education, computer mediated communication (CMC) enables students to interact with one another free 
of space and time constraints and to participate in communities of learning with their counterparts in the 
target culture. The Language Learning in Computer Mediated Communities (LLCMC) Conference 
explores the use of computers as a medium of communication in language learning communities. 
Conference highlights will include a plenary talk by Dr. Gilberte Furstenburg (MIT), a special panel 
presentation showcasing online cultural exchanges based at the University of Hawai‘i, and a variety of 
intriguing concurrent sessions. Preregistration deadline – September 15, 2009. 
NEW NFLRC PUBLICATIONS 
Talk-in-interaction: Multilingual perspectives 
Edited by Gabriele Kasper and Hanh Thi Nguyen, this first volume in NFLRC's 
new series Pragmatics & Interaction offers original studies of interaction in a 
range of languages and language varieties. These include Chinese, English, 
Japanese, Korean, Spanish, Swahili, Thai, and Vietnamese; monolingual and 
bilingual interactions, and activities designed for second or foreign language 
learning. Conducted from the perspectives of conversation analysis and 
membership categorization analysis, the chapters examine ordinary conversation 
and institutional activities in face-to-face, telephone, and computer-mediated 
environments. 
Language Learning & Technology 10
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Check out our many other publications. 
OUR ONLINE JOURNALS SOLICIT SUBMISSIONS 
Language Learning & Technology is a refereed online journal, jointly sponsored by the University of 
Hawai‘i NFLRC and the Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research 
(CLEAR). LLT focuses on issues related to technology and language education. For more information on 
submission guidelines, visit the LLT submissions page. 
Language Documentation & Conservation is a fully refereed, open-access journal sponsored by NFLRC 
and published exclusively in electronic form by the University of Hawai‘i Press. LD&C publishes papers 
on all topics related to language documentation and conservation. For more information on submission 
guidelines, visit the LD&C submissions page. 
Reading in a Foreign Language is a refereed online journal, jointly sponsored by the University of 
Hawai‘i NFLRC and the Department of Second Language Studies. RFL serves as an excellent source for 
the latest developments in the field, both theoretical and pedagogic, including improving standards for 
foreign language reading. For more information on submission guidelines, visit the RFL submissions 
page. 
 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education 
and Research (CLEAR) 
CLEAR's mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States. 
Projects focus on materials development, professional development training, and foreign language 
research. 
SUMMER WORKSHOPS 
The Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR) at Michigan State University is offering 
several low-cost summer professional development workshops in July. These workshops offer hands-on 
experience and concrete ideas for language teachers, and are appropriate for foreign language teachers as 
well as ESL teachers. 
CLEAR has been offering workshops since 1997, and foreign language teachers from all over the country 
have come to East Lansing to attend them. The workshops offered this year cover a wide range of topics, 
appropriate as “refreshers” for experienced teachers or as reinforcement on topics in language teaching 
for newer and pre-service teachers.  
Each workshop is three full days, and there are discounts for those attending multiple workshops. 
Full descriptions, dates, pricing information, and workshop applications are available here. 
An Online Language Portfolio Approach to the Development of Speaking and Listening 
Proficiency  
July 9–11, 2009 
  
Rich Internet Applications for Language Learning: Introductory Techniques 
July 13–15, 2009 
  
Rich Internet Applications for Language Learning: Advanced Techniques 
July 16–18, 2009 
Language Learning & Technology 11
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
  
The Second “C”: Culture Teaching in the Language Classroom 
July 20–22, 2009 
  
Teaching Writing in the Foreign Language Classroom 
July 23–25, 2009 
  
Revisiting, Reinventing, and Restarting a Language Program: A Step-by-Step Approach 
July 27–29, 2009 
MATERIALS DEVELOPMENT 
Selected Products 
The list below comprises just some of our free and low-cost materials for language educators. Be sure to 
visit our Web site occasionally for updates and announcements on new products: http://clear.msu.edu. 
• CLEAR’s Rich Internet Applications initiative has been underway for over a year. RIA is a 
research and development lab where our programmers are working on free tools that language 
teachers can use to create online language teaching materials – or have their students create 
activities themselves! 
o NEW! Revisions (process writing and feedback tool) 
o NEW! Broadcasts (create your own podcasts) 
o Worksheets (add multimedia elements to online worksheets) 
o Audio Dropboxes (put a dropbox in any Web page; students’ recordings get put into your 
dropbox automatically) 
o Conversations (record prompts for students to do virtual interviews and conversations) 
o Mashups (combine media elements to create a new resource for language teaching) 
o Viewpoint (record or upload videos to link from other sites or embed inside your own 
Web pages) 
o SMILE (tool for creating interactive online exercises) 
• NEW! Introductory Business German (CD-ROM) – This CD-ROM provides a condensed, 
highly-focused set of activities intended for use by business professionals who conduct business 
with Germans and German companies and wish to learn more about the German business and 
economics environment. 
• Celebrating the World’s Languages: A Guide to Creating a World Languages Day Event (guide) 
– This publication provides a step-by-step guide to planning “World Languages Day,” a 
university event for high school students designed to stimulate interest in learning languages and 
to highlight the importance of cultural awareness. 
• La phonétique française (CD-ROM) – This cross-platform multimedia program consists of 
interactive lessons that can be used by French teachers to learn how to teach pronunciation, or by 
advanced students working independently. 
• MIMEA: Multimedia Interactive Modules for Education and Assessment (German, Chinese, 
Arabic, Vietnamese, Korean, Russian; online video clips and activities) 
 
Coming Soon! • More Rich Internet Applications 
• Introductory Business Chinese 
CONFERENCES 
CLEAR exhibits at local and national conferences year-round. We hope to see you at ACTFL, CALICO, 
MiWLA, Central States, and other conferences. 
Language Learning & Technology 12
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
NEWSLETTER 
CLEAR News is a free biyearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. 
Download PDFs of back issues and subscribe at http://clear.msu.edu/clear/newsletter/.  
 
The Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL) 
The Center for Applied Linguistics is a private, nonprofit organization that promotes and improves the 
teaching and learning of languages, identifies and solves problems related to language and culture, and 
serves as a resource for information about language and culture. CAL carries out a wide range of 
activities in the fields of English as a second language, foreign languages, cultural education, and 
linguistics.  
CAL Celebrates Its 50th Anniversary  
Visit our CAL50 Web site devoted to information about CAL's history, new resources, and special 
anniversary events. 
Featured Resources: 
• CAL News 
CAL News is our electronic newsletter created to provide periodic updates about our projects and 
research as well as information about new publications, online resources, products, and services of 
interest to our readers. Visit our Web site to sign up. 
• Alliance for the Advancement of Heritage Languages 
The Alliance for the Advancement of Heritage Languages (the Alliance) consists of individuals and 
organizations who share a commitment to advancing language development for heritage language 
speakers in the United States. The work of the Alliance is carried out through publications, the 
ongoing development of its Web site, a newsletter, and a discussion list.  
 
• Center for Research on the Educational Achievement and Teaching of English Language 
Learners (CREATE) 
Visit the CREATE Web site to learn more about CREATE, its research and upcoming events, 
including the October 2009 CREATE conference. To keep current on CREATE activities sign up to 
receive an electronic newsletter and periodic announcements.  
 
• SIOP Model Professional Development Services 
CAL works with schools, states, and districts to design and deliver high-quality, client-centered 
professional development services on the SIOP Model. 
 
• CAL Services: Institutes on Teaching Reading to English Language Learners 
CAL is offering institutes in 2009 featuring our What’s Different? professional development program. 
CAL provides a variety of professional development and technical assistance services related to 
language education and assessment needs.  
Featured Publications: 
• Refugees from Iraq (Expanded Refugee Backgrounder) 
Language Learning & Technology 13
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 14
• An Insider’s Guide to SIOP Coaching 
• Developing Reading and Writing in Second Language Learners 
• Guiding Principles for Dual Language Education, Second Edition 
• Realizing the Vision of Two-Way Immersion: Fostering Effective Programs and Classrooms 
• What’s Different About Teaching Reading to Students Learning English?  
 
Visit CAL’s Web site to learn more about our projects, resources, and services. 
 
