Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol14num3/elolaoskoz.pdf 
October 2010, Volume 14, Number 3 
pp. 51–71 
 
Copyright © 2010, ISSN 1094-3501 51 
COLLABORATIVE WRITING: FOSTERING FOREIGN LANGUAGE AND  
WRITING CONVENTIONS DEVELOPMENT 
 
Idoia Elola,1 Texas Tech University 
Ana Oskoz, University of Maryland, Baltimore County 
The use of social technologies, such as wikis and chats, has brought a renewed attention to 
L2 collaborative writing. Yet, a question that still remains to be answered is the extent to 
which learners’ writing is enhanced when using these tools. By analyzing learners’ 
individual and collaborative writing, this study (a) explores L2 learners’ approaches to the 
writing task in the wikis, (b) examines learners’ collaborative synchronous interactions 
when discussing content, structure and other aspects related to the elaboration of the 
writing task, and (c) describes learners’ perceptions of individual and collaborative writing 
and their impressions of the use of social tools in the FL writing class. Analysis of the data 
showed that while statistically significant differences were not evident in terms of fluency, 
accuracy and complexity when comparing the individual and collaborative assignments, 
there were observable trends that inform us about how learners’ interactions with the text 
differ when working individually or collaboratively. Further, an analysis of learners’ 
approaches to collaborative writing through the use of social tools shows that wikis and 
chats allowed them to concentrate on writing components in a different, yet 
complementary, manner depending on whether they interacted in the wikis or in the chats. 
INTRODUCTION 
A wide variety of collaborative work is frequently used to develop oral skills in the foreign language (FL) 
classroom. In FL writing, however, peer response is the only form of collaborative work that has been 
widely adopted and studied since the 1990s (Hyland, 2000; Liang, 2010; Lockhart & Ng, 1995; Villamil 
& de Guerrero, 1996). In contrast, the practice of collaborative writing, two or more people working 
together to produce a document with group responsibility for the end product (Bosley, 1989), has only 
been cautiously trialed to date. Research into collaborative writing, both in the first language (L1) and 
second language (L2), has shown that this pedagogical approach has great potential; it demands reflective 
thinking, helps learners to focus on grammatical accuracy, lexis and discourse, and it encourages a 
pooling of knowledge about the language (DiCamilla & Anton, 1997; Donato, 1994; Hirvela, 1999; 
Storch, 2002; Swain & Lapkin, 1998).  
The birth of social technologies, such as wikis and chats, has brought a renewed attention to L2 
collaborative writing (Arnold, Ducate, & Kost, 2009; Elola & Oskoz, in press; Kessler, 2009; Kessler & 
Bikowski, 2010; Oskoz & Elola, 2010, in press). These applications facilitate authoring flexibility, 
content creation, and the generation of new knowledge. The open editing and review structure of wikis, 
for example, makes them a suitable tool to support collaborative writing (Parker & Chao, 2007). By 
integrating audio applications, the level of interactivity and accountability of the participants increases 
(Oskoz & Elola, 2010, in press; Rick, Guzdial, Carroll, Holloway-Attaway, & Walker, 2002). A question 
that remains to be answered, however, is the extent to which collaborative writing and the use of these 
tools helps learners in their writing. By analyzing individual and collaborative wiki-based writing, this 
study explores approaches to two writing tasks taken by a group of L2 learners. It also examines learners’ 
collaborative, synchronous interactions as they discuss content, structure and other aspects related to the 
performance of the writing task. In addition, the study gathers learners’ perceptions of individual and 
collaborative writing and their impressions regarding the use of social tools in the FL writing class.  
 
Idoia Elola and Ana Oskoz  Collaborative Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 52 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Despite extensive research about L2 writing processes, genres, tasks and other aspects (Hyland & Hyland, 
2006), less is known about the role that writing plays in L2 development. Yet, as Harklau (2002) claims, 
“If learners work more through written […] sources of language, they will tend to develop the linguistic 
features that are associated with written registers in that particular context” (p. 339). The potential value 
of interacting with a text is increased when learners engage with problem-solving activities to express 
their ideas in their L2. In situations that require decision-making, L2 writers generally come to recognize 
their limitations or gaps when trying to match their linguistic knowledge to the demands of formal 
academic writing (Swain, 1985).  
The value of collaborative writing as a means to develop the linguistic and writing conventions of a 
second language has also been underpinned from a sociocultural perspective (Storch, 2005; Villamil & de 
Guerrero 1996, 1998). Their research has noted that in a collaborative situation writers are impelled to 
make decisions about the language needed to express their ideas, and thus to formulate the structure in 
which to express those ideas as they produce a text together. Wells (2000), citing Franklin (1996), states 
that “knowledge is created and re-created in the discourse between people doing things together” (p. 71). 
Knowledge is situated in a particular activity setting and it involves individuals working together to 
achieve a common goal, or overlapping goals, to which they direct their efforts (Freire, 1970; Lave & 
Wenger, 1991; Wells, 2000; Wenger, 1998). Knowledge building thus happens in the course of 
collaborative meaning-making through discourse; learners progress towards their “own understanding 
through the constructive and creative effort involved in saying and in responding to what was said” 
(Wells, p. 74). Wells emphasizes that it is the “joint attempt to construct common understandings” (p. 74) 
that is superior to individual understandings. In this view “learning as increasing participation in 
communities of practice concerns the whole person acting in the world” (Lave & Wenger, 1991, p. 49). 
The individual participates and relates with others in an ongoing, social and interactional process; that is, 
members interact, “do things together, negotiate new meanings, and learn from each other” in 
communities of practice (Wenger, 1998, p. 102). In this learning context the instructor is no longer 
viewed as the only active agent of learning, the one who “deposits” knowledge into the learners; nor are 
learners seen as the “depositories” of knowledge (Freire, 1970). Rather, the classroom per se is envisioned 
as a site where new knowledge, grounded in the meaningful experiences of learners and teacher alike, is 
produced through dynamic interactions. 
In L2 educational domains Swain (2000) points out that “when it comes to the learning of a language, the 
mediating role of dialogue is less well understood” (p. 110), because of the misconception that might 
result from the fact that “the notion of ‘language mediating language’ is more difficult to conceptualize 
and that it is more difficult to be certain of what one is observing empirically” (p. 110). Research in L2 
learning (Donato, 1994; Ohta, 2000; Swain & Lapkin, 1998), however, has provided support for the 
mediating notion of dialogue and the establishment of community of practices (Hall, 1995; Mondada & 
Pekarek Doehler, 2004; Ohta, 1995). According to Swain (2000), it is through collaborative dialogue—
dialogue that constructs linguistic knowledge when learners complete a task—that learners focus their 
attention on conveying their message and producing alternatives. In other words, dialogue provides 
learners with opportunities to use language, and also to reflect on their own language use. As a result of 
this collaboration, “…together [learners’] jointly constructed performance outstrips their individual 
competences” (Swain, 2000, p. 111). Through the act of writing collaboratively, learners engage in a 
dialogue that impels them to notice gaps in their L2 production and then to test new hypotheses regarding 
language and literacy acquisition. Further, learning is not seen just as the product of one individual's 
efforts, but as deeply connected to the surroundings, tools and the overall context in which the learning 
takes place. 
Idoia Elola and Ana Oskoz  Collaborative Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 53 
Technology in Foreign Language Writing 
Contemporary media and communication technologies are radically redefining our understanding of 
literacy (Warschauer, 1999) since their use “involves multifaceted skills and competencies, forcing us to 
reconceive the nature of written media and the writing activity” (Canagarajah, 2002, p. 211). In the FL 
classroom, tools such as chat applications and wikis are opening the doors to “more student-directed 
activities and the L2 learners’ journey towards self-definition and identity as a multilingual/multicultural 
speaker” (Blake, 2008, p. 22). These tools also “stretch the input and output limits of the FL classroom” 
(Ortega, 2007, p. 198) by providing environments that enhance collaborative writing (Hirvela, 1999) 
while presenting further opportunities for interactive and meaningful practices. When applied to L2 
writing, asynchronous and synchronous tools, such as wikis and chats, stress the social dimension of the 
writing process by allowing learners to participate in a social process of writing (Brown & Adler, 2008).  
Wikis provide learners with a tool to create, transform, and erase their work with built-in accountability. 
At the same time, the wiki tracking system allows teachers and researchers to follow the writers’ 
collaborative processes by examining what changes are made, who is making them, when and how often. 
Because the flexibility of this software facilitates communication between learners and promotes the 
shaping and sharing of knowledge when working collaboratively, wikis have attracted the attention of a 
wide variety of educators in distance learning courses, hybrid and face-to-face courses (Byron, 2005; 
Farabaugh, 2007; McLoughlin & Lee, 2007; Parker & Chao, 2007; Trentin, 2008), in English as a second 
language and English rhetoric courses (Chang & Schallert, 2005; Wang, Lu, Yang, Chiou, Chiang, & Hsu, 
2005), and in FL courses (Arnold, Ducate, & Kost, 2009; Honegger, 2005; Kessler, 2009; Kessler & 
Bikowski, 2010; Oskoz & Elola, 2010, in press).  
Recent studies in FL education have suggested that the collaborative nature of the wikis provides learners 
with an environment in which, if not always totally collaborative (Arnold et al., 2009), learners engage in 
content development (Kessler, 2009; Oskoz & Elola, 2010). In contrast with individual writing, where 
learners tend to focus on local aspects such as grammar, collaborative writing via wikis allows them to 
focus more strongly on structure and organization (Oskoz & Elola, 2010). Regarding accuracy, there are 
some conflicting results. Kessler found that, as long as grammatical errors did not interfere with meaning, 
learners were not particularly concerned with the accuracy of their writing, whereas Lee (2010) found that 
learners did collectively address language errors at the sentence or word level in meaning-driven activities. 
Arnold et al. (2009) also found that learners gave linguistic feedback and made adjustments to each 
other’s errors three-quarters of the time. These divergent results when using wikis echo Ware and 
O’Dowd’s (2008) findings on discussion-board writing in bicultural interactions. When examining both e-
tutoring and e-partnering encounters, Ware and O’Dowd found that learners were more likely to provide 
feedback on form when they were encouraged to do so than when it was just suggested. In addition to 
cultural differences that might influence learners’ approaches to correcting partners, other reasons for the 
lack of feedback on form among peers (either in monocultural or bicultural settings) might be a result of 
learners’ excellent command of the L2, their failure to notice problems in their partners’ writing, or even 
their reluctance to appear critical of a partner when establishing a relationship (Lee, 2010; Ware & 
O’Dowd, 2008).  
The collaborative value of the wiki is enhanced when accompanied by the use of synchronous Web-based 
text and audio applications, a combination that further increases the level of interaction and accountability 
of the participants (Elola & Oskoz, in press; Oskoz & Elola, 2010). Both synchronous text and audio 
applications have been employed as a means to engage learners in corrective feedback interactions (Lee, 
2008; Morris, 2005; Pellettieri, 2000; Sotillo, 2005). These studies further support the notion that task 
type affects learners’ interactions (Pica, Kanagy, & Falodun, 1993). As such, tasks in which learners 
jointly compose a piece of discourse tend to trigger high numbers of lexical and morphosyntactic 
negotiations (Pellettieri, 2000). 
Idoia Elola and Ana Oskoz  Collaborative Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 54 
Although still in its infancy, there is no doubt that technology “put to the use of social networks can foster 
second language and literacy learning that is remarkably rich in social terms” (Ortega, 2009, p. 248). Yet, 
little is known of the value of collaborative writing while using social tools on outcomes such as L2 
development or specific L2 writing aspects, such as the mastery of specific genres. There is also a need to 
understand the benefits that writers obtain when working with similar tasks (e.g., same genre) while 
making use of these tools. Therefore, this study set out to answer three questions:  
1. What are the differences between collaborative and individual writing?  
2. How do writers approach collaborative writing through the use of social tools? 
3. What are students’ perceptions on writing individually and collaboratively and how do they 
perceive collaborative work performed with the use of social tools?  
BACKGROUND INFORMATION 
The study reported in this article was conducted at a U.S. commuter, mid-sized East Coast university. The 
eight Spanish majors who participated in the study, whose ages ranged between 19 and 21, were enrolled 
in an advanced Spanish writing course, a three-credit, one-hour capstone of the program that is mandatory 
for all majors in Spanish. The learners had completed at least four courses in Spanish at the third-year 
level; two of those courses focused on the development of grammar and writing conventions. Six of the 
learners had lived abroad for one semester and, except for one student (originally from Poland and a 
native speaker of Polish), all the learners were native speakers of American English. The instructor had 
taught Spanish for four years in this institution; her goal was to develop learners’ writing skills in Spanish 
and expand their individual experiences through collaborative writing. To overcome the difficulties that 
“commuter learners” encounter in meeting face-to-face to work in groups or pairs, the instructor provided 
social tools that would allow them to experience a more learner-centered and interactive approach. 
Thereby, a media-rich environment was created to support learners’ communication activities and provide 
a forum for creating and revising their essays collaboratively.  
For the writing assignments, the instructor and researchers decided to introduce the use of wikis for both 
collaborative and individual writing tasks so that learners did not have to change mediums. Because all 
their assignments were stored centrally, the instructor was able to access the different drafts easily, to 
identify any problems the students may have had and provide feedback. The instructor selected PBwiki 
over other free wikis, such as MediaWiki or Google Docs, due to its ease of use and sophisticated 
methods of tracking user activities. The university’s system of text-based and voice chats were chosen as 
complementary tools because they allowed for easy recording of learners’ interactions. Learners were 
trained in the use of the wikis and in both oral and written chats. Given that students had completed the 
same courses, the instructor was able to pair the students randomly during the training sessions. After a 
period of familiarization with these tools, in which assignments were not graded, the instructor rearranged 
pairings to match as closely as possible the learners' proficiency levels. 
PROCEDURE 
The class met one evening a week for two-and-a-half hours. During class learners worked on grammar 
exercises and managed organizational and structural issues regarding different written genres with the 
help of the textbook, Gramática para la composición (Whitley & González, 2000). The textbook follows 
a widespread trend in FL writing instruction in the U.S, one which has been influenced to some degree by 
practices common in L1 writing instruction (Reichelt, 2009). The instructor used the textbook to illustrate 
genre and writing conventions and as a platform to introduce Spanish linguistic elements. In addition, in-
class discussions took place about the topics of the writing assignments; these originated from the 
textbook or from ideas suggested in the classroom. Therefore, learners’ interactions dealt with issues 
Idoia Elola and Ana Oskoz  Collaborative Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 55 
related to language, structure, organization and content. Learners completed each writing assignment in 
15 days (see Table 1 for schedule); for each writing assignment learners turned in a first version (Draft 1) 
and a final revised version (Draft 2).  
Table 1. Schedule and Activities 
Schedule Activities 
Week 1, Day 1 Learners discuss the topic, organization and structure in class. 
Week 1, Days 2–5 Learners work on writing assignments using wikis and chats. 
Week 1, Day 5 Draft 1 using wikis is turned in.  
Week1, Days 6–7 The instructor provides comments regarding content, structure and form in the 
wikis (within two days). 
Week 2, Day 1 In class, learners and the instructor comment on a few of the learners’ essays, 
reading for content, structure and accuracy. 
Week 2, Days 2–7 Learners continue working on their writing assignments using both wikis and 
chats. 
Week 3, Day 1 Learners complete the writing assignment (Draft 2) in the wikis. 
First, learners and instructor discussed the given topic and the organization and structure of the particular 
genre together in class. After brainstorming ideas, learners, either in pairs for the first writing piece (the 
role of men and women in Latino societies), or individually for the second piece (the effects of 
globalization in the Latino world), had five days to complete Draft 1 of the assignment in their wikis; this 
allowed for flexible scheduling of their working time. The instructor then provided feedback via the wikis 
regarding content (creation, elaboration and deletion of ideas), structure (genre general features), 
organization (order and flow of ideas within a paragraph) and form (error correction). During the 
following class, the instructor and learners looked at a few anonymous examples of student writing to 
discuss and revise key points about content, structure, organization and form. After this class learners 
revised and completed the assignment, Draft 2, during the following week.  
For the purposes of this study, learners completed two argumentative essays: the first one collaboratively 
and the second one individually. Each essay followed the same procedure. By allowing a couple of weeks 
to complete the assignment, the teacher gave learners ample opportunity to reflect on the topics and to 
fully consider both essay structure and linguistic issues. Each student approached the assignments 
differently (i.e., some revised more or added more information than others), and so the number of wiki 
drafts they created varied (ranging from 15 to 100 drafts). When working collaboratively learners 
accessed the wikis from multiple sites and communicated through chats. In the chats learners interacted a 
minimum of twice when working collaboratively, once before starting to work in the wiki, and again after 
receiving the instructor’s feedback. One of the pairs engaged in chat one additional time, and another pair 
two more times. Three pairs chose written (text-based) chats, while the remaining pair used voice chats 
(see Table 2), which were transcribed to facilitate analysis. Conversations ranged from one to two hours 
in duration. Although learners were not obligated to communicate any specific number of times, or to 
address any specific topics, they were asked to discuss essay content, organization and form in Spanish.  
Idoia Elola and Ana Oskoz  Collaborative Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 56 
Table 2. Social Tools Employed by the Pairs  
 Pairs  Social tools employed 
Pair 1  wiki + written chat  
Pair 2  wiki + written chat  
Pair 3  wiki + written chat  
Pair 4  wiki + oral chat  
At the start and completion of the course learners completed two questionnaires (consisting of 5-point 
Likert scale questions with added space for explanations) regarding their perceptions about individual and 
collaborative writing. The questionnaire also addressed learners’ perceived use of wikis and voice or 
written chat tools for writing purposes. 
ANALYSIS 
Essay drafts, questionnaires, wiki drafts and chats were analyzed to ascertain the differences between 
individual and collaborative work and to explore the potential use of social tools for FL writing.  
Learners’ Essays (Drafts 1 and 2)  
Draft 1 and Draft 2 were coded for fluency (measured by number of words and number of T-units used), 
accuracy (the percentage of error-free T-units) and complexity (the percentage of words per T-unit and 
subordinate clauses per T-unit). T-units consist of one main clause plus a subordinate clause attached to 
or embedded in it (Hunt, 1965). The T-unit has been adopted as a measure in previous research on writing 
(Arnold et al., 2009; Polio, 1997; Spelman Miller, 2006), and it was considered to be the most appropriate 
way to code and record changes regarding fluency, accuracy and complexity among different drafts. The 
inter-rater reliability score for all the measures was at or above 0.95.  
Questionnaires 
The researchers analyzed the responses pertaining to how learners perceived their work when writing 
individually and collaboratively. They also assessed and quantified learners’ perceived value of the wikis 
and chats as a tool for collaboration. 
Wiki Drafts and Chats 
Categories were assigned to the data based on meaningful segments that reflected the objective of the 
research (Merriam, 1998). The two researchers individually read one of the transcripts of a chat and one 
set of wiki drafts (as recorded in the history feature of the wikis), marked every point that revealed 
information relevant to the study and wrote comments. There was a common category of essay-related 
aspects (content, organization, structure, grammar, vocabulary, punctuation and references) in wikis and 
chats. An additional category of interaction-related aspects (asking for opinions, dividing the work, 
planning the task, providing feedback, showing agreement or disagreement) was found in chats. The 
researchers achieved an inter-rater reliability score of 0.96. Finally, all the writing episodes (e.g., content) 
were quantified and percentages were calculated to compare how the learners approached the writing and 
how they worked via the wikis and chats. 
RESULTS 
This section reports (1) the differences between collaborative and individual writing when looking at 
Draft 2 (the final version), (2) the differences between Draft 1 and 2 when working collaboratively and 
individually, (3) differences between individual and collaborative performances in the wiki drafts, (4) 
Idoia Elola and Ana Oskoz  Collaborative Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 57 
learners’ interactions in the chats, and (5) learners’ perceptions as expressed in their questionnaire 
responses.  
(1) The first analysis examines Draft 2 texts for differences between collaborative and individual writing 
by analyzing variations in fluency, accuracy, and syntactic complexity. Independent t-tests and non-
parametric Mann Whitney U tests were conducted for these three measures. There were non-significant 
results in all of the three measures, which might be a reflection of the low number of participants.  
(2) The second analysis compares learners’ individual and collaborative performances between Draft 1 
and Draft 2 texts; there were some noticeable trends with regard to fluency and accuracy. When working 
individually, the paired t-tests showed a significant increase in fluency (total words) (p = 0.014), and 
accuracy (% correct) (p = 0.011) from Draft 1 to Draft 2. When the Wilcoxon test was used, fluency (total 
t-units) (p = 0.043), fluency (total words) (p = 0.017) and accuracy (% correct) (p = 0.012) also showed 
significant increases from Draft 1 to Draft 2 for the individually written essays. A close examination of 
the essays indicates that learners working individually paid attention to local aspects related to grammar. 
As seen in the following example, learners also included extra information in Draft 2 to support their 
ideas, focusing on presenting new information not seen in Draft 1 (see Appendix A for a translation).  
Draft 1 
La cuestión de la oferta de la labor es una que aparece muchas veces en los debates económicas 
sobre la inmigración. Conforme a algunos economistas, en concreto George Borgas, un inmigrante 
cubano y profesor de la economía y la policía social, los trabajadores inmigrantes reducen los 
salarios por un 4% para los hombres nacidos en los EE. UU. (Kerper). Además, para los hombres 
sin un diploma de la escuela secundaria, los salarios disminuye por un 7.4% (Kerper). Al contrario a 
esta conclusión, según Marks los inmigrantes no dañan la economía, sino que ayudan la economía. 
Draft 2 
La cuestión de la oferta de la labor es una que aparece muchas veces en los debates económicos 
sobre la inmigración. Algunos economistas apuntan varias consecuencias negativas con un aumento 
grande en la oferta de la labor como resultado de una afluencia de los inmigrantes. Según George 
Borgas, un profesor de la economía y la policía social, los trabajadores inmigrantes reducen los 
salarios por un 4% para los hombres nacidos en los EE. UU. y para los hombres sin un diploma de 
la escuela secundaria, los salarios disminuye por un 7.4% (Kerper). Por lo tanto, a menudo este 
efecto es temporáneo y al nivel local. Además, comparado con los beneficios numerosos de este 
aumento de la oferta del la labor, esta competición limitada no es tan significante. Marks, un 
miembro del Comité del estudio de la inmigración, destaca algunos de tales beneficios a la economía. 
When the students worked collaboratively, neither the t-tests nor the Wilcoxon tests showed significant 
changes from Draft 1 to Draft 2 for any of the three measures. However, by looking at the differences 
between the mean scores of learners’ accuracy when they worked collaboratively, it was evident that the 
difference between Draft 1 and Draft 2 was greater for the collaborative group (12.67) than for the 
individual group (10.92). Therefore, despite the non-significant results, this shows that accuracy remained 
a concern for learners writing collaboratively. When looking at fluency, Draft 2 did not add substantially 
to the number of words used, sometimes even reducing their number to achieve greater precision of 
meaning; a close examination reveals that learners had worked on their ideas and considered how to 
express them better (see Appendix B for a translation). 
Idoia Elola and Ana Oskoz  Collaborative Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 58 
Draft 1 
En Perú el 70% de los delitos denunciados son cometidos por hombres que pegan a sus compañeras 
mientras que investigadores en un estudio del año 2005 han concluido que el 52% de las ciudadanas 
nicaragüenses sufrieron en eso año alguna agresión por los hombres con quienes conviven y tienen 
una relación de intimidad y confianza.  
Draft 2 
El machismo hace daño en Latinoamérica tanto literalmente como metafóricamente. Además de 
impedir el desarrollo de la mujer en la sociedad el machismo está muy vinculada con el abuso 
doméstico.  
(3) The third analysis examines how learners focused on various writing components while working 
individually and collaboratively in the wikis. Table 3 shows the seven writing components most 
frequently identified, either for collaborative or individual writing: these are content, editing, grammar, 
organization, references, structure and vocabulary.  
Table 3. Analysis of the Elements Most Frequently Identified in Pair and Individual Work via Wikis 
Collaborative Content 
(36.03%) 
Organization 
(14.72%) 
Editing 
(13.52%) 
Grammar 
(12.61%) 
Vocabulary 
(10.51%) 
Structure 
(7.81%) 
References 
(4.80%) 
Individual Content 
(36.96%) 
Organization 
(11.68%) 
Grammar 
(11.68%) 
Editing 
(11.28%) 
Structure 
(10.89%) 
Vocabulary 
(8.95%) 
References 
(8.56%) 
 
As seen in Table 3, learners focused primarily on content and organization, either when working 
collaboratively or individually. Content and organization were followed by editing and grammar, 
although not in the same sequence. These categories were followed by vocabulary and structure, again in 
a different order. References was the least addressed category, although learners worked on the references 
more frequently when working individually than when working collaboratively. 
Several interesting aspects emerged when comparing individual and collaborative wiki-assisted writing. 
With regard to structure, when working collaboratively, problems with essay structure were usually 
addressed at the beginning of the joint work, thus establishing the thesis, supporting evidence and 
conclusion as a structural framework. When working individually, learners constantly revisited their essay 
structure as they completed several drafts. When working with organization, however, learners working 
individually tended to define the thematic sentences of their paragraphs in the first drafts, and then to 
work the paragraph around the established thematic sentence. When working collaboratively, while still 
defining thematic sentences at the outset of the writing, learners were more likely to change them in the 
course of developing and elaborating the essay content with their partner. Finally, when working 
individually, learners tended to use the final drafts to focus on the editing of grammar and vocabulary. 
When working collaboratively, while still dedicating specific drafts to work on such aspects, these 
adjustments were more dispersed and appeared at many different points in the writing process. With 
regard to references, learners (either working individually or collaboratively) followed a very similar 
approach, addressing these at the beginning stage of the essay. This consistent approach shows that all 
learners gathered the source material for their essay at the initial stages of their writing.  
(4) The fourth analysis focused on the chats, which were analyzed to understand how writers approached 
collaborative writing through the use of social tools. Analysis of the chats reveals categories that focused 
on (a) components of the essay, and (b) types of interaction between participants. As seen in Table 4, the 
content of the essay triggered most of the negotiations that occurred in the chats (51.94%), followed by 
suggesting methods of structuring (15.55%) the information that they had collected. Learners also shared 
Idoia Elola and Ana Oskoz  Collaborative Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 59 
the sources (14.84%) of the information to back their argument and discussed some grammatical (7.77%) 
aspects of the essay. Learners also spent some time discussing the organization (6.71%) of the essay, 
finding the appropriate vocabulary (2.12%) and editing (1.07%) some specific aspect of the essay. 
Table 4. Analysis of the Elements Most Frequently Identified in Pair Work via Chats 
Categories Content 
(51.94%) 
Structure 
(15.55%) 
Sources 
(14.84%) 
Grammar 
(7.77%) 
Organization  
(6.71%) 
Vocabulary 
(2.12%) 
Editing 
(1.07%) 
 
The analysis also illustrated the types of interaction, such as showing agreement or task planning, 
observed among the participants in the chats when discussing different aspects of their writing (see Table 
5).  
Table 5. Analysis of the Interactions Most Frequently Identified in Pair Work via Chats 
Interactions Showing 
dis/agreement 
(44.10%) 
Planning      
task 
(16.92%) 
Providing 
opinion 
(15.90%) 
Providing 
feedback 
(11.79%) 
Dividing the 
work  
(11.28%) 
Across all of their interactions learners tended to show agreement or disagreement with their partner’s 
opinions or suggestions 44.10% of the time. Once they had agreed on topic and structure, learners then 
planned how to conduct the task (16.92%). Learners also asked each other’s opinions (15.90%) as they 
worked together. In the chat sessions there was a clear emphasis on providing feedback (11.79%) to each 
other on content and structure as a way to move forward in the assignment. Learners (usually at the end of 
the chat sessions) also discussed dividing up the work (11.28%) because although they were working 
collaboratively, some of the composing process was also carried out individually. 
Student Perceptions of Individual and Collaborative Writing 
The researchers analyzed students’ responses in the questionnaires to understand students’ own 
perceptions on (a) how they write individually or collaboratively, and (b) the usefulness of technology for 
collaborative writing with regard to grammar, content and structure.  
Although writers perceived individual and collaborative writing in a different manner according to their 
individual preferences, difficulties or successes, their perceptions showed some common trends. In 
relation to individual writing, the learners preferred to write by themselves for the following reasons: to 
develop a personal style in Spanish; to handle content, organization, vocabulary and grammar issues 
without having to defend their choices to others; to avoid disagreements with their partners (e.g., 
conflicting visions for the paper); and to work on their own time schedule. When working collaboratively, 
learners realized that the analysis and critique of their ideas enhanced not only the content but also the 
overall quality of their essays. Learners became aware that everybody brought to the projects a unique set 
of skills and that often they could learn more from correcting their partner’s grammar and critiquing their 
ideas than from their own work. In addition, structure and organization improved because the discussions 
allowed learners to concentrate on a thesis for their essays and support that thesis in a more organized 
manner. Although there were contradictory perceptions about correcting each other’s grammar 
successfully, overall learners liked working with others for the extra editing assistance that their partners 
could offer. 
Potential Benefits of the Use of Wikis and Chats When Working Collaboratively 
The questionnaires also provided information about whether the use of social tools was seen by learners 
as beneficial to their writing in terms of grammar, content and structure (see Table 6). Before starting to 
use wikis and chats, the majority of learners saw the potential benefits of using wikis as a means to 
Idoia Elola and Ana Oskoz  Collaborative Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 60 
improve their essays in terms of grammar, content and structure, and they thought that chats would help 
them to reflect on content and structure. Opinions on the value of chats for grammar development were 
evenly divided. 
At the end of the semester learners’ opinions about the benefits of wikis for grammar improvement were 
evenly divided between agree and disagree. Those who claimed to have benefited from the wikis realized 
that their partners could often identify and correct mistakes despite the fact that they did not always revise 
and proofread together. With regard to content development, all the learners agreed or strongly agreed 
about the usefulness of the wikis. In relation to essay structure, most learners felt that working in the wiki 
was very helpful, especially because the wiki approach required learners to create an outline together 
before starting to write.  
Table 6. Student Responses to the Value of Wikis and Chats for Grammar, Content, and Organization  
Questions 
Strongly 
agree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
disagree 
Using the wiki to work collaboratively with my 
partner improved my written grammar. 
10% 90% 
50%* 
 
50% 
 
Using the wiki to work collaboratively with my 
partner improved the content of my writing. 
10% 
10% 
80% 
90% 
10%  
Using the wiki to work collaboratively with my 
partner improved the structure of my writing. 
10% 
30% 
90% 
50% 
 
20% 
 
Using the written/voice chat to work 
collaboratively with my partner improved my 
written grammar. 
 50% 
30% 
50% 
70% 
 
Using the written/voice chat to work 
collaboratively with my partner improved the 
content of my writing. 
 
10% 
80% 
90% 
20% 
 
 
Using the written/voice chat to work 
collaboratively with my partner improved the 
structure of my writing. 
 70% 
90% 
30% 
10% 
 
*Bold percentages represent the results of the second questionnaire. The other percentages relate to the results of 
the first questionnaire. 
As in the case of wikis, chats were not perceived as the ideal vehicle for discussing and improving 
grammar; they were, however, regarded as highly beneficial for the exchange of ideas and structuring of 
the essay, despite certain technical problems encountered when using the voice chat. Learners generated 
ideas and shared them with the intention of creating a more complete text. As seen in the following 
example of a written chat (presented as written by the learners), learners challenged their co-author’s 
ideas, were obliged to explain their own ideas to their partners, contributed additional ideas after listening 
to each other and then finally presented stronger arguments in their essays. 
Lauren:  
 
 
 
 
 
despues de pensar anoche, no creo que sea posible arguir que el machismo 
es causada por una razon 
 
after thinking about it last night, I don’t think it’s possible to argue that 
sexism is caused by only one thing 
 
Idoia Elola and Ana Oskoz  Collaborative Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 61 
Monica: 
 
 
 
 
 
Lauren: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Monica: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lauren: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Monica: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Lauren: 
pero violencia domestica no es un argumento, no es una posicion. yo no 
quiero argumentar que si existe el machismo para nada  
 
but domestic violence isn’t an argument, it’s not a point of view, I don’t 
want to argue about whether sexism exists at all 
 
eso es mi opinion: podemos argumentar que el machismo existe a traves de 
sus consecuencias, como el abuso contra mujeres, o la desigualdad en el 
sector laboral, o cualquier cosa.  
 
this is my opinion: we can argue that sexism exists through its 
consequences, like abuse against women, or workplace inequality, or 
anything like that. 
 
pero el problema que tengo con esto si escogimos el abuso solo tenemos 
una razon que demuestra que el machismo existe. solo podemos decir que 
existe porque hay violencia y no hay mas para apoyar al argumento que 
existe el machismo. creo que si vamos a argumentar que existe el 
machismo necesitamos muchos hechos para apoyar el argumetno  
 
but the problem that I have with that is this: if we select abuse, we only 
have one reason that demonstrates that sexism exists. We can only say that 
it exists because there is violence and there’s nothing else to support the 
argument that sexism exists. I think that if we are going to argue that 
sexism exists we need a lot of facts to support our argument 
 
vamos a hacer una lista por que creemos que todavia existe. tal vez puede 
ayudarnos en elegir un tema, desigualdad en el trabajo, la division de 
deberes en la casa… 
 
we’ll have to make a list of reasons why we think it still exists; maybe that 
can help us select one topic, inequality in the workplace, the division of 
chores at home… 
 
ok si quieres hacer abuso domestico podemos argumentar que el machismo 
causa el abuso domestico porque el abuso domestico no es suficiente para 
argumetnar que si existe el machismo  
 
OK, if you want to do domestic abuse we can add that sexism causes 
domestic abuse, because domestic abuse isn’t enough to argue that sexism 
exists 
 
ok, de acuerdo: el abuso domestico es una consecuencia del machismo. 
 
OK, I agree: domestic abuse is a consequence of sexism. 
In the excerpt above, Monica and Lauren discuss the main argument of the projected essay and how to 
support it. Domestic violence was a recurrent topic in their previous interactions and one of great interest 
to Lauren. However, Monica, while not disregarding the topic, challenges the idea that domestic violence 
should be the major theme of their essay; she reasons that the incidence of domestic violence does not in 
itself support the hypothesis that sexism exists. After listening to Monica, Lauren suggests that they 
should make a list of examples that show that sexism is prevalent in society, such as inequality in the 
workplace or in division of work in the home. At that point Monica concedes that domestic abuse, 
Idoia Elola and Ana Oskoz  Collaborative Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 62 
Lauren’s topic of interest, can be in that list as a consequence or example of sexism in society. At the end 
of the above exchange Lauren agrees that domestic violence is a consequence of sexism and not the cause 
of it.  
DISCUSSION 
Research Question 1 
The first research question of this study explores the potential differences between collaborative writing 
and individual writing when using wikis and chats. Because of the low number of learner participants, 
statistically significant differences were not evident in terms of fluency, accuracy and complexity when 
comparing both assignments. Although there were no significant differences in the measure of complexity 
with regard to fluency and accuracy, there were observable trends that inform us about the learners’ 
interactions with the text when working in either the individual or the collaborative mode.  
Working in either mode learners paid attention to local aspects related to grammar, suggesting an 
expected concern for accuracy (Hyland & Hyland, 2006). However, as seen in the wiki drafts, learners 
approached the grammatical accuracy of their essays differently, depending on whether they worked by 
themselves or with a partner. When working individually, learners preferred to polish their text (grammar, 
editing, vocabulary) towards the end of the writing process, when the text was almost completed; when 
working collaboratively, learners tended to work and polish the essays (grammar, editing, vocabulary) 
during the course of developing the multiple drafts. This difference in the correction pattern could be due 
to the fact that in the collaborative mode the learner has a reader, and this encourages him/her to pay 
attention to grammatical accuracy as when composing multiple drafts. This finding seems to conflict with 
learners' own perceptions that the collaborative work in the wikis did not help them to improve their 
grammar. Nevertheless, it was evident that learners expressed a preference to work with grammar on their 
own, which partially supports Kessler’s (2009) results that as long as grammatical errors did not interfere 
with meaning, learners working collaboratively in the wiki were relatively unconcerned with the accuracy 
of their partner's writing. It is interesting to note that learners in our study primarily fixed language 
problems when completing their assigned sub-tasks and corrected their partner’s to a lesser extent— a 
finding which differs from Arnold et al. (2009), who found that learners corrected each other's errors 
frequently, and Lee (2010), who found that the mutual scaffolding supplied by the wiki fostered the 
improvement of language accuracy. Similarly to Ware and O'Dowd’s (2008) observations in bicultural 
interactions, and as stated in the surveys, in the present study learners did not readily notice problems in 
their partners’ writing, tended to overlook grammar in favor of content and structure, or thought it 
inappropriate to discuss grammar because perceived criticism might threaten the establishment of a good 
working relationship. Yet, the instructor eventually received an accurate essay that, as observable in the 
wiki-produced drafts, was the product of the partners’ joint effort.  
Regarding fluency, as mentioned in the results for individually written essays, Draft 2 showed a statistical 
increase in the quantity of words and T-units used. A closer examination showed a direct connection 
between the measure of fluency and content. As observed in the wiki drafts (see Table 3), while all 
learners put a great effort into content development, there were quantitative and qualitative differences in 
how they approached the writing task. When working individually, the generation of ideas played a 
central role during the two revision sessions, whereas when working collaboratively, learners benefited 
from mutual interaction, not by generating more content per se, but by reworking, refining and fine-tuning 
the content already written. In other words, when working collaboratively, learners focused their attention 
on producing alternatives to, and improved versions of, their previous texts. 
Regarding structure, there was also a qualitative difference in how learners approached the task. In the 
individually-produced wiki drafts learners defined their thesis and worked on the essay structure 
throughout the entire writing process. When working collaboratively, learners established the structure 
Idoia Elola and Ana Oskoz  Collaborative Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 63 
early in the initial wiki drafts. It appears that learners had discussed structure and organization early in the 
chats and that the collaboratively-created outlines then provided a structural foundation at the beginning 
of the writing process. As stated by some participants in the surveys, wikis and chats did help them to 
develop and improve the content and structure of their essays. As observed in the wiki drafts, learners 
played with structure and organization, switching paragraphs and sentences around; in their chat 
interactions they also discussed extensively the content, structure and organization of the essay. Thus, the 
wikis and chats became an interactional arena where learners were helped to reflect on and engage with 
the L2 writing task. This reflective space also promoted further linguistic development as well as better 
understanding of particular writing conventions. The constant elaboration of both local and global aspects 
of the essay over the entire writing process provided learners with further valuable opportunities for L2 
development (Harklau, 2002; Ortega, 2007).   
Research Question 2 
The second research question sought to explore the action of writing collaboratively with the use of social 
tools; results show that that wikis and chats brought different benefits to a range of L2 writing 
components. As seen in Table 7, the writing component mentioned most frequently, both for wikis and 
chats, is that of content. 
Table 7. Analysis of the Elements Most Frequently Identified in Pair Work via Wikis and Chats 
Wiki Content 
(36.03%) 
Organization 
(14.72%) 
Editing 
(13.52%) 
Grammar 
(12.61%) 
Vocabulary 
(10.51%) 
Structure 
(7.81%) 
References 
(4.80%) 
Chat Content 
(51.94%) 
Structure 
(15.55%) 
Sources 
(14.84%) 
Grammar 
(7.77%) 
Organization 
(6.71%) 
Vocabulary 
(2.12%) 
Editing 
(1.07%) 
There was, however, a qualitative distinction between wikis and chats in how students approached content 
development. When interacting in the chats learners’ conversations focused on topic development (i.e., on 
what to write about), while in the wiki learners proceeded to reformulate the content of ideas previously 
discussed in the chats. Overall, learners used the chats to discuss the structure, the thesis and the overall 
division of the essay into introduction, body and conclusion, whereas in the wiki learners generally 
worked on the organization at the paragraph level, focusing on thematic sentences and internal coherence 
of ideas within a paragraph. Through the chats learners addressed specific concerns in real time, often 
searching for information together, looking for sources and dividing the work, while at the same time 
moving towards agreement on the major issues; in other words, a significant benefit of using the chats 
was that it encouraged a structured approach to the essay writing. Wikis, on the other hand, allowed 
learners to focus on grammatical detail and matters of editing, such as fine-tuning of vocabulary choices. 
Thus, through the collaborative dialogue fostered by wikis and chats, learners constructed knowledge and 
created a specific “community of practice.” Constant interaction with their partners impelled learners to 
notice issues related to the linguistic and writing conventions of the target language (Swain, 2000; Wells, 
2000) and provided scaffolding for this to occur in a polite, structured manner. As seen in Lauren and 
Monica’s chat interaction regarding the main thesis of the essay (see Results section), learners pushed 
each other to analyze their main and supporting ideas and so ultimately to reach a higher level of 
performance in their essay. Echoing Wells (2000), this example shows how, in their attempt to achieve a 
common goal, Monica and Lauren directed their efforts to choosing an appropriate argument for the basis 
of their essay. Through their collaborative dialogue, not only did Monica and Lauren complete the task, 
but by the exchange of alternative theses (in a kind of scaffolding), they also achieved a result beyond 
what they would have achieved by working on their own (Swain, 2000). This new approach of paying 
attention to issues at the discourse level is extremely significant to FL classroom research and teaching 
because the tendency in this area has been to revise and edit at the sentence level. This probably occurs 
Idoia Elola and Ana Oskoz  Collaborative Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 64 
because of learners’ L2 limitations or their lack of expertise with diverse genres, or because they may 
think that the instructor is mostly interested in the accuracy of the text and not so much in the content of 
the text as a whole (Hedgcock & Lefkowitz, 1994; Porte, 1996, 1997). At the same time, learners’ 
attention to local aspects, such as vocabulary and grammar, supports the idea that collaborative interaction 
can also foster language awareness and consequently L2 development (Harklau, 2002; Ortega, 2007; 
Swain, 2000).  
Research Question 3 
The final research question sought learners’ perceptions about the experience of working with wikis and 
chats, collaboratively or individually. Although all the learners expressed a liking for writing individually, 
because this allowed them to manipulate the text to suit their personal style and to work within their own 
schedule, all the learners noted that when working collaboratively the overall quality of their work 
improved. Although learners still preferred to focus on the local aspects, such as accuracy or vocabulary, 
of their own sub-texts, all learners acknowledged that working with a partner allowed them to develop a 
more finely tuned thesis and to develop a better structured and organized essay. This supports Wells’ 
(2000) suggestion that learners jointly construct a performance that surpasses their individual 
competences. The content and structure also improved because learners were able to construct an ongoing 
dynamic process of discussion and negotiation (Hirvela, 1999). Learners’ comments in the questionnaires 
highlight the view that collaborative performance could surpass the individual (Swain, 2000; Wells, 2000). 
Learners’ own emphasis on improved content development thus illustrates how both the instructor’s and 
their own concerns about linguistic accuracy are minimized in favor of other learning goals. In addition, 
learners’ positive perceptions about the use of chats and wikis confirm previous findings that support the 
use of social tools, especially for content development (Arnold et al., 2009; Kessler, 2009; Lee, 2010).  
It is essential to state here that while the use of social technology tools can reinforce student learning, they 
do not always lead to positive learning results (Lindblom-Ylänne & Pihlajamäki, 2003). In any 
educational setting it is important to evaluate carefully the relationship between the properties of these 
tools and how they are used to assist learners (Kirschner, 2002). Moreover, as McLoughlin and Lee 
(2007) note, instructors and researchers need to acknowledge that “technologies are intricately related to 
many other elements of the learning context” (p. 666), such as subject content, curriculum, 
communication, process, resources, scaffolding and learning tasks. In the case of the FL writing 
classroom, it is crucial that classroom practitioners understand how the use of social tools can support the 
effective delivery of learning. Therefore, as suggested by Hyland (2003), it is necessary first to develop a 
well-structured writing course based on genre-specific pedagogy. In this process the instructor models 
texts and helps learners to deconstruct and analyze features of language and structure. The judicious 
integration of Web-based tools can then make learners become active participants in the process whereby, 
through collaboration and multiple drafts, they acquire the necessary linguistic and writing conventions of 
the target language. 
We would like to conclude this discussion with a word of caution. Regardless of how useful or valid the 
collaborative exercises may have been, there is no doubt that learners still feel more comfortable when 
writing individually for several reasons: they retain more control over their writing, they establish their 
own personal style, and they are not dependent on the input of others. At the logistical level working 
collaboratively outside the classroom can be problematic and cumbersome for some learners. For example, 
learners who are used to writing on their own have to negotiate times to meet, have to deal with 
technology-related problems on their own and depend on another person for their grade. These learner 
perceptions present an important challenge for instructors who adopt collaborative approaches to class 
assignments. For instructors, it is essential to (a) demonstrate to learners that integrating social tools goes 
beyond a classroom exercise (Levy & Kennedy, 2004; Ortega, 2009; Warschauer, 2004), (b) transform 
learners into critical users who understand how the application of technological tools can transform the 
learning environment (Blake, 2008), and (c) highlight the importance of seeing collaborative work as a 
Idoia Elola and Ana Oskoz  Collaborative Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 65 
practice that can be relevant to learners’ future professional lives (Brown & Adler, 2008). The 
collaboratively-created text should not be regarded as a combination of individual endeavors, but rather as 
the result of several contributions which together create one distinctive voice. 
CONCLUSION       
The adoption of educational technology can create a space beyond the more traditional classroom setting 
that can be used judiciously to facilitate learners’ writing processes and interactions. The use of social 
Web technology in the present study was able to expand traditional classroom boundaries (Ortega, 2007; 
Van Deusen-Scholl, 2008; Van Deusen-Scholl, Frei, & Dixon, 2005), creating a learning community that 
was less teacher-dependent, and one that was not exclusively based on topics presented in the textbook or 
by the instructor, but that emerged from the interests and interactions of all class members (Levy & 
Kennedy, 2004). The use of these tools also allowed the researchers to observe how writers dealt with L2 
writing challenges through a novel medium. Learners’ engagement in virtual collaboration through 
meaningful interactions (i.e., having to make decisions and solve problems related to set tasks) becomes a 
perfect vehicle for language development (Blake, 2000; Ortega, 2009; Sotillo, 2000). Learners found 
ways to address the L2 system (e.g., choice of vocabulary or syntactic structures) and genre features 
outside the traditional classroom environment. Moreover, the dialogue helped writers to construct or 
reconstruct their content knowledge and to engage with the writing conventions and use the appropriate 
language register for the argumentative essay genre.  
We do not propose that collaborative work should displace individual work but that both approaches can 
complement each other and expand the writers’ linguistic experiences in a holistic manner. Given that FL 
instruction promotes communication as a prime methodology to acquire a second language, requiring 
learners to address L2 writing aspects interactively appears to be a “win–win” situation. From a 
pedagogical point of view, it is also important to consider which methodological approaches may best 
support language learners in diverse instructional contexts (e.g., distance learning, commuter schools, and 
on-campus courses) and which can minimize levels of stress or frustration when learners are being 
introduced to unfamiliar genres. 
There are several limitations in this study that need to be addressed in future research. First, the low 
number of learner participants (although not unusual in advanced FL courses) means that our study 
cannot provide generalizable results. Second, this study focused exclusively on one task: the 
argumentative essay. Obviously, writing processes will need to vary according to the cognitive demands 
of other tasks (e.g., expository or narrative essays). Comparing how learners work collaboratively and 
individually on a variety of tasks is likely to provide more insights for L2 writing research and classroom 
practice. Third, the sequence in which learners completed the task may have affected the results of this 
study. Instead of having learners complete the first task collaboratively and the second one individually, it 
would be beneficial to have a second group complete the first argumentative essay individually and the 
second one collaboratively. This approach would diminish the group effect and provide a better 
perspective of learners’ writing processes when approaching an argumentative essay at different writing 
stages. Fourth, other language proficiency levels should also be considered when conducting research into 
the application of social tools for FL writing. Fifth, collaborative writing using wikis and chats should be 
compared to that performed without the use of these technologies to provide more information about how 
use of social tools supports writing processes. Finally, there is a need for more research generally in the 
area of collaborative writing and its possible benefits for L2 development; such research needs to be 
based on theoretical models that illuminate social interaction, and should consider a diversity of writing 
tasks performed with the support of available social technologies.  
NOTES 
1. Authors are listed in alphabetical order and contributed equally to the manuscript. 
Idoia Elola and Ana Oskoz  Collaborative Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 66 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Idoia Elola is an Assistant Professor of Spanish and Applied Linguistics & Second Language Studies at 
Texas Tech University. Her research, quantitative and qualitative in nature, focuses predominantly on 
second language writing with an emphasis on feedback and revision, collaborative writing through the use 
of social Web technologies, and the effects of planning, pausing and revision on texts in English and 
Spanish among Spanish heritage speakers. She has published articles on the topics of foreign language 
writing, collaborative writing with social tools, and the use of technology in the language classroom for 
intercultural competence development. 
E-mail: idoia.elola@ttu.edu 
Ana Oskoz is an Associate Professor of Spanish in the Department of Modern Languages, Linguistics and 
Intercultural Communication at the University of Maryland Baltimore County. Her research focuses on 
the use of technology for second language learning and second language acquisition. She has examined 
the use of synchronous and asynchronous communication tools such as online chats, discussion boards, 
blogs, and wikis for second language learning to enhance second language writing and foster intercultural 
competence development. She has published articles on the topics of error correction, classroom-based 
assessment, and the use of technology in the language classroom. 
E-mail: aoskoz@umbc.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Arnold, N., Ducate, L., & Kost, C. (2009). Collaborative writing in wikis: Insights from culture project in 
German class. In L. Lomicka & G. Lord (Eds.), The next generation: Social networking and online 
collaboration in foreign language learning (pp. 115–144). CALICO Monograph Series Volume 5. San 
Marcos, TX: Texas State University. 
Blake, R. J. (2008). Brave new digital classroom: Technology and foreign language learning. 
Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press. 
Bosley, D. S. (1989). A national study of the uses of collaborative writing in business communication 
courses among members of the ABC (Doctoral dissertation). Illinois State University, Illinois. 
Brown, S., & Adler, R. P. (2008). Minds on fire. Open education, the long trail, and learning 2.0. 
Educause Review, 43(1), 16–32. Retrieved from http://net.educause.edu/ir/library/pdf/ERM0811.pdf 
Byron, M. (2005). Teaching with wiki. Teaching Philosophy, 28(2), 108–113. 
Canagarajah, A. S. (2002). Critical academic writing and multilingual students. Ann Arbor, MI: The 
University of Michigan Press. 
Chang, Y. F., & Schallert, D. L. (2005). The design for a collaborative system of English as foreign 
language: Composition writing of senior high school students in Taiwan. In Proceedings of the Fifth 
IEEE International Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies (pp. 774–775). Los Alamitos, CA. 
Retrieved from http://www.informatik.uni-trier.de/~ley/db/conf/icalt/index.html  
DiCamilla, F., & Antón, M. (1997). Repetition in the collaborative discourse of L2 learners: A 
Vygotskian perspective. The Canadian Modern Language Review, 53, 609–633.  
Idoia Elola and Ana Oskoz  Collaborative Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 67 
Donato, R. (1994). Collective scaffolding in second language learning. In J. Lantolf & G. Appel (Eds.), 
Vygotskian approaches to second language research (pp. 33–56). Westport, CT: Ablex.  
Elola, I., & Oskoz, A. (in press). A social constructivist approach to foreign language writing in online 
environments. In G. Levine & A. Phipps (Eds.), Critical and intercultural theory and language pedagogy 
(pp. 185–201). Boston: Cengage Heinle.  
Farabaugh, R. (2007). The isle is full of noises: Using wiki software to establish a discourse community 
in a Shakespeare classroom. Language awareness, 16(1), 41–56. 
Freire, P. (1970). Pedagogy of the oppressed. New York, NY: Seabury Press. 
Hall, K. J. (1995). “Aw, man, Where you goin?”: Classroom interaction and the development of L2 
interactional competence. Issues in Applied Linguistics, 5, 37–62. 
Harklau, L. (2002). The role of writing in classroom second language acquisition. Journal of Second 
Language Writing, 11, 329–350. 
Hedgcock, J., & Lefkowitz, N. (1994). Feedback on feedback: Assessing learner receptivity in second 
language writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 3, 141–163. 
Hirvela, A. (1999). Collaborative writing: Instruction and communities of readers and writers. TESOL 
Journal, 8(2), 7–12. 
Honegger, B. D. (2005). Wikis – a rapidly growing phenomenon in the German-speaking school 
community. In D. Riehle (Ed.), Proceedings of the 2005 International Symposium on Wikis (pp. 113–116). 
New York, NY. Retrieved from http://www.wikisym.org/ws2005/proceedings/paper-10.pdf 
Hunt, K. W. (1965). Grammatical structures written at three grade levels. Champaign, IL: National 
Council of Teachers of English. 
Hyland, K. (2000). Disciplinary discourses: Social interactions in academic writing. Harlow, UK: 
Longman.  
Hyland, K. (2003). Genre-based pedagogies: A social response to process. Journal of Second Language 
Writing, 12, 17-29. 
Hyland, K., & Hyland, F. (2006). Feedback on second language students’ writing. Language Teaching, 
39, 83–101.  
Kessler, G. (2009). Student-initiated attention to form in wiki-based collaborative writing. Language 
Learning & Technology, 13(1), 79–95. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num1/kessler.pdf 
Kessler, G., & Bikowski, D. (2010). Developing collaborative autonomous language learning abilities in 
computer mediated language learning: Attention to meaning among students in wiki space. Computer 
Assisted Language Learning, 23(1), 41–58. 
Kirschner, P. A. (2002). Can we support CSCL? Educational, social and technological affordances for 
learning. In P. A. Kirschner (Ed.), Three worlds of CSCL: Can we support CSCL? (pp. 7–47). Heerlen, 
The Netherlands: Open University of the Netherlands. 
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. New York, NY: 
Cambridge University Press.  
Lee, L. (2008). Focus-on-form through collaborative scaffolding in expert-to-novice online interaction. 
Language Learning & Technology, 12(3), 53–72. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num3/lee.pdf  
Lee, L. (2010). Exploring wiki-media collaborative writing: A Case Study in an Elementary Spanish 
Course. CALICO Journal, 27(2), 260-276. Retrieved from http://www.calico.org/  
Idoia Elola and Ana Oskoz  Collaborative Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 68 
Levy, M., & Kennedy, C. (2004). A task-cycling pedagogy using audio-conferencing and stimulated 
reflection for foreign language learning. Language Learning & Technology, 8(2), 50-68. Retrieved 
from http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num2/pdf/levy.pdf  
Liang, M. (2010). Using synchronous online peer response groups in EFL writing: Revision-related 
discourse. Language Learning & Technology, 14(1), 45–64. Retrieved 
from http://llt.msu.edu/vol14num1/liang.pdf 
Lindblom-Ylänne, S., & Pihlajamäki, H. (2003). Can a collaborative network environment enhance essay-
writing processes? British Journal of Educational Technology, 34(1), 17–30. 
Lockhart, C., & Ng, P. (1995). Analyzing talk in ESL peer response groups: Stances, functions, and 
content. Language Learning, 45(4), 1–51. 
McLoughlin, C., & Lee, M. (2007). Social software and participatory learning: Pedagogical choices with 
technology affordances in the Web 2.0 era. In Proceedings ASCILITE Singapore 2007: December 2–5 
(pp. 664–675). Retrieved from http://www.ascilite.org.au/conferences/singapore07/procs/mcloughlin.pdf  
Merriam, S. B. (1998). Qualitative research and case applications in education: Revised and expanded 
from case study research in education (2nd ed.). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.  
Mondana, L., & Pekarek Doehler, S. (2004). Second language acquisition and situated practice: Task 
accomplishment in the French second language classroom. The Modern Language Journal, 88, 501-518. 
Morris, F. (2005). Child-to-child interaction and corrective feedback in a computer mediated L2 class. 
Language Learning & Technology, 9, 29–45. Retrieved 
from http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num1/morris/default.html  
Ohta, A. (1995). Applying sociocultural theory to an analysis of learner discourse: Learner-learner 
collaborative interaction in the zone of proximal development. Issues in Applied Linguistics, 6, 93–121. 
Ohta, A. (2000). Rethinking interaction in SLA: Developmentally appropriate assistance in the zone of 
proximal development and the acquisition of L2 grammar. In J. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and 
second language acquisition (pp. 51–78). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Ortega, L. (2007). Meaningful L2 practice in foreign language classrooms: A cognitive-interactionist 
SLA perspective. In R. M. DeKeyser (Ed.), Practice in second language: Perspectives from Applied 
Linguistics and Cognitive Psychology (pp. 180-207). NewYork, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
Ortega, L. (2009). Understanding second language acquisition. London, UK: Hodder Education 
Oskoz, A., & Elola, I. (2010). Meeting at the wiki: The new arena for collaborative writing in foreign 
language courses. In M. Lee & C. McLaughlin (Eds.), Web 2.0-based E-learning: Applying social 
informatics for tertiary teaching (pp. 209-227). Hershey, PA: IGI Global 
Oskoz, A., & Elola, I. (in press). Academic writing in the foreign language classroom: Wikis and chats at 
work. In M. Pennington & P. Burton, The College Writing Toolkit: Tried and Tested Ideas for Teaching 
College Writing. London, UK: Equinox. 
Parker, K. R., & Chao, J. T. (2007). Wiki as a teaching tool. Interdisciplinary Journal of Knowledge and 
Learning Objects, 3, 57–72. 
Pellettieri, J. (2000). Negotiation in cyberspace: The role of chatting in the development of grammatical 
competence. In M. Warschauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Network-based language teaching: Concepts and 
practice (pp. 59–86). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Idoia Elola and Ana Oskoz  Collaborative Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 69 
Pica, T. Kanagy, R., & Falodun, J. (1993). Choosing and using communication tasks for second language 
instruction. In S. Gass (Ed.), Tasks and language learning: Integrating theory and practice (pp. 9–34). 
Clevendon, Avon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Polio, C. G. (1997). Measures of linguistic accuracy in second language writing research. Language 
learning, 47, 101-143. 
Porte, G. K. (1996). When writing fails: How academic context and past learning experiences shape 
revision. System, 24, 107–116. 
Porte, G. K. (1997). The etiology of poor second language writing: The influence of perceived teacher 
preferences on second language revision strategies. Journal of Second Language Writing, 6, 61–78. 
Reichelt, M. (2009). A critical evaluation of writing teaching programmes in different foreign language 
settings. In R. M. Manchón (Ed.), Writing in foreign language contexts (pp. 183–208). Buffalo, NY: 
Multilingual Matters.  
Rick, J., Guzdial, M., Carroll, K., Holloway-Attaway, L., & Walker, B. (2002). Collaborative learning at 
low cost: CoWeb use in English composition. Proceedings of Computer Support for Collaborative 
Learning Conference, January 7-11 (pp. 435-442). Boulder, CO, USA. Retrieved 
from http://home.cc.gatech.edu/csl/uploads/6/CoWebInEnglish-CSCL2002.pdf  
Sotillo, S. (2005). Corrective feedback via instant messenger learning activities in NS-NNS dyads. 
CALICO, 22 (3), 467–496. 
Spelman Miller, K. (2006). The Pausological Study of Written Language Production. In P. H. Sullivan 
and E. Lindgren (Eds.), Computer keystroke logging and writing (pp. 11-39). Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands: Elsevier.  
Storch, N. (2002). Patters of interaction in ESL pair work. Language learning, 52, 119-158. 
Storch, N. (2005). Collaborative writing: Product, process, and students' reflections. Journal of Second 
Language Writing, 14(3), 153–173. 
Swain, M. (1985). Communicative competence: Some roles of comprehensible input and comprehensible 
output in its development. In S. Gass & C. Madden (Eds.), Input in second language acquisition (pp. 
235–253). Rowely, MA: Newbury House. 
Swain, M. (2000). The output hypothesis and beyond. In J. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second 
language acquisition (pp. 97–114). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.  
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (1998). Interaction and second language learning: Two adolescents French 
immersion students working together. The Modern Language Journal, 82, 320–337. 
Trentin, G. (2008). Using a wiki to evaluate individual contribution to a collaborative learning project. 
Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 24, 1–13.  
Van Deusen-Scholl, N. (2008). Online discourse strategies: A longitudinal study of computer-mediated 
foreign language learning. In S. S. Magnan, (Ed.), Mediating Discourse Online, (pp. 191–217). 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands: John Benjamins Publishing Company 
Van Deusen-Scholl, N., Frei, C., & Dixon, E. (2005). Coconstructing learning: The dynamic nature of 
foreign language pedagogy in a CMC environment. CALICO Journal, 22, 657-678. 
Villamil, O. S., & de Guerrero, M. C. M. (1996). Peer revision in the L2 classroom: Social-cognitive 
activities, mediating strategies, and aspects of social behavior. Journal of Second Language Writing, 5, 
51–75.  
Idoia Elola and Ana Oskoz  Collaborative Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 70 
Villamil, O. S., & de Guerrero, M. C. M. (1998). Assessing the impact of peer revision in L2 writing. 
Applied linguistics, 19(4), 491–514. 
Wang, H., Lu, C., Yang, J., Hu, H., Chiou, G., Chiang, Y., & Hsu, W. (2005). An empirical exploration 
of using wiki in an English as a second language course. In Proceedings of the Fifth IEEE International 
Conference on Advanced Learning,(pp. 155–157). doi: 10.1109/ICALT.2005.152 
Ware, P. D., & O’Dowd, R. (2008). Peer feedback on language form in tellecollaboration. Language 
Learning & Technology, 12(1), 43–63. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num1/wareodowd  
Warschauer, M. (1999). Electronic literacies: Language, culture, and power in online education. Mahwah, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Warschauer, M. (2004). Technological change and the future of CALL. In S. Fotos & C. Brown (Eds.), 
New perspectives on CALL for second and foreign language classrooms (pp. 15-25). Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.  
Wells, G. (2000). Dialogic inquiry in education. Building on the legacy of Vygotsky. In C. Lee & P. 
Smagorinsky (Eds.), Vygostkian perspectives on Literacy research. Constructing meaning through 
collaborative inquiry (pp. 51–85). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.  
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. New York, NY: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Whitley, M. S, & González, L. (2000) Gramática para la composición. Washington DC: Georgetown 
University Press. 
 
Idoia Elola and Ana Oskoz  Collaborative Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 71 
APPENDIX A. English Translation of Written Essays 
Draft 1 
The question of the job offer is one that appears many times in economic debates about immigration. 
In line with some economists, specifically George Borgas, a Cuban immigrant and Professor of 
Economics and Social Police, immigrant workers reduce the salaries of men born in the United States 
by 4% (Kerper). Additionally, for those men without a secondary school diploma, salaries decrease 
by 7.4% (Kerper). In contrast to this conclusion, according to Marks, immigrants do not harm the 
economy, but they help it. 
 
Draft 2 
The question of the job offer is one that appears many times in economic debates about immigration. 
Some economists note various negative consequences with a large increase in the offer of jobs as a 
result of an influx of immigrants. According to George Borgas, a Professor of Economics and Social 
Police, immigrant workers reduce the salaries of men born in the United States by 4%, and for those 
men without a secondary school diploma, salaries decrease by 7.4% (Kerper). Therefore, this effect is 
often temporary and at a local level. Additionally, compared with the numerous benefits of this 
increase in job offers, this limited competition is not so significant. Marks, a member of the research 
team on immigration, emphasizes some of these benefits to the economy. 
(Translated as close to the Spanish version as possible) 
 
APPENDIX B. English Translation of Collaborative Writing 
Draft 1 
In Peru 70% of the crimes reported are committed by men who hit their [female] partners, while 
researchers in a 2005 study have concluded that, during that year, 52% of Nicaraguan citizens 
suffered some type of aggression by the trusted men with whom they lived and had a relationship. 
 
Draft 2 
Sexism causes pain in Latin America, both literally and metaphorically. Besides being a hindrance to 
the development of the woman in society, sexism is very much linked to domestic abuse.  
(Translated as close to the Spanish version as possible) 
 
