Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol14num2/commentary.pdf 
June 2010, Volume 14, Number 2 
pp. 26–29 
 
Copyright © 2010, ISSN 1094-3501 26 
 
INVITED COMMENTARY: VOCABULARY 
Ron Martinez and Norbert Schmitt 
The University of Nottingham 
While attending a conference in Brazil in 1998, the first author came across a store specializing in video 
games called “Game Over.” When asked if the locals knew what that expression meant, the store 
manager’s matter-of-fact reply was, “Todo o mundo sabe” (literally, “the whole world knows”). He may 
be right. It turns out that the phrase game over is recognized practically worldwide (just do a few 
language-specific Google searches to get an idea), and one need not stretch the imagination very much to 
guess why. While formal research into the effect various technologies have on vocabulary acquisition is 
still in its infancy, it is clear that—intentionally or incidentally—students have used various electronic 
media to learn new words for some time now. Moreover, although it is still far from clear exactly how 
one acquires vocabulary in a second language even from “traditional” media such as newspapers and 
books (see Schmitt, 2010, for a review), the growing ethos among L2 pedagogy practitioners seems to be 
that technologies like computerized corpora, captioned videos, electronic games, and mobile phones can 
somehow enhance the learning and teaching of new words. The timeliness, therefore, of the four data-
informed papers in this special edition in supporting that ethos is indisputable. Perhaps less obvious are 
the further questions that the respective studies beg—ones that perhaps we did not even realize needed 
asking. 
Chen and Baker, for example, in their paper Lexical bundles in L1 and L2 academic writing show that a 
computer can facilitate the comparison of phraseological patterns between what native experts write and 
what learners actually produce. The authors conclude that although there is much overlap, there are also 
key differences (e.g., a tendency for students to over-generalize in the target language), and suggest that 
L2 writers can improve by using certain bundles used by native writers. The effectiveness with which 
they take advantage of technology to compile their list of bundles using both quantitative and qualitative 
methods is clear, but perhaps it is only a beginning. Questions that now still need to be addressed include  
 Why do learners seem to prefer certain types of expressions over others in their discourse?  
 Is a native expert target necessarily a better model?  
 How can a bundle like the nature of the or at the end of the be incorporated into formal language 
instruction?  
With regard to the first question, it is now clear that non-natives actually use more of certain favorite 
formulaic sequences which they know well and tend to overuse as “safe bets,” compared to natives (de 
Cock, 2000; Foster, 2001; Granger, 1998). However, exactly why some sequences are apparently more 
familiar than others is not entirely clear, and most likely involves a complexity that we are only just 
beginning to comprehend. For example, Xu, McKenny, and Morgan (2010) also compared Chinese 
learner and native corpora and found an overuse of the bundle as we all know. The researchers were able 
to trace the phenomenon to a confluence of various factors, including a particular textbook which 
prescribed the expression, differences in academic conventions in Chinese, and the relative pervasiveness 
of an equivalent of as we all know in Mandarin. And that is just one bundle, from one particular 
demographic. 
Furthermore, it seems unlikely that widespread incorporation of lexical bundles of the type described in 
Chen and Baker will occur on any significant level unless teachers and students alike can be convinced 
that their use will result in some kind of concrete advantage (e.g., higher scores on essays). There is some 
indirect evidence that this is generally the case (Lewis, 2008; Ohlrogge, 2009), but it is still unknown 
whether an increase in any particular type of lexical bundle—such as the ones natives use to “hedge” in 
Ron Martinez and Norbert Schmitt   Invited Commentary: Vocabulary 
 
Language Learning & Technology  27 
the Chen and Baker study—will ultimately translate into the kinds of positive gains that could motivate a 
more widespread and systematic inclusion of them in courses. 
Finally, perhaps of greatest relevance to pedagogy is, if and when such lexical bundles become 
recognized as important, how does one go about learning/teaching them? The bundles identified in the 
Chen and Baker study are extremely useful to the extent that they shed light on differences that merit 
further exploration, but the ease with which the average teacher could explicitly teach those particular 
word strings is less clear. Until very recently, no extensive lists were available specifically intended for 
pedagogic use, but with the Academic Formulas List (Simpson-Vlach & Ellis, forthcoming) and the 
Phrasal Expressions List (Martinez & Schmitt, under review), there seems to be an emerging trend of 
resources becoming available that will help enable the selection of multiword lexical items that are 
teachable and testable. However, the challenge will of course ultimately be how those items can best be 
learned, and there is little doubt that the growing variety of multimedia described in the other three 
articles in this special edition will contribute in that regard in ways we have yet to explore. 
One such medium can already be considered relatively common in schools today: video. As pointed out 
by Sydorenko in her paper Modality of input and vocabulary acquisition, although some research already 
exists into the effectiveness of learning vocabulary through video, very few studies have investigated the 
vocabulary-learning advantages of using captions (i.e., subtitles) with video, and fewer still have looked 
at whether any particular type of modality (e.g., watching with or without captions) may be more 
beneficial to the recall of lexis. Her findings have direct implications for language pedagogy: learners 
appear to develop better form-meaning links with new vocabulary when video (and audio) is combined 
with captions. Naturally, as with the Chen and Baker study, Sydorenko’s research will prove valuable for 
the evidence it provides, but perhaps even more valuable for the questions it provokes, such as Is there a 
type of vocabulary that is learned better through captioned video? and Would the results be any different 
in a non-laboratory setting? 
Although Sydorenko does not seek to specifically answer the question of what kinds of lexical items were 
better learned than others in the study, some clues are offered in the written reports offered by participants 
in the study: “Most words I learned were accompanied by actions on screen, such as sadites’ [“sit down”], 
proshu vas [“after you”]…” (p. 44). As acknowledged by a number of researchers (e.g., Coulmas, 1981), 
language is full of formulae which are attached to certain social “routines,” and formulaic items like sit 
down and after you may be ideally learned through the medium of captioned video.  
Two aspects of Sydorenko’s study that learners reported having difficulty with were the speed of the 
video and/or captions, and when participants did notice a new word or expression, retaining that form-
meaning link in their heads. Since participants did not have control over the video in the laboratory setting 
in which the study was conducted, one wonders if those complaints would subside if they could control 
functions like pause and rewind.  
Clearly, one important aspect of technology today is its growing mobility. Ten years ago the use of video 
in language instruction was only discussed in the context of the classroom (or the self-access center) and, 
much more rarely, at home. However, given the popularization of mobile devices that are increasingly 
usable as mobile video-viewing devices (e.g., the iPod and iPhone), the concept of using video in the 
fashion described by Sydorenko—but with learners at the controls—is far from science fiction. Although 
watching captioned video on such devices may be an eye strain, with the release of the iPad and similar 
devices this obstacle can be overcome.  
Unlike video, which already has a fairly established tradition in the language classroom already, little is 
known about the pedagogic advantages of learning a language through electronic game play, and less still 
is known about what if any vocabulary gets picked up by players. To explore that issue, deHaan, Reed, 
and Kuwada in The effect of interactivity with a music video game on second language vocabulary recall 
asked participants to either play or watch a video game, and tested them on what words were learned 
Ron Martinez and Norbert Schmitt   Invited Commentary: Vocabulary 
 
Language Learning & Technology  28 
under each condition. Although there was a large difference in the immediate uptake of vocabulary 
(immediate post-test: watchers 57% vs. players 18%), as advocated in Schmitt (2010), delayed scores are 
what really count to evaluate durable learning. Here we find that the watchers still maintained a sizable 
advantage (watchers 39% vs. players 13%), however even the players achieved very good results 
considering that the test required them to remember and write the written form in the cloze blanks. Laufer 
and Goldstein (2004) found that form recall is the most difficult level of mastery of the form-meaning 
link, and many other studies into incidental learning do not show anything near this amount of learning 
(see Schmitt, 2010) for an overview of incidental vocabulary learning, mainly from reading). This of 
course raises the question: How can video games be optimized for vocabulary acquisition? As deHaan et 
al. point out, the results of their study suggest that working memory limitations and language-focused 
game interactivity will certainly play a role, but there is so much that is yet to be explored—what we 
know now is that it seems to be worth the exploration.  
The final study by Stockwell, Using mobile phones for vocabulary activities: examining the effect of 
platform, is a very good example of the value of carrying out studies in non-laboratory settings, 
particularly when mobile technology is involved (as is increasingly the norm). It is clear that in addition 
to more conventional functions such as telephoning and text messaging, mobile devices are now regularly 
used for everyday tasks once done exclusively on desk- and laptop computers like sending email and 
Internet browsing. Researchers have begun to investigate the extent to which these relatively new 
functions can be used in the classroom. However, as pointed out by Stockwell, the true value in a mobile 
phone lies, obviously, in its mobility, and in order to truly understand its viability as a vocabulary-
learning tool it needs to be observed as it was intended to be used—outside the classroom. After 
collecting data from three cohorts spanning three years, Stockwell found that when learners had the 
option to perform the same activities using a personal computer, participants preferred the computer 
nearly 80% of the time. Causes cited for their aversion to the use of the mobile phone included issues with 
screen size, keyboard size, and data transmission speed. However, once more, given today’s trends in the 
mobile market, one is compelled to ask what difference—if any—a multi-touch enabled device (e.g., 
iPhone, Android) might make. Such handsets are slowly becoming the norm, pushing out conventional 
keyboard phones, and allowing for a kind of interactive experience a conventional desktop computer does 
not generally afford. Moreover, there is a plethora of “apps” released on a daily basis for such mobile 
phones, and instead of having to access the Internet (as the participants did in the Stockwell study), it is 
quite conceivable that a dedicated app might produce more satisfying results—particularly one which 
provided such a tactile user interface. Finally, although at the time of writing there is still much to be 
understood about it, the mobile-like devices like the iPad and its inevitable imitators could completely 
overcome the challenge of screen size, while still remaining as portable as the conventional mobile phone. 
In summary, what can be said regarding all four papers is that they contribute valuable evidence that 
technology is one more medium through which vocabulary learning and teaching can be enhanced, but we 
are still very far away from being able to claim that electronic media can play as large a role in 
vocabulary acquisition as, say, reading a variety of authentic material on a regular basis. However, the 
majority of the studies presented also suggest that the multimodality afforded by technology provides a 
way for the vocabulary learner to engage with language input in ways not possible with more paper-based 
media. Moreover, with the increasing integration of media and technologies into mobile devices that once 
only existed in DVD players and personal computers, the suggestion that electronic vocabulary resources 
may one day overtake more conventional ones (e.g., paper textbooks) as the main learning tool is not far-
fetched. In other words, while we still have much to understand about how vocabulary is learned through 
multimedia, and though technology still has a long way to go as a vocabulary teaching and learning tool, 
it is far from game over. 
Ron Martinez and Norbert Schmitt   Invited Commentary: Vocabulary 
 
Language Learning & Technology  29 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Ron Martinez is the author of several textbooks with a vocabulary focus, and holds an MSc in Applied 
Linguistics and Second Language Acquisition from Oxford University. Most recently, as part of his 
doctoral research at the University of Nottingham, he has completed a corpus-informed list of the most 
common multiword expressions for the purposes of teaching and testing, which is now beginning to be 
incorporated into a number of syllabuses and tests internationally. 
E-mail: ronmartinez@yahoo.com  
Norbert Schmitt is Professor of Applied Linguistics at the University of Nottingham.  He is interested in 
all aspects of second language vocabulary, and has published widely on this topic.  His current research 
focuses on formulaic language, explicit vs. implicit knowledge of vocabulary, and the automaticity of 
vocabulary processing. 
E-mail: norbert.schmitt@nottingham.ac.uk 
 
REFERENCES 
Coulmas, F. (1981). Conversational routine. The Hague: Mouton. 
de Cock, S. (2000). Repetitive phrasal chunkiness and advanced EFL speech and writing. In C. Mair & 
M. Hundt (Eds.), Corpus linguistics and linguistic theory (pp. 51–68). Amsterdam: Rodopi.  
Foster, P. (2001). Rules and routines: A consideration of their role in the task-based language production 
of native and non-native speakers. In M. Bygate, P. Skehan, & M. Swain, (Eds.) Researching pedagogic 
tasks: Second language learning, teaching, and testing (pp. 75–94). Harlow: Longman.  
Granger, S. (1998). Prefabricated patterns in advanced EFL writing: Collocations and formulae. In A. P. 
Cowie (Ed.), Phraseology: theory, analysis and applications (pp. 145–160). Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.  
Laufer, B., & Goldstein, Z. (2004). Testing vocabulary knowledge: Size, strength, and computer 
adaptiveness. Language Learning, 54, 399–436.   
Lewis, M. (2008). The idiom principle in L2 English: Assessing elusive formulaic sequences as indicators 
of idiomaticity, fluency and proficiency (Unpublished doctoral thesis). Stockholm: Stockholm University. 
Martinez, R., & Schmitt, N. (under review). A phrasal expressions list.  
Ohlrogge, A. (2009). Formulaic expressions in intermediate EFL writing assessment. In R. Corrigan, E. 
A. Moravcsik, H. Ouali, & K. M. Wheatley (Eds.), Formulaic language volume 2: Acquisition, loss, 
psychological reality, and functional explanations (pp. 375–386). Amsterdam: John Benjamins 
Publishing Company. 
Schmitt, N. (2010). Researching vocabulary: A vocabulary research manual. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
Simpson-Vlach, R., & Ellis, N.C. (forthcoming). An academic formulas list: New methods in phraseology 
research. Applied Linguistics. 
Xu, J., McKenny, J., & Morgan, M. (2010, March). As we all know… a confidence builder? Paper 
Presented at the FLaRN Interdisciplinary Conference on Formulaic Language. Paderborn, Germany. 
 
