Copyright © 2010 Language Learning & Technology, ISSN 1094-3501. 
Articles are copyrighted by their respective authors. 
 
About Language Learning & Technology 
Language Learning & Technology is a refereed journal which began publication in July 1997. The journal 
seeks to disseminate research to foreign and second language educators in the US and around the world 
on issues related to technology and language education. 
• Language Learning & Technology is sponsored and funded by the University of Hawai'i National 
Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) and the Michigan State University Center for 
Language Education And Research (CLEAR), and is co-sponsored by the Center for Applied 
Linguistics (CAL).  
• Language Learning & Technology is a fully refereed journal with an editorial board of scholars in 
the fields of second language acquisition and computer-assisted language learning. The focus of 
the publication is not technology per se, but rather issues related to language learning and 
language teaching, and how they are affected or enhanced by the use of technologies.  
• Language Learning & Technology is published exclusively on the World Wide Web. In this way, 
the journal seeks to (a) reach a broad audience in a timely manner, (b) provide a multimedia 
format which can more fully illustrate the technologies under discussion, and (c) provide 
hypermedia links to related background information.  
• Beginning with Volume 7, Number 1, Language Learning & Technology is indexed in the 
exclusive Institute for Scientific Information's (ISI) Social Sciences Citation Index (SSCI), ISI 
Alerting Services, Social Scisearch, and Current Contents/Social and Behavioral Sciences. 
• Language Learning & Technology is currently published three times per year (February, June, 
and October). 
  
 
Sponsors, Board, and Editorial Staff  
Volume 14, Number 1 
SPONSORS 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR) 
CO-SPONSOR 
Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL) 
 
ADVISORY AND EDITORIAL BOARDS 
Advisory Board 
Susan Gass Michigan State University 
Richard Schmidt University of Hawai‘i at Manoa 
Editorial Board 
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas Georgetown University 
Klaus Brandl University of Washington 
Thierry Chanier Université Blaise Pascal 
Robert Godwin-Jones Virginia Commonwealth University 
Lucinda Hart-González Second Language Testing, Inc. 
Philip Hubbard Stanford University 
Michelle Knobel Montclair State University 
Marcus Kötter University of Münster 
Marie-Noelle Lamy The Open University 
Meei-Ling Liaw National Taichung University 
Lara Lomicka University of South Carolina 
Noriko Nagata University of San Francisco 
John Norris University of Hawai‘i at Manoa 
Lourdes Ortega University of Hawai‘i at Manoa 
Jill Pellettieri Santa Clara University 
Joy Kreeft Peyton Center for Applied Linguistics, Washington, DC 
Patrick Snellings University of Amsterdam 
Maggie Sokolik University of California, Berkeley 
Susana Sotillo Montclair State University 
Mark Warschauer University of California, Irvine 
 Copyright © 2010 Language Learning & Technology, ISSN 1094-3501. 
The contents of this publication were developed under a grant from the Department of Education (CFDA 84.229, 
P229A60012-96 and P229A6007). However, the contents do not necessarily represent the policy of the Department 
of Education, and one should not assume endorsement by the Federal Government. 
Editorial Staff 
Editors Dorothy Chun University of CA, Santa Barbara 
  Irene Thompson The George Washington University 
(Emerita) 
Associate Editors Trude Heift Simon Fraser University 
  Carla Meskill State University of New York-
Albany 
Managing Editor Matthew Prior University of Hawai‘i at Manoa 
Web Production Editor Carol Wilson-Duffy Michigan State University 
Book & Multimedia Review 
Editor 
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas Georgetown University 
Emerging Technologies Editor Robert Godwin-Jones Virginia Commonwealth University 
Copy Editors Dennis Koyama Kanda University of International 
Studies 
 Daniel Jackson University of Hawai‘i at Manoa 
 
 
