Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol14num1/liang.pdf 
February 2010, Volume 14, Number 1 
pp. 45–64 
 
Copyright © 2010, ISSN 1094-3501 45 
 
USING SYNCHRONOUS ONLINE PEER RESPONSE GROUPS IN EFL 
WRITING: REVISION-RELATED DISCOURSE 
 
Mei-Ya Liang 
National Central University 
In recent years, synchronous online peer response groups have been increasingly used in 
English as a foreign language (EFL) writing. This article describes a study of synchronous 
online interaction among three small peer groups in a Taiwanese undergraduate EFL 
writing class. An environmental analysis of students’ online discourse in two writing tasks 
showed that meaning negotiation, error correction, and technical actions seldom occurred 
and that social talk, task management, and content discussion predominated the chat. 
Further analysis indicates that relationships among different types of online interaction and 
their connections with subsequent writing and revision are complex and depend on group 
makeup and dynamics. Findings suggest that such complex activity may not guarantee 
revision. Writing instructors may need to proactively model, scaffold and support revision-
related online discourse if it is to be of benefit. 
INTRODUCTION 
As a learner-centered process approach to second language (L2) writing, peer response has been widely 
adopted and studied since the 1990s (Hyland & Hyland, 2006). The dialogic nature of peer response 
seems to foster multiple support systems (Hyland, 2000) and communicative behaviors (Villamil & de 
Guerrero, 1996). L2 research has shown that peer response can increase chances for meaning negotiation 
and language practice (Lockhart & Ng, 1995; Mendonca & Johnson, 1994), encourage collaborative 
reading and writing (Tsui & Ng, 2000), and promote writing revisions (Berg, 1999; Mendonca & Johnson, 
1994; Min, 2006, 2008; Stanley, 1992). These interactive practices appear to draw upon and enhance 
interactional and writing skills.  
Recently, online peer response has also been used as an alternative to face-to-face (F2F) communication. 
Online peer response that blends spoken, written, and electronic communication can promote student 
motivation, participation, and collaboration (Warschauer, 1996, 2002), an awareness of audiences (Ware, 
2004), a critical analysis of linguistic, negotiation, and writing features through the use of printouts 
(DiGiovanni & Nagaswami, 2001), as well as frequent use of peer ideas in revisions (Hewett, 2000; Tuzi, 
2004). Applying electronic technologies in L2 writing classes, research has set out to explore such issues 
as effective uses of synchronous online peer responses and revisions (Hansen & Liu, 2005). While 
training procedures for improving revision-related discourse have been proposed in composition studies 
(e.g., Berg, 1999; DiGiovanni & Nagaswami, 2001; Hansen & Liu, 2005; Min, 2006, 2008; Rollinson, 
2005; Stanley, 1992), relatively few studies have provided adequate frameworks for describing the nature 
of L2 interaction in synchronous online peer response groups. To further this research, it is necessary to 
understand how L2 learners interact in synchronous computer-mediated communication (SCMC). 
This study explores L2 students’ synchronous online peer response in an EFL writing class. Research on 
revision-related L2 discourse in SCMC is reviewed as are the ways that revision-related online discourse 
might facilitate L2 writing and revision processes. A coding scheme (Liang, 2008) is employed in 
analyzing peer discussions about their writing. The author concludes with suggested strategies for 
supporting and facilitating synchronous online peer response groups.  
Mei-Ya Liang Synchronous Online Peer Response Groups 
 
Language Learning & Technology 46 
 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
L2 Interaction in Face-to-Face and Online Contexts  
Interactive processes of L2 peer response have been characterized from two perspectives: (a) meaning 
negotiation and (b) collaborative learning. Meaning negotiation refers to interactive feedback (e.g., 
confirmation checks, comprehension checks, clarification requests) that deals with unclear messages. 
Varonis and Gass (1985) proposed that “the types of linguistic activities that occur in NNS-NNS 
conversations differ from those in other types of discourse, particularly with respect to the negotiation of 
meaning when there has been an actual or potential breakdown” (p. 71). During negotiation, L2 learners 
notice linguistic features and modify messages (Pica, 1996). Long (1996) also suggested that speaking 
and writing partners in an L2 environment not only provide comprehensible input, but also facilitate 
learner output through meaning negotiation and error correction. Foster and Ohta (2005) further found 
that, in L2 peer interaction, modified output in the forms of self-correction and supportive talk was more 
common than other-correction and meaning negotiation.  
Following Vygotsky, sociocultural theorists, such as Donato (1994, 2000) and Swain (2000), have 
highlighted peer assistance and mutual scaffolding in collaborative dialogues. Van Lier (1996, 2000) has 
also specified the importance of contingency in collaborative discourse through the concept of 
“intersubjectivity”—that is, a shared social context for interaction where “participants are jointly focused 
on the activity and its goals, and they draw each other’s attention into a common direction” (van Lier, 
1996, p.161). He argues for the ecological value of learners’ meaningful actions in social spaces of 
interaction (van Lier, 2000). De Guerrero and Villamil (2000), for example, had pairs of students role-
play as writer and reviewer, helping to give them a sense of personal investment in the peer revision task. 
Learners may even use an L2 to establish and maintain social relationships while discussing content. By 
considering social contexts, sociocultural perspectives enrich our understanding of L2 learning, including 
speaking, writing, and collaborative dialogues.  
Text-based SCMC brings with it instant messaging, which leads to similar discourse functions and 
negotiation sequences to F2F communication (e.g., Blake, 2000; Smith, 2003; Sotillo, 2000). On the other 
hand, there are some differences: (a) technical actions in various forms of keyboard strokes (e.g., 
emoticons and punctuations) replace nonverbal cues (e.g., gestures and facial expressions) and 
paralinguistic features (e.g., pitch, volume, and intonation) (Negretti, 1999); (b) delayed responses to 
messages allow L2 learners to see and correct errors (Lee, 2001); and (c) lack of turn-taking provokes L2 
students’ extensive use of communicative strategies for discourse management (Chun, 1994; Sotillo, 
2000). Fitze (2006) designed an experiment to compare F2F and written electronic whole-class discussion 
in two intact classes and found that advanced L2 students utilized a wider variety of vocabulary and 
communicative strategies (e.g., clarification requests, dis/agreement statements, social formulations, topic 
managements) in online discussion. 
Several L2 studies have focused on communicative features and discourse functions unique to the 
temporal and spatial context established by SCMC. Analyzing chat discourse in Webchat between 
English nonnative speakers and native speakers, Negretti (1999) reported that the participants often used 
explicit and economical strategies in order to manage procedures and tasks, maintain social cohesion, and 
show awareness of chat features. Using the WebCT chat environment, Darhower (2002) also found that 
non-native learners and their teachers created a sense of intersubjective communication by means of 
teasing, joking, and off-topic discussion, as well as accepting, rejecting, and explaining ideas within 
conversations. While meaning negotiation is the essence of L2 interaction in both F2F and online 
conversations, researchers have also observed that L2 learners use other interactional strategies, such as 
technical actions, social formulations, error corrections, and discourse management more frequently than 
they do in F2F discussions. 
Mei-Ya Liang Synchronous Online Peer Response Groups 
 
Language Learning & Technology 47 
 
Revision-Related Discourse in SCMC  
L2 researchers have developed coding schemes to explore revision-related discourse in synchronous 
online peer response. Adapting Mendonca and Johnson’s (1994) descriptive categories, DiGiovanni and 
Nagaswami (2001) examined L2 students’ revision-related discourse based on four major categories—
questions, explanations, restatements, and suggestions—in both online and F2F oral settings. They found 
that the number of negotiations was higher in F2F but that the proportion of agreement or disagreement 
with ideas or with the organization of ideas was higher in synchronous online peer discussion. 
DiGiovanni and Nagaswami’s (2001) framework, though not exhaustive, provided some key features of 
negotiating meaning when discussing writing. Taking Halliday’s (1994) functional-semantic view of 
dialogue as a basis, Jones, Garralda, Li, and Lock (2006) divided revision-related discourse into two 
move types— initiating moves (i.e., offer, directive, statement, and question) and responding moves (i.e., 
clarification, confirmation, acceptance, rejection, acknowledgement). They found that tutees asked more 
questions and made more statements in online interaction than in F2F peer tutoring. Specifically, they 
asked questions to elicit information and evaluation rather than provide explanations. 
Jones et al. (2006) further investigated the area of online peer response. They discovered that the EFL 
students in a first year writing class were more likely to discuss textual issues (e.g., grammar, vocabulary, 
and style) in F2F sessions, but chose to focus on global concerns (e.g., content, organization, topic, and 
thesis) and relational communication in synchronous online sessions. Jones et al.’s finding contradicts Liu 
and Sadler’s (2003), in which computer-enhanced groups tended to focus on local revisions, whereas the 
F2F group covered both local and global revisions. These L2 writing studies suggest different functions 
of peer comments in the two modes of communication. While DiGiovanni and Nagaswami (2001) and 
Jones et al. (2006) have put emphasis on interactional dynamics that facilitate collaborative responses, 
another line of research has turned the focus to revision and has questioned the quality of peer response in 
SCMC. For example, Braine (2001) and Liu and Sadler (2003) have noted disjointed discourse and off-
task messages in simultaneous online composing.  
A few investigators have attempted to develop a framework specific to CMC contexts to discuss types of 
revision-related discourse and areas of revision resulting from synchronous online conferences. Using an 
electronic whiteboard in synchronous online conferencing, Hewett (2006) examined the types of 
communicative utterances (e.g., content, form, process, context, and phatic) in her first year English 
classes. The results showed that half of the talk was for interpersonal connections, interaction facilitation, 
and workspace discussion. Regarding students’ revision-related discourse, 25% focused on content and 
context of writing, 62% on writing processes and problems (e.g., thesis, supporting ideas, organization), 
and 13% on formal concerns (e.g., grammar, mechanisms, citation practices). Comparing revision-related 
discourse and revision changes, she further found that most of the online interactions could be connected 
with writing and revision. Although none of the students’ essay drafts had formal connections related to 
the synchronous conferences, Hewett’s study has shown that synchronous online conferences could result 
in new writing practices and revision changes in an L1 writing context. Relationships among types of 
interaction and their connections to revision, however, remain unclear in L2 contexts.  
Drawing upon studies on both meaning negotiation and collaborative learning in L2 contexts and in 
SCMC, Liang (2008) proposed a framework which outlines six major types of synchronous online 
interaction to explore L2 peer groups’ engagement in a summary writing and revision task. They are (a) 
meaning negotiation, (b) content discussion, (c) error correction, (d) task management, (e) social talk, and 
(f) technical action. In the 2008 study, the patterns observed across the six groups showed that the total 
percentage of turns for meaning negotiation, error correction, task management, and technical action was 
very low and that two-thirds of the turns were spent on social talk and content discussion. This framework 
seems to be adequate to reveal the relative contributions among different types of interaction. The current 
study investigates peer response in SCMC through which writing and revision resulting from revision-
related discourse or other important interactional processes in SCMC can be traced and considered.  
Mei-Ya Liang Synchronous Online Peer Response Groups 
 
Language Learning & Technology 48 
 
THIS STUDY 
As part of a larger research project that explores online interaction impacts on EFL university students’ 
L2 development, this study focuses on the use of synchronous online peer response groups in EFL writing. 
Specifically, this study asks two questions: 
1. What are the different types of interaction in synchronous online L2 discourse? 
2. How does synchronous online peer revision-related discourse facilitate subsequent writing and 
revision? 
Course Context 
This study involved a sophomore EFL writing course during the fall semester of 2008 at a major 
university in Taiwan. The course was open to English majors and minors. The course took a process 
writing approach and focused on expository writing. The goal was for students to help each other write 
clear and well-reasoned prose. Students used a variety of print and electronic resources to discuss ideas, 
compose multiple drafts, and edit and revise texts. The class met 3 hours per week for 18 weeks. Course 
grades were determined by class participation and several writing assignments: an issue paper, 
annotations and peer comments, exam essays, reflective essays, a book review, and a research paper and 
presentation. Each assignment was evaluated based on (a) title and thesis, (b) main and supporting ideas, 
(c) organization and style, (d) word choice and grammar, and (e) editing and revision. 
In the class meetings, through both print and multimedia writing prompts (e.g., videos, audio clips, films, 
artworks, advertisements, etc), the instructor led the class to practice peer response strategies in their 
discussion about how to improve writing. The class discussions on revision-related strategies were 
organized around the following topics: (a) reading-writing connections, (b) quoting, paraphrasing, and 
summarizing, (c) text structures in expository writing, (d) coherence and cohesion, and (e) weak 
reasoning and errors of logic. Students also participated in synchronous online peer response sessions in a 
computer lab during the class time as part of the class requirement. They were placed in three groups. The 
online sessions offered students opportunities to discuss and review peer drafts at different stages of the 
writing process: 
• Prewriting and Drafting. There was one 2-hour online session in the second week. Students 
brainstormed ideas for their issue papers. During the process, students collected all their resources 
to compose topic sentences and thesis statements as well as to outline paragraphs in their essays. 
After students posted issue papers in their blogs, the instructor left comments on each student’s 
post.  
• Revising and Editing. There were four 2-hour online sessions on the 3rd, 6th, 9th, and 13th
• Presentation and Submission. There were two 2-hour sessions on the 15
 weeks. 
Before class meetings, students posted their drafts of annotations in their personal blogs. In class, 
they shared ideas in drafts by asking questions or by making suggestions and comments about 
unclear ideas. After each synchronous online peer session, students reviewed the transcripts, left 
comments on their peers’ blogs, and posted their own revised drafts.  
th and 17th
Participants 
 weeks. The 
first was a collaborative writing of book review task, in which students reviewed writing 
strategies and discussed what to write. The second was a research paper presentation task. 
Students posted their drafts before class. During class, they reviewed ideas and evaluated writing. 
After that, students compiled and submitted their work for grading. 
The participants for this study were 12 university students (10 females and 2 males) who took Sophomore 
Composition in the department of English. According to the results of a pre-course questionnaire, three 
Mei-Ya Liang Synchronous Online Peer Response Groups 
 
Language Learning & Technology 49 
 
students had studied English for 8 years and the other 9 students had had more than 9 years of previous 
English study. Based on their self reports, six students had passed the Intermediate-level GEPT (i.e., a 
general English proficiency test developed in 1999, commissioned by the Ministry of Education in 
Taiwan, see Roever and Pan, 2008), and three had achieved the High-Intermediate level. The other three 
students did not specify or take any GEPT, but their English level was approximately TOEFL CBT 193- 
250.  
At the beginning of the semester, students were also asked to specify which aspects of their writing in 
English needed further improvement. The results from the questionnaire show that most of the students 
wished to improve writing skills in global idea development and organization, such as having a clear main 
idea in the paragraph, developing additional support for main points, writing a good concluding paragraph, 
and having smooth connections and transitions between sentences. The results of the two questionnaires 
are in Appendix A.  
Revision-Related Discourse Training Procedures 
The students were asked to form three groups of four. Both Group 1 and Group 2 were composed of 
English majors, whereas Group 3 consisted of 2 English majors, 1 Chinese major, and 1 French major. 
The English majors had taken the author’s “Freshman English” course in the fall semester of 2007. In the 
course, students also formed small groups and discussed electronic and print texts in both F2F meetings 
and online interaction. Given example sentences, students in small groups had practiced group 
collaborative skills by negotiating meaning (e.g., “What does this word/idea mean?” “Are you saying ...?” 
“Do you mean that…”), discussing content (e.g., “I don’t understand because…” “A/Another reason for 
this might be...” “It’s not the point. The main point is …”) and managing tasks (e.g., “What might be 
important here...?” “How is this task related to...?”). Students were also asked to correct errors and 
manage tasks as well as to clarify and comment on messages by using a checklist: 
• Is the title or topic attractive?  
• Are the words in the essay appropriate?  
• Does the essay cover important points of an issue?  
• Is the essay written in the writer’s own words?  
• Does the essay include mistakes in spelling and grammar? 
• Does the essay include multimedia aids that serve clear purposes or make the stories more 
interesting? 
In the writing class, students received additional training procedures in the writing process. At the 
prewriting and drafting stage, the instructor adopted Rollinson’s (2005) suggestions: (a) explaining the 
potential benefits of peer feedback, (b) discussing with students the purposes of peer responses and the 
role of the reviewer in reader-writer dialogues, and (c) modeling comments and coaching synchronous 
peer response on sample paragraphs in class. Two F2F teacher-student conferences were held in the 7th 
and 14th
• Why are you writing this paper?  
 weeks to review and discuss students’ writing drafts and peer revision. After each conference, 
students posted reflections on their blogs. As students progressed toward the later stages of editing, 
revisions, and presentations, the instructor summarized important writing and revision strategies that had 
been discussed during class time. To guide revision and possibly facilitate synchronous online peer 
revision-related discourse, the following list of questions was also posted on the class blog:  
• Do the title and keywords forecast an issue or an attitude toward the subject? 
• Do the library and Web sources provide sound reasons and proper evidence for the issue?  
Mei-Ya Liang Synchronous Online Peer Response Groups 
 
Language Learning & Technology 50 
 
• Do you share experiences, emotions, or cultures to support your opinions?  
• Do you organize the ideas with a smooth connection and transition between sentences?  
• Do you quote some words, phrases, or sentences or paraphrase them? 
• Do you adopt your peer’s opinions?  
• Do you polish your language and check grammar (e.g., verb tense, subject-verb agreement, word 
form, run-on sentence, informal register, etc.)? 
• Do you find weak reasoning and errors of logic (e.g., irrelevant, oversimplification, 
overgeneralization, false analogy, undefined terms, etc.)?  
• Do you change your question or problem during the course of study? 
Data Collection and Analysis 
Through MSN Messenger (tw.msn.com), the EFL university students participated in synchronous online 
peer response group activities. On their personal blogs, they posted their writing assignments. Data were 
collected from the online chat sessions, student blogs, and two corresponding writing assignments: the 
book review and research paper tasks. The following directions were listed in the course syllabus:  
• Book review (Group work). Provide a brief description of the main ideas and provide an appraisal 
of the strengths and weaknesses of the book. Your review should include your group members’ 
opinions about the book. It should range from 500-750 words. 
• Research Paper. Use your annotations to support your points of view by the evidence. Provide 
the reasons why you choose this issue as the focus of your paper. Write questions on the issue and 
contrast two or more competing perspectives. Write an 8-10 page research paper (2000-2500 
words) with supporting citations in APA format.  
During the online sessions, the instructor was present in the computer lab to assist with computer 
problems and remind students of the task requirements. Otherwise students engaged in group discussions 
and made progress with the two assignments without instructor participation. 
Following Liang’s (2008) coding scheme, the author first identified participants’ discourse types. The 
taxonomy of revision-related discourse includes four categories: (a) meaning negotiation, (b) content 
discussion, (c) error correction, and (d) task management. Additional codes were included to 
accommodate the (e) social talk, and (f) technical action that were not directly related to student writing. 
Definitions and examples for each coding category are presented in Appendix B. The units of analysis to 
describe L2 learners’ co-constructed online discourses are “turns.” Using the taxonomy, the author and a 
trained research assistant coded chat data independently and then reviewed all cases of disagreement and 
resolved differences together. Almost all of the turns included only one type of interaction per turn, but a 
few turns (less than 10 cases in this study) that included two types of interaction were counted as two 
turns. χ2 Goodness of Fit Tests were then performed in order to check for differences across discourse 
types and groups. 
The process of investigating the connections between the chat and subsequent writing and revision was 
recursive and iterative. For the book review task, students’ collaborative texts were examined by the 
research assistant and the author. We highlighted the words and phrases that were used in the revision-
related discourse in each of the three groups’ transcripts. For the research paper, students’ revision 
changes between drafts were also highlighted and then their chat transcripts were read to look for signals 
of relationships between revision-related online discourse and individual students’ revised work (for 
samples, see Appendices C and D).  
Mei-Ya Liang Synchronous Online Peer Response Groups 
 
Language Learning & Technology 51 
 
RESULTS  
Book Review 
Table 1 shows the number and percentage of turns in the L2 learners’ co-constructed online discourse for 
the book review task. Overall, the three groups produced similar patterns. The rates of meaning 
negotiation (i.e., comprehension checks, confirmation checks, and clarification requests), error correction, 
and technical actions were very low; most of the turns were spent on content discussion, task management, 
and social talk. The results of the χ2 tests show that there were no statistically significant differences 
among the three groups for both revision-related and non-revision-related discourse types. In other words, 
the three groups produced similar proportions of revision-related and non-revision-related discourses. 
Table 1. Revision-Related and Non-Revision-Related Discourse by Groups for the Book Review Task 
Revision-Related Group1 Group 2 Group 3 p 
Meaning Negotiation 2 (1%) 17 (7%) 9 (4%) ns 
Content Discussion 115 (37%) 64 (26%) 79 (40%) ns 
Error Correction 3 (1%) 9 (4%) 1 (0%) ns 
Task Management 96 (30%) 73 (30%) 11 (6%) .000 
TOTAL 216 (69%) 163 (66%) 100 (50%) ns 
Non-Revision-Related Group1 Group 2 Group 3 p 
Social Talk 96 (30%) 76 (31%) 97 (49%) .044 
Technical Action 3 (1%) 7 (3%) 3 (1%) ns 
TOTAL 99 (31%) 83 (34%) 100 (50%) ns 
On the other hand, there were statistically significant differences in percentage distribution by groups. 
First, higher proportions of revision-related discourse than of non-revision-related discourse were 
produced in Group 1 (χ2 = 14.44, df = 1, p = .000) and Group 2 (χ2 = 10.24, df = 1, p = .001), whereas 
there was no difference between the two major discourse types for Group 3. Second, Group 3 produced a 
higher proportion of social talk than did Groups 1 and 2 (χ2 = 6.24, df = 2, p = .044). Third, Groups 1 and 
2 spent a higher proportion of turns on task management than did Group 3 (χ2 = 17.76, df = 2, p = .000). 
Table 2 presents the number and percentage of sentences that each group composed after the chat. Groups 
1 and 3 composed most of the sentences in the book review based on the discussion content, whereas only 
32% of the sentences were adapted into Group 2’s book review. It is noted that Group 3 yielded the most 
social talk among the three groups and incorporated the most content from the chat. As Appendix C 
shows, Group 3 transferred almost all content discussion into their book review through editing and 
revision operations, such as spelling and grammar corrections, insertions and deletions of transitions, and 
sentence combinations and re-arrangements.  
Table 2. Sentences and Percentage of Peer Content in the Book Review Task 
 Group1 Group 2 Group 3 
Peer Content  34 (92%) 11 (32%) 32 (97%) 
Non-Peer Content 3 (8%) 23 (68%) 1 (3%) 
TOTAL 37 34 33 
Group 1 also edited and revised most of their content discussion into coherent passages through 
transitional words (e.g., firstly, thus, besides, etc), while they added an introductory paragraph to the book 
review. By contrast, Group 2 abandoned many ideas in the chat. Both Group 1 and Group 2 produced 
Mei-Ya Liang Synchronous Online Peer Response Groups 
 
Language Learning & Technology 52 
 
more revision-related discourse than non-revision-related discourse, but yielded different writing and 
revision outcomes.  
Groups 1 and 2 addressed the issue of the reader’s role, whereas they showed diverse group dynamics in 
their discussions. In Group 1, members conversed about the topic by acknowledging, repeating, and 
revising a prior message. As shown in the following excerpt, SA started the topic about the readers:  
SA:  
CE:  
CE:  
EA:  
EA:  
SA:  
SA:  
EA:  
CE: 
JE:  
JE:  
JE:  
SA:  
EA:  
SA:  
By the way, we have to know who are the readers 
To interest the readers~ 
with your own topic! 
You need to make your readers be convinced 
Some experiences can support your perspective. 
You are right 
So we have to choose our subject carefully 
Also, choose to describe things in objective or subjective way. 
And supporting our ideas with some research. 
yeah 
and try to convince audieane 
audience 
you really did point out the point 
Make readers see what you have found out and feel as your feeling. 
Yeah, things that can move us can have stonger impact in our heart 
The topic “the readers” was soon taken over by CE. She added, “to interest the readers with your own 
topic.” Another student, OE, also joined the discussion by suggesting “You need to make your readers be 
convinced. Some experiences can support your perspective.” The initiator, SA, then facilitated 
communication by showing her agreement—“You are right”—and advanced the discussion by connecting 
with CE’s ideas: “we have to choose our subject carefully.” In the subsequent turns, the group rephrased 
and elaborated previous messages to fine tune the language and content of discussion on the topic. 
Accordingly, Group 1 successfully shared the initiated contexts and incorporated the group’s ideas in 
their book review.  
By contrast, Group 2 seems to produce some interpersonal conflicts over discussion content: 
CY:  
VI: 
RY: 
RY: 
CY: 
CY: 
CY: 
VI: 
CY: 
RY: 
CY: 
CY: 
VI: 
CY:  
first of all, we have to know who are the readers 
I think the author tend to pick some good article to teenagers just like us!!!  
because all of there aeticles are good examples to us 
these 
and then make outlines of it 
to draft  
brainstorming  
I do not understand what you mean 
I mean before you write an essay  
discussing together 
you have to organize it 
do you get it 
so…did we discuss what kind of readers of article? 
there are some misunderstanding… 
One student, CY, initiated the topic of knowing who the readers are. Her group member, VI, took 
over the topic by joking that they were teenagers, “I think the author tend to pick some good article to 
teenagers just like us!!!” Another student, RY, picked up on the topic and explained the message. In the 
subsequent turns, CY refocused the group by suggesting the group should follow the procedures: “and 
Mei-Ya Liang Synchronous Online Peer Response Groups 
 
Language Learning & Technology 53 
 
then make outlines of it,” “to draft,” and “brainstorming.” VI did not seem to appreciate the direction CY 
was taking; instead she requested for explanations. Even though her group members attempted to 
negotiate meaning and procedures during the chat, without mutual understanding, the exchange of the 
meaning of messages did not lead to collaborative peer content. In the end, Group 2 did not address the 
topic in their book review. 
Research Paper 
Table 3 shows the number and percentage of turns in the L2 learners’ online discourse for the research 
paper presentation. Like the book review task, the three groups yielded a similar pattern. The rates of 
meaning negotiation, error correction, and technical actions were very low; most of the turns were spent 
on content discussion and social talk. The results of the χ2 tests show that there were no differences 
among the three groups for both revision-related and non-revision-related discourse types. 
Table 3. Revision-Related and Non-Revision-Related Discourse by Groups for the Research Paper Task 
Revision-Related Group1 Group 2 Group 3 p 
Meaning Negotiation 9 (4%) 5 (2%) 9 (2%) ns 
Content Discussion 130 (52%) 80 (36%) 116 (30%) .037 
Error Correction 5 (2%) 3 (1%) 3 (1%) ns 
Task Management 13 (5%) 43 (20%) 39 (10%) .007 
TOTAL 157 (63%) 131(59%) 167 (43%) ns 
Non-Revision-Related Group1 Group 2 Group 3 p 
Social Talk 57 (23%) 74 (34%) 216 (55%) .001 
Technical Action 35 (14%) 16 (7%) 6 (2%) .009 
TOTAL 92 (37%) 90 (41%) 222 (57%) ns 
There were statistically significant differences in percentage distribution by groups. First, Group 1 
produced more revision-related discourse than non-revision-related discourse (χ2 = 6.76, df = 1, p = .009), 
whereas there were no differences between the two major discourse types for Groups 2 and 3. Second, 
compared to the other groups, Group 1 spent higher proportions of turns on content discussion (χ2 = 6.57, 
df = 2, p = .037) and technical actions (χ2 = 9.47, df = 2, p = .009). Third, Group 3 produced a higher 
proportion of social talk than did Groups 1 and 2 (χ2 = 14.16, df = 2, p = .001). Fourth, Group 2 spent a 
higher proportion of turns on task management than did Groups 1 and 3 (χ2 = 10, df = 2, p = .007). 
Group 3’s social talk shows that they frequently exchanged course information with one another. Group 1 
yielded a relatively higher rate of technical actions because they copied and pasted texts from their blog 
posts to chat. These technical actions feature a series of monologues which are different from the typical 
simultaneous and sometimes interrupted writing in synchronous online peer discourse:  
EA: 
EA: 
EA: 
 
 
 
EA:  
 
 
EA:  
EA:  
EA:  
Abortion: A Serious Challenge between Morality and Women’s right 
key words: abortion, women's human rights 
I search the information on internet database with these words in English way.  
Because I want to know more about the cases and the world trend of abortion.  
By using the keywords, I do find many information and some of them support to 
my opinion. 
1. Women's consideration (Reasons for abortion) 
2. Human rights (Research about the abortion laws) 
3. Looking from another standpoints ( the thoughts of those who anti-abortion) 
That's the outlines of my paper. 
2. Topics/themes in four annotations and their intended audiences 
1) The first annotation is videos about the opinions of Obama, the 
president-elect in America. He thinks that limit the liberty of abortion may 
Mei-Ya Liang Synchronous Online Peer Response Groups 
 
Language Learning & Technology 54 
 
harm women's human right. 
Audience: People who care about the relationship between abortion and  
government. 
Chat content reveals that all groups tended to focus on the development and organization of their writing 
over local revision. Specifically, 11 students made revisions in global areas by restating main points and 
providing supporting sentences. Only six students made revisions in local areas, such as adding, deleting, 
substituting, and rephrasing words, phrases, and clauses. Above all, Group 1 spent the highest proportion 
of turns on revision-related discourse and, in particular, on content discussion. However, they either 
skipped language issues in the peer discussion or left editing and local revisions to individuals to manage, 
as shown in the following excerpt: 
CE:  
EA: 
SA: 
SA: 
JE: 
JE: 
EA: 
SA: 
CE: 
Do you have coherence between the paragraph? 
Some conjunctions 
I...am not sure about that 
i think i did....吧 
do make the mistake as same as me 
don't 
Well. You can do it better when you looking your sentence again. 
ok 
Check it again! 
It is also noted that four students had posted only short drafts or outlines before making their 
presentations. To fulfill the length of the research paper at the presentation and submission stage, these 
students focused on adding new paragraphs. For the eight students who had posted full-length papers 
before the peer response session, the connections between revision-related discourse and revision changes 
are not apparent. While some portions of their global revisions could be related to revision-related 
discourse, no local revisions can be textually traced back to the chat. 
As shown in Appendix D, WY and RY provided suggestions on CY’s paper, while CY sought opinions 
for developing and refining her writing (CY13). During synchronous online peer response sessions, WY 
and RY attempted to redirect CY’s attention to “pets” as a subject of writing about the issue of animal 
welfare (WY4, WY9, RY1, RY2, RY3) and CY restated her main points in this paper (CY4, CY5). After 
that chat, she inserted two paragraphs and three sentences in her revised paper. Among the five insertions, 
one that she inserted in the first paragraph ties into revision-related discourse (CY4, CY5). For example, 
revision-related discourse, such as “most of your annotations talk about the stray dog” (WY1) could tie 
into CY’s later comment of, “I think I will put emphasis on dogs” (CY5), and that is actually a revision in 
the text. There were other possible links, but their connections were not textually traceable. For example, 
CY added one paragraph (i.e., the third insertion) about her missing dog experience, which might be 
related to the revision-related discourse (WY3, WY9). 
Besides content discussion, Group 2 also spent a higher proportion of turns on task management than did 
the other two groups. They phrased responses and actions about the writing assignment during the chat:  
CY:  
CY: 
WY: 
CY: 
RY: 
VI: 
i think maybe you can ask more culture shocks in other aspect 
such as food here 
since you are talking about discrimination 
the landscap here, 
the life style 
and after this discussion I have to interview a 外籍新娘 [denizen bride]. 
Mei-Ya Liang Synchronous Online Peer Response Groups 
 
Language Learning & Technology 55 
 
Even though group members did ask questions and provide suggestions, the writer, VI, incorporated one 
new idea—the denizen bride—in writing about the topic “racial discrimination” without exploring it 
sufficiently in the group discussion. Instead, she used the shared first language (Chinese) to express her 
actions in carrying out the assignment. Nevertheless, this instance of task management resulted in her 
expansion of the research paper by adding three paragraphs as a supporting example in which she 
described her interview with a denizen bride in a local New Immigrant Center for Learning. 
DISCUSSION  
The following discussion of these results is amplified by insights and findings from research in L2 
interaction, SCMC, and L2 writing with respect to relationships between online revision-related discourse 
and subsequent writing and revision by these twelve EFL students.  
Relationships among Different Types of Interaction  
Overall, no differences were found in this study among the three groups in two genres of writing based on 
the revision-related and non-revision-related taxonomy. In terms of revision-related discourse, meaning 
negotiation and error correction were less frequent than content discussion and task management. Similar 
to Liang’s (2008) and DiGiovanni and Nagaswami’s (2001) findings, students in this study tended to 
focus more on content discussion than on meaning negotiation. As an alternative to F2F feedback, this 
specific pattern of interaction could be generated due to the temporal and spatial context of SCMC. 
Regarding non-revision-related discourse, social talk occurred more frequently than technical actions. 
Specifically, an environmental analysis of the key components of interaction allows us to understand 
various interactional processes interdependent with linguistic negotiations and their relative contributions 
to synchronous online peer response.  
For instance, in the book review task, students in Group 3 produced the highest proportion of social talk 
among the three groups while engaging in meaningful content discussion. By contrast, Group 2’s 
meaning negotiation failed to create a shared text and context by achieving mutual understanding beyond 
repair in the chat. In other words, the nature of online synchronous peer response could not be fully 
described by previous L2 writing studies that value revision-related discourse and disregard non-revision-
related discourse as off-task messaging (e.g., Liu & Sadler, 2003) or simultaneous composing as a 
communication problem (e.g., Braine, 2001). Despite possible challenges due to the lack of nonverbal 
cues and turn-taking, certain types of interaction cannot be confined to labels, such as “incoherent 
discourse” and “communication problems.” Largely corroborating the results of Darhower (2002), this 
study also found that students could co-construct meaning and content while enjoying social talk in 
dynamic Internet discourse. 
It also appears that different compositions of groups generate different proportions of interactions. The 
study was conducted in a monolingual context with three diverse groups—two groups with only-English 
majors and one with mixed majors. Among the three groups, Group 3 yielded the largest amount of social 
talk in both tasks. Since the members in Group 3 were from different departments, they may have felt the 
need to create a shared social context by exchanging course information and background knowledge. By 
contrast, Group 1 and 2 spent most of their turns on content discussions or task management probably 
because they had already established familiarity. Group 2 spent a higher percentage of turns on task 
management in both tasks. In particular, their chat episodes show non-English codes, such as Chinese 
characters and other symbols (e.g., ). As those found in Negretti’s (1999) and Darhower’s (2002) 
studies, they were not used as compensation strategies for better comprehension, but as deliberate 
strategies for managing chat discourse. Future studies might explore these management moves in 
synchronous online peer discussions.  
Mei-Ya Liang Synchronous Online Peer Response Groups 
 
Language Learning & Technology 56 
 
Additionally, the nature of the writing task could have influenced the results of the study. In both tasks, 
participants sought opinions from peers, but the task requirements for the two types of writing were 
different. The book review task required each group’s collaborative writing of a common text. The 
research paper presentation task asked students to revise individual work. Regarding task 
implementations, Group 1, for example, spent a higher proportion of turns on task management in the 
book review, but produced a higher proportion of technical actions in the research paper presentation. 
With drafts in blogs, Group 1 copied the instructor’s guidelines and their writing from the blogs and 
pasted them on chat screens. As a result, the availability of the two communication tools—blogging and 
chatting—in the research paper task may have influenced the amount and types of interaction.  
Revision-Related Discourse and Student Writing and Revision  
Further analyses have shown that the relationships between online peer discourses and subsequent 
composing and revision actions are complex and dynamic. In linking group participation in revision-
related discourse with writing outcomes, one sees that certain types of synchronous online peer 
interaction facilitate subsequent writing and revision, though admittedly this depends on the group’s co-
constructed interactional context for coherent discussion and communication.  
For example, in the book review task, Groups 1 and 3 were able to engage in revision-related discourse 
and undertake discourse-related revision. With reference to the amount and type of interaction, a large 
proportion of social talk in Group 3 did not interfere with their joint construction of meaning and content, 
whereas the negotiation of meaning in Group 2’s discourse did not facilitate meaning generations or more 
adoption of peer content into subsequent writing. A further comparison of the chat discourse between 
Group 1 and Group 2 also shows that differences in the quality of their peer interaction (i.e., collaborative 
efforts on reaching mutual understanding) led to different writing outcomes, despite similar amounts and 
types of interaction. Inspired by sociocultural researchers, such as de Guerrero and Villamil (2000) and 
van Lier (1996, 2000), the author suggests that students’ engagement and shared perspectives in the 
collaborative process of reaching intersubjectivity may impact subsequent writing and revision.  
In the research paper presentation task, students’ revision-related discourse focused on talking about 
writing procedures and assignments or requesting and providing information, which could facilitate 
individual students’ developing and refining ideas in writing. Accordingly, most of the students made 
global revisions. These findings appear to correspond with the results of Jones et al.’s (2006) study, but 
differ from those found in Liu and Sadler’s (2003) research. There are possible reasons for the differences 
observed. It may be that synchronous online conferencing does not allow time for correcting errors or 
clarifying meanings in writing as compared to other forms of electronic peer response, such as peer 
comments on blogs and Word documents. It does, however, allow instant support (Hyland, 2000) and 
more dynamic communicative behaviors (Chun, 1994; Fitze, 2006; Villamil & de Guerrero, 1994) for 
expressing opinions and developing ideas. Given differences in individual competence (e.g., L2 
proficiency, content knowledge, and group skills) and task requirement (e.g., short essays versus long 
research papers), certain students may not be able to adopt peers’ suggestions in revision.  
In this study, revision-related discourse in the two writing tasks facilitated students’ writing and revision 
of alternative positions to varying degrees, but groups that differed in quantity and types of interaction 
may have influenced the collaborative writing and revision process. In the book review task, two out of 
the three groups incorporated most of the content discussion in the chat into subsequent collaborative 
writing texts. By contrast, in the research paper task, a relatively lower proportion of revision could be 
textually linked to revision-related discourse. Specifically, no surface formal revision could be connected 
with the online discourse but some of the idea development changes were related to revision-related 
discourse, which echoes Hewett’s (2006) findings. Other revision changes could also result from the 
writer’s own decisions and from other sources stimulated by the other types of interactional processes 
within their groups. 
Mei-Ya Liang Synchronous Online Peer Response Groups 
 
Language Learning & Technology 57 
 
CONCLUSION  
Using peer response groups in EFL writing enables students to collaboratively brainstorm, share, and 
review texts. Synchronous Web technology adds a valuable tool for facilitating and recording the 
dynamics of group interaction. On the other hand, there are possible reasons why synchronous online peer 
response groups might be fun, but not very effective. The revision-related and non-revision-related 
discourse taxonomy used in this study can give an overall view of online interaction from which 
instructors can proceed to make task implementations more consistent and the results correspondingly 
stronger. For example, writing and revision processes can be improved by asking students to concentrate 
on revision-related discourse and to play down non-revision-related discourse. However, the results of 
this study have also shown that the relationships between revision-related discourse and discourse-related 
revision are not straightforward. If we consider the ecological nature of online interaction, we will 
encourage students to make meaningful use of overall online interactional features in the collaborative 
process for better composition and revision. 
To maximize learner-centered, collaborative opportunities for L2 learning, writing, and communication, 
training procedures and support systems should be employed according to group interaction and task 
performance along with students’ progress in the writing process. Modeling peer response strategies at the 
beginning of the course can prepare students at different L2 proficiency levels for online negotiation and 
discussion. Training should focus on connecting students’ prior experiences with current writing 
pedagogy. During the revising and editing process, teachers might draw attention to student variation and 
group interaction. Chat transcripts and selected episodes can be reviewed to help less experienced 
students learn diverse ways of interaction and locate revision-related discourse. At the presentation and 
submission stage, while students might feel under pressure as writing tasks are developed into final 
products, they still need to demonstrate a range of communicative strategies in order to accomplish 
various learning goals. To revise their writing after the peer response session, these L2 writers can 
continue the process of negotiating with various resources and audiences either inside or outside the 
writing class. In short, revision-related online discourse in small-group synchronous writing tasks can 
provide potentially useful pedagogical insights and tools for the teaching of writing.  
Mei-Ya Liang Synchronous Online Peer Response Groups 
 
Language Learning & Technology 58 
 
APPENDIX A. Student Demographics and Writing Concerns 
Group Group 1  Group 2  Group 3 
Student SA JE EA CE  CY WY RY VI  BY ON JU DI 
Gender               
Male            √  √ 
Female √ √ √ √  √ √ √ √  √  √  
Major               
Chinese             √  
English √ √ √ √  √ √ √ √  √ √   
French              √ 
Prior English Study               
8 years or less   √    √      √  
9 years or more √ √  √  √  √ √  √ √  √ 
GEPT               
Intermediate  √ √ √    √   √ √   
High-Intermediate √     √ √        
MSN Use               
Frequent user √ √ √   √  √ √  √ √  √ 
Non-frequent user    √   √      √  
Writing Concerns               
Title   √ √       √    
Topic sentence  √ √ √  √        √ 
Thesis statement  √  √  √      √  √ 
Main idea √ √  √  √ √     √   
Additional support √ √  √   √  √  √ √ √  
Conclusion √ √ √   √  √ √     √ 
Off-topic message               
Paragraph unity √ √    √  √    √   
Logic point   √ √  √     √  √  
Transition  √ √   √  √ √  √   √ 
Paraphrasing      √        √ 
Word order        √     √  
Spelling         √      
Run-on sentence √              
Vocabulary choice       √ √ √  √  √ √ 
Punctuation      √     √    
Grammar  √ √        √  √ √ 
Editing and revision  √    √   √     √ 
Style   √ √  √      √   
Catching readers  √  √  √      √  √ 
Mei-Ya Liang Synchronous Online Peer Response Groups 
 
Language Learning & Technology 59 
 
APPENDIX B. SCMC Interaction Analysis Framework 
Content Code Descriptions Examples 
Meaning 
Negotiation 
Participants check understanding, 
ask for confirmation, or probe for 
explanations of messages.  
SA: baby’s psychological problem 
CE: It’s psychological problem of women 
JE: i agree with SA 
CE: Do you mean that I should develop 
baby's psychological problem? 
CE: Then I can try. 
SA: no 
Content 
Discussion 
Participants propose thoughts, 
elaborate or make comments and 
suggestions on messages. 
WY: i think you can find other aspects of 
this issue 
WY: why this is not legal in some of the 
countires 
WY: that must have its reason 
RY: That’s a good suggestion! 
Error 
Correction 
Participants make target-like 
reformulations of all or part of 
incorrect messages. 
CY: you’ve mentioned that the keywords you 
used to search 
WY: sorry, that is adaptation not adaption 
VI: thanks a lot WY 
Task 
Management 
Participants talk about task 
procedures and assignment 
requirements  
JE: the most important thing is you need to 
paraphrase them in your own ideas 
JE: did you do that?(attacking) 
SA: (i can feel that 
SA: it's hard to say it over here 
Social Talk Participants check attendance, signal 
presence, inform acknowledge, or 
express humor 
BY: hahah 
ON: JU??? 
DI: great she’s back 
ON: come out come out wherever you 
are~~ 
Technical 
Action 
Participants use chat room 
commands or online tools, or copy, 
paste, or link messages. 
JU: I give you a web 
DI: i should have researched more in the sex 
center 
JU: http://intermargins.net/  
Note. The target sentences are in bold. 
Mei-Ya Liang Synchronous Online Peer Response Groups 
 
Language Learning & Technology 60 
 
APPENDIX C. Book Review Linking to Revision-Related Discourse 
Excerpt of SCMC Interaction Excerpt of Book Review 
JU: 
 
BY: 
BY: 
BY: 
BY: 
JU: 
 
JU: 
DI: 
 
 
 
DI: 
 
DI: 
 
BY: 
BY: 
 
DI: 
JU: 
 
ON: 
ON: 
ON: 
JU: 
 
ON: 
DI: 
DI: 
DI: 
ON: 
BY: 
DI: 
BY: 
ON: 
JU: 
JU: 
BY: 
ON: 
ON: 
JU: 
ON: 
JU: 
BY: 
 
JU: 
 
from these student essays, we can know how 
to revise our problems 
yeah  
and when this book talk about paintings 
it would give us many paintings 
for students to practice  
just like our discussion in class before, we 
compare two articles 
and then we can notice which is better 
It provides students essays, which encourage 
students to write as good as them and 
sympathize them since they make similar 
mistakes. 
This book is endowed with vivid illustrations 
helping readers understand its words.  
Its wording and typesetting are impeccable. 
With different colors and sizes of words.  
yeah  
because sometimes we do not know how to 
use words well  
here he is  
I think in the book, it provide many question 
to think after reading the article  
haha  
hi~everybody~  
I am here~~~  
it is important because we can realize some 
point which we egnore before  
so what's now?  
have discussed a lot~~~ 
i’ll give u our record and  
u could tell us about your thoughts  
thanks for yor kindness  
you have to write the article  
we then discuss~~ 
haha  
oh haha  
welaom  
welcome  
ok le us continue 
THNAKSSS!!!!!!!!  
ok  
ok  
go ahead  
I had talked about the question after the article  
so what the bad points do you think of this 
book?  
I find that the question the book provide after 
the article is the key point  
From these student essays, we can know how 
to revise our problems. Just like our discussion 
in class before, we compare two articles and 
then we can notice which one is better. And 
when this book talks about paintings, it would 
give us many paintings for students to 
practice. It provides students with essays, 
which encourage students to write as good as 
them and sympathize with them since they 
make similar mistakes. What’s more, this 
book is endowed with vivid illustrations 
helping readers understand its words. Its 
wording and typesetting are impeccable with 
different colors and sizes of words. We think 
in the book, it provides many question to think 
after reading the article. And it is very 
important because we can realize some points 
which we ignore before. We find that the 
questions the book provides after the article 
are the key point. 
Note. The words used in both the SCMC interaction and the book review are highlighted. 
Mei-Ya Liang Synchronous Online Peer Response Groups 
 
Language Learning & Technology 61 
 
APPENDIX D. Revision in Research Paper Linking to Revision-Related Discourse 
Excerpt of SCMC Interaction Excerpt of Book Review 
WY1: 
 
CY1: 
CY2: 
WY2: 
CY3: 
WY3: 
 
 
WY4: 
 
CY4: 
 
WY5: 
 
RY1: 
 
WY6: 
WY7: 
RY2: 
WY8: 
CY5: 
RY3: 
CY6: 
 
CY7: 
WY9: 
 
WY10: 
CY8: 
WY11: 
CY9: 
 
CY10: 
CY11: 
 
CY12: 
RY4: 
WY12: 
CY13: 
 
RY5: 
 
CY14: 
RY6: 
most of your annotations talk about the 
stray dog 
ok, don’t read the avove  
above 
and what kind of thing they will encounter  
i will talk each annotation briefly  
maybe you can find some other things 
about dog to explain why you want to talk 
about animale walfare  
recently, more and more people would cast 
physical abusement upon their pets  
I’ve used a film clip, a piece of news, a 
wikipedia resources, and a research paper  
this kind of law, animal welfare, can give 
them a chance to survive  
well. I think that some welfare are just 
suitable for the “pets” 
umm that is useful  
what do you think about my opinion, CY  
but not all the animals  
or do you have any questions  
i think i will put emphasis on dogs  
some people are just worry about their pets  
because i use the movie dogs trend to start 
my essay  
and then bring the topic to animale welfare  
yes i mean some dogs people keep in house 
also have this problem  
ok, that is find  
usually, i search in English 
fine  
and i also quote some sentences from the 
annotation  
it is for sure!  
umm...i think this is the end of my 
presentation  
thanks  
fine  
it is good  
do you have any ideas about my issue 
paper?  
did you try to find some laws of animal 
welfare to support the opinion?  
umm... i remember it mentions a little in it  
It’s an interesting topic haha 
1st
In my issue paper, I will put my emphasis on 
dogs by using some news articles, film clips 
and journal articles to provides some useful 
information and thus support my points. 
 Insertion  
2nd
It happened with “101 Dalmatians,” when 
people caved in to their kids and bought 
Dalmatians, and then found out they were not 
as cute as they had thought before. Then, 
Dalmatians got dumped at animal shelters. It 
happened with “Babe” –so cute, so smart, so 
not suited to many owners. Dump them at the 
animal shelter. To ban on that kind of movies 
is impossible. The government and the movie 
makers should appeal to the idea of adopting 
dogs from animal shelters. It’s a lot cheaper 
than buying a dog from pet shops. If so, the 
owners of puppy mills will not make so profits. 
Thus the mother animals will not be compelled 
to death. 
 Insertion  
3rd
The above film clips remind me of my dog －
Dodo. In March this year, my little dog was 
missing because my mom did not pay attention 
when she took Dodo out for a walk. As soon as 
I knew about it, I burst out crying, and was 
anxious whether Dodo was safe or not. I was 
afraid she would be bullied by bad guys or 
other dogs or even worse, dead. Fortunately, a 
nice woman saw it on the street and took her 
home. Upon seeing the flyer which I spend a 
lot of time on the street pasting them alone the 
road, she called me and gave Dodo back to us. 
After that, I pay much attention when I take her 
out, because she is already a member of our 
family. How will you feel when your family 
member get lost and never come back?  
 Insertion  
4th
Do they have souls or consciousness? 
 Insertion  
5th
To continue the question, “Do animals have 
souls or consciousness?” 
 Insertion  
Note. The words used in both SCMC interaction and the revised research paper are highlighted.  
Mei-Ya Liang Synchronous Online Peer Response Groups 
 
Language Learning & Technology 62 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This study is funded by the National Science Council of Taiwan (NSC97-2410-H-008-037). I would like 
to thank Shi-Wei Yang and Chang-Pei Tsai for their assistance in coding data. I am grateful to Dr. Curtis 
Bonk and Dr. Anthony Lichi for reading earlier versions of this paper and to the reviewers and the editors 
of this journal for providing valuable suggestions. Special thanks go to Dr. Carla Meskill for her advice 
on the final drafts of this paper.  
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Mei-Ya Liang is an associate professor in the Department of English at National Central University, 
Taiwan. Her current research focuses on the use of technology in the teaching of English.  
E-mail: mliang@cc.ncu.edu.tw 
 
REFERENCES  
Berg, E. C. (1999). The effects of trained peer response on ESL students’ revision types and writing 
quality. Journal of Second Language Writing, 8, 215-241. 
Blake, R. (2000). Computer mediated communication: A window on L2 Spanish interlanguage. Language 
Learning & Technology, 4 (1), 120-136. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/blake/default.html 
Braine, G. (2001). A study of English as a foreign language (EFL) writers on a local-area network (LAN) 
and in traditional classes. Computers and Composition, 18, 275–292.  
Chun, D. (1994). Using computer network to facilitate the acquisition of interactive competence. System, 
22(1), 17-31. 
Darhower, M. (2002). Interactional features of synchronous computer-mediated communication in the 
intermediate L2 class: A sociocultural case study. CALICO Journal, 19 (2), 249-277. 
Donato, R. (1994). Collective scaffolding in second language learning. In J.P. Lantolf & G. Appel (Eds.), 
Vygotskian approaches to second language research (pp. 173-193). Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
Donato, R. (2000). Sociocultural contributions to understanding the foreign and second language 
classroom. In J. P. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 27-50). Oxford 
University Press. 
de Guerrero, M. C. M., & Villamil, O. S. (2000). Activating the ZPD: Mutual scaffolding in L2 peer 
revision. The Modern Language Journal, 84(1), 51-68. 
DiGiovanni, E., & Nagaswami, G. (2001). Online peer review: An alternative to face-to-face? ELT 
Journal, 55(3), 263-272.  
Fitze, M. (2006). Discourse and participation in ESL face-to-face and written electronic conferences. 
Language Learning & Technology, 10(1), 67-86. Retrieved 
from http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num1/fitze/default.html 
Foster, P., & Ohta, A. S. (2005). Negotiation for meaning and peer assistance in second language 
classrooms. Applied Linguistics, 26, 402–430. 
Halliday, M. A. K. (1994). An introduction to functional grammar (2nd ed.). London: Edward Arnold. 
Hansen, J. G., & Liu, J. (2005). Guiding principles for effective peer response. ELT Journal, 59(1), 31-38. 
Mei-Ya Liang Synchronous Online Peer Response Groups 
 
Language Learning & Technology 63 
 
Hewett, B. (2000). Characteristics of interactive oral and computer mediated peer group talk and its 
influence on revision. Computers and Composition, 17, 265-288. 
Hewett, B. (2006). Synchronous online conference-based instruction: A study of whiteboard interactions 
and student writing. Computers and Composition, 23, 4-31. 
Hyland, F. (2000). ESL writers and feedback: Giving more autonomy to students. Journal of Language 
Teaching Research, 4(1), 33-54. 
Hyland, K. & Hyland, F. (2006). Contexts and issues in feedback on L2 writing. In K. Hyland & F. 
Hyland (Eds.), Feedback in second language writing: Contexts and issues. New York: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Jones, R. H., Garralda, A., Li, D. C. S., & Lock, G. (2006). Interactional dynamics in on-line and face-to-
face peer-tutoring sessions for second language writers. Journal of Second Language Writing, 15, 1-23. 
Lee, L. (2001). Online interaction: Negotiation of meaning and strategies used among learners of Spanish. 
ReCALL, 13(2), 232-244. 
Liang, M. Y. (2008). SCMC interaction and EFL writing revision: Facilitative or futile? Proceedings of 
E-learn 2008 (pp. 2886-2892). Chesapeake, VA: Association for the Advancement of Computing in 
Education (AACE). 
Liu, J., & Sadler, R. W. (2003). The effect and affect of peer review in electronic versus traditional modes 
on L2 writing. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 2, 193–227. 
Lockhart, C., & Ng, P. (1995). Analyzing talk in ESL peer response groups: Stances, functions, and 
content. Language Learning, 45(4), 1-51. 
Long, M. H. (1996). The role of the linguistic environment in second language acquisition. In W. Ritchie 
& T. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 413-468). New York: Academic Press. 
Min, H-T. (2006). The effects of trained peer review on EFL students’ revision types and writing quality. 
Journal of Second Language Writing, 15, 118-141. 
Min, H-T. (2008). Reviewer stances and writer perceptions in EFL peer review training. English for 
Specific Purposes, 27, 285-305. 
Mendonça, C. O., & Johnson, K.E.(1994). Peer review negotiations: Revision activities in ESL writing 
instruction. TESOL Quarterly 28, 745–769. 
Negretti, R. (1999). Web-based activities and SLA: A conversation analysis research approach. Language 
Learning & Technology, 3(1), 75-87. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num1/negretti/index.html 
Pica, T. (1996). Do second language learners need negotiation? International Review of Applied 
Linguistics, 34(1), 1-19. 
Roever, C., & Pan, Y-C. (2008). GEPT: General English Proficiency Test. Language Testing, 25(3), 403-
418. 
Rollinson, P. (2005). Using peer feedback in the ESL writing class. ELT Journal, 5(1), 23-30. 
Smith, B. (2003). Computer-mediated negotiated interaction: An expanded model. The Modern Language 
Journal, 87(1), 38-57. 
Sotillo, S. (2000). Discourse functions and syntactic complexity in synchronous and asynchronous 
communication. Language Learning & Technology, 4(1), 82-119. Retrieved 
from http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/sotillo/default.html 
Mei-Ya Liang Synchronous Online Peer Response Groups 
 
Language Learning & Technology 64 
 
Stanley, J. (1992). Coaching student writers to be more effective peer evaluators. Journal of Second 
Language Writing, 1, 217-233. 
Swain, M. (2000). The output hypothesis and beyond: Mediating acquisition through collaborative 
dialogue. In J. P. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 97-114). Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.  
Tsui, A. B. M., & Ng, M. (2000). Do secondary L2 writers benefit from peer comments? Journal of 
Second Language Writing, 9(2), 147-170. 
Tuzi, F. (2004). The impact of e-feedback on the revisions of L2 writers in an academic writing course. 
Computers and Composition, 21, 217-235. 
van Lier, L. (1996). Interaction in the language curriculum: Awareness, autonomy and authenticity. New 
York: Longman. 
van Lier, L. (2000). From input to affordance: Social-interactive learning from an ecological perspective. 
In J. P. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 245-260). Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Varonis, E. M., & Gass, S. (1985). Non-native/non-native conversations: A model for negotiation of 
meaning. Applied Linguistics, 6(1), 71-90. 
Villamil, O. S., & de Guerrero, M. C. M. (1996). Peer revision in the L2 classroom: Social-cognitive 
activities, mediating strategies, and aspects of social behavior. Journal of Second Language Writing, 5(1), 
51-75. 
Ware, P. D. (2004). Confidence and competition online: ESL student perspectives on web-based 
discussions in the classroom. Computers and Composition, 21(4), 451-468.  
Warschauer, M. (1996). Comparing face-to-face and electronic discussion in the second language 
classroom. CALICO Journal, 13(2), 7-26.  
Warschauer, M. (2002). Networking into academic discourse. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 
1(1), 45-58. 
 
