Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol14num1/commentary.pdf 
February 2010, Volume 14, Number 1 
pp. 3–8 
 
Copyright © 2010, ISSN 1094-3501 3 
 
INVITED COMMENTARY: 
NEW TOOLS FOR TEACHING WRITING 
Mark Warschauer 
University of California, Irvine 
Less than two decades ago, new forms of socially constructed multimedia were believed to be devaluing 
writing, marginalizing the essay, and contributing to a postmodern death of the author (e.g., Faigley, 
1997; Landow, 1992). But today, writing is more important than ever before (National Commission on 
Writing, 2003), mastery of the essay remains critical to academic success (Intersegmental Committee of 
the Academic Senates, 2002), and, as Chesher (2005, para. 1) has noted, “the author is alive and well, and 
has a blog.” 
Writing is especially important for the instruction of second language learners for three reasons. First, 
writing well is a vital skill for academic or occupational success (National Commission on Writing, 
2004), but one that is especially difficult for second language learners to master. Second, writing can be 
an effective tool for the development of academic language proficiency as learners more readily explore 
advanced lexical or syntactic expression in their written work (e.g., Warschauer, 1996; Weissberg, 1999). 
Third, writing across the curriculum can be invaluable for mastering diverse subject matter, as written 
expression allows learners to raise their awareness of knowledge gaps, abstract problem-specific 
knowledge into schemas that can be applied to other relevant cases, and elaborate mental representations 
of knowledge that can be more easily retrieved, while simultaneously allowing teachers to better 
understand the students’ state of knowledge and thinking process and thus adjust instruction as necessary 
(see discussion in Reeves, 2002). 
New digital media have played an important role in the teaching of writing, through both the cognitive era 
that began in the 1980s, in which word processing was emphasized as a tool for revision (Pennington, 
1993), and the sociocognitive era that began in the 1990s, in which computer-mediated communication 
was emphasized as a tool of social construction of meaning (Kern & Warschauer, 2000). Over the last 
decade, though, important new tools have emerged for the teaching and learning of writing. In the 
remainder of this essay, I briefly review four such tools: blogs, wikis, automated writing evaluation, and 
open-source netbook computers. Most of what I write about will focus on English language learners, as 
that is the target of my most recent research; some of it may be applicable to teaching other languages as 
well. 
BLOGS 
The development and free online availability of blogging software has helped transform the Web from a 
place principally used to access information to one where vast numbers of people publish their own work, 
with hundreds of millions of blogs launched in the past decade. The potential role of blogs in education, 
and in second language learning in particular, is revealed through an analysis of the medium’s 
affordances. The value of online communication in second language learning has been attributed to how it 
combines the interactivity of speech with the permanence of writing (Warschauer, 1997). Yet different 
types of online communication achieve this combination in different ways. An analysis by Herring and 
colleagues demonstrates how blogs serve as a bridging genre between more highly interactive forms of 
asynchronous computer-mediated communication (CMC) and standard published HTML documents (see 
Figure 1). Blogs are more frequently updated (in terms of adding new content or comments), include 
more exchange among people, and have a higher percentage of text (as opposed to multimedia) than 
standard Webpages. But the exchanges on them tend to be more asymmetric (i.e., dominated by main 
authors) and less frequently updated than CMC sites such as newsgroups. If online communication 
represents an intermediate space between speech and writing, blogs can thus be characterized as 
Mark Warschauer   New Tools for Teaching Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology  4 
occupying an intermediate space among online media. Blogs thus represent a particularly effective tool to 
combine the publishing and discussion of student writing in a single medium. 
Standard HTML documents 
(e.g., personal home pages) 
Weblogs 
 
Asynchronous Computer-Mediated 
Communication (e.g., newsgroups) 
 
infrequently updated 
asymmetrical broadcast 
multimedia 
frequently updated 
asymmetrical exchange 
text-predominate 
constantly updated 
symmetrical exchange 
text only 
Figure 1. Weblogs as a bridging genre. Adapted from Herring, Scheidt, Bonus, & Wright (2005). 
Blogs have revived the importance of authorship, and indeed created more authors than probably any 
other medium in human history. Yet they have also changed the nature of authorship, with writers on 
public blogs needing to be concerned about both their immediate audience of intended readers and an 
essentially unlimited audience of anyone with a Web browser who could accidentally or intentionally 
come across a blog posting (such as a future employer). Blogging can thus be used to help students write 
for a social audience and hone their words in response to others, while becoming sensitive to both the 
benefits and risks of expressing themselves online. 
Second language educators are exploiting the affordances of blogs to good effect. The ease of writing and 
publishing on blogs makes them an appealing medium to students and thus has been found to help 
increase the quantity of student writing as well as its lexical sophistication (Fellner & Apple, 2006). 
Having students write on blogs can help learners transition from a more colloquial to an academic writing 
style, develop a sense of voice, learn to participate in a community of writers, and gain an important new 
literacy in its own right by becoming contributors to and not just consumers of online content (Bloch, 
2007; Rezaee & Oladi, 2008). 
WIKIS 
Parallel to the rapid growth of blogs over the last decade has been similar growth among wikis. The most 
prominent wiki, Wikipedia, ranks sixth among most visited Websites in the world, and features 14 million 
articles written in more than 200 languages. Lesser known wikis exist on a large array of topics, and free 
software is available for teachers to start their own wikis. 
Much of the discussion regarding the role of wikis in education has focused on the suitability of 
Wikipedia as a source for student research. The founder of Wikipedia, Jim Wales, provides the most 
commonsense answer to this, suggesting that although Wikipedia can help provide an overview of issues 
and a starting point for identifying primary sources, students are better off using primary sources as 
definitive sources in their research. “For God’s sake, you’re in college; don’t cite the encyclopedia,” 
Wales told one college student (Young, 2006, para. 2). 
A more interesting question is how writing for wikis in language, composition, and other courses can 
affect the learning process. The potential of wikis for teaching and learning is hinted at by Ward 
Cunningham, inventor of the wiki, who commented, “The blogosphere is a community that might 
produce a work, whereas a wiki is a work that might produce a community.” Cunningham’s statement 
illuminates a central contradiction of CMC since its inception: it has served as a powerful medium for 
exploring identity, expressing one’s voice, airing diverse views, and developing community, yet has 
proven a very unsuitable medium for accomplishing many kinds of collaborative work due to the inherent 
difficult of arriving at decisions in groups dispersed by space and time (see meta-analysis comparing face-
to-face and computer-mediated decision-making by Baltes, Dickson, Sherman, Bauer, & LaGanke, 2002). 
Mark Warschauer   New Tools for Teaching Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology  5 
Wikis turn traditional CMC activity around. Whereas e-mail and chat facilitate informal, author-centric, 
personal exchange, writing on a wiki facilitates more formal, topic-centric, depersonalized exchange. 
Each edit makes a concrete contribution to a collaborative written product. A log of edits and their authors 
is relegated to a separate page, which a teacher can use to confirm who contributed what to a joint student 
product. Wikis are thus an especially powerful digital tool for collaborative writing and collective 
knowledge development.  
Initial reports of the use of wikis for collaborative writing assignments in second language learning 
suggest that participating students increase their quantity of writing, develop more confidence in their 
writing, and find such assignments motivating (Mak & Coniam, 2008; Kovacic, Bubas, & Zlatovic, 
2007). There is no published research yet on projects involving students writing for Wikipedia, but the 
existence of a Simple English Wikipedia targeted at English language learners could facilitate such 
projects. 
AUTOMATED WRITING EVALUATION  
Automated essay scoring has been under development since the 1960s, when researchers first created 
programs that could assign essays a numerical rating based on their similarity in machine-countable 
lexical and syntactic features to essays on the same topic previously scored by human raters (for an 
overview, see Warschauer & Ware, 2006). In the last decade, though, broader automated writing 
evaluation (AWE) programs have been developed that combine automated essay scoring software with a 
range of other tools for classroom use, such as model essays, scoring rubrics, graphic organizers, word 
banks, dictionaries, thesauri, and spelling/grammar/usage checkers.  
Upon first consideration, the use of machine scoring appears to conflict with the goals of a sociocognitive 
approach to writing, and, indeed, automated essay scoring has been widely criticized within the 
composition community (e.g., Cheville, 2004). However, my research (e.g., Grimes & Warschauer, in 
press) and that of others (e.g., Chen & Cheng, 2008) suggests that the impact of such software depends to 
a large effect on how it is used. When AWE is used to replace writing for a teacher or other audience, 
students are dissatisfied (Chen & Cheng, 2008). However, when AWE is used as part of a social writing 
process—in which, for example, students write earlier drafts for review by the software, and later drafts to 
be submitted to the teacher or published online for peers—results are more positive (Grimes & 
Warschauer, in press). Such use provides students a range of tools (e.g., word banks, scoring rubrics) and 
rapid feedback (both on overall score and on language mechanics) to encourage and motivate autonomous 
writing and revision. And while students are working autonomously, teachers can individually help 
students most in need, while still reviewing all students’ final drafts (Warschauer & Grimes, 2008). 
Finally, AWE software programs also include tools for teachers to comment on student drafts, and my 
most recent research project (see description below) suggests that some teachers use these tools to 
increase the amount of instructor feedback to students. 
OPEN-SOURCE NETBOOKS 
The use of technology for teaching writing is most effective when students have daily access to an 
individual computer (see studies by Russell, Bebell, & Higgins, 2004; Warschauer, 2006). Until recently, 
such access was very expensive to provide. However, new hardware/software combinations now make 
possible much more sustainable one-computer-per-student initiatives. 
Netbook computers—laptops that are optimized for low weight and low cost—first emerged in late 2007. 
Most current models have 9-10 inch screens, weigh 2-3 pounds, and have sufficient capacity for most 
educational applications other than video editing (which could be carried out as needed on a small number 
of more powerful shared computers rather than on individual computers). Though netbooks can run on 
Windows, Linux-based open source operating systems maximize their effectiveness, since they place 
Mark Warschauer   New Tools for Teaching Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology  6 
fewer demands on the computers’ limited capacity, and the use of other open source software (e.g., for 
word processing) further reduces the educational cost. More recent hardware developments, such as the 
use of very power- and cost-efficient ARM-based processors in new kinds of laptops that are sometimes 
referred to as smartbooks, may further remove barriers to widespread use of educational computers for the 
teaching of writing. 
With funding from the Haynes Foundation and Google Research, I am currently carrying out a study in 
two U.S. school districts that have substantial numbers of English language learners and that have 
recently implemented district-wide student writing programs involving individual use of open-source 
networks combined with district-wide blog and wiki media. The total cost of hardware and software for 
the program in each district is approximately $300 per student; one of the districts also uses an AWE 
program at an additional cost of about $20 per student per year. In that latter district, students first write 
their essays using the AWE software, and then are encouraged to post their final essays on the school-
community blog for comments from other students, teachers, or parents. The quantity of student writing 
appears to have gone up substantially in both districts, and students also receive much more feedback on 
their writing, whether it be from blog comments by peers, online comments from teachers, or software-
generated scoring or error feedback. Initial test score analysis suggests substantial benefits in writing 
outcomes, including for English language learners.  
CONCLUSION 
The diffusion of new technologies, and the development of the knowledge economy that these 
technologies have contributed to, have made the teaching and learning of writing more important than 
ever before. Fortunately, these same new technologies can also aid the teaching of second language 
writing. Blogs, wikis, automated essay scoring, and open-source netbooks are four important tools that 
can assist writing instruction. As with other educational tools, none of these will bring positive results 
merely from their presence. However, thoughtful use of these tools can enhance effective instructional 
approaches that emphasize writing for meaningful social purposes, mastery of relevant genres, and 
development of students’ academic language proficiency.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I wish to thank Rick Kern and Doug Grimes for their thoughtful comments on an earlier draft of this 
paper. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Mark Warschauer is Professor of Education and Informatics at the University of California, Irvine, where 
he directs the Digital Learning Lab and the Ph.D. in Education program, the latter of which includes a 
specialization in Language, Literacy, and Technology. His most recent book is Laptops and Literacy: 
Learning in the Wireless Classroom (Teachers College Press). 
Mark Warschauer   New Tools for Teaching Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology  7 
REFERENCES 
Baltes, B. B., Dickson, M. W., Sherman, M. P., Bauer, C. C., & LaGanke, J. S. (2002). Computer-
mediated communication and group decision making. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes, 87(1), 156-179. doi:10.1006/obhd.2001.2961 
Bloch, J. (2007). Abdullah's blogging: A generation 1.5 student enters the blogosphere. Language 
Learning & Technology, 11(2), 128-141. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num2/bloch/default.html 
Chen, C.-F. E. C., & Cheng, W.-Y. E. C. (2008). Beyond the design of automated writing evaluation: 
Pedagogical practices and perceived learning effectiveness in EFL writing classes. Language Learning & 
Technology, 12(2), 94-112. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num2/chencheng.pdf 
Chesher, C. (2005, May). Blogs and the crisis of authorship. Paper presented at the Blogtalk Downunder 
conference, Sydney, Australia. Retrieved from http://incsub.org/blogtalk/?page_id=40 
Cheville, J. (2004). Automated scoring technologies and the rising influence of error. English Journal, 
93(4), 47-52. doi:10.2307/4128980 
Faigley, L. (1997). Literacy after the revolution. College Composition and Communication, 48(1), 30-43. 
doi:10.2307/358769 
Fellner, T., & Apple, M. (2006). Developing writing fluency and lexial complexity with blogs. The JALT 
CALL Journal, 2(1), 15-26.  
Grimes, D., & Warschauer, M. (in press). Utility in a fallible tool: A multi-site case study of automated 
writing evaluation. Journal of Technology, Language, and Assessment.  
Herring, S. C., Scheidt, L. A., Bonus, S., & Wright, E. (2005). Weblogs as a bridging genre. Information, 
Technology & People, 18(2), 142-171. doi:10.1108/09593840510601513 
Intersegmental Committee of the Academic Senates. (2002). Academic literacy: A statement of 
competencies expected of students entering California's public colleges and universities. Sacramento: 
ICAS. 
Kern, R., & Warschauer, M. (2000). Theory and practice of network-based language teaching. In M. 
Warschauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Network-based language teaching: Concepts and practice (pp. 1-19). New 
York: Cambridge University Press.  
Kovacic, A., Bubas, G., & Zlatovic, M. (2007). Evaluation of activities with a wiki system in teaching 
English as a second language. Retrieved from http://cmc.foi.hr:8080/eng-wiki/articles/ICT-
Florence_Kovacic-Bubas-Zlatovic_2007-distr.pdf 
Landow, G. P. (1992). Hypertext: The convergence of contemporary critical theory and technology. 
Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press. 
Mak, B., & Coniam, D. (2008). Using wikis to enhance and develop writing skills among secondary 
school students in Honk Kong. System, 36(3), 437-455.  
National Commission on Writing. (2003). The neglected "r": The need for a writing revolution. New 
York: The College Entrance Examination Board. 
National Commission on Writing. (2004). Writing: A ticket to work…or a ticket out. New York: The 
College Entrance Examination Board. 
Pennington, M. (1993). Exploring the potential of word processing for non-native writers. Computers and 
the Humanities, 27(3), 149-163. doi:10.1007/BF01830068 
Reeves, D. (2002). Accountability in action. Denver, Colorado: Advanced Learning Press. 
Mark Warschauer   New Tools for Teaching Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology  8 
Rezaee, A. A., & Oladi, S. (2008). The effect of blogging on language learners' improvement in social 
interactions and writing proficiency. Iranian Journal of Language Studies, 2(1), 73-88.  
Russell, M., Bebell, D., & Higgins, J. (2004). Laptop learning: A comparision of teaching and learning in 
upper elementary classrooms equipped with shared carts of laptops and permanent 1:1 laptops. Journal of 
Educational Computing Research, 30(4), 313-330. doi:10.2190/6E7K-F57M-6UY6-QAJJ 
Warschauer, M. (1996). Comparing face-to-face and electronic communication in the second language 
classroom. CALICO Journal, 13(2), 7-26.  
Warschauer, M. (1997). Computer-mediated collaborative learning: Theory and practice. Modern 
Language Journal, 81(4), 470-481. doi:10.2307/328890 
Warschauer, M. (2006). Laptops and literacy: Learning in the wireless classroom. New York: Teachers 
College Press. 
Warschauer, M., & Grimes, D. (2008). Automated writing assessment in the classroom. Pedagogies, 3, 
22-36.  
Warschauer, M., & Ware, P. (2006). Automated writing evaluation: Defining the classroom research 
agenda. Language Teaching Research, 157-180. doi:10.1191/1362168806lr190oa 
Weissberg, B. (1999). Developmental relationships in the acquisition of English syntax: Writing vs. 
speech. Learning and instruction, 10, 37-53.  
Young, J. (2006, June 12). Wikipedia founder discourages academic use of his creation. Chronicle of 
Higher Education. Retrieved from http://chronicle.com/ 
  
 
