Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol14num3/columncall.pdf 
October 2010, Volume 14, Number 3 
p. 94 
 
Copyright © 2010, ISSN 1094-3501 94 
 
CALL FOR PAPERS for New Action Research Column 
 
Editor: Fernando Naiditch 
Action-Research (AR) is a research methodology which leads first to the understanding of the causes of 
a certain situation and then to producing change in it. Its focus is in solving a problem that has been 
identified by one individual, or a group of practitioners such as a school, an institution or an organization. 
AR has developed as a way to broaden people’s knowledge and understanding of their own practice and 
of issues that affect the productivity and/or the quality of the work they do. The findings of AR are used 
as additional research data or as a way of developing some kind of action—intervention—in the 
environment being studied. 
The new AR column in Language Learning & Technology will serve as a forum for researchers and 
practitioners alike to disseminate the results of their projects and to consider the pedagogical implications 
of their research more closely. We strongly encourage teachers and/or teams of professionals who are 
addressing educational issues or challenges in their teaching environments to submit manuscripts for 
consideration. We are primarily interested in manuscripts that address the integration of technology 
and its potential in improving second/foreign language teaching and learning in a variety of 
contexts with different student populations. We are also interested in contributions that represent a 
wide spectrum of foreign languages, particularly the Less Commonly Taught Languages (LCTLs). 
To submit articles for this new column, we encourage authors to consider the following guidelines for the 
format of their manuscripts: 
1. Identification of Problem Area 
2. Collection and Organization of Data 
3. Interpretation of Data 
4. Action Based on Data 
5. Assessment/Reflection of the Researcher 
Criteria for assessing manuscripts will include the following: 
• Adherence to principles of action research 
• Clearly articulated conceptual framework and connections to relevant literature 
• Thorough description of data collection and analysis procedures 
• Readability and originality 
• Potential implications for the second/foreign language classroom 
Guidelines for Authors:  
Articles should be no longer than 5,000 words (including references but not appendices). For specific 
guidelines, please refer to the submissions page http://llt.msu.edu/guidelines/index.html 
For guidelines for conducting and reporting Action Research, please refer to: 
http://www.lab.brown.edu/pubs/themes_ed/act_research.pdf 
http://cadres.pepperdine.edu/ccar/define.html 
 For Further Information: Please contact the column editor at naiditchf@mail.montclair.edu  
