Language Learning & Technology 
http:/llt.msu.edu/vol14num2/review2.pdf 
June 2010, Volume 14, Number 2 
pp. 22–25  
 
Copyright © 2010, ISSN 1094-3501 22 
 
REVIEW OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN LANGUAGES FOR 
SPECIFIC PURPOSES: ISSUES AND PROSPECTS 
 
Information Technology in Languages for Specific Purposes: Issues 
and Prospects 
 
Elisabet Arnó Macià, Antonia Soler Cervera, and Carmen Rueda Ramos 
(Editors) 
 
2006 
ISBN 978-0-387-28595-5 
£104.95, US $139.99 (hardcover)  
268 pp. 
 
Springer  
New York, NY, USA  
 
Review by Is’haaq Akbarian, University of Qom  
Information Technology in Languages for Specific Purposes: Issues and Prospects is based on papers 
presented at the 6th
In the Foreword, Mark Warschauer sets the tone for the rest of the book by stating that information and 
communication technologies have transformed both the “context of language learning” and “how people 
learn languages” (p. xiii–xiv).  
 International Conference on Languages for Specific Purposes (LSP) held in January 
2003 in Barcelona, Spain. It is intended for LSP teachers, researchers, and applied linguists. The purpose 
of the volume is “to offer an overview of an ample variety of applications of IT in the field of LSP” (p. 5). 
The individual chapters fall within the framework of a socio-cognitive approach to language learning, 
drawing “attention to language form in the context of authentic language use for specific purposes” (p. 
xiv, emphasis in original). The book contains 15 chapters which include a foreword, an introduction, five 
thematic parts, conclusion, and a subject index.  
The Introduction contains only one chapter entitled “The Role of Information Technology in Languages 
for Specific Purposes: Some Central Issues” by Arnó, Soler, and Rueda. They define LSP or ESP 
(English for Specific Purposes) in terms of a comprehensive framework proposed by Dudley-Evans and 
St. John (1998), within which IT is approached from two different perspectives. Thus, the book covers 
two main strands that determine its organization. One strand deals with pedagogy, namely the latest 
trends in CALL applications, while the other strand is concerned with research in the use of technology in 
LSP.  
Part 1, entitled “Corpus-based Studies,” contains three chapters. In “Corpus Linguistics and English for 
Academic Purposes,” Swales introduces the Michigan Corpus of Academic Spoken English (MICASE) 
and explains the relative usefulness of specialized as compared to general corpora. He describes his own 
experience with a corpus-linguistic and concordancing approaches to studying academic speech and 
provides examples of pedagogical applications of corpus linguistics to the teaching of LSP 
In “Interaction in Academic Spoken English: The Use of ‘I’ and ‘You’ in the MICASE,” Fortanet Gómez 
reports on a study to establish the frequency, referents, and discourse functions of the pronouns “I” and 
“you.” Using MICASE for quantitative research and a sub-corpus of five lectures for qualitative research, 
Is’haaq Akbarian Review of Information Technology in Languages for Specific Purposes 
 
Language Learning & Technology 23 
 
she found that interaction in lectures was associated with a higher frequency of the use of “I,” whereas 
monologic language in the MICASE showed a tendency towards more frequent use of “you.” Her 
research highlights the usefulness of MICASE as a specialized corpus.  
In “Exploring Epistemic Modality in Academic Discourse Using Corpora,” Rizomilioti examines 
epistemic modality (i.e., “the speaker’s confidence or lack of confidence in the truth of the proposition 
expressed,” p. 55), in three small corpora from articles in biology, literary criticism, and archaeology 
journals, aiming to find similarities and differences across disciplines in terms of the expression of both 
reduced and emphasized certainty. Overall, the researcher found a high degree of uncertainty in 
archaeology articles, whereas certain claims were made with certainty in biology. The highest levels of 
certainty were observed in literary criticism. While showing the need for further investigation, this study 
produces evidence-derived pedagogical materials for teaching academic writing in the three fields.  
Part 2, “Computer-Mediated Communication,” includes three chapters. Apple and Gilabert Guerrero 
report on a collaborative tandem e-mail project between LSP students in Dublin and Barcelona in their 
article “Finding Common Ground in LSP: A Computer-Mediated Communication Project.” They 
investigated two tandem groups who wrote to each other – one with and one without assigned tasks. The 
results showed that in task-assigned learning, LSP learners “produc[ed] more language, more regularly 
and in a sustained way” (p. 85), suggesting that task-based learning is a flexible framework for 
implementing tasks and catering to learners’ specific needs in computer-mediated communication 
contexts. 
In “Uncovering Tasks and Texts – Teaching ESP Through Online Workshops,” Hussin describes two 
interactive online workshops: one to develop cross-cultural communication skills of ESL  nursing 
students, and the other to teach ESL business students to write a research conference paper and avoid 
plagiarism. Hussin discusses the positive features and challenges of each workshop. She concludes that 
online workshops are effective in helping students develop and manage their communication skills and 
academic writing. 
In “The SMAIL Project: A Dialogic Approach to Computer-Assisted Language Learning for the LSP 
Classroom,” Caballero Rodríguez and Ruiz Madrid report on developing a multimedia learning 
environment, called SMAIL, to promote autonomous language learning. SMAIL was implemented in 
accordance with the European Portfolio for Languages following the guidelines proposed by the 
European Council. The system includes a learning styles questionnaire and a proficiency test in the 
foreign language (French, Spanish, German, and English) to build a learner profile. The materials are 
organized according to different genres, such as instruction leaflets, car ads, and argumentative texts. 
Additionally, “journey metaphors” (i.e., discovering a language through a journey in which the learner 
enters or discovers a new culture through its language) act as a blueprint for presenting learning activities 
while taking into account learner diversity and autonomy. The authors describe a case study of how 
learners interact with SMAIL and choose activities based on their personal interests. 
Part 3 is titled “Specific Technology-Based Projects in Different Educational Settings”. It contains two 
chapters. In “Technology for Trust, Collaboration, and Autonomy among Asian Students at the 
University Level,” Devaux, Otterbach, and Cheng who represent three institutions (China, the United 
States, and Taiwan) describe a collaborative technology-based project to help LSP students from Taiwan 
and China to transition from an educational approach that stresses the accumulation of information and 
memorization to a more active one. By situating their project in the zone of proximal development 
(Vygotsky, 1978), the authors created a scaffolding environment within which they helped students build 
trust, move from isolation to collaboration, and develop autonomous learning. The authors reported a 
substantial improvement in writing academic papers, working as a team, building a community, 
communicating and collaborating, and conducting original research. 
 In “Networking for Learning and Teaching English for Specific Purposes,” Healey describes a three-year 
Is’haaq Akbarian Review of Information Technology in Languages for Specific Purposes 
 
Language Learning & Technology 24 
 
project in which specialists from Oregon conducted workshops aimed at improving skills in e-mail and 
Internet use in an EFL/ESP environment in Tunisia where the use of technology and the Internet is scarce. 
The project ended in collaboration both among faculty members of different departments and between the 
participating institutions.  
Part 4, titled “Technology and Learner Autonomy in Higher Education,” contains three chapters. In 
“Learning English with Computers at the University Level,” Lasagabaster and Sierra used a questionnaire 
to investigate the impressions of 59 undergraduate students about their learning experiences in a 
university multimedia laboratory in a self-access center in the Basque Autonomous Community. Based on 
the results, they suggest that the teachers could analyze the software programs used in the courses and 
consider the students’ reactions “to refine the pedagogical quality of these materials and their usage to 
better meet LSP students’ needs” (p. 171).  
In “Using the Internet to Promote Autonomous Learning in ESP,” Luzón Marco and González Pueyo 
explore the use of the Internet for ESP teaching as well as ways in which teachers can exploit Internet-
based materials to design activities to promote autonomous learning by ESP learners. They present a 
sample Internet-based activity (http://webquest.sdsu.edu/) in which a group of students is presented with 
an authentic situation along with a specific task such as solving a problem, or making a decision. The 
authors conclude that such activities provide scaffolding and increase motivation, integration, learner-
centeredness, and strategy use. They caution, however, that the use of technology does not per se 
guarantee autonomy building, unless teachers take into account the students’ language level and the 
relevance of the activities to the students’ goals, as well as provide guidance, feedback, and support.  
In “Integration of E-learning into a Tertiary Educational Context,” Trinder describes the integration of an 
e-learning component into face-to-face Business English classes in Austria. She discusses considerations 
in designing web-delivered courses (Chapelle, 2001) such as learner fit, language learning potential, and 
focus on meaning and presents students’ perceptions concerning the effectiveness of the classes. As 
Trinder argues, integrating an e-learning component into a program “involves a predisposition of the 
learner to exploiting it to its best advantage” (p. 205). This predisposition depends on learner internal 
factors, such as needs and learning styles, interacting with contextual factors (e.g., endorsement by 
teachers and peers), and courseware intrinsic factors (e.g. motivation). 
Part five, “Terminology and Lexis: Teaching and Translation,” includes two chapters. Piqué-Angordans, 
Posteguillo, and Melcion in “The Development of a Computer Science Dictionary, or How to Help 
Translate the Untranslateable” report on a collaborative effort by researchers at two Spanish and one 
British university to develop a bilingual dictionary of computing (English-Spanish/Spanish-English). The 
dictionary is based on a corpus of 1,125,768 words, consisting of sub-corpora of different texts and 
glossaries, and consists of words selected for relevance, clarity, and economy. Entries include head word, 
part of speech, quotations, and technical commentary.  
In “The Importance of Key Words for LSP,” Scott considers the application of the notion of “keyness” to 
LSP. Keyness “presupposes an interest in text and textuality” (p. 232). There are two main underlying 
aspects of “keyness”: namely, importance and aboutness, or what a communicative event is about. Scott 
argues that certain procedures might be used to identify the items with “great aboutness” as opposed to 
those with “no aboutness” and then to consider what the relationships may be between such keywords and 
other items in the middle of such a continuum (p. 234). He then suggests using technological tools to help 
students identify the main point(s) of a text. He also discusses different levels and types of context and 
gives a useful example for detecting “keyness” using WordSmith Tools (Scott, 1999). In the remainder of 
the chapter Scott looks at keywords from a pedagogical perspective, concluding that they “can provide a 
further way of raising language awareness” (p. 241).  
In “Conclusions,” Arnó, Soler, and Rueda discuss the individual chapters from the perspectives of 
specialized language, online communication, CALL in LSP, distance education, and learner autonomy. 
Is’haaq Akbarian Review of Information Technology in Languages for Specific Purposes 
 
Language Learning & Technology 25 
 
They believe that “it is no longer a matter of how to incorporate technology, but rather how to adapt LSP 
practice to a context of constant technological changes” (p. 257). The editors list key factors in the 
process of adaptation to the changes brought about by IT. Among them are the need to adapt LSP practice 
to technological changes; the need for LSP teachers to catch up with their students’ technological skills; 
technological innovation and collaboration among LSP practitioners; and external factors that impact the 
adoption of technology by LSP practitioners 
Readers of Information Technology in Languages for Specific Purposes: Issues and Prospects will benefit 
from the variety of perspectives on the use of technologies in LSP teaching, learning, and research. 
However, much more work remains to be done. For instance, future practitioners and researchers could 
focus on the application of IT to listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills, as well as grammar, 
vocabulary, and pronunciation.  
One limitation of the book is that it is limited to papers presented at the 6th
To conclude, Information Technology in Languages for Specific Purposes: Issues and Prospects is an 
informative, well written, and timely contribution to the field of second language learning. Despite the 
above-mentioned shortcomings, the volume is a helpful reference for LSP practitioners and researchers.  
 International Conference on 
Languages for Specific Purposes. As a result, some important areas of LSP are not included. For instance, 
the volume could have benefitted from the inclusion of a chapter on the use of IT in LSP assessment. A 
chapter dealing with the limitations of technology in teaching LSP would have provided a needed balance 
between the positive and negative effects of technology in teaching LSP.  
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER  
Is’haaq Akbarian is Assistant Professor in the Department of English Language and Literature at the 
University of Qom, Qom, Iran, where he teaches reading courses and introductory research methods to 
undergraduate students. He received his Ph.D. in TEFL from the University of Tehran. His areas of 
interest include learning, teaching, and assessing vocabulary. He has reviewed materials for English for 
Specific Purposes and ELT Journal.  
E-mail: i-akbarian@qom.ac.ir, ishaaq.akbarian@gmail.com 
 
REFERENCES  
Chapelle, C. (2001). Computer applications in second language acquisition. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Dudley-Evans, T., & St. John, M. (1998). Development in English for specific purposes: A 
multidisciplinary approach. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Scott, M. (1999). WordSmith Tools 4. Oxford: Oxford University Press. (Also version 5 available at 
http://www.lexically.net/wordsmith/) 
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
  
