Language Learning & Technology 
http:/llt.msu.edu/vol14num2/review1.pdf 
June 2010, Volume 14, Number 2 
pp. 17–21  
 
Copyright © 2010, ISSN 1094-3501 17 
 
 
REVIEW OF LEARNING LANGUAGE AND CULTURE VIA PUBLIC 
INTERNET DISCUSSION FORUMS 
Learning Language and Culture via Public 
Internet Discussion Forums 
 
Barbara E. Hanna and Juliana de Nooy 
 
2009 
ISBN: 0230576303 
US $80.00 (hardcover) 
221 pp. 
 
Palgrave Macmillan 
New York, NY 
  
 
Review by Sonja Lind, University of California, Irvine 
In Learning Language and Culture via Public Internet Discussion Forums, authors Barbara Hanna and 
Juliana de Nooy ask the reader to reconsider using public Internet forums, a “neglected genre” (p. 1), in 
language teaching. Forums are, in fact, thriving. According to Big Boards, a forum ranking website, 
popular discussion forums such as 4chan and Offtopic.com have attracted 22,000 to 50,000 members and 
have hosted 127,000,000 to 425,000,000 posts since the sites’ emergence in 2004 and 2001, respectively. 
And these are just two of thousands of active online forums, many of which are general and cultural 
discussion forums related to video gaming and role-playing. However, public discussion forums have 
been excluded from research literature on language learning and technology. As a result, researchers are 
left with “very little awareness of pedagogical use [of such forums]” (p. 1). Hanna and de Nooy, both 
lecturers teaching French in Australia, have written this book in response to this research gap. Their 
purpose is to “look at what happens when culture becomes an issue online” (p. 10). The book is addressed 
at both teachers and researchers, and it suggests a focus on teaching content, not linguistic accuracy, in 
the teaching of writing. 
The Internet forum originated as a type of electronic bulletin board to which anyone could post 
information and asynchronously respond to others’ questions or comments on topics as diverse as kite-
flying or basket-weaving. Most information on discussion forums is user-generated, but contributors 
cannot edit others’ entries. This differs from wikis, which allow users to edit entries and act as 
moderators. In forums, on the other hand, a moderator is often hired to sift through posts and comments. 
For the most part, these moderators delete inappropriate content such as name-calling and obscenities. 
Most forums are also text-based, with few visual or auditory elements. Additionally, forums often 
encourage discussions that, under the wrong circumstances, can become inflammatory: commentators 
may be personally attacked or “flamed,” and emotions can run high. Knowing how to position oneself in 
this milieu can be challenging, as Hanna and de Nooy note: “Public Internet discussion is a way of getting 
to know some of the locals in the global village, but it will mean doing so not only in their language but 
largely on their terms” (p. 189). In other words, getting to know these locals necessitates learning how to 
speak in the locals’ own terms. Cultural differences remain, the authors insist, despite the ideal of a 
borderless, neutral Internet society, and these cultural differences can incite cultural clashes. 
 
Sonja Lind Review of Learning Language and Culture  
 
Language Learning & Technology 18 
 
As a result, Hanna and de Nooy posit that language teachers should include discussion forums in their 
curriculum, in order to help language learners develop intercultural communicative competence. They 
claim that discussion forums can be taught as part of a genre-based approach to writing: “Not only may 
cultural differences in, for example, letter writing be carried over into a new genre, but a quite different 
genre altogether (casual conversation, for example) may emerge as the primary model for practice” (p. 
37). Appropriate cultural behavior can be learned in forums through “explicit commentary [by 
moderators] on the appropriateness of contributions,” “implicit commentary [by moderators or other 
users] on [cultural] appropriateness,” “informal induction of newcomers to the forum by seasoned 
contributors,” “comparisons made with other genres and situations,” and, of course, “instances of protest 
or conflict [by posters who use the forum as a way to express their opinions]” (p. 8). However, not all 
language learners receive such feedback from teachers or other forum users that inform their cultural 
positioning, and some may even receive negative responses from forum users. As a result, the authors 
emphasize the need for students to be prepared for negative reactions prior to entering a discourse 
community in which there are certain cultural expectations. 
At this point, it is helpful to draw a parallel between Hanna and de Nooy’s genre theory and Jim Gee’s 
model of “primary” and “secondary” discourses (Gee, 2001, p. 54). Primary discourses are native social 
and linguistic habits of any person; in contrast, secondary discourses are acquired later, learned as part of 
socialization into other social and cultural discourses beyond those of one’s family; for example, 
secondary discourses are learned through socialization in outside groups or institutions, such as schools, 
churches, and businesses. As more layers of secondary discourses are added throughout a person’s life, 
the person’s background knowledge becomes more culturally complex. Gee (2001) states that “[t]hese 
secondary discourses all build on, and extend, the uses of language we acquired as part of our primary 
discourse” (p. 541). Similarly, Hanna and de Nooy liken the process through which language learners are 
gradually exposed to an unfamiliar genre to foreign language discussion forums: with the teachers’ help, 
learners can step further in and become confident and even culturally fluent in the secondary discourse 
practices of a forum. 
However, as Gee (2001) notes, the primary discourse often impacts the learning of a secondary discourse, 
and teachers need to be aware of the cultural influences of the first language. According to Hanna and de 
Nooy, just because a forum contributor uses colloquial language and writes in brief sentences in one 
language does not mean that this is an appropriate way to contribute to a forum in another language. No 
learner can assume that “the Internet removes cultural differences” (p. 20). The authors continue, “Online 
behaviour, then, is linked to other culturally determined modes of behaviour, but not in predictable ways” 
(p. 64). Furthermore, “What happens in one online context may not happen in another” (p. 39). In other 
words, language learners need to be shown by their teachers how one genre, such as discussion forums, 
can be read and written differently.  
Learning Language and Culture via Public Internet Discussion Forums contains ten chapters and is 
divided into two parts, the first part focusing on cultural differences between British and French online 
newspapers, and the second part focusing on individual language learners and intercultural 
communication styles. Both parts interweave research studies with theory and pedagogical implications. 
All research methods are qualitative, and include ethnography, cultural studies, and discourse analysis of 
online text. The most interesting chapters are those in which the authors describe their research of French 
language forums. In Chapter 3, for instance, the authors analyze the similarities and differences between 
two French newspaper forums (Le Monde; Le Nouvel Observateur) and two British newspaper forums 
(The Guardian; BBC). The data was gathered between 2000 and 2002. Hanna and de Nooy found that, on 
the British sites, comments often dispersed into tangents; contributors typically did not debate with each 
other, language was more conversational, contributors used an informal register, and comments were 
brief. However, on the French sites (see Figure 1 for screenshot of Le Monde discussion board), 
contributors remained strictly on topic even after pages of discussion, debating was robust, language was 
Sonja Lind Review of Learning Language and Culture  
 
Language Learning & Technology 19 
 
more formal, contributors used a formal register, and comments were lengthy, up to 500 words each.  
Another chapter, Chapter 6, focuses on four French students and their participation strategies in the online 
newspaper forum Forums Le Monde in 1999 and 2000. Two of the students were British and two were 
American, but all four were studying French. The two British students posted introductions in French 
(“Hello! My name is...”) and asked for penpals, but their introductions were considered trite by other 
users, and although they were mostly positively received, they also received a few negative responses. As 
a result, the British students became discouraged and did not continue to participate in the discussions. 
However, the two American students prefaced their comments by apologizing for their French language 
skills. These two students also introduced themselves as foreigners. In sharp contrast to the two British 
students, both Americans were welcomed by forum participants. Interestingly, one of the American 
students, David, wrote mostly in English, and he too was welcomed as much as Laura, the other 
American student, who wrote mostly in French. This study indicates that neither friendliness, an approach 
the British students used, nor linguistic accuracy, a skill David lacked, indicated intercultural competence. 
Cultural positioning was more important than either fluency or friendliness, and the authors imply that 
teachers should emphasize content over accuracy in teaching writing.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Forums Le Monde, the forum for French newspaper Le Monde.  
Forums are categorized. For example, in the screenshot above, there are two categories: “l'actualité” (“In 
the news”) and “International.” Under “In the news,” there are two subcategories, which alternate 
according to the latest news: In this screenshot, “Politique française: les régionales” (“French politics: 
Regional”) and “Musique, cinéma: la mort de Jean Ferrat” (Music, movies: The death of [French singer-
songwriter] Jean Ferrat.”) 
Another chapter, Chapter 9, discusses the authors’ experience in using public Internet forums to develop 
French written argumentation skills. The action research project involved 32 students enrolled in the same 
  
Sonja Lind Review of Learning Language and Culture  
 
Language Learning & Technology 20 
 
third-year university French class. Students were asked to post at least five contributions to a French 
newspaper forum over a four-month semester. However, before posting to the forums, the instruction was 
scaffolded, and students familiarized themselves with the communicative conventions in the forums. 
Hanna and de Nooy note, “It seems advisable therefore to preface any student involvement with an 
investigation of what successful participation would mean for a particular forum” (p. 117). In this context, 
“successful participation” meant that responses to student postings would be mostly positive, contrary to 
the students’ initial doubts. This finding implies that communicating in the target language may be 
viewed positively even if the communication is not free of linguistic errors, as was the case with David, 
the American student who mostly wrote in English. Again, the emphasis is not on fluency or errors, but 
on how the students positioned themselves culturally. 
However, Hanna and de Nooy also caution that while the teachers enjoyed teaching learners how to 
contribute to the forums, students were not always enthusiastic about the forum assignments. One class 
evaluation revealed that most students preferred oral discussions to online postings, and only five of the 
32 students felt that “forum participation [was] the most valuable aspect of the course” (p. 177). Perhaps 
this may have been due to the fact that the students were required to write at least five 300-word posts on 
the forums and received grades for their work even though they were not rewarded for accuracy, just for 
participation. Unfortunately, the authors do not explore the effect of this evaluation on the value students 
placed on the activity. 
Nevertheless, Hanna and de Nooy insist, that learning through forums takes students beyond classroom 
cultures and learner-to-learner communication. Such forums provide opportunities to join in an authentic 
cultural practice in the foreign language on its own terms, for neither teachers nor students determine the 
rules and conventions of the online community (p. 186). In other words, the authors maintain that 
authentic communication in a foreign language helped students become part of the discourse community 
in a real way, not in a way that resembled role-play. Language teachers have long emphasized the need 
for authentic communication, and this book certainly helps outline what communication may look like in 
practice. 
However, Hanna and de Nooy could have addressed the following potentially negative aspects of online 
forum participation for language learners. First, while forums do give students, particularly shyer ones, a 
chance to communicate with native speakers, most students preferred oral discussions with classmates 
and native speakers to forum participation. Implications include a greater emphasis on oral discussions 
rather than written assignments in language classes. Second, the text-focused approach of forums can be 
alienating for learners with different learning preferences, such as visual, auditory, or kinesthetic styles. 
Furthermore, the most popular discussion forums online are gamer or “picture rating” forums, where the 
emphasis is on kinesthetic (gaming) or visual (photos) information. If the authors' goal was for their 
students to interact with native speakers in an authentic context, they might have focused on a less text-
based genre as well. 
Certainly the newspaper forums will provide language learners with “insider” cultural knowledge, as the 
authors contend, but did not state whose culture would be learned. Not all French speakers read or 
participate in newspaper forums. However, the authors seem to imply that only formal French is 
“authentic.” In contrast, the authors might have focused on more colloquial French in other forums, such 
as a French video gaming forum. Supplemental research on other forums, such as gaming or hobby 
forums, would provide a wider perspective on learning and teaching with this technology. 
Additionally, a comparison between blogs, traditional course management software, and forums could 
also have benefited this book. Blogs and wikis are popular with many language teachers, probably more 
so than discussion forums. A recent Alexa review of the top 500 sites on the web indicated that search 
engines (e.g., Google), social networking sites (e.g., Facebook), media sites (e.g., YouTube), and blogs 
and microblogs (e.g., Blogger, Twitter) represent the most visited sites internationally 
Sonja Lind Review of Learning Language and Culture  
 
Language Learning & Technology 21 
 
(http://www.alexa.com/topsites). There are no discussion forums, newspaper or otherwise, in the top 20 
sites, but two blogging sites and one microblogging site (Blogger, Wordpress, and Twitter) are. Blogs 
have long been used in language classrooms (Black, 2006; Bloch, 2007; Lam, 2000), possibly for their 
easy accessibility. For instance, while most discussion forums often require members to sign up for 
accounts and generally do not allow users to design their own pages, add photos, videos, or a blogroll (a 
list of the user’s favorite websites), Blogger and Wordpress blogs are free and customizable, and users 
can post photos, audio, and videos immediately. In many cases, students do not need to set up accounts to 
make comments on other blog posts. 
In general, discussion forums appear to be conducive to a communicative language teaching (CLT) 
approach. One of the more interesting findings from Hanna and de Nooy’s research is that native speaker 
feedback in these newspaper forums focuses more on the content rather than the accuracy of the 
contributions, Clearly, discussion forums could have potential for language teachers who teach writing to 
advanced learners and who want to take a more relaxed approach to grammatical accuracy and focus on 
content and academic writing conventions. Internet discussion forums can be one effective way of 
introducing language learners to cultural and academic functions in writing: “A public discussion forum is 
not a neutral space … but a cultural practice, with specific conventions and patterns of behaviour” (pp. 
184–185). Apprenticing language learners into a language community is, after all, the pedagogical goal of 
language teachers. These teachers will find the book an interesting read and a useful addition to the 
research on authentic materials and the genre approach to teaching. 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER  
Sonja Lind is a second-year Ph.D. student in Education, with a specialization in Language, Literacy and 
Technology, at the University of California, Irvine. Her research interests include identity and community 
construction, and discourse and text analysis. She is currently researching Third Culture Kid identity and 
community formation in online communities. 
Email: slind@uci.edu 
 
REFERENCES  
Black, R. W. (2006). Language, culture, and identity in online fanfiction. E-Learning, 3(2), 170–184. 
Bloch, J. (2007). Abdullah’s blogging: A generation 1.5 student enters the blogosphere. Language 
Learning & Technology, 11(2), 128–141. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num2/bloch/default.html  
Gee, J. P. (1997). Thinking, learning, and reading: The situated sociocultural mind. In D. Kirshner & J. A. 
Whitson (Eds.), Situated cognition: Social, semiotic, and psychological perspectives (pp. 235–259). 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Gee, J. P. (2001). What is literacy? In E. Cushman, E. R. Kintgen, B. Kroll, & M. Rose (Eds.), Literacy: 
A critical sourcebook (pp. 537–544). Boston, MA: Bedford/St. Martin’s. 
Krashen, S. D. (1988). Second language acquisition and second language learning. New York: Prentice-
Hall International. 
Lam, W. S. E. (2000). Second language literacy and the design of the self: A case study of a teenager 
writing on the Internet. TESOL Quarterly, 34, 457–482. 
  
