Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol14num2/chenbaker.pdf 
June 2010, Volume 14, Number 2 
pp. 30–49 
 
Copyright © 2010, ISSN 1094-3501 30 
 
LEXICAL BUNDLES IN L1 AND L2 ACADEMIC WRITING 
Yu-Hua Chen and Paul Baker  
Lancaster University 
This paper adopts an automated frequency-driven approach to identify frequently-used 
word combinations (i.e., lexical bundles) in academic writing. Lexical bundles retrieved 
from one corpus of published academic texts and two corpora of student academic writing 
(one L1, the other L2), were investigated both quantitatively and qualitatively. Published 
academic writing was found to exhibit the widest range of lexical bundles whereas L2 
student writing showed the smallest range. Furthermore, some high-frequency expressions 
in published texts, such as in the context of, were underused in both student corpora, while 
the L2 student writers overused certain expressions (e.g., all over the world) which native 
academics rarely used. The findings drawn from structural and functional analyses of 
lexical bundles also have some pedagogical implications. 
INTRODUCTION 
“Phraseology” (Granger & Meunier, 2008; Meunier & Granger, 2007) and “formulaic 
sequences/language” (Schmitt, 2004; Wray, 2002, 2008) are two umbrella terms often used to refer to 
various types of multi-word units. In recent years, an increasing number of studies have made use of 
corpus data to add weight to the importance of multi-word units in language. For instance Altenberg 
(1998), in his exploration of the London-Lund Corpus, estimated that 80% of the words in the corpus 
formed part of recurrent word combinations. As Wray (2002, p. 9) observes, however, there is a “problem 
of terminology” when describing word co-occurrence. On the one hand, the same term might be used in 
different ways by different scholars; on the other hand, various terms are used to refer to similar or even 
the same notion of word co-occurrence. Some examples of such terms include clusters (Hyland, 2008a; 
Schmitt, Grandage & Adolphs, 2004; also used in the corpus tool WordSmith), recurrent word 
combinations (Altenberg, 1998; De Cock, 1998), phrasicon (De Cock, Granger, Leech, & McEnery, 
1998), n-grams (Stubbs, 2007a, 2007b) and lexical bundles (e.g., Biber & Barbieri, 2007; Cortes, 2002). 
These terms—clusters, phrasicon, n-grams, recurrent word combinations, lexical bundles—actually refer 
to continuous word sequences retrieved by taking a corpus-driven approach with specified frequency and 
distribution criteria. The retrieved recurrent sequences are fixed multi-word units that have customary 
pragmatic and/or discourse functions, used and recognized by the speakers of a language within certain 
contexts. This methodology is considered to be a frequency-based approach for determining phraseology 
(see Granger & Paquot, 2008).  
From a psycholinguistic viewpoint, formulaic language has been found to have “a processing advantage 
over creatively generated language” for non-native as well as native speakers (Conklin & Schmitt, 2008, 
p. 72), although different psycholinguistic studies have used various types of formulaic language, such as 
idioms (e.g., take the bull by the horn) or non-idiomatic phrases (e.g., as soon as), as the target forms. A 
particularly inspirational study was conducted by Jiang and Nekrasova (2007), in which they utilized 
corpus-derived recurrent word combinations as materials in two online grammaticality-judgment 
experiments. Their findings provide “prevailing evidence in support of the holistic nature of formula 
representation and processing in second language speakers” (Jiang & Nekrasova, 2007, p. 433). Schmitt 
et al. (2004) also investigated the psycholinguistic validity of corpus-derived recurrent clusters and share 
some similarities with Jiang and Nekrasova (2007).  
In a series of lexical bundle studies conducted by Biber and colleagues (Biber & Barbieri, 2007; Biber & 
Conrad, 1999; Biber, Conrad, & Cortes, 2003, 2004; Biber, Johansson, Leech, Conrad, & Finegan, 1999), 
it was found that conversation and academic prose present distinctive distribution patterns of lexical 
Yu-Hua Chen and Paul Baker Lexical Bundles in L1 and L2 Academic Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 31 
 
bundles. For example, most bundles in conversation are clausal, whereas most bundles in academic prose 
are phrasal. Other studies of bundles have focused primarily on comparisons between expert and non-
expert writing. Cortes (2002) investigated bundles in native freshman compositions and found that the 
bundles used by these novice writers were functionally different from those in published academic prose. 
In another study, Cortes (2004) compared native student writing with that in academic journals, 
concluding that students rarely used the lexical bundles identified in the corpus of published writing. Even 
if they did, the students used these bundles in a different manner. Working with academic writing only, 
Hyland (2008b) indicated that there was disciplinary variation in the use of lexical bundles. He also 
investigated the role of lexical bundles in published academic prose and in postgraduate writing and 
found that postgraduate students tended to employ more formulaic expressions than native academics in 
order to display their competence (Hyland, 2008a).  
To date, only a few studies of L2 written data have performed structural and functional categorization of 
lexical bundles. Although Hyland, in his two studies (2008a, 2008b), included masters’ theses and 
doctoral dissertations produced by L2 English students in Hong Kong, he did not begin from a 
perspective of second-language learning. Instead, he treated L2 postgraduate writing as “highly 
proficient,” on the ground that all the data in his corpus of texts had been awarded high passes. Drawing 
on the previous research, the present study aims to compare the use of recurrent word combinations in 
native-speaker and non-native speaker academic writing in order to reveal the potential problems in 
second language learning. Quantitative and qualitative analyses were carried out on three corpora in order 
to identify similarities and differences in recurrent word combinations at different levels of writing 
proficiency. One corpus (the L2 or learner corpus) contained writing from L1 Chinese learners of L2 
English, while the two other comprised L1 writing: one from academics (whom we term “expert” writers) 
and the other university students (who are similar in background to the L1 Chinese learners, aside from 
their first language). Lexical bundles is adopted as the primary term throughout this study, as it is used by 
Biber in a series of studies upon which the theoretical and analytical framework of the current study is 
based. Another term, recurrent word combination, is also used interchangeably, given its transparent 
literal meaning. 
DATA AND METHODOLOGY 
Data 
Two existing corpora are used in the present study: the Freiburg-Lancaster-Oslo/Bergen (FLOB) corpus, 
and the British Academic Written English (BAWE) corpus. To ensure comparability, only part of each 
corpus was selected for investigation. The FLOB corpus is a one-million-word corpus of written British 
English from the early 1990s, comprising fifteen genre categories. For the current study, only the category 
of academic prose, FLOB-J, was used to represent native expert writing. FLOB-J contains eighty 2,000-
word excerpts from published academic texts, retrieved from journals or book sections. With regard to L1 
and L2 student academic writing, parts of the BAWE corpus were utilized. The BAWE corpus, released 
in 2008, contains approximately 3,000 pieces (approx. 6.5m. words) of proficient assessed student writing 
from British universities. Two subcorpora were selected from the BAWE corpus: BAWE-CH contains 
essays produced by L1 Chinese students of L2 English, and BAWE-EN is a comparable dataset 
contributed by peer L1 English students. FLOB-J, BAWE-CH and BAWE-EN cover a wide range of 
disciplines, including arts and humanities, life sciences, physical sciences and social sciences (for BAWE, 
see Alsop & Nesi, 2009; for FLOB, see Hundt, Sand & Siemund, 1998). The size of each finalized corpus 
for investigation is around 150,000 words (see Table 1). 
 
Yu-Hua Chen and Paul Baker Lexical Bundles in L1 and L2 Academic Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 32 
 
Table 1. Constituents of the Three Academic Corpora 
Representation Corpus Word count Average length of text No. of texts 
Native expert writing FLOB-J 164,742 2,059 80 
Native peer writing BAWE-EN 155,781 2,596 60 
Learner writing BAWE-CH 146,872 2,771 53 
Operationalization 
Several key criteria have been pinpointed in the literature regarding how to generate a list of lexical 
bundles using automated corpus tools. The first criterion is the cut-off frequency, which determines the 
number of lexical bundles to be included in the analysis. The normalized frequency threshold for large 
written corpora generally ranges between 20-40 per million words (e.g.,  Biber et al., 2004; Hyland, 
2008b), while for relatively small spoken corpora, a raw cut-off frequency is often used, ranging from 2-
10 (e.g., Altenberg, 1998; De Cock, 1998). The second criterion is the requirement that combinations 
have to occur in different texts, usually in at least 3-5 texts (e.g., Biber & Barbieri, 2007; Cortes, 2004), or 
10% of texts (e.g., Hyland, 2008a), which helps to avoid idiosyncrasies from individual writers/speakers. 
The last issue concerns the length of word combinations, usually 2-, 3-, 4-, 5-, or 6-word units. Four-word 
sequences are found to be the most researched length for writing studies, probably because the number of 
4-word bundles is often within a manageable size (around 100) for manual categorization and 
concordance checks. The frequency and dispersion thresholds adopted vary from study to study, and even 
the sizes of corpora and subcorpora differ drastically, ranging from around 40,000 to over 5 million words. 
After repeated experiments with the corpus data under investigation, the frequency and distribution 
thresholds for determining 4-word lexical bundles were set to 4 times or more (approximately 25 times 
per million words on average), occurring in at least three texts. This resulted in an “optimum” number of 
bundles, which was considered sufficiently representative of the corpora being examined. One might 
argue that an identical standardized threshold, such as 20 or 40 times per million words, should be applied 
to each of the corpora investigated, as generally reported in the literature. However, when a normalized 
rate is converted to raw frequencies, it substantially affects the number of generated word combinations 
when comparing corpora of various sizes. For instance, if we compare an 80,000-word corpus with a 
40,000-word corpus with a cut-off standardized frequency set at 40 times per million words, it means that 
the converted raw-frequency threshold for the larger corpus is 3.2, whereas the converted raw-frequency 
threshold for the smaller corpus is much lower, at 1.6. Any decimals have to be rounded up or down in 
order to function as an operational cut-off frequency. Yet rounding down 3.2 to 3 results in a normalized 
rate of 37.5 whereas rounding up 1.6 to 2 generates a normalized rate of 50, both of which are different 
from the originally reported frequency threshold of 40 times per million words. Reporting only the 
standardized frequency criterion could therefore be misleading, because a standardized cut-off frequency 
would inevitably lose its expected impartiality after being converted into raw frequencies corresponding 
to different corpus sizes. In this study, it could be argued that both the raw cut-off frequency and 
corresponding normalized frequency should be reported in order to reflect transparently the threshold 
adopted. For the sake of comparison, if the frequency threshold is set at 25 times per million words for the 
present study, the converted raw frequencies for each corpus are 3.7, 3.9 and 4.1 times respectively, 
which are all rounded up or down to 4 (cf. Table 2 and Table 3). 
 
Yu-Hua Chen and Paul Baker Lexical Bundles in L1 and L2 Academic Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 33 
 
Table 2. Raw and Corresponding Normalized Frequency Thresholds Adopted 
Corpus 
 
Set raw frequency threshold 
 Corresponding normalized frequency 
(per million words) 
FLOB-J  4  24.3 
BAWE-EN  4  25.7 
BAWE-CH  4  27.2 
Table 3. Normalized and Corresponding Raw Frequency Thresholds for Comparison 
Corpus 
 Set normalized frequency threshold 
(per million words) 
 
Corresponding raw frequency 
FLOB-J  25  3.7 
BAWE-EN  25  3.9 
BAWE-CH  25  4.1 
After automatic retrieval of 4-word clusters using the corpus tool WordSmith 4.0 (Scott, 2007), word 
sequences containing content words that were present in the essay questions (e.g., financial and non 
financial), or any other context-dependent bundles, usually incorporating proper nouns (e.g., in the UK 
and, the Second World War), were manually excluded from the extracted bundle lists. It was also found 
that overlapping word sequences could inflate the results of quantitative analysis. Overlaps were thus 
checked manually via concordance analyses. Two major types of overlaps are discussed here. One is 
“complete overlap,” referring to two 4-word bundles which are actually derived from a single 5-word 
combination. For example, it has been suggested and has been suggested that both occur six times, 
coming from the longer expression it has been suggested that. The other type of overlap is “complete 
subsumption,” referring to a situation where two or more 4-word bundles overlap and the occurrences of 
one of the bundles subsume those of the other overlapping bundle(s). For example, as a result of occurs 
17 times, while a result of the occurs five times, both of which occur as a subset of the 5-word bundle as 
a result of the. Each case of the above overlapping word sequences (12 cases in total) were combined into 
one longer unit so as to guard against inflated results.  
A further potential problem when comparing bundles across corpora involves what is actually counted 
(i.e., type/token distinction). Should we count the number of types of bundles (e.g., counting as a result of 
and it is possible to each as one type of bundle), or should we count the total occurrence of bundles (e.g., 
as a result of might occur 20 times in one corpus and 50 times in another)? One corpus could exhibit a 
very narrow range of bundles but have very high frequencies of them, while another might have the 
opposite pattern. We therefore distinguished between different types of bundles (types) and frequencies of 
bundles (tokens).1 The numbers of bundle types and tokens, before and after data refinement, including 
removing context-dependent bundles and overlapping ones, are shown in Table 4 below.  
Table 4. Number of Bundles Before and After the Removal of Context-Dependent Bundles and Overlaps 
Corpus 
Before refinement  After refinement 
No. of lexical 
bundles (types) 
No. of lexical 
bundles (tokens)  
No. of lexical 
bundles (types) 
No. of lexical 
bundles (tokens) 
FLOB-J 118 749  108 704 
BAWE-EN 120 757  104 667 
BAWE-CH 90 554  80 507 
 
Yu-Hua Chen and Paul Baker Lexical Bundles in L1 and L2 Academic Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 34 
 
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS 
Our analyses in the following section are based on the recurrent word combinations retrieved and refined 
(for the full list, see Appendix). In this section, structural and functional comparisons are made between 
the three groups of different writing proficiency levels. At the beginning of each sub-section, Structures 
or Discourse Functions, we begin by illustrating how the lexical bundles are categorized, structurally or 
functionally. Then we go on to the examples and discuss how usage of these word combinations is 
different and/or similar in the three groups of writers, in terms of both structures and discourse functions. 
For functional analysis, we look further at the quantitative comparisons with some statistical analysis. 
Structures 
The structural classification of lexical bundles in the Longman Grammar of Spoken and Written English 
(Biber et al., 1999) has been widely used in other studies on recurrent word combinations (Cortes, 2002, 
2004; Hyland, 2008a, 2008b). In the Longman Spoken and Written English (LSWE) corpus, fourteen 
categories of lexical bundles are grouped in conversation and twelve categories in academic prose with 
some overlap between them. Here, a structural classification, following the LSWE taxonomy, was carried 
out on the lexical bundles retrieved from FLOB-J, BAWE-EN and BAWE-CH. The results were then 
compared with the proportions of structural categories in the LSWE corpus. As shown in Table 5, despite 
the drastic difference in corpus size2 and different frequency thresholds (ten times per million words for 
LSWE, and four times as the raw cut-off frequency for the current study), there appears to be a surprising 
close match between the academic prose component of LSWE and FLOB-J, while the proportions for the 
two groups of student writing fluctuate to some extent when compared with the academic prose in LSWE. 
Not only does such comparison lend a good deal of credence to the use of smaller corpora with different 
frequency cut-offs in the current project, but it also indicates a gap between native expert academic prose 
and immature student academic writing. This gap might be a result of genre difference between published 
academic essays and university assignments, but it is more likely that it hinges on writing proficiency.  
Three broad structural categories were distinguished: “NP-based,” “PP-based,” and “VP-based.” NP-
based bundles include any noun phrases with post-modifier fragments, such as the role of the or the way 
in which (i.e., Category (1) in Table 5). PP-based bundles refer to those starting with a preposition plus a 
noun-phrase fragment, such as at the end of or in relation to the (i.e., Category (2) in Table 5). With 
regard to VP-based bundles, any word combinations with a verb component, such as in order to make or 
was one of the, is assigned to this category (i.e., Categories (3) to (8) in Table 5).  
In Table 5, it can be seen that the use of NP-based bundles differs the most amongst the three groups of 
writing. We thus grouped the NP-based combinations further into two structural subcategories to see 
more precisely how these three corpora were distinguished from each other. These two subcategories are 
noun phrase fragments with of (NP + of) (e.g., in the context of) and any other noun phrase fragments 
without of (NPf) (e.g., the way in which). In addition to the relatively low proportion of NP-based bundles 
when compared with FLOB-J, the Chinese student writing represented in BAWE-CH is notably different 
from the two groups of native writing in the subcategory of NPf, because there is no NPf bundle in 
BAWE-CH. In contrast, the NPf bundles present in FLOB-J are mostly used by the British students in 
BAWE-EN, although there are some slight variations (see Table 6). The NPf combinations found in this 
investigation are all part of relative clauses, such as the extent to which, the fact that this, or the way(s) in 
which. It is evident that these L2 students did not use these types of relative clause as frequently as native 
speakers did. 
 
Yu-Hua Chen and Paul Baker Lexical Bundles in L1 and L2 Academic Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 35 
 
Table 5. Proportional Distribution of Lexical Bundles (Types) Across the Structural Categories in LSWE, 
FLOB-J, BAWE-EN and BAWE-CH (cf. Biber et al., 1999) 
Category  Pattern 
ACAD 
(LSWE) 
FLOB- 
J 
BAWE- 
EN 
BAWE- 
CH Example 
NP-based (1) 
noun phrase with 
post-modifier 
fragment 
30% 32.5% 15.4% 15% the nature of the 
PP-based  (2) preposition + 
noun phrase 
fragment 
33% 36% 28.8% 32.5% as a result of 
V
P-
ba
se
d 
(3) copula be + 
NP/AdjectiveP 
2% 2.6% 10.6% 6.3% is one of the 
(4) VP with active 
verb  
-- 0.9% 2.9% 6.3% has a number of 
(5) anticipatory it + 
VP/adjectiveP + 
(complement-
clause) 
9% 8.8% 5.8% 8.8% it is possible to 
(6) passive verb + PP 
fragment 
6% 7% 10.6% 5% is based on the 
(7) (VP +) that-clause 
fragment 
5% 2.6% 4.8% 6.3% 
should be noted 
that 
(8) (verb/adjective +) 
to-clause fragment 9% 7% 18.3% 15% are likely to be 
 (9) others 6% 2.6% 2.8% 4.8% as well as the 
 Total 100% 100% 100% 100%  
Table 6. Similar NPf Bundles in FLOB-J and BAWE-EN 
Corpus FLOB-J BAWE-EN 
Bundle 
the degree to which 
the extent to which 
(5)* the extent to which 
(6) 
the fact that this 
(8) 
the fact that the (4) 
the fact that they 
(8) 
the way in which 
(4) 
the ways in which 
(14) the way in which 
(4) 
Total 
(7) 
type 5 type 4 
token 33 token 27 
* The raw frequency is indicated in brackets, and this practice is used throughout this paper. 
Secondly, a great number of NP + of and PP + of bundles can be grouped into two productive frames: “the 
+ Noun + of the/a,” and “in the + Noun + of.” The professional writing in FLOB-J manifests a relatively 
wide range of nouns that collocate with these two frames (Table 7 and Table 8). In this regard, it appears 
that the patterns emerging from FLOB-J lend support to the finding reported by Biber et al. (2003), who 
described the same two “fixed frames” (termed “phrase-frame” by Stubbs, 2007a) used for 43 and 17 
different lexical bundles respectively in their academic prose as “extremely productive frames” (Biber et 
al., 2003, p.78). In comparison, neither the British students nor the Chinese students seem to have 
recognized the importance of these nominal or prepositional expressions in their academic writing.  
Yu-Hua Chen and Paul Baker Lexical Bundles in L1 and L2 Academic Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 36 
 
Table 7. The Frame for “the + Noun + of the/a” 
the + Noun + of the/a 
Total 
type token 
FLOB-J 
 
end (10), creation (4), existence (4), history (7), impact (4), 
magnitude (4), results (4), nature (17), rest (11), role (5), rules 
(5), size (7), status (4), strength (5), structure (4), value 
 
(5) 
16 
 
 
100 
BAW-EN 
development (11), end (10), length (6), nature (7), quality (4), 
rest (12), size (4), structure (6), use 
 
(9) 9 
 
69 
BAWE-CH 
development (4), end (4), importance (4), nature (5), rest (8), 
role (4), size (4), top 
 
(4) 8 
 
37 
* The bundles appearing in two or three corpora are indicated in bold. This practice is used throughout this paper. 
Table 8. The Frame “in the + Noun + of” 
in the + Noun + of 
Total 
type type 
FLOB-J 
absence (7), case (19), context (19), course (5), face (4), form 
(8), hands (5), light (6), number (6), presence 
 
(8) 10 
 
87 
BAWE-EN absence (4), case (23), form 3 (8) 35 
BAWE-CH case (10), context (5), form 3 (4) 19 
As seen in Table 5, both groups of student writing generally had more VP-based bundles than native 
expert writing, and this tendency is particularly marked in certain subcategories. For example, we found 
that the student writers in BAWE-EN and BAWE-CH used considerably more “to-clause fragments” 
(see Table 9), showing a preference for the frame “in order to + Verb.” L1 Chinese students in particular 
used six different verbs that fit in the slot: achieve, avoid, be, maintain, make and understand, while 
British students had two such bundles: in order to make and in order to minimise. For this subcategory, 
we see more similarity between BAWE-EN and BAWE-CH. 
Table 9. Bundles in the Subcategory of “to-Clause Fragments” 
Corpus FLOB-J  BAWE-EN  BAWE-CH 
Bundle to be able to  (5) in order to make 
in order to minimise 
(8) 
to be able to 
(4) 
to be added to 
(8) 
to cope with the 
(4) 
to enable them to 
(4) 
to take into account 
(4) 
 
(4) 
in order to achieve 
in order to avoid 
(8) 
in order to be 
(7) 
in order to maintain 
(5) 
in order to make 
(4) 
in order to understand 
(4) 
to be able to 
(4) 
to ensure that the 
(4) 
Total 
(4) 
type 1  
 
type 7  
 
type 8  
token 5  token 36  token 40  
Yu-Hua Chen and Paul Baker Lexical Bundles in L1 and L2 Academic Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 37 
 
Although there is a substantial number of VP-based bundles in BAWE-CH, L1 Chinese students did not 
use the “Passive verb + prepositional phrases” (PassPP) form as frequently as native speakers did. As can 
be seen in Table 10, there are seven passive-verb bundles in FLOB-J and eleven in BAWE-EN, both of 
which make up around 20% of the VP-based bundle types within each individual corpus. In comparison, 
the four passive-verb bundles in BAWE-CH constitute merely 10% of the total VP-based bundle types. 
Additionally, none of the four passive bundles were shared by either of the native group of writers. 
Table 10. Bundles in the Subcategory “Passive Verb + Prepositional Phrases”  
Corpus FLOB-J  BAWE-EN  BAWE-CH 
Bundle are shown in fig 
be found in the 
(6) 
be seen in the 
(5) 
be taken into account 
(4) 
can be found in 
(5) 
is concerned with the 
(6) 
was followed by a 
(4) 
 
(4) 
be seen as a 
be included in the 
(5) 
be taken into account 
(4) 
be used in the 
(5) 
can be applied to 
(5) 
can be found in 
(7) 
can be seen as 
(6) 
can be seen in 
(5) 
can be used for 
(4) 
could be seen as 
(5) 
should be placed on 
(5) 
 
(4) 
can be divided into 
can be explained by 
(4) 
can be regarded as 
(7) 
is illustrated in figure 
(4) 
 
(4) 
Total 
type 7   type 11   type 4  
token 34   token 55   token 19  
 
Discourse Functions 
The functional categorization adopted here follows the taxonomy devised by Biber and colleagues (Biber 
& Barbieri, 2007; Biber et al., 2003, 2004). Three major categories were distinguished: referential 
bundles, stance bundles, and discourse organizers.  
Referential expressions are characterized by the function of attribute specification. The first type, 
framing bundles, are used to specify a given attribute or condition (e.g., in terms of the). Another common 
type of referential bundles is quantifying expressions (e.g., per cent of the), which qualify a proposition 
with expressions related to anything potentially measurable, such as size, number, amount or extent. The 
last subcategory of referential expressions includes place/time/text-deictic bundles (e.g., at the beginning 
of).  
• Framing: in the context of, the nature of the, the existence of a  
• Quantifying: a wide range of, the extent to which, in a number of 
• Place/time/text-deictic: are shown in fig, at the same time 
Stance bundles are often used to express a writer’s evaluation of a proposition in terms of certainty or 
uncertainty (epistemic) (e.g., seems to have been). They can also convey the writer’s attitude about 
proposition (obligation/directive) (e.g., it is important to). If the writer’s judgment on the ability to do 
something is involved, then they are grouped under “ability” (e.g., will be able to). 
• Epistemic: are more likely to, it can be argued, the fact that the 
• Obligatory/directive: it is necessary to, that need to be, it has to be 
Yu-Hua Chen and Paul Baker Lexical Bundles in L1 and L2 Academic Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 38 
 
• Ability: it is difficult to, to be able to 
Discourse organizers are used to structure texts. They can introduce a topic (e.g., essay is going to), 
elaborate on the topic (e.g., be taken into account), or make inference (e.g., in the sense that). In addition, 
a large number of the discourse organizers discovered here function to identify the focus that the writer is 
making (e.g., bear in mind that). 
• Topic introduction: essay is going to, last but not least, in this essay I 
• Topic elaboration: in more detail in, on the other hand, can be used to 
• Inferential: as a result of, in view of the, this is due to 
• Identification/focusing: one of the most, there would be no, we can see that 
As can be seen from Figure 1, FLOB-J contains a higher proportion of referential expressions (60%), 
whereas they are much less frequent in both BAWE-EN (37%) and BAW-CH (41%). On the other hand, 
discourse organizers rank as the largest category in both BAWE-EN and BAWE-CH, having very similar 
proportions at 39% and 42% respectively, while discourse organizers in FLOB-J make up only about half 
of that (21%). As for stance bundles, BAWE-EN has the highest percentage of use at 24%, but this 
category is the smallest one in each of the three corpora. 
 
Corpus
FLOB-JBAWE-ENBAWE-CH
Pe
rc
en
t
100.0%
80.0%
60.0%
40.0%
20.0%
0.0%
21%
39%42%
19%
24%16%
60%
37%
41%
Discourse organisers
Stance bundles
Referential expressions
Function
 
Figure 1. Functional distribution (types). 
A chi-square test indicates that there is significant difference, in terms of the functional distribution of 
bundle types, between BAWE-CH, BAWE-EN and FLOB-J at the 0.05 level (X2 = 16.4, df = 4, p = 0.003, 
Cramer’s V = 0.167).3 The standardized residuals (R), a cell-by-cell comparison of observed and expected 
counts, were calculated to identify the cells that made a major contribution to the significant difference. 
Yu-Hua Chen and Paul Baker Lexical Bundles in L1 and L2 Academic Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 39 
 
As can be seen from Table 11, only two cells, the referential expressions and discourse organizers in 
FLOB-J, have an absolute value of R greater than 1.96, which suggests that these two categories in 
FLOB-J made a statistically significant contribution to the rejection of the null hypothesis. We can use the 
information from the values of R to conclude that there are significantly more referential expressions and 
fewer discourse organizers in native academic writing in comparison with academic student writing. 
Table 11. Standardized Residuals in a Chi-Square Contingency Table for Functional Distribution (Types) 
X2 
Cramer’s V=0.167 
= 16.4, df = 4, p = 0.003 Referential 
expressions 
Stance 
bundles 
Discourse  
organizers 
FLOB-J Observed Count 65 20 23 
 Expected Count 50.3 21.5 36.2 
  R 2.1 -0.3 -2.2 
BAWE-EN Observed Count 38 25 41 
 Expected Count 48.4 20.7 34.9 
  R -1.5 0.9 1.0 
BAWE-CH Observed Count 33 13 34 
 Expected Count 37.3 15.9 26.8 
 R -0.7 -0.7 1.4 
  
The token distribution of functions among the three corpora is virtually the same as for type distribution. 
As can be seen in Figure 2, the proportion of referential expressions remains the most marked difference 
between FLOB-J, BAWE-EN and BAWE-CH, as referential expressions make up almost two thirds of 
the bundles in FLOB-J. On the other hand, both BAWE-EN and BAWE-CH rely more heavily on 
discourse organizers, having proportions as high as 39% and 48% respectively. 
A chi-square test indicates that there is significant difference, in terms of the functional distribution of 
bundle tokens, among the three groups at the 0.05 level (X2 = 148.5, df = 4, p < 0.0005, Cramer’s V = 
0.199). The standardized residuals were again calculated. As can be seen from Table 12, apart from the 
stance bundles in FLOB-J, every cell in this contingency table contributed significantly to the differences. 
On the basis of the information provided by R, the referential expressions and discourse organizers in 
FLOB-J are still found to make the most contribution to rejecting the null hypothesis, just like the type 
distribution. On the whole, there are significantly more referential expressions and fewer discourse 
organizers in native expert writing, while both groups of student writing contain significantly fewer 
referential expressions and more discourse organizers. In addition, the British students, represented by 
BAWE-EN, used more stance bundles than expected, whereas the Chinese students in BAWE-CH used 
fewer stance bundles. 
Drawing on the standardized residuals from functional analysis (Table 11 and Table 12), the FLOB-J 
corpus appears to represent the group which differs the most from the other two groups of university 
student writing. Given that the texts retrieved from FLOB-J are published academic texts, written by 
native academics, and must therefore have been repeatedly edited by experienced editors, it is not too 
surprising to see that FLOB-J distinguishes itself among the three groups of writing. The similarities 
between BAWE-EN and BAWE-CH revealed by the standardized residuals also meet with our 
expectations to a certain extent. The student writing in both BAWE-EN and BAWE-CH was produced by 
university students, who can be regarded as novice academic writers. In addition, both groups of student 
writing were originally extracted from the same BAWE corpus, although it should be born in mind that 
the topics for each piece of assignment varied to a very large degree in these two student subcorpora, 
covering many disciplines. It should be noted also that the text types and constituents in the FLOB-J and 
Yu-Hua Chen and Paul Baker Lexical Bundles in L1 and L2 Academic Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 40 
 
BAWE subcorpora might have had an impact on the analysis, and this will be discussed further in the 
section of Discussion. 
 
Corpus
FLOB-JBAWE-ENBAWE-CH
Pe
rc
en
t
100.0%
80.0%
60.0%
40.0%
20.0%
0.0%
20%
39%
48%
18%
24%
13%
62%
37%39%
Discourse organisers
Stance bundles
Referential expressions
Function
 
Figure 2. Functional distribution (tokens). 
Table 12. Standardized Residuals in a Chi-Square Contingency Table for Structural Distribution (Tokens) 
X2 
Cramer’s V=0.199 
= 148.5, df = 4, p < 0.0005 Referential 
expressions 
Stance 
bundles 
Discourse 
organizers 
FLOB-J Observed Count 437 125 142 
 Expected Count 329.5 132.3 242.2 
  R 5.9 -0.6 -6.4 
BAWE-EN Observed Count 246 161 260 
 Expected Count 312.2 125.4 229.4 
  R -3.7 3.2 2.0 
BAWE-CH Observed Count 196 67 244 
 Expected Count 237.3 95.3 174.4 
 R -2.7 -2.9 5.3 
As revealed in the type distribution (see Figure 1 and Table 11) and token distribution (see Figure 2 
and Table 12), we already know that referential expressions are highly frequent in expert academic 
writing, whereas university students do not rely on this discourse function as much. Among the referential 
expressions, one type of quantifying bundle is noteworthy (i.e., the extent/degree modifiers, which are 
Yu-Hua Chen and Paul Baker Lexical Bundles in L1 and L2 Academic Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 41 
 
present in both groups of native writing, but not in learner writing). There are four such bundles in FLOB-
J: in so far as (6), the degree to which (5), the extent to which (6), and to a large extent (4), and two in 
BAWE-EN: the extent to which (8), and to a certain extent (4)
• No matter what the nature of the being, the principle of equality 
requires that its suffering be counted equally with the like suffering - 
in so far as rough comparisons can be made - of any other being. (FLOB-J) 
. It appears that learners do not use this type 
of modifier very much, whereas native speakers tend to use them to modify the extent or degree of their 
proposition as the following examples demonstrate:  
• Thus even though when one entertains in commercial setting aspects of 
intimacy can work well to a certain extent. (BAWE-EN) 
On the other hand, Chinese student writers seem to use certain referential deictic expressions, such as in 
the long run (13), in the recent years (6), and all over the world (6)
• Almost all economists today agree that monetary policy influences 
unemployment, at least temporarily, and determines inflation, at least in 
the long run. (BAWE-CH) 
, as exemplified below. These deictic 
expressions do not appear in the repertoire of word combinations used by professional writers nor British 
peer students.  
• They are more or less equivalent way of paying out retained earning, 
while stock repurchases indeed have become an important source of payout 
in the recent years. (BAWE-CH) 
• This strategy is now very popular all over the world, for it maximizes 
the value of limited monetary amount of fringe benefits and gives the 
employees some controls over their own rewards. (BAWE-CH) 
The first word combination, in the long run, is an idiomatic expression, occurring 13 times in BAWE-CH 
but only once in FLOB-J. This idiom, in the long run, is actually more characteristic of non-academic text 
than of academic prose, and is quite frequent in speech, as indicated by the British National Corpus 
(BNC),4 albeit not always being identified as an informal expression in dictionaries (e.g., Macmillan 
Dictionary, Rundell, 2007). The second bundle, in the recent years, was generally expressed as in (more) 
recent years and recently by native writers in FLOB-J and BAWE-EN. Interestingly, we found 2,344 
instances of in recent years and only 2 instances of in the recent years in the BNC. This suggests that in 
the recent year is therefore a “learner bundle” rather than a “native bundle.” The third expression, all over 
the world, might reflect a general tendency of learners to be categorical and to over-generalize as this 
expression appears to be favored by learners at various proficiency levels (Chen, 2009).  
Turning now to stance bundles, it was found that the supposedly least-competent writers, represented by 
the L2 writers in BAWE-CH, employed the smallest range of epistemic bundles, whereas the most 
proficient writers in FLOB-J manifested the widest range of epistemic expressions. Further investigation 
of the epistemic markers used by the native writers shows that both native groups are quite capable of 
taking advantage of comprehensive measures to hedge their statements. The frame “copula be + likely to” 
is frequently used in native writing to mitigate a proposition, with a few variations such as is likely to be 
(7),
5 are likely to be (9), are more likely to (13). In addition to this frame, native writers are also capable of 
flexibly employing other hedging devices, including the “Anticipatory it + adjective fragment” frame (it 
Yu-Hua Chen and Paul Baker Lexical Bundles in L1 and L2 Academic Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 42 
 
is clear that (19), it is not clear (4), it is possible to (6)), modal verbs (would have to be (12), would need to 
be (4), would be difficult to (5)), hedging verbs (seems to have been (6), it has been suggested (4), it 
can/could be argued (19), it is estimated that (4)), and hedging nouns (there is no evidence (4), there is 
evidence that (5), the fact that the (8)
• This change indicates that two relatively dissimilar clusters have been 
merged and that the number of clusters prior to this merger is likely to 
be the most appropriate. (FLOB-J) 
, etc.) to qualify their propositions.  
• If activists actions are justified it could be argued that firms should 
withdraw from the market because they are acting unethically. (BAWE-EN) 
By contrast, there are only four bundles in the L2 writing that can be regarded as hedging expressions: are 
more likely to (5), is considered to be (4), it has been suggested that (6), it is believed that (5)
Both British and Chinese students used a relatively high number of discourse organizers in their writing 
when compared to the academic prose in FLOB-J. In particular, they used more discourse organizers to 
elaborate and/or clarify a topic, the majority of which are VP-based bundles, such as “Passive verb + 
prepositional phrase fragment” (can be regarded as, be included in the, etc.), “Verb + to-clause fragment” 
(can be used to, in order to make, etc.), and “Subject + verb” (this means that the, that is to say).  
. 
• An example can be used to clarify the theory. (BAWE-CH) 
• According to the report by Mintel International Group Limited (2004), 
consumers spending on cars grew in year 2001 excess of 10% due to the 
drop in prices as a result of pressure from the government. This means 
that the industry do compete on pricing among other things. (BAWE-CH) 
• A study on domestic tourism by National Council of Applied Economics 
Research during 2002-2003 pointed out that nearly two third of all 
tourists in India traveled for social purpose (Social-cultural Drivers); 
that is to say, traveling for social purposes, overall, stands the 
largest percentage of trips across the country… (BAWE-CH) 
An impression of the instances above is that they all seem to be rather verbose. The most noticeable 
example of tautology might be the last one, which repeatedly refers to travelling for social purposes in 
India, using various paraphrases. The contrast with that is to say in the professional academic writing 
below demonstrates one of the major differences between L1 expert writing and learner writing. In the 
following example, by use of the expression that is to say, the native academic does not simply 
paraphrase what has already been written as learners do, but instead progresses further, using other means 
(e.g., giving a specific example) to illustrate the previous proposition. 
• It is now accepted on all sides that Britain needs more of its workforce 
to be vocationally trained to intermediate levels; that is to say, to 
craft or technician standards as represented, for example, by City and 
Guilds examinations (at part 2) or BTEC National Certificates and 
Diplomas. (FLOB-J) 
Yu-Hua Chen and Paul Baker Lexical Bundles in L1 and L2 Academic Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 43 
 
DISCUSSION 
The analysis in the previous sections set out to compare the use of recurrent word combinations, in terms 
of their structures and functions, in native expert writing, native student writing and L2 student writing. A 
deeper investigation, however, suggested that the quantitative analysis needed to be complemented and 
supported by qualitative analyses which considered an examination of expanded concordance lines. By 
utilizing such a hybrid methodology, a number of distinctive features, which vary according to level of 
writing proficiency, have been unveiled.  
L2 academic writing has been found to be stylistically more verbose (cf. Lorenz, 1998, 1999) and to show 
less control of cautious language (cf. Hyland, 1994; Hyland & Milton, 1997). Consider the use of hedging 
in cautious language for example. L1 Chinese learners of L2 English in the current study are found to 
show some control of this feature in their academic writing, but do not demonstrate it as diversely and 
robustly as native writers do. Indeed, Hyland and Milton (1997) compared expressions for qualification 
and certainty in the writing of L1 and L2 students and found that Chinese students in Hong Kong in 
particular had some problems in this pragmatic area. They concluded that this could be partly attributed to 
a lack of introduction of hedging devices in EAP textbooks. Another aspect relating to L2 writers’ 
underuse of hedging devices is their tendency to be categorical and to over-generalize. As Ringbom 
(1998) discovered, even at advanced level, learner language was still in some respects more, in others less, 
vague than native speaker language, although this was a word-based perspective rather than a 
phraseological one. Investigating learners’ writing development using IELTS candidate scripts across 
band scores, Kennedy and Thorp (2007) also pointed out that L2 learners at lower proficiency levels tend 
to express their opinions in a more categorical manner, and that their writing is modified less by hedging. 
The finding here, therefore, reinforces this distinctive aspect of L2 writing from a phraseological 
viewpoint. The tendency to hedge less and instead adopt an overstating tone seems to be universal for 
learners from different L1 backgrounds, as the studies discussed above are not exclusive to L1 Chinese 
learners of L2 English. What is more, it appears that these features may change with proficiency 
development, as evidenced by Kennedy and Thorp (2007). Learner writing is likely to improve as 
proficiency progresses, most likely by edging closer to the norms of native expert writing and showing 
better control of cautious language.  
Another interesting issue is the relationship between the number of recurrent word combinations and 
writing proficiency. As shown in Table 4, the number of recurrent word combinations increases with 
advancing writing proficiency, which is the case both for the range of lexical bundles used (types), and 
the overall occurrence of lexical bundles (tokens). It appears that the use of formulaic expressions grows 
with writing proficiency. This finding is, nonetheless, contrary to some of the results reported in the 
literature (De Cock, 2000; Hyland, 2008a). It should be noted that these studies did not remove 
overlapping bundles or context-dependent ones, while the current research does. Take Hyland’s study 
(2008a) for example. He compared academic clusters among published research articles, PhD 
dissertations, and Master theses. In his conclusion, Hyland indicated that the least confident or proficient 
students at Master’s level relied on formulaic expressions most, while the expert writers used the fewest 
clusters. Comparisons across studies like these, however, need to exercise extreme caution. Firstly, 
Hyland included all the topic-related clusters occurring in his study (e.g., in the Hong Kong), while such 
context-dependent bundles are excluded in the present paper. Next, our repeated experiments have 
revealed that the number of recurrent word combinations retrieved might relate to corpus size to a large 
extent. On the whole, larger corpora will generate fewer recurrent word combinations with the same cut-
off normalized frequency, when compared with smaller corpora, because large corpora will elicit higher 
converted raw frequencies, as discussed in the section on Operationalization. Furthermore, the dispersion 
requirement (e.g., occurring in at least three texts or 10% of texts) also impacts on the number of 
recurrent word combinations. It is virtually impossible to find different corpora, of exactly the same size 
composed of the same number of texts, for direct comparison. For cross-study comparisons, we have to 
Yu-Hua Chen and Paul Baker Lexical Bundles in L1 and L2 Academic Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 44 
 
bear these limitations in mind. As a result, it is still not conclusive as to whether there is a relationship 
between proficiency and the number of formulaic expressions used, particularly when the student groups 
are not identical, as in Hyland (2008a) and the current study. Interestingly, the results from the current 
study are in line with those in De Cock’s study (2004), in which she compared recurrent word 
combinations between native and non-native speech. She found that, after discarding the repeats (e.g., I I 
or the the) and the hesitation items (e.g., er or erm), native data actually contain more recurrent word 
combinations of different lengths than non-native speech does. 
It has to be acknowledged that the use of FLOB-J to represent native expert academic writing might have 
had some impact on the word combinations derived. First of all, a large proportion of the texts included in 
FLOB-J are hard-science based. This is probably why we found bundles such as a function of the, the 
magnitude of the, the structure of the, and a high level of in FLOB-J, which appear to be strongly 
concerned with the disciplines of hard science. Meanwhile, the journal papers or book sections selected in 
FLOB-J are all 2000-word long excerpts, rather than the complete texts included in the BAWE student-
writing corpus. It is probable that there are more occasions in BAWE student writing to use discourse 
organizers, as student essays are mostly structured as Introduction, Body and Conclusion. However, it 
should also be noted that when examining concordance lines, we found very few discourse organizers 
which could be attributed to the differences between excerpts and full texts (i.e., topic-introduction 
bundles such as in this essay I or last but not least). In addition to the use of FLOB-J, clearly there have 
been other constraints on the present study. For one, this corpus-driven approach cannot cater for 
discontinuous word combinations, and thus certain information might be missing. For another, it is 
notoriously difficult to obtain large quantities of quality learner data, and the learner writing investigated 
in this paper is not error-tagged. We cannot know for sure if there are any learner errors which might have 
affected the generation of word combinations, although these assignments have been assessed as being 
good university essays.  
CONCLUSION 
This comparative study has revealed the fundamental differences and similarities between native and 
learner academic writing. Through structural and functional comparisons, it has been found that the use of 
lexical bundles in non-native and native student essays is surprisingly similar. They both contain many 
more VP-based bundles and discourse organizers than native expert writing does, which appears to be a 
sign of immature writing. On the other hand, native professional writers exhibit a wider range of NP-
based bundles and referential markers. A further qualitative examination revealed, however, that native 
student writing actually shares a few features distinctive in academic writing, such as the control of 
cautious language in native professional writing. Non-native writing, however, demonstrates a tendency 
that seems to be exclusive to L2 writing (e.g., over-generalizing and favoring certain idiomatic 
expressions and connectors).  
With the development of corpus techniques, the importance of corpus-extracted word combinations as 
building blocks in constructing discourse has been increasingly recognized. However, the growing 
interest in identifying phraseology with corpus tools during the past decade does not appear to have 
encouraged ELT publishers or practitioners to put more emphasis on computer-retrieved formulaic 
language in the curriculum and/or materials. In the current study, through investigation of three groups of 
academic writing, it was found that there was a gap, in terms of the use of lexical bundles, between native 
expert academic writing and university student writing (native and non-native alike). We argue that, after 
careful selection and editing, the frequency-driven formulaic expressions found in native expert writing 
can be of great help to learner writers to achieve a more native-like style of academic writing, and should 
thus be integrated into ESL/EFL curricula.  
Yu-Hua Chen and Paul Baker Lexical Bundles in L1 and L2 Academic Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 45 
 
NOTES 
1. All the frequencies of bundles indicated in this study are raw frequencies rather than normalized ones. 
2. In LSWE, the data of academic prose is as large as 5.3 million words. 
3. The statistical package used is SPSS 17.0 (2008). 
4. In the BNC, for academic writing, the frequency per million words of in the long run is 6.72. This 
figure is 8.27 for non-academic prose and 4.23 for speech. 
5. For reasons of space, the frequencies in brackets are the sum of both FLOB-J and BAWE-EN. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Some of the data in this study come from the British Academic Written English (BAWE) corpus, which 
was developed at the Universities of Warwick, Reading and Oxford Brookes, under the directorship of 
Hilary Nesi and Sheena Gardner (formerly of the Centre for Applied Linguistics [previously called 
CELTE], Warwick), Paul Thompson (Department of Applied Linguistics, Reading), and Paul Wickens 
(Westminster Institute of Education, Oxford Brookes), with funding from the ESRC (RES-000-23-0800). 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Yu-Hua Chen completed her PhD at Lancaster University in 2009, and this paper is part of her doctoral 
research. Her research interests include corpus linguistics, language testing, phraseology, second language 
writing, and computer-assisted language learning.   
E-mail: cyuhua@ntu.edu.tw  
Paul Baker is a senior lecturer in the Department of Linguistics and English Language at Lancaster 
University. He is the commissioning editor of the journal Corpora. His recent books include Using 
Corpora for Discourse Analysis (2006), Sexed Texts (2008), and Sociolinguistics and Corpus Linguistics 
(2010). He has recently built the BE06—a one-million word reference corpus of written British English 
sampled circa 2006, using the same model as the Brown corpus. 
E-mail: j.p.baker@lancaster.ac.uk  
 
REFERENCES 
Alsop, S., & Nesi, H. (2009). Issues in the development of the British Academic Written English 
(BAWE) corpus. Corpora, 4(1), 71–83. 
Altenberg, B. (1998). On the phraseology of spoken English: the evidence of recurrent word-
combinations. In A. P. Cowie (Ed.), Phraseology: theory, analysis and applications (pp. 101–122). 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Biber, D., & Barbieri, F. (2007). Lexical bundles in university spoken and written registers. English for 
Specific Purposes, 26, 263–286. 
Biber, D., & Conrad, S. (1999). Lexical Bundles in Conversations and Academic Prose. In H. Hasselgard 
& S. Oksefjell (Eds.), Out of corpora: studies in honour of Stig Johansson (pp. 181–190). Amsterdam: 
Rodopi. 
Yu-Hua Chen and Paul Baker Lexical Bundles in L1 and L2 Academic Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 46 
 
Biber, D., Conrad, S., & Cortes, V. (2003). Lexical bundles in speech and writing: an initial taxonomy. In 
A. Wilson, P. Rayson & T. McEnery (Eds.), Corpus linguistics by the Lune: a festschrift for Geoffrey 
Leech (pp. 71–93). Frankfurt: Peter Lang. 
Biber, D., Conrad, S., & Cortes, V. (2004). If you look at ...: Lexical bundles in university teaching and 
textbooks. Applied Linguistics, 25(3), 371–405. 
Biber, D., Johansson, S., Leech, G., Conrad, S., & Finegan, E. (1999). The Longman Grammar of Spoken 
and Written English. London: Longman. 
Chen, Y.-H. (2009). Lexical Bundles across Learner Writing Development. Unpublished doctoral thesis, 
Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK. 
Conklin, K., & Schmitt, N. (2008). Formulaic sequences: Are they processed more quickly than 
nonformulaic language by native and nonnative speakers? Applied Linguistics, 29(1), 72–89. 
Cortes, V. (2002). Lexical bundles in Freshman composition. In R. Reppen, S. M. Fitzmaurice & D. Biber 
(Eds.), Using corpora to explore linguistic variation (pp. 131–145). Amsterdam: John Benjamins 
Publishing Company. 
Cortes, V. (2004). Lexical bundles in published and student disciplinary writing: Examples from history 
and biology. English for Specific Purposes, 23, 397–423. 
De Cock, S. (1998). A recurrent word combination approach to the study of formulae in the speech of 
native and non-native speakers of English. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 3(1), 59–80. 
De Cock, S. (2000). Repetitive phrasal chunkiness and advanced EFL speech and writing. In C. Mair & 
M. Hundt (Eds.), Corpus Linguistics and Linguistic Theory (pp. 51–68). Amsterdam: Rodopi. 
De Cock, S. (2004). Preferred sequences of words in NS and NNS speech. Belgium Journal of English 
and Literatures (BELL), New Series 2, 225–246. 
De Cock, S., Granger, S., Leech, G., & McEnery, T. (1998). An automated approach to the phrasicon of 
EFL learners. In S. Granger (Ed.), Learner English on computer (pp. 67–79). London: Longman. 
Granger, S., & Meunier, F. (Eds.). (2008). Phraseology: An interdisciplinary perspective. Amsterdam: 
John Benjamins. 
Granger, S., & Paquot, M. (2008). Disentangling the phraseological web. In S. Granger & Meunier (Eds.), 
Phraseology: An interdisciplinary perspective. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Hundt, M., Sand, A., & Siemund, R. (1998). Manual of Information to accompany The Freiburg-LOB 
Corpus of British English (‘FLOB’). Retrieved from http://khnt.hit.uib.no/icame/manuals/flob/INDEX.HTM   
Hyland, K. (1994). Hedging in academic writing and EAP textbooks. English for Specific Purpose, 13(3), 
239–156. 
Hyland, K. (2008a). Academic clusters: Text patterning in published and postgraduate writing. 
International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 18(1), 41–62. 
Hyland, K. (2008b). As can be seen: Lexical bundles and disciplinary variation. English for Specific 
Purposes, 27(1), 4–21. 
Hyland, K., & Milton, J. (1997). Qualification and certainty in L1 and L2 students’ writing. Journal of 
Second Language Writing, 6(2), 183–205. 
Jiang, N., & Nekrasova, T. M. (2007). The processing of formulaic sequences by second language 
speakers. The Modern Language Journal, 91, 433–445. 
Yu-Hua Chen and Paul Baker Lexical Bundles in L1 and L2 Academic Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 47 
 
Kennedy, C., & Thorp, D. (2007). A corpus investigation of linguistic responses to an IELTS Academic 
Writing task. In L. Taylor & P. Falvey (Eds.), IELTS collected paper: research in speaking and writing 
assessment (pp. 316–378). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Lorenz, G. (1998). Overstatement in advanced learners' writing: stylistic aspects of adjective 
intensification. In S. Granger (Ed.), Learner English on Computer (pp. 53–66). New York: Addison 
Wesley Longman Limited. 
Lorenz, G. (1999). Adjective intensification--Learners versus native speakers. A corpus study of 
argumentative writing. Amsterdam: Radopi. 
Meunier, F., & Granger, S. (Eds.). (2007). Phraseology in Foreign Language Learning and Teaching. 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing. 
Ringbom, H. (1998). Vocabulary frequencies in advanced learner English. In S. Granger (Ed.), Learner 
English on Computer (pp. 41–52). London: Addison Wesley Longman Limited. 
Rundell, M. (Ed.). (2007). Macmillan English Dictionary For Advanced Learners (Second Edition). 
Oxford: Macmillan Education. 
Schmitt, N. (2004). Formulaic sequences: acquisition, processing, and use. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Schmitt, N., Grandage, S., & Adolphs, S. (2004). Are corpus-derived recurrent clusters 
psycholinguistically valid? In N. Schmitt (Ed.), Formulaic Sequences (pp. 127–152). Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins Publishing. 
Scott, M. (2007). Oxford WordSmith Tools (Version 4.0) [Computer software]. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
SPSS for Windows (2008), Rel. 17.0.0. [Computer software]. Chicago: SPSS Inc. 
Stubbs, M. (2007a). An example of frequent English phraseology: Distribution, structures and functions. 
In R. Facchinetti (Ed.), Corpus Linguistics 25 years on (pp. 89–105). Amsterdam: Radopi. 
Stubbs, M. (2007b). Quantitative data on multi-word sequences in English: The case of word ‘world’. In 
M. Hoey, M. Mahlberg, M. Stubbs & W. Teubert (Eds.), Text, Discourse and Corpora: Theory and 
Analysis (pp. 163–189). London: Continuum. 
Wray, A. (2002). Formulaic language and the lexicon. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Wray, A. (2008). Formulaic Language: Pushing the Boundaries. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Yu-Hua Chen and Paul Baker Lexical Bundles in L1 and L2 Academic Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 48 
 
APPENDIX. Lexical Bundles in Frequency Order 
BAWE-CH  BAWE-EN  FLOB-J  
on the other hand 
(and) + at the same time 
that there is a/an 
as well as the 
in the long run 
as a result of 
one of the most 
can be used to 
in the case of 
is one of the 
it is difficult to 
as one of the 
the rest of the 
in order to achieve 
at the end of + (the) 
it is necessary to 
in order to avoid 
in the end of + (this) 
we can see that 
can be explained by 
as long as the 
at the beginning of 
a number of factors 
all over the world 
it is easy to 
to the development of 
at the expense of 
in the recent years 
it has been suggested  +  that 
that is to say 
are more likely to 
as part of a 
on the basis of 
bear in mind that 
in order to be 
in terms of the 
last but not least 
the nature of the 
(played) + an important role in 
as a part of 
in the context of 
it is believed that 
a wide range of 
as part of the 
can be divided into 
can be regarded as 
for the development of 
in addition to the 
in order to maintain 
in order to make 
in order to understand 
is illustrated in figure 
is not only a 
it can be seen 
it is important to 
the development of the 
the importance of the 
the size of the 
the top of the 
this means that the 
to be able to 
to ensure that the 
to the fact that 
will focus on the 
with respect to the 
with the introduction of 
36 
24 
17 
16 
13 
12 
11 
10 
10 
9 
9 
9 
8 
8 
8 
8 
7 
7 
7 
7 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
in the case of 
can be used to 
as a result of + (the) 
it is important to 
it could be argued that + (the) 
(at) + the end of the 
in terms of the 
(for) + the development of the 
it is possible to 
is one of the 
the rest of the 
it can be seen + (that) 
one of the main 
as well as the 
the use of the 
in the same way 
to be able to 
(due) + to the fact that 
an example of this + (is) 
in the form of 
it is clear that 
the fact that the 
in order to make 
the nature of the 
one of the most + (important) 
and as a result 
it is necessary to 
the way in which 
can be applied to + (the) 
than that of the 
and the use of 
are more likely to 
not be able to 
the extent to which 
was one of the 
could be used to 
is an example of + (a) 
it is difficult to 
the structure of the 
can be found in 
is the fact that 
the length of the 
with respect to the 
would have to be 
can be seen as + 
+ be seen as a 
at the same time 
be taken into account 
be used in the 
could be seen as 
it would have been 
this is due to + (the) 
with the development of 
would be able to 
are likely to be 
can also be used + (to) 
in relation to the 
in terms of its 
it can be argued + (that) 
of the number of 
through the use of 
to a lack of 
can be used for 
for each of the 
there would be no 
a great deal of 
23 
19 
17 
17 
14 
13 
13 
13 
13 
12 
12 
12 
11 
10 
9 
9 
8 
8 
8 
8 
8 
8 
8 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
4 
in the context of + (the/a) 
in the case of 
on the other hand 
the nature of the 
as a function of 
on the basis of 
in terms of the 
it is necessary to 
the way in which + (the) 
(at) + the end of the 
it is clear that 
the rest of the 
one of the most 
at the same time 
by the fact that 
a wide range of 
as a result of 
that there is a 
per cent of the 
in the form of 
on the one hand 
the extent to which 
in the sense that 
would have to be 
as we have seen 
in the presence of 
in the absence of 
is likely to be 
the size of the 
are more likely to 
as we shall see 
that there is no 
the history of the 
the turn of the century 
can be found in 
in the first place 
it is difficult to 
it is possible to 
of a number of 
on the part of 
in so far as 
in the number of 
it is important to 
seems to have been 
with respect to the 
are shown in fig 
can be used to 
in the light of 
a function of time 
as shown in fig 
be taken into account 
for each of the 
in a number of 
it can be seen + that 
to the fact that 
would be difficult to 
at the time of 
be found in the 
in the hands of 
the degree to which 
the role of the 
the rules of the 
the strength of the 
the value of the 
to be able to 
a function of the 
19 
19 
19 
17 
15 
14 
14 
14 
14 
13 
11 
11 
10 
10 
9 
9 
9 
9 
9 
8 
8 
8 
8 
8 
8 
8 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
Yu-Hua Chen and Paul Baker Lexical Bundles in L1 and L2 Academic Writing 
 
Language Learning & Technology 49 
 
a high level of 
a large number of 
as soon as the 
essay is going to 
in the form of 
is considered to be 
it has to be 
it is easy for 
meet the requirement of 
must be able to 
of the number of 
pay more attention to 
the role of the 
this is due to 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
an integral part of 
as part of the 
by the presence of 
in an attempt to 
is by no means 
it is estimated that 
it should be noted 
of some of the 
on the other hand 
should be able to 
the fact that they 
there is no evidence 
this means that the 
to a certain extent 
to be added to 
to enable them to 
to take into account 
would need to be 
as a way of 
at the heart of 
be included in the 
because it is not 
can be seen in 
for the use of 
in order to minimise 
in the absence of 
in this essay I 
should be placed on 
taking into account the 
that is to say 
that need to be 
the quality of the 
the size of the 
this may be due + to 
to cope with the 
will be able to 
will be used to 
with the addition of 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
in the course of 
there is evidence that 
whether or not to 
a large number of 
an example of this 
be seen in the 
by a variety of 
in contrast to the 
in more detail in 
in relation to the 
in terms of a 
in view of the 
it has been suggested 
it has not been 
it is not always 
on a number of 
the fact that this 
the right hand side 
the status of the 
the structure of the 
the ways in which 
to a large extent 
a high level of 
are likely to be 
at each end of 
at the beginning of 
end of the spectrum 
has a number of 
in the face of 
is concerned with the 
it is not clear 
the creation of a 
the existence of a 
the impact of the 
the magnitude of the 
the point of view 
the results of the 
the second half of 
to that of the 
was followed by a 
was not so much 
was one of the 
5 
5 
5 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
 
