Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol14num3/editors.pdf 
October 2010, Volume 14, Number 3 
p. 1 
 
Copyright © 2010, ISSN 1094-3501 1 
 
FROM THE EDITORS 
We hope that your new academic year is off to a good start. We are pleased to introduce 
Volume 14, Number 3 of Language Learning & Technology with a newly designed 
homepage. This issue has three articles, a commentary by Carol Chapelle, our usual 
Emerging Technologies column, three reviews, and a Call for Papers for our new Action 
Research column. We are pleased to announce that Professor Fernando Naiditch of 
Montclair State University has joined our editorial team as editor of the Action Research 
column. Welcome aboard, Fernando! 
Two of the research articles are concerned with L2 writing: In “Writing/thinking in real 
time: Digital video and corpus query analysis,” Kwanhyun Park and Celeste Kinginger 
discuss the combined use of real-time video and a networked linguistic corpus to 
investigate the moment-by-moment analysis of an L2 writer’s composing process. Idoia 
Elolo and Ana Oskoz investigate whether L2 learners’ writing is enhanced by wikis and 
chats in “Collaborative writing: Fostering foreign language and writing conventions 
development.” The third article, “Oral computer-mediated interaction between L2 
learners: It’s about time!” by Íñigo Yanguas, explores task-based, synchronous oral 
computer-mediated communication among intermediate-level learners of Spanish. 
Carol Chapelle’s commentary is a retrospective look at LLT’s first fourteen years and 
the annual conference on Technology and Second Language Learning (TSLL) that has 
taken place every year since 2003. She emphasizes a pragmatically oriented research 
agenda and that the understanding of effective technology uses must be developed 
though research and reflective practice. We hope to address these very issues with our 
new Action Research column. 
Our faithful columnist, Bob Godwin-Jones, whose “Emerging Technologies” columns 
are always timely and insightful, revisits the notion of “Literacies and Technologies,” 
which was the topic of a 2000 special issue in Language Learning & Technology. 
Our new Reviews Editor, Paige Ware, brings us three timely book reviews: Greg Kessler 
reviews the 4-volume series Computer Assisted Language Learning: Critical Concepts 
in Linguistics, edited by Philip Hubbard. Shannon Sauro reviews Always On: Language 
in an Online and Mobile World, and Robert O’Dowd provides a review of Intercultural 
Language Activities with an accompanying CD-ROM. 
We would like to remind our authors and reviewers that all articles, columns, and 
reviews should now be submitted online through ScholarOne Manuscripts. Full 
instructions and support are available at http://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/llt and a user 
ID and password can be obtained by authors and reviewers on their first visit. 
If you are not already a subscriber, please take a few minutes to fill out our free 
subscription form. This enables us to compile useful statistics about the readership of 
our journal. If you enjoy reading LLT, you can recommend the journal to a colleague 
with our new “Recommend LLT” button, and if you would like to make a monetary 
donation to the journal, please click on the “Make a Contribution” button. 
Sincerely, 
Irene Thompson and Dorothy Chun  
Editors-in-Chief 
 
