 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 16 
 
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS 
Sponsors 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR) 
Co-Sponsor 
Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL) 
 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource 
Center (NFLRC)  
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials 
development projects and conducts workshops and conferences for language professionals among its 
many activities. 
CULTURA: WEB-BASED INTERCULTURAL EXCHANGES (OCTOBER 10-11, 2009) 
The Cultura project, pioneered at MIT by Gilberte Furstenberg and her colleagues, has inspired a variety 
of online cultural exchanges based on a set of principles and best practices. The Cultura: Web-Based 
Intercultural Exchanges pre-conference event featured presentations by a variety of educators who have 
created exchanges based on the Cultura model. 
LANGUAGE LEARNING IN COMPUTER MEDIATED COMMUNITIES (LLCMC) 
CONFERENCE (OCTOBER 11-13, 2009) 
Once, computers were seen as thinking machines or electronic tutors. Now the computer has become one 
of many devices that people use to form virtual communities of all kinds. In the field of language 
education, computer mediated communication (CMC) enables students to interact with one another free 
of space and time constraints and to participate in communities of learning with their counterparts in the 
target culture. The Language Learning in Computer Mediated Communities (LLCMC) Conference 
explores the use of computers as a medium of communication in language learning communities. 
Conference highlights included a plenary talk by Dr. Gilberte Furstenberg (MIT), a special panel 
presentation showcasing online cultural exchanges based at the University of Hawai‘i, and a variety of 
intriguing concurrent sessions. 
NEW NFLRC PUBLICATIONS 
Toward Useful Program Evaluation in College Foreign Language Education 
by John M, Norris, John McE. Davis, Castle Sinicrope, &Yukiko Watanabe, (Eds.) 
This volume reports on innovative, useful evaluation work conducted within U.S. 
college foreign language programs. An introductory chapter scopes out the territory, 
reporting key findings from research into the concerns, impetuses, and uses for 
evaluation that FL educators identify. Seven chapters then highlight examples of 
evaluations conducted in diverse language programs and institutional contexts. Each 
case is reported by program-internal educators, who walk readers through critical 
steps, from identifying evaluation uses, users, and questions, to designing methods, 
interpreting findings, and taking actions. A concluding chapter reflects on the 
emerging roles for FL program evaluation and articulates an agenda for integrating 
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 17 
 
evaluation into language education practice. Browse the table of contents. 
Hoping and language learning
This 60 minute video presentation asks the question, “To what degree do our 
methods provide productive pathways and confidence to aid our language 
learners?” During this sixth annual presentation in Hawai‘i, Tim Murphey 
discusses the importance of fostering language learners’ hope, agency, imagined 
selves, and communities motivation and ways to do so. 
 by Tim Murphey 
View/download free. 
Check out our many other publications. 
OUR ONLINE JOURNALS SOLICIT SUBMISSIONS 
Language Learning & Technology is a refereed online journal, jointly sponsored by the University of 
Hawai‘i NFLRC and the Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research 
(CLEAR). LLT focuses on issues related to technology and language education. For more information on 
submission guidelines, visit the LLT submissions page. 
Language Documentation & Conservation is a fully refereed, open-access journal sponsored by NFLRC 
and published exclusively in electronic form by the University of Hawai‘i Press. LD&C publishes papers 
on all topics related to language documentation and conservation. For more information on submission 
guidelines, visit the LD&C submissions page. 
Reading in a Foreign Language is a refereed online journal, jointly sponsored by the University of 
Hawai‘i NFLRC and the Department of Second Language Studies. RFL serves as an excellent source for 
the latest developments in the field, both theoretical and pedagogic, including improving standards for 
foreign language reading. For more information on submission guidelines, visit the RFL submissions 
page. 
 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education 
and Research (CLEAR)  
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
Five professional development workshops are slated for July 2010.  
o Using Video to Promote Language Development in the Classroom 
o Blending Language Classes 101 
o Rich Internet Applications for Language Learning: Introductory Techniques 
o Rich Internet Applications for Language Assessment 
o The Second “C”: Culture Teaching in the Language Classroom 
Detailed information on all workshops can be found on our website: 
http://clear.msu.edu/clear/professionaldev/summerworkshops.php.  
CONFERENCES 
CLEAR exhibits at local and national conferences year-round. We hope to see you at ACTFL, CALICO, 
MIWLA, Central States, and other conferences. 
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 18 
 
NEWSLETTER 
CLEAR News is a free biyearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. 
Download PDFs of back issues and subscribe at http://clear.msu.edu/clear/newsletter/.  
MATERIALS DEVELOPMENT 
Selected Products 
The list below comprises just some of our free and low-cost materials for language educators. Be sure to 
visit our website occasionally for updates and announcements on new products: http://clear.msu.edu. 
• CLEAR’s Rich Internet Applications initiative has been underway for over three years. RIA is a 
research and development lab where our programmers are working on free tools that language 
teachers can use to create online language teaching materials—or have their students create 
activities themselves! There are currently ten RIAs, including: 
o NEW! QuizBreak! (gameshow template for creating Jeopardy-like activities) 
o NEW! Scribbles (script teaching tool for non-Roman characters) 
o Revisions (process writing and feedback tool) 
o Broadcasts (create your own podcasts) 
o Worksheets (add multimedia elements to online worksheets) 
o Audio Dropboxes (put a dropbox in any web page; students’ recordings get put into your 
dropbox automatically) 
• La phonétique française (CD-ROM) – This cross-platform multimedia program consists of 
interactive lessons that can be used by French teachers to learn how to teach pronunciation, or by 
advanced students working independently. 
• Introductory Business German (CD-ROM) – This CD-ROM provides a condensed, highly-
focused set of activities intended for use by business professionals who conduct business with 
Germans and German companies and wish to learn more about the German business and 
economics environment. 
• Celebrating the World’s Languages: A Guide to Creating a World Languages Day Event (guide) 
– This free publication provides a step-by-step guide to planning “World Languages Day,” a 
university event for high school students designed to stimulate interest in learning languages and 
to highlight the importance of cultural awareness. 
 
Coming Soon! • More Rich Internet Applications 
• Introductory Business Chinese 
 
 News From Our Sponsors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 19 
 
The Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL)  
The Center for Applied Linguistics is a private, nonprofit organization that promotes and improves the 
teaching and learning of languages, identifies and solves problems related to language and culture, and 
serves as a resource for information about language and culture. CAL carries out a wide range of 
activities in the fields of English as a second language, foreign languages, cultural education, and 
linguistics. 
Featured Resources: 
• Report From the National K-12 Foreign Language Survey
CAL surveyed public and private elementary and secondary schools across the country to identify 
current patterns and shifts in foreign language education over time. Visit our Web site to learn more 
about the survey and read the executive summary. 
 
• CAL News 
CAL News is our electronic newsletter created to provide periodic updates about our projects and 
research as well as information about new publications, online resources, products, and services of 
interest to our readers. Visit our Web site to sign up. 
• Alliance for the Advancement of Heritage Languages 
Visit the Alliance Web site to browse the Heritage Language Program Profiles, view the Heritage 
Voices Collection, and sign up to receive the quarterly electronic newsletter, Alliance News Flash.  
 
• Center for Research on the Educational Achievement and Teaching of English Language 
Learners (CREATE) 
Visit the CREATE Web site to learn more about CREATE, its research, and upcoming events. To 
keep current on CREATE activities sign up to receive its electronic newsletter, CREATE News, and 
periodic announcements via email.  
 
• CAL SIOP Professional Development Services 
CAL works with schools, states, and districts to design and deliver high-quality, client-centered 
professional development services on the SIOP Model. 
 
• CAL Services: Institutes on Teaching Reading to English Language Learners 
In response to growing requests from K-8 educators for training materials on teaching reading to 
English language learners, CAL will be offering additional institutes in Washington, DC in 2010. 
CAL provides a variety of professional development and technical assistance services related to 
language education and assessment needs.  
Featured Publications: 
• Foreign Language Teaching in U.S. Schools: Results of a National Survey 
• 
• 
Refugees from Iraq (Expanded Refugee Backgrounder) 
Using the SIOP Model: Professional Development Manual for Sheltered Instruction
• 
 
Developing Reading and Writing in Second Language Learners 
• Realizing the Vision of Two-Way Immersion: Fostering Effective Programs and Classrooms 
• What’s Different About Teaching Reading to Students Learning English?  
 
Visit CAL’s Web site to learn more about our projects, resources, and services.  
