Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol14num3/news.pdf 
October 2010, Volume 14, Number 3 
pp. 10–13 
 
Language Learning & Technology 10 
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS 
Sponsors 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR) 
Co-Sponsor 
Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL) 
 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource 
Center (NFLRC)  
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials 
development projects and conducts workshops and conferences for language professionals among its 
many activities. 
UH TITLE VI CENTERS WIN $9M IN CONTINUED FUNDING 
Over the summer, the five Title VI centers at the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa received the news that 
their recent grant applications were successful and they would each be re-funded for another 4 years 
(2010-14). They are the National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC), the National Resource 
Center East Asia (NRCEA), the Center for Southeast Asian Studies (CSEAS), the Center for Pacific 
Islands Studies (CPIS), and the Center for International Business Education and Research (CIBER). 
In addition, UH was awarded Foreign Language and Area Studies (FLAS) Scholarships for East Asia and 
for Southeast Asia, bringing the total number of U.S. Department of Education Title VI International 
Education grants gained to an impressive seven. As Chancellor Virginia Hinshaw commented, “These 
awards recognize UH Mānoa’s world-class programs in Asian-Pacific languages and cultural studies, and 
the key role our campus plays in connecting Hawai‘i with the rest of the world.” Collectively, the seven 
grants will bring close to $9 million to UH over the 4 years. 
The NFLRC, housed in the College of Languages, Linguistics, and Literature, was one of the original 
three national Language Resource Centers (LRCs) established in 1990. Its mission is to improve the 
teaching of foreign languages throughout the U.S., particularly the less commonly taught languages of 
Asia and the Pacific. In its 20 years thus far, it has carried out innovative research and projects and 
produced an outstanding array of publications, conferences, and summer institutes to aid foreign language 
educators and students alike. 
The three National Resource Centers (NRCEA, CSEAS, & CPIS) support modern foreign language 
training, area studies, teacher training, curriculum development, outreach, and library collections for their 
respective world regions. Together, they are housed in the internationally recognized School of Pacific & 
Asian Studies. 
The UH CIBER, housed in the Shidler College of Business, was one of the original six national CIBERs 
established in 1989 and focuses its efforts on creating innovative international business programs and 
ensuring the nation’s competitiveness and continued global economic, political, military, and social 
leadership. 
The five centers frequently collaborate on joint projects and events, tapping into their collective national 
expertise and emphases in international education, together multiplying their impact. Congratulations to 
all five centers and here’s to 4 more years of magnificent, groundbreaking work!  
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 11 
2ND
 (FEBRUARY 11-13, 
2011) 
 INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON LANGUAGE DOCUMENTATION & 
CONSERVATION (ICLDC): STRATEGIES FOR MOVING FORWARD
The 1st ICLDC, with its theme “Supporting Small Languages Together," underscored the need for 
communities, linguists, and other academics to work in close collaboration. The theme of the 2nd ICLDC 
is “Strategies for Moving Forward." We aim to build on the strong momentum created at the 1st ICLDC 
and to discuss research and revitalization approaches yielding rich, accessible records which can benefit 
both the field of language documentation and speech communities.  
Conference highlights include plenary talks by Keren D. Rice (University of Toronto), Wayan Arka 
(Australian National University/Udayana University), and Larry Kimura (University of Hawai‘i at Hilo); 
three invited colloquia on “The Use of Film in Language Documentation,” “Grammaticography,” and 
“Dictionaries and Endangered Languages: Technology, Revitalization, and Collaboration;” and a wide 
assortment of optional pre-conference technical workshops (February 9-10). We hope you will join us. 
NEW NFLRC PUBLICATIONS 
Pragmatics and Language Learning Volume 12 
by G. Kasper, H. t. Nguyen, D. R. Yoshimi, & J. K. Yoshioka, (Eds.) 
This volume examines the organization of second language and multilingual speakers’ 
talk and pragmatic knowledge across a range of naturalistic and experimental 
activities. Based on data collected on Danish, English, Hawai‘i Creole, Indonesian, 
and Japanese as target languages, the contributions explore the nexus of pragmatic 
knowledge, interaction, and L2 learning outside and inside of educational settings. 
Browse the table of contents. 
NFLRC Hawai‘i Launches YouTube Channel 
What’s the second most popular search engine after Google? YouTube! NFLRC 
now makes an appearance on its own YouTube channel, offering teaching tips, 
tech tips, and, most notably, a collection of 54 authentic Chinese videos ranging 
in length from one to eight minutes. We will be adding new collections and 
more videos as time goes on. We welcome your suggestions. In the meantime, 
do you want to know the easy way to set up your Mac for typing the Hawaiian 
‘okina and kahakō in all applications? Check out the NFLRC YouTube video. 
Check out our many other publications.  
OUR ONLINE JOURNALS SOLICIT SUBMISSIONS 
Language Learning & Technology is a refereed online journal, jointly sponsored by the 
University of Hawai‘i NFLRC and the Michigan State University Center for Language 
Education and Research (CLEAR). LLT focuses on issues related to technology and language 
education. For more information on submission guidelines, visit the LLT submissions page. 
Language Documentation & Conservation is a fully refereed, open-access journal sponsored 
by NFLRC and published exclusively in electronic form by the University of Hawai‘i Press. 
LD&C publishes papers on all topics related to language documentation and conservation. 
For more information on submission guidelines, visit the LD&C submissions page. 
Reading in a Foreign Language is a refereed online journal, jointly sponsored by the 
University of Hawai‘i NFLRC and the Department of Second Language Studies. RFL serves 
as an excellent source for the latest developments in the field, both theoretical and pedagogic, 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 12 
including improving standards for foreign language reading. For more information on submission 
guidelines, visit the RFL submissions page. 
 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education 
and Research (CLEAR)  
CLEAR’s mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States. 
Projects focus on materials development, professional development training, and foreign language 
research. 
CLEAR has been awarded funding for the Language Resource Centers’ 2010-14 funding cycle. We look 
forward to this fifth cycle and to continuing our service to the language education community. In 
addition, we are very pleased to continue our co-sponsorship of LLT along with our partners. 
CONFERENCES 
CLEAR exhibits at local and national conferences year-round. We hope to see you at ACTFL, CALICO, 
MIWLA, Central States, and other conferences. 
NEWSLETTER 
CLEAR News is a free biyearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. 
Download PDFs of back issues and subscribe at http://clear.msu.edu/clear/newsletter/.  
MATERIALS DEVELOPMENT 
CLEAR will be developing several new products during our new funding cycle. Check our Web site for 
updates on new products and services. Some of our upcoming projects include: 
• Professional development webinars on diverse topics 
• Online videos for language teaching techniques 
• Online listening and speaking tests for LCTLs 
• Applications for language learning on mobile devices 
• Introductory Business Chinese CD-ROM 
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
Watch our Web site for the announcement of our summer 2011 workshops. New titles will be posted in 
mid-October. http://clear.msu.edu/clear/professionaldev/summerworkshops.php.  
 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 13 
The Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL)  
The Center for Applied Linguistics is a private, nonprofit organization that promotes and improves the 
teaching and learning of languages, identifies and solves problems related to language and culture, and 
serves as a resource for information about language and culture. CAL carries out a wide range of 
activities in the fields of English as a second language, foreign languages, cultural education, and 
linguistics. 
Featured Resources: 
• CAL News 
CAL News is our electronic newsletter created to provide periodic updates about our projects and 
research as well as information about new publications, online resources, products, and services of 
interest to our readers. Visit our Web site to sign up. 
• Alliance for the Advancement of Heritage Languages 
Visit the Alliance Web site to browse the Heritage Language Program Profiles, view the Heritage 
Voices Collection, and sign up to receive the quarterly electronic newsletter, Alliance News Flash.  
 
• Center for Research on the Educational Achievement and Teaching of English Language 
Learners (CREATE) 
Visit the CREATE Web site to learn more about CREATE, its research, and free resources. To keep 
current on CREATE activities sign up to receive its electronic newsletter, CREATE News.  
 
• CAL SIOP Professional Development Services 
CAL works with schools, states, and districts to design and deliver high-quality, client-centered 
professional development services on the SIOP Model. 
 
• CAL Solutions: Institutes on Teaching Reading to English Language Learners 
CAL is continuing its successful series of institutes on teaching reading to English language learners 
in Washington, DC in 2010. CAL provides a variety of professional development and technical 
assistance services related to language education and assessment needs.  
Featured Publications: 
• Improving Education for English Language Learners: Research-Based Approaches 
• Education for Adult English Language Learners in the United States: Trends, Research, and 
Promising Practices 
• Foreign Language Teaching in U.S. Schools: Results of a National Survey 
• Realizing the Vision of Two-Way Immersion: Fostering Effective Programs and Classrooms 
• Refugees from Iraq (Expanded Refugee Backgrounder) 
• Using the SIOP Model: Professional Development Manual for Sheltered Instruction
• 
 
What’s Different About Teaching Reading to Students Learning English?  
 
Visit CAL’s Web site to learn more about our projects, resources, and services.  
