Language Learning & Technology 
http:/llt.msu.edu/vol14num1/review1.pdf 
February 2010, Volume 14, Number 1 
pp. 20–23  
 
Copyright © 2010, ISSN 1094-3501 20 
 
REVIEW OF SECOND LANGUAGE TEACHING AND LEARNING  
IN THE NET GENERATION 
Second Language Teaching and Learning in the 
Net Generation 
 
Raquel Oxford and Jeffrey Oxford (Editors) 
 
2009 
ISBN 978-0-9800459-2-5 
US $30.00 (paperback) 
240 pp. 
 
National Foreign Language Resource Center 
University of Hawai’i at Manoa 
 
 
Review by Ulugbek Nurmukhamedov, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
In the field of Computer-Assisted Language Learning (CALL), the term “Net Generation” has been 
clearly defined by Prensky (2001), who states that Net Generation members are “digital natives” since 
they “[have] spent their entire lives surrounded by and using computers, videogames, digital music 
players, video cams, cell phones, and all the other toys and tools of the digital age” (p. 1), all of which 
make them different from the baby boomer generation. For those who are eager to learn more about the 
language learning needs and necessities of the Net Generation, the edited book by Oxford and Oxford 
(2009), entitled Second Language Teaching and Learning in the Net Generation is a must-read resource. 
Since most of the contributors to the book are second and foreign language instructors as well as 
researchers, almost every chapter of the book describes empirical studies involving different innovative 
technologies and state-of-the-art tools, offering pedagogical ideas, effective strategies, and useful 
suggestions on how these technologies could be applied to enhance language teaching and learning.  
The book comprises 14 chapters that include a wide range of topics. In Chapter 1, van Compernolle and 
Williams look into technology as a means of communication that can potentially contribute to the 
implementation of “intercultural communication, sociolinguistic and pragmatic development, and online 
communication and linguistic accuracy” (p. 11) and review advantages and disadvantages of each of these 
areas. In Chapter 2, Niño provides information about Internet based technologies, such as Google, wikis, 
Blogs, Skype, YouTube, Podcasting, and social networking sites, offering particularly useful and teacher-
friendly suggestions on how these tools could be used in second language teaching and learning. For 
example, language learners can use Google to learn vocabulary (e.g., find correct spelling, look for 
appropriate collocations), collaborate on writing tasks; similarly, teachers can provide ESL writers with 
written feedback via Google Docs and furthermore utilize Google Talk to create opportunities for 
interaction in the target language. Chapter 3 reports on a study that investigated the computer competence 
of secondary school students, teachers, and administrators in a school in Germany in an attempt to 
examine whether there was a gap between theory and practice in terms of the participants’ computer-
media literacy. Although responses to questionnaires revealed that the teachers believed that computer 
literacy skills were important for the future of the students, the majority of the students claimed that they 
had acquired essential computer skills, as well as online browsing techniques, not from their teachers but 
by themselves.  
Chapters 4 and 5, after providing an informative synopsis of the background, as well as the current status, 
Ulugbek Nurmukhamedov Review of L2 Teaching and Learning in the Net Generation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 21 
 
of hybrid curricula (i.e., activities which could be done largely online instead of in a traditional 
classroom) in second and foreign language teaching, respond to an ongoing question about whether or not 
digital natives are ready for hybrid foreign-language instruction. In Chapter 4, Goertler believes that 
college students are “maybe” ready to benefit from hybrid (i.e., blended) courses. She also claims that it 
cannot be “assumed that because someone is a digital native that that person wants to learn any particular 
subject matter in a digital format” (p. 61). She further adds that certain constraints, such as language 
learning preferences and computer literacy skills, need to be taken into account even among the members 
of the Net Generation. In Chapter 6, Raquel Oxford examines the use of writing-assistant programs (Atajo 
3.0 and Spanish Partner) to improve the writing skills of learners of Spanish in terms of quality and 
quantity, particularly the use of grammar and vocabulary, in their compositions. Chapters 7 and 8 provide 
information about studies that examined podcasts and their use in language teaching and learning. The 
authors of Chapter 7, Bird-Soto and Rengel, provide examples from their own experience of the 
challenges and learning curves they had to master and teaching insights they gained before, during, and 
after they launched Personalidades. This project was integrated into a course curriculum to give 
intermediate to advanced learners of Spanish an opportunity to improve their listening and speaking 
skills, as well as develop interaction among students and teachers through interviews which were later 
posted on discussion boards. In Chapter 8, Ducate and Lomicka describe a study in which learners of 
German and French, after receiving instruction on how to create a podcast session, were asked to create 
their own podcast as a course requirement. In addition to podcasting posts on special blogs, the students 
also had to write comments on their blogs about their learning experience with podcasting.  
In Chapter 9, Lazo-Wilson and Espejo demonstrate how blogs could be used in language classrooms and 
report on a study in which blogs were set up successfully for three different Spanish courses at Eastern 
Washington University with the objective to review grammar, expand vocabulary, and broaden students’ 
cultural awareness. Chapter 10 focuses on students’ utterances collected from WebCT sessions, primarily 
used to create a “data-driven learning” approach (Johns, 1991, p. 27) to teaching grammar rules to 
learners of French. Chapters 11 and 12 describe several online activities involving Second Life (SL), “an 
online virtual community that is being created by its residents in which they can own land and build 
houses and either rent or reside in them” (p. 154). After logging on to SL, the students were able to 
practice target language via activities (e.g., inviting lecturers from different countries, teaching 
vocabulary by using visual cues in 3D format, organizing field trips to popular buildings and sites in the 
world), which are often difficult to organize quickly in real life, especially in a traditional classroom 
environment. In chapter 13, Warren describes the pros and cons of web-based portfolios and their 
pedagogical asset to teaching target language culture to foreign language students. In Chapter 14, 
Charbonneau-Gowdy talks about the role of Sociocultural Theory and technology in teaching English to 
NATO-supported military personnel and explains how this online project generated collaborative and 
empowering dialogues between teachers and learners during the course of the program.  
Although the book covers a broad range of topics in terms of different tools, varied technology, diverse 
research interests and studies involving different learner populations, all 14 chapters have one theme in 
common: the use of technology can supplement and enhance language learning and teaching particularly 
in the era of the Net Generation. The suggested activities in the book can certainly meet the needs of 
language instructors who often look for innovative ways to use technology in a foreign and second 
language teaching setting. Technologies ranging from SL, podcasting, blogs, wikis, Internet-based 
activities to language learning software are believed to be the kind of tools the Net Generation are already 
familiar with. Podcasting, for instance, has already entered the realm of language learning (Thorne & 
Payne, 2005) and is believed to accelerate language acquisition through new applications and creative 
podcasting broadcasts. Teachers can use podcast episodes to teach listening skills, speaking strategies, 
and pronunciation, as well as raise learner’s awareness about cultural differences (Fox, 2008). In fact, 
learners whose language classes incorporated podcast sessions and podcasting related activities (reported 
Ulugbek Nurmukhamedov Review of L2 Teaching and Learning in the Net Generation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 22 
 
in Chapters 7 and 8) spoke positively of this tool and believed that it improved their listening skills, 
exposed them to different accents, enabled them to record their own voices, and gave them ample 
opportunities to explore the target language. Despite such positive comments, O’Bryan and Hegelheimer 
(2008) caution that “podcast users and developers should focus on what this technology may add to an 
existing program of study and reflect on how it may transform language learning” (p. 346). This statement 
clearly indicates that technology alone does not make language acquisition happen; instead, it facilitates 
the language learning process.  
Integrating new innovative tools and emerging technologies into a traditional curriculum will require a 
hybrid approach to language teaching and learning, with instruction being done partially outside of the 
classroom depending on the different technologies. Chapters 4 and 5 provide detailed information about 
the implications of hybrid courses for foreign and second language learning/teaching. Both chapters claim 
that the majority of foreign language learners at U.S. universities support the importance of the use of 
technology in second language learning since their language skills improved. Interestingly, among 
learners of the Net Generation are also those who express more negative attitudes toward hybrid 
instruction due to previous, presumably negative, experiences with the use of technology in language 
classrooms. Some of the frustrations result from the fact that even ‘digital natives’ still need special 
assistance with certain technological tools (e.g., creating podcast episodes; using SL). As a response to 
these attitudes, Goertler (in Chapter 4) counters that the few negative answers from learners should not 
hinder the development of hybrid language learning since the mindsets and attitudes of learners towards 
the use of technology can vary based on their personality, language learning styles, and preferences.  
In addition to emerging technologies and their connection to pedagogy, Chapters 11 and 12 discuss how 
SL can be used in language teaching. Clark, in Chapter 11, shares ideas on how SL can be integrated into 
a course syllabus and suggests interactive activities that can bring creativity into an existing curriculum. 
The recommended activities, such as learning Spanish vocabulary with visual cues, introducing each 
other’s avatars (i.e., an image representing “real” people in online games, chat rooms, and online virtual 
worlds), learning Spanish culture, are worth trying because these activities promote interaction and raise 
cultural awareness among learners. Based on previous research involving SL, Cooke-Plagwits, Chapter 
12, recommends effective ways to incorporate other online tools (e.g., supplementary webpages, videos, 
podcasts, wikis) into SL to create even more interactive activities for language learners. However, the 
author also warns SL users of certain problematic sides of SL because “its interface is not particularly 
intuitive, and its learning curve is fairly steep” (p. 177). This issue was also encountered in a study by 
Sadler & Nurmukhamedov (2008), in which high intermediate ESL students were given tasks using SL, 
such as constructing tables, building different shapes, and looking for different items in a designated area. 
Even though the participants understood the instructions for the tasks, the students could not finish the 
tasks within the designated time frame of 45 minutes because the participants were all “newbies” (i.e., a 
term used by SL members to refer to somebody who does not have much experience using the virtual 
world). Clearly, teachers’ and students’ patience and practice are required to overcome learning curves 
while using technology in foreign language learning setting.  
Surprisingly, however, while the book emphasizes the use of technology in foreign and second language 
learning, only two chapters include images of the types of technology described (Wimba voice chat, and 
discussion board; video-based conferencing software Waveasy). For readers who have only recently 
started integrating and using technology, the inclusion of images could help see or imagine the mentioned 
technology and/or tools as students engage in activities. Additionally, URL addresses of software and 
programs (e.g., SL; university-based learner-friendly blogs) have not been provided either, thus making it 
difficult, if not impossible, for educators to use these resources and techniques in different classroom 
settings. Currently, interested readers will have to find information about the mentioned software or the 
website URLs themselves. Although techies (those who are technologically savvy) might be familiar with 
most of the resources and websites provided in the chapters, for both tech-aficionados and tech-novices, 
Ulugbek Nurmukhamedov Review of L2 Teaching and Learning in the Net Generation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 23 
 
the absence of URLs could be a slight inconvenience. 
However, despite these inconveniences, the book editors Oxford and Oxford manage to fulfill its overall 
purpose, namely “how technology is both being used and can be used to improve second language 
acquisition” (p. 2) in the ever expanding Net Generation. The chapters have been carefully selected to 
address the issues based on research and practical explanations, making this book appropriate for a range 
of audiences: techies, tech-aficionados, and tech-novices. For this reason, this book can function as a 
useful practical resource for instructors working in intensive language programs and eager to incorporate 
state-of-the-art technologies into their existing syllabi, and university faculty who teach CALL related 
courses at the university level. These audiences will benefit from the research ideas, listed literature in the 
references section, and classroom-friendly practical suggestions provided in the book. 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Ulugbek Nurmukhamedov is an ESL instructor at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. His 
research interests include L2 writing, spoken grammar, and vocabulary acquisition. He is also interested 
in using research from corpus linguistics to enhance vocabulary and grammar accuracy among L2 writers.  
Email: ulugbeknur@gmail.com 
 
REFERENCES 
Blake, R. (2001). What language professionals need to know about technology. ADFL Bulletin, 32(3), 93-
99.  
Chapelle, C. (2003). English language learning and technology. Lectures on applied linguistics in the age 
of information and communication technology. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.  
Fox, A. (2008). Using podcasts in the EFL classroom. TESL-EJ, 11(4). Retrieved from http://tesl-ej.org 
Hegelheimer, V., & O'Bryan, A. (2008). Mobile technologies, podcasting and language education. In M. 
Thomas (Ed), Handbook of research in Web 2.0 and second language learning. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
Johns, T. (1991). From printout to handout: Grammar and vocabulary teaching in the context of data-
driven learning. ELR Journal, 4, 27-45.  
Prensky, M. (2001). Digital natives, digital immigrants: A new way to look at ourselves and our kids. On 
the Horizon, 9(5). Retrieved from http://www.marcprensky.com/writing 
Sadler, R., & Nurmukhamedov, U. (2008, March). Second Life and task-based learning. Paper presented 
at the CALICO Annual Conference, San Francisco, CA. 
Tapscott, D. (1998). Growing up digital: The rise of the Net generation. New York: McGraw-Hill.  
Thorne, S. L., & Payne, J. S. (2005). Evolutionary trajectories, Internet-mediated expression, and 
language education. CALICO Journal, 22(3), 371-397.  
