Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol14num1/editors.pdf 
February 2010, Volume 14, Number 1 
pp. 1–2 
 
Copyright © 2010, ISSN 1094-3501 1 
FROM THE EDITORS 
Happy 2010 to all our contributors, reviewers, and readers! We hope that you are ready 
to face the challenges and opportunities that the New Year will bring. We are happy to 
report that we have received 139 submissions from 26 countries in 2009 and are looking 
forward to another productive year. Our readership remains robust worldwide: just in the 
last two weeks of December 2009, we had 4,231 visits from 120 countries/territories.  
It is our pleasure to introduce Volume 14 number 1, a regular issue of our journal. We 
have assembled one commentary, three articles, one column, and two reviews covering a 
range of CALL topics and a variety of languages (Arabic, Chinese, English, Italian, 
Russian, and Spanish).  
In his invited commentary “New Tools for Teaching Writing,” Mark Warschauer 
discusses the importance of learning to write in a second language, as well as the role of 
digital media in writing instruction.  
In “Corpus-Assisted Creative Writing: Introducing Intermediate Italian Learners to a 
Corpus as a Reference Source,” Claire Kennedy and Tiziana Miceli describe three case 
studies that provide a starting point in the process of developing corpus-consultation 
literacy in the context of learning Italian as a foreign language. The authors see the 
process of “making the corpus your own” as a matter of developing not only skills in 
conceptualizing and executing searches and interpreting examples, but also 
understanding the principles that underlie the effective use of corpora and reference 
resources in general.  
 “Using Synchronous Online Peer Response Groups in EFL Writing” by Mei-Ya Liang 
proposes an analytic framework for describing L2 interaction during synchronous 
computer-mediated communication. The results of the study showed that students tended 
to focus more on content discussion than on negotiation and error correction and that the 
quantity and quality of each type of interaction were dependent on groups and tasks. The 
author proposes ways in which the proposed analytical framework can be applied to 
writing instruction.  
“The Effects of Captioning Videos Used for Foreign Language Listening Activities” by 
Paula Winke, Susan Gass, and Tetyana Sydorenko reports on the results of a study that 
investigated the effects of captioning during video-based listening activities designed for 
learners of Arabic, Chinese, Spanish, and Russian. The results showed that captioning 
was more effective than no captioning. For learners of Spanish and Russian, captioning 
first was more effective than captioning second, while for Arabic and Chinese learners, 
there was a trend toward captioning second being more effective. Interview data showed 
that students used captions to increase attention, improve processing, reinforce previous 
knowledge and decompose language, although some learners reported using captioning 
as a crutch.  
In his popular Emerging Technologies column, Bob Godwin-Jones describes recent 
developments in Web browsing and authoring and their implications for language 
learning. He discusses some of the significant transformations of the Web that expand 
and supplement its ability not only to retrieve and display data, but also to make it a 
vehicle for delivering Web-based applications and server-stored programs with 
sophisticated user interfaces and a full range of interactivity. This added Web 
functionality will support the creation of interactive Web pages for language practice 
 From the Editors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 2 
 
and the design of collaborative environments for group interactions.  
We are pleased to present two book reviews, edited by Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas. 
Ulugbek Nurmukhamedov reviews Second Language Teaching and Learning in the Net 
Generation edited by Raquel Oxford and Jeffrey Oxford. Most chapters in the book 
describe empirical studies of different innovative technologies and state-of-the-art tools, 
present ideas for pedagogical applications, discuss effective strategies, and offer useful 
suggestions on how these technologies could be applied to improve language teaching 
and learning. Mandy Reinig reviews The Theory and Practice of Online Learning 
(second edition) edited by Terry Anderson. The book explores technologies developed 
in the five years since the publication of the 1st edition such as increased use of social 
networking sites and audio and video support in the classroom, illustrated by experience 
gained in the distance education program at Athabasca University. The volume offers a 
good starting place for institutions interested in the development of online courses by 
providing useful information on the pedagogical applications of different technologies 
and the need for support services tailored to online learners.  
We have an important announcement for our authors and reviewers. Due to the large 
number of submissions that LLT receives, and through the support of the National 
Foreign Language Resource Center of the Unviversity of Hawai‘i and the Center for 
Language Education and Research of Michigan State University), we have adopted 
ScholarOne ManuscriptsTM 
 
(Formerly Manuscript Central) for managing our online 
submission and review processes. Starting on February 15, 2010, all articles, columns, 
and reviews should be submitted online through ScholarOne. Full instructions and 
support will be available on the site and a user ID and password can be obtained by 
authors and reviewers on the first visit. We appreciate your patience during the transition 
period.  
Sincerely, 
Irene Thompson and Dorothy Chun 
Editors 
 
 
 
 
