Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol14num3/parkkinginger.pdf 
October 2010, Volume 14, Number 3 
pp. 31–50 
 
Copyright © 2010, ISSN 1094-3501 31 
WRITING/THINKING IN REAL TIME: DIGITAL VIDEO AND  
CORPUS QUERY ANALYSIS 
 
Kwanghyun Park and Celeste Kinginger 
Pennsylvania State University 
The advance of digital video technology in the past two decades facilitates empirical 
investigation of learning in real time. The focus of this paper is the combined use of real-
time digital video and a networked linguistic corpus for exploring the ways in which these 
technologies enhance our capability to investigate the cognitive process of learning. A 
perennial challenge to research using digital video (e.g., screen recordings) has been the 
method for interfacing the captured behavior with the learners’ cognition. An exploratory 
proposal in this paper is that with an additional layer of data (i.e., corpus search queries), 
analyses of real-time data can be extended to provide an explicit representation of 
learner’s cognitive processes. This paper describes the method and applies it to an area of 
SLA, specifically writing, and presents an in-depth, moment-by-moment analysis of an L2 
writer’s composing process. The findings show that the writer’s composing process is 
fundamentally developmental, and that it is facilitated in her dialogue-like interaction with 
an artifact (i.e., the corpus). The analysis illustrates the effectiveness of the method for 
capturing learners’ cognition, suggesting that L2 learning can be more fully explicated by 
interpreting real-time data in concert with investigation of corpus search queries. 
INTRODUCTION 
Technological innovations and increasingly ubiquitous access to networked computers via the Internet 
(Chun, 1994; Kern, 1995) are rapidly changing the scope of research in second language acquisition 
(SLA). The advance of digital video technology in the past two decades facilitates the collection of data 
on, and empirical investigation of, real time learning processes. Furthermore, technological revolutions in 
computer networking allow for innovative research methodologies that have been difficult, if not 
impossible, to conceptualize in the past. The focus of this paper is the combined use of digital video and a 
networked linguistic corpus for exploring the way in which these technologies enhance our capability to 
investigate the process of learning in SLA. The paper describes this exploratory method and applies it to 
the study of second language writing. This area is chosen for the known difficulty of tracking the learner’s 
cognition during the composing process (Miller, 2005). This study will present an analysis of a second 
language (L2) writer’s composing process, illustrating the effectiveness of the method for fine-grained 
portrayal of learners’ cognition.  
In the past fifty years or so, much research on the composing process has endeavored to understand the 
workings of the human mind as it constructs a text. A perennial challenge to research in this area has been 
to collect data that interfaces with the cognitive processes of writers (Humes, 1983; Stallard, 1974). 
Typically, this research has relied upon two major data sources: (a) retrospective accounts from 
participants (e.g., stimulated recall interviews) and (b) audio/video data collected in real time (e.g., 
keystroke logging and screen recording). Although these studies have significantly advanced the 
description of real-time, online writing processes, they have encountered difficulties in connecting the 
interpretation of data to internal cognitive processes.  
Retrospective data is not so much a precise reproduction of the composing process as a reinterpretation of 
it, through which writers create coherence out of their past writing experiences. Reliance on the 
participant’s account taken at face value, thus, can and does undermine the validity of research (Pavlenko, 
2007). In order to provide more precise documentation of the composing process, process research has 
increasingly used computer-aided techniques for recording user activity, primarily keystroke analysis 
Kwanghyun Park and Celeste Kinginger Writing/Thinking in Real Time 
 
Language Learning & Technology 32 
(Miller, 2005; New, 1999; Sullivan & Lindgren, 2006) and screen recording studies (Geisler & Slattery, 
2007).  
Real-time methodology, however, has its own shortcomings: Lacking a means to connect the real-time 
video and keystroke transcripts to internal cognitive processes, analysis of these data relies on 
researchers’ interpretations, a position exactly opposite to, and no better than, the retrospective method 
relying on the participant’s perceptions. Thus, the contribution of the real-time data has been limited to 
descriptions of user behavior (e.g., the number and length of pauses) and has not been extended to 
enhance analytical validity in composing process research.  
Due to this methodological gap, research on the composing process has been reduced to basing data 
interpretation either on the researcher’s speculation (Miller, 2005, p. 311) or on the participant’s 
perceptions. Although some studies have suggested supplementing real-time data with retrospective 
accounts (e.g., Geisler & Slattery, 2007; Lindgren & Sullivan, 2006), such suggestions only bring us back 
to the debate over whether retrospective narratives constitute valid research data. A new answer may 
reside in constructing an additional layer of data that reflects, and thus, allows the study of, the cognitive 
processes underlying the construction of text.  
In this study, the analysis of real-time data is complemented with investigation of writers’ search queries 
used to consult a corpus. The term “query” broadly refers to words and phrases that users enter into a 
database in order to retrieve relevant results. In this study, it refers to a particular kind of search that L2 
writers use to consult a specialized academic corpus as a linguistic reference. The study’s central 
hypothesis is that each query expresses an immediate need of the writer, and thus furnishes information 
about his or her thinking processes.  
An exploratory proposal in this paper is that, using the corpus queries as research data, we can begin to 
reconstruct internal cognitive processes without undermining analytical validity. This paper describes a 
methodological framework that triangulates three types of data (i.e., screen recordings, retrospective 
reflections in oral and written forms, and corpus search queries). Based on these data, the study 
documents the L2 composing process through a moment-by-moment microanalysis of text construction. 
Consistent with the post-cognitive perspective in writing research (Atkinson, 2003) and the growing 
interest in artifact-mediated language learning and development (Chapelle, 2000; Chun, 1994; Kern, 
1995; Kinginger & Belz, 2005; Kramsch & Thorne, 2002; Salaberry, 1999; Thorne, 2003; Warschauer, 
1997, 1998; Warschauer & Kern, 2000), the study takes into account the role of a particular artifact (i.e., 
an online corpus) as an integral part of the focal rhetorical situation.  
After briefly reviewing studies on the composing process and current issues in real-time methodology, the 
paper develops a corpus-based methodology responding to these issues. This methodology is then applied 
to an analysis of the composing process and the findings are discussed in regard to the role of the 
methodology in enhancing our understanding of the composing process. The paper concludes with a 
discussion regarding the implications of the methodology and potential directions for corpus-enhanced 
research as it relates to the investigation of learners’ cognitive processes. 
A Brief Overview of Composing Process Research 
Two theoretical orientations have made major contributions to composing process research: the 
psychologically focused, cognitive-processing model (Flower & Hayes, 1981; Hayes & Flower, 1980) 
and the more socially oriented, post-cognitive approach (Kent, 1999; Trimbur, 1994). In the cognitive-
processing model, the human mind is typically conceptualized as a processor whose internal mechanisms 
are the focus of research (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1987; Hayes, 1996). Drawing on information-
processing theory (Newell & Simon, 1972), the goal of this approach is to create a cognitive model for 
describing internal brain operations during the production of a text. Conceptually, the model represents 
machinery that takes input (information and knowledge); repeats planning, translating, and reviewing; and 
Kwanghyun Park and Celeste Kinginger Writing/Thinking in Real Time 
 
Language Learning & Technology 33 
generates a text as output. Previously influential in L1 and L2 writing research (Krapels, 1990; Raimes, 
1983, Zamel, 1982, 1983), the model has lost much of its allure because it sidesteps consideration of 
sociocultural contexts and writers’ development in academic settings (Silva, 1990); yet, its 
epistemological stance remains pervasive in writing research. 
The post-cognitive perspective emphasizes sociocultural aspects of the acquisition of knowledge, positing 
that cognition takes place in a “network.” Unlike the processor metaphor, wherein the mind is an inviolate 
entity operating in isolation, the network metaphor suggests that the human mind is inseparably 
embedded within a social-material situation (Kinginger, 2004; Lantolf, 2006; Lantolf & Pavlenko, 2001). 
Accordingly, research on composing from this perspective has expanded to include cultural, historical, 
and socio-political contexts in understanding the construction of texts (Atkinson, 2003; Matsuda, 2003).  
With the shift toward the post-cognitive era, we are in a better position than that afforded by the 
processing model to address the changing ecology of academic writing. In this period of digital 
communication environments, the contemporary writing context now offers an extensive array of 
networked artifacts, including Web search engines, academic databases, and linguistic corpora. In such an 
environment, the post-cognitive perspective enhances our understanding of the composing process by 
bringing to the fore the nature of writing as a multi-resourced and multi-party activity.  
Real-Time Data Collection Methodologies in Composing Process Research 
Methods for real-time data collection and analysis first became visible in the literature in the mid-1990s. 
Two state-of-the-art real-time techniques, keystroke logging and screen recording, are reviewed in Table 
1.  
Table 1. Real-time Computer Techniques in Composing-Process Research 
Technique and Area Study 
Keystroke logging  
Behavioral features (pause, deletion, 
and repetition) 
Eklundh (1994); Lansman, Smith, & Weber, (1993); Levy 
& Ransdell (1994); Miller (2000, 2006); Miller, Lindgren, 
& Sullivan (2008); Ransdell (1995); Thorson (2000); 
Quantity and types of revision Bonk & Reynolds (1992); Flinn (1987); New (1999); 
Ransdell & Levy (1994); Reynolds & Bonk (1996) 
Task type and text structure Eklundh & Kollberg (2003) 
Topic development Miller (2005) 
  
Screen recordings  
Screen videotaping Collier (1983) 
L1 revision in word-processing  Owston, Murphy, & Wideman (1992) 
Personal writing  Geisler (2001) 
EFL collaborative writing  Glendinning & Howard (2001, 2003) 
Learner perception Luoma & Tarnanen (2003) 
Technical writing  Slattery (2005, 2007) 
Communication in the workplace  Swarts (2004, 2010); Van Ittersum (2009) 
Keystroke logging refers to computer software and techniques to record keyboard presses and mouse 
movements (Lindgren & Sullivan, 2006). Studies of this type have mainly focused on describing formal 
Kwanghyun Park and Celeste Kinginger Writing/Thinking in Real Time 
 
Language Learning & Technology 34 
behavioral features including pauses, deletions, and repetitions of key presses. In L2 composing process 
studies, the use of keystroke logging in writing pedagogy has been discussed with regard to charting out 
the revision types in French (New, 1999; Scott & New, 1994) and the comparison of L1 and L2 writing in 
German (Thorson, 2000) and Swedish (Lindgren & Sullivan, 2006). When compared with keystroke 
logging, screen recording offers a better visualization than a keystroke replay. These programs record the 
computer screen actions and create digital video clips (for review, see Latif, 2008).  
Issues in Real-Time Method in Research on Composing Processes 
Despite the growing popularity of these techniques, the value of real-time methods is not well defined or 
widely recognized in pedagogical research. Researchers in this area have not articulated what the quantity 
and type of keystrokes and behavior captured in screen recordings reveal about internal cognitive 
processes of writers in the construction of texts. Geisler and Slattery (2007) suggested that the key to this 
problem might be found in taking account of “the writers’ consciousness” (p. 199); therefore, “suitable 
prodding” in recall interviews would reveal “why a writer has employed a given sequence of actions” (p. 
197). However, this suggestion immediately reminds us of the issue of internal validity raised in narrative 
research: Participants create coherence out of past events through story-telling (i.e., narratives) and their 
accounts are not exact reproductions of the events (Ochs & Capps, 2001; Pavlenko, 2007). Regarding the 
difficulty of connecting real-time data to cognitive processes, Miller (2005) observes:  
From the outset, it has been clear that keystroke logging yields only partial and indirect data about a 
highly complex human activity. . . . Although triangulation of data from concurrent or retrospective 
interviews can support the teacher/researcher’s process of interpretation, the observations remain 
speculative. We can at best infer what underlies the overt behaviour we are able to capture. (p. 311) 
Although these points concerning the speculative nature of data interpretation are well taken, the 
limitation does not necessarily imply that real-time technique cannot be used for studying a highly 
complex human activity such as (L2) writing; nor does it mean that researchers have no better means of 
inquiry than retrospective speculation. A high degree of precision (and less speculation) in data 
interpretation can be obtained by introducing appropriately innovative methodology. For example, 
Lindgren and Sullivan (2006) used keystroke data to perform a step-by-step analysis of the linguistic 
hypotheses that 12th–15th
I want you to come to sweden therefor Sweden <4.8> 6 
-grade Swedish writers made about L2 English. Instead of asking the participants 
to produce a holistic reflection on their writing, the researchers (p. 162) described in detail the instances 
of revision and inferred the cognitive process that the writers were experiencing. For example, one 
student wrote:  
  the summer holidays 
In Sweden <3.0> are really great. 
The keystroke replay shows that the student originally wrote, “I want you to come to sweden therefor 
Sweden,” then paused (4.8 seconds) and deleted “Sweden,” and added, “the summer holidays in Sweden 
are really great.” In regard to the revision, Lindgren and Sullivan (2006) discussed two potential 
hypotheses, which can be summed up as follows:  
Hypothesis 1: The revision is formal. “therefore” is a mistranslation for a Swedish word with a 
similar morphology, “därfür,” for English “because.” The writer was working on the form (i.e., 
sentence structure) intending to create a subordinate sentence that would provide the reason for the 
invitation.  
Hypothesis 2: The revision is conceptual. In the midst of a global revision, the writer might have an 
(unknown) intention to “adjust” the sentence according to “the overall plan” (p. 162). Therefore, the 
significance of the deletion of “Sweden” is minimal.  
Kwanghyun Park and Celeste Kinginger Writing/Thinking in Real Time 
 
Language Learning & Technology 35 
Although this analysis marks a step forward in keystroke analysis by breaking down the cognitive activity 
into smaller units to trace learner hypotheses, the analysis still relies on the researchers’ interpretation; 
therefore, it is more or less speculative. The two hypotheses are based upon inferences about the writer’s 
cognitive process that the key presses may or may not represent.  
How then do we remove this speculative reasoning from an analysis of real-time data? This paper 
proposes that one answer lies in the provision of a further layer of data—one capable of connecting real-
time data to cognitive processes. Although such a move cannot save us from speculation altogether, it can 
more securely anchor interpretation to results. Suppose we have a hypothetical piece of data showing that 
the writer in the above example eventually replaced “therefore” with “because.” With this pair of words, 
it becomes much clearer that the writer was focusing on these particular items, rather than on a global-
scale adjustment, and thus, the pair allows us to accept Hypothesis 1 and reject Hypothesis 2 with greater 
confidence. Such pairs, in other words, serve as an additional layer of data revealing writers’ thinking 
processes during composing. This paper explores a methodology for augmenting analysis of real-time 
data with additional data in the form of corpus queries.  
THE STUDY  
Objective 
This study is a part of a larger project that longitudinally investigated the composing processes of L2 
writers in the context of corpus-assisted writing instruction at the tertiary level (Park, 2010). The present 
study seeks to achieve a high level of precision in real-time data interpretation and composing process 
documentation through a methodological innovation. Specifically, this study evaluates one special kind of 
data—corpus search queries—for its potential to enhance the analysis of real-time data. The study focuses 
on two research questions:  
1. How can a methodology be developed to collect and analyze corpus search queries?  
2. What is the role of corpus search queries in connecting the interpretation of real-time data and 
retrospective data to the needs and the internal cognitive processes of an L2 writer? 
Context 
The research site was an intermediate/advanced ESL writing course at a large American university. The 
class met twice a week in a classroom. Additionally, students attended three writing conferences in the 
teacher’s office during the semester. This paper tracks one female student, Yilin (a pseudonym), and 
documents her composing process. Yilin was a first-year student in business with an L1 background in 
Mandarin Chinese. Yilin had one year’s experience of taking general English courses in an international 
school in China and had a high level of proficiency both in written English as attested in the scores she 
received for her written assignments. 
As a resource for the course and a research tool as well, the first author created a corpus-based system 
with a database of academic texts and a custom search engine (Google CSE) as a companion searching 
device to the database. An electronic collection of academic texts within a relevant topic area, the corpus 
had about 350,000 words and consisted of online academic journals in the broad topic areas of 
communication and technology, language use, and language learning.  
While the custom search engine is similar to a concordancer, a popular corpus search tool, within 
pedagogical applications the search engine and the concordancer function in fundamentally different ways 
(for concordancing in pedagogy, see Davies, 2008). Concordancers produce lines in a format called 
keyword-in-context (KWIC). Advocates of pedagogical concordancing argued that the KWIC 
representation helps learners to notice linguistic patterns (e.g., collocations) through focus-on-form 
activities, and thus facilitates language learning (Cobb, 1997; Flowerdew, 1996; Gaskell & Cobb, 2004; 
Kwanghyun Park and Celeste Kinginger Writing/Thinking in Real Time 
 
Language Learning & Technology 36 
Johns, 1986, 1991; Tribble, 1990). In addition to the KWIC lines, most concordancers provide analytical 
information such as word frequency, collocation, keywords, and n-grams, which learners may find useful. 
Custom search engines differ from concordance software in that they do not offer analytical information 
or present search results in KWIC format. The search engine, however, comes with other benefits: First, it 
is a prefabricated service that allows users to create a corpus accessible via the Internet, which is a 
capability that most concordancers lack (but see Lu, 2009). Instead of collecting texts, users can simply 
provide hyperlinks of the online texts to the engine and create a searchable database. Secondly, the search 
engine provides a relatively richer context than does the KWIC format, showing sentences that co-occur 
with the search terms and highlighting all search terms instead of one single keyword. Third, multiple-
word search is much easier with a search engine than with concordancers. This functionality is important 
for the writing course in this study, as the corpus system was introduced to allow students to access the 
corpus for writing references rather than for form-focused activities. A useful feature of the engine was its 
flexibility, which allowed the course designers to easily compile and modify the contents of the corpus by 
simply creating hyperlinks to the online texts. In addition to search capability, it is important that the 
system have a logging device to record the searches that users enter into the system. A computer program 
was written for this purpose and attached to the system. The program received and saved the queries in a 
separate computer database, from which a log of search queries could be retrieved. The log contained 
three kinds of key information among others: timestamps, search queries, and sign-in pseudonyms. Figure 
1 shows an example of the retrieved query log.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Screenshot of a sample query log. (Note. IP addresses are not the actual addresses due to 
privacy concerns.) 
Data and Collection Procedures 
This study analyzes three types of data: (1) the query log, (2) screen recordings, and (3) oral and written 
reflections. Screen recordings and corpus queries were collected during writing tasks in the classroom. 
The classroom was equipped with networked computers offering students access to the corpus system. A 
query is a search that writers enter in order to consult the course corpus. Thus, the query log in this study 
simply refers to a list of searches that writers have entered while consulting the corpus. The log contains 
three kinds of information: timestamps, search queries, and sign-in pseudonyms. The computers had 
screen-recording software (iShowU) installed as well, which the students used to record their screens. The 
data were collected while the students were engaged in their in-class writing tasks. As for the oral 
reflection data, writing conferences took place in the teacher’s office and each session lasted 
approximately twenty to thirty minutes. In the sessions, students watched their screen-recording clips and 
commented on their corpus consultations. The written reflections were collected from student papers and 
electronic bulletin board postings.  
Among the three kinds of data, the query log is of special importance to this study, as it constitutes the 
“additional layer of data” to address the validity issue in real-time writing research. In contrast to research 
Kwanghyun Park and Celeste Kinginger Writing/Thinking in Real Time 
 
Language Learning & Technology 37 
emphasizing the writer’s reflections (e.g., Geisler & Slattery, 2007), this paper suggests that we may 
improve analytical validity through a kind of data that mediates between real-time data and cognition. 
Specifically, this paper hypothesizes that search queries closely interface with writers’ thinking processes, 
as queries are, by definition, created to address (and thus reflect) their cognitive needs. In that sense, no 
query is random and all queries have a specific purpose. Analysis of these search queries may lend 
stronger support to our inferences regarding the cognitive processes of writers given that we will base our 
data interpretation on logical reasoning, rather than on our intuition and/or the writers’ perceptions.  
Data Analysis  
Data analysis was performed using a two-step procedure. In order to develop basic research tools (i.e., to 
define what to analyze and how) a pilot analysis was conducted. The objective of the pilot analysis was 
two-fold: to identify the unit of analysis and to establish a data-coding scheme. Three primary data—
screen video clips, oral/written reflections, and the query log—were reviewed multiple times to identify 
consistent patterns across these data. After the pilot analysis had identified the analytical unit and the 
coding scheme, a main analysis was performed on the focal student’s data to document her composing 
process.  
The pilot analysis of the data suggested that the focal student’s composing processes were organized in 
chunks forming discernable patterns. These patterns seemed to reflect her writing needs followed by an 
effort to address those needs. The present paper refers to such a sequence as “transaction.” Conceptually, 
a transaction in a composing process is identified based on three characteristics: (a) it responds to a 
particular problem or challenge, (b) it looks for a single target discourse item, and (c) it normally begins 
and ends with a visual signal in the screen recordings (e.g., beginning with mouse cursor highlighting and 
ending with scrolling away). The next step was to formally define a transaction. The following example 
obtained from a student’s screen recording illustrates a formal transaction boundary:  
 
Original text: Internet will take place of paper backs 
   
 Challenge: The definite article 
   
 Target item: The 
   
 Begin signal: movement of the mouse cursor over the text 
   
 Query 1: take place of  
 Query 2: take the place of  
   
 End signal: textual revision and scrolling away 
  
Revised text: Internet will take the place of paper backs 
Figure 2. Illustration of a formal transaction boundary sequence. 
Figure 2 shows that a transaction is a formally identifiable phenomenon across three types of data (i.e., 
corpus query, screen recordings, and reflections). In the query log, the student’s searches (Query 1 and 2) 
have formal similarities and are considered a potential transaction. These queries can be connected to the 
Kwanghyun Park and Celeste Kinginger Writing/Thinking in Real Time 
 
Language Learning & Technology 38 
corresponding visual signals in the screen recordings. Typically, the writer begins a reflection by 
commenting on the begin signal (moving mouse cursor) and concludes the narrative with a comment that 
corresponds with the end signal (revision and scrolling away) in the screen clip. Furthermore, description 
in stimulated recalls shows that the boundary of the transaction corresponds to the reflection data as well: 
The writer describes the writing process in a series of narrative episodes, each of which has an identifiable 
beginning and end. This sequence shows that the writer perceives a challenge and an ensuing effort as an 
identifiable event, which gives further support to the proposal that the transaction is a valid unit of 
analysis. Traditional units such as words, sentences, and paragraphs do not capture the writer’s 
conceptualization. In contrast, transactions allow us to reorganize composing processes within meaningful 
boundaries of writers’ needs and responsive effort in a way that is consistent with the writer’s perceptions.  
Analyzing Transactions 
This paper offers a formal and functional analysis of the composing process. In formal analysis, the 
objective is to identify transactions and describe the needs based only on the form. In the above example, 
two searches, “take place of” and “take the place of,” constitute a transaction, which allows us to locate 
the learner’s need and make a guess about it. By comparing the two related queries, we may conclude that 
the transaction revolves around a syntactic issue (i.e., the article system and a lexical issue, namely a 
formulaic expression). At this point, of course, the conclusion is based only on the form reflected in the 
query log.  
Functional analysis connects formally identified transactions to a writer’s hypotheses and strategies by 
considering the content of the data. If formal analysis seeks to answer what the challenge was, functional 
analysis focuses on how the challenge was met. In addition to the formal analysis of the query log, the 
screen video clips further show that the writer was comparing two example sentences in the search results 
(Figure 3):  
 
Original text: Internet will take place of paper backs 
   
 Search result 1: Thus, he announced that the premiere performance of “Hamlet” 
would take place at 20:00 GMT . . . 
   
 Search result 2: Nothing can take the place of a human person. That is my bottom 
line… 
  
Revised text: Internet will take the place of paper backs 
Figure 3. Sample sequence of queries, search results, and revision. 
These two example sentences from the corpus lead to the subsequent revision in which “the” is added to 
the writer’s sentence, resulting in “Internet will take the place of paper backs.” From the first search 
result, the writer noticed the discrepancy between the intended meaning in the original text (“replace”) 
and the meaning in the example sentence (“occur”). Then the writer formed a hypothesis about a correct 
form, tested it out in the next query, and accepted the hypothesis by confirming it in the second search 
result.  
The next step in the analysis is to connect our interpretation of the transaction to the writer’s perception of 
the process as it is given in the reflective narrative. This step looks for consistency of content between the 
data sources:  
Kwanghyun Park and Celeste Kinginger Writing/Thinking in Real Time 
 
Language Learning & Technology 39 
I was not sure about whether “take place of” or “take the place of” is correct. At the beginning, it 
[the corpus] didn’t solve my problem, because I didn’t pay attention to the actual results. Only by 
simply comparing the number of results from “take place” and “take the place.” I chose to use take 
place here. [However], I noticed that although “take place” provides more results, none of them are 
in the form of “take place of.” Then I tried “take the place” to see it’s correct. 
(Note. Excerpt from the writer’s self-reflection) 
Despite its brevity, the writer’s reflection has all the essential components and maintains the canonical 
sequence of a narrative (Labov & Waletsky, 1967). The writer began the reflection with an orientation, “I 
was not sure,” and presented the content of the story. Then there came the complication, when the writer 
described how the initial assumption was challenged by a later discovery (“I chose to use take place here. 
[However], I noticed that…”). Finally, resolution was reached when the writer tried a new query (“Then I 
tried…”). Thus, reflective accounts are organized as narrative “episodes,” wherein problems are noticed 
(analyzing the search results, noticing the discrepancy), then solved (setting up and testing a hypothesis).  
To conclude, the pilot analysis shows that the transaction is a valid unit for analysis. Although the 
example in the sample analysis is a very simple one, it still shows that even this simple transaction 
involves a complicated procedure of identifying the challenge, evaluating the resources, and testing a 
hypothesis.  
Data Coding  
In coding the query data, two formal categories of transaction, simple and complex, emerged and were 
used to distinguish between transactions with only one query (simple) and those with multiple queries 
(complex). Figure 4 exemplifies these two kinds of transactions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Simple and complex transactions. 
There were two reasons to code transactions as either simple or complex. First, there were noticeable 
differences between the distributions of simple and complex transactions in the query log: Complex 
Kwanghyun Park and Celeste Kinginger Writing/Thinking in Real Time 
 
Language Learning & Technology 40 
transactions tend to cluster together forming a visible group in the query log, while simple queries are 
scattered between the complex query clusters. This suggests that the analysis might benefit from isolating 
and examining them separately. Second, complex transactions seem to reflect the writer’s needs and her 
strategy to address the needs. In other words, complex transactions make visible the writer’s cognitive 
processes in a moment-by-moment manner. Thus, complex transactions offer richer insight into the 
writing processes than do simple transactions.  
Once these kinds of transactions had been identified, it was clear that interpreting simple transactions is 
much more difficult than interpreting complex transactions. For example, in Figure 4, a pair of queries 
“hard task” (#1521) and “difficult task” (#1524) form a complex transaction, as they differ minimally in 
regard to the adjectives, “hard” and “difficult”, indicating that the writer’s needs revolved around a lexical 
choice (i.e., an adjective for “task”). With a simple transaction, however, (e.g., “confused,” #1344), such 
reasoning would be extremely difficult. Therefore, the analytic focus of this study is the complex 
transaction.  
RESULTS  
For the present analysis, we collected a total of 109 minutes of screen recordings for the focal student. We 
also retrieved 194 corpus searches from the focal writer’s query log and identified 118 transactions. 
Among them, simple transactions (N = 92) outnumbered complex transactions (N = 26) by approximately 
three times.  
Documenting Transactions and Multi-Dimensional Needs 
Transactions originate from writers’ needs and concluded in a follow-up effort for addressing these needs. 
An analysis of the query log suggests that needs arise from syntactic, lexical, and morphological issues:  
Table 2. Breakdown of Learner Needs in Transactions 
Motivation  Query ID  Query 
Syntactic  751  no excuse from  
  752  no excuse for  
     
Lexical  1582  change essay  
  1625  revise essay 
     
Morphological  1743  miss used word usage 
  1744  misused word usage 
Table 2 exemplifies the rather simple, two-query transactions. By comparing two queries that minimally 
differ from each other, we can zero in on the particular needs of the writer. We identify a syntactic need 
(i.e., a grammar issue based on comparison of “for” and “from”), a lexical need (i.e., a word choice, by 
comparing “change” “and “revise”), and a morphological concern in the third pair (i.e., “miss used” and 
“misused”) 
These needs are further complicated, if multiple linguistic foci come into play in a single transaction. 
Then, a mix of needs may be identified in a single transaction. Table 3 illustrates three mixed needs 
(lexico-morphological, lexico-syntactic, and syntactic-morphological) in the query log:  
Kwanghyun Park and Celeste Kinginger Writing/Thinking in Real Time 
 
Language Learning & Technology 41 
Table 3. Mixed Needs in Transactions 
Mixed motivation  Query ID  Query example  Motivation 
Lexico-morphological  647  relative to  lexical/morphological 
  648  related to  lexical/morphological 
Lexico-syntactic  1585  on a website  syntactic 
  1587  in a website  syntactic 
  1589  in the web  syntactic/lexical 
Syntactic-morphological  2461  aquire information   syntactic 
  2462  aquire of information   syntactic 
  2463  aquire of information    
  2464  acquire of information   morphological  
  2465  acquiring of information   syntactic 
  2466  acquirance of information   morphological 
  2467  acquisition of information   morphological 
The first transaction consists of one minimal query pair that contrasts two words (“relative” and “related”), 
which are etymologically connected, but differ in meaning. Apparently, the morphological similarity 
between the two lexically separate items was a source of confusion for the writer. The query log has other 
similar examples including “respectably” and “respectively,” and “beneficial” and “beneficiary.” The 
second transaction shows a syntax-focused contrast between two prepositions (“on”/ “in”) in the first 
minimal query pair, while it extends to syntactic (“a”/“the”) and lexical (“website”/“web”) concerns in 
the second pair. The final example has multiple queries that are not only plural in number, but recurrent 
throughout the transaction. We see a series of revisions with a syntactic focus (“acquire of information” 
and “acquiring of information”) as well as a morphological focus (“aquire” and “acquirance”). These 
needs alternate in a recursive manner between concerns about syntax and morphology following the path 
of the writer’s problem-solving.  
For the purpose of demonstrating a method to analyze transactions, one transaction from the focal 
student’s query was retrieved and coded: 
Table 4. Coding a Transaction  
Query ID  Query example  Needs 
2435  obtain skill   Lexical 
2437  have skill   Lexical 
2440  writing skill   Lexical 
2441  develop writing skill   Lexical 
2442  develop writing ability   Lexical 
2444  develop writing abilities   Syntactic 
2446  develop writing skill   Lexical 
Table 4 shows that the focal writer’s transaction was motivated by lexico-syntactic needs. The coded 
transaction serves as ground data for the next step in the transaction analysis.  
Kwanghyun Park and Celeste Kinginger Writing/Thinking in Real Time 
 
Language Learning & Technology 42 
Tracking Hypotheses  
In the next step of analysis, the query log is compared with screen recordings and reflections to confirm 
(or revise) the transaction analysis so far. Based on the comparison, the composing process will be 
described. The description, however, does not directly rely on either kind of data—screen recordings or 
reflections. Instead, the present analysis will reconstruct the focal writer’s hypotheses by triangulating 
from multiple data sources. The reconstructed description of hypotheses, then, will serve as an 
intermediary dataset to support inferences about the composing process.  
The first step to describe the hypothesis development is to list the queries in a complex transaction in 
parallel with the writer’s reflections. A complex transaction in the query log suggests that the writer is 
evaluating the corpus search results; a subsequent refinement of a query indicates that the writer is 
formulating a hypothesis based on the evaluation and is testing it against the corpus. Therefore, by 
examining the query refinement, we can possibly track the writer’s hypotheses as they have developed. 
Figure 5 exemplifies this step by tabulating the focal writer’s queries and her reflections:  
Original text: Obtaining a decent writing skill will not only help college students 
   
 Query  Reflection 
 obtain skill  
 
it sounds like anyone could go out and buy their 
skillfulness in writing. So I searched “obtain skill” 
 have skill (no comment) 
 writing skill most of the sentence use “obtain + property”, but 
skill is ability, and I did not find any reference 
contains “obtain skill.” Then I typed in ”writing skill” 
 develop writing skill I saw sometimes they use “development of writing 
skill,” then I search “develop writing skill.”  
 develop writing ability I found people do use it. But I also saw they use 
“develop writing ability” I was considering whether I 
should use “ability” instead of “skill,” then I searched 
it, but they do not use it a lot. So I keep using 
develop writing skill 
   
Revised text: Developing a decent writing skill will not only help college students 
Figure 5. Tabulating the learner’s queries and reflection. 
The side-by-side tabulation of the queries and the accompanying comments allows us to track the 
development of Yilin’s thinking. Just by examining the queries (left column), we can draw a tentative 
conclusion that these queries focus on lexical issues (i.e., word choice) rather than on syntactic or 
morphological issues. Then, by taking account of the writer’s reflection (right column), we can confirm 
our conclusion with greater confidence.  
The next step in tracking the development of the learner’s hypotheses is to actually reconstruct them 
within the available datasets. Based on triangulation of these data, the present analysis provides a 
moment-by-moment representation of the development of her hypotheses, again, in a tabulated 
presentation:  
Kwanghyun Park and Celeste Kinginger Writing/Thinking in Real Time 
 
Language Learning & Technology 43 
Original text: Obtaining a decent writing skill will not only help college students 
   
 Query  Learner’s hypothesis Evaluation 
 obtain skill  
 
H1: “skill” may not be 
something that can be 
obtained in a short time 
H1: Accepted 
 
 
  H2: “obtain” does not 
highlight the fact that the 
object (“skill”) takes time 
and effort to achieve 
H2: Accepted 
 have skill   
 writing skill H3: “writing skill” may 
elicit the collocating 
verbs 
H3: Partially accepted 
 develop writing skill H4: “develop skill” is an 
appropriate collocation 
H4: Partially accepted 
 develop writing ability H5: “develop ability” is 
more appropriate than 
“develop skill” 
H5: Rejected 
   
Revised text: Developing a decent writing skill will not only help college students 
Figure 6. Visualizing the learner’s hypothesis development.  
The tabulated representation (Figure 6) shows that the writer evaluated corpus results and tested her 
hypotheses based on the evaluation of the results. On the surface, the only textual change is the 
substitution of “developing” for “obtaining.” However, the analysis shows that the revision is a result of a 
complex process involving the writers’ linguistic analysis and hypothesis.  
Yilin’s first and second queries originated from her sensitivity to language use and an effort to articulate 
her thoughts about learning to write as an L2 writer. In her first query, “obtain skill,” Yilin hypothesized 
that there was a better verb than “obtain” for emphasizing the work it takes for an international student to 
become a good writer in English. For her, achieving a high level of skill as an L2 writer was something 
that would require a longitudinal effort; it was not a skill that one could simply come by in a short period 
of time. H1, her first hypothesis, accordingly states that the semantics of the noun, “skill,” entails a 
longitudinal effort. She felt, somehow, that the verb “obtain” did not connote this painstaking effort. Yilin 
commented that “obtain” sounded as if the writing expertise were something that “anyone could go out 
and buy,” such that its use would downplay the challenges involved in the longitudinal learning process. 
H2, the second, subsequent hypothesis, states that the verb, “obtain,” does not correspond with the 
semantics of “skill.” 
The corresponding query, “obtain skill,” was her strategy to confirm her hypothesis about the non-
existence (and therefore inappropriateness) of this verb–noun collocation. The screen capture data shows 
that the collocations for “obtain” retrieved from the corpus in response to her query included 
“information,” “outcome,” “meaningful data,” “goals,” and “many skills.” Perusing these results, Yilin 
concluded that the verb “obtain” did not encode the aspect of temporal longitude, as it depicted rather a 
finite status of achievement. Thus, she accepted two hypotheses and concluded that “obtain” did not 
collocate well with “skill.” Then, in her second query, “have skill,” seems to reflect her effort to 
Kwanghyun Park and Celeste Kinginger Writing/Thinking in Real Time 
 
Language Learning & Technology 44 
determine the semantic property of “skill” by contrasting “obtain” with “have,” which represents an 
aspect of a finite state. 
Yilin’s next step was, naturally, to look for a verb that would express the longitudinal acquisition of 
writing “skill.” Her third query (“writing skill”) is an effort to find such a verb, from which the third 
hypothesis can be inferred. However, the following hypothesis, H3, is quite different in its purpose from 
the two preceding hypotheses. In the two earlier hypotheses (H1 and H2), Yilin already had in mind the 
target form (“obtain skill”) and intended to confirm the (non) use of this particular form. In her third 
hypothesis, however, she did not have the target form and, therefore, had to elicit one from the corpus 
through her query. Although she felt that “obtain” did not work for “skill,” she did not know what verb 
would substitute for “obtain.” In response to the need, H3 states that the query, “writing skill” will elicit 
some verbs to replace “obtain.” As a result of the search, Yilin did find a candidate verb, but in a nominal 
form (“development”). Now her query only partially served the purpose (of testing the hypothesis). 
Therefore, we may argue that she partially confirmed H3 by finding a semantic replacement and yet 
partially rejected it as well by retrieving a nominal form.  
Then her logical next step was to confirm whether or not the collocation “develop skill” is an appropriate 
one, as reflected in H4. Although Yilin eventually accepted the hypothesis, her decision process was a 
convoluted one because she noticed that the verb “develop” co-occurs not only with “skill” but also with 
“ability.” Now she had to choose one noun over the other. Yilin’s final query, “develop writing ability,” 
was intended to help make a decision between two collocations in her final hypothesis (H5). As the 
corpus results suggested that “skill” was used more often with “develop” than was “ability,” Yilin 
rejected H5 and retained her original choice, “develop skill.”  
In sum, the analysis shows that the focal student engaged in a complex process of hypothesis 
development, shuttling between finding lexico-grammatical resources from the corpus and testing her 
hypotheses. Yilin’s composing process can be understood as a multi-stage procedure consisting of three 
recursive steps: hypothesis testing through a query, analysis and evaluation of the search results, and 
revision (or optional query refinement).  
DISCUSSION 
Composing as a Developmental Process  
The present analysis shows that Yilin’s composing process was organized around dialogue-like 
interactions between her and an artifact. In her transaction, problem-solving began with a corpus query 
for hypothesis testing, followed by an evaluation of the search results, and finally an optional query 
refinement for further hypothesis testing. In its essence, it was a process in which the focal writer asked a 
question and received candidate answers from the corpus.  
The dialogic pattern in the writer’s corpus consultation bears a striking similarity to the way in which an 
experienced tutor offers help to a novice writer (described in Aljaafreh & Lantolf, 1994). With regard to 
help in a tutoring session, Aljaafreh and Lantolf defined the qualities of graduation and contingency: 
Tutors offer graduated assistance by aligning with the students’ current stage of development; they offer 
contingent help by maintaining a high level of sensitivity to the student’s performance and withdrawing 
that level of assistance once the student has reached the next developmental level.  
Corpus consultation emulates such tutoring in two important respects. First, the corpus system 
dynamically adjusts exemplar materials to the increasingly sophisticated level of the writer’s skill as 
reflected in a series of queries (graduation). Based on this graduated help, our focal writer achieved 
micro-level development, moving on from one dimension of challenge to the next, solving one little 
problem after another. Once the writer had solved the problem, the corpus consultation immediately came 
to an end and she started transferring the enhanced awareness to performance (contingency).  
Kwanghyun Park and Celeste Kinginger Writing/Thinking in Real Time 
 
Language Learning & Technology 45 
This analysis suggests that the composing process is fundamentally a developmental process. This study, 
thus, challenges the cognitive-processing model of Flower and Hayes (1981) as well as all studies 
neglecting the role of development in the construction of text. The data in this study show that each step 
in text production is both a process and a result of development, and L2 writing, as a whole, is a site 
where the struggle to achieve that development takes place.  
Composing as Problem-Solving 
While it has been conventional in L2 writing research to describe the composing process as consisting of 
temporal stages (i.e., planning, writing, and revising) the data in this study suggests otherwise by showing 
that planning, writing, and revising occur at the same time and across multiple linguistic dimensions (e.g., 
syntactic-lexical needs). The focal writer’s composing process simply cannot be described as a sequence 
of discrete stages. Rather, planning, writing, and revising are difficult to separate from each other and do 
not necessarily occur in a temporal sequence. Specifically, the findings in this study suggest that the 
writer’s composing process is organized around problem-solving work. And, inhering in this work is a 
dense locus of cognitive activity focused on hypothesis testing aimed at addressing the immediate 
challenges of producing text.  
Composing as a Distributed Activity  
The complex hypothesis testing of the focal writer suggests that she constructed her text in cognitive 
collaboration with the corpus system, rather than through an isolated processing activity. In other words, 
the focal writer and the corpus system engaged in a cognitive division of labor: The search engine 
performed all repetitive and time-consuming tasks such as collecting register-specific, grammatically 
acceptable texts and retrieving relevant sentences in response to the learner’s needs. As the system had 
done this basic groundwork on the lexicogrammatical level, the cognitive burden on the writer became 
lighter, thus allowing the writer to operate on the more creative rhetorical level, concentrating on testing 
her linguistic hypotheses and articulating her thoughts.  
CONCLUSION 
This study sought to answer a question that is of significance to technology-enhanced research on 
learners’ cognitive processes: How can we base our interpretation of real-time data on empirical evidence 
so as to enhance our understanding of the learner’s cognition during the composing process? The 
challenge is to develop a method to index real-time data to the learners’ cognition. The study has shown 
that a combination of screen recordings and corpus search queries, as an additional layer of research data, 
can play a significant role in providing a basis for data interpretation—one that is founded on logical 
reasoning rather than on our intuition or the participant’s perception. When applied to the area of writing, 
the method allowed for a moment-by-moment analysis of the query data and traced a complicated process 
of hypothesis testing. The analysis therefore showed that this exploratory method can enhance our 
understanding of the L2 composing processes beyond what current research methods have offered. It is 
unclear that real-time techniques alone, with or without the support of reflective narrative, are sufficient 
to provide data from which to make inferences about the writer’s internal cognitive process. 
One limitation of the suggested method is that it examines only the portion of composing processes that 
are reflected in corpus queries. No doubt there were episodes when Yilin did not appeal to the corpus 
query in her composing process. These other moments are not captured in the query log and thus cannot 
be examined. The challenge of adequately describing these episodes remains unresolved. A related issue 
is learners’ level of proficiency. It can be hypothesized that a novice learner will not produce as many 
complex queries as an advanced learner such as Yilin does. Complex queries suggest a process of 
hypothesis testing, one that requires both analytical skill and relatively high proficiency. Then, analysis of 
the novice learners’ queries may not be as revealing as scrutiny of advanced learners’ queries. Another 
limitation is that the method still depends on the learner’s reflections for interpreting the query log. While 
Kwanghyun Park and Celeste Kinginger Writing/Thinking in Real Time 
 
Language Learning & Technology 46 
the triangulation technique is effective in identifying consistency between the real-time data and the 
learner’s reflections, the method suffers when the learner’s reflections are not available. Although a 
technique for representing the learner’s cognitive process without such reflections is beyond the scope of 
this study, this is clearly a key issue for future inquiry.  
The combination of screen recording video and corpus query analysis is an unexplored area of potential 
benefit for methodological innovations in learning process research. An important next step in this area is 
to conduct a larger-scale study to examine the development of L2 learners through query analysis and the 
real-time data collected in pedagogical as well as professional situations. Future research also needs to 
extend real-time research techniques to issues including learner behavior analysis, assessment of learners’ 
performance and development, and evaluation of technology/software for language learning and teaching. 
Such efforts may yield ecologically valid applications for technology-enhanced pedagogy in 
contemporary contexts of language learning and teaching—contexts that are increasingly mediated, 
distributed, and collaborative. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We are very grateful to the anonymous reviewers for valuable suggestions leading to significant 
improvements in the paper. We are also grateful to our colleagues in the College of Liberal Arts at the 
Pennsylvania State University, particularly Karen Johnson, Xiaofei Lu, and Xiaoye You.  
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Kwanghyun Park recently received his Ph.D. in Applied Linguistics at the Pennsylvania State University. 
His research interests include applied corpus linguistics and learner language analysis with a focus on 
developing methods to investigate learner development using a computational system and real-time video 
data. 
E-mail: kpark90@gmail.com  
Celeste Kinginger is Associate Professor of Applied Linguistics at the Pennsylvania State University 
where she is affiliated with the Center for Advanced Language Proficiency Education and Research 
(CALPER).  
E-mail: cxk37@psu.edu  
 
REFERENCES 
Aljaafreh, A., & Lantolf, J. (1994). Negative feedback as regulation and second language learning in the 
zone of proximal development. The Modern Language Journal, 78, 465–487. 
Atkinson, D. (2003). L2 writing in the post-process era: Introduction. Journal of Second Language 
Writing, 12, 3–15. 
Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1987). The psychology of written composition. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Bonk, C., & Reynolds, T. (1992). Early adolescent composing within a generative-evaluative 
computerized prompting framework. Computers and Human Behavior, 8(1), 39–62. 
Chapelle, C. (2000). Is network-based learning CALL? In M. Warschauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Network-
Kwanghyun Park and Celeste Kinginger Writing/Thinking in Real Time 
 
Language Learning & Technology 47 
based language teaching: Concepts and practice (pp. 204–228). New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Chun, D. (1994). Using computer networking to facilitate the acquisition of interactive competence. 
System, 22, 17–31. 
Cobb, T. (1997). Is there any measurable learning from hands-on concordancing? System 25(3), 301–315. 
Collier, R. (1983). The word processor and revision strategies. College Composition and Communication, 
34(2), 149–155. 
Davies, G. (Ed.). (2008). Information and communications technology for language teachers (ICT4LT). 
Slough, Thames Valley University. Retrieved from http://www.ict4lt.org 
Eklundh, K. (1994). Linear and nonlinear strategies in computer-based writing. Computers and 
Composition, 11, 203–216.  
Eklundh, K., & Kollberg, P. (2003). Emerging discourse structure: computer-assisted episode analysis as 
a window to global revision in university students’ writing. Journal of Pragmatics, 35(6), 869–891. 
Flinn, J. (1987). Case studies of revision aided by keystroke recording and replaying software. Computers 
and Composition, 5, 31–43. 
Flower, L. S., & Hayes, J. R. (1981). A cognitive process theory of writing. College Composition and 
Communication, 32, 365–387.  
Flowerdew, J. (1996). Concordancing in language learning. In M. Pennington (Ed.), The power of CALL 
(pp. 97–113). Houston, TX: Athelstan. 
Gaskell, D., & Cobb, T. (2004). Can learners use concordance feedback for writing errors? System, 32(3), 
301–319. 
Geisler, C. (2001). Textual objects: Accounting for the role of texts in the everyday life of complex 
organizations. Written Communication, 18(3), 296–325. 
Geisler, C., & Slattery, S. (2007). Capturing the activity of digital writing: Using, analyzing, and 
supplementing video screen capture. In H. A. McKee & D. N. DeVoss (Eds.), Digital writing research: 
Technologies, methodologies, and ethical issues (pp. 185–200). Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press. 
Glendinning, E., & Howard, R. (2001). Examining the intangible process: Lotus ScreenCam as an aid to 
investigating student writing. Edinburgh Working Papers in Applied Linguistics, 11, 42–58.  
Glendinning, E., & Howard, R. (2003). Lotus ScreenCam as an aid to investigating student writing. 
Computer Assisted Language Learning, 16, 31–46. 
Hayes, J. R. (1996). A new model of cognition and affect in writing. In M. Levy & S. Ransdell (Eds.), 
The science of writing (pp. 1–30). Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Hayes, J. R., & Flower, L. S. (1980). Identifying the organisation of writing processes. In L. W. Gregg & 
E. R Steinberg (Eds.), Cognitive processes in writing (pp. 3–30). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates. 
Humes, A. (1983). Research on the composing process. Review of Educational Research, 53(2), 201–216.  
Johns, T. (1986). Micro-concord: A language learner’s research tool. System, 14(2), 151–162. 
Johns, T. (1991). Should you be persuaded: Two examples of data driven learning. ELR Journal, 4, 1–16. 
Kent, T. (Ed.). (1999). Post-process theory: Beyond the writing process paradigm. Carbondale: Southern 
Illinois University Press.  
Kern, R. G. (1995). Restructuring classroom interaction with networked computers: Effects on quantity 
Kwanghyun Park and Celeste Kinginger Writing/Thinking in Real Time 
 
Language Learning & Technology 48 
and quality of language production. The Modern Language Journal, 79, 457–476. 
Kinginger, C. (2004). Bilingualism and emotion in the autobiographical works of Nancy Huston. Journal 
of Multilingual and Multicultural Development, 25, (2&3), 159–178. 
Kinginger, C., & Belz, J. (2005). Sociocultural perspectives on pragmatic development in foreign 
language learning: Case studies from telecollaboration and study abroad. Intercultural Pragmatics, 2(4), 
369–421. 
Kramsch, C., & Thorne, S. (2002). Foreign language learning as global communicative practice. In D. 
Block & D. Cameron (Eds.), Globalization and language teaching (pp. 83–100). New York: Routledge. 
Krapels, A. R. (1990). An overview of second language process research. In B. Kroll (Ed.), Second 
language writing: Research insights for the classroom (pp. 37–56). Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Labov, W., & Waletzky, J. (1967/1997). Narrative analysis: Oral versions of personal experience. In J. 
Helms (Ed.), Essays on the verbal and visual arts (pp. 12–44). Seattle: University of Washington Press. 
(Reprinted in Journal of Narrative and Life History, 7, 3–38). 
Lansman, M., Smith, J., & Weber, I. (1993). Using the writing environment to study writers’ strategies. 
Computers and Composition, 10, 71–92.  
Lantolf, J. P. (2006). Sociocultural theory and L2: State of the art. Studies in Second Language 
Acquisition, 28, 67–109.  
Lantolf, J. P., & Pavlenko, A. (2001). (S)econd (L)anguage (A)ctivity theory: Understanding second 
language learners as people. In M. Breen (Ed.), Learner contributions to language learning: New 
directions in research (pp. 141–158). New York: Longman. 
Latif, M. (2008). A state-of-the-art review of the real-time computer-aided study of the writing process. 
International Journal of English Studies, 8, 29–50. 
Levy, C., & Ransdell, S. (1994). Computer-aided protocol analysis of writing processes. Behavior 
Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 26, 219–223. 
Lindgren, E., & Sullivan K. (2006). Analyzing on-line revision. In G. Rijlaarsdam (Series Ed.) and K. P. 
H. Sullivan & E. Lindgren (Vol. Eds.), Studies in writing, computer keystroke logging: Methods and 
applications (pp. 157–188). Oxford: Elsevier. 
Lu, X. (2009). A corpus-based approach to tracking L2 development. Paper presented at the 2009 Annual 
Convention of the American Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages (ACTFL-09). San Diego, 
CA. 
Luoma, S., & Tarnanen, M. (2003). Creating a self-rating instrument for second language writing: From 
idea to implementation. Language Testing, 20, 440–465. 
Matsuda, P. K. (2003). Process and post-process: A discursive history. Journal of Second Language 
Writing, 12, 65–83. 
Miller, K. (2000). Academic writers online: Investigating pausing in the production of text. Language 
Teaching Research, 4, 123–148.  
Miller, K. (2005). Second language writing research and pedagogy: A role for computer logging? 
Computers and Composition, 22, 297–317.  
Miller, K. (2006). Pausing, productivity and the processing of topic. In K. Sullivan & E. Lindgren (Eds.), 
Computer key-stroke logging: Methods and applications (pp. 131–156). Oxford: Elsevier. 
Kwanghyun Park and Celeste Kinginger Writing/Thinking in Real Time 
 
Language Learning & Technology 49 
Miller, K., Lindgren, E., & Sullivan, K. (2008). The psycholinguistic dimension in second language 
writing: Opportunities for research and pedagogy using computer keystroke logging. TESOL Quarterly, 
42(3), 433–454. 
New, E. (1999). Computer–aided writing in French as a foreign language: A qualitative and quantitative 
look at the process of revision. The Modern Language Journal, 83(1), 80–97. 
Newell, A., & Simon, H. (1972). Human problem solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
Ochs, E., & Capps, L. (2001). Living narrative. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Owston, R., Murphy, S., & Wideman, H. (1992). The effects of word processing on students’ writing 
ability. Research in the Teaching of English, 26, 249–276. 
Park, K. (2010). Enhancing lexicogrammatical performance through corpus-based mediation in L2 
academic writing instruction. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, The Pennsylvania State University, USA. 
Pavlenko, A. (2007). Autobiographic narratives as data in applied linguistics. Applied Linguistics, 28(2), 
163–188.  
Raimes, A. (1983). Tradition and revolution in ESL teaching. TESOL Quarterly, 19, 535–552. 
Ransdell, S. (1995). Generating thinking-aloud protocols: Impact on the narrative writing of college 
students. American Journal of Psychology, 108(1), pp. 89–98. 
Ransdell, S. & Levy, C. (1994). Writing as process and product: the impact of tool, genre, audience, 
knowledge, and writer expertise. Computers in Human Behavior, 10, 511–527. 
Reynolds, T., & Bonk, C. (1996). Facilitating college writers' revisions within a generative-evaluative 
computerized prompting framework. Computers and Composition, 13, 93–108. 
Salaberry, R. (1999). CALL in the year 2000: Still developing the research agenda. A commentary on 
Carol Chapelle’s CALL in the year 2000: Still in search of research paradigms. Language Learning & 
Technology, 3(1), 104–107. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num1/comment/index.html 
Scott, V. M., & New, E. (1994). Computer-aided analysis of foreign language writing strategies. CALICO 
Journal, 11, 5–18. 
Silva, T. (1990). Second language composition instruction: Developments, issues and directions in ESL. 
In B. Kroll (Ed.), Second language writing: Research insights for the classroom (pp. 11–23). New York: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Slattery, S. (2005). Technical writing as textual coordination: An argument for the value of writers’ skill 
with information technology. Technical Communication, 52(3), 353–360. 
Slattery, S. (2007). Un-distributing work through writing: How technical writers manage texts in complex 
information environments. Technical Communication Quarterly, 16(3), 311–325. 
Stallard, C. K. (1974). An analysis of the writing behavior of student writers. Research in the Teaching of 
English, 8, 206–218.  
Sullivan, K., & Lindgren, E. (Eds.). (2006). Computer key-stroke logging and writing: Methods and 
applications. Oxford: Elsevier.  
Swarts, J. (2004). Technological mediation of document review: The use of textual replay in two 
organizations. Journal of Business and Technical Communication, 18(3), 328–360. 
Swarts, J. (forthcoming 2010). Recycled writing: Assembling actor-networks from reusable content. 
Journal of Business and Technical Communication. 
Kwanghyun Park and Celeste Kinginger Writing/Thinking in Real Time 
 
Language Learning & Technology 50 
Thorne, S. L. (2003). Artifacts and cultures-of-use in intercultural communication. Language Learning & 
Technology, 7(2), 38–67. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/thorne/default.html 
Thorson, H. (2000). Using the computer to compare foreign- and native-language writing processes: A 
statistical and case study approach. The Modern Language Journal, 84, 55–70. 
Tribble, C. (1990). Concordancing in an EAP writing program. CAELL Journal, 1(2), 10–15. 
Trimbur, J. (1994). Taking the social turn: Teaching writing post-process. College Composition and 
Communication, 45, 108–118. 
Van Ittersum, D. (2009). Distributing memory: rhetorical work in digital environments. Technical 
Communication Quarterly, 18(3), 259–280.  
Warschauer, M. (1997). Computer-mediated collaborative learning: Theory and practice. The Modern 
Language Journal, 81, 470–481. 
Warschauer, M. (1998). Researching technology in TESOL: Determinist, instrumental, and critical 
approaches. TESOL Quarterly, 32(4), 757–761. 
Warschauer, M., & Kern, R. (Eds.). (2000). Network-based language teaching: Concepts and practice. 
New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Zamel, V. (1982). The process of discovering meaning. TESOL Quarterly, 16(2), 195–209.  
Zamel, V. (1983). The composing processes of advanced ESL students: Six case studies. TESOL 
Quarterly, 17, 165–187. 
 
