Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol14num3/commentary.pdf 
October 2010, Volume 14, Number 3 
pp. 27–30 
 
Copyright © 2010, ISSN 1094-3501 27 
INVITED COMMENTARY 
RESEARCH FOR PRACTICE: A LOOK AT ISSUES IN TECHNOLOGY  
FOR SECOND LANGUAGE LEARNING 
 
Carol A. Chapelle 
Iowa State University 
At the launch of Language Learning & Technology fourteen years ago, it was impossible to foresee the 
splash—to put it mildly—that computer technology in general and the Internet in particular would make 
on second and foreign language teaching and learning. In that first issue of the journal, I suggested that 
research might be useful in helping applied linguists to understand how language learners interact and 
learn—or fail to learn—with the many new options made available by new technologies. Moreover, I 
suggested that it might be fruitful to approach research and development in a manner that draws from 
practices in instructed second language acquisition research. The need was clear at that time, as it is now, 
for research designs to move beyond quantitative, outcomes-oriented studies comparing learning through 
technology to learning in a classroom—a paradigm inherited from education. At the same time, however, 
I expressed the concern that the research should focus on second language learning rather than being 
guided by the objectives of other fields—fields with research objectives and methods relevant to studying 
the issues they are concerned with.  
Over the past fourteen years, the pages of Language Learning & Technology have been filled with 
examples of research that take up the challenge of investigating second language learning through 
technology. It has been a period of expansion and growth in many ways. The expansion of technologies 
as well as their acceptance and use in language learning has provided a fertile field for investigating 
questions about language learning through technology. Over the same period, approaches to the study of 
second language acquisition have expanded, offering more constructs and methods that can be used in 
research on technology for second language learning. A look through Language Learning & Technology 
provides one valuable perspective on the richness of the research issues at the intersection of technology 
and language learning. Another perspective that I would like to offer comes from the themes and issues 
that we have targeted at our conference on Technology and Second Language Learning (TSLL) each year 
at Iowa State University. A retrospective look at the conference themes is useful for pointing out issues to 
be investigated from a practice-oriented perspective on technology for second language learning. 
The purpose of the conference is to explore issues at the interface of research and practice with respect to 
the use of computer technology for second language learning. Pragmatically speaking, if one holds a 
vision that language learning can be improved relative to current practices, what is the understanding that 
needs to be developed in order to make progress toward this vision? The assumption is that an 
understanding of effective technology uses can be developed though research and reflective practice. For 
the conference each year, we identify a set of interlocking issues pertaining to practice—issues at the 
intersection of language learning and technology in need of research, reflection and focused discussion. 
Retrospectively, it is evident that we revisit several recurring themes as we sort out a focus for each year’s 
conference: the selection and structuring of learning material, assessment of students learning, and the use 
of empirical data for evaluating the success of students’ learning. These areas of inquiry play out 
differently in various areas of practice, and therefore the topics of the conferences reflect the specifics of 
practice. 
The first TSLL conference, held in October of 2003, addressed a perennial issue in materials 
development: What aspects of language to target in order to address important learner needs. This 
perennial issue had a few new twists when viewed in the current context of computer-assisted research, 
individualized instruction, and assessment. The new version of the old question was addressed by a 
Carol A. Chapelle Invited Commentary: Research for Practice 
 
Language Learning & Technology  28 
confluence of perspectives in applied linguistics from corpus studies to second language acquisition and 
grammar pedagogy to assessment. Sylviane Granger (Université catholique de Louvain in Belgium) 
spoke on the use of learner corpora for the systematic study of learner language, and Ron Cowan 
(University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign) spoke on the interpretation of such data from perspectives 
in second language acquisition. Trude Heift (Simon Fraser University) spoke about individualized 
responses to learners’ input, and Jim Purpura (Columbia University) raised issues of evaluating 
grammatical knowledge. It was evident that a productive path for computer-assisted language learning 
materials development would entail such collaborations across these areas where only minimal 
collaborative work had occurred in the past, and thus an important idea that emerged in this event was the 
need to bring together researchers working in various strands of applied linguistics within a pragmatically 
oriented research agenda. 
The second annual TSLL conference focused on how practices can be evaluated through the use of 
qualitative and quantitative research approaches that provide more detailed and instructive information to 
researchers than can be yielded through quantitative outcomes-based comparisons. Evaluation of 
instruction has been an important issue in second language teaching for many years, but when it is 
technology for language learning, both the needs for evaluation and the opportunities to do so are 
amplified. Invited speakers, Paul Gruba (University of Melbourne) and Joan Jamieson (Northern Arizona 
University), each examined methodological issues in designing such research and interpreting research 
results. Papers offered a variety of examples of how researchers had examined specific aspects of learning 
materials and activities using detailed methods aimed at revealing how specific conditions of learning 
might have contributed to learning.  
The third annual TSLL conference was held jointly with the conference of the MidWest Association of 
Language Testers (MwALT), and we therefore took the opportunity to target the complex issues of 
assessment, which are so fundamental to evaluation of technology for language learning. The invited 
speaker, J. Charles Alderson (Lancaster University), spoke about his experience with technology for 
language testing in the large pan-European DIALANG project. His paper raised concerns about the state 
of knowledge in diagnostic assessment, a topic often presented in visions for technology-based 
assessments. The conference as a whole brought together concepts and practices dealing with assessment 
of learners’ language through technology and assessment of technology for second language learning.  
The topic of the fourth conference was the strategies language learners use with particular focus on 
strategies in their use of technology for language learning. Andrew Cohen, (University of Minnesota) 
spoke about his work in the study of learner strategies including the use of Web sites for helping foreign 
language students to develop their learning strategies. Phil Hubbard (Stanford University) demonstrated 
that the strategies learners use to direct their second language learning are critical when students use 
multimedia learning technologies, the Internet, and other electronic resources. Presenters discussed 
investigations of strategies that language learners use in technology-mediated environments, the impact of 
new technologies on learning strategies, the design of materials to prompt good learning strategies, 
evaluation/assessment of the effects of learner strategy training in CALL, current and future trends in 
educating language teachers to teach strategies for using technological language resources, and impact of 
distance and Web-based learning environments for language learning strategies. Discussion touched on 
the issue that tools give students access to a large range of learning resources and opportunities, but for 
the most part leave learners on their own to decide how to best use them. How to change this practice was 
identified as an important challenge. 
The fifth annual conference, like the first one, brought together researchers who typically work in 
different areas of applied linguistics under the umbrella of improving individualized learning through the 
use of assessment and diagnostic assessment. The many invited speakers included Robert Mislevy 
(University of Maryland) in addition to researchers working in natural language processing and diagnostic 
assessment. The papers are in an on-line edited volume that appears at 
Carol A. Chapelle Invited Commentary: Research for Practice 
 
Language Learning & Technology  29 
http://apling.public.iastate.edu/TSLL/5th_2007/proceedings2007/. This volume captures complex areas in 
need of focused inquiry such as diagnostic language assessment, student models, natural language 
processing, and the design adaptive instruction. The practices of interest at this conference could 
eventually offer students level- and content-appropriate instruction through the use assessment strategies 
administered and interpreted diagnostically during the course of instruction.  
The sixth annual conference revisited issues in language learning materials with focus on developing and 
evaluating language learning materials. The invited speakers were Dorothy Chun (University of 
California at Santa Barbara), Sue Otto and James Pusack (University of Iowa), and Sherry Preiss (Pearson 
Education). Presentations demonstrated the range of new language learning opportunities afforded by 
technology. The presenters pointed out that technology expands what teachers and learners see as 
language materials because they can include a variety of individualized, social and classroom learning, 
particularly through the combination of textbooks, workbooks, CD-ROMs, databases, and tools for 
linguistic analysis and communication. The presenters pointed out that the increase in options that 
technology provides underscores the significance of professional knowledge in developing and evaluating 
materials. The papers from this conference appear in the proceedings at 
https://www.apling.engl.iastate.edu/tsll/2008/. 
The seventh TSLL was held in conjunction with the inaugural conference of Pronunciation in Second 
Language Learning and Teaching and therefore explored how the teaching of speaking and listening can 
be facilitated through the use of technology and what important issues are raised by trying to promote 
spoken interaction using technology. Papers and poster presentations touched on issues including the 
following: How technology can be used to promote spoken interaction, how new technologies can best be 
blended with printed materials to draw on their complementary strengths, how the use of spoken corpora 
improve materials design and classroom teaching, how listening materials can be made interactive by 
using computer technology, how technology can be used to assess listening and speaking skills, how 
multimedia technology can enhance listening comprehension, how technology can be used to supplement 
spoken language instruction for varied student populations, and how changes in teacher education 
programs need to help promote the use of technology for teaching oral communication. The proceedings 
from this conference appear online at https://www.apling.engl.iastate.edu/tsll/2009/. 
The topic of the eighth TSLL conference was hybrid or blended learning for language classrooms 
particularly as it is informed by knowledge obtained in research and practice in CALL. Blended learning 
in practice can range from tutorial CALL to social networking resources, automated essay-scoring 
systems, and other emerging technologies. Use of such resources often precipitates questions concerning 
cost, training, and effectiveness. Papers included topics such as the following: How experience with 
CALL has helped in the development and evaluation of hybrid and online language courses, how results 
from SLA research can provide insight into the development and evaluation of these courses, what core 
research issues and methods need to be addressed when developing these courses, what knowledge can be 
gained from both successful and less successful attempts at reflective course conversion projects, and how 
public discussion with stakeholders can affect the development, evaluation, and success of hybrid 
language courses.  
As we plan the ninth annual TSLL conference, we are returning to issues in the use of technology in 
assessment, and particularly the role of technology in developing innovations in assessment, as the 
conference is again held jointly with MwALT. The invited presenters will consider what the test takers 
say about the use of technology in innovative assessments (Margaret Malone; Center for Applied 
Linguistics), research on the use of computers in scoring essays (Sara Weigle; Georgia State University), 
and research methods for examining innovation in assessment (Lia Plakans; University of Iowa).  
As a chronological collection, the conference themes provide a glimpse of some of the characteristics of a 
practice-driven research path aimed at improving technology for language learning. Such an agenda needs 
Carol A. Chapelle Invited Commentary: Research for Practice 
 
Language Learning & Technology  30 
to have a principled means of investigating the detail of learners’ technology use. Valid and useful 
inferences need to be made on the basis of a variety of data that can be obtained through the use of 
technology to implement acquisition-focused research. Such research needs to feed into subsequent 
materials and task design in an iterative fashion so that effective designs for technology can be developed 
and learners can be taught successful strategies for learning through technology.  
Fundamental to these practices is a means of evaluating the success of learning that is relevant to the 
objectives of learning. Such assessments seldom, if ever, exist as a ready-made solution for research 
objectives and therefore perspectives on assessment are needed that are sufficiently sophisticated to 
develop specific purpose assessments that can be used in research and learning. Central to research needs 
in technology and second language learning then are perspectives on development and validation of 
assessments.  
Our pragmatically-driven research topics at the conference have been energized and informed by 
developments in technologies, pedagogies and the research appearing on the pages of Language Learning 
& Technology. I hope that this brief look at the areas that we have chosen for the annual conference will 
in turn be useful to authors and readers who are creating this field of research and practice. It should be 
evident that the purpose of each conference was to open and explore an area, with the aim of sparking 
interest, ideas, and future research. I hope that this commentary helps to transmit some of the ideas that 
we have explored in Ames, Iowa, USA to Language Learning & Technology readers around the world 
and that it helps to enlarge the network dedicated to research for practice in technology for second 
language learning. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Carol A. Chapelle is Distinguished Professor of Liberal Arts and Sciences at Iowa State University, where 
she teaches courses and conducts research in language assessment and technology for language learning 
in the doctoral program in Applied Linguistics & Technology. She has served as president of the 
American Association for Applied Linguistics and as editor of TESOL Quarterly.  
E-mail: carolc@iastate.edu 
