Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol14num3/yanguas.pdf 
October 2010, Volume 14, Number 3 
pp. 72–93 
 
Copyright © 2010, ISSN 1094-3501 72 
ORAL COMPUTER-MEDIATED INTERACTION BETWEEN  
L2 LEARNERS: IT’S ABOUT TIME! 
Íñigo Yanguas 
San Diego State University 
This study explores task-based, synchronous oral computer-mediated communication 
(CMC) among intermediate-level learners of Spanish. In particular, this paper examines 
(a) how learners in video and audio CMC groups negotiate for meaning during task-based 
interaction, (b) possible differences between both oral CMC modes and traditional face-to-
face (FTF) communication, and (c) how this oral computer mediated negotiation compares 
to that found in the text-based CMC literature. Fifteen learner-to-learner dyads were 
randomly assigned to an audio group, a video group, and a FTF control group to complete 
a jigsaw task that was seeded with 16 unknown lexical items. Experimental groups used 
Skype, free online communication software, to carry out the task. The transcripts of the 
conversations reveal that oral CMC groups do indeed negotiate for meaning in this 
multimedia context when non-understanding occurs between speakers. In addition, results 
showed differences in the way audio and video groups carry out these negotiations, which 
were mainly due to the lack of visual contact in the audio group. No differences were 
found between video and FTF groups. Furthermore, oral CMC turn-taking patterns were 
shown to be very similar to FTF patterns but opposite to those found in written 
synchronous CMC. Oral CMC interaction patterns are shown to be more versatile. 
INTRODUCTION 
Research investigating computer-mediated communication (CMC) in the context of second language 
acquisition (SLA) has proliferated since the early 1990s. Several scholars at that time embarked on 
investigations that assessed second language (L2) learners’ interactions using local networked computers 
and the Daedalus interchange software (e.g., Beauvois, 1992; Chun, 1994; Kelm, 1992; Kern, 1995). 
Since then and after the appearance of several Web-based chat programs such as Yahoo and MSN 
Messenger, several studies have been published investigating various aspects of CMC such as teacher 
strategies (Meskill & Anthony, 2005), socialization (Sengupta, 2001; Shin, 2006), individual differences 
(Payne & Ross, 2005), or studies that compared synchronous versus asynchronous CMC (Pérez, 2003; 
Sotillo, 2000). 
However, the bulk of research has investigated CMC under an interactionist perspective (Blake, 2000; 
Darhower, 2002; Fernández-García & Martínez-Arbelaiz, 2002; Negretti, 1999; Pellettieri, 2000; Smith, 
2003; Toyoda & Harrison, 2002; Tudini, 2003; Warner, 2004; Xie, 2002). Not only do these studies 
deserve a special mention for their numbers but also for their efforts to connect this strand of Computer-
Assisted Language Learning (CALL) with the SLA field by utilizing the Interaction Hypothesis (Long, 
1996) as theoretical framework. This hypothesis associates input, attention, and output through 
negotiation in meaningful and productive ways and has been widely investigated in the SLA field. Studies 
have used different types of tasks and activities that promote interaction and have shown that negotiation 
of meaning in these learner-to-learner interactions does indeed occur (Ellis, Tanaka, & Yamazaki, 1994; 
Gass, 1998; Gass & Varonis, 1985; Long, 1983; 1985; Loschky, 1994; Mackey, 1999; Pica, 1994; Pica, 
Holliday, Lewis, Berducci, & Newman, 1991). Even if evidence that interactive negotiation leads to 
language acquisition is not conclusive, it is widely believed by the SLA community that this type of 
interaction among L2 learners is beneficial for L2 development (Smith, 2004). 
Less fruitful, at least in terms of quantity, has been research investigating a more direct link between 
CMC interaction and SLA (De la Fuente, 2003; Sachs & Suh, 2007; Shekary & Tahririan, 2006; Smith, 
Íñigo Yanguas Oral Computer-Mediated Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 73 
2004, 2005). Far from being conclusive, results from some of these studies seem to suggest that lexical 
items trigger more negotiation episodes than any other aspect of conversation (Blake, 2000; Blake & 
Zyzik, 2003; Toyoda & Harrison, 2002) and, therefore, are most likely to be learned. For instance, Smith 
(2004) found positive effects for CMC negotiated interaction on lexical acquisition. Along the same lines, 
De la Fuente found that text-based CMC was as effective as face-to-face (FTF) interaction in promoting 
written receptive and productive learning of the target words. Interestingly, results for oral acquisition 
were not quite the same and she concluded “text-based CMC negotiated interaction may not be the best 
answer for development of productive, oral skills” (p.74). However, there are studies that have shown that 
interacting in a chatroom environment can foster oral skills (Payne & Whitney, 2002). 
As all these investigations show, much research in the CMC strand of research has focused on written 
communication, whether synchronous or asynchronous. In the oral CMC realm, Cziko and Park (2003) 
reviewed six free Web-based programs that allowed video and/or voice communication over the Internet. 
They claimed that recent advances in programming, computer speed, and Internet bandwidth had 
facilitated the possibility of free real-time communication through video-conferencing and its application 
in the L2 classroom. Three years later, Levy and Stockwell (2006) stated that the spread of broadband 
technologies and lower prices for both software and hardware made audio- and video-conferencing 
affordable for most institutions. At the turn of the decade, technological advances have taken on a new 
dimension making the present time, when laptops come equipped with cameras and microphones and fast 
broadband Internet networks are common on many campuses, even more favorable for investigating and 
implementing oral computer-mediated-communication (OCMC) in the L2 classroom. Traditional free 
Internet chatting programs now have, in addition to chatting capabilities, appropriate audio and video 
quality, and they are widely used. Furthermore, some electronic mail providers such as Gmail have 
recently included video-conferencing capabilities that provide high quality pictures easily from your 
inbox. Skype, a relatively new program that has been based in Luxembourg since 2003, is a program with 
high picture and sound quality. Godwin-Jones (2005) claimed that in comparison to programs such as 
Paltalk, Skype generally offers better quality and poses less compatibility issues than other programs. On 
Skype’s Website (http://about.skype.com/), it is noted that in the third quarter of 2009, Skype users made 
almost 28 billion Skype-to-Skype calls, more than three quarters of which were video calls. As a matter of 
fact, we have used Skype at a large public university to foster speaking practice in the L2 since 2007, and 
can confirm that, contrary to Hampel and Hauck (2004), the effective implementation of video- and 
audio-conferencing in the L2 classroom, given the appropriate technological infrastructure, is not such a 
complex endeavor. However, we agree with Blake (2008) who claimed that any technological tool is 
inherently neutral, and that successful CMC will depend on careful planning on the part of the instructor 
or researcher. 
Synchronous written computer-mediated communication (WCMC) has been labeled as a hybrid mode 
because it exhibits features of both written and spoken language (Roed, 2003; Smith 2005; Yates, 1996) 
and as such has been capitalized on by practitioners in the L2 classroom. Overall, research has shown that 
WCMC poses similar benefits to traditional FTF interaction (Blake, 2000) because of the real time 
interaction in which learners negotiate meaning, modify input and output, and respond to feedback. 
Written CMC has been argued to have advantages over FTF because learners amplify their attention to 
form, produce a larger quantity of better output, and feel less threatened (Smith, 2004; Blake, 2008). 
Nevertheless, this hybrid mode is different from FTF as WCMC is a non-visual mode of communication 
where visual cues, which are key in understanding and interpreting spoken messages in the real world, are 
not available to the speakers (besides emoticons). It is therefore necessary to practice and foster 
communicative habits that can provide learners with the right tools to effectively communicate orally be it 
with other L2 learners or with native speakers in the outside world. In its video version OCMC offers the 
possibility of incorporating visual communication clues, but research needs to be conducted to assess the 
potential benefits of negotiated interaction for the L2 learner using this mode of communication. 
Íñigo Yanguas Oral Computer-Mediated Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 74 
As Blake (2008) pointed out, research into audio- and video-conferencing has been predominantly in the 
area of distance language education (e.g., Develotte, 2009; Lamy, 2004; Rosell-Aguilar, 2005). In fact, 
very few studies (some exceptions are, Lee, 2007; Jepson, 2005; Sykes, 2005) have investigated 
synchronous OCMC in the classroom as a means to develop L2 proficiency. These researchers 
investigating OCMC, however, have taken very different perspectives and have used entirely different 
research designs making it very difficult to draw any general conclusions. For example, Jepson (2005) 
compared the patterns of repair moves in text chat rooms and in voice chat rooms on the Internet; 
specifically, he was interested in the types of repair moves that each group used.. Participants in Jepson’s 
study were students of English as a foreign language at an online school where they were enrolled. Jepson 
used Long (1983, 1996) to operationalize and count repair moves according to two categories: 
Negotiation of Meaning and Negative Feedback. Results showed that a significantly higher number of 
repair moves were made in voice chats than in text chats. Additionally, qualitative analyses indicated that 
most repair moves in these voice chats were pronunciation related. In turn, Sykes (2005) examined the 
effects of three types of synchronous group discussion in the acquisition of a speech act (refusal of an 
invitation) in the L2. She found that no group outperformed another in pragmatic acquisition, but she also 
found that the synchronous written chat group outperformed the other two in complexity and variety of 
strategies used. Finally, Lee (2007) investigated L1-L2 dyads in task-based video-conferencing from a 
qualitative perspective. She carried out interviews to examine participants’ experiences and insights into 
video-conferencing as a tool to foster speaking skills. She concluded that it was essential to use a well-
designed and motivating task, to carefully select the linguistic context, and to provide students with 
training in video-conferencing. 
Results from these three studies are revealing; they serve as a starting point on which to build our 
knowledge of how OCMC promotes the L2 acquisition process. There are, however, many unanswered 
questions related to the implementation of OCMC in the classroom and its effects on L2 development; the 
present study seeks to provide insight to some of these questions. In particular, this task-based study 
compares two different versions of OCMC (video-conference and voice-conference) and a control FTF 
group on the communicative outcomes of a learning task. In addition, it seeks to compare results for both 
the OCMC groups with what has been found in the previous interactionist literature for WCMC. In order 
to achieve these goals, participants in this study interacted in the L2 in an effort to solve a learning task 
for which they were randomly placed in two experimental conditions (VidCMC and AudCMC) and a 
control group (FTF). To my knowledge, the current CMC study is the first work to use Skype, a free 
widely used Internet application, to investigate L2 negotiated interaction in CALL. 
Negotiation of Meaning in Task-Based Learner-to-Learner OCMC 
As most of the studies discussed above, the present investigation was carried out under an interactionist 
perspective. Long’s (1996) Interaction Hypothesis suggests that learners engaging in conversation will 
create an ideal situation for L2 learning when some misunderstanding arises and the speaker and 
interlocutor negotiate for meaning. Interlocutors may modify their speech using several mechanisms such 
as: modifications, recasts, repetitions, elaborations, etc. When this adjustment is made, attention (Schmidt, 
1990) is drawn to the part of the input that has not been understood by the learner thus optimizing the 
opportunity for learning to occur. Furthermore, learners will modify their output in the L2 to adapt it to 
the negotiated form reaping the benefits attributed to this process by Swain (1985, 1995). These benefits 
include the use of the learners’ linguistic resources in the L2 and the opportunity to test hypotheses about 
the target language while syntactically processing it. 
Though it cannot be claimed that negotiation of meaning directly causes SLA, this interactionist stance 
has countless followers in the field because this negotiation “creates a fertile environment for SLA to 
occur” (Blake, 2000, p. 121). The benefits of interacting in the L2 have been shown for traditional L1 - 
L2 learner (e.g., Long, 1983) and L2 learner/L2 learner FTF interactions (e.g., Gass & Varonis, 1994) and, 
as discussed above, in networked text-based interactions (e.g., Smith, 2003). The present study adds a 
Íñigo Yanguas Oral Computer-Mediated Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 75 
new context to the investigation of negotiated interaction by exploring how L2 learner/L2 learner dyads 
interact using audio- and video-conferencing. 
The way learners interact among them is different from the way learners and L1 speakers interact, and 
more research is needed to ascertain what consequences this type of interaction has on the learning 
process (Adams, 2007). If any benefits for L2 acquisition were to be attributed to learner-to-learner 
interactions, they could be reaped in the L2 classroom. In addition, investigations of non-text-based CMC 
are due at a time when technological resources, both hardware and software applications, are becoming 
more available and this mode of communication has gone widely underesearched. 
Research Questions 
The present study seeks answers to the following research questions: 
1. (a) How do learners in video and audio CMC groups negotiate for meaning during task-based 
interaction? (b) Are there any differences between oral CMC and traditional FTF communication? 
2. How do these negotiation routines compare to those found in the text-based CMC negotiation 
literature? 
METHOD 
Participants 
Conversations from 15 dyads of Spanish L2 learners were recorded and qualitatively analyzed to find an 
answer to this study’s research questions. One intact class of third semester Spanish, enrolled in a large 
public university in Southern California, participated in this investigation. Based on a pretreatment 
background questionnaire, learners were determined to have taken an average of almost two Spanish 
college classes, ranging from one to four classes (M = 1.9, SD = .90). 
Procedure 
Participants met in a language lab as part of their regular class syllabus, and they were randomly assigned 
to one of the following three interaction groups: video-conferencing (VidCMC), audio-conferencing 
(AudCMC), and face-to-face (FTF). They were assigned to a numbered computer station where they 
listened to a recording explaining the procedure for this lab session; each computer station was also 
labeled with the names of the group they belonged to (VidCMC, AudCMC, FTF). Once they finished 
listening to the recording, they read and signed the participant consent form. Immediately after, the 
researcher checked that participants understood the procedure and answered any questions learners had at 
that point. Given that Skype was widely used in Spanish classes at the host institution, participants only 
had questions about the task and how to record their conversation. After all questions were answered and 
assessment tasks administered, participants signed into Skype and called their assigned partners. Dyads 
for the FTF control group were seated together and computer microphones were used to record their 
conversations. The groups of VidCMC and AudCMC dyads were seated far apart from each other in the 
computer lab and used headsets to carry out their conversations. The lab was set up so that learners could 
not easily see each other’s screens or talk with one another. Specifically, each computer station was 
equipped with a privacy guard on either side of the station. This guard was removed for FTF dyads and 
their chairs were set to face each other. Once all the CMC dyads had established and tested their Skype 
connection, they were instructed to begin the task. Time was limited to 20 minutes; this time was set 
based on the previous piloting of the task with an intact class of third semester Spanish where most dyads 
finished within this time frame. Participants then completed the post-task assessment tasks. 
Task 
Each group completed a jigsaw style task (see Appendix  for instructions). Pica, Kanagy, and Falodun 
(1993), in one of the most widely cited works on task typology, argued that jigsaw and information-gap 
tasks promoted the most negotiation. In particular, jigsaw tasks are those tasks that force learners to 
 A
Íñigo Yanguas Oral Computer-Mediated Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 76 
equally share their (different) information to achieve a particular goal. Extensively used in the literature 
(e.g., Blake, 2000; Smith, 2003, 2004), this type of two-way task adheres to what Pica and her colleagues 
cited as the most recurrent characteristics of tasks discussed in the literature: first, they should be oriented 
toward goals; second, participants are expect to take on active roles in carrying out the task. Furthermore, 
as advocated by Hampel (2006) in her discussion of a framework for the development of tasks in a 
synchronous online environment, the task used in the present study is “genuinely interactive and student-
centered” (p. 119). In addition, we utilized a task in this study that had a connection to the real world; The 
Amazing Race is a reality television game show in which a team of two people race around the world in 
competition with other teams. Based on this popular award-winning game show, the task used in this 
study, also called The Amazing Race, required participants to interact in pairs to prepare for a race in 
Latin America. Before they embarked on the trip, they had to decide on which items they would take with 
them with a limited $120 budget. Each participant was given a list with eight objects including pictures 
and prices (see Appendices A and B) of which they had to choose four items each to be carried in a 
shared backpack. Similar to the piloting stage of the task development, the originality of the task used in 
this study engaged and motivated participants to carry it out successfully. 
Since it appears that lexical items are negotiated most frequently (Sato, 1986; Pica, 1994) if the task is not 
structure-focused (Blake & Zyzyk, 2003), this task was seeded with low frequency, unknown lexical 
items (objects). Each participant (Student A and Student B) received eight different target lexical items 
(see Appendices B and C). As suggested in the literature (see Smith, 2003), these items were selected 
based on the results of a pretest that was administered two weeks before to a randomly chosen third 
semester class in which 25 items were included. The sixteen less known items were selected for inclusion 
in the task, none of these items were known by more than three students in the class. 
ANALYSIS 
The model put forth by Varonis and Gass (1985) was utilized to identify and analyze the negotiation 
routines found in the transcriptions of the conversations carried out by the 15 L2 learner/L2 learner 
conversational dyads that participated in this investigation. Widely used both in the traditional 
interactionist literature and in the CMC literature (e.g., Blake, 2000; Fernández-García & Martínez-
Arbelaiz, 2002; Gass & Varonis, 1994; and Smith, 2003), this model for negotiation of meaning among 
L2 learners proposes four functional primes and two different parts: a trigger (T), and then a resolution 
composed of an indicator (I), a response (R), and a reaction to the response (RR). The trigger (T) or 
source of non-understanding generates a resolution, which starts with an acknowledgement of the 
communication problem or indicator (I). The response (R) then tries to solve the problem; the last 
functional prime is an optional element in this model, a reaction to the solution given or reaction to the 
response (RR) that might or might not take place. In Varonis and Gass (1985) terms, the horizontal flow 
of conversation is interrupted when the indicator (I) occurs following the trigger (T); then, it is pushed 
down until the negotiation for meaning ends successfully or otherwise. The conversation at this point 
goes back to the main line of discourse. 
Since the task utilized in the present study was seeded with unknown lexical items, it was to be expected 
that the main sources of non-understanding were lexical items. As mentioned, this fact is common in the 
literature because lexical items carry a higher communicative load that makes them often crucial for the 
development of the conversation and the task (Blake & Zyzik, 2003). There are, however, several other 
factors that can cause a conversation to come to a halt such as the incorrect use of a word, grammatical or 
morphosyntactic issues or task-related problems. 
Following Smith (2003), a ratio of negotiated turns to total turns was calculated. Turns were counted 
every time participants held the floor rather than every time they spoke. Often, perhaps due to their 
limited oral proficiency, participants’ interventions signaled the beginning of a turn. In some cases 
learners held the floor after a short pause, therefore, extending their intervention. For example, in Excerpt 
Íñigo Yanguas Oral Computer-Mediated Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 77 
1 there are a total of eight turns. “Student A” and “Student B” are used in all the excerpts used in this 
section for consistency and ease of reference for the reader that can see the items each student had in 
Appendices B and C. 
Excerpt 1 
1 
 
A: ¿cómo se dice otra vez? 
[How do you say it again?] 
 
2 B: navaja 
[Swiss army knife] 
 
3 A: ¿navaja? 
[Swiss army knife?] 
 
4 B: y cuesta 8 dólares 
[And it costs $8] 
 
5 A: ¡sólamente 8, bien! 
[Just 8, great!] 
y tengo un… uh unos zapatos de mar 
[And I have uh a pair of water shoes] 
 
6 B: ¿es negro? 
[Is it black?] 
¿es para… uh hacer surf cuando es frío? 
[Is it for uh surf when it’s cold?] 
 
7 A: sí, uh 
[Yes] 
dice unos “escarpines” 
[It says “escarpines”] 
 
8 B: ok 
[OK] 
Since all dyads spent a different amount of time on task within the twenty assigned (M = 18.2; SD = 0.8) 
and previous analyses of the pilot task showed that most negotiations took place during the first twelve 
minutes, only the first twelve minutes were analyzed in an effort to make data from all dyads comparable. 
Negotiation Routines 
As mentioned above, Varonis and Gass’ (1985) model was used to analyze negotiation routines. Four 
components or functional primes were distinguished in this model: Trigger (T), Indicator (I), Response 
(R), and (the optional) reaction to the response (RR). Following these authors, a negotiation routine, or 
non-understanding routine, serves either to negotiate a non-understanding or to continue a conversation. 
A negotiation routine is operationally defined as “those exchanges in which there is some overt indication 
that understanding between participants has not been complete” (Varonis & Gass, 1985, p. 73). 
Additionally, comprehension checks (CC) can occur anywhere in the conversation. 
Íñigo Yanguas Oral Computer-Mediated Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 78 
Excerpt 2 illustrates these functional primes (optional components of the model are shown in parentheses): 
Excerpt 2 
A: 
 
y tengo un silbato, 5 dólares…  
[I have a whistle, $5] 
 
TRIGGER 
 
B: ¿silbato? 
[A whistle] 
 
INDICATOR 
 
A: es…um…para hacer ruido con tu boca cuando necesitas 
ayuda or… 
[It’s to make noise with your mouth when you need help] 
 
RESPONSE 
 
A: ¿sabes? 
[do you know?] 
 
(COMPREHENSION CHECK) 
 
B: oh sí, sí, es bueno  
[Oh yeah, it’s good] 
(REACTION TO RESONSE) 
 
Different categories within these functional primes have been distinguished in the literature to account for 
the occurrences found in the conversations under scrutiny. I believe, however, that it is key not to restrict 
any qualitative analysis to preconceived categories and that these categories should be creates during the 
process of analysis (McCracken, 1988). In the following section, the different types of functional primes 
found in the conversations will be analyzed and discussed. Two raters independently coded the 
conversations for turns, negotiation routines, and functional primes. All disagreements in coding were 
discussed until 100% agreement was reached. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Qualitative analyses of the conversations of the VidCMC, AudCMC, and FTF dyads were carried out to 
investigate how learners in these three groups negotiated for meaning during task-based interaction. Table 
1 shows the total number of turns, the negotiated turns, the mean percentages of turns negotiated, and the 
total number of negotiation routines for all three groups. 
Table 1. Total Turns and Negotiated Turns During Task-based Interaction 
Group 
Negotiated 
Turns 
Turns 
Total 
Mean 
Percentage 
Negotiation 
Routines 
VidCMC 230  475 48%  39 
AudCMC 290  505 57%  35 
FTF 242  480 50%  42 
Total 742 1460 50.8% 114 
It can be seen in Table 1 that the relative amount of negotiation in all groups is quite similar for VidCMC 
and FTF. The percentage of negotiated turns is somewhat higher for AudCMC (57%) with a slightly 
lower number of actual negotiation routines. It remains a fact, therefore, that learners negotiated for 
meaning of the lexical items regardless of the group they were in. It is also a fact that these are high 
percentages compared to Smith’s (2003) findings where one third of conversations were spent on 
Íñigo Yanguas Oral Computer-Mediated Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 79 
negotiation. This is not surprising, nonetheless, because only the first part of the conversation, where most 
negotiations occurred, was analyzed.  
As far as the quality and type of the negotiation routines produced by the groups, Table 2 shows that the 
target lexical items triggered the vast majority of negotiation routines in both groups, as the previous 
literature suggests (e.g., Blake, 2000; Blake & Zyzyk, 2003; Smith, 2004). In addition, there were a few 
instances of nontarget lexical items triggering negotiation routines. Table 2 shows the number of 
nontarget lexical items that triggered embedded negotiation subroutines. Finally, there were some cases in 
which the source of the communication problem was related to the general coherence of the conversation; 
these cases were labeled discourse triggers. 
Table 2. Breakdown of Triggers in Main Negotiation Routines by OCMC Group (Number of Instances) 
Trigger Type VidCMC AudCMC FTF 
Target Lexical Item 36  33  40 
Nontarget Lexical Item  1  0  1 
Embedded Nontarget Lexical Items  4 10  4 
Discourse   2  2  1 
Since target lexical items are the main source of non-communication and the goal of our first research 
question is to analyze how these two OCMC groups negotiate for meaning, I am going to focus 
exclusively on the target lexical items so that there is a solid base for comparison and a clearer depiction 
of communicative strategies and resources by each group can be drawn. In several cases, within the main 
negotiation routine, other nontarget lexical items triggered embedded negotiation episodes that forced 
learners to solve the main source of non-communication. These cases were analyzed in the context of 
occurrence and, therefore, they are not included in the count of negotiation routines shown in Table 1. It 
is in these negotiation episodes, however, where the larger differences among the three groups can be 
seen: AudCMC dyads negotiated for meaning of non-target lexical items more than either of the other two 
groups. 
Table 3 shows the outcomes of the target item negotiation episodes by groups. It can be seen that the main 
differences among the groups under scrutiny are in the number of routines in which the interlocutor 
reached complete and partial understanding of the target item negotiated. AudCMC dyads’ negotiation 
outcomes were different from the other OCMC group and also different from the traditional FTF group in 
that they did not seem to be able to negotiate the exact meaning of 39% of the target words negotiated. 
Table 3. Negotiation Outcome per Group (Percentages of Totals) 
Negotiation VidCMC AudCMC FTF 
Complete Understanding 23 (64%) 15  (45%) 28 (70%) 
Partial Understanding 9 (25%) 13  (39%) 6  (15%) 
No Understanding 4 (11%) 5  (15%) 6  (15%) 
Cases such as shown in Excerpts 3 and 4 were categorized as complete and partial understanding 
respectively. 
Íñigo Yanguas Oral Computer-Mediated Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 80 
Excerpt 3. Example of Complete Understanding 
B: 
 
creo que um…necesitamos un navaja 
[I think um…we need a Swiss army knife] 
 
A: ¿qué es? 
[What is it?] 
 
B: es como una…como um…como… 
[It’s like um…like a…um] 
 
A: ¿Qué usas para?, ¿usas para qué? 
[What do you use it for?] 
 
B: Para cortar cosas o… 
[For cutting stuff] 
 
A: ¡Oh! Sí, sí 
[Oh! Yes] 
Excerpt 4. Example of Partial Understanding 
B: 
 
y navaja por 8 dólares 
[And a Swiss army knife for $8] 
 
A: ¿navaja? 
[A Swiss army knife?] 
 
B: por cocinar 
[For cooking] 
 
A: ¡Oh! sí 
[Oh! Yes] 
 
B: Para cortar cosas o… 
[For cutting stuff] 
 
A: ¡Oh! Sí, sí 
[Oh! Yes] 
 
In Excerpt 3, we can be sure that Student A understood that “navaja” is a cutting utensil, which is the 
main use of a Swiss army knife. There are other routines in which learners arrived at a more precise 
interpretation of the word “navaja,” but the raters agreed to code cases like the one in Excerpt 3 as 
complete understanding reached. On the contrary, Student A in Excerpt 4 interpreted this word as a tool 
for cooking in general; we cannot be sure of what this participant had in mind when he or she confirms 
understanding. 
In the following, I explain how dyads achieved these different negotiation outcomes. Table 4 shows the 
subcategories of each negotiation phase by group. 
Íñigo Yanguas Oral Computer-Mediated Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 81 
Table 4. Percentages of Subcategories of Negotiation Phase per Group 
Negotiation Phase Subcategory VidCMC AudCMC FTF 
Trigger Lexical 100% 100% 100% 
Indicator <I> Omitted 31% 35% 29% 
 Global 41% 39% 44% 
 Local  23% 17% 25% 
 Inferential 5% 9% 2% 
Response <R> Elaboration 42% 95% 47% 
 Use of Signs 55% N/A 45% 
 Synonyms 2% 4% 7% 
Reaction to Response<RR> Minimal 48% 52% 50% 
 Testing Hypotheses  25% 26%% 21% 
 Task Appropriate Response 15% 14% 21% 
 Implicit 10% 5% 4% 
Contrary to WCMC in which turn adjacency conventions are not usually followed (Jepson, 2005), we find 
that most negotiation routines by both OCMC groups in this study, as well as the FTF group, adhere to 
these conventions and complete the negotiation sequence outlined by Varonis and Gass (1985) as shown 
in Excerpt 2. As a consequence, all routines that reached complete or partial understanding in all groups 
completed the sequence T – I – R – (RR). There are, nonetheless, a number of cases in which negotiation 
routines are completed with one omitted element (<I>). Given the nature of the target items utilized in 
this study and the task itself participants assumed their interlocutor did not know the target word and thus 
anticipated the response <R>, omitting the indicator <I> as in Excerpt 5. 
Excerpt 5. Example of an Omitted Indicator 
A: 
 
Es muy bien…uh…yo creo que es necesario uh yo creo nos necesitamos los es car pin es, 
unos escarpines <T>, (<I>) es como los zapatos para el agua <R> 
[Very good…uh…I think that It is necessary uh…I think…us… we need a pair of water shoes, 
it’s like shoes for the water] 
 
B: ¡Oh! sí sí <RR> 
[Oh yes, yes!] 
Since the omission of <I> in the routine did not affect its outcome nor its internal structure, these routines 
were categorized as abbreviated routines. These routines reached complete or partial understanding of the 
target items in all cases for both OCMC groups. As shown in Table 4, a large percentage of <I> elements 
in both OCMC and FTF groups are omitted. The fact that this pattern occurs in all three groups seems to 
point to the task and the nature of the target items as possible causes for omitted <I> elements. Varonis 
and Gass (1985) included in their classification of indicators what they called non-verbal responses that 
could be of use here; they included here silence or mmmm. Some of the cases found in the present study, 
such as shown in Excerpt 5, would not seem to fall within this category because the speaker did not wait 
for the interlocutor to signal non-understanding and simply continued to define the word. All cases, 
however, show that there is a break on the intonation pattern on the trigger that could be taken advantage 
of by the interlocutor to gain the floor. Sometimes the interlocutor did not take his or her turn, however, 
and the speaker went on with the elaboration presupposing that the interlocutor did not know the word. 
Íñigo Yanguas Oral Computer-Mediated Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 82 
All other types of <I> found in the transcripts of the conversations carried out by dyads in both OCMC 
groups fall within the categories defined by Rost and Ross (1991). These authors distinguished global, 
local, and inferential indicators. Global indicators occur when the trigger is not specifically identified, and 
local indicators are said to be those that clearly specify the trigger; finally, inferential indicators are used 
when interlocutors test their own hypotheses about the meaning of certain lexical items. In the transcripts 
of the conversations carried out by all groups in the present study, we found a clear abundance of global 
indicators (41% and 39% respectively for OCMC groups and 44% for FTF) that did not specifically 
identify the trigger (see Excerpt 6). 
Excerpt 6. Example of a Global Indicator 
B: 
 
Um…también…uh…necesita o necesitamos una brújula <T> 
[um..also…needs or we need a compass] 
 
A: ¿Qué es eso? <I> 
[What is that?] 
 
B: para cuando nosotros no sabemos el dirección <R> 
[For when we don’t know what direction to take] 
 
A: sí <RR> 
[Yes] 
Looking at Table 4, it seems clear that the larger difference among groups is the types of response given 
by speakers. Very interestingly, these responses are perhaps the most vital element in the negotiation 
routines because, on the one hand, they include the feedback provided to the interlocutor to fix the 
communication problem and, on the other, they are pushed output on the part of the speaker. These are 
the main premises of the interaction hypothesis (Long, 1996) and the output hypothesis (Swain, 1995) 
respectively. Thus, under either perspective, these responses are key in making this environment ripe for 
language acquisition to occur (Blake, 2000). As Table 4 shows, they take the form of elaborations in the 
AudCMC group (95%); whereas in the VidCMC and FTF groups, learners made use of both gestures and 
elaborations at roughly 50% respectively. Excerpts 7 and 8 illustrate this. 
Excerpt 7. Response <R> Elaborations (AudCMC) 
A: Un toldo, toldo, cuarenta y cinco dólares 
[Awning, $45] 
 
B: ¿qué es? 
[What is it?] 
 
A: um…un poquito como un…uh…cuando ir al campo, es parte su casa cuando ir al campo, 
¿sí? 
[Um… it’s a little like a…when you go camping, it’s part of your home when you camp, yes?] 
 
B: ¡oh! Sí 
[Oh! Yes] 
 
Íñigo Yanguas Oral Computer-Mediated Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 83 
Excerpt 8. Response <R> Use of Signs (VidCMC) 
A: y también tengo un toldo 
[And I also have an awning] 
 
B: ¿Qué es esto? 
[What is this?] 
 
A: es como… [MAKING SIGNS FOR SHELTER] 
[It’s like…] 
 
B: ¡oh! como casa 
[Oh! like a house] 
 
A: sí 
[Yes] 
It seems that the impossibility of using visual cues in the AudCMC dyad pushed Student A to elaborate 
on the lexical item that caused the non-communication. On the contrary, Student A in the VidCMC group 
used signs to tackle the communication problem. In both cases, the result is the same but in terms of both 
output and linguistic input the scenario in Excerpt 8 does not seem to be ideal for L2 learning. Inevitably, 
elaborations made routines longer, which in several cases included other lexical items (see Table 2) that 
triggered embedded negotiation routines fertilizing, using Blake’s (2000) metaphor, even more the 
grounds for L2 development to occur. 
However, these more linguistically elaborated responses had negative consequences, namely, they 
translated into a higher percentage of partially understood target lexical items, as shown in Table 3. The 
question is then what is more important for L2 acquisition, to linguistically elaborate on the item 
augmenting the possibility of non-communication to occur, or to fully and unequivocally understanding 
the concept being focused on as a source of non-communication? In an interactionist context such as ours, 
it seems that the most logical answer would be the former rather than the latter but more research is 
needed to properly address this question. 
As aforementioned, very few studies to date (Lee, 2007; Jepson, 2005; Sykes, 2005) have included 
synchronous OCMC in their research designs. However, these studies’ results are difficult to bring into 
our present discussion because their goals and research designs were entirely different from the present 
study’s design. Jepson (2005) found, on the one hand, that the voice chat group outperformed the written 
chat group in number of repair moves. On the other hand, he found that most of these moves were 
pronunciation related. Our results show that the AudCMC group used more elaborated responses to try to 
solve the non-communication episode but none of them were pronunciation related. Undoubtedly, this 
could be attributable to the type of non-task-based activity that learners were carrying out in Jepson’s 
study. In turn, Lee (2007) used task-based activities but she analyzed L1/L2 learner dyads, and her focus 
was on their perceptions toward the medium rather than on the quality and type of conversations they 
carried out. Finally, Sykes (2005) found no difference between oral CMC, written CMC, and FTF in 
pragmatic acquisition but did find that the WCMC group used a more complex and varied set of strategies. 
This study is very relevant due to its focus on pragmatic aspects of SLA, but not pertinent for our present 
purposes. 
In regards to our second research question, which compares the present results with past results for 
WCMC, let us begin by saying that WCMC has been hailed as a hybrid mode of communication because 
it has some of the characteristics of oral speech. To support this, it has been argued that in synchronous 
WCMC participants converse in real time and, therefore, might have the possibility of benefiting from 
Íñigo Yanguas Oral Computer-Mediated Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 84 
interacting and negotiating meaning as FTF speakers do. As a matter of fact, Sotillo (2000) found that 
interactional modifications in WCMC were similar to those occurring in FTF interaction. As a counter 
argument, it has been claimed that FTF and synchronous WCMC conversations clearly differ in the 
discourse sequence (Jepson, 2005). Along these lines, Smith (2003) stated that turn adjacency is complex 
in the WCMC mode and, as such, some of the negotiations and repair moves that occur in the 
conversations are related to these complexities. 
On the contrary, the present results show that turn adjacency in synchronous oral CMC resembles the one 
occurring in FTF communication and, consequently, it is opposed to what has been found for WCMC. 
Both OCMC modes, audio- and video-conferencing, display turn-taking patterns similar to the traditional 
FTF version. In fact, the main difference among the three modes investigated in the present study seems 
to be the inability of the AudCMC participants to resort to signs, thus being bound to find a resolution to 
the non-communication problem by linguistic means, which translated into a higher number of 
elaboration responses. In this sense, WCMC and OCMC could be argued to be comparable, given that 
written chat tends to produce more complex language than FTF (Payne & Whitney, 2002). Otherwise, it 
can be argued that both OCMC modes are much closer to FTF than WCMC has been in the past research; 
as a matter of fact, no qualitative differences have been found between VidCMC and FTF in the present 
study. WCMC has been said to display more equal patterns of participation (Kelm, 1992), AudCMC 
would have to be further investigated on this issue but it would seem logical that students felt at ease and, 
therefore, participate more in the tasks in this mode because they still remain anonymous behind the 
computer’s screen. 
In terms of the components of the negotiation routines, in particular, indicators, it has been shown above 
that most were of a global nature (39%–44%) and many (29%–35%) were omitted. We explained the 
latter by looking at the low frequency of the target lexical items and the nature of the task, but the former 
clearly contrasts with results from WCMC studies such as Smith (2003) and Fernandez-García and 
Martínez-Arbelaiz (2002) who found that most indicators were local. This can be interpreted by 
considering turn adjacency conventions in both CMC modes; as discussed above, when chatting, these 
conventions are not easy to follow and interlocutors may feel the need to specifically refer to the item that 
is creating the communication problem. On the contrary, oral CMC follows these conventions as 
traditional FTF would, and it seems that participants were aware of what caused the communication 
problem. This argument, however, would go against Smith’s (2003) explanation for the use of local 
indicators in his study: “…due to the absence of nonlinguistic cues” (Smith, 2003, p. 47), since global 
indicators also appear in the AudCMC. 
Another significant consequence of OCMC conventional turn adjacency is the low occurrence of 
interrupted or split negotiation routines that are very common in WCMC (Smith, 2003). Participants in 
this study for the most part finished the negotiation routine they were engaged in before starting a new 
one. We did find, however, several cases of reversed routines where the target <T> is introduced at the 
end of the routine, as in Excerpt 9. 
Excerpt 9. Reversed Routine 
A: tengo un um… uh…unos zapatos de mar 
[I have some water shoes] 
 
B: ¿es negro? ¿es para hacer surf cuando es frío? 
[Are they black? Are they used for surfing when it’s cold] 
 
A: sí 
[Yes] 
 
Íñigo Yanguas Oral Computer-Mediated Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 85 
B: ok 
[Ok] 
 
A: dice unos escarpines 
[They are called escarpines] 
 
We can see how all the functional elements of the negotiation routine are present, but Student A 
introduces what really caused the negotiation at the end. This leads us to conclude that the interlocutor 
assumed that his or her partner did not know the target item and began by giving a synonym to start the 
negotiation. It was only when Student A was sure that Student B had understood the concept that the 
target item was introduced. This type of routine is parallel to the omission of the indicator <I> discussed 
above, given that both are a consequence of the speaker assuming that the interlocutor did not know the 
target word. Both strategies are facilitated by the fact that all groups in this study followed turn adjacency 
conventions, as mentioned above. 
Regarding the optional component of the conversation routines, reaction to response <RR>, Table 4 
shows no large differences among groups. The present results are in accord with other task-based CMC 
studies that have found the greater percentage of these turns are minimal responses (Smith, 2003). These 
responses are typically short, explicit statements of understanding after a response to the non-
communication problem has been given. Examples of these can be seen in Excerpts 7, 8, and 9. Smith 
(2003) also distinguished what he called task appropriate responses (TAR) in task-based synchronous 
WCMC; examples of these were also found in the transcriptions of the conversations in the present study 
(see Table 4). In many cases, minimal reactions to responses were followed by comments that had to do 
with the development of the task by either learner or both. Most of the time, learners remarked how useful 
the items were to attain the goal of the task or how much they cost. For example, see the following 
interchange between an AudCMC dyad after they have resolved the negotiation routine around navaja 
(Swiss army knife) 
Excerpt 10. Example of Task Appropriate Response <TAR> 
A: ¿y cuánto cuesta? <TAR> 
[And how much is it?] 
 
B: cuesta 8 dólares 
[It costs $8] 
 
A: solamente 8 ¡bien! 
[Just 8, great!] 
This interchange takes place after learners have resolved the non-communication problem. Student A 
gives a reaction to response that implicitly signals understanding of the concept being negotiated by 
asking about the price. Then, two more turns are added to the reaction to response phase that are related to 
the value of the item for the task at hand. The present data reveals that examples like these are very 
common in both the OCMC and FTF groups; learners tend to carry out the conversations past the reaction 
to response stage showing a deep involvement in the task. This has also been shown in task-based CMC 
studies such as Smith (2003), where Varonis and Gass’ (1985) model has been proven to be a valid basic 
tool to analyze task-based WCMC conversations but not able to account for several instances in which 
participants go past the reaction to response phase. These contrasting results are not surprising because 
this earlier study did not include a task in its research design; participants were asked to carry out 
informal open conversations. It seems, therefore, that the model should be revised in the light of the 
results of these task-based CMC studies. 
Íñigo Yanguas Oral Computer-Mediated Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 86 
CONCLUSION 
We should begin by acknowledging that different modes of communication allow for different ways of 
communicating; it is important to emphasize that the material resources themselves (i.e., the computer, 
the headset, etc) play an important role when making meaning in the CMC context, they certainly offer 
“new possibilities for representation and communication” (Hampel & Hauck, 2006, p. 8). 
As far as the present study’s results are concerned, several implications can be drawn; first, there seem to 
be certain commonalities between task-based interaction across different modes; we have shown how 
Varonis and Gass’ (1985) (non-task-based) model holds in our present task-based OCMC context but 
does not quite account for many of the interchanges, which appear to continue after negotiation of 
meaning has ended. Smith (2003) achieved these same results in his task-based WCMC study and, 
therefore, we have to conclude that it is in the nature of learning tasks to produce longer interchanges than 
those accounted for by the model utilized. Moreover, the nature of the task appears to be responsible for 
the type and focus of the negotiations; in the present case, the task had a clear lexical focus and most 
negotiations occurred around the lexical target items. As Pica and colleagues (1993) argued, the present 
results confirm that negotiations are highly sensitive to the task. 
Second, this study has shown how AudCMC forces learners to make use of linguistic resources, which 
could be superseded by visual cues in VidCMC and FTF groups. The abundance of language use by 
learners, however, does not appear to lead to success in the negotiation outcome. Given the important 
roles assigned to input, selective attention, and output in the interactionist paradigm, the consequences of 
this finding for L2 development need further research to ascertain what scenario is more beneficial for L2 
learning. 
Third, OCMC’s turn-taking patterns have been shown to be very close to FTF’s allowing for the 
appearance of a large number of global indicators that need not include the specific trigger causing the 
negotiation routine. This turn-taking structure is opposite to the one shown in the literature for WCMC 
where learners interact following mode specific patterns. Another consequence of these regular FTF turn-
taking patterns shown for OCMC is the versatility of negotiation routines where trigger items are 
introduced at the end of the routine or indicators are omitted, which does not seem to be viable in non-
standard WCMC turn-taking routines. 
Finally, as far as the capabilities of OCMC to provide learners with input modification, feedback, and 
opportunities to produce output through negotiation, it has been shown that this medium has the potential 
to become a very useful tool in L2 classrooms. Through this medium, learners could practice oral skills 
that they will need in the real world which are difficult to replicate using traditional chatting applications. 
As a matter of fact OCMC offers many advantages of the traditional FTF mode plus the advantages 
derived from the use of technological applications. Furthermore, it would seem logical that both audio 
and video CMC could be implemented successfully in distance education to practice learners’ 
conversational skills in a more student-centered atmosphere. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I am very grateful for the support and assistance that The Language Acquisition Resource Center (LARC) 
at San Diego State University provided me with to carry out this project. In particular, I would like to 
thank Trevor Shanklin, Allison Lopez and David Leyva for their invaluable help at different stages of this 
study. I would also like to thank the graduate students in the Spanish department at SDSU, Missy Baralt, 
and the anonymous reviewers for their very constructive comments. 
Íñigo Yanguas Oral Computer-Mediated Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 87 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Iñigo Yanguas is an assistant professor of Spanish and director of the Spanish Language Program at San 
Diego State University. His research interests include different aspects of SLA, CALL and Spanish as a 
heritage language in the US. Currently, he is investigating oral computer mediated interaction and its 
effects on L2 learning. In addition, he is experimenting with blogs, YouTube, and wikies as means to 
foster student involvement and L2 production. 
E-mail: iyanguas@mail.sdsu.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Adams, R. (2007). Do second language learners benefit from interacting with each other? In A. Mackey 
(Ed.), Conversational Interaction in SLA (pp. 29–51). Oxford: Oxford Applied Linguistics. 
Beauvois, M. H. (1992). Computer-assisted classroom discussion in the foreign language classroom: 
Conversation in slow motion. Foreign Language Annals, 25, 455–464. 
Blake, R. (2000). Computer mediated communication: A window on L2 Spanish interlanguage. Language 
Learning and Technology 4(1), 120–136. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/blake/default.html 
Blake, R. (2008). Brave new digital classroom: Technology and foreign language learning. Washington, 
D.C.: Georgetown University Press. 
Blake, R., & Zyzik, E. (2003). Who’s helping whom? Learner/heritage-speakers’ networked discussions 
in Spanish. Applied Linguistics, 24, 519–544. 
Chun, D. M. (1994). Using computer networking to facilitate the acquisition of interactive competence. 
System, 22(1), 17–31. 
Cziko, G., & Park, S. (2003). Internet audio communication for second language learning: A comparative 
review of six programs. Language Learning & Technology, 7(1), 15–27. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num1/review1/default.html 
Darhower, M. (2002). Instructional features of synchronous computer-mediated communication in the L2 
class: A sociocultural case study. CALICO Journal, 19, 249–277. 
De la Fuente, M. (2003). Is SLA interactionist theory relevant to CALL? A study on the effects of 
computer-mediated interaction in L2 vocabulary acquisition. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 
16(1), 47–81. 
Develotte, C. (2009). From face to face to distance learning: The online learner’s emerging identity. In R. 
Goodfellow & N. M. Lamy (Eds.), Learning Cultures in Online Education (pp. 71–92). London: 
Continuum Books. 
Ellis, R., Tanaka, Y., & Yamazaki, A. (1994). Classroom interaction, comprehension, and the acquisition 
of L2 word meanings. Language Learning, 44, 449–491. 
Fernandez-Garcia, M., & Martinez-Arbelaiz, A. (2002). Negotiation of meaning in non-native speaker-
non-native speaker synchronous discussions. CALICO Journal, 19, 279–294. 
Gass, S. (1998). Apples and oranges: Or, why apples are not oranges and don't need to be. Modern 
Language Journal, 82, 83–90. 
Gass, S., & Varonis, E. (1985). Task variation and non-native/nonnative negotiation of meaning. In S. 
Gass & C. Madden (Eds.), Input and second language acquisition (pp. 149–161). Rowley, MA: Newbury 
House. 
Íñigo Yanguas Oral Computer-Mediated Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 88 
Gass, S., & Varonis, E. (1994). Input, interaction, and second language production. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition, 16, 283–302. 
Godwin-Jones, R. (Ed.). (2005). Language Learning & Technology, 9(3), 9–12. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num3/emerging/default.html 
Hampel, R. (2006). Rethinking task design for the digital age: A framework for language teaching and 
learning in a synchronous online environment. ReCALL, 18(1), 105–121. 
Hampel, R., & Hauck, M. (2004). Towards an effective use of audio conferencing in distance language 
courses. Language, Learning & Technology, 8(1). 66–82. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num1/hampel/default.html 
Hampel, R., & Hauck, M. (2006). Computer-mediated language learning: Making meaning in multimodal 
virtual learning spaces. JALT-CALL Journal, 2(2), 3–18. 
Jepson, K. (2005). Conversations–and negotiated interaction–in text and voice chat rooms. Language 
Learning & Technology, 9(3), 79–98. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num3/jepson/default.html 
Kelm, O. (1992). The use of synchronous computer networks in second language instruction: A 
preliminary report. Foreign Language Annals, 25, 441–454. 
Kern, R. (1995). Restructuring classroom interaction with networked computers: Effects on quantity and 
characteristics of language production. Modern Language Journal, 79, 457–476. 
Lamy, M. N. (2004). Oral conversations online: Redefining oral competence in synchronous environment. 
ReCALL, 16(2), 520–538. 
Lee, L. (2007). Fostering second language oral communication through constructivist interaction in 
desktop videoconferencing. Foreign Language Annals, 40(4), 635–649. 
Levy, M. & Stockwell, G. (2006). CALL dimensions: Options and issues in computer-assisted language 
learning. Mahwah, NJ: Routledge. 
Long, M. (1983). Native speaker/non-native speaker conversations in the second language classroom. In 
M. A. Clarke & J. Handscombe (Eds.), On TESOL ’82 (pp. 207–225). Washington, DC: TESOL. 
Long, M. (1985). Input and second language acquisition theory. In S. Gass & C. Madden (Eds.), Input 
and second language acquisition (pp. 377–393). Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
Long, M. H. (1996). The role of the linguistic environment in second language acquisition. In W. Ritchie 
& T. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 413–468). San Diego, CA: Academic 
Press. 
Loschky, L. (1994). Comprehensible input and second language acquisition: What is the relationship? 
Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 19, 37–66. 
Mackey, A. (1999). Input, interaction, and second language development: An empirical study of input, 
interaction, and second language development. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 21, 557–588. 
McCracken, G. (1988). The Long Interview (12th Ed.). Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications. 
Meskill, C. and Anthony, N. (2005). Foreign language learning with CMC: Forms of online instructional 
discourse in a hybrid Russian Class. System, 33(1), 89–105. 
Negretti, R. (1999). Web-based activities and SLA: A conversation analysis research approach. Language 
Learning & Technology, 3(1), 75–87. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num1/negretti 
Íñigo Yanguas Oral Computer-Mediated Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 89 
Payne, J. S., & Ross, B. (2005). Synchronous CMC, working memory, and L2 oral proficiency 
development. Language Learning & Technology, 9(3), 34–54. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num3/payne/default.html 
Payne, J. S., & Whitney, P. J. (2002). Developing L2 oral proficiency through synchronous CMC: Output, 
working memory, and interlanguage development. CALICO Journal, 20(1), 7–32. 
Pellettieri, J., (2000). Negotiation in cyberspace: The role of chatting in the development of grammatical 
competence. In M. Warschauer & R. Kern. (Eds.), Network-based Language Teaching: Concepts and 
Practices (pp. 59–86). New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Pérez, L. C. (2003). Foreign language productivity in synchronous versus asynchronous computer-
mediated communication. CALICO Journal, 21(1), 89–104. 
Pica, T. (1994). Research on negotiation: What does it reveal about second-language learning conditions, 
processes, and outcomes? Language Learning, 44, 493–527. 
Pica, T., Holliday, L., Lewis, N., Berducci, D., & Newman, J. (1991). Language learning through 
interaction: What role does gender play? Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 13, 343–372. 
Pica, T., Kanagy, R., & Falodun, J. (1993). Choosing and using communication tasks for second language 
research and instruction. In G. Crookes & S. Gass (Eds.), Tasks and second language learning (pp. 9–34). 
Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Roed, J. (2003). Language Learner Behaviour in a Virtual Environment. Computer Assisted Language 
Learning: An International Journal, 16(2-3), 155–72. 
Rosell-Aguilar, F. (2005). Task design for audiographic conferencing: Promoting beginner oral 
interaction in distance language learning. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 18(5), 417-442. 
Rost, M., & Ross, S. (1991). Learner use of strategies in interaction: Typology and teachability. 
Language Learning, 41, 231–249. 
Sachs, R. & Suh, B. R. (2007). Textually Enhanced Recasts, Learner Awareness, and L2 Outcomes in 
Synchronous Computer-Mediated Interaction. In A. Mackey (Ed.), Conversational Interaction and 
Second Language Acquisition: A Series of Empirical Studies (pp. 197–227). Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
Sato, C. (1986). Conversation and interlanguage development: Rethinking the connection. In R. Day (Ed.), 
Talking to learn: Conversation in second language acquisition (pp. 2–45). Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
Schmidt, R. (1990). The Role of Consciousness in Second Language Learning. Applied Linguistics, 11(2), 
129–158. 
Sengupta, S. (2001). Exchanging ideas with peers in network-based classrooms: An aid or a pain? 
Language Learning & Technology, 5(1), 103–134. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num1/sengupta/default.html 
Shekary, M. & Tahririan, M. H. (2006). Negotiation of meaning and noticing in text-based online chat. 
The Modern Language Journal, 90(4), 557–573. 
Shin, D. (2006). ESL students’ computer-mediated communication practices: Context configuration. 
Language Learning & Technology, 10(3), 65–84. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num3/shin/default.html 
Smith, B. (2003). Computer-mediated negotiated interaction: An expanded model. The Modern Language 
Journal, 87(1), 38–57. 
Smith, B. (2004). Computer-mediated negotiated interaction and lexical acquisition. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition, 26, 365–398. 
Íñigo Yanguas Oral Computer-Mediated Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 90 
Smith, B. (2005). English language learning and technology: Lectures on applied linguistics in the age of 
information and communication technology. Modern Language Journal, 89(4), 647–648. 
Sotillo, S. (2000). Discourse functions and syntactic complexity in synchronous and asynchronous 
communication. Language Learning & Technology, 4(1), 82–119. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/sotillo/default.html
Swain, M. (1985) Communicative competence: Some roles of comprehensible input and comprehensible 
output in its development. In S. Gass & C. Madden (Eds.), Input in Second Language Acquisition (pp. 
235–256). New York: Newbury House.  
Swain, M. (1995) Three functions of output in second language learning. In G. Cook & B. Seidelhofer 
(Eds.), Principle and practice in applied linguistics: Studies in honor of H.G. Widdowson (pp. 125–144). 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.  
Sykes, J. (2005). Synchronous CMC and pragmatic development: Effects of oral and written chat. 
CALICO Journal, 22(3), 399–431. 
Toyoda, E. & Harrison, R. (2002). Categorization of text chat communication between learners and native 
speakers and native speakers of Japanese. Language Learning & Technology, 6(1), 82–99. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/toyoda/default.html 
Tudini, V. (2003). Using native speakers in chat. Language Learning & Technology 7(3), 141–159. 
Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num3/tudini/default.html 
Varonis, E., & Gass, S. (1985). Non-native / non-native conversations: A model for negotiation of 
meaning. Applied Linguistics, 6, 71–90. 
Warner, C. N. (2004). It’s just a game, right? Types of play in foreign language CMC. Language 
Learning & Technology 8(2), 69–87. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num2/warner/default.html 
Yates, S. J. (1996). Oral and written aspects of computer conferencing. In S. C. Herring (Ed.), 
Computermediated communication: Linguistic social and crosscultural perspectives (pp. 29–46). 
Philadelphia: John Benjamins. 
Xie, T. (2002). Using Internet relay chat in teaching Chinese. CALICO Journal 19(3), 513-524. 
Íñigo Yanguas Oral Computer-Mediated Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 91 
APPENDIX A. Jigsaw Task Instructions 
The Amazing Race 
 
Congratulations! You have been selected to represent your school in the college version of “The Amazing 
Race.” You and a partner will be traveling through Central and South America competing against 30 
other teams. You have a big advantage because you are one of the few teams that speak Spanish, so you 
are certain to receive help from the locals. You know that you will be in the rainforest and close to water 
for much of the time. You will also be responsible for creating your own shelter. It will be a tremendous 
test of your survival skills. 
 
Before you leave on the race you receive a list of 8 very necessary items for the race. Your instructions 
are the following: 
You have one backpack between the two of you a budget of $120.00 total. In order to qualify for the race 
and claim the million-dollar prize, you and your partner must select 4 items each (8 total) from your lists 
to fill your backpack. You MUST choose at least 1 item that will allow you to survive in the water and the 
items necessary to build a shelter. Remember the 8 items MUST NOT cost more than $120 total. 
Using Skype discuss with your partner which items seem most necessary for your adventure and fit 
within your budget and guidelines. Your success on this task will depend on how well you chose your 
items based on the instructions. 
 
Good Luck!
Íñigo Yanguas Oral Computer-Mediated Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 92 
APPENDIX B. Lexical items for Student A  
 
 
 
(UNA) SOGA $20 (UN) SILBATO $5 
 
 
 
 
(UN) NECESER $18 (UN) TOLDO $45 
 
 
 
 
(UNA) BRÚJULA $8 (UNA) RIÑONERA $10 
 
 
  
(UNOS) ESCARPINES $27 (UNA) CAÑA $12 
 
 
 
Íñigo Yanguas Oral Computer-Mediated Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 93 
APPENDIX C. Lexical items for Student B  
 
 
 
ESTERILLA $20 MALLA $40 
 
 
 
 
(UNOS) MANGUITOS $15 (UNOS) IMPERDIBLES $3 
 
 
 
 
(UNOS) MOSQUETONES $15 (UNA) FIAMBRERA $14 
 
 
  
(UNA) BENGALA $17 (UNA) NAVAJA $8 
 
 
