Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol14num2/sydorenko.pdf 
June 2010, Volume 14, Number 2 
pp. 50–73  
 
Copyright © 2010, ISSN 1094-3501 50 
 
MODALITY OF INPUT AND VOCABULARY ACQUISITION  
Tetyana Sydorenko 
Michigan State University 
This study examines the effect of input modality (video, audio, and captions, i.e., on-
screen text in the same language as audio) on (a) the learning of written and aural word 
forms, (b) overall vocabulary gains, (c) attention to input, and (d) vocabulary learning 
strategies of beginning L2 learners. Twenty-six second-semester learners of Russian 
participated in this study. Group one (N = 8) saw video with audio and captions (VAC); 
group two (N = 9) saw video with audio (VA); group three (N = 9) saw video with 
captions (VC). All participants completed written and aural vocabulary tests and a final 
questionnaire. 
The results indicate that groups with captions (VAC and VC) scored higher on written 
than on aural recognition of word forms, while the reverse applied to the VA group. The 
VAC group learned more word meanings than the VA group. Results from the 
questionnaire suggest that learners paid most attention to captions, followed by video and 
audio, and acquired most words by associating them with visual images. Pedagogical 
implications of this study are that captioned video tends to aid recognition of written word 
forms and the learning of word meaning, while non-captioned video tends to improve 
listening comprehension as it facilitates recognition of aural word forms. 
INTRODUCTION 
Input has received considerable attention in the field of second language acquisition (SLA) (Gass, 1997). 
In recent years, some interest has been expressed towards modality of input in language learning due to 
the increased use of multimedia materials. Multimedia, that is, a combination of print, audio, and imagery, 
has been argued to enhance input by making it more comprehensible (Plass & Jones, 2005). It has been 
shown that pictures and video can increase reading comprehension and listening comprehension (see 
Plass & Jones for a review). This supports Paivio’s (1986, 1991, 2007) Dual Coding Theory, which states 
that a combination of imagery and verbal information improves information processing. The use of 
multimedia is also advocated because (a) it allows for the provision of authentic input and thus exposure 
to target culture, (b) it motivates learners, and (c) it accounts for students’ different learning styles 
(Brinton, 2001). A considerable amount of research has also been conducted on the use of multimedia for 
vocabulary learning (see Plass & Jones for a review), but the findings are not entirely clear when 
captioned videos are used. Another area that deserves attention is how learners process different types of 
input presented simultaneously. While there is a theory of multimedia learning in the native language 
(Mayer, 1997, 2001), it has been applied to second language learning primarily in the context of 
multimedia annotations (Al-Seghayer, 2001; Jones, 2003; Jones & Plass, 2002; Plass, Chun, Mayer, & 
Leutner, 1998, 2003), but not in other multimedia environments. Given that vocabulary plays a key role in 
language acquisition and that videos are widely used as instructional material, this study investigates the 
effect of visual images, audio, and captions on a) the acquisition of vocabulary and b) learner attention to 
input. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Input from Visual and Auditory Modalities 
Input in various modalities is now being used in language teaching because multiple modalities are 
believed to improve language acquisition. This view is supported by Paivio’s (1986, 1991, 2007) Dual 
Coding Theory, the main assumption of which is that verbal and non-verbal stimuli are processed by two 
different systems, but that these verbal and non-verbal systems interact. The activation of both systems 
results in better recall. This explains why second language (L2) learning can be increased by combining 
Tetyana Sydorenko Modality of Input and Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 51 
 
visual images with verbal information. Vocabulary learning from written text (Al-Seghayer, 2001; Chun 
& Plass, 1996a, 1996b; Plass et al., 1998, 2003) and aural passages (Jones & Plass, 2002) can be 
enhanced if new words are annotated with both verbal input and images rather than when they are 
annotated with only one of these stimuli. However, there are conflicting results on the effect of still 
pictures versus dynamic images. Al-Seghayer found that multimedia annotations consisting of video and 
text led to better vocabulary learning than annotations that combined pictures and text. However, the 
reverse was found by Chun and Plass (1996a). A possible reason for the different findings is the 
characteristics of the images, for example, their concreteness or familiarity. In studies with video input, 
gestures and facial expressions have been found to aid listening comprehension in the L2 (Hernandez, 
2005; Sueyoshi & Hardison, 2005). However, Baltova (1994) argues that authentic videos help with 
global comprehension of information due to visual images, but they do not increase understanding of the 
language per se. To help language learners with comprehension of the language, videos are often 
augmented with on-screen text. 
On-screen text can appear in various forms: subtitles (L1 text, L2 sound), reversed subtitles (L1 sound, L2 
text), or captions (sound is in the same language as the text). Concerning comprehension, it is yet to be 
resolved which of these on-screen text presentations is most beneficial (Baltova, 1999; Lambert, Boehler, 
& Sidoti, 1981; Markham & Peter, 2003; Markham, Peter, & McCarthy, 2001). Danan (2004) suggests 
that subtitles should be used with very difficult material; otherwise, the use of captions in the L2 is 
advised. In vocabulary learning, L2 captions and reversed subtitles result in similar gains, and they are 
better than subtitles for recall (Baltova, 1999; Danan, 1992) and recognition (Lambert et al., 1981). This 
study focuses on captions in the L2 because captions appear to have an advantage over subtitles for 
vocabulary acquisition and they provide more exposure to the L2 than reversed subtitles. 
Vocabulary Acquisition from Captioned Videos 
While captions facilitate listening comprehension in a foreign language (Baltova, 1999; Garza, 1991; 
Guillory, 1998; Markham, 1993, 2001), their effect on vocabulary learning is not as transparent. Several 
studies investigated the influence of captions on learning vocabulary as assessed by written tests (Baltova, 
1999; Danan, 1992; Neuman & Koskinen, 1992). At least one other study assessed the learning via aural 
tests (Markham, 1999). These researchers’ tests, following Nation (2001), can be classified as recognition 
of form, recall of form (c-cloze, fill-in-the-blank, free recall), and recall of meaning (L2 to L1 translation). 
Table 1 summarizes these four studies. 
Table 1. Summary of Research on Vocabulary Acquisition from Captioned Videos 
Test Study Participants Specific Task 
Recognition    
 • Written Neuman & 
Koskinen, 1992 
middle school ESL learners 
(beginning to advanced) 
distinguish words from 
non-words 
 • Aural Markham, 1999 college ESL learners 
(advanced) 
select the word you hear 
Recall    
 • Written Baltova, 1999 high school learners of French 
(beginning to intermediate) 
c-cloze 
  Danan, 1992 college learners of French 
(beginning; intermediate to advanced) 
fill-in-the-blank, 
translation 
  Neuman & 
Koskinen, 1992 
middle school ESL learners  
(beginning to advanced) 
free recall 
 • Aural No studies   
Note. Estimated proficiency level is indicated in parentheses.  
Tetyana Sydorenko Modality of Input and Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 52 
 
The studies cited above indicate that the presentation of video, audio, and captions (VAC) leads to better 
performance on both written and aural tests than the presentation of video and audio (VA), yet there are at 
least two gaps in the literature which make it difficult to generalize the findings. First, the studies have 
been conducted with learners of different ages and at different levels of proficiency. It is difficult to 
ascertain from the descriptions of the participants in the studies exactly how they would compare in terms 
of proficiency. Roughly, the participants in the studies can be categorized as beginning, intermediate, and 
advanced. Following this classification, it appears that aural vocabulary acquisition of beginning and 
intermediate learners has not been studied. Additionally, previous research has investigated the 
recognition, but not recall, of aural vocabulary. Form recognition is different from form recall or 
translation because less cognitive processing is required for form recognition (Nation, 2001). To 
determine which forms of vocabulary—written, aural, or both—are being learned from the VAC input, 
learner performance on recognition and recall vocabulary tests in written and aural modalities should be 
compared. Although acquisition of both written and aural forms of vocabulary is important in language 
learning, commonly used tests of vocabulary are based on orthography, not phonology (Milton & 
Hopkins, 2006). While it is generally assumed that learners can transfer their orthographic word 
knowledge to phonological word knowledge, this might not be the case. Previous research suggests that 
linguistic performance is best in the same modality in which new information was learned. This applies at 
least to semantic categorization in L1 (Dodd, Oerlemans, & Robinson, 1988) and vocabulary recognition 
in L1 (Nelson, Balass, & Perfetti, 2005) and L2 (Bird & Williams, 2002). Following this research, it is 
expected that after receiving aural input, learners will perform better on aural than on written vocabulary 
tests, and vice versa. However, it is necessary to investigate the outcome when both types of input are 
presented. Will the input in both aural and written modes be learned, and if so, at what ratio? 
What Modalities do Learners Attend to? 
It is important to investigate what learners pay attention to for both practical and theoretical reasons. 
While existing research indicates that the presentation of a video with audio and captions is superior at 
least for written vocabulary learning, the concern of many teachers is that learners might not attend to 
audio when they also have captions, which would hinder their listening skills development (Borras & 
Lafayette, 1994). Garza (1991) argues that captions help develop listening skills, but he did not 
investigate this claim empirically. Markham (1999) found that on an aural recognition test, performance 
of advanced learners was better when they watched captioned rather than non-captioned videos. He 
concluded that participants were attending to audio; however, it is not clear whether the same would be 
true for lower-level learners. 
The hypothesized reason why learners might not be paying attention to audio when watching captioned 
video is that they have to divide their attention among three types of stimuli: visual images, text, and 
audio. Because their attentional capacity is limited, learners have to use attention selectively (Robinson, 
2003; Wickens, 2007). Otherwise, learners’ attempts to pay attention to all three modalities may result in 
cognitive overload. Cognitive overload occurs even when tasks are performed in the native language and 
is attributed to the limits of working memory (Baddeley, 1986, 1992; Chandler & Sweller, 1991; Miller, 
1956; Sweller, 1999). The redundancy principle of the cognitive load theory (Sweller, 2005) is relevant 
for the current study. This principle assumes that redundant material slows down information processing 
and learning. Mayer (1997, 2001) applied cognitive load theory to the generative theory of multimedia 
learning. In one study, Mayer, Heiser, and Lonn (2001) found that native speakers of English who saw an 
animation and listened to a concurrent corresponding narration in their L1 were able to retain more 
information from the narration than those who also received captions as a third modality. The researchers 
concluded that captions are distracting when audio is also present because they carry the same 
information, which follows the redundancy principle. Thus, according to the cognitive load theory, non-
captioned videos will be easier to process than captioned videos.  
However, it appears that the prediction above is not borne out for second language learners. As the studies 
on captioned videos indicate, three modes of presentation (i.e., video, audio, and captions) are more 
beneficial for listening comprehension and vocabulary learning than two modes (i.e., video and audio). 
The question is, how do language learners as opposed to native speakers attend to the three types of 
Tetyana Sydorenko Modality of Input and Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 53 
 
input? Do they continuously attend to audio, but switch between images and captions? Or could it be that 
language learners at times are not paying a lot of attention to visual images and instead focus on captions 
and audio, especially when the images do not carry useful information? It is also possible that language 
learners do not attend to audio as much as they do to captions or that they are not able to process audio as 
well as captions. For example, Lambert et al. (1981) found that on a combined written and aural test, L2 
learners recognized more words learned from reading than those learned through listening. This might 
depend on the nature of instruction or input learners receive. If learners regularly receive more reading 
than listening practice, they might process captions better than audio. On the other hand, captions may be 
less beneficial for the learners whose L1 has a writing system that is very different from that of the L2. In 
the studies reviewed above, writing systems in the L1 and L2 are similar. In the current study with 
learners of Russian, the L1 and L2 orthographies differ, but learners of Russian at a college level master 
the Cyrillic alphabet within two weeks. Therefore, the difference in orthography is not a factor in this 
study.  
To answer the question of whether learners attend to audio, one must compare the performance of the 
VAC (captioned video with audio) and the VC (captioned video without audio) groups. If both groups 
perform similarly post treatment, it would perhaps indicate that audio is not as necessary of a component 
for acquisition. However, if the VAC group outperforms the VC group, attention to audio could be 
deemed as beneficial to the learning process. If the VAC group underperforms the VC group, it might 
mean that attention was too split for the VAC group to succeed. 
Only two studies have investigated what modalities L2 learners pay attention to when presented with 
three types of stimuli simultaneously: audio, video, and captions. In a study by Vanderplank (1988), 
European and Arabic high-intermediate to advanced college students learning English watched captioned 
British TV programs over the course of nine weeks. The European students were from France, Germany, 
Austria, Denmark, Italy, and Spain. Two learners reported that they tried but could not pay much attention 
to audio because the captions were present. Many students reported that initially they were distracted by 
the presence of captions. However, over the course of the study, European students found captions useful 
and not distracting, while the Arabic students mentioned that the captions changed too fast. Vanderplank 
suggested that European students are used to captions and can utilize them better. However, the difference 
between the L1 and L2 scripts might be the underlying factor (Winke, Gass, & Sydorenko, 2008). 
Another study was conducted by Taylor (2005) with beginning college learners of Spanish. Captions were 
found to be distracting for many learners with little exposure to Spanish, while more experienced learners 
could utilize all three types of stimuli when processing videos. The majority of all students (26 of 35) 
reported that they attended to the audio, suggesting that availability of captions does not make all students 
ignore the audio completely. Both Vanderplank and Taylor concluded that over time learners can develop 
strategies for processing input in the three modalities. While these studies provide useful information on 
learners’ processing of captioned video, more studies are needed with a variety of learners and viewing 
conditions.  
Research Questions 
The major gaps in research on captioned video concern (a) how captions affect learners’ acquisition of 
vocabulary, especially, the difference between written and aural word forms, (b) how exactly the learners 
are able to acquire vocabulary from videos, and (c) what input modalities learners pay attention to when 
watching videos. To fill this gap, the present study investigates the following four research questions. 
1. Does the modality of input have a differential effect on the learning of written and aural forms of 
vocabulary? 
2. Is the overall learning of words (i.e., combined written and aural vocabulary) affected by different 
input modalities? 
3. What input modalities do the learners attend to when watching videos? 
4. What strategies do learners use to acquire new vocabulary from videos?  
The hypotheses are as follows. 
Tetyana Sydorenko Modality of Input and Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 54 
 
1a. The VC group will score higher on written than on aural tests, and the VA group will score higher 
on aural than on written tests because studies suggest that performance is best in the modality in 
which new information was learned. 
1b. The VAC group will score higher on written than on aural tests because Lambert et al. (1981) 
found that learners remembered more words from written than from aural input. 
2a. The VAC group will perform better than the VA group based on the previous research on 
captioned video. 
2b. The VC group will outperform the VA group since written input appears to have an advantage 
over aural input (Lambert et al., 1981). 
2c. The VAC group will outperform the VC groups since there is some indication from previous 
research that learners pay attention to audio. 
3a. Based on the existing studies, all learners will pay attention to captions. 
3b. Learners will also pay attention to visuals because they have been shown to increase listening 
comprehension. 
3c. Learners will pay less attention to audio than to captions because written input seems to be more 
beneficial than aural. 
4. Learners will associate visual images with written and/or aural verbal information to learn new 
vocabulary, as has been shown to occur in studies on multimedia annotations. 
METHODOLOGY 
Participants 
The participants were 26 non-heritage learners from two sections of second-semester (beginning) Russian 
at a large Midwestern university. The participants’ age ranged from 18 to 26, with a mean of 20. The L1 
was English for 25 participants and Cantonese for one. Of the native English speakers, one participant 
also considered French as an L1 and another considered Italian and Spanish as L1s in addition to English. 
There were 14 females and 12 males. The participants were compensated for their time with a gift 
certificate for lunch (valued at 5 dollars). They also received extra credit in their Russian course for 
participating. 
The participants were divided randomly into three stimulus conditions: video with audio and captions 
(VAC), video with audio (VA), and video with captions (VC). There were eight participants in the VAC 
group, and nine participants in each of the other two groups. To ensure that the VAC, VA, and VC groups 
did not differ in terms of their abilities to learn written and aural word forms, these abilities were tested 
before the study.  
Group Equality Test  
All participants read one text and listened to another text two times, with the order and modality of texts 
counterbalanced (see Appendix A for one of the texts). The topics of the texts, professions and buying, 
had not been studied by the participants prior to the study. Almost every sentence in each text contained 
one new word accompanied by a visual image. None of the new words were cognates. Every sentence of 
the text, together with an accompanying picture when applicable, was presented on a PowerPoint slide for 
five seconds. The participants then took written and aural recognition and translation tests. On the 
recognition test, the participants had to mark the words that they thought appeared in the texts; these 
words were mixed with non-words. On the written recognition test, the new words from prior reading 
were presented on paper, and on the aural recognition test, the new words from prior listening were 
presented aurally. For the written and aural translation tests, the task was to translate from Russian into 
English the same target words that were on recognition tests. After that, the participants were asked to 
indicate for each target word whether they have (1) never encountered it before, (2) encountered it before, 
(3) knew its meaning, or (4) used it. Only those target words that were new for the participants were 
Tetyana Sydorenko Modality of Input and Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 55 
 
included in the analysis. The results of a mixed-design ANOVA [Test (written recognition, aural 
recognition, written translation, aural translation) x Group (VAC, VA, VC)] showed a non-significant 
main effect of group, F(2, 17) = .44, p = .65, which means that the three treatment groups were 
comparable on learning new vocabulary. The results also revealed a significant main effect of test, F(3, 
51) = 18.42, p < .001, r = .51 and a non-significant Test x Group interaction, F(6, 51) = .96, p = .461. As 
shown in Table 2 and Figure 1, the participants scored higher on written than on aural tests, suggesting 
that their reading abilities were better than their listening abilities. 
Table 2. Descriptive Statistics on the Group Equality Test 
 VAC (N = 8)  VA (N = 9)  VC (N = 9)  All Groups 
 M SD  M SD  M SD  M SD 
Written recognition .84 .10  .83 .08  .87 .12  .85 .10 
Aural recognition .68 .11  .74 .11  .69 .19  .71 .14 
Written translation .62 .22  .69 .27  .57 .34  .62 .28 
Aural translation .27 .18  .27 .24  .48 .19  .35 .22 
Note. The scores represent percentage of words learned from the new target words. 
 
Figure 1. Results from the group equality test. 
Procedures 
The study took place in the language lab and was conducted outside of class time. The participants first 
filled out a background questionnaire, which consisted of questions in four categories: (a) demographic 
data (age, gender, L1); (b) length of study of L2 and motivation; (c) out-of-class exposure to L2; (d) self-
rating of reading and listening skills in Russian. Then the participants watched the video clips on 
individual computers. The VAC group saw the videos with audio and captions, the VA group saw the 
videos with audio, and the VC group saw the videos with captions, but did not receive audio input. The 
participants were instructed to watch each video for meaning the first time, and to pay attention to the 
language the second time because they would be tested on both meaning and language. After watching 
each video, the participants completed comprehension, written and aural recognition, written and aural 
translation (from L2 to L1), and word knowledge tests in that order. The recognition test always preceded 
the translation test, while the order of written and aural tests was counterbalanced. Following Al-Seghayer 
Tetyana Sydorenko Modality of Input and Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 56 
 
(2001), Bird and Williams (2002), and Danan (1992), the word knowledge test was not given before the 
study in order to avoid prompting the participants to pay special attention to new words. At the end of the 
study, the participants completed a final questionnaire. The whole procedure took between 50 and 60 
minutes.  
Materials 
The materials consisted of three video clips, each 2 to 3 minutes long, from a popular Russian comedy 
series for native Russian speakers. The clips contained target words that were highly unlikely to be known 
since they did not appear in the participants’ textbook. In addition, the participants’ instructor felt that 
these words were highly unlikely to be heard in class. However, the participants could learn the target 
words from video context, mainly due to a high correlation between visual images and dialogs. For 
example, in one of the video clips a boy says A u menya brat boksyor (“My brother is a boxer”), after 
which a male boxer appears. That is, the criteria for target word selection were that words or phrases must 
be well-supported visually and most likely unknown to the participants.1 
The topics of the video clips included professions, eating, and compliments. The participants knew only a 
few words on the topics of food and professions, and they had not studied the compliments topic prior to 
the study. There were 6 target words in Clip 1, 12 target words in Clip 2, and 10 target words in Clip 3 
(see Appendix B). Of these 28 words, there were 13 nouns, 5 verbs, 5 adjectives, 1 adverb, 3 phrases 
consisting of 2 words, and 1 single-word expression. About one fourth of the words were abstract, others 
were concrete and well-supported visually. Of all target words, six were cognates, and two were false 
cognates. Usually, learners can guess new words from context when at least 95% of the words in the text 
are known (Nation, 2001). Following the intuition of the participants’ Russian instructor, the videos in 
this study had a much lower percentage of known words.2
Instruments 
  
Comprehension test 
The comprehension test consisted of three very general true-false questions that did not require the 
knowledge of the target words. Although a larger number of questions is desirable to test comprehension, 
this was not possible because the videos were too short. The comprehension test was included to 
encourage the participants to pay attention not only to the language used in the videos, but also to the 
main ideas of the clips. Because comprehension of captioned videos has been widely studied, it was not 
the focus of this study and thus was not one of the dependent variables. 
Recognition test  
Since recognition of new lexical forms is considered to be an initial step in vocabulary learning, 
recognition of the target word forms was measured (see Appendix C). The recognition test involved 
discriminating between words presented in the input (target items) and those that were not presented in 
the input (non-target items) (Pulido, 2004). In this study, non-target items were non-words. Half of the 
target words and half of the non-words were presented in a written form, the other half aurally. Following 
Huibregtse, Admiraal, and Meara (2002), one point was awarded for a “yes” response to a target item, 
and one point was awarded for a “no” response to a non-word. Responses to non-words had to be taken 
into account to correct for guessing. Words that participants knew before the study were excluded from 
the analysis. The scores from the three videos were combined and calculated as the percentage of 
recognized new words from the total number of new words, following Smith (2004) (see Equation 1). 
Non-words were also added to the equation. 
recognized new words + unselected non-words  (1)  
    
all new words + all non-words    
 
 
Tetyana Sydorenko Modality of Input and Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 57 
 
Translation Test 
This test consisted of the same target words as the recognition test, but non-words were not included 
(see Appendix C). Half of the words were presented in a written form, the other half aurally. One point 
was given for each translation of the new word that was possible in the context of the video. For example, 
in clip 1 the word lyotchik means “pilot,” but the translation airplane would have been accepted because 
in the clip the word lyotchik appeared when the airplanes were flying. Although this measure does not 
reflect the number of words the participants learned correctly, it shows some level of learning and the 
ability to remember new form-meaning associations. The scores from the three videos were combined and 
calculated as the percentage of new words translated from the total number of new words. 
Word Knowledge Test 
The purpose of the word knowledge test was to check which target words were new for each participant. 
The participants rated their knowledge of the words prior to the study as 1 = never encountered before, 2 
= encountered before, 3 = know the meaning, 4 = use it (see Appendix C). Some non-words from the 
recognition tests were used to adjust for guessing. If a participant knew the meaning of the word prior to 
the study or used it, such a word was not considered new and was excluded from the analysis. 
Final Questionnaire 
In the final questionnaire, the participants were asked open-ended questions on whether they liked the 
videos and why, what strategies they used to learn the new words, what difficulties they had, and what 
could have helped them to understand the videos better. Two Likert-scale questions asked the participants 
to rate how much attention they paid to visual images and how helpful they were (following the design of 
Sueyoshi & Hardison, 2005). The participants were asked the same questions about audio and captions if 
they had them (see Appendix D). 
Analysis 
The between-participant independent variable was input modality (VAC, VA, and VC), and the within-
participant independent variable was test modality (written and aural). There were two dependent 
variables: recognition and translation test scores. A mixed-design ANOVA3 was conducted for each of 
the two dependent variables. 
The data from open-ended questions on the final questionnaire were analyzed qualitatively, using a 
content analysis approach. In a content analysis approach, themes emerging from the data are grouped 
into categories, which should also emerge from the data (Berg, 2001). The data can then be subjected to 
frequency counts and descriptive statistics. The data from the two Likert-scale questions on the final 
questionnaire were analyzed using descriptive statistics. These data were not subjected to statistical tests 
due to the small number of tokens. 
RESULTS 
Does the modality of input have a differential effect on the learning of written and aural forms of 
vocabulary?  
The results of a mixed-design ANOVA on the vocabulary recognition test [Test (written, aural) x Input 
Modality (VAC, VA, VC)] showed a non-significant main effect of test, F(1, 23) = 1.32, p = .263. The 
results also revealed a significant Test x Input Modality interaction, F(2, 23) = 4.06, p = .031, r = .39. 
Groups with captions scored higher on written than on aural recognition, while the VA group scored 
higher on aural than on written recognition (see Table 3 and Figure 2). The results of a mixed-design 
ANOVA on the vocabulary translation test [Test (written, aural) x Input Modality (VAC, VA, VC)] 
showed a non-significant main effect of test, F(1, 23) = 2.43, p = .133, and a non-significant Test x Input 
Modality interaction, F(2, 23) = .53, p = .599. This indicates that there were no significant differences 
between written and aural translation for each group. 
Tetyana Sydorenko Modality of Input and Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 58 
 
Is the overall learning of words (i.e., combined written and aural vocabulary) affected by different 
input modalities?  
The results of the mixed-design ANOVA on the vocabulary recognition test (mentioned above) showed a 
non-significant main effect of input modality, F(2, 23) = 1.10, p = .351. This means that combined written 
and aural recognition was the same for each group. The results of the mixed-design ANOVA on the 
vocabulary translation test (described above) showed a significant main effect of input modality, F(2, 23) 
= 3.75, p = .039, r = 
Table 3. Descriptive Statistics on Vocabulary Tests 
.37. A post-hoc Tukey’s HSD test revealed a significant difference between the VAC 
and the VA groups. The VAC group scored significantly higher than the VA group and non-significantly 
higher than the VC group on overall translation. This suggests that the VAC combination is more 
favorable than the VA combination for learning the meanings of new words.  
 VAC (N = 8)  VA (N = 9)  VC (N = 9)  All Groups 
 M SD  M SD  M SD  M SD 
Written recognition .73 .10  .63 .10  .76 .12  .71 .12 
Aural recognition .67 .15  .69 .08  .68 .06  .68 .10 
Written translation .36 .11  .25 .13  .28 .10  .30 .12 
Aural translation .35 .18  .18 .13  .24 .12  .25 .15 
Note. The scores represent percentage of words learned from the new target words. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Results from vocabulary tests. 
What input modalities do the learners attend to when watching videos?  
To answer this research question, the participants were instructed to rate the amount of attention they paid 
to video, audio, and captions, as well as the usefulness of these modalities. They were also asked to 
describe the difficulties they encountered when watching the videos and taking vocabulary tests, as well 
as how these difficulties can be avoided.  
The descriptive statistics for attention paid to various modalities are reported in Table 4. In the VAC 
group, the participants thought they paid most attention to captions, then to video, then to audio. In the 
Tetyana Sydorenko Modality of Input and Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 59 
 
VA group, the participants said they paid the same amount of attention to audio and video. In the VC 
group, the participants reported paying more attention to captions than to video. That is, both the VAC 
and the VC groups seemed to pay most attention to captions. 
Table 4. Participants’ Perception of the Amount of Attention Paid to Audio, Captions, and Video 
 VAC (N = 8)  VA (N = 9)  VC (N = 9) 
 M SD  M SD  M SD 
Audio 3.75 1.28  4.33 0.71    
Captions 4.5 1.07     4.11 0.78 
Video 4.25 0.71  4.33 0.71  3.56 0.88 
Note. Higher means indicate more reported attention. 
The participants were also asked to rate the utility of video, as well as captions and audio when available, 
for their understanding of the clips. The descriptive statistics from these data are reported in Table 5. In 
all three groups, the participants found video to be most helpful, although, as mentioned above, none of 
the three groups reported paying most attention to video. The VAC group found audio to be the least 
helpful. 
Table 5. Participants’ Perception of the Amount of Help Obtained from Audio, Captions, and Video 
 VAC (N = 8)  VA (N = 9)  VC (N = 9) 
 M SD  M SD  M SD 
Audio 3.25 1.39  3.11 0.93    
Captions 4.13 0.99     4.00 1.00 
Video 4.75 0.46  4.78 0.44  4.67 0.71 
Note. Higher means indicate more reported helpfulness. 
Reported difficulties with watching the videos and completing vocabulary tests and their solutions also 
reveal to what modalities the learners were attending (see Table 6). Participants in all groups had some 
difficulty with audio or captions. Such difficulties were contributed to the speed of the dialogs (they were 
too fast), lack of time to read all captions, and the heavy burden of reading captions while watching the 
videos at the same time. One learner also mentioned focusing only on known words due to captions. 
Another learner reported reading captions and scanning the images, but having no time to listen to audio. 
One more learner tried to sound out captions because there was no audio. Because learners in the VAC 
group did not specify whether a “fast dialog” and “very fluent Russian” referred to audio, captions, or 
both, it is not clear which kind of stimulus as a whole was more difficult to process, captions or audio.  
Participants in all groups reported that they had difficulty with unknown vocabulary and vocabulary tests. 
Many participants mentioned that they could not figure out the meanings of new words or that there was 
too much new vocabulary. One participant pointed out that it was difficult to learn words not supported 
by images. Learners also mentioned not remembering which specific words were used in the videos, 
especially their aural forms. Some participants reported that they could guess the meanings of the words 
while watching the videos, but forgot the actual words by the time they had to take a vocabulary test. 
Tetyana Sydorenko Modality of Input and Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 60 
 
Table 6. Difficulties with Watching Videos and Completing Vocabulary Tests and their Mitigation 
 VAC (N = 8) VA (N = 9) VC (N = 9) 
Difficulties    
With audio or captions    
 fast dialog 2 2  
 fast flow of captions   5 
 very fluent Russian 1   
 trying to read captions and watch videos at once   1 
 captions make one focus on known words 1   
 only read captions and scanned visual images 1   
 trying to sound out captions due to lack of audio   1 
    
With vocabulary in the videos and tests    
 too much new vocabulary 1 4  
 figuring out meanings of new words 3 3 4 
 learning words not supported by images  1  
 were in the video 2 3 3 
 remembering aural word forms from the video 1  2 
 translating 1 3 6 
 remembering word-meaning associations 5 3  
What can lessen the difficulties?    
Scaffolding    
 shorter sentences in the dialog 1   
 captions  3  
 slower dialog  2  
 sound   7 
 more time for reading captions   1 
    
Knowledge of Russian    
 more knowledge of Russian 3   
 more known or pre-taught vocabulary  5 2 
 more time to get familiar with pre-viewing vocabulary 1   
 dictionary 1   
Note. The numbers indicate how many within the group provided the given response. 
The learners were also asked what could have helped them understand the videos better. The participants 
mentioned various types of scaffolding (depending on the group they were in), such as shorter sentences, 
captions, sound, more time to read captions, or slower dialog. It appears that most learners wanted to have 
access to all modalities (video, audio, and captions) and have more time to process the information in 
these modalities. However, while only two learners in the VC group did not state that they would like to 
Tetyana Sydorenko Modality of Input and Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 61 
 
have audio, six learners in the VA group did not say anything about captions. That is, it is either more 
important or more natural for the learners to watch videos with audio than with captions, as one would 
expect. Several learners provided another solution to the problem of not understanding the videos: a better 
knowledge of Russian in general or vocabulary in particular.  
What strategies do learners use to acquire new vocabulary from videos?  
On the final questionnaire, the participants were asked whether they learned new words from the videos 
and how they were able to do that. The strategies learners reported and their frequencies are provided in 
Table 7 and can be divided into two categories: modality-specific strategies and common vocabulary 
guessing strategies.  
Regarding modality-specific strategies, six learners from each group reported using visual images to help 
them figure out the meanings of new words. One participant wrote, “Most words I learned were 
accompanied by actions on screen, such as sadites’ [“sit down”], proshu vas [“after you”], and boksyor 
[“boxer”].” The participants in the VAC group did not say whether they matched visual images to 
captions, audio, or both.  
Concerning common vocabulary guessing strategies, only one participant in the VAC group reported 
using them; specifically, this learner relied on familiar roots. More participants in the other two groups 
mentioned that they used guessing strategies: five participants in the VA group and four in the VC group. 
The participants thought they had understood new words which were similar to their L1s (English, 
Spanish, or Italian), although they did not realize that some of these words were false cognates. They also 
reported using roots of familiar words, relying on the verbal context, and employing their knowledge of 
grammar to understand new words. 
Table 7. Learners’ Strategies and their Frequencies for Learning New Words 
Strategies VAC (N = 8) VA (N = 9) VC (N = 9) 
Modality-specific strategies    
 matching visual images with words 6 6 6 
 reading captions 1   
     
Common vocabulary guessing strategies    
 recognizing words that are similar to L1  3 1 
 using the roots of known words 1  1 
 paying attention to verbal context  1 1 
 paying attention to grammar  1 1 
Note. The numbers indicate how many within the group provided the given response. 
DISCUSSION 
The intent of this study was to investigate vocabulary acquisition from different types of video input 
when the goal is to both understand the content of the videos and to learn new words from them. The 
results suggest that for beginning learners with better reading than listening skills: (a) captions facilitate 
recognition of written word forms, while audio facilitates recognition of aural word forms; (b) more word 
meanings are learned when videos are shown with both audio and captions than with either audio or 
captions; (c) participants think they pay most attention to captions, then to video, then to audio, but they 
consider video to be the most helpful; some participants have difficulty attending to all three modalities; 
and (d) the meanings of some new words can be learned from very difficult authentic videos when the 
language is well-supported by visual images. These findings are discussed below in detail. 
Tetyana Sydorenko Modality of Input and Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 62 
 
Does the modality of input have a differential effect on the learning of written and aural forms of 
vocabulary?  
Since the VA group performed better on aural than on written recognition test, and the performance of the 
VC group resulted in the reverse pattern, the results support the hypothesis that recognition of form is best 
when modality of input and test modality are the same, as was found by Bird and Williams (2002). Jones 
(2004), on the other hand, found that vocabulary recognition was not affected by the modality of the test. 
However, in her study text was in L1, while in this study captions and vocabulary tests were in L2. 
Additionally, in Jones’ study test modalities were written and pictorial, while in this study they were 
written and aural.  
Contrary to the hypothesis, it was found that for recall of meaning test modality does not interact with 
input modality. As mentioned earlier, recognition and translation of vocabulary are different skills 
(Nation, 2001). The recognition test indicates whether learners have noticed the forms in the input, that is, 
their episodic memory of the forms, while the translation test indicates whether learners have understood 
the meaning of the forms (Pulido, 2004). Compared to form recognition, production of meaning requires 
deeper processing because learners need to deduce the meaning of the form while they watch the videos, 
and then recall the meaning of the form when they take the test. It is possible that if learners understood 
and remembered the meaning of the word, they have built the connections between the meaning and both 
of its forms (written and aural). Thus it does not matter whether they have to produce the meaning of the 
written or of the aural form of the same word, or at least the differences are not substantial. On the other 
hand, if learners have only noticed the form either through reading or listening, but did not understand its 
meaning, one can suppose that they have not built connections between the written and aural forms.  
For form recognition, the results also support the hypothesis that given both written and aural input, 
learners presented with video, audio, and captions would perform better on written than on aural tests. 
This could be due to instruction because the participants in this study appeared to have better reading than 
listening skills, or due to the previous finding that people in general process written input better than aural 
(Nelson et al., 2005) at least when non-logographic script is used. 
Is the overall learning of words (i.e., combined written and aural vocabulary) affected by different 
input modalities? 
The hypothesis was that learners would be able to recognize and translate more vocabulary in the VAC 
group than in the VA group. That is, captions were predicted to increase the acquisition of vocabulary. 
This was only partially confirmed: while the VAC group scored significantly higher than the VA group 
on overall translation, there were no differences between the groups on overall recognition. It was 
mentioned earlier that recognition of written and aural forms depends on modality of input, so there is an 
interaction effect. It appears that for acquiring word meaning, the most beneficial condition is video 
combined with both written and aural verbal input, but for form recognition, there is no effect from 
combined written and aural verbal input. 
The fact that learners in the VAC group were able to acquire more word meanings than those in the VA 
group is in line with findings in previous research on captions (Baltova, 1999; Danan, 1992; Neuman & 
Koskinen, 1992). However, this runs counter to Robinson’s (2003) hypothesis that attentional division 
among many stimuli may be negatively taxing for L2 learners. Even though the learners in the VAC 
group had to divide their attention among more stimuli than those in the VC and the VA groups, and even 
reported that following audio or captions was cognitively taxing, the process of doing so did not hinder 
their language learning. In fact, in this study it was found that performing three tasks was better than 
performing two. This finding also opposes the predictions of cognitive load theory: according to the 
redundancy principle, the presentation of the same information simultaneously through two modalities 
(text and audio) negatively affects information processing at least in L1 (Sweller, 2005). One explanation 
why native speakers and L2 learners may process information in multiple modalities differently is the 
idea that certain kinds of redundancy, such as repetitions, topic-fronting, or paraphrase, can be beneficial 
for learners’ comprehension of input (Larsen-Freeman & Long, 1991). In multimedia environments, 
redundancy stemming from different modalities might be also beneficial. Jones (2003) and Grgurović and 
Tetyana Sydorenko Modality of Input and Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 63 
 
Hegelheimer (2007) attribute the advantage of redundancy through multiple modalities to learners’ 
individual preferences: learners choose what they need to focus on (video, audio, or captions). 
Additionally, while the processing of speech is natural for native speakers, learners, especially at the 
beginning level, might not even know where each word begins and ends. As Ellis (2003, p. 77) put it, 
“learning to understand a language involves parsing the speech stream into chunks which reliably mark 
meaning.” Captions could be more useful than distracting because they help learners parse the stream of 
speech, as was suggested by Vanderplank (1993) and reflected in the learners’ comments in Winke et al. 
(2008).  
It is also possible that captions help beginners more than audio in learning new vocabulary from videos 
because the VC group scored higher than the VA group. However, because this difference was not 
significant, further research is needed. On the other hand, even if learners can process captions better than 
audio, there is evidence in this dataset that they still attend to audio because the VAC group was able to 
recall more word meanings than the VC group, although this difference was not significant. In other 
words, attention (at some level) was paid to audio and can be considered as the factor that increased word 
recall. This supports Markham’s (1999) finding that learners attend to audio when they also have captions. 
Although the VC group slightly outperformed the VA group, it is not suggested that learners should be 
exposed to the VC rather than the VA input. The VC group was used only for research purposes and is 
generally not suitable for instruction because, as evident from the participants’ comments, this condition 
is unnatural. One learner tried to sound out captions because there was no audio, and most learners in the 
VC group said they wanted audio. 
What do the learners attend to when watching videos?  
The participants reported paying most attention to captions, then video, then audio. Thus, as predicted, 
learners paid attention to all three modalities, and they paid more attention to captions than to audio. This 
suggests that captions might have an advantage over audio, which goes along with the results of the 
vocabulary tests: in the VAC group written recognition was higher than aural, and the VC group 
outperformed the VA group on the translation test. The participants also reported paying some attention to 
audio rather then completely ignoring it, although one participant in the VAC group did mention that 
he/she ignored the audio while trying to process video and captions. It is not surprising that participants 
paid attention to video because studies on listening comprehension (Hernandez, 2005; Sueyoshi & 
Hardison, 2005) and multimedia annotations (Al-Seghayer, 2001; Chun & Plass, 1996a) found that video 
enhances comprehension and vocabulary learning as compared to verbal information. Wagner (2007) 
found that when listening to a lecture or a dialog, all learners paid attention to video, although to varying 
degrees. 
While learners seem to attend more to captions than to video, the participants reported that video is more 
helpful than captions. A plausible explanation is that language learners can only understand a portion of 
captions in L2, but they have no difficulty processing visual images and thus find them more helpful. This 
goes along with the fact that learners in all groups were reporting difficulties following audio or captions, 
but not video, which supports previous findings (Taylor, 2005; Vanderplank, 1988). In Jones (2003), 
some learners reported that although annotations in the form of L1 translations were helpful, they did not 
encourage deep thinking. On the other hand, pictures did lead to deep processing of aural input, especially 
when combined with text. If learners find L1 translations less helpful than images, they will surely find 
captions in L2 less helpful than video. Studies reviewed in Paivio (2007) support learners’ reports that 
imagery has an advantage over verbal input for information processing.  
An interesting finding was that many learners preferred to have access to all modalities (video, audio, and 
captions), even though they also reported difficulties processing all three modalities. While this seems to 
be a contradiction, it could be that some cognitively taxing tasks are beneficial for language learners, 
especially when multimedia is involved. In Jones (2003), learners who did not have access to annotations 
during a listening task were frustrated because they could not comprehend the input, while learners who 
had annotations in various modalities did not express such concerns. Thus, for language learners a 
combination of input in multiple modalities may be more of an advantage rather than a distraction. 
Tetyana Sydorenko Modality of Input and Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 64 
 
What strategies do learners use to acquire new vocabulary from videos?  
As predicted, it appears that visual context in combination with either aural or written language is a 
frequently used strategy to learn new words from videos. The same was found in previous research on 
multimedia annotations (Al-Seghayer, 2001; Chun & Plass, 1996a; Jones & Plass, 2002; Plass et al., 1998, 
2003). The detailed analysis of the translation test results shows that the clarity of visuals is important: on 
average, 36% of words well-supported by visual images were translated correctly, but only 6% of 
concrete and abstract words which were not clearly represented by images were translated correctly. One 
participant also pointed out that it was difficult to learn words not supported by images. However, readers 
should keep in mind that visual images often matched the language in these videos, which is not 
necessarily the case in all videos. In terms of the differences between groups, participants in the VAC 
group reported using fewer general guessing strategies than the participants in the other two groups. This 
could be because they were paying attention to all three modalities and did not have time to employ other 
strategies, or because visual images in conjunction with audio and captions were enough to understand the 
meanings of many new words. These findings relate especially to videos that were difficult for the 
learners. It is possible that learners at higher proficiency levels would have used more general guessing 
strategies. 
It should be noted that although all learners acquired some vocabulary (between 3 and 7 new words), 
based on the comments from the final questionnaire, many participants did not feel that they learned new 
words. The absence of feedback may explain these results. The participants often guessed the meanings of 
the words, but they did not know whether they learned them correctly. In fact, 19% of all accepted 
translations were incorrect, although possible in the context of the videos. In addition, two learners said “I 
don’t know that I learned any new words to the extent that I would feel comfortable using them—but I 
could probably recognize a few” and “I comprehended cognates, but cannot use them.” Additionally, 
several participants reported that they could guess the meanings of the words while watching the videos, 
but forgot the actual words by the time they had to take a vocabulary test. To convince the students that 
they can learn some vocabulary from videos, teachers should provide learners with feedback and 
opportunities for production.  
CONCLUSION  
The pedagogical implication of this study is that different types of video input seem to provide different 
benefits. First, teachers can use videos to improve their students’ vocabulary knowledge. Vocabulary 
knowledge is often a big hurdle for language learners, and it seems that captioned video with content 
well-supported by visual images can be a useful type of input, especially for beginning learners who often 
receive little authentic input because it is deemed as too difficult. However, when the goal is to improve 
listening, another skill with which foreign language learners often have difficulties, videos should be 
without captions. Teachers can also show a video once with captions and once without if the goals are 
both vocabulary learning and listening skills development. Videos can be used not only for learning new 
vocabulary, but also to reinforce initially learned vocabulary because the combination of images and 
verbal forms in the aural or written mode helps subsequent recall of vocabulary (Mayer, 2001; Paivio, 
2007). Finally, learners should be exposed to captioned videos so that they can develop strategies for 
dealing with several types of input at the same time (Vanderplank, 1988). 
Several questions were answered in this study, but future research is necessary to continue investigating 
how L2 learners process captioned videos. The findings of this study are limited in several ways. First, a 
larger sample size would increase power, that is, the probability that a test will find an effect assuming 
that it exists in the population. Second, a better control of target word selection, such as exclusion of 
cognates, would have been desirable, but this was constrained by the availability of videos in which new 
words were well-supported visually. The extreme shortness of vocabulary tests was also due to the 
available videos, which affected the test reliability and thus the validity of the findings. It is advisable to 
replicate this study with a larger number of videos and longer vocabulary tests. If such videos are not 
available, the researchers could consider creating their own videos. Another methodological issue is the 
way learners’ strategies and their viewing behavior were investigated. While learners’ reports of what 
Tetyana Sydorenko Modality of Input and Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 65 
 
they paid attention to provide directions for further research, these results should be interpreted with 
caution because no statistical analyses were performed, and the reliability of self-reported data is not clear. 
Additionally, on the final questionnaire the participants reported some of the strategies they employed for 
learning the new words from videos, but their explanations were not very detailed, possibly because 
learners themselves are not aware of this process. Verbal reports, such as stimulated recall or think-aloud 
protocols, might be a better method for investigating the processing of video. Eye-tracking technology 
could be also used to investigate how learners attend to video and captions, but not audio. 
The generalizability of the findings is also restricted by the nature of the videos and participant pool. The 
videos were of the comedy genre rather than informative, and they contained a large number of vivid 
images, which was conducive to the learning of new vocabulary. If videos had a heavier information load, 
for example, depicting historic events, the learners could have paid more attention to the propositional 
content rather than new vocabulary. The participants in this study were beginners at a university foreign 
language program in the US. They did not often watch videos with captions in Russian, at least as part of 
their course, and thus might have not developed strategies for dealing with different types of input 
simultaneously. These learners also appeared to have better reading than listening skills. Thus, the results 
cannot be generalized to learners of different proficiency levels, in different contexts, such as the target 
language environment, or with different types of instruction. Finally, script differences can play a role in 
the way learners process captions (Winke et al., 2008). Native speakers of English learning Chinese or 
Arabic could receive fewer benefits from captions in vocabulary learning than learners of Russian or 
German, or their processing strategies might be different. 
Future studies could take different directions to investigate vocabulary acquisition from captioned videos. 
One factor not taken into account in this study is individual differences in modality preferences, which 
could influence vocabulary acquisition from videos. Dörnyei (2005) suggested that some people are 
visual and others are auditory learners. Spatial and verbal working memory might also contribute to 
individual differences affecting cognitive processing of videos since this was a factor in studies on 
multimedia annotations (Plass et al., 1998, 2003). The researchers could also look into other beneficial 
ways of using captions in language instruction. For example, as one anonymous reviewer suggested, 
captions in a form of dynamic glosses are now possible with recent technological developments and 
should be investigated. Giving learners some control over their learning can increase the benefits of 
instruction. In Jones (2003), participants liked the fact that they could choose from multiple modalities, 
and in this study learners wished they had control over the number of times they could play the videos. 
Finally, more research is needed to understand how language learners as opposed to native speakers learn 
in multimedia environments as the results in this study suggest that the processes might be different.  
 
NOTES 
1. The initial criteria for target word selection were not strict, which made it possible to identify the 
maximum number of possible target words. This was necessary in order to maximize the length of the 
vocabulary tests, thus making them more reliable. For example, even though many participants might 
have known the word holodnij (“cold”), it was nevertheless included in the vocabulary test. Ideally, 
videos with a large number of unknown target words that were well-supported visually would be used, 
but I was not able to find such videos. I was also not able to find more videos of this kind. The solution to 
this limitation was the use of the word knowledge test to identify which words were new for each 
participant. In addition, the target words were counterbalanced across written and aural vocabulary tests 
in such a way that half of the words predicted to be possibly known were on the aural test, and the other 
half on the written test. For the same reason, words that are easy to learn, such as cognates, were included. 
However, they were evenly divided between written and aural vocabulary tests.  
2. While a more principled approach of measuring the ratio of known/unknown words in the videos 
would have been to give the participants a word knowledge test of all words in the videos, this was not 
done because the participants were willing to volunteer for a limited amount of time. The use of the 
instructor’s judgments was considered acceptable because the participants were in a foreign language 
Tetyana Sydorenko Modality of Input and Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 66 
 
environment, and only three participants had completed a study-abroad program (as they indicated in the 
background questionnaire). That is, most students had limited exposure to vocabulary not used in the 
classroom. Since the ratio of known/unknown words in the videos was used to describe the nature of the 
videos rather than as a variable, a more stringent measure was not considered crucial for this study.  
3. Although the sample size in each group was relatively small, the homogeneity of variances assumption 
was met, thus it was appropriate to use an ANOVA test. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I would like to thank Dr. Paula Winke, Dr. Susan Gass, Dr. Shawn Loewen, Sara Hillman, and Maren 
Schierloh for reviewing earlier drafts of this report. I am also thankful to Drs. Diana Pulido and Senta 
Goertler for valuable suggestions. Finally, I would like to thank Dr. Dennie Hoopingarner and Michael 
Kramizeh for technical support. All remaining errors are my own. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Tetyana Sydorenko is a Ph.D. candidate in the Second Language Studies Program at Michigan State 
University. Her research interests include computer-assisted language instruction and testing, second 
language curriculum and materials development, and second language acquisition. She has published 
book chapters on computer-assisted language learning and testing. 
E-mail: sydoren1@msu.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Al-Seghayer, K. (2001). The effect of multimedia annotation modes on L2 vocabulary acquisition: A 
comparative study. Language Learning & Technology, 5(1), 202–232. Retrieved 
from http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num1/alseghayer/default.html  
Baltova, I. (1994). The impact of video on the comprehension skills of core French students. The 
Canadian Modern Language Review, 50, 507–532. 
Baltova, I. (1999). Multisensory language teaching in a multidimensional curriculum: The use of 
authentic bimodal video in core French. The Canadian Modern Language Review, 56(1), 32–48. 
Baddeley, A. D. (1986). Working memory. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Baddeley, A. D. (1992). Working memory. Science, 255, 556–559. 
Berg, B. L. (2001). An introduction to content analysis. In B. L. Berg (Ed.), Qualitative research methods 
for the social sciences (pp. 238–267). Boston: Allyn and Bacon. 
Bird, S. A., & Williams, J. N. (2002). The effect of bimodal input on implicit and explicit memory: An 
investigation into the benefits of within-language subtitling. Applied Psycholinguistics, 23, 509–533. 
Borras, I., & Lafayette, R. C. (1994). Effect of multimedia courseware subtitling on the speaking 
performance of college students of French. The Modern Language Journal, 78, 61–75. 
Brinton, D. (2001). The use of media in language teaching. In M. Celce-Murcia (Ed.), Teaching English 
as a second or foreign language (pp. 459–476). Boston, MA: Heinle & Heinle. 
Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (1991). Cognitive load theory and the format of instruction. Cognition and 
Instruction, 8, 293–332. 
Tetyana Sydorenko Modality of Input and Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 67 
 
Chun, D. M., & Plass, J. L. (1996a). Effects of multimedia annotations on vocabulary acquisition. The 
Modern Language Journal, 80, 183–197. 
Chun, D. M., & Plass, J. L. (1996b). Facilitating reading comprehension with multimedia. System, 24, 
503–519. 
Danan, M. (1992). Reversed subtitling and dual coding theory: New directions for foreign language 
instruction. Language Learning, 42(4), 497–527. 
Danan, M. (2004). Captioning and subtitling: Undervalued language learning strategies. Meta, 49(1), 67–
77. 
Dodd, B., Oerlemans, M., & Robinson, R. (1988). Cross-modal effects in repetition priming: A 
comparison of lipread, graphic and heard stimuli. Visible Language, 22, 58–77. 
Dörnyei, Z. (2005). The psychology of the language learner: Individual differences in second language 
acquisition. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Ellis, N. C. (2003). Constructions, chunking, and connectionism: The emergence of second language 
structure. In C. J. Doughty & M. H. Long (Eds.), The handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 63–
103). Malden, MA: Blackwell. 
Garza, T. J. (1991). Evaluating the use of captioned video materials in advanced foreign language 
learning. Foreign Language Annals, 24(3), 239–258. 
Gass, S. M. (1997). Input, interaction, and the second language learner. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Grgurović, M., & Hegelheimer, V. (2007). Help options and multimedia listening: Students’ use of 
subtitles and the transcript. Language Learning & Technology, 11(1), 45–66. Retrieved 
from http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num1/pdf/grgurovic.pdf  
Guillory, H. G. (1998). The effects of keyword captions to authentic French video on learner 
comprehension. CALICO Journal, 15(1-3), 89–108. 
Hernandez, S. S. (2005). The effects of video and captioned text and the influence of verbal and spatial 
abilities on second language listening comprehension in a multimedia learning environment. Dissertation 
Abstracts International, 65(8), 2958-A-2959-A. (UMI No. DA3142667) 
Huibregtse, I., Admiraal, W., & Meara, P. (2002). Scores on a yes-no vocabulary test: Correction for 
guessing and response style. Language Testing, 19, 227–245. 
Jones, L. (2003). Supporting listening comprehension and vocabulary acquisition with multimedia 
annotations: The students’ voice. 
Jones, L. (2004). Testing L2 vocabulary recognition and recall using pictorial and written test items. 
Language Learning & Technology, 8(3), 122–143. Retrieved 
from 
CALICO Journal, 21(1), 41–65.  
http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num3/jones/default.html  
Jones, L., & Plass, J. L. (2002). Supporting listening comprehension and vocabulary acquisition with 
multimedia annotations. The Modern Language Journal, 86, 546–561. 
Lambert, W. E., Boehler, I., & Sidoti, N. (1981). Choosing the languages of subtitles and spoken 
dialogues for media presentations: Implications for second language education. Applied Psycholinguistics, 
2, 133–148.  
Larsen-Freeman, D., & Long, M. (1991). An introduction to second language acquisition research. 
London: Longman. 
Markham, P. (1993). Captioned television videotapes: Effects of visual support on second language 
comprehension. Journal of Educational Technology Systems, 21(3), 183–191. 
Markham, P. (1999). Captioned videotapes and second-language listening word recognition. Foreign 
Language Annals, 32(3), 321–328. 
Tetyana Sydorenko Modality of Input and Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 68 
 
Markham, P. (2001). The influence of culture-specific background knowledge and captions on second 
language comprehension. Journal of Educational Technology Systems, 29(4), 331–343. 
Markham, P., & Peter, L. (2003). The influence of English language and Spanish language captions on 
foreign language listening/reading comprehension. Journal of Educational Technology Systems, 31(3), 
331–341. 
Markham, P., Peter, L. A., & McCarthy, T. J. (2001). The effects of native language vs. target language 
captions on foreign language students' DVD video comprehension. Foreign Language Annals, 34(5), 
439–445. 
Mayer, R. E. (1997). Multimedia learning: Are we asking the right questions? Educational Psychologist, 
32, 1–19. 
Mayer, R. E. (2001). Multimedia learning. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Mayer, R. E., Heiser, J., & Lonn, S. (2001). Cognitive constraints on multimedia learning: When 
presenting more material results in less understanding. Journal of Educational Psychology, 93, 187–198. 
Miller, G. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits on our capacity for 
processing information. Psychological Review, 63, 81–97. 
Milton, J., & Hopkins, N. (2006). Comparing phonological and orthographic vocabulary size: Do 
vocabulary tests underestimate the knowledge of some learners? The Canadian Modern Language Review, 
63(1), 127–147. 
Nation, I. S. P. (2001). Learning vocabulary in another language. New York: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Nelson, J., Balass, M., Perfetti, C. (2005). Differences between written and spoken input in learning new 
words. Written Language and Literacy, 8(2), 101–120.  
Neuman, S. B., & Koskinen, P. (1992). Captioned television as comprehensible input: Effects of 
incidental word learning from context for language minority students. Reading Research Quarterly, 27, 
94–106. 
Paivio, A. (1986). Mental representations: A dual coding approach. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Paivio, A. (1991). Dual coding theory: Retrospect and current status. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 45, 
255–287. 
Paivio, A. (2007). Mind and its evolution: A dual coding theoretical approach. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Plass, J. L., Chun, D. M., Mayer, R. E., & Leutner, D. (1998). Supporting visual and verbal learning 
preferences in a second language multimedia learning environment. Journal of Educational Psychology, 
90, 25–36. 
Plass, J. L., Chun, D. M., Mayer, R. E., & Leutner, D. (2003). Cognitive load in reading a foreign 
language text with multimedia aids and the influence of verbal and spatial abilities. Computers in Human 
Behavior, 19, 221–243. 
Plass, J., & Jones, L. (2005). Multimedia learning in second language acquisition. In R. Mayer (Ed.), The 
Cambridge handbook of multimedia learning (pp. 467–488). New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Pulido, D. (2004). The relationship between text comprehension and second language incidental 
vocabulary acquisition: A matter of topic familiarity? Language Learning, 54(3), 469–523. 
Robinson, P. (2003). Attention and memory during SLA. In C. J. Doughty & M. H. Long (Eds.), The 
handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 631–678). Malden, MA: Blackwell. 
Smith, B. (2004). Computer-mediated negotiated interaction and lexical acquisition. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition, 26, 365–398. 
Tetyana Sydorenko Modality of Input and Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 69 
 
Sueyoshi, A., & Hardison, D. (2005). The role of gestures and facial cues in second language listening 
comprehension. Language Learning, 55(4), 661–699. 
Sweller, J. (1999). Instructional design in technical areas. Camberwell, Australia: ACER Press. 
Sweller, J. (2005). The redundancy principle in multimedia learning. In R. Mayer (Ed.), The Cambridge 
handbook of multimedia learning (pp. 159–168). New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Taylor, G. (2005). Perceived processing strategies of students watching captioned video. Foreign 
Language Annals, 38(3), 422–427. 
Vanderplank, R. (1988). The value of teletext sub-titles in language learning. English Language Teaching 
Journal, 42(4), 272–281. 
Vanderplank, R. (1993). A very verbal medium: Language learning through closed captions. TESOL 
Journal, 3(1), 10–14. 
Wagner, E. (2007). Are they watching? Test-taker viewing behavior during an L2 video listening 
test. Language Learning & Technology, 11(1), 67–86. Retrieved 
from http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num1/wagner/default.html  
Wickens, C. D. (2007). Attention to the second language. IRAL, 45(3), 177–191. 
Winke, P., Gass, S., & Sydorenko, T. (2008, August). The effects of captioning on video-based listening 
activities in the second language classroom. Paper presented at the International Association of Applied 
Linguistics conference, Essen, Germany. 
 
 
Tetyana Sydorenko Modality of Input and Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 70 
 
APPENDIX A. One of Two Group Equality Tests 
 Лена: Какие ты купила подарки на Новый Год? 
Lena: What presents did you buy for the New Year? 
 
Оля: Сестре и брату я купила игрушки
Olya: For my sister and my brother, I bought 
. 
toys. 
 
Оля: Маме я купила чулки
Olya: For my mom, I bought 
. 
panty hose. 
 
Оля: Тёте—платок
Olya: For my aunt, I bought a 
. 
head scarf. 
 
Оля: Папе я купила ремень
Olya: For my dad, I bought a 
. 
belt
 
. 
 
 Оля: А ты что купила? 
Olya: And what did you buy? 
 
Лена: А я папе купила перчатки
Lena: For my dad, I bought 
. 
gloves. 
 
Лена: Маме я купила шляпу
Lena: For my mom, I bought a 
. 
hat.  
 
Лена: Сестре—шкатулку
Lena: For my sister I bought a 
. 
jewelry box. 
 
Лена: А брату я дам деньги
Lena: And my brother will get 
. 
money
Note. Target words supported by visual images are underlined here, but not in the study. Translation is provided for the journal 
readers only, not for the participants. 
. 
Tetyana Sydorenko Modality of Input and Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 71 
 
APPENDIX B. Target Words from Videos 
Video 1 Video 2 Video 3 
boksyor (“boxer”) yesh (“eat”) sadites’ (“sit down”) 
ohotnik (“hunter”) ne budu (“I won’t”) tsvetochki (“flowers”) 
iz OMONa (“from SWAT”) morkovka (“carrot”) obaldet’ (“wow”) 
tankist (“tank operator”) sol’ (“salt”) divnij (“nice”) 
lyotchik (“pilot”) lapsha (“noodles”) proshu vas (“after you”) 
komandir korablya (“ship commander”) lupa (“magnifying glass”) pohozhi (“look like”) 
 goryachij (“hot”) naryadnaya (“dressed up”) 
 holodnij (“cold”) prichyoska (“hairdo”) 
 lopaj (colloquial “eat”) potresayushche (“super”) 
 luk (“onion) kulonchik (“pendant”) 
 kompot (“compote”)  
 korotkaya (“short”)  
Note. All captions (including target words) appeared in Cyrillic in the study. 
Tetyana Sydorenko Modality of Input and Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 72 
 
APPENDIX C. Sample Comprehension, Vocabulary, and Word Knowledge Tests for Videos 
Mark the following as true or false. 
 
____ The boys’ friends will help them fight. 
____ The boys are saying they will be in the military when they grow up. 
____ The boys are brothers. 
 
Check all words/phrases that were in the video. 
командир корабля 
ганторист 
сворник 
лётчик 
бодовой  
танкист 
 
Now you will hear six words or phrases. Check all of those that were in the video. 
1.  
2.  
3.  
4.  
5.  
6.  
 
Translate the following words/phrases into English. 
из ОМОНа ___________________________ 
охотник ___________________________ 
боксёр ___________________________ 
 
Now listen to three words/phrases and translate them into English. 
1. _______________________________________________________________ 
 
2. _______________________________________________________________ 
 
3. _______________________________________________________________ 
 
[Note. Translation test was not on the same page as the recognition test.] 
 
What was your knowledge of these words before today? Circle the corresponding number. 
 
 Never encountered it Encountered it Know its meaning Use it 
боксёр 1 2 3 4 
охотник 1 2 3 4 
ганторист* 1 2 3 4 
[Note. Words marked with * are non-words (they were not marked in the original test).] 
Tetyana Sydorenko Modality of Input and Vocabulary Acquisition 
 
Language Learning & Technology 73 
 
APPENDIX D. Final Questionnaire 
1. Did you like watching Russian videos? Yes ___ No ___  
Why? 
 
2. Did you learn any new words when watching the videos?  Yes ___ No ___ 
If yes, describe what you did to figure out the meanings of new words. 
 
3. For each of the following statements, please circle the option that applies to you. 
a. When watching the videos, I was listening to the soun
All the time 
d 
 Most of the time  Half of the time  Some of the time  Not at all 
b. 
All the time 
When watching the videos, I was reading the captions 
 Most of the time  Half of the time  Some of the time  Not at all 
c. When watching the videos, I was paying attention to the visual images
All the time 
  
 Most of the time  Half of the time  Some of the time  Not at all 
 
4. What were the most difficult things for you when watching the videos? 
 
5. What would have helped you to understand the videos better?  
 
6. What was difficult while you were doing the exercises after the videos? 
 
7. Please rate the following statements on a scale from 5 to 1. 
a. 
Strongly agree 
“The captions helped me to understand the videos.” 
   Strongly disagree 
5 4 3 2 1 
 
b. “The audio helped me to understand the videos.
Strongly agree 
” 
   Strongly disagree 
5 4 3 2 1 
 
c. 
Strongly agree 
“The visual images helped me to understand the videos.” 
   Strongly disagree 
5 4 3 2 1 
 
8. If you have more comments, please write them here.  
