Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol14num3/emerging.pdf 
October 2010, Volume 14, Number 3 
pp. 2–9 
 
Copyright © 2010, ISSN 1094-3501 2 
EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES 
LITERACIES AND TECHNOLOGIES REVISITED 
Robert Godwin-Jones 
Virginia Commonwealth University 
Ten years ago, this journal produced a special issue on “Literacies and Technologies.” It seems an 
opportune time to revisit this theme, given major shifts in the nature of electronic reading and writing in 
recent years. Static Web sites have been displaced as the core of the Web by an ever-increasing number of 
services allowing peer-to-peer and peer-to-many communication. Access to Internet data may come 
through a conventional Web browser or, increasingly, through dedicated applications on a mobile device. 
More and more options are available to write and read about one's own life and about that of people we 
care about or have an interest in. The lives of our students increasingly are invested in this kind of reading 
and writing and in other networked collaborative, social, or gaming activities. One of our challenges 
today as language educators is to find creative and effective ways to leverage our students’ heavy 
investment in social networking to promote and facilitate language learning. Much has changed since 
2000, yet a number of concepts and analyses from that LLT issue can be effectively applied to our tech 
world of today. 
READING 
I am maintaining here the organization of my column in the 2000 LLT issue, thus starting with an update 
on reading and technology. In that issue, Cameron Richards replied to the widespread notion at that time 
that “visual literacy is in the process of supplanting verbal literacy” (p. 69). Although audio and even 
video clips were possible in the earliest incarnations of the World Wide Web, it was around ten years that 
the explosion of popularity of the MP3 music format and the burgeoning use of streaming video made on-
line multimedia more mainstream. Since then, the use of streaming Flash has made YouTube a 
phenomenon, with embedded video clips today a ubiquitous way to consume video of all types. Yet, 
despite the boom in digital video, text has not gone away. In fact, Net users are likely reading more on-
line than was the case in 2000. In part this is due to a shift in the newspaper industry, with more and more 
newspapers going to a primarily or uniquely on-line delivery. The trend holds for magazines as well. But 
it is also due to the popularity of reading material available only in electronic format, such as blogs, which 
have exploded in popularity in recent years. New too is the popularity of uniquely electronic compendia 
of information, such as Wikipedia. However, for young people today, most reading done on electronic 
devices is likely a by-product of participation in social networking. Facebook, in particular, has seen 
tremendous growth and looms large in the everyday lives of many young people particularly in Western 
countries. 
Distracted Readers 
Facebook updates, as well as tweets, short messages from the popular micro-blogging tool, Twitter, are 
short, de-contextualized messages using informal language dealing with topics of everyday life like 
relationships, current interests, upcoming plans, etc. Some have bemoaned this trend. Nicolas Carr, for 
example, in a recent bestseller, The Shallows: What the Internet Is Doing to Our Brains, writes about 
what our current use of electronic media is doing to our thought processes, “Calm, unfocused, 
undistracted, the linear mind is being pushed aside by a new kind of mind that wants and needs to take in 
and dole out information in short, disjointed, often overlapping bursts—the faster the better” (Kindle e-
book location 231). He is not just referring to social media updates, but also to how the links through the 
hypertext structure of the Web distract us from focused reading and thinking, citing studies that show that 
linear, plain texts results in readers remembering more information when compared to the same text 
containing links.  
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Literacies and Technologies Revisited 
 
Language Learning & Technology  3 
Carr’s books and other of his writings dealing with this topic have raised a good bit of on-line debate. 
Web provocateur Clay Shirky criticized Carr for trying to defend an outdated literate literary?culture. In 
response to Carr’s lament over a friend’s inability to read War and Peace, Shirky wrote, “It’s not just 
Carr’s friend, and it’s not just because of the Web—no one reads War and Peace. It’s too long and not so 
interesting.” Shirky has a similar take on Proust, arguing that many more people read about why A la 
recherche du temps perdu is important than actually read the work itself. He argues that the culture that 
values such works is gone, “The threat isn’t that people will stop reading War and Peace. That day is long 
since past. The threat is that people will stop genuflecting to the idea of reading War and Peace
E-books on the Rise 
.” While 
Shirky may formulate his views in an extreme way, many commentators in the discussion of Carr’s work 
share the perspective that the abundance and diversity of reading materials on the Web is a positive 
development, even if it leads to distracted minds. 
However one might feel about the cultural implications of our changing reading habits, one development 
in this area seems inescapable. It is the increasing percentage of reading being done on electronic devices 
rather than on paper. In 2000 a new e-book format, Microsoft Reader, had just been introduced to great 
fanfare, particularly as it featured a font rendering process called ClearType, now integrated into 
Windows. However, this technology failed to gain wide acceptance, as the Pocket PCs it was primarily 
designed to support did not sell well. Today, Amazon’s Kindle device also features a new display 
technology, e-ink, which emulates the readability of paper print?. After a slow start, the Kindle has 
become a popular device and, along with it, sales of electronic books have risen sharply. Since summer, 
2010, Amazon sells more e-books than hardcover books, and the pace is accelerating. Kindle-formatted 
books can also be read on other devices such as smartphones. Apple’s popular iPad features an e-book 
reader as well, and Barnes and Noble markets the Nook e-book reader. 
The greater availability of reading materials in e-book format, the enhanced displays, longer battery life, 
and the convenience of storing a large number of books in a small electronic device have combined to 
make e-books suddenly much more widely used. The Kindle seamlessly syncs (over WiFi) bookmarks, 
notes, and highlighting across multiple devices. Other e-book readers have similar functionality. Also 
popular are phone apps such as Instapaper which allow users to save texts from the Web which can then 
be synced with portable devices and read off-line. Instapaper also has the advantage of displaying an 
electronic text cleanly, stripping away ads and other extraneous elements present on a Web page. The 
most recent version of Apple’s Safari browsers has a “Reader” function that also displays text only in a 
new, lightbox-style window. Other apps feature consolidation of multiple pages of a news story or a 
lengthy article into single document for easier reading. Increasingly it seems, Internet users are warming 
to the screen as a reading device and forgoing the practice of printing electronic data to paper. 
Environmental concerns may be accelerating this trend. 
WRITING 
In 2000, email was the most widely used form of electronic communication. In fact, at that time email 
was becoming possible on mobile devices, although the extremely small screens and phone-style key 
input did not make writing very practical. Today texting (SMS) has largely displaced email within the 
student-age population as the principal means of person-to-person written communication. Traditional 
phone keyboards are still used for texting, but are being more and more supplanted by virtual keyboards, 
first made popular by the Apple iPhone, or miniature KWERTY keyboards now available on many 
smartphones. Some new models feature both styles of text entry. This has opened up many new 
possibilities for writing on the go, especially as more and more phones are capable of connecting to the 
Internet. This allows for remote blog posting, social networking updates or other kinds of electronic 
writing, which were not possible before. Phones today may also incorporate cameras, capable of taking 
quite good photos, as well as shooting, and even editing video. This allows for media to be posted on-line 
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Literacies and Technologies Revisited 
 
Language Learning & Technology  4 
along with text. Personal blogs are not uncommon among university students. A number of my students 
who have studied abroad have created blogs in order to provide a record of the experience for friends and 
family to share. Using a mobile device makes it possible to update the blog from any location and at any 
time. 
Personalized Writing 
Social networking accounts for a good amount of writing being done by the current generation of 
students. This, in fact, has become for many young people, a vital part of their social lives. They stay in 
contact with friends, acquaintances and family through writing updates to their Facebook pages and 
through checking regularly what others have written. Twitter too has been growing at a phenomenal rate, 
pushed along by all the mobile twitter options now available. Clearly, the kind of writing students do for 
social networking has little relationship to their studies, apart from perhaps joining in a discipline-based 
on-line group or “friending” fellow students. Language educators need to be cognizant of this 
development and think about what it might mean for the dynamics of collaborative language learning. 
Facebook, for example, is not just a U.S. phenomenon, but is being used worldwide, with an interface 
available in many different languages. Having in the past two years had summer school experiences in 
China and Russia, with schools hosting foreign students from a variety or countries, I know that in both 
cases the students in my classes communicated and planned post-course contact through Facebook. In 
discussing communication options in class, it was assumed that all the students had Facebook accounts. 
Facebook, however, is not the only such service, there are many similar national varieties. StudiVZ, for 
example, is popular with students in Germany, Orkut with Brazilians. 
Of course, much of what is written within international groups tends to be in English. One way for 
teachers of other languages to take advantage of the world-wide interest in improving language skills is to 
set up tandem partners between groups of English learners abroad and target language learners locally. 
Tandem learning has been more popular in Europe than in the US. Although a number of studies have 
shown good results for tandem learning, there are also a number of difficult practical issues to resolve, 
ranging from time zones to diverging cultural practices (O’Rourke, 2005). The main problem, however, is 
that the writing students do with tandem partners is an assigned school task. This makes students less 
engaged in the process, and the lower personal commitment tends to put less importance on getting across 
what they want to say. The value of intense personal engagement for benefiting language learning is clear 
in study abroad experiences. The main benefit of that experience is, of course, the cultural immersion and 
the constant input in the target language. But important too is the new receptivity to learning that one 
feels when immersed in thet target culture. Suddenly it matters in a very practical and directly personal 
way whether one can compose a sentence that a native speaker will understand. That receptivity leads to 
more focused and more efficient language learning. 
Engaging Students’ Real Lives 
We need to make being able to write understandably in a second language a similar necessity in students’ 
real lives. This is no easy task in a course-oriented, assessment-obsessed academic environment. It might 
involve venturing into not only social networking, but also into areas as remote to most language teachers 
as on-line gaming, which, it has been shown, can be used to motivate language learning (Thorne & Black, 
2007). The advantage of students’s finding that commitment to real communication outside the classroom 
is also the likelihood of its continuing when the course is over. Language maintenance is not something to 
which language teachers traditionally have tended to attach much importance, but it is certainly of 
significant importance to the lives of many students today. Helping them to put together personalized 
strategies for language development and language maintenance which go beyond the academic setting 
should be a service language educators provide. This becomes even more important when, as is 
increasingly the case today, students study several languages and need to have opportunities to keep their 
knowledge of the languages alive.  
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Literacies and Technologies Revisited 
 
Language Learning & Technology  5 
Commercial services are beginning to fill this void, including Transparent Language’s byki and 
LiveMocha. However, these sites are not always designed well, or even include basic tools needed by 
learners. I agree with Klaus Schwienhorst (2008) that CALL professionals need to think about going 
beyond using CALL programs in isolation by integrating those programs with existing other tools and 
services. This may mean showing students where to find and how to use available on-line writing and 
proofing tools, such as auto-glossers, on-line dictionaries, and browser-based spell checkers. This could 
also include tools some language educators might feel uncomfortable recommending students use, such as 
Babel Fish or translate.google.com. These are tools students are likely to find on their own anyway, and it 
would be helpful to students, both for their course work and beyond, to have an understanding of the 
advantages and limitations of both machine and crowd-sourced translation services. Having students, for 
example, compare translations of sample sentences from different automatic translators could prove to be 
very instructive. Studies such as a recent comparison of usage of the efficacy of on-line dictionaries could 
also be helpful. 
ELECTRONIC LITERACY 
In 2000 my home institution, Virginia Commonwealth University, had just announced a requirement for 
incoming students to own a computer. Today virtually all VCU students own a computer (mostly laptops) 
and in the most recent student survey, over half also owned portable devices capable of accessing the 
Internet. Ten years ago there was in addition a computer literacy graduation requirement in place, as was 
the case at many universities in the US. Students were required to demonstrate facility in email, word 
processing, and use of spreadsheets. Students could sign up for a 1-credit course to fulfill the requirement 
or take an on-line proficiency test. Last year the requirement was dropped. There is no longer a need for 
it; students would hardly be able to complete their studies without that knowledge and more (for example, 
how to create presentations!) or without ready access to a networked computer. Virtually all courses at 
VCU have a corresponding course Web site which students are normally required to visit on a regular 
basis and which serves as the repository of course information, assignments, grades, as well as services 
such as homework submission, on-line assessments, discussion forums, blogs, group collaboration, etc. 
Our required student evaluation of instruction at the end of each course includes a number of questions 
about the extent and effectiveness of the instructor's use of technology. Given the ubiquity of computer 
technology in the US, the issue is not longer access to technology but how to evaluate its effectiveness. 
As Carol Chapelle has written (2003), this development has clear implications for CALL research. 
Studies exploring the comparative effectiveness of classroom instruction compared to computer-based 
equivalents seem besides the point in an environment in which it is hardly possible not to use technology. 
Coping With Information Overload 
One skill not included in the former computer literacy requirement at VCU was information retrieval. 
According to Google CEO Eric Schmidt, from the beginning of recorded human history to the year 2003, 
human civilization produced 5 exabytes (an exabyte is one quintillion bytes) of information; today that 
much information is generated every two days. In the face of such an avalanche of information (described 
by one analyst as an exaflood), it becomes even more important to be able to find and evaluate on-line 
information. A recent study of students at Northwestern University has shown that this is not an ability 
widely shared by students today. Students based their judgments on the validity of information solely 
from rankings in search results, not from consideration of the reliability of the sources. A quarter of the 
students in the study told researchers they simply used whatever was at the top of the search results list. 
Most students in the study relied on Google, with almost religious devotion. Other search options have, 
however, appeared in recent years, most notably Microsoft’s Bing, which has gained a significant level of 
use. However, no matter how Internet searching is done, the problem remains of how to access the results 
and find the pertinent and accurate information sought. With the inclusion now of some information 
culled from social networking sites (public tweets, for example), the problem is becoming more acute. 
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Literacies and Technologies Revisited 
 
Language Learning & Technology  6 
Searches in known collections of materials, such as the peer-reviewed Merlot offers one alternative to a 
wide-open Internet search. Increasingly, information is being found as filtered through social networking. 
Sites/services such as Yelp, for example, offer rankings based on reviews, which can be further filtered by 
relying more heavily on comments by one’s particular circle of acquaintances (who have also registered 
with the service). The rapidly increasing use of such apps to find and share information has led Wired 
Magazine to announce recently that the “The Web is dead.” While overstated, the article does point to 
how Internet resources increasingly are being accessed not through the traditional means of a Web 
browser, but through mobile apps and social networking sites. 
A Future for Metadata? 
Another direction is represented by Freebase, a data collection service recently acquired by Google. 
Created by Danny Hillis, one of the pioneers of parallel computing, freebase strives to create an open and 
structured database of knowledge (Hillis uses the term “Knowledge Web”) culled semi-automatically 
from the Web and tagged semantically. It is too early to tell whether this implementation of the Semantic 
Web will be any more successful than previous similar projects. Adding meta-data to resources in order to 
help refine search makes a good deal of sense but it runs up against stiff resistance from users. An 
interesting venture to encourage use and creation of the Semantic Web is the recently announced 
partnership between the Global Learning Resource Connection (GLRC) and the IMS Global Learning 
Consortium that is intended to help governments set up Web-based directories of educational resources, 
searchable by content and learning standard. This leverages work done by the Achievement Standards 
Network (ASN), a repository of learning objects tagged with RDF (Resource Description Framework, a 
meta-data model). The IMS is planning to incorporate the linking of such resources into the Common 
Cartridge, a interoperability standard for learning content that is being increasingly supported. 
OUTLOOK 
It is not only Nick Carr who believes the volume of information available to us and the temptation to 
browse continually through the accumulated storehouse of data can lead to shallow cognitive processing; 
the concern has been with us for some time. In fact, in the 2000 LLT issue on literacy, Denise Murray 
refers to her 1995 book, Knowledge Machines: Language and Information in a Technology Society, 
which already “reflects this concern that information is not knowledge, that we might drown in 
phosphorus dots on a screen and spend our time investigating rather than reading and developing 
knowledge and wisdom” (p. 50). However one views the Internet today, it is clear that the looming 
presence of computer tools and services in our lives has effected profound changes. We use available 
tools and come to rely on them and in turn are shaped by them. This is a point Claire Kramsch made in an 
article from the LLT literacy issue, in which she discuses the transformation of the concept of authorship 
to that of agency, and authenticity to identity. In the process, she argued, this was “transforming our 
conception of foreign language learning by changing the very notions of who we are and how we present 
ourselves through language” (p. 98).  
Multiple Identities 
This process has only accelerated with students today creating identities for themselves in many different 
ways (a Facebook profile, a gaming avatar, a pseudonym for blog posts, a student persona in Blackboard). 
They engage in a variety of on-line activities, which may include remixing, such as writing fanfiction, 
informal translating, recreational subtitling, relay writing. As Steve Thorne (2009) has written, language 
teachers need to recognize the importance and validity of such transcultural and hybridized forms of 
language use. This suggestion is not new; it is reflected in a well-known position paper from 1996, which 
influenced substantially the broadening of the concept of literacy, the New London Group’s “A Pedagogy 
of Multiliteracies: Designing Social Futures.” The authors sought to expand the understanding of literacy 
by extending it “to account for the context of our culturally and linguistically diverse and increasingly 
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Literacies and Technologies Revisited 
 
Language Learning & Technology  7 
globalized societies, for the multifarious cultures that interrelate and the plurality of texts that circulate” 
(p. 61). A key concept in this re-envisioning was that of design “in which we are both inheritors of 
patterns and conventions of meaning and at the same time active designers of meaning” (p. 65). The 
article today seems astonishingly prescient, as do the ideas on literacy pedagogy. In a Eurocall keynote in 
2008, Andrea Kárpáti’s discussion of “trialogical” learning theory meshes with concepts of the New 
London Group, with the emphasis on process over outcome, remixing of content and collaborative 
projects. She gives several interesting examples of EU projects which have moved in this direction, 
including the KP-Lab and the LeMill toolbox. 
Part of the reality of computer-aided language instruction today is the challenge of connecting with 
students used to using computer technology in ways significantly different from traditional CALL 
approaches. The CALPER Technology Project offers one strategy for moving in this direction. The 
project calls for the use of “bridging activities” to connect in-course tasks to the experiences of students in 
their (real) on-line lives. The advantage of having students connect to learning through use of familiar 
tools and services is the greater engagement of their interest but also the greater likelihood of continued 
use after a course is over. At the same time, some caution is called for, as students may prefer to keep 
their social and academic lives separate. This was interestingly demonstrated in a recent review of 
Livemocha (Stevenson & Liu, 2009), in which users of the service expressed misgivings over requests for 
personal information, which they would normally not hesitate to provide to known social networking 
sites. 
 
REFERENCES 
Carr, N. (2010). The shallows: What the Internet is doing to our brains.
Chapelle, C. (2003). 
 New York: Norton. 
English language learning and technology: Lectures on applied linguistics in the age 
of information and communication technology.
Kárpáti, A. (2009). Web 2.0 technologies for Net native language learners. 
 Amsterdam: John Benjamin. 
ReCALL, 21
Kramsch, C, A’Ness, F. & Lam, W. (2000). Authenticity and authorship in the computer-mediated 
acquisition of L2 literacy. 
, 139-156. 
Language Learning & Technology, 4(2), 78-104. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num2/kramsch/default.html 
Murray, D. (2000). Changing technologies, changing literary communities. Language Learning & 
Technology, 4(2), 43-58. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num2/murray/default.html 
New London Group (1996). A pedagogy of multiliteracies: Designing social futures. Harvard 
Educational Review, 66
O’Rourke, B. (2005). Form-focused interaction in online tandem learning. 
(1), 60-92. 
CALICO Journal, 22
Richards, C. (2000). Hypermedia, Internet communication, and the challenge of redefining literacy in the 
electronic age, 
(3), 433-
466. 
Language Learning & Technology, 4(2), 59-77. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num2/richards/default.html 
Shirky, C. (2008). Why abundance is good: A reply to Nick Carr. Retrieved from 
http://www.britannica.com/blogs/2008/07/why-abundance-is-good-a-reply-to-nick-carr/ 
Schwienhorst, K. (2008). CALL and autonomy: Settings and context variables in technology-enhanced 
language environments, Independence, 43
Stevenson, M., & Liu, M. (2009). Learning a language with Web 2.0: Exploring the use of social 
, 13-15. 
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Literacies and Technologies Revisited 
 
Language Learning & Technology  8 
networking features of foreign language learning Websites. CALICO Journal, 27
Thorne, S. (2009). ‘Community,’ semiotic flows, and mediated contribution to activity, 
(2), 233-259. 
Language 
Teaching, 42
Thorne, S., & Black, R. (2007). Language and literacy development in computer-mediated contexts and 
communities. 
(1), 81-94. 
Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 27
RESOURCE LIST 
, 1-28.  
Electronic Literacy, Searching, and the Semantic Web 
• An Introduction to Connective Knowledge – By Stephen Downes 
• Are the New Millennium Learners Making the Grade? – OECD Bookshop 
• Big Think Small Screen: How Semantic Computing in the Cloud Will Revolutionize the Consumer 
Experience on the Phone – By Tom Gruber 
• Can Google Challenge Facebook in Social? Key Industry Thinkers Say... Maybe – By Marshall 
Kirkpatrick, ReadWriteWeb 
• The DARPA Agent Markup Language – DAML.org 
• Debunking the Digital Native Myth – Cengage Learning 
• Google CEO Schmidt: “People Aren’t Ready for the Technology Revolution” – By Marshall 
Kirkpatrick, ReadWriteWeb  
• Google’s Eric Schmidt on What the Web Will Look Like in 5 Years – By Marshall Kirkpatrick, 
Readwriteweb  
• Half an Hour: Why the Semantic Web Will Fail – By Stephen Downes 
• KP-Lab System & Tools – KP-Lab Knowledge Practices Laboratory 
• Multiliteracies for Social Networking And Collaborative Learning Environments – Electronic Village 
Online 
• Ontologies vs. Formats vs. Scheme vs. APIs (Discussion of strategies for group tagging) – 
TagCommons 
• The Protégé Ontology Editor and Knowledge-Base Framework 
• Review and Demonstration of Popular Learning Repositories With School Resources – LeMill 
• Semantic Search Engine Hakia Adds Social Feature – By Julie Sloane, Wired  
• Semantically-Interlinked Online Communities Initiative – SIOC Project 
• So-Called “Digital Natives” Not Media Savvy, New Study Shows – By Sarah Perez, ReadWriteWeb 
• Web 3.0, Semantic Web, Potayto, Potahto – By Ted Greenwald, Wired 
• Web 3.0: Rosie, Jeeves & That Thing in Your Pocket – By Ted Greenwald, Wired  
Reading and Writing 
• Android Shipments up Nearly 900% – By Sarah Perez, ReadWriteWeb 
• Brain Research: Implications for Second Language Learning – By Fred Genesee, ERIC Digest.  
• Instapaper 
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Literacies and Technologies Revisited 
 
Language Learning & Technology  9 
• The Internet Diet: Nicholas Carr Is a Sane Guide to How It’s Changing Us (In The Shallows, 
Nicholas Carr asks how the Internet is changing minds) – By Michael Agger, Slate Magazine  
• Kindle and iPad Books Take Longer to Read Than Print – By Lauren Indvik, Mashable/Tech 
• Language Study and the Brain 
• Magic Beans Grow Portable Social Networks – By Dana Oshiro, ReadWriteWeb 
• Multilingualism, the Brain, & Web Based Learning – By Sabine Reljic 
• No, the Internet Won’t Make You Stupid – By Erick Schhonfeld, TechCrunch 
• Reading This Post Will Make You Smarter, Unless It Makes You Dumber: How the Web Affects 
Your Brain (Is Nicholas Carr right about the Internet and attention spans?) – By Mary Carmichael, 
Newsweek  
 
