Language Learning & Technology 
http:/llt.msu.edu/vol14num2/review2.pdf 
October 2010, Volume 14, Number 3 
pp. 19–22  
 
Copyright © 2010, ISSN 1094-3501 19 
REVIEW OF ALWAYS ON: LANGUAGE IN AN ONLINE AND  
MOBILE WORLD 
 
Always On: Language in an Online and Mobile World 
Naomi S. Baron 
 
2008 
ISBN 978-0-19-073544-0  
US $18.95 (softcover)  
304 pp.  
 
Oxford University Press 
Oxford, UK 
 
 
 
Review by Shannon Sauro, University of Texas at San Antonio 
Naomi Baron’s (2008) Always On: Language in an Online and Mobile World, provides an overview of 
trends in digital communication and the impact these trends and practices have for personal 
interconnectivity, literacy, attitudes towards privacy and ownership, and the ongoing negotiation of 
linguistic norms. Formatted as a popular book (i.e., each chapter includes social commentary in the form 
of comics and cartoons, and in-text citation is replaced with chapter notes at the end of the book), Always 
On has a target audience that includes the non-specialist interested in the ongoing debate regarding the 
impact of technology on language and society (see, for example, Crystal, 2008) as well as scholars and 
students involved in research on computer-mediated communication. 
The book is divided into ten chapters which describe the types and histories of online and mobile 
communication and examine how linguistic and social norms change and evolve as these technological 
tools are increasingly embedded in daily life. Key chapters incorporate cross-disciplinary research on 
specific communication technologies (e.g., IM, mobile phones) and draw historical parallels to related 
technologies and communication practices (e.g., telephones, call-in talk shows). Several central chapters, 
in addition to synthesizing research from anthropology, discourse analysis, sociolinguistics, education, 
and neuroscience, include the results of original research carried out by Baron and her colleagues on 
select US undergraduate populations over the past decade to examine popular assumptions or questions 
concerning patterns of behavior and linguistic features of online and mobile communication. 
The first two chapters of the book lay the groundwork for the following eight, each of which addresses 
the book’s central themes in depth. While Chapter One serves to establish the overarching goal of the 
book, to explore the social, linguistic and literacy consequences of living in an online and mobile world, 
Chapter Two provides a basic introduction to the types of electronically mediated forms of 
communication explored in the following chapters. Although redundant for researchers already familiar 
with Wikis, MUDs and Facebook, by itself, Chapter Two serves as an easy and concise overview of 
recent communication technologies for scholars and students who are new to common digital contexts. 
The focus of Chapter Three, electronic discourse management, takes up the theme of how individuals 
control the amount of spoken and written communication they are exposed to. The foremost focus in this 
chapter is technology-mediated multitasking. Perhaps most interesting to those who are themselves avid 
multitaskers or find themselves teaching students who engage in technology-mediated multitasking 
during class lectures is the research Baron identifies as the cognitive consequences of common 
Shannon Sauro Review of Always On: Language in an Online and Mobile World  
 
Language Learning & Technology 20 
multitasking behaviors. Chapter Three also reports on the first of several of Baron’s own pilot studies 
peppered throughout the book. The data reported consist of responses collected from American University 
undergraduates during 2004 and 2005 to a questionnaire regarding multitasking practices involving 
Instant Messaging (IM). 
Of greatest relevance to applied linguists doing research in computer-mediated contexts are the next four 
chapters, which focus in particular on linguistic and sociolinguistic aspects of electronic-mediated 
communication. Chapter Four tackles questions often raised by those unfamiliar with CMC discourse 
regarding its relationship to written or spoken language. Baron synthesizes work in anthropology, corpus-
linguistics, and CMC studies (e.g., Baron 2003; Biber, Conrad & Reppen, 1998; Chafe & Danielwicz, 
1987) to provide an overview of key differences in the discoursal, lexical and morphosyntactic properties 
of speech and writing. In addition, the author also provides readers with a brief overview of research on 
gender differences across modalities to set up the results of a study of IM language conducted in 2003. 
Although the results of this small-scale study can at best be used to provide a snapshot of the linguistic 
features of a specific population’s IMs (a limitation Baron acknowledges), the discussion of key units of 
analysis used as well as an overview of the data collection procedure is particularly valuable for those 
interested in conducting similar comparative research on different populations. 
Chapter Five expands upon the theme of discourse management introduced in Chapter Three and also 
explores the presentation of self (Goffman, 1959) in IM away messages and in Facebook pages in two 
separate pilot studies. The first of these includes linguistic and content analysis conducted on a select 
number of IM away messages produced by students during a two-week period in 2002. Baron augments 
the linguistic and content analysis of these away messages with interview data from participants regarding 
their perceptions of different types of away messages as well as their expectations for good away 
messages. The second study, a questionnaire-based investigation of attitudes, beliefs and practices 
surrounding Facebook use in 2006, is unexpectedly timely in light of current criticism regarding 
Facebook’s shifting privacy settings and ownership of personal data. The expansion that has occurred in 
Facebook since 2006, when the data were collected, casts these findings in an interesting historical light. 
These student responses may at best illuminate a fleeting perspective on social networking practices and 
provide an interesting baseline against which to contrast more recently collected data in a wider variety of 
contexts.  
In Chapter Six, Baron moves on to discuss one-to-many electronic-mediated discourse and begins by 
drawing a parallel between the social function of blogs and other historical and modern forms of one-to-
many communication (i.e., speaker’s corners, letters to the editor, and radio talk-shows). In addition to 
outlining the history and characteristics of different types of blogs, Baron then explores other types of 
multiparty electronic-mediated communication including YouTube and Wikis. What unites these media, 
Baron argues, is their ability to afford individuals self-expression to communicate with potentially vast 
audiences. 
In the following chapter, Baron moves from Internet-mediated communication to mobile phones. This 
chapter includes a cross-cultural perspective on the historical proliferation of mobile telephone use in 
multiple regions around the world and the corresponding emergence of text-messaging. Following a 
discussion of some of the social norms that have grown up around the use of mobile phones in different 
countries, the latter half of this chapter presents the results of two pilot studies, conducted by Baron and 
Rich Ling, addressing attitudes towards usage and a comparative linguistic analysis of text messaging. 
The first, a questionnaire-based study conducted in 2005, examined the mobile-phone based practices of 
US university students at two different universities. Of greater interest to those involved in language-
related research, however, is the second study, which examined specific linguistic features of text 
messages produced by two university undergraduate populations, including message length, punctuation, 
and use of emoticons and lexical shortenings. Chapter Seven then revisits the linguistic analysis of IM 
discussed in Chapter Five to present a side-by-side comparison of the language features of these two types 
Shannon Sauro Review of Always On: Language in an Online and Mobile World  
 
Language Learning & Technology 21 
of written synchronous electronic-mediated communication and to identify a range of similarities and 
differences between the two. The comparison of data generated by two related but separate participant 
groups provides an interesting starting point for future carefully designed studies that compare the 
language of these two electronically-mediated contexts. 
The next two chapters take up the question of the impact of digital discourse on spoken and written 
language. In the same vein as Crystal (2008), Baron also argues against scapegoating IM and text-
messaging for perceived shifts in writing norms and standards. Instead, she attributes these shifts to an 
overarching change in attitude towards linguistic consistency, which itself stems from the changing 
function and presence of the written word, the growth in the literacy rate, and the decreasing use of 
language as a social marker. At best, these new technologies are amplifying or accelerating pre-existing 
ongoing linguistic tendencies. Chapter Nine explores this theme further by focusing on the particular 
influence reading and writing online is having on general literacy practices and written culture. In 
particular, Baron describes the impact that the ease of producing and publishing electronic texts and the 
affordance of electronic-search tools appear to be having on hurried writing and reading, resulting in what 
Baron labels “snippet literacy” and “vapor text.” She concludes this chapter by articulating questions 
concerning the future role of books and literacy, touching on issues of ownership, publishing trends, 
language standards, and norms for acceptable text length. 
In the final chapter, Baron ends on a cautionary note with an overview of many of the social, linguistic, 
and cultural consequences of being always on and offers the following warning: “Modern language 
technologies are invaluable aids to human productivity, social connectedness, safety, and relaxation. 
However, we may need to learn to use them more responsibly” (p. 231). 
Overall, Always On brings together multidisciplinary research on the social, cognitive, and linguistic 
impact of online and mobile communication from a US perspective, supplemented with the results of 
original pilot research conducted over the past decade. Written as a popular text, Always On is an easy 
read, accessible to academic and non-academic audiences. As a result, however, although providing an 
overview of the research and results from various pilot studies, it does not include sufficient description 
of the methods or instruments used for those interested in replication or validation. While Chapter Seven 
does provide a contrastive overview of mobile phone practices, the remainder of the book is exclusively 
US-focused and does not explore the social and linguistic consequences and practices of other populations 
who may also find themselves always on. However, Baron’s Always On is a provocative and insightful 
overview of the changing face of US social interaction, literacy, and spoken and written language as 
mediated by early 21st
 
 century online and mobile communication technologies. 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER  
Shannon Sauro is Assistant Professor of Applied Linguistics in the department of Bicultural-Bilingual 
Studies at the University of Texas at San Antonio. Her research explores second language acquisition 
processes within the context of computer-mediated communication.  
Email: shannon.sauro@utsa.edu 
 
REFERENCES  
Baron, N.S. (2003). Why E-mail looks like speech: Proofreading, pedagogy and public face. In J. 
Aitchison & D. Lewis (Eds.), New media language (pp. 102–113). London: Routledge. 
Biber, D., Conrad, S., & Reppen, R. (1998). Corpus linguistics: Investigating language structure and use. 
Shannon Sauro Review of Always On: Language in an Online and Mobile World  
 
Language Learning & Technology 22 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Chafe, W, & Danielwicz, J. (1987). Properties of spoken and written language. In R. Horowitz and S.J. 
Samuels (Eds.), Comprehending oral and written language (pp. 83–113). San Diego, CA: Academic 
Press.  
Crystal, D. (2008). Txtng: The gr8 db8. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Goffman, E. (1959). The presentation of self in everyday life. Garden City, NY: Doubleday. 
 
