Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol14num2/news.pdf 
June 2010, Volume 14, Number 2 
pp. 12–16 
 
Language Learning & Technology 12 
 
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS 
Sponsors 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR) 
Co-Sponsor 
Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL) 
 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource 
Center (NFLRC)  
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials 
development projects and conducts workshops and conferences for language professionals among its 
many activities. 
HERITAGE SPEAKERS: LINGUISTICS & PEDAGOGY (JUNE 21-25, 2010) 
Organized by the National Heritage Language Resource Center (NHLRC) and hosted by the NFLRC, the 
focus of this institute is on current linguistic research and the implications for heritage language 
instruction. 
2ND
 (FEBRUARY 11-13, 
2011) 
 INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON LANGUAGE DOCUMENTATION & 
CONSERVATION (ICLDC): STRATEGIES FOR MOVING FORWARD
The 1st ICLDC, with its theme “Supporting Small Languages Together," underscored the need for 
communities, linguists, and other academics to work in close collaboration. The theme of the 2nd ICLDC 
is “Strategies for Moving Forward." We aim to build on the strong momentum created at the 1st ICLDC 
and to discuss research and revitalization approaches yielding rich, accessible records which can benefit 
both the field of language documentation and speech communities. We hope you will join us. 
The Call for Proposals deadline is August 31, 2010. 
 
NEW NFLRC PUBLICATIONS 
Research Among Learners of Chinese as a Foreign Language 
by Michael E. Everson & Helen H. Shen (Eds.) 
Cutting-edge in its approach and international in its authorship, this fourth 
monograph in a series sponsored by the Chinese Language Teachers Association 
features eight research studies that explore a variety of themes, topics, and 
perspectives important to a variety of stakeholders in the Chinese language learning 
community. Employing a wide range of research methodologies, the volume provides 
data from actual Chinese language learners and will be of value to both theoreticians 
and practitioners alike. [in English & Chinese] Browse the table of contents. 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 13 
 
Manchu: A Textbook for Reading Documents (second edition) 
by Gertraude Roth Li 
This book offers students a tool to gain a basic grounding in the Manchu language. 
The reading selections provided in this volume represent various types of documents, 
ranging from examples of the very earliest Manchu writing (17th century) to samples 
of contemporary Sibe (Xibo), a language that maybe considered a modern version of 
Manchu. Since Manchu courses are only rarely taught at universities anywhere, this 
second edition includes audio recordings to assist students with the pronunciation of 
the texts. Browse the table of contents. 
Agency and Student Voice  
In this video, Dr. Murphey explains how listening to what students say works and 
doesn't work in their own second-language education can be of great value not 
only to educators, but also to students themselves. Featured is an engaging 
YouTube video of Japanese learners of English delivering a “wish-list” of more 
student involvement in an improved Japanese educational system. Includes .pdf 
handout. 
by Tim Murphey 
View this streaming video now. 
Young Learner Development with Co-Learning Adults 
by Tim Murphey 
If we just depend on occasional lessons in schools, we are not realizing the 
potential of our everyday learning environments for allowing young learners to 
learn not only foreign languages but also “learning how to learn.” Parents and 
regular primary school teachers can help young learners learn and reinforce 
occasional lessons from language informants. When primary school teachers and 
parents model good learning strategies, they teach more valuable simply the 
language, they model “learning how to learn.” 
Check out our many other publications.  
 
OUR ONLINE JOURNALS SOLICIT SUBMISSIONS 
Language Learning & Technology is a refereed online journal, jointly sponsored by the 
University of Hawai‘i NFLRC and the Michigan State University Center for Language 
Education and Research (CLEAR). LLT focuses on issues related to technology and language 
education. For more information on submission guidelines, visit the LLT submissions page. 
Language Documentation & Conservation is a fully refereed, open-access journal sponsored 
by NFLRC and published exclusively in electronic form by the University of Hawai‘i Press. 
LD&C publishes papers on all topics related to language documentation and conservation. 
For more information on submission guidelines, visit the LD&C submissions page. 
Reading in a Foreign Language is a refereed online journal, jointly sponsored by the 
University of Hawai‘i NFLRC and the Department of Second Language Studies. RFL serves 
as an excellent source for the latest developments in the field, both theoretical and pedagogic, 
including improving standards for foreign language reading. For more information on 
submission guidelines, visit the RFL submissions page. 
 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 14 
 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education 
and Research (CLEAR)  
CLEAR’s mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States. 
Projects focus on materials development, professional development training, and foreign language 
research. 
CLEAR has just submitted a grant proposal for the Language Resource Centers’ 2010-14 funding cycle.  
We hope to be funded for a fifth cycle to continue our service to the language education community. 
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
Five professional development workshops are slated for July 2010.  Hurry!  Early bird application 
deadline is May 7, regular application deadline is June 1. 
o Using Video to Promote Language Development in the Classroom 
o Blending Language Classes 101 
o Rich Internet Applications for Language Learning: Introductory Techniques 
o Rich Internet Applications for Language Assessment 
o The Second “C”: Culture Teaching in the Language Classroom 
Detailed information on all workshops can be found on our website: 
http://clear.msu.edu/clear/professionaldev/summerworkshops.php.  
CONFERENCES 
CLEAR exhibits at local and national conferences year-round. We hope to see you at ACTFL, CALICO, 
MIWLA, Central States, and other conferences. 
NEWSLETTER 
CLEAR News is a free biyearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. 
Download PDFs of back issues and subscribe at http://clear.msu.edu/clear/newsletter/.  
MATERIALS DEVELOPMENT 
Featured Products 
The list below comprises just some of our free and low-cost materials for language educators. Be sure to 
visit our website occasionally for updates and announcements on new products: http://clear.msu.edu. 
• CLEAR’s Rich Internet Applications initiative has been underway for over three years. RIA is a 
research and development lab where our programmers are working on free tools that language 
teachers can use to create online language teaching materials—or have their students create 
activities themselves!  There are currently ten RIAs, including: 
o NEW! QuizBreak! (gameshow template for creating Jeopardy-like activities) 
o NEW! Scribbles (script teaching tool for non-Roman characters) 
o Revisions (process writing and feedback tool) 
o Broadcasts (create your own podcasts) 
o Worksheets (add multimedia elements to online worksheets) 
o Audio Dropboxes (put a dropbox in any web page; students’ recordings get put into your 
dropbox automatically) 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 15 
 
• Celebrating the World’s Languages: A Guide to Creating a World Languages Day Event (guide) 
– This free publication provides a step-by-step guide to planning “World Languages Day,” a 
university event for high school students designed to stimulate interest in learning languages and 
to highlight the importance of cultural awareness. 
 
Coming Soon! • More Rich Internet Applications 
• Introductory Business Chinese 
 
The Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL)  
The Center for Applied Linguistics is a private, nonprofit organization that promotes and improves the 
teaching and learning of languages, identifies and solves problems related to language and culture, and 
serves as a resource for information about language and culture. CAL carries out a wide range of 
activities in the fields of English as a second language, foreign languages, cultural education, and 
linguistics. 
Featured Resources: 
• Report From the National K-12 Foreign Language Survey
CAL surveyed public and private elementary and secondary schools across the country to identify 
current patterns and shifts in foreign language education over time. Visit our web site to learn more 
about the survey. 
 
• CAL News 
CAL News is our electronic newsletter created to provide periodic updates about our projects and 
research as well as information about new publications, online resources, products, and services of 
interest to our readers. Visit our web site to sign up. 
• Alliance for the Advancement of Heritage Languages 
Visit the Alliance web site to browse the Heritage Language Program Profiles, view the Heritage 
Voices Collection, and sign up to receive the quarterly electronic newsletter, Alliance News Flash.  
 
• Center for Research on the Educational Achievement and Teaching of English Language 
Learners (CREATE) 
Visit the CREATE web site to learn more about CREATE, its research, and free resources. To keep 
current on CREATE activities sign up to receive its electronic newsletter, CREATE News.  
 
• CAL SIOP Professional Development Services 
CAL works with schools, states, and districts to design and deliver high-quality, client-centered 
professional development services on the SIOP Model. 
 
• CAL Solutions: Institutes on Teaching Reading to English Language Learners 
CAL is continuing its successful series of institutes on teaching reading to English language learners 
in Washington, DC in 2010. CAL provides a variety of professional development and technical 
assistance services related to language education and assessment needs.  
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 16 
 
Featured Publications: 
• Education for Adult English Language Learners in the United States: Trends, Research, and 
Promising Practices 
• Foreign Language Teaching in U.S. Schools: Results of a National Survey 
• Realizing the Vision of Two-Way Immersion: Fostering Effective Programs and Classrooms 
• Refugees from Iraq (Expanded Refugee Backgrounder) 
• Using the SIOP Model: Professional Development Manual for Sheltered Instruction
• 
 
What’s Different About Teaching Reading to Students Learning English?  
 
Visit CAL’s Web site to learn more about our projects, resources, and services.  
 
 
