Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol14num2/editors.pdf 
June 2010, Volume 14, Number 2 
pp. 1–3 
 
Copyright © 2010, ISSN 1094-3501 1 
 
FROM THE EDITORS 
News 
We would like to share some good news with our readers. A 2008 article by Julie Belz 
and Nina Vyatkina entitled “The pedagogical mediation of a developmental learner 
corpus for classroom-based learner instruction,” received the prestigious ACTFL 
Pimsleur award in 2009. We would like to congratulate these authors for their fine 
achievement.   
A 2009 Thomson Reuters report in ScienceWatch placed LLT in the top 20 Education 
Journals based on our 2007 ISI (Institute for Scientific Information) impact factor of 
1.222. In 2008, our impact factor rose to 1.700 and our five-year impact factor was 
2.067. In addition, a 2009 article by Bryan Smith and Barbara A. Lafford in the Modern 
Language Journal found that LLT was ranked by CALL experts as the top journal in the 
field. Finally, current figures show our number of subscribers as 15,430, an increase of 
14% since 2008 and 81% since 2006. Of course, the continued growth and success of 
our journal would not be possible without the support of our readers, authors, and 
reviewers. 
In other news, in June 2010, Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas will step down as Reviews 
Editor. We wish to sincerely thank Sigrun for all her work over the past five years and 
wish her continued success in all her future endeavors. Paige Ware will be joining us as 
the new Reviews Editor starting with our October 2010 issue. We would like to warmly 
welcome Paige to the LLT editorial team and look forward to working with her.  
June will also bring some changes to our editorial board. We would like to express our 
gratitude to Michelle Knobel, Noriko Nagata, John Norris, Lourdes Ortega, and Joy 
Peyton for their years of service and warmly welcome Tracey Derwing, Regine Hampel, 
Claire Kennedy, Lina Lee, and Bryan Smith as incoming members. 
About this volume 
It is our pleasure to introduce Volume 14 number 2, a special issue reporting on research 
into the ways that multimedia can contribute to the learning of foreign language 
vocabulary. This special issue completes our Back to Basics series and contains an 
introductory commentary, four articles, a column, and two reviews.  
In their invited introductory commentary Vocabulary, Ron Martinez and Norbert 
Schmitt discuss the four research papers included in this volume both from the point of 
view of their contributions to our knowledge about the role of technologies in the 
acquisition of vocabulary and perhaps most importantly from the point of view of further 
questions engendered by the studies. 
Yu-Hua Chen and Paul Baker in Lexical bundles in L1 and L2 academic writing adopt 
an automated frequency-driven approach to identify frequently-used word combinations 
(i.e., lexical bundles) in academic writing.  Their study shows that a computer can 
facilitate the comparison of phraseological patterns between what native experts and 
learners write. Based on these comparisons, the authors suggest ways in which students 
can improve their writing skills.  
 From the Editors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 2 
 
In Modality of input and vocabulary acquisition Tetyana Sydorenko investigates the 
effect of input modality (video, audio, and captions) on the learning of written and aural 
word forms by beginning L2 learners. Her findings indicate that captioned video tends to 
aid recognition of written word forms and the learning of word meaning, while non-
captioned video tends to improve listening comprehension as it facilitates recognition of 
aural word forms. 
Jonathan DeHaan, W. Michael Reed, and Katsuko Kuwada in The effect of interactivity 
with a music video game on second language vocabulary recall investigate the effect of 
video game interactivity on the noticing and recall of second language vocabulary. They 
asked participants to either play or watch a video game, and tested them on what words 
were learned under each condition. Players recalled significantly less vocabulary than 
the watchers possibly as a result of the additional cognitive load induced by the 
interactivity of the game. The authors suggest that future studies should explore how the 
interactivity of video games affects cognitive load and knowledge building by 
investigating a wide variety of video game interactivities and their various cognitive 
effects.  
In Using mobile phones for vocabulary activities: Examining the effect of platform, 
Glenn Stockwell used data collected from three cohorts over a three-year period to 
examine the use of mobile phones by L2 learners. His results show that when learners 
had the option to use a personal computer or a mobile phone to perform language 
learning activities, they preferred the computer nearly 80% of the time. Reasons given 
by the participants included issues with mobile phone screen and keyboard size, as well 
as data transmission speed. These issues will no doubt be solved with improvements in 
mobile technology.  
Robert Godwin-Jones’ popular Emerging Technologies Column From memory palaces 
to spacing algorithms: Approaches to second-language vocabulary learning describes 
the integration of sophisticated technological tools for dedicated study of vocabulary 
into online L2 learning environments.   
Sigrun Biesenbach-Lucas has assembled reviews of two recent books on technology and 
L2 acquisition. Sonja Lind reviews Learning Language and Culture via Public Internet 
Discussion Forum by Barbara Hanna and Juliana de Nooy. The authors propose that 
language instructors consider using public internet forums in their curriculum in order to 
help students learn appropriate cultural behavior. The book will be of interest to 
language teachers who teach writing to advanced learners and who want to focus on 
content and writing conventions as part of a genre approach to writing instruction and 
who want to foster a more relaxed learning environment.   
Is’haaq Akbarian reviews Information Technology in Languages for Specific Purposes: 
Issues and Prospects, edited by Elisabet Arnó Macià, Soler Cervera Antonia, and 
Carmen Rueda Ramos. The book is based on papers presented at the 6th
 
 International 
Conference on Languages for Specific Purposes (LSP) held in January 2003 in 
Barcelona, Spain. The reviewer notes that readers interested in the use of technologies in 
language for special purposes instruction will benefit from the variety of perspectives 
adopted by contributors to the volume.  
 From the Editors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 3 
 
 
We have an important reminder for our authors and reviewers. All articles, columns, and 
reviews should now be submitted online through ScholarOne Manuscripts. Full 
instructions and support are available at http://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/llt and a user 
ID and password can be obtained by authors and reviewers on their first visit. We thank 
you for your patience during the transition period. 
If you are not already a subscriber, please take a few minutes to fill out our free 
  
subscription form. This enables us to compile useful statistics about the readership of 
our journal.  
We wish you a restful summer and look forward to receiving contributions from all over 
the world and especially those dealing with L2s other than English.  
Sincerely, 
Irene Thompson and Dorothy Chun 
Editors-in-Chief  
 
 
 
