Language Learning & Technology 
http:/llt.msu.edu/vol14num1/review2.pdf 
February 2010, Volume 14, Number 1 
pp. 24–27  
 
Copyright © 2010, ISSN 1094-3501 24 
 
REVIEW OF THE THEORY AND PRACTICE OF ONLINE LEARNING 
The Theory and Practice of Online Learning 
 
Terry Anderson (Ed.) 
 
2008, 2nd
ISBN 978-1-897425-08-4 
 Edition 
1st Edition - Free (available at 
http://cde.athabascau.ca/online_book/) 
2nd
XI, 472 pp. 
 Edition Printed Copy - $39.95  
 
AU Press, Athabasca University 
Edmonton, AB, Canada 
 
 
Review by Mandy Reinig, Pennsylvania State University, Altoona 
Present-day distance education relies on a variety of technological tools, including e-mail, synchronous 
and asynchronous communication, specially designed websites and online modules. As a result, colleges 
and universities have to adapt their distance offerings in order to keep up with rapid technological 
changes. The Theory and Practice of Online Learning (TTPOL), edited by Terry Anderson, examines 
whether colleges and universities are meeting the needs of online learners and whether they can improve 
the services they offer to these learners. The 2nd edition of the book explores additional technologies 
developed in the five years since the publication of the 1st
TTPOL addresses issues that need to be considered by administrators and educators when creating, 
implementing, and maintaining online courses or programs at academic institutions. The book will not 
only benefit administrators and educators, but will also be useful in graduate education courses by 
exposing future educators to the most important issues involved in distance education. TTPOL is divided 
into four main sections, each focusing on a particular issue. Each section contains four to five contributed 
chapters that describe the building blocks, tools, and information necessary for the creation and delivery 
of successful online courses. 
 edition such as increased use of social 
networking sites and audio and video support in the classroom, illustrated by experience gained in the 
distance education program at Athabasca University. 
The first section, Role and Function of Theory in Online Education Development and Delivery, contains 
four chapters that describe the educational theories and online learning philosophies that underlie many 
online courses. Chapter 1, by Mohamed Ally, discusses behaviorist, cognitivist, constructivist, and 
connectivist schools of learning, all of which have impacted the creation and delivery of online courses. 
Ally proposes a learning model based on these educational theories which details the components of a 
successful online course (Figure 1). Chapter 2, by Terry Anderson, explains the attributes of online 
learning, such as student centeredness, as well as the various forms of interaction which take place in 
online environments, such as student-teacher and teacher-content interactions. According to Anderson, all 
of these are enhanced by the semantic web to create an environment where advanced levels of learning 
can take place. Dianne Conrad, in Chapter 3, explores prior learning assessment and recognition within 
the online environment and the use of e-portfolios as an assessment tool. Finally, Chapter 4, by Heather 
Kanuka, discusses the philosophies of online instruction in terms of Dahlberg’s (2004) three stances 
including uses, technology, and social determinism. In addition, she discusses various philosophies of 
teaching, such as liberal and radical, and the role played by technology according to these philosophies. It 
Mandy Reinig Review of The Theory and Practice of Online Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 25 
 
is these theories that form the backbone of online education and not the technology itself (Bonk & 
Reynolds, 1997; Rovai 2002). 
 
 
Figure 1. Components of effective online reading (p. 37). 
The second set of chapters, Infrastructure and Support for Content Development, describes the necessary 
support and structures needed for effective course development. Chapter 5, by Alan Davis, Paul Little, 
and Brian Stewart, discusses the components of an online learning system and the issues related to 
Mandy Reinig Review of The Theory and Practice of Online Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 26 
 
transitioning from traditional to online education. The authors discuss the need to understand students’ 
needs and the desired outcomes before developing online courses. Rory McGreal and Michael Elliott, in 
Chapter 6, expand upon the previous chapter but exploring the technologies that are currently available 
for delivery of online courses, such as streaming video and wikis.They examine their educational uses and 
provide resources for readers to begin to explore these technological options. Chapter 7, by Patrick Fahy, 
continues this discussion by examining the strengths and weaknesses of both current and emerging forms 
of technology, as well as the issues that need to be considered when selecting a technological tool to use. 
The emergence and examples of programs using mobile technology are discussed in Chapter 8 by 
Maureen Hutchinson, Tony Tin, and Yang Cao, as a means of exploring the next wave of online learning. 
Finally, Terry Anderson, in Chapter 9, investigates the social challenges that instructors might face when 
teaching in an online environment. Anderson also provides examples of technology, such as blogs, 
YouTube, and Skype, which can assist in meeting with these social challenges. 
The third section, Design and Development of Online Courses, explores in detail the components 
involved in the development of online courses. Dean Caplan and Rodger Graham, in Chapter 10, describe 
the necessary personnel, such as a web designer and faculty, required to conduct successful online courses 
as well as the components that need to be in place before online courses can be effectively and efficiently 
taught. Chapter 11, by Jan Thiessen and Vincent Ambrock, discusses the role and responsibilities of an 
online course editor and the value such a person adds to the course development process. Chapter 12, by 
David Annand, expands on the previous chapters by exploring the real costs of conducting online courses 
and discussing how to determine if an online course is likely to be cost effective. In the final chapter of 
this section, Nancy Parker focuses on quality management and what needs to be considered in order to 
provide quality online instruction. Parker also describes some of the legislation and policies that are in 
place, specifically in Canada, to maintain the quality of online instruction.  
The final section of TTPOL, Delivery, Quality Control, and Student Support of Online Courses, contains 
five chapters that discuss that actual design of online courses and the implementation of some of the 
support services necessary for delivering successful online instruction. In Chapter 14, Terry Anderson 
explores issues related to “getting the mix right” (p. 348) in terms of creating a social, cognitive, and 
teaching presence in an online environment to be able enhance instructor effectiveness. The right mix is 
important in the development of trust among students, instructors, and the technology itself in creating an 
interactive environment (Doering & Beach 2002; Malhotra, Majchrzak, & Rosen, 2007). Chapter 15, by 
Alex Kondra et al. discusses the development of call centers for distance learners and provides an 
example of a successful call center at Athabasca University. In Chapter 16, Kay Johnson et al. examine 
the types of library support that online learners require as well as the creation of virtual library 
environments. Chapter 17, by Susan Moisey and Judith Hughes, explores the issues related to supporting 
online learners, including disability services, career advisement, and academic support to enable students 
to succeed in an online environment. In closing, in Chapter 18, Deborah Hurst and Janice Thomas 
examine the development of teamwork and group projects in an online course and provide two case 
studies of successful team building projects in an online graduate course.  
Even though TTPOL provides a wealth of information, there are several areas where further information 
would have been helpful. For example this book focuses mostly on what is taking place in Canada, 
specifically at Athabasca University. It would have had a much wider appeal if it had also included 
chapters on online learning implemented at institutions in the U.S. and Europe, among other places.  
In addition, the chapters focus a bit narrowly on whether or not online learning meets the needs of the 
students and on the importance of course design and content in conjunction with technological tools. 
However, the effectiveness of online courses and the actual compatibility of the students’ and the 
university’s needs are not addressed. Additional research, such as by Sampson (2003), which examined 
the satisfaction of students taking a distance education courses at a British university to determine if the 
online courses were meeting students’ expectations, would be beneficial to understanding the 
Mandy Reinig Review of The Theory and Practice of Online Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 27 
 
effectiveness of online education. Sampson’s work demonstrates the importance of knowing if a program 
is meeting students’ needs in terms of course content as well as student services.  
By the same token, several chapters present detailed descriptions of how or why different forms of 
technology have been used, particularly at Athabasca University, but few chapters actually present 
statistical information on these programs. For example, it would have been valuable to know how many 
students are making use of the various call centers to determine how useful these centers are and what 
questions students typically ask. In addition, information on what types of online courses have been 
created, the number of students who typically take the courses, and information about the students’ 
satisfaction with their online education would also aid in the understanding of the impact of and the need 
for online courses. Despite these shortcomings, TTPOL offers a good starting place for institutions 
interested in the development of online courses by providing useful information on the pedagogical 
applications of various types of technology and the need for support services tailored to online learners. 
With that in mind, the book contributes to the understanding of the development of online courses and of 
the need to adjust instruction and services to meet the needs of students in the age of technology. 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Mandy Reinig is an Education Abroad Advisor and ESL instructor at Pennsylvania State University in 
Altoona. She recently completed her Master’s Degree in TESL, and her thesis focused on the use of blogs 
in ESL writing. She is working on implementing other forms of technology into her teaching. 
Email: arr14@psu.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Bonk. C.J., & Reynolds, T.H. (1997). Learner-centered web instruction for higher-order thinking, 
teamwork, and apprenticeship. In B.H. Khan (Ed.), Web-based instruction (pp. 167-178). Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Educational Technology Publications. 
Dalhberg, L. (2004). Internet research tracings: Towards non-reductionist methodology. Journal of 
Computer Mediated Communication, 7(1). Retrieved from http://jcmc.indiana.edu/ 
Doering, A. & Beach R. (2002). Preservice English teachers acquiring literacy practices through 
technology tools. Language Learning and Technology, 6(3), 127-146. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num3/doering/default.html 
Malhotra, A., Majchrzak, A., & Rosen, B. (2007). Leading virtual teams. Academy of Management 
Executive Perspectives, 21(1), 60-70. 
Rovai, A. (2002). Building sense of community at a distance. International Review of Research in Open 
and Distance Learning. 3(1). Retrieved from http://www.irrodl.org 
Sampson, N. (2003). Meeting the needs of distance learners. Language Learning & Technology, 7(3), 
103-118. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num3/pdf/sampson.pdf 
 
