Language Learning & Technology 
http:/llt.msu.edu/vol14num3/review1.pdf 
October 2010, Volume 14, Number 3 
pp. 14–18  
 
Copyright © 2010, ISSN 1094-3501 14 
REVIEW OF COMPUTER ASSISTED LANGUAGE LEARNING:  
CRITICAL CONCEPTS IN LINGUISTICS 
 
Computer Assisted Language Learning: Critical 
Concepts in Linguistics 
 
Philip Hubbard (Ed.) 
 
2009 
ISBN: 978-0-415-46539-7 
US $1,425.00 (hardcover) 
1820 pp. 
 
Routledge 
London & New York 
 
 
 
Review by Greg Kessler, Ohio University 
Computer Assisted Language Learning: Critical Concepts in Linguistics is a four-volume collection 
consisting of 74 of the most influential published papers throughout the history of the field of CALL, 
resulting in a total of 1,820 pages. Any attempt to gather representative documentation of a field as 
diverse as CALL within even this number of pages is nothing less than a Herculean effort. As the editor, 
Philip Hubbard, points out, the expansion of CALL research has not only helped to establish and validate 
CALL as its own legitimate field, it has increased the credibility of CALL within broader fields such as 
Applied Linguistics and Education. This collection provides early examples of CALL research, 
illustrating how the foundational work has contributed to the rich development of the field today. 
Hubbard has not only selected a balanced and varied representation of articles and chapters, but has also 
provided an engaging and effective overview in the general introduction that frames the collection and its 
role within the field. Hubbard (2009) states in the introductory chapter that CALL “is both exciting and 
frustrating…because it is complex, dynamic and quickly changing” (p. 1).  
This collection is unique both in its scope and context. Unlike an edited volume for which an editor 
invites submissions, the entries in this collection arrive familiar and fully intact. Further, for the most part, 
their influence upon the field has already been observed. According to Hubbard, the guidelines were to 
include what had already been proven to be important to the field. Toward this goal he put together an 
editorial advisory board that would help him to accomplish a greater sense of field collaboration. The 
advisory board consisted of editors of all the major CALL journals as well as individuals Hubbard 
recognized as experts able to provide specific insights in certain areas. The advisory board provided a 
diversity of perspectives that reflect an inclusive, broad, and international view of CALL rather than any 
individual’s singular vision. The feedback from the advisory board resulted in nearly 500 potential 
entries, which Hubbard then reduced to the final 74 articles and chapters. They are organized into four 
volumes and 16 parts that include: 
I) Foundations of CALL 
Part 1: CALL Theory, Frameworks, and Conceptualizations 
Part 2: Early CALL Projects 
Part 3: CALL Research Trends and Issues 
Greg Kessler Review of Computer Assisted Language Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 15 
Part 4: CALL Design and Evaluation 
II) CALL and Language Skills 
Part 5: Listening, Speaking, and Pronunciation 
Part 6: Reading and Writing 
Part 7: Grammar, Vocabulary, and Data-driven Learning 
III) Computer Mediated Communication in Language Learning 
Part 8: CMC Foundations and Conceptualizations 
Part 9: Synchronous CMC 
Part 10: Asynchronous and Mixed CMC 
IV) Present Trends and Future Directions in CALL 
Part 11: Online Learning 
Part 12: Assessment 
Part 13: Learner training and autonomy 
Part 14: Teacher Education 
Part 15: Intelligent CALL 
Part 16: Future Directions 
This collection was constructed with Hubbard’s perspective that the scope of CALL includes the “use of 
computers to improve teacher productivity and teacher education, professional development, materials 
development, and language assessment. In terms of what appears in CALL publications and conference 
presentations, then, the wider field of CALL encompasses any use of computer technology in the domain 
of language learning” (p. 2). Toward this end, the first volume includes 18 selections originally published 
between 1988 and 2003 that provide an essential foundation of the emergence of CALL from its disparate 
academic areas of influence. The first part juxtaposes Higgins’ (1988) reflections on the benefits of 
computer use across varied pedagogical practices with a number of perspectives on the frameworks, 
theories, and prospective paths the authors hoped the field of CALL would follow. These include the 
tutor-tool framework proposed by Levy (1997), Warschauer and Healey’s (1998) oft-cited overview of 
the evolution of CALL reflecting trends in the broader world of education, and Garrett’s (1998) plea for 
an expansion of research into varied CALL contexts. This first part concludes with two seminal pieces, 
including Bax’s (2003) challenge for the field to strive toward CALL as a normalized element within 
language learning and teaching and Chappelle’s (2003) overview of research investigating the role of 
input, interaction and production. This first part of Volume I lays the groundwork for the emerging field 
of CALL and inspires a variety of classroom practices and future research.  
Part 2 of the first volume reminds readers of early CALL projects, such as the Athena Language Learning 
Project (Murray, Morgenstern, & Furstenberg, 1989). Part 3 explores trends in CALL research, including 
Dunkel’s (1991) summary of CALL research, Chapelle’s (1997) criticism of the lack of focus in CALL 
research, and Levy’s (2000) overview of CALL research that argues, “CALL research is worthy of study 
as a body of work in its own right, not merely as an adjunct to research being undertaken in another, 
related field” (p. 190). Reflections on the critical areas of design and evaluation include the construction 
of a methodological framework for development, evaluation and implementation of tutorial courseware 
(Hubbard, 1996), and an SLA-informed evaluation framework (Chapelle, 2001). Other work includes 
attention to principles for designing hypermedia language learning materials (Hemard, 1997), as well as 
courseware evaluation practices that are pedagogically focused (Murray & Barnes, 1998) or that utilize 
Greg Kessler Review of Computer Assisted Language Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 16 
checklists (Susser, 2001). 
Volume II includes articles and chapters concerned with language skills, including listening, speaking, 
pronunciation, reading, writing, grammar, and vocabulary. Listening studies in this section include a 
model for self-access listening and viewing based upon sociocultural theory and individual differences 
(Hoven, 1999), as well as findings that suggest learners benefit from control over speech rate (Zhao, 
1997), varied annotation modes and choice of mode (Jones, 2003), and a better understanding of feedback 
in CALL (Pujola, 2001). Selections related to speaking and pronunciation focus on the benefits of using 
subtitles (Borras & Lafayette, 1994), suggestions for improvement in pronunciation pedagogy (Neri, 
Cucchiarini, Strik, & Boves, 2002; Pennington, 1999), and the use of visual feedback in teaching 
discourse intonation (Chun, 1998). Research into teaching reading and vocabulary includes exploring text 
manipulation programs for enhancing reading proficiency (Cobb & Stevens, 1996), comparing visual and 
verbal annotations (Plass et al., 1998) and using annotations in incidental vocabulary learning (Chun & 
Plass, 1996). Pennington (2004) offers an extensive overview of the word processing research as well as 
the emerging literacies of the Internet. Studies involving data-driven learning include the use of 
concordance software for creating a variety of exercises (Johns, 1994) and training learners to use corpora 
themselves (Chambers, 2005). 
Volume III addresses computer-mediated communication (CMC), including foundations and 
conceptualizations, as well as synchronous, asynchronous, and mixed CMC. This volume begins with the 
general overview of varied forms of CMC and related research from the book CALL Dimensions (Levy & 
Stockwell, 2006). The foundations and conceptualizations of CMC also include Salaberry’s (1996) early 
observations of the nature and potential of CMC in pedagogical contexts, Smith’s (2003) CMC-focused 
expansion of the Varonis and Gass (1985) model for negotiation of meaning, and Warschauer’s (1997) 
framework for online collaborative exchanges. Part 9 focuses upon synchronous text-based CMC. Early 
studies suggest that in-class, text-based CMC discussions between students fosters interactive competence 
(Chun, 1994), promotes equal participation and greater lexical and syntactic complexity (Warschauer, 
1995/6), and results in increased participation, morphosyntactic complexity, and a wide range of 
discourse functions (Kern, 1995). Later studies suggest that the negotiation of meaning is promoted by 
synchronous CMC-based jigsaw tasks (Blake, 2000) and information gap tasks (Pellettieri, 2000). Other 
studies in this volume suggest that text-based CMC can be used to construct a “dynamic, learner-centered 
discourse community” (Darhower, 2002, p. 273), and that chatting can help improve oral proficiency 
(Abrams, 2003; Payne & Whitney, 2002). Studies into asynchronous and mixed CMC have found that 
telecollaboration may not succeed between students with differing language levels and value of language 
(Belz, 2001), that email exchanges can promote syntax and vocabulary (Stockwell & Harrison, 2003), and 
that communication tasks benefit from the use of appropriate tools (Thorne, 2003).  
The final volume focuses on current trends (online learning, assessment, learner training and autonomy, 
teacher education, intelligent CALL) and future directions. Studies investigating online learning include 
suggestions for teacher use and creation of materials (Felix, 1999), suggestions for creating optimal 
psycholinguistic learning environments (Doughty & Long, 2003), and suggestions for helping “students 
enter into a new realm of collaborative inquiry and construction of knowledge” (Kern, Ware, & 
Warschauer, 2004, p. 254). Other work involving online learning examines audio conferencing in 
distance language courses (Hampel & Hauck, 2004) and the proposal of a learner-context theory of 
distance language learning (White, 2005). The area of assessment is summarized and its potential 
projected first by Brown (1997), who provides a practical series of questions and answers, and later by 
Chapelle and Douglas (2006), who highlight the advantages that computer-assisted language testing has 
over traditional methods. Learner training and autonomy are also briefly examined by Hubbard (2004), 
who proposes a cyclic method of training, and by Blin (2004), who proposes the use of cultural-historical 
activity theory to describe student autonomy in CALL. Part 14 concerns teacher education including 
studies into the use of CALL following training (Egbert, Paulus, & Nakamichi, 2002) and teachers’ 
Greg Kessler Review of Computer Assisted Language Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 17 
communication in an online training course (Arnold & Ducate, 2006). This section concludes with the 
introductory chapter to the book Teacher Education in CALL that summarizes the area and proposes a 
role-based framework for CALL education (Hubbard & Levy, 2006). The area of intelligent CALL 
includes investigation into intelligent feedback in Japanese vocabulary and structure (Nagata, 1993), 
natural language processing and student modeling (Hamburger, Schoelles, & Reeder, 1999), and learner 
control and reliance on peeking at correct answers (Heift, 2002). This section concludes with a review of 
the area of intelligent CALL (Heift & Schulze, 2007). The final part of the volume is about future 
directions in CALL. These include virtual worlds for language learning (Svenson, 2003), the use of cell 
phones in mobile language learning in Japan (Thornton & Houser, 2004), and suggestions for using a 
variety of Web 2.0 tools for language learning (Thorne & Payne, 2005). The final volume concludes with 
a glance toward the future, focusing on technological advancements and the anticipated benefits they will 
offer regarding mobility and social connections (Price, 2007). 
Each of the articles and chapters in this collection offer a variety of rich insights, making it impossible to 
adequately summarize them in a brief review. Hopefully, the salient points aforementioned will inspire 
readers. Often researchers involved in CALL, as with any discipline involving technology, are 
preoccupied with looking forward rather than reflecting on past conceptualizations. Further, given the 
diversity of the field, our individual knowledge of previous work is likely limited to our own areas of 
expertise. This collection should serve as a reminder of the important work that CALL scholars have 
contributed to bring the field to its current state as a unique discipline with numerous dedicated journals, 
books, edited volumes, conferences, and communities. This collection goes far in documenting the 
construction of the field, as well as the theories, observations, and discussions that have informed its 
evolution. For readers who have been scholars of CALL for more than a decade, many of the entries in 
this collection are likely to be familiar, while those who are relatively new to the field may find that many 
of these articles fill in gaps in their understanding of the emergence and evolution of the field. The articles 
in this collection are invaluable from both of these perspectives. As a testament to their sustained impact 
on the field, most continue to be cited frequently in current research. 
The collection is easy to navigate in a variety of ways. It includes not only a table of contents that is 
organized by volume, parts, and articles, but also a separate chronological table of the original 
publications dates of the articles and chapters. This table serves as a timeline with complete bibliographic 
information and details about the location of each article or chapter within the collection. This cross-
listing allows the reader to readily locate the article or chapter within its time period, within the collection 
itself, or in its original published form. 
At $1,425.00 this four-volume set is clearly priced for institutional purchases. This reviewer strongly 
recommends that those able to purchase a set for a library do so. Yet, as this is a collection of previously 
published work, there are other means by which readers without access to university libraries can gather 
these important articles. Hubbard has provided a very useful online guide to the collection at 
http://www.stanford.edu/~efs/callcc/ that includes a table of contents with direct links to each of the 
articles that are freely available online, including those published in Language Learning & Technology, 
CALICO Journal, ReCALL, or archived on individual scholars’ Web sites. Twenty-seven of the 74 
articles are directly available in this manner. The others are either chapters in books or journal articles that 
can be accessed through a university periodical or document retrieval system. The table of contents 
includes full bibliographic information as guidance. The editor’s support site also includes a full copy of 
the 20-page general introduction chapter, which is a succinct and engaging overview of the field on its 
own. While it is a very thorough site, missing is a list of the nearly 500 articles considered for the 
collection, which would be a useful addition and an invaluable resource for CALL scholars. 
This collection is one of many within the Routledge Critical Concepts series. Other editions that may be 
of interest to readers include Second Language Acquisition, Language Acquisition, Cognitive Linguistics, 
Pragmatics, Bilingualism and Multilingualism, and Sociolinguistics. The formatting for this series is 
Greg Kessler Review of Computer Assisted Language Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 18 
consistent across collections, with each series including a general introduction to the collection. In this 
collection, Hubbard’s general introduction does an excellent job of providing context for the field and 
guidance toward how one might approach the reading of the articles. Each of the volumes also begins 
with a clear and concise overview of the contribution of the content. While these overviews are all useful 
for providing overviews, one piece that would be helpful across the series would be transition texts 
between sections within a volume or between articles. 
Also useful would be a second collection on CALL, as this would allow for the inclusion of more articles. 
Other collections in this series, such as Pragmatics, have released two complete sets in order to capture 
the breadth of their fields. Certainly CALL is varied and diverse enough to warrant this expansion. This is 
particularly important considering that, as Hubbard notes, “We have many promising and innovative 
ideas but only the beginnings of definitive answers as to how to use computers most effectively to support 
language learning” (p. 1). According to Hubbard, a second collection would allow inclusion of more 
recent research that had not yet been empirically explored at the time of these selections, including 
investigation into mobile learning, varied forms of Web 2.0 implementation, and virtual worlds. Of 
course, the current ubiquity of technology in modern life will likely introduce unforeseen innovation that 
will be adapted and integrated into CALL contexts. As we engage in, observe, and evaluate these 
advancements we can benefit greatly from the pioneering scholarship represented in this collection. 
Anyone who is serious about scholarship in CALL should consider the articles in these volumes as 
required reading. This collection includes many highlights of the essential evolution of CALL as it has 
been defined over the past few decades. It forms a solid foundation upon which the future of this diverse 
and exciting, yet sometimes frustrating field will be built. As Hubbard writes in the general introduction,  
As the field of CALL keeps evolving and more of what astounds us today becomes commonplace, it 
is hoped that the articles in Computer Assisted Language Learning: Critical Concepts in Linguistics 
will continue to capture valuable insights about where we have come from to help provide a 
foundation for understanding where to go next. (p. 14) 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER  
Greg Kessler is Assistant Professor of CALL and director of the Language Resource Center at Ohio 
University. His research interests include CALL teacher preparation, CALL use in innovative pedagogical 
contexts, and student and teacher autonomy in CALL contexts. He was also a member of the advisory 
board for Computer Assisted Language Learning: Critical Concepts in Linguistics Collection. For more 
information, visit his homepage at http://www.ohio.edu/linguistics/people/Kessler.html 
E-mail: kessler@ohio.edu 
 
REFERENCES  
Varonis, E. M., & Gass, S. (1985). Non-native/non-native conversations: A model for negotiation of 
meaning. Applied Linguistics, 6(1), 71–90. 
  
