Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol14num2/dehaanreedkuwada.pdf 
June 2010, Volume 14, Number 2 
pp. 74–94 
 
Copyright © 2010, ISSN 1094-3501 74 
 
THE EFFECT OF INTERACTIVITY WITH A MUSIC VIDEO GAME ON 
SECOND LANGUAGE VOCABULARY RECALL 
Jonathan deHaan, University of Shizuoka  
W. Michael Reed, New York University, Radford University 
Katsuko Kuwada, Tohoku University  
Video games are potential sources of second language input; however, the medium’s 
fundamental characteristic, interactivity, has not been thoroughly examined in terms of its 
effect on learning outcomes. This experimental study investigated to what degree, if at all, 
video game interactivity would help or hinder the noticing and recall of second language 
vocabulary. Eighty randomly-selected Japanese university undergraduates were paired 
based on similar English language and game proficiencies. One subject played an English-
language music video game for 20 minutes while the paired subject watched the game 
simultaneously on another monitor. Following gameplay, a vocabulary recall test, a 
cognitive load measure, an experience questionnaire, and a two-week delayed vocabulary 
recall test were administered. Results were analyzed using paired samples t-tests and 
various analyses of variance. Both the players and the watchers of the video game recalled 
vocabulary from the game, but the players recalled significantly less vocabulary than the 
watchers. This seems to be a result of the extraneous cognitive load induced by the 
interactivity of the game; the players perceived the game and its language to be 
significantly more difficult than the watchers did. Players also reported difficulty 
simultaneously attending to gameplay and vocabulary. Both players and watchers forgot 
significant amounts of vocabulary over the course of the study. We relate these findings to 
theories and studies of vocabulary acquisition and video game-based language learning, 
and then suggest implications for language teaching and learning with interactive 
multimedia. 
INTRODUCTION 
Video games have been very popular for several decades; the Entertainment Software Association (2008) 
reported that 65 percent of all Americans play video games. Video and computer games are receiving 
increasing attention by researchers and practitioners in education; however, most of the theory and 
pedagogy focus on general education (e.g., Squire, 2006) or language and literacy development of native 
speakers (e.g., Gee, 2007; Steinkhueler, 2007). With the growing popular and pedagogical focus on 
games, it is important “to become involved in the design and implementation of new media systems 
before they are institutionalized” (Steuer, 1993, p. 21, emphasis in original). Effective second language 
teaching and learning with games is more likely to occur if practical conclusions can be drawn from 
empirical evidence. Investigating the relationship between video games and language acquisition is 
problematic because of the ever-increasing variations of the media. Numerous genres of commercial 
games (Prensky, 2001; Wolf, 2001) and “serious” (i.e., educational) games (Sawyer & Smith, 2008) have 
been identified. Video games can differ in terms of hardware, graphical fidelity, human-computer 
interface, intended audience, theme, and interaction between players. 
Investigations have been made of second language learning in multiplayer games. Piirainen-Marsh and 
Tainio (2009) studied small groups of players interacting with (i.e., repeating, analyzing, and using 
language from) a console roleplaying game, Sykes, Oskoz, and Thorne (2008) described meaning-making 
and pragmatic development among players in massively multiplayer online games, and Zheng, Young, 
Brewer and Wagner (2009) found that language learners’ attitude and self-efficacy towards their second 
language improved through the use of tools to communicate with native speakers to complete quests in a 
Jonathan deHaan, W. Michael Reed, and Katsuko Kuwada The Effect of Interactivity with a Music Video Game 
 
Language Learning & Technology 75 
 
game-like virtual world. These studies have high ecological validity and pedagogical and practical 
significance, but they did not investigate how a second language video game might be played by only one 
individual. Since many video games can be played by a single player, our study focused on the human-
computer interaction of a single-player game. 
Second language teachers, students or media designers may not be especially helped by general posits for 
video games’ support of second language acquisition that focus on the benefits of playful learning 
(Hubbard, 1991; Prensky, 2001), motivation, (Baltra, 1990; Carrier, 1991; deHaan, 2005a; Hubbard, 
1991; Li & Topolewski, 2002), rewards (Li & Topolewski, 2002), or positive affect (Garcia-Carbonell, 
Rising, Montero, & Watts, 2001). Understanding how language learning may happen with video games is 
“more than just the fact that language is involved in the play” (Hubbard, 1991, p. 221–222). It is easy to 
“blindly accept something as valuable for language learning simply because it involves language and 
problem solving and students enjoy it …. [M]edia selection should be done on the basis of … whether it 
really promotes language learning” (Hubbard, 1991, p. 222). 
Language teachers or learners may also not be aided by discussions focusing on game features such as: 
comprehensible input, self study opportunities, subtitles, repetition, and authentic language (Baltra, 1990; 
deHaan, 2005a; Hubbard, 1991; Meskill, 1990; Purushotma, 2005); these are features games share with 
other educational technologies such as DVD movies. Second language research, teaching, and design 
should focus on what distinguishes games from other multimedia. We agree with Clark (2001) that all 
instructional media contain both technological affordances and educational communication between the 
designer and user. Video games incorporate various technological and pedagogical elements to both 
entertain and train the player. Pedagogical scaffolds may be essential for a user’s understanding of many 
complex games and learning environments (Allen & Otto, 1996; Gee, 2003; Kulikowich & Young, 2001; 
Um & deHaan, 2005). These scaffolds are worthy of study and hold enormous potential for assisting 
teaching with, playing and designing games, but they are not found in every game. The starting point for 
our project was a focus on what constitutes a game rather than what can be added to a game to make it 
more enjoyable or educational. 
Study Framework 
Interactivity, “the extent to which users can participate in modifying the form and content of a mediated 
environment in real time” (Steuer, 1993, p. 84) is a defining characteristic of video games (Murray, 1997; 
Wolf & Perron, 2003). While many games include animated or video sequences that do not allow or 
require player interaction, games invariably necessitate some degree of player interaction in order to 
advance (Tamborini et al., 2001, p. 22). Turkle (1985) suggested that, while television is “something you 
watch,” a video game is “something you do, a world that you enter and, to a certain extent … something 
you become” (pp. 66–67). While interactivity certainly characterizes video games, it is a challenging 
construct to frame and to study as it is “overused and underdefined” (Heeter, 2000, p. 75) and perhaps 
“the most grossly misunderstood and callously misused term associated with computers” (Crawford, 
2005, p. 25). 
Numerous taxonomies of interactivity in educational media exist (e.g., Sims, 1997). Although 
classifications help to identify player actions, research has not yet been conducted to demonstrate the 
effects of these various interactivities on the second language acquisition process. Complex materials can 
prevent learning (Paas, Renkl, & Sweller; 2003), and it has not yet been determined if or what complexity 
is added by physical interaction with a second language technology or media. This article reports a study 
in which the physical interactivity of a second language music video game was manipulated to investigate 
the effect of interactivity on vocabulary acquisition and cognitive load. Before describing the methods, 
results and conclusions of the project, an addition to a cognitive theory of language learning with 
multimedia is suggested. 
Jonathan deHaan, W. Michael Reed, and Katsuko Kuwada The Effect of Interactivity with a Music Video Game 
 
Language Learning & Technology 76 
 
Plass and Jones (2005) presented an interactionist and cognitivist model of language learning with 
multimedia by synthesizing Gass’ (1997) second language acquisition model and Mayer’s (2001) 
cognitive theory of multimedia. Plass and Jones reviewed examples and studies of second language 
instructional multimedia that assist language learning: (a) glosses: text and/or images that provide 
additional information for unknown lexical items (e.g., Chun & Plass, 1996a, 1996b; Laufer & Hill, 2000) 
and (b) simultaneously-presented aural and video information (e.g., Hernandez, 2004). Plass and Jones 
(2005) stated that “the level of cognitive load induced by the input enhancement and the role this load 
may play in the acquisition of vocabulary and construction of meaning needs to be taken into 
consideration” (p. 483). Their consideration of apprehended input seemed to be concerned only with 
words or pictures selected (by simple computer mouse movements) and viewed; neither the research 
studies they review nor their theoretical framework address the physical interactivity required of more 
complex learning environments such as virtual worlds and video games. 
When language students watch a video with subtitles, they are required only to attend to input, and their 
cognitive resources may not be so taxed as while playing a video game. Players of a video game in their 
second language must perform additional playful and spontaneous tasks (dependent on the specific game 
genre, for example, pressing a button in time with music, such as the game used in this study) while 
simultaneously attending to aural and textual language. Not only the cognitive load of the input 
enhancement, but also that of the fundamental interactivity with the learning environment (whether 
simple computer mouse actions, or quick and complex video game controller movements) should be a 
focus of inquiry. Cognitive load theory (Paas et al., 2003) provides a framework for understanding the 
effect of interactivity on the language learning process. Since human cognitive architecture consists of a 
limited short-term (or working) memory (Baddeley, 1992; Miller, 1956), and a game’s complex elements 
(e.g., music and subtitles) can create an unalterable high demand on working memory (intrinsic cognitive 
load), it is important to understand whether a media feature, such as interactivity, presents a student with 
unnecessary extraneous cognitive load, which interferes with learning, or germane load, which enhances 
learning. 
There is some evidence for interactivity increasing mental activity. Pellouchoud, Smith, McEvoy, and 
Gevins (1999) compared (using electroencephalograms) the mental effort required of children playing or 
watching a Super Nintendo puzzle game for 15 minutes. The subjects experienced higher cognitive load 
(i.e., higher theta rhythms and lower alpha and mu rhythms were recorded) when playing the game. No 
learning outcomes were measured in their study. Brett (2001) reported a unique study in which language 
learners were required not only to attend to language in various audio-visual presentations, but also to 
simultaneously perform an interactive task. He found that students exposed to video and subtitles 
performed best on written summaries, followed by subjects who used video, subtitles and simultaneous 
on-screen comprehension tasks. Brett concluded that the complex learning environment of videos, 
subtitles, and tasks caused cognitive overload. Since neither Pellouchoud et al. nor Brett specify which 
type of cognitive load was caused by interaction with the media in their studies, further research is 
required. 
Our study was designed to investigate whether the interactivity (and simultaneously presented text, audio 
and animation) of video games is extraneous cognitive load (thus having a negative effect on learning) or 
germane load (thus having a positive effect on learning). In addition to cognitive load theory, the impact 
of attention on language learning outcomes was also of conceptual value to the study. The importance of 
attention’s role in second language acquisition has been established both theoretically and empirically 
(Leow, 2000; Mackey, Gass, & McDonough, 2000; Robinson, 1995; Rosa & O’Neil, 1999; Schmidt, 
2001; Tomlin & Villa, 1994). Not being able to attend to second language input in a media environment 
(such as a video game) will prevent subsequent analyses, integration, and use of that language (Chapelle, 
1998). 
Jonathan deHaan, W. Michael Reed, and Katsuko Kuwada The Effect of Interactivity with a Music Video Game 
 
Language Learning & Technology 77 
 
Kalyuga, Chandler, and Sweller (1999) described instructional media that cause split attention and 
extraneous cognitive load as having “several sources of information [that] are difficult or impossible to 
understand in isolation and must be mentally integrated to achieve understanding” (p. 367-368). Although 
the audio-visual split attention Kalyuga et al. described can take place in video games (e.g., animations, 
subtitles, and spoken dialogue), a more primary focus of research on split attention should be of that 
between the audio-visual elements and the typifying physical interactivity of video games, since video 
games’ physical interface “requires frequent input from the player and the input required can disrupt the 
player’s involvement with the game space” (Taylor, 2002, p. 20). Because games can contain useful 
linguistic information, it is necessary to determine whether interactivity contributes to or detracts a 
student from noticing it. 
deHaan (2005b) reported one Japanese as a foreign language student’s experience of playing a Japanese 
baseball video game for one month. Although anecdotal positive learning outcomes were documented 
(Kanji character reading improved 57% on the post-test from the pre-test), the participant reported that his 
attention was divided between playing the game and listening to and reading the Japanese (“I can hear 
them talking, but I’m concentrating on hitting the ball … I’m not listening to them” and “I’m trying to 
listen [to what the announcers are saying] . . . I’m not paying attention to pitching” p. 284) and he could 
not focus on both at the same time, a result that supports Brett’s (2001) findings and Kalyuga et al.’s 
(1999) suggestions. 
Second language acquisition theory delineates the importance of noticing linguistic information in a 
media environment (Chapelle, 1998; Schmidt, 2001), and video games seem to be a medium with various 
features that can support the language acquisition process (deHaan, 2005a), yet the particular influence of 
playful interactivity is not yet well understood. Cognitive load theory (Paas et al., 2003) and research 
seems to suggest that physical interactivity will increase mental effort (Pellouchoud et al., 1999) and 
hinder noticing and vocabulary acquisition (Brett, 2001; deHaan, 2005b). However, the question of how 
interaction with a video game environment may affect second language acquisition has not been 
adequately investigated. 
RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
1. What is the effect of the degree of interaction (i.e., watching or playing) with a music video game 
on immediate written vocabulary recall? Are there additional effects for interaction and language 
proficiency or video game proficiency on vocabulary recall? 
2. What is the effect of the degree of interaction (i.e., watching or playing) with a music video game 
on delayed written vocabulary recall? 
3. What is the effect of the degree of interaction (i.e., watching or playing) with a music video game 
on cognitive load? Are there additional effects for interaction and language proficiency or video 
game proficiency on cognitive load? 
4. Was there a difference between the attitudes of players versus watchers of the music video game?  
Non-directional hypotheses were assumed and null hypotheses of no differences were tested in this study; 
no expectations were made in regard to vocabulary recall, cognitive load or opinions for any group. 
METHOD 
Participants and design 
This experimental study investigated to what degree, if at all, video game interactivity would help or 
hinder the noticing and recall of second language vocabulary. Independent variables included 
interactivity, language proficiency, and video game proficiency. Dependent measures included cognitive 
Jonathan deHaan, W. Michael Reed, and Katsuko Kuwada The Effect of Interactivity with a Music Video Game 
 
Language Learning & Technology 78 
 
load, vocabulary written recall (immediate and 2-week delayed), and participant opinions of the 
treatment. 
Eighty undergraduates (65 males, 15 females, ages 18-24), from a computer science university in rural 
Japan participated. The participants spoke Japanese as their first language, had between 6 and 11 years of 
formal English education, and were taking one or two weekly English for Specific Purposes (Computer 
Science) classes. Very few participants had taken a standardized English proficiency test and very few 
students studied English with media (e.g., movies, music, and books) outside of class. The participants 
rated, on a scale ranging from 1 (much worse) to 7 (much better), their reading skills as slightly worse (M 
= 3.49), their listening skills as slightly worse (M = 3.32), and their music video game skills as worse (M 
= 2.75) than other students in their year at the university. Nine participants had traveled (all for less than a 
month) in an English-speaking country. Only individuals who had never played Parappa the Rapper 2 
(NanaOn-Sha, 2002) or similar music video games participated. The participants reported many years of 
video game playing experience (M = 11.85), most considered role-playing and action/adventure games to 
be their favorite video game genres, and 16 had played English-language video games. Fifty-six of the 
participants liked music video games, and the participants played video games, on average, for 7.16 hours 
each week (SD = 9.16, Mode = 3.0). The participants were randomly selected from the university via 
flyers and email. The two experimental groups (players and watchers of a video game) did not differ 
significantly in their: gender, age, level of education, familiarity with music video games, overall 
language proficiency, overall video game proficiency, or self-reported pre-treatment knowledge of the 
vocabulary of the video game used in the study (players M = 35.7 words, watchers M = 35.8 words, t(39) 
= .152, p = .880),. The written pre-test required each participant to indicate whether he or she knew a 
particular vocabulary item. The test was comprised of 41 distinct words from the video game lyrics used 
as answers on the cloze test (duplicate vocabulary items from the lyrics were not included) and 21 
additional distracters. There were 62 items in total on the vocabulary pretest, and these items were 
arranged randomly. A cloze test of the game's lyrics was not used to gauge prior knowledge in order to 
avoid priming the subjects for the post-tests. 
This study manipulated video game interactivity. Forty pairs of students participated and in each pair, one 
played the game and the other watched an identical video signal of the partner’s game (See Figure 1). For 
the interactive treatment, participants played Stage One of the game Parappa the Rapper 2 on a Sony 
PlayStation 2 connected to a 25” TV. English subtitles were displayed on the screen. Players did not 
pause the game. Players used stereo headphones and sat in a cubicle. For the non-interactive treatment, 
participants watched the video of the player’s game on a linked identical 25” TV in an adjoining cubicle. 
The watchers could also see English subtitles on the screen and used stereo headphones. Participants were 
grouped in order to ensure that each pair was exposed to identical language. The players and watchers 
could not see each other or interact. 
Materials 
Parappa the Rapper 2 was used because of its authentic English language (it was designed for the 
commercial North American video game market), its simultaneously presented aural and textual language 
(English raps and English subtitles), and its prototypical rhythm game elements (“gameplay requires 
players to keep time with a musical rhythm”; Wolf, 2001, p. 130).  
 
Jonathan deHaan, W. Michael Reed, and Katsuko Kuwada The Effect of Interactivity with a Music Video Game 
 
Language Learning & Technology 79 
 
 
Figure 1. A bird’s eye view of the treatment cubicles for the player and watcher of the game. 
Note. Arrows indicate the delivery of the game console’s audio and video signal to both screens. 
Each level of this game is a short rap; the player completes lines of the rap by pressing controller buttons 
at the correct times. If the player’s timing is “off,” the line is not completed and if many lines are not 
completed, the player fails the stage. The rap for the game stage played in this project contains 
instructions about how to make a burger (e.g., “heat the grill” and “turn the patty over”). Some of the 
lines of the rap are given by a non-player character (Beard Burger Master). English is not central to 
gameplay. In other words, a player need not comprehend the game’s language to interact successfully 
with the game. The game’s display includes a fast food restaurant (various ingredients and cooking 
implements can be seen on the screen), a rhythm meter, a score meter, and subtitles of the game’s lyrics 
(Figure 2). Parappa the Rapper 2’s elements all relate and interact in complex ways. One button press 
(cued by a moving icon on the rhythm bar) produces a heard word (e.g., “burger”) coupled with an action 
in the 3D environment (e.g., flipping a burger) that is semantically linked to other words to create a line of 
the rap and to other actions to create a fast food meal. The correctness of the button press is indicated by 
an animation on the screen, a change in score, and a sound effect. The game seems to have high 
interactivity since its elements need to be simultaneously noticed and understood by a player (or watcher). 
Physical interactivity can have many forms and functions; the type that most closely approximates the 
physical interaction the player had with this study’s game is object interactivity “in which ... things are 
activated using ... a device [causing] some form of audio-visual response” (Sims, 1997, p. 162), 
categorized as “basic stimulus-response” (p. 161). The interactivity of the game in this study is quite 
simple compared to many of the interactive learning environments used in teaching and research with 
Jonathan deHaan, W. Michael Reed, and Katsuko Kuwada The Effect of Interactivity with a Music Video Game 
 
Language Learning & Technology 80 
 
technology, for example Nelson and Ketelhut’s (2007) virtual inquiry worlds. Still, since any extraneous 
load can disrupt learning (Sweller, 1994), it is important to examine the effect of the interactivity that this 
(or any) game has on learning processes and outcomes. 
 
Figure 2. Game controller and wire frame of game screen. 
Procedure 
This was an experimental study implemented in a laboratory setting. Participants were paired and one 
participant in each pair was randomly assigned to either play or watch a video game. 
In the recruitment phase, the participants were invited to participate and gave consent online. The students 
understood that participation was voluntary, confidential, and that they would be compensated (1,500 yen 
each). In the preliminary data collection phase, the participants self-reported (online) information about 
their: biography (gender, L1, age, and education), familiarity with Parappa the Rapper 2 and similar 
video games, language proficiency and study habits, knowledge of 41 vocabulary items extracted from 
the video game, and video game habits and proficiency. 
Participants were then paired based on similar language and video game proficiencies. The English and 
video game proficiency data were used to holistically categorize equal numbers of pairs of participants 
Jonathan deHaan, W. Michael Reed, and Katsuko Kuwada The Effect of Interactivity with a Music Video Game 
 
Language Learning & Technology 81 
 
into “high” and “low” language and video game proficiency groups. 
Next, participants were randomly assigned to one of the two treatments. The pairs participated for 20 
minutes. Each participant was instructed to play (or watch) the game and learn the words of the rap. The 
video game level was repeated five times by all pairs. This was done to approximate the repetitions of a 
level, either for fun or because the player failed the stage, which might happen in authentic gameplay with 
this particular genre. The time and repetitions were decided after a pilot test (six months prior to the 
experiment) in which students who had participated for 30 minutes doing eight repetitions reported 
boredom and shifting attention. The participants were not allowed to take notes or use their dictionaries. 
Following the treatment, the participants each completed (presented in Japanese and English) a cognitive 
load measurement, a vocabulary written recall test, and an opinion questionnaire. Finally, two weeks 
following the treatment, the participants completed the same vocabulary written recall test. 
Instruments 
Cognitive load 
The participants completed a Cognitive Load Subjective Experience Questionnaire targeting invested 
mental effort (based on Paas, 1992; Cronbach’s alpha > 0.85 as cited in Paas, Van Merrienboer, & Adam, 
1994) and perceptions of material difficulty (based on Kalyuga et al., 1998; Cronbach’s alpha = .4583). 
Mental effort may not be the same as task difficulty (i.e., a particular learner may find the material 
difficult, but not be willing to invest any mental effort to understand it). Items in the questionnaire 
distinguished between the cognitive load from playing or watching the game and cognitive load from the 
game’s language. The four questions were: 
1. How much mental effort did you invest in playing (watching) the video game? (nine-point Likert 
scale from extremely low mental effort to extremely high mental effort) 
2. How easy or difficult was the video game to play (watch)? (seven-point Likert scale from 
extremely easy to extremely difficult) 
3. How much mental effort did you invest in studying the video game’s language? (nine-point Likert 
scale from extremely low mental effort to extremely high mental effort) 
4. How easy or difficult was the video game’s language to understand? (seven-point Likert scale 
from extremely easy to extremely difficult) 
Vocabulary written recall (immediate and 2-week delayed) 
The lyrics of the game level were used as a written cloze test (i.e., stressed words from the lyrics were 
replaced with blanks). There were 41 unique vocabulary words in the cloze test. Participants were 
required to write the missing words from the game’s rap in the test’s blanks. Answers were scored using 
the acceptable scoring method, meaning misspelled but recognizable (e.g., “musterd” instead of 
“mustard”) and answers with the correct stem (e.g., “round” instead of “around”) were accepted. Notably, 
though, answers that matched semantically (e.g., “watch the fire” instead of the correct answer “watch the 
grill”) were not accepted. Each correct answer was counted as one point. The same vocabulary written 
recall test was given two weeks following completion of the treatment to measure vocabulary retention. 
See Appendix A for the test (underlined words appeared as blanks for the participants). 
Player and watcher opinions 
Each subject reported his/her enjoyment of the game or video, the usefulness of the game or video for 
studying English, and any questions or comments about his/her experience. These opinions were 
analyzed: (a) to determine trends in the participants’ experiences of the video game and the video and (b) 
to supplement the measures of vocabulary recall and cognitive load. 
Jonathan deHaan, W. Michael Reed, and Katsuko Kuwada The Effect of Interactivity with a Music Video Game 
 
Language Learning & Technology 82 
 
RESULTS 
The data did not violate assumptions of normality, linearity, homogeneity of regression slopes, equality of 
variance, or homogeneity of intercorrelations. For the statistical analyses, the alpha level was .05, the 
power was .80, and the effect size was .46 (medium) based on G*Power 3 (Faul, Erdfelder, Lang, & 
Buchner, 2007). 
Research question 1. What is the effect of the degree of interaction (i.e., watching or playing) with a 
music video game on immediate written vocabulary recall? Are there additional effects for 
interaction and language proficiency or video game proficiency on vocabulary recall? 
A paired-samples t-test revealed that the watchers of the video game recalled significantly more 
vocabulary items (M = 21.70, SD = 6.94) than the players [M = 7.23, SD = 4.76, t(39) = 11.63, p<.05]. 
See Table 1. The eta squared statistic (.78) indicated a large effect size, Cohen’s d = 2.43 also showed a 
large effect, and observed power was 0.99. No statistically significant main or interaction effects for 
language proficiency or video game proficiency on vocabulary recall were found. 
Table 1. Mean Scores on Immediate Post-Procedure Vocabulary Recall Test 
  Recall Test Scores 
Treatment Group  N Mean SD 
Players  40 7.23 4.76 
Watchers  40 21.7 6.94 
Research question 2. What is the effect of the degree of interaction (i.e., watching or playing) with a 
music video game on delayed written vocabulary recall? 
The average immediate (Time 1) and delayed (Time 2) vocabulary recall scores of the players and 
watchers are presented in Table 2. Missing delayed posttest data required that 14 participants (i.e., 7 pairs 
of participants) be removed from the data set, leaving 66 participants’ (33 pairs’) data. A two-factor 
(interactivity: watching or playing the video game) analysis of variance (ANOVA) with a repeated 
measure on one factor (time: immediate or delayed posttest) revealed that the main effect for time was 
significant F (1,64) = 76.82, p < .05, Eta-squared = .546 (a strong effect), Cohen’s d = 0.91 (a large 
effect), observed power = 0.99. The immediate recall scores were much higher than the delayed recall 
scores. A significant main effect for interactivity was also obtained, F (1,64) = 129.01, p 
Table 2. Mean Scores on Immediate and Delayed Vocabulary Recall Tests 
< .05, Eta-
squared = .668 (a strong effect), Cohen’s d = 2.54 (a large effect), observed power = 1.00. The vocabulary 
recall scores of the watchers were significantly higher, on average, than the scores of the players. 
  Time 1 
(immediately post-procedure) 
 Time 2 
(2 weeks after procedure) 
Treatment Group  N Mean SD  N Mean SD 
Players  33 7.42 5.07  33 5.15 3.81 
Watchers  33 23.27 6.09  33 16.03 5.79 
A significant interaction effect (i.e., Time x Interactivity) was also obtained, F (1,64) = 20.96, p < .05, 
Eta-squared = .247 (a medium effect), observed power = 0.98. There was a much larger decrease in scores 
for the watchers (from 23.27 to 16.03) than for the players (from 7.42 to 5.15), although the very low 
scores of the players on the recall test immediately following the procedure may explain some of the 
Jonathan deHaan, W. Michael Reed, and Katsuko Kuwada The Effect of Interactivity with a Music Video Game 
 
Language Learning & Technology 83 
 
stability of the players’ scores from Time 1 to Time 2. 
Research question 3. What is the effect of the degree of interaction (i.e., watching or playing) with a 
music video game on cognitive load? Are there additional effects for interaction and language 
proficiency or video game proficiency on cognitive load? 
Invested mental effort in the game 
A paired-samples t-test revealed that the players’ (M = 6.33, SD = 1.75) and watchers’ (M = 5.50, SD = 
2.17) reported mental effort in the game was not significantly different [t(39) = 1.78, p = .082]. The eta 
squared statistic (.08) indicated a moderate effect size; observed power was 0.08. 
Perception of the game’s difficulty 
The players reported higher scores regarding game difficulty (M = 3.72, SD = 1.13) than the watchers did 
(M = 2.45, SD = 1.26); furthermore, a paired-samples t-test revealed that this difference was statistically 
significant [t(39) = 5.25, p = <.05]. The eta squared statistic (.41) indicated a large effect size, Cohen’s d 
= 1.06 (a large effect), observed power was 0.71. 
Invested mental effort in the game’s language 
A paired-samples t-test revealed that the players’ (M = 5.08, SD = 1.65) and watchers’ (M = 5.88, SD = 
2.09) reported mental effort in the game’s language was not significantly different [t(39) = -1.80, p = 
.080]. The eta squared statistic (.08) indicated a moderate effect size; observed power was 0.08. 
Perception of the game’s language difficulty 
The players reported higher scores regarding the game’s language difficulty (M = 4.13, SD = 0.97) than 
the watchers did (M = 3.65, SD = 1.10); furthermore, a paired-samples t-test revealed that this difference 
was statistically significant [t(39) = 2.38, p = .022]. The eta squared statistic (.10) indicated a moderate 
effect size, Cohen’s d = 0.46 (a moderate effect), observed power was 0.09. 
No statistically significant main or interaction effects for language proficiency or video game proficiency 
on any aspect of cognitive load were found. 
Research question 4. Was there a difference between the attitudes of players versus watchers of the 
music video game?  
On average, players enjoyed the game more than watchers (M = 8.00, SD = 1.33 and M = 7.47, SD = 1.54, 
respectively, on a 9-point scale); this difference is not statistically significant. However, more watchers 
(19) than players (7) reported that they would buy the game to learn English, and watchers (38) thought 
that the game was useful listening and reading practice for them (30 players agreed). The watchers, in 
general, seemed more likely to use the game to study English. Some players may have responded 
negatively due to their poor performance on the vocabulary test (several were unable to recall any 
vocabulary). 
The open-ended responses were translated and coded. The more important themes included: 
Repetition 
Many of the watchers reported feeling a little bored watching the same level of the game five times, while 
many of the players wanted to continue playing the game to be able to raise their score further, and to 
learn more of the language in the game. 
Watcher’s concentration 
It seemed that the watchers had more time than the players to consider the game; some of the watchers’ 
comments included details about the environment (none of the players’ comments involved the 
environment of the game). A few of the watchers commented that the combination of the objects in the 
Jonathan deHaan, W. Michael Reed, and Katsuko Kuwada The Effect of Interactivity with a Music Video Game 
 
Language Learning & Technology 84 
 
game level (foods, cooking tools) and the sentences describing the pictures made it “easy to learn” the 
vocabulary. 
Player’s concentration 
Many players commented that it was very difficult for them to pay attention to both the game and the 
language simultaneously. They stated difficulty in pressing the buttons accurately when they focused on 
the language and that they could not listen to or read the English when they concentrated on the 
gameplay. A few of the players commented that they “wanted to be a watcher to learn the English.” One 
player commented that other video game genres would be better reading practice. 
In summary, both the players and the watchers of the video game recalled vocabulary from the game, but 
the players recalled significantly less vocabulary than the watchers. This seems to be a result of the 
extraneous cognitive load induced by the interactivity of the game; the players perceived the game and its 
language to be significantly more difficult than the watchers did. Both players and watchers forgot 
significant amounts of vocabulary over the course of the study. Players reported difficulty simultaneously 
attending to gameplay and vocabulary. 
DISCUSSION 
The players of the video game did recall some of its language, confirming various posits (Baltra, 1990; 
deHaan, 2005a; Hubbard, 1991; Meskill, 1990) that video games are potential sources of linguistic 
information for language learners. However, the watchers of the game recalled more vocabulary items 
than the players. It is important to note that the difference between the players’ and watchers’ mental 
effort in the game’s language was not statistically significant. The players and watchers invested 
comparable mental effort on media and language they perceived to be of different difficulties; the players’ 
poorer recall of vocabulary seems to be attributable to the interactivity of the video game. 
It is also important to note that the players and watchers did not differ significantly in their pre-treatment 
knowledge of the video game vocabulary. If their knowledge had differed, the difference in vocabulary 
recall scores could be attributable to prior knowledge. Additionally, although both players and watchers 
reported knowing many of the game’s words prior to the study (players M = 35.7 words, watchers M = 
35.8 words), the players recalled only 7.2 words and the watchers recalled only 21.7 words. The 
participants were not able to notice or recall many known words in either the video and video game 
environments. 
It can be concluded that the physical interactivity of this particular game was extraneous cognitive load, 
that is, the interactivity was not conducive to learning and seems to have unnecessarily diverted the 
players’ attention from the vocabulary and hindered recall. The interactivity of this video game was not 
germane cognitive load; it did not contribute to schema development. The watchers of the game were not 
exposed to the additional extraneous load of the physical interactivity and were able to devote more 
cognitive resources to the intrinsic load of the game and its language. This finding extends the research 
conducted by Pellouchoud et al. (1999); their participants also experienced higher cognitive load when 
playing a video game than when watching a video game. 
Previous research (Brett, 2001; deHaan, 2005b) illustrated that interactivity with foreign language 
multimedia learning environments can hinder language acquisition. Our study reinforces those findings; 
the players recalled fewer vocabulary items than the watchers. With continued research on other 
interactivities (such as those mentioned by Sims, 1997), learning environments (like the multiplayer 
games studied by Sykes et al., 2008, and Zheng et al., 2009) and language elements, it may be possible to 
broaden Plass and Jones’ (2005) discussion of apprehended input in second language multimedia 
environments to include a consideration of the user’s physical manipulation of the media’s interface. 
Jonathan deHaan, W. Michael Reed, and Katsuko Kuwada The Effect of Interactivity with a Music Video Game 
 
Language Learning & Technology 85 
 
As Hubbard (1991) suggested, it is important to be critical about the potential of video games to support 
second language acquisition. This study demonstrated that even though a video game can be enjoyable 
and contain foreign language vocabulary, its interactivity hindered the language acquisition process; 
players were unable to recall the game’s vocabulary as well as watchers could recall them. 
The reason for the lack of more positive learning outcomes for the players in this study may be framed by 
Murray’s (1997) discussion of interactivity and agency: 
Activity alone is not agency. Some games, like chess, can have relatively few or infrequent actions 
but a high degree of agency, since the actions are highly autonomous, selected from a large range of 
possible choices, and wholly determine the course of the game. (p. 128) 
This study’s video game did not in any way allow the players to navigate through the rap, or to make 
meaningful choices about the game’s language. The “object interactivity” (Sims, 1997, p. 161) of the 
video game lacked user agency, and the controlled experimental research design seemed to have 
prevented the learners from “select[ing] and organiz[ing] their own learning resources” (Schwienhorst, 
2002, p. 197) or focusing the learners on the “meaning and purpose” (Culley, Mulford, & Milbury-Steen, 
1986, p. 70) of language. More agentive (i.e., “immersive virtual”; Sims, 1997, p. 167) interactivities 
(e.g., video games with more controllable in-game tasks that foster deeper consideration of language) may 
support better incidental second language vocabulary recall outcomes than the “basic stimulus-response” 
(Sims, 1997, p. 161) interactivity of this study’s video game. Also, English was not crucial for gameplay; 
this may have contributed to the results. Games that integrate language use and play may be better for 
language acquisition. 
The players’ inability to simultaneously attend to the game and its language support the theoretical and 
empirical work on noticing and second language acquisition (e.g., Schmidt, 2001) and split attention 
effects (Kalyuga et al., 1999). The players of the video game were asked to play the game and attend to 
the vocabulary simultaneously and these multiple foci of attention prevented them from noticing and 
recalling more vocabulary items than the watchers. 
As Gass (1997) has delineated, before language can be truly acquired, it must be comprehended, 
integrated with prior knowledge, and used purposefully. Our results do not suggest that vocabulary can be 
acquired more effectively through non-interactive environments than interactive environments, only that 
the initial exposure to the vocabulary of this game, for these players, was made more difficult by their 
simultaneous interaction with the video game. As in previous studies involving incidental vocabulary 
acquisition (Knight, 1994; Rott, 1999), both the watchers and the players of the game forgot vocabulary 
over time. 
This study did not capture casual gameplay; neither the players nor the watchers were permitted to pause 
or take a break from the game to reflect. Long (1991) explicated the need for language learners to self-
initiate momentary transfers of attention to elements of language; if the player and watcher had had more 
agency with their media (i.e., been allowed to pause the game, or control how they interacted with the 
game), the results may have differed. This study was conducted in a laboratory setting, and since context 
is important to cognition and learning processes, results may differ if this game were used at home or in a 
classroom setting. 
Limitations 
The results of this study must be considered in light of its limitations. An important limitation is the low 
number of female participants (15 out of 80, although there were no between-group gender differences). 
Another limitation is that the instrument used to measure cognitive load was a self-report questionnaire 
that did not have strong internal consistency (the mental effort scale had an alpha coefficient of .551, and 
the material difficulty scale had an alpha coefficient of .565). The vocabulary-based cloze test should also 
not be taken as an ultimate measure or predictor of learning with games, and the production task may not 
Jonathan deHaan, W. Michael Reed, and Katsuko Kuwada The Effect of Interactivity with a Music Video Game 
 
Language Learning & Technology 86 
 
have captured the players’ and watchers’ focus on comprehending game language. A further limitation is 
the manner in which the participants were grouped into “high” and “low” language and game 
proficiencies. One threat to generalizability is the treatment media; the results from watching or playing a 
game in a typical video game playing environment (e.g., on a sofa in a friend’s living room) might be 
different, and longer or repeated playing or watching sessions may have resulted in better learning 
outcomes for both groups. The results of this study are also limited in their ability to generalize to the 
English as a Foreign Language population at large, or to other topics or aspects of second language 
acquisition. 
Implications 
This study did not attempt to determine that one media (e.g., a video game or a video) was better or worse 
than another at supporting second language acquisition, since all media are complex combinations of 
technological affordances and communication between designers and users (Clark, 2001). This study 
carefully manipulated one aspect of a video game in order to provide an initial understanding of how 
interactivity affects recall and attention of second language vocabulary. As some have argued (e.g., 
Arnseth, 2006; Squire, 2002), the power of games for educational purposes may not reside in the games 
themselves, but in the context and activities related to and extending from play. Further educational game 
research (from various perspectives) and careful design and pedagogy are required. 
Implications for research 
Although the basic stimulus-response interactivity of this study’s game negatively impacted attention and 
recall, the interactivity of other games may have different outcomes. Further studies should investigate 
interactivities that more closely align with the language of the game (e.g., many sports games’ voice 
commentary describes player actions), or give the learner deeper choices about in-game actions (e.g., 
many simulation and strategy games allow great agency). Purushotma (2005) describes the link between 
player choice and goal-related incidental language learning (with remediated text glossed by images and 
animations) in the life simulation game “The Sims;” that game’s interactivity might lead to positive 
learning outcomes for the players in a replication of the current study. Continued interactivity research 
could utilize Sims’ (1997) taxonomy of interactivity as well as perspectives such as endogenous fantasy 
(Habgood, Ainsworth, & Benford, 2005) or action memory (Engelkamp, 2001). 
This study focused on the initial exposure to vocabulary items and immediate and delayed recall. Future 
research should examine how interactivity helps or hinders other stages of the second language 
acquisition process. Studies that examine how game vocabulary is integrated with previous knowledge 
(i.e., how interactivity affects understanding), or is used communicatively, could greatly benefit digital 
game-based language learning research. Other affordances of video games (e.g., stories, play, subtitles, 
repetition, feedback, and visual representations of language) should continue to be examined. As well, 
studies should focus not only on vocabulary acquisition, but also on phonetic, syntactic, pragmatic 
knowledge building, and the transfer of these skills to communicative use. 
Further research regarding language acquisition through video games could examine how various 
instructional techniques affect the learning process. These studies could focus not only on the scaffolds 
game designers use to introduce players to the mechanics of a particular game (outlined in Gee, 2003; 
Prensky, 2003; Um & deHaan, 2005), but also strategies that multimedia designers and classroom 
teachers use to encourage learners to focus more explicitly on the linguistic content of materials. 
Paribakht and Wesche (1997) suggest that explicit instruction may support a more complete acquisition of 
vocabulary; studies on instructional techniques might range from pre-gameplay activities (i.e., schema 
activation) to multimedia glosses of vocabulary (as suggested by the studies reviewed by Plass & Jones, 
2005) or intelligent feedback in the video game environment to individual or class debriefings following 
gameplay (according to the focus on form approach delineated by Long, 1991). 
Jonathan deHaan, W. Michael Reed, and Katsuko Kuwada The Effect of Interactivity with a Music Video Game 
 
Language Learning & Technology 87 
 
In this study, the players of the interactive video game experienced higher extraneous cognitive load (i.e., 
perception of material difficulty) than the watchers of the non-interactive video did. As Ben-Shaul (2003) 
emphasizes, it is important to explore how the interactivity of video games affects cognitive load and 
knowledge building. Researchers should investigate the wide variety of video game interactivities and 
their various cognitive effects. 
The use of various empirical perspectives could provide a deeper understanding of how video games 
affect second language acquisition. Experimental studies can be useful for systematic comparisons and 
generalizations of features, but ethnographic work may provide a more valid understanding of gameplay 
and learning with foreign language video games. Naturalistic gameplay studies (as called for by Squire, 
2002) are needed of players of games in a second language. Action research (i.e., precise accounts and 
analyses of actual classroom practice) may provide valuable insights regarding teaching methods and 
learning outcomes with foreign language video games. Observations, interviews, and stimulated recalls of 
more natural gameplay habits (e.g., turn taking, pausing to reflect on gameplay, discussing the game with 
friends, using Internet resources) may provide valuable insights into how to design and teach with digital 
games. Conducting mixed methods research with a variety of game genres seems to be a logical next step 
for digital game-based language research due to the early nature of the field. 
Implications for instructional design 
Designers of educational games for the teaching of foreign languages should consider the type of 
interactivity they are requiring from their users, especially if their game is based on a similar interactivity 
as that used in this study. The incorporation of additional ludic (e.g., cooperative or competitive modes of 
play) or social tasks (e.g., recording and sharing video of gameplay) may foster better attention and 
processing of the game’s language. Although the results of this study cannot be widely generalized to 
other types of video games or other multimedia environments used for language instruction (e.g., 
interactive DVDs or websites), designers of those media should carefully consider the degree and type of 
interaction they require from their users in order to avoid overwhelming them. Purushotma, Thorne and 
Wheatley (2008) offer numerous principles for the design of digital games for language learning. 
Implications for self study 
Students use a variety of media to autonomously learn a foreign language. As video games continue to 
gain popularity, it seems likely that learners will import or download foreign language games. Students 
should realize that not all video games are useful for language learning; they should choose their study 
materials carefully. If students want to use a game like Parappa the Rapper 2, they should be aware of the 
difficulty in balancing their attention between gameplay and language. Students may not be as 
overwhelmed as the players in this study by: repeating levels, taking breaks between sessions, using notes 
and dictionaries, recording their play to watch later, consulting online forums and guides, and playing 
with friends (perhaps alternating and discussing the game and its language after each turn). Video games 
used in conjunction with learner strategies may be more beneficial than this experimental study’s 
controlled play and tasks. Students, for example, may choose a game of a different genre than the game 
used in this study. 
Implications for pedagogy 
Because of students’ enjoyment of video games, language teachers may be interested in using games in 
their classrooms. While games do contain a wealth of comprehensible language, the results of this study 
suggest that teachers should carefully consider the interactivity of the games they want to use in class and 
design pedagogical strategies for scaffolding students’ play and language learning with mindfully-
selected games. Teachers may like to choose a game of a different genre than the game used in this study. 
Scaffolds might be used before, during or after gameplay. 
Jonathan deHaan, W. Michael Reed, and Katsuko Kuwada The Effect of Interactivity with a Music Video Game 
 
Language Learning & Technology 88 
 
Before gameplay, a teacher might ask the students to brainstorm vocabulary of the situation in the game 
(e.g., a fast food restaurant), since more complete schema can contribute to lower cognitive load (Douglas 
& Hargadon, 2001; Sweller, 1994). A teacher might discuss the difficulty in balancing gameplay and 
attention to language, perhaps emphasizing this point by having one student play the game in front of the 
class and talk about her experience and foci of attention during play. Pre-teaching vocabulary using drills 
or dictionary work, or viewing a non-interactive video of the game before play might also be effective 
pre-play scaffolding. 
During gameplay, a teacher might suggest that pairs of players and watchers alternate playing and 
watching to balance gameplay and linguistic analysis. These pairs could be asked to transcribe or 
complete a cloze activity of the game’s language together. During gameplay, a teacher could use a focus 
on form approach to draw students’ attention to unique phonetic, morphological, or syntactic elements of 
the game’s language (especially after errors made during students’ meaningful L2 communication about 
the game), and then have students continue playing to examine the language in its natural context. 
After gameplay, students could write definitions and original sentences for the unfamiliar words noticed 
during gameplay. Students could also create gameplay tips for other players in order for the other players 
to free up cognitive resources for attention to and analysis of language. In order to push the students 
toward linguistic output (Swain, 1995), a teacher might have the students write and perform original role-
plays based on the vocabulary of the video game (e.g., co-workers in a fast food restaurant). If a variety of 
video games are used in the classroom, the class might create a database of language noticed during 
gameplay and then investigate word collocations in various video game contexts. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We are grateful to Jan L. Plass, Lixing (Frank) Tang, the editors, and the reviewers for their useful and 
insightful suggestions. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Jonathan deHaan is an Associate Professor in the Faculty of International Relations at the University of 
Shizuoka. He earned his Ph.D. in Educational Communication and Technology from New York 
University. His research focuses on second language learning and teaching with games and simulations. 
E-mail: dehaan@u-shizuoka-ken.ac.jp  
W. Michael Reed was a retired professor of Educational Communication and Technology at New York 
University and the IRB/IACUC Administrator for Radford University in Virginia. His research interests 
spanned over a 25-year period and focused on educational computing, problem-solving, metacognition, 
and composing processes. 
Katsuko Kuwada is a doctoral student in the International Cultural Studies program at Tohoku University. 
She investigates language and culture; her current research compares the use of first-person subjects in 
Japanese and English based on different cultural backgrounds. 
E-mail: k-kuwada@u-aizu.ac.jp  
Jonathan deHaan, W. Michael Reed, and Katsuko Kuwada The Effect of Interactivity with a Music Video Game 
 
Language Learning & Technology 89 
 
Allen, B. S., & Otto, R. G. (1996). Media as lived environments: the ecological psychology of 
educational technology. In D. Jonassen (Ed.), Handbook of research for educational communications and 
technology (pp. 199–225). New York: Macmillan. 
REFERENCES 
Arnseth, H. C. (2006). Learning to play or playing to learn - A critical account of the models of 
communication informing educational research on computer gameplay. Game Studies, 6(1). Retrieved 
from http://gamestudies.org/0601/articles/arnseth  
Baddeley, A. (1992). Working memory. Science, 255, 556–559. 
Baltra, A. (1990). Language learning through computer adventure games. Simulation and Gaming 
Journal, 21, 445–452. 
Ben-Shaul, N. (2003). Split attention problems in interactive moving audiovisual texts. Retrieved from 
http://hypertext.rmit.edu.au/dac/papers/BenShaul.pdf 
Brett, P. (2001, June). Too many media in my multimedia? A study of the effects of combinations of media 
on a recall task. Paper presented at Escuela Superior de Administracion y Direccion de Empresas, 
Barcelona, Spain. 
Carrier, M. (1991). Simulations in English language teaching: A cooperative approach. Simulation and 
Gaming Journal, 22(2), 224–33. 
Chapelle, C. (1998). Multimedia CALL: Lessons to be learned from research on instructed SLA. 
Language Learning & Technology, 2(1), 21–39. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol2num1/article1/  
Chun, D. M., & Plass, J. L. (1996a). Effects of multimedia annotations on vocabulary acquisition. The 
Modern Language Journal, 80, 183–198. 
Chun, D. M., & Plass, J. L. (1996b). Facilitating reading comprehension with multimedia. System, 24, 
503–519. 
Clark, R. E. (Ed.) (2001). Learning from media. Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing. 
Crawford, C. (2005). Chris Crawford on interactive storytelling. Berkeley, CA: New Riders. 
Culley, G., Mulford, G., & Mulbury-Steen, J. (1986). A foreign language adventure game: Progress report 
on an application of AI to language instruction. CALICO Journal, 4, 69–94. 
deHaan, J. (2005a). Learning language through video games: A theoretical framework, an analysis of 
game genres and questions for future research. In S. Schaffer & M. Price (Eds.), Interactive Convergence: 
Critical Issues in Multimedia (vol. 10), Chapter 14, pp. 229–239. Retrieved from http://www.inter-
disciplinary.net/publishing/idp/eBooks/icindex.htm  
deHaan, J. (2005b). Acquisition of Japanese as a foreign language through a baseball video game. 
Foreign Language Annals, 38(2), 278–282. 
Douglas, Y., & Hargadon, A. (2001). The pleasures of immersion and engagement: Schemas, scripts and 
the fifth business. Digital Creativity, 12(3), 153–166. 
Engelkamp, J. (2001). Action memory: A system-oriented approach. In H. D. Zimmer, R. Cohen, M. 
Guynn, J. Engelkamp, R. Kormi-Nouri, & M. N. Foley (Eds.), Memory for action: A distinct form of 
episodic memory? (pp. 49–96). New York: Oxford University Press. 
Entertainment Software Association. (2008). Industry Facts. Retrieved from http://www.theesa.com/
facts/index.asp
 
Jonathan deHaan, W. Michael Reed, and Katsuko Kuwada The Effect of Interactivity with a Music Video Game 
 
Language Learning & Technology 90 
 
Faul, F., Erdfelder, E., Lang, A. G., & Buchner, A. (2007). G*Power 3: A flexible statistical power 
analysis program for the social, behavioral, and biomedical sciences. Behavior Research Methods, 39, 
175–191. 
Garcia-Carbonelli, A., Rising, B., Montero, B., & Watts, F. (2001). Simulation/gaming and the 
acquisition of competence in another language. Simulation and Gaming
Gass, S. (1997). Input, interaction, and the second language learner. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates Publishers. 
 Journal, 32(4), 481–491. 
Gee, J. P. (2003). What videogames have to teach us about learning and literacy. New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
Gee, J. P. (2007). Good video games and good learning: Collected essays on video games, learning and 
literacy (New literacies and digital epistemologies). New York: Peter Lang Publishers. 
Habgood, M. P. J., Ainsworth, S. E., & Benford, S. (2005). Endogenous fantasy and learning in digital 
games. Simulation and Gaming Journal, 36(4), 483–498. 
Heeter, C. (2000). Interactivity in the context of designed experiences. Journal of Interactive Advertising, 
1(1), 75-89. 
Hernandez, S. S. (2004). The effects of video and captioned text and the influence of verbal and spatial 
abilities on second language listening comprehension in a multimedia environment (Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation). New York University, New York.  
Hubbard, P. (1991). Evaluating computer games for language learning. Simulation and Gaming Journal, 
22, 220-223. 
Kalyuga, S., Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (1998). Levels of expertise and instructional design. Human 
Factors, 40(1), 1–17. 
Kalyuga, S., Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (1999). Managing split-attention and redundancy in multimedia 
instruction. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 13(4), 351–372. 
Knight, S. (1994). Dictionary: The tool of last resort in foreign language reading? A new perspective. 
Modern Language Journal, 78(3), 285–299. 
Kulikowich, J. M., & Young, M. F. (2001). Locating an ecological psychology methodology for situated 
action. The Journal of Learning Sciences, 10(1&2), 165–202. 
Laufer, B., Hill, M., 2000. What lexical information do L2 learners select in a CALL dictionary and how 
does it affect word retention?. Language Learning and Technology, 32, 58–76, Available from: 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol3num2/laufer-hill/index.html  
Leow, R. P. (2000). A study of the role of awareness in foreign language behavior: Aware vs. unaware 
learners. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 22,
Li, R. C., & Topolewski, D. (2002). ZIP & TERRY: A new attempt at designing language learning 
simulation. Simulation & Gaming Journal, 33, 181–186. 
 557–584. 
Long, M. H. (1991). Focus on form: A design feature in language teaching methodology. In K. de Bot, R. 
Ginsberg, & C. Kransch (Eds.), Foreign Language Research in Cross-Cultural Perspective (pp. 39–52). 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Mackey, A., Gass, S., & McDonough, K. (2000). Learners’ perceptions about feedback. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition, 22, 471–497. 
Mayer, R. E. (2001). Multimedia learning. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Jonathan deHaan, W. Michael Reed, and Katsuko Kuwada The Effect of Interactivity with a Music Video Game 
 
Language Learning & Technology 91 
 
Meskill, C. (1990). Where in the world of English is Carmen Sandiego? Simulation and Gaming Journal, 
21(4), 457–460. 
Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits on our capacity for 
processing information. Psychological Review, 63, 81–97. 
Murray, J. (1997). Hamlet on the holodeck. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
NanaOn-Sha. (US Release 2002). Parappa the Rapper 2 [computer software]. Sony Computer 
Entertainment. 
Nelson, B. C., & Ketelhut, D. J. (2007). Scientific inquiry in educational multi-user virtual environments. 
Educational Psychology Review, 19(3), 307–326. 
Paribakht, T. S., & Wesche, M. (1997). Vocabulary enhancement activities and reading for meaning in 
second language vocabulary acquisition. In J. Coady and T. Huckin (Eds.), Second language vocabulary 
acquisition: A rationale for pedagogy (pp. 174–200)
Paas, F. (1992). Training strategies for attaining transfer of problem-solving skill in statistics: A 
cognitive-load approach. Journal of Educational Psychology, 84, 429–434. 
. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Paas, F., Renkl, A., & Sweller, J. (2003). Cognitive load theory and instructional design: Recent 
developments. Educational Psychologist, 38, 1–4. 
Paas, F., Van Merrienboer, J., & Adam, J. (1994). Measurement of cognitive load in instructional 
research. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 79, 419-430. 
Pellouchoud, E., Smith, M. E., McEvoy, L., & Gevins, A. (1999). Mental effort related EEG modulation 
during video game play: Comparison between juvenile epileptic and normal control subjects. Epilepsia, 
40(4), 38–43. 
Piirainen-Marsh, A., & Tainio, L. (2009). Other-repetition as a resource for participation in the activity of 
playing a video game. Modern Language Journal, 93, 153–169. 
Plass, J. L., & Jones, L. C. (2005). Multimedia learning in second language acquisition. In R. E. Mayer 
(Ed.), Cambridge handbook on multimedia learning (pp. 467–488). Cambridge, MA: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Prensky, M. (2001). Digital game-based learning. New York: McGraw Hill. 
Prensky, M. (2003). Escape from planet Jar-Gon. Or, what video games have to teach academics about 
teaching and writing. Retrieved from http://www.marcprensky.com/writing/Prensky%20-
%20Review%20of%20James%20Paul%20Gee%20Book.pdf  
Purushotma, R. (2005). Commentary: You’re not studying, you’re just .... Language Learning & 
Technology, 9(1), 80–96. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num1/purushotma/default.html  
Purushotma, R., Thorne, S. L., & Wheatley, J. (2008). 10 Key Principles for Designing Video Games for 
Foreign Language Learning. Retrieved from http://knol.google.com/k/ravi-purushotma/10-key-
principles-for-designing-video  
Robinson, P. (1995). Attention, memory, and the “noticing” hypothesis. Language Learning, 45, 
Rosa, E., & O’Neill, M. D. (1999). Explicitness, intake and the issue of awareness: Another piece to the 
puzzle. 
283–
331. 
Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 21,
Rott, S. (1999). The effect of exposure frequency on intermediate language learners’ incidental 
vocabulary acquisition and retention through reading. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 21, 589–
 511–556. 
Jonathan deHaan, W. Michael Reed, and Katsuko Kuwada The Effect of Interactivity with a Music Video Game 
 
Language Learning & Technology 92 
 
619. 
Sawyer, B., & Smith, P. (2008). Serious games taxonomy. Retrieved from 
http://www.dmill.com/presentations/serious-games-taxonomy-2008.pdf    
Schmidt, R. W. (2001). Attention. In P. Robinson (Ed.), Cognition and second language instruction
Schwienhorst, K. (2002). Why virtual, why environments? Implementing virtual reality concepts in 
computer-assisted language learning. Simulation and Gaming Journal, 33(2), 196–209. 
 (pp. 
3–32). New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Sims, R. (1997). Interactivity: A forgotten art? Computers in Human Behavior, 13, 157–80. 
Squire, K. D. (2002). Cultural framing of computer/video games. Game Studies, 2(1). Retrieved from 
http://www.gamestudies.org/0102/squire/  
Squire, K. D. (2006). From content to context: Video games as designed experiences Educational 
Researcher, 35(8), 19–29. 
Steuer, J. (1993). Defining virtual reality: Dimensions determining telepresence. Social Responses to 
Communication Technologies Paper #104. Retrieved from http://www.presence-
research.org/papers/steuer92defining.pdf  
Steinkuehler, C. (2007). Massively multiplayer online gaming as a constellation of literacy practices. 
eLearning, 4(3), 297–318. 
Swain, M. (1995). Three functions of output in second language learning. In G. Cook & B. Seidlhofer 
(Eds.), Principle and practice in applied linguistics (pp. 125–144). Oxford, England: Oxford University 
Press. 
Sweller, J. (1994). Cognitive load theory, learning difficulty, and instructional design. Learning and 
Instruction, 4, 295–312. 
Sykes, J., Oskoz, A., & Thorne, S. L. (forthcoming). Second language use, socialization, and learning in 
Internet interest communities and online gaming. Retrieved from 
http://language.la.psu.edu/~thorne/Thorne_etal_MLJ_2009_Draft.pdf  
Tamborini, R., Eastin, M., Lachlan, K., Skalski, P., Fediuk, T., & Brady, R. (2001, May). Hostile 
thoughts, presence and violent virtual video games. Paper presented at the 51st annual convention of the 
International Communication Association, Washington, D.C. Retrieved from 
http://info.cas.msu.edu/icagames/HTP.pdf  
Taylor, L. N. (2002). Video games: Perspective, point-of-view, and immersion (Unpublished Master’s 
Thesis). University of Florida, Florida. Retrieved from http://purl.fcla.edu/fcla/etd/UFE1000166  
Tomlin, R., & Villa, V. (1994). Attention in cognitive science and second language acquisition. Studies in 
Second Language Acquisition, 16,
Turkle, S. (1985). The second self. New York: Simon & Schuster. 
 183-204. 
Um, E. J., & deHaan, J. (2005). Video games and cognitive apprenticeship-based learning. Proceedings of 
the Association for Educational Communications and Technology, USA, 28, 499–505. 
Wolf, M. J. P. (2001). The medium of the video game. Austin: University of Texas Press. 
Wolf, M. J. P., & Perron, B. (2003). The video game theory reader. New York: Routledge. 
Zheng, D., Young, M. F., Brewer, R. B., & Wagner, M. (2009). Attitude and self-efficacy change: 
English language learning in virtual worlds. CALICO Journal, 27, 205–231.  
Jonathan deHaan, W. Michael Reed, and Katsuko Kuwada The Effect of Interactivity 
 
Copyright © 2010, ISSN 1094-3501 93 
 
APPENDIX. Parappa the Rapper 2 Vocabulary Written Recall Test 
Instructions: Fill in the blanks with the words from the rap you just heard. 
  
That’s right
I’m in the 
, 
house
Here it 
, 
comes
 
! 
 
<Lesson 1> 
Extra extra, read all about it
The best burgers in 
, 
town from all around
People from around the 
! 
world come and get it
The line goes 
, 
around like a merry go round
 
! 
Cut
Heat! 
! 
Toast! 
Cook! 
Cut! 
Heat! 
Toast! 
Cook
 
! 
 
<Lesson 2> 
Burgers to fries, a shake or a friend
If you’re 
, 
hungry simply line up at the end
Come on 
. 
people, gather 
We got 
round 
everything you want from all around
 
! 
Cut the lettuce
Heat the 
, 
grill
Toast the 
, 
buns
Cook the 
, 
patties
Serve the 
, 
drinks
Melt the 
 [Serve them!] 
cheese
French the 
 [Ow!] 
fries
Sweep the 
 [French them!] 
floors
 
. 
 
<Lesson 3> 
The ketchup, the mustard, the salt and the pepper
Pour it on 
, 
right cos we got no extras
Yo, watch the 
, 
grill, control the flame guys
Follow the 
, 
rules, stay productive and wise
 
. 
Cook those burgers
Turn the patty 
, 
over
Watch them 
! 
fries, 
Jonathan deHaan, W. Michael Reed, and Katsuko Kuwada The Effect of Interactivity 
 
Language Learning & Technology 94 
 
Better execute sooner
Bring on the 
! 
ketchup
Don’t forget the 
, 
cheese
Bring on the 
, 
mustard
Handle it with 
, 
ease
 
! 
 
<Lesson 4> 
Burgers, burgers, is all we have in 
We cook the 
mind 
best, better get in 
Put it on the 
line 
tray, is it for here or to go
Any which 
? 
way it tastes good you know
 
. 
Cook those burgers, turn the patty over
Cut the 
! 
lettuce, don’t forget the cheese
Toast the 
! 
buns, French the fries
Bring on the 
! 
ketchup, sweep the floors
 
! 
