Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2011/dooly.pdf 
June 2011, Volume 15, Number 2 
pp. 69–91 
 
Copyright © 2011, ISSN 1094-3501 69 
DIVERGENT PERCEPTIONS OF TELECOLLABORATIVE LANGUAGE 
LEARNING TASKS: TASK-AS-WORKPLAN VS. TASK-AS-PROCESS 
 
Melinda Dooly, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona 
 
The use of computer-supported collaborative learning is more and more commonplace in 
language learning classrooms; this has given rise to the need for more research on roles 
and processes of telecollaboration in language teaching and learning and how online 
interactions are integrated with face-to-face classroom activities. Using a data-driven, 
qualitative approach to provide snapshots of a telecollaborative language learning project, 
this article examines participants’ modes of language use beginning with the task-as-
workplan (Breen, 1987, 1989) and then examining episodes (both F2F and online) and 
outcomes of the task-in-process. By pinpointing specific moments of emerging language 
knowledge in the telecollaborative process, the article aims to delineate salient factors 
involved in this type of language learning context. 
INTRODUCTION 
Despite being a fairly new educational mode, there is a considerable and growing body of research on 
telecollaboration in language learning, and definitions and uses of telecollaboration have gone through 
many transformations. Generally, telecollaboration in language learning contexts is seen as an Internet-
based exchange aimed at developing both language skills and intercultural communicative competence 
(Guth & Helm, 2010). In this article the label Telecollaborative Language Learning (henceforth TlcLL)1 
will be employed. 
Language educators know well that communicative-based environments do not guarantee that language 
learning takes place. The task design and its implementation are key elements for efficient language 
learning to develop—a carefully designed task or activity that requires off- and online co-construction of 
knowledge not only provides opportunities for target language practice, it also helps integrate language 
use as the means for shared knowledge-building, thus further enhancing purposeful communication. (For 
an in-depth overview of “the growing awareness of the centrality of tasks in CMC [computer-mediated 
communication] learning environments” (p. 19) and subsequent research into task-based language 
teaching in CMC, see Müller-Hartmann & Schocker-v. Ditfurth, 2008). 
Several researchers of TlcLL have called for more focus on what it means to efficiently design a 
communicative venue for online interaction in the target language (Levy & Stockwell, 2006; Mangenot, 
2008). Hermeneutic views of the more common task typology used in telecollaboration can be found in 
recent literature (see Harris, 2002; O’Dowd & Ware, 2009), however research into what occurs during the 
learning process in TlcLL is still lagging behind. Arguably, this is even more so in the case of TlcLL in 
primary education, where there are far fewer studies. Along these lines, this article aims to explore the 
discourse space between online and F2F language learning talk that takes place in a fifth grade classroom 
in Catalonia, Spain. The learners in the study participated in a yearlong telecollaborative project with a 
partner class in the Czech Republic. By considering data from specific episodes during the learning 
process (both on- and offline), the text outlines the anatomy of the language-in-action in these different 
modes of communication, all of which were essential, interlocking components to the overall project 
design. Considering that the use of telecollaboration in language classrooms is becoming more common, a 
micro-analysis of divergent perceptions of telecollaborative language learning tasks of the participants 
involved (learners and teachers) may provide useful insight into the learning process, along with 
understanding of potential gaps between task plans and actions (and final output). The environment is 
understood as a blended learning environment2 therefore data from off- and online contexts are taken into 
Melinda Dooly Divergent Perceptions of Telecollaborative Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 70 
account. 
Contextual and conversational analysis begins with the task-as-workplan (in the classroom) and then 
examines different episodes (both F2F and online) of the task-in-process (Breen, 1987, 1989) to discern 
whether student uses of different resources are legitimized by the teacher as part of the emergent language 
learning in the TlcLL project. The conjunction of different, segmented data, collocated within the 
“network of activity” (Barab, Hay, & Yamagata-Lynch, 2001) that constitutes the yearlong 
telecollaborative project provide the foci for the driving questions of this descriptive study:  
• Is a relationship between learner repertoires, tasks, and output discernable in the described 
episodes (snapshots)? 
• Are there indicators of language learning in these described episodes (snapshots)? 
• Are these indicators recognised and acknowledged in the teaching process? 
• Are there divergences between task plans and participant actions? 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Lamy and Hampel (2007) provide an overview of the history of computer-supported language acquisition, 
describing it in three broad phases: behaviouristic CALL, communicative CALL and integrative CALL 
(p. 9). In the first phase, computers principally were used for individual drill-type exercises. In the 
communicative phase, targeted language practice included speaking and listening albeit via machine-
learner interaction. The integrative phase (beginning in the 1990s) involves multimedia network-based 
interaction, which usually mediates human-human interaction and is often group-based. Second Language 
Acquisition (SLA) theories have generally guided studies of language learning online (Levy, 1998). 
Chapelle (2001) provides a comprehensive overview of the connections between SLA and computer-
supported learning. 
There are two broad paradigms which have been quite influential in SLA (Lamy & Hampel, 2007): 
cognitive and sociocultural (although these can be further categorised into different theoretical branches 
and research areas). “Cognitive SLA is an applied psycholinguistic discipline oriented towards the 
cognitive processes involved in the learning and the use of language” (Lamy & Hampel, 2007, p. 19). 
(For a very thorough description of the debate between the two fields of inquiry in SLA, see Zuengler & 
Miller, 2006). Cognitivism focuses principally on the individual, with the notion of the single language 
learner processing linguistic input and output (based on the metaphor of the brain as a computer). 
Recently however, SLA research has received criticism for holding an imbalanced focus on the four 
linguistic competencies (listening, reading, writing and speaking), based on mostly empirical research that 
mainly considers form and accuracy (with idealised images of native-speaker performance) and with little 
consideration of language as a process and a communicative means for use in socially and culturally 
embedded cultural activities (see Firth & Wagner, 1997, 2007). 
Sociocultural theories aim to put more emphasis on the importance of interaction for language learning 
and in turn highlight situated, learner-centred social practices as part of the learning process. In recent 
years, there have been a number of studies that propose the importance of the sociocultural base of 
language learning (see Firth & Wagner, 1997, 2007; Lantolf, 2000; Mondada & Pekarek-Doehler, 2004). 
Roberts (2001), Kanno and Norton (2003), and Norton and Kamal (2003) have even argued that learning 
linguistic competences is in itself a socialising process in which the individual deploys and negotiates 
new identities as a member of the target language community. This sociocultural perspective can be found 
in CMC research as well:  
[T]he role of technology in education has increasingly been studied through the lens of learning 
theories and models that mark a departure from cognitive approaches, by locating knowledge not only 
Melinda Dooly Divergent Perceptions of Telecollaborative Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 71 
in the mind of individual learners but also in the history, culture and communities that provide the 
context in which learning is taking place. (Blin, 2005, p. 5) 
Applying an even more critical stance to early SLA research, Hall, Cheng, and Carlson (2006) assert that 
much of the research in SLA relies on three assumptions that have underlying theoretical flaws. These 
are: 
1. The assumption of homogeneity of language knowledge across speakers and contexts;  
2. A view of L1 and L2 language knowledge as distinct systems; and 
3. The presumption of a qualitative distinction between multi-competence and mono-competence   
(Hall, Cheng, & Carlson, 2006, p. 220). 
These authors contend that speakers’ language knowledge should not be considered as homogeneous; 
they argue that language knowledge is “not composed of a-contextual, stable system components” (Hall 
et al., 2006, p. 230). This is predicated on the fact that an individual’s use of language is not static, even 
in the case of native speakers; levels of accuracy and fluency will vary, according to everyday contexts. 
Someone writing an article for an academic journal, for instance, will pay more attention to form and 
accuracy of language than he or she might when writing an e-mail to a colleague or sending an SMS 
message (which are often purposefully composed of lexical, syntactical and spelling errors). By 
acknowledging these “varying shapes and substance of individuals’ language use” (Hall et al., 2006, p. 
233) we can have better insight into the way in which learners’ develop their language knowledge 
according to the context in which they are interacting and make comparisons of individual use across 
different episodes and communicative events. 
The other two “flawed assumptions” stem from an idea that language learning processes are sequential 
and monolingual (based on the notion that learners are principally monolingual speakers learning other 
languages as separate systems). Given that many telecollaborative language learning processes take place 
within blended-learning environments in which at least one (and often times more than one) other 
language is available as a communicative resource (apart from the target language), this assumption begs 
reconsideration. In most cases, the task design does indeed aim to elicit a monolingual product (output) at 
the end of a learning process. However, the process of generating the product itself, especially among 
lower level (multilingual) learners, is not always a monolingual process, despite the best intentions of 
students or the admonitions of teachers to use the target language.  
Research indicates that multilingual practices can contribute to the eventual construction of a final 
monolingual output. It has been put forth that plurilingual-hybrid practices often scaffold cognitive and 
communicative activities which eventually allow speakers to participate in monolingual activities at the 
end of the process (Borràs, Canals, Dooly, Moore, & Nussbaum, 2009). Recent research with multilingual 
language learners working towards monolingual task accomplishment shows that they tend to shift 
between different types (or stages) of L1 and target language use (Borràs et al., 2009; Masats, Nussbaum, 
& Unamuno, 2007). Their code-switching allows them to overcome communicative obstacles, facilitating 
an eventual stage where the learner can maximise use of the target language for task management, task 
fulfilment, and other communicative events (e.g., side-sequences). 
This suggests that research must adopt a learner-centred focus that looks at how learners use their various 
linguistic resources to acquire communicative expertise in the target language (Kasper, 2004), and in this 
particular case how this process follows a path that starts with multilingual practices (the simultaneous 
presence of more than one language) to reach voluntary monolingual practices (the use of only one 
language at will) through both off- and online interaction. Furthermore, by viewing the multilingual 
language learner as having an integrated system of different languages that “constitute a repertoire” 
(Canagarajah, 2009, p. 5), the idea of competences (often based on native versus non-native idealised 
standards) must be interrogated. 
Melinda Dooly Divergent Perceptions of Telecollaborative Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 72 
Interrogating the idea of competences inevitably foregrounds the question of what is evidence of language 
learning. Recent work critiques the dominant view of language assessment, arguing for a more context 
sensitive model of dynamic assessment (see Rea-Dickins & Gardner, 2000; Poehner & Lantolf, 2005). 
Gardner and Rea-Dickins (2002) propose using language sampling (recordings of what learners say and 
do during a task and analysing this later) in order to gain more insight into learners’ needs and abilities. 
According to Rea-Dickins (2006, 2007, December), there are a number of potential clues that can be used 
as an indication of a child’s learning. These include when a learner is able to extend a concept; is able to 
relate the activity to own experience; use the targeted learning concepts in different contexts and provide 
evidence of engagement and persistence on a task (among others). This is consistent with language 
learning research that focuses on the socially constructed nature of learning interaction over time.  
This in turn, brings up the question of what constitutes research data for language learning. It is becoming 
more common to find classroom interaction presented as a means of study for language learning 
processes, although this type of reduced data has also been critiqued (see Stubbs, 1981) due to the fact 
that it is the researcher who selects and then interprets the data. Nonetheless, an interactional view sees 
the language input and output of the classroom as inextricably linked and therefore a micro-perspective of 
different learning episodes can provide insight into this learning process (see key studies of classroom 
interaction analysis by Sinclair & Coulthard, 1975; Mondada & Pekarek-Doehler, 2004; Seedhouse, 
2004). This type of analysis, in large part based on social research methods, is traditionally grounded in 
repeated study of collections of examples of human interaction as a means of gaining insight into specific 
moments of very complex, situated practices, as is the case of language teaching and learning. 
Attempting to cover the complexity of interaction in language learning situations implies inherent 
difficulties in classroom research. The approach adopted here focuses on segmented chunks (referred to 
here as snapshots) of the language learners’ actions as the unit of analysis in order to encapsulate the 
language learner as a social and cultural participant engaged in linguistic interaction. At the same time, 
endeavouring to delineate what constitutes interrelated nodes of actions within a classroom is difficult 
since any one pedagogical activity is inevitably embedded in many other activities and often times the 
activity itself is intersected by many other factors.  
Barab et al. (2001), for example, underscore the highly complex interrelations that make up an activity 
system in the learning process, suggesting that a methodological approach based on situated cognition 
must necessarily try to “[track] knowing in the making as the course unfolds” (p. 64). While these 
episodes do not provide a full picture of learning processes, they do offer chunks (or nodes) of segmented 
data that provide insight into the relationship between the nodes that represent the “historical 
development” (Barab et al., p. 69) of the learner. Similarly, finding a way to map the density of a yearlong 
language learning course in which the activities and outcomes were integrated into both online and face-
to-face contexts can be problematic. Therefore, the analysis traces the interaction patterns in both F2F and 
online activities through these snapshots (interrelated episodes of data segments) in order to discern how 
varying activities promote or hinder opportunities for learners to use the target language productively and 
thus gain insight into the effect of specific tasks on students’ language production and, over time, on their 
language development. 
The complexity of this blended-learning interaction is further exacerbated by the difficulties of defining 
task within a SLA or foreign language learning situation. Seedhouse (2005) argues for the need for more 
clarification of the notions of task from the perspective of task-as-workplan (which deals with intentions 
and expectations of the task) and task-in-process (or what “actually happens”, p. 535) and task-as-
outcomes (Seedhouse & Almutairi, 2009, p. 312). This underscores the notion that learners, as active 
agents in learning processes, can modify activities according to their own intentions—modifications 
which may or may not be in direct accordance with the initial intentions of that task-as-workplan.  
As for the off- and online dimensions of learning processes, Kitade (2008) states that most previous 
Melinda Dooly Divergent Perceptions of Telecollaborative Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 73 
studies “have examined only online interactions….without addressing the role of offline interactions or 
the learners’ engagement in combined online and offline interactions” (p. 67). The author posits that “in 
order to fully understand how learners implement a task….and the potential of this task with regard to L2 
learning” it is necessary to integrate a sociocultural perspective that examines and reveals “how each type 
of interaction—online, offline, or combined interactions—can provide learners with opportunities for 
collaborative learning” (p. 67). 
PARTICIPANTS AND CONTEXT 
The data come from a yearlong telecollaborative, cross-disciplinary project that focused on both content 
and language. While it was not formally labelled as a Content Language and Integrated Learning (CLIL) 
project, the project was designed and implemented by an English specialist and the social science teacher 
and dealt with environmental issues. The project was carried out across the full academic year with Year 
Five students (ten-to-eleven year old students) in a Spanish primary school (in the Barcelona area, thus 
the principal school language of instruction is Catalan). The partner school was located in the Czech 
Republic (in the Vychodocesky State); the school language was Czech. There were twenty-six students in 
the Barcelona group (twelve girls, fourteen boys) and twenty-eight students in the Czech group (fifteen 
girls and thirteen boys). The focus of this inquiry is on the Catalan students. The project aims were for the 
students to make initial contact, form work groups to exchange information and opinions about different 
types of pollution (paying special attention to locally-specific issues), and to form work groups made up 
of local and national pairs to compile ideas for contributing to a shared wiki about environmental 
problems. The teachers took charge of posting the negotiated information to the wiki. 
The data were compiled by a student teacher working at the Spanish primary school while completing a 
graduate degree in research in language and literature teaching methods; her research advisor helped 
record and collect the initial data. The teacher and research advisor were not directly involved in the 
planning but the student teacher did take part in the implementation and the research advisor was an 
observer. Class sessions that were related to the telecollaborative work were recorded throughout the year 
using one recorder per working group. These were transcribed using the language archiving technology 
called Transana (transcription key in Appendix A). 
Permission to audio record the face-to-face exchanges was obtained from the Spanish students’ parents, 
however due to strict regulations in the school the exchanges could not be videotaped. The teacher also 
received permission from both the Spanish and the Czech participants for full access to the data online 
(forums, e-mails, wiki). 
MATERIALS 
The project activities consisted of face-to-face work (whole class activities, group work activities, pair 
work and individual work) and online work with international partners in the Czech Republic (primarily 
pair work and group work). The English specialist was in charge of implementing the exchange, including 
the preparatory work leading up to the online collaboration. Some of the online activities involved: 
• Participating in a forum about environmental issues in which the students explained different 
topics and concepts related to the environment that were relevant to their countries (e.g., water 
conservation was important to the students in Spain following a drought in 2008). The pupils 
were asked to post comments, links, and images. 
• Comparing and contrasting different issues that were important to each community and how they 
were dealt with. 
• Based on the previously shared information, preparing a collaborative environment alert wiki. 
Overall, the data collected during the year are the teacher’s work plans (handwritten in a notebook; seven 
Melinda Dooly Divergent Perceptions of Telecollaborative Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 74 
recorded F2F class sessions, screenshots of forum interactions during the year (breakdown of interactions 
can be found in Appendix B) and the final wiki. The data presented here consist of: 
1. Teachers’ workplans (Spanish EFL teacher: Laura) 
2. Student-teacher’s field notes 
3. F2F pair work interaction (one extract)  
- Participants: two female students (Berta, Clara) and one female teacher (Laura) 
4. Forum entries 
- Three students (Maria, Berta, and Clara) 
- Two teachers (Laura, Agnieska) 
The names of the participants have been changed. 
ANALYSIS FRAMEWORK: DATA SELECTION AND MANAGEMENT 
Since task is understood here as something in progress—in a constant state of negotiation and 
construction (Breen, 1987, 1989)—these data extracts are seen as snapshots of interaction, allowing 
glimpses into moments of specific language learning events taking place during the overall exchange, and 
not just as end-products. Taking the position that language learning is dynamic, non-linear, and 
contingent upon multiple, non-isolatable factors, then language use and learning can be seen to emerge in 
nested patterns. “These patterns are not predicted but ‘retrodicted’ or described post priori, since 
interrelationships are so complex that causation in the traditional sense is untenable” (Reinhardt, in press).  
Furthermore, within an interactional research framework, data analysis actually begins with the data 
compilation and segmentation. The analytical approach follows the premise posed by Barab et al. (2001) 
that methodological approaches aiming to capture learning processes from a situated-cognition 
perspective must try to describe the rich contexts “of knowing about [knowledge-construction] that are so 
fundamental to situative or distributed conceptions of cognition” (p. 67). These authors propose a means 
of representing the learning process “as a network of activity—a network that allows for the inclusion 
(capturing) of material, conceptual, and social components” (Barab et al., 2001, p. 67). They apply a 
method of identifying relevant data through three steps. “[E]xperiences are (a) sectioned into action-
relevant episodes (AREs), (b) parsed down to codes in a database, and (c) then represented as nodes in a 
network so that the historical development of the particular phenomenon of interest can be traced” (Barab 
et al., 2001, p. 63). 
A similar approach is taken here, however, rather than using AREs, snapshots (captured data segments) 
revolving around chosen language use are employed. “It is important to note that the boundaries of what 
constitutes a chunk are determined by the needs of the study and not some ontological truth” (Barab et al., 
2001, p. 66). The snapshots in this study focus principally on one pair (girl-girl) in different stages of the 
task-as-process. The pair also interacts with others but the focus is on the language use by these two girls. 
The timeline shown in Figure 1 helps underscore the complexity of describing the interrelatedness of 
tasks and activities over a long-term period. For instance, snapshot 2, time wise, falls after snapshots 3, 4 
and 5, but it is clearly linked to the snapshots that come before and after it. This will be described in more 
detail in the analysis. 
Melinda Dooly Divergent Perceptions of Telecollaborative Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 75 
 
Figure 1. Mapping the network of activities. 
Before determining which data segments were of interest, multiple listening sessions were arranged 
(twice for the transcriptions done by the student teacher and researcher) and once for triangulation by a 
nonparticipant. Following that, data sessions3 were arranged to (a) select relevant data segments 
(snapshots) for further analysis, and (b) revise and analyse the selected data. Due to the nature of the 
telecollaborative situation, these sessions dealt with more than the recorded transcripts; thus written and 
online data were also included (teachers’ workplans; student teacher’s field notes; F2F pair work 
interaction; forum entries). 
Taking Rea-Dickins’ (2006, 2007, December) indicators of language learning as a preliminary basis for 
data selection (extension of a concept; relating an activity to own experience; use of targeted learning 
concepts in different contexts; evidence of engagement and persistence on a task), the data session 
participants incorporated van Lier’s notion of being “on the lookout for patterns and regularities” in the 
data (1988, p.16). This article focuses on snapshots that showed recurring patterns of use of new lexical 
items in the students’ L2 repertoire: noise and annoy. (The reasons for this selection are illustrated further 
on.) Researchers are not unmotivated by the theoretical frames in which they move, thus the way in which 
the data were selected and managed is considered part of the analysis cycle, as illustrated in Figure 2. 
Following the data segmentation related to the chosen features to be analysed (episodic snapshots related 
to the words noise and annoy), the interactions—both face-to-face and online—are examined through the 
parameters applied to the study of talk-in-interaction. The interactions are analysed in terms of “the 
order/organization/orderliness of social action, particularly, those social actions that are located in 
everyday interaction, in discursive practices, in the sayings/tellings/doings of members of society” 
(Psathas, 1995, p. 2). 
The snapshots of interaction are then placed in conjunction with the original task-as-workplan (network of 
activities) to highlight convergences and divergences between the task plans and actions. As Markee 
(2000) argues, a social-interactionist approach that closely examines the learners’ talk can help identify 
Melinda Dooly Divergent Perceptions of Telecollaborative Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 76 
successful and unsuccessful learning behaviours as well as show how meaning is constructed by the 
participants (students and teacher) in the learning situation. 
 
 
Figure 2. The analysis cycle. 
Inevitably, the fact that these exchanges take place within a wider context of the classroom implies that 
there is a different speech exchange system than other types of talk-in-interaction (McHoul, 1978). As 
Meskill (2005) puts it, school discourse is made up of “those ways of talking that have become 
institutionally sanctioned or ‘normal’” (p. 46). In this study, the importance of unequal roles of teacher 
and student within this school discourse emerges as an important feature determining the talk-in-
interaction in both the face-to-face and online interaction. 
ANALYSIS 
The first data segment consists of written text while the second data segment is a short F2F extract of in-
class pair work. However the content of both data segments relate to online interaction that will take place 
later on in the network of activities. The analysis illustrates a mismatch between the intended task plan (as 
understood by the teacher) and the learners’ actions. This mismatch carries implications that will be 
discussed further on. 
Melinda Dooly Divergent Perceptions of Telecollaborative Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 77 
Snapshots 1 and 2: F2F classroom interaction 
The first snapshot deals with the teacher’s plans (see network of activity, Figure 1, above). According to 
the teacher, the underlying plan of the overall exchange was to provide opportunities for the students to 
use the target language in their F2F and online work (stated intentions were collected in student-teachers’ 
field notes). The workplan focused on the use of F2F work for language planning (metalinguistic focus)—
the students first consider carefully about how they should phrase their interaction with their partners. 
This was intended to lead into their exchange between the online partners. The focus of the workplan is 
on specific target language that should take place during the online work. 
 
 
- Brainstorm words associated 
with environment/contamination 
in class 
- Make pairs & match with 
partner 
- Pairs suggest topics in the 
forum for the project (2 wks) 
- Pairs use forum/chat to 
negotiate topic (in computer 
lab) 
 
- Pairwork in class: make 
suggestions of images, words for 
the online mural (topics already 
decided) […] 
Figure 3. The teacher’s first workplan (transcribed next to the original notes). 
The workplan indicates that sub-tasks leading up to the online interaction centred on vocabulary 
(beginning with the oral elicitation of possible topics in the brainstorming) and structures needed for 
making introductions and suggestions (about the topics). The first brainstorming produced the following 
lexical items: 
• Ozone layer holes 
• Ecology 
• Al Gore 
• Global heat [warming] 
• Factories 
• Too much traffic 
• Cutting down trees in the Amazon 
• Dead fish 
• Cow farts 
• Golf courses in Almería 
Melinda Dooly Divergent Perceptions of Telecollaborative Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 78 
• Greenhouse effect (list comes from the student-teachers’ field notes) 
Following this, the teacher presented short dialogues as models for the online exchange. According to the 
field notes, the teacher used the F2F sessions as a means of a priori language practice of the modeled 
structures. At this point in the task plan, the teacher’s focus is on presenting, practicing, and producing 
discrete, previously selected target language (how to introduce themselves and make suggestions for 
topics). This is to then be transferred to the online exchange. 
The next snapshot proceeds from the F2F exchange (audio recording) of a pair of students discussing in 
Catalan what topic they are interested in working on with their online partners. According to the workplan 
(Figure 4), the students should first make their introductions online, mention local environmental 
problems, read the Czech students’ posts and then make specific project-topic suggestions and wait for a 
response.  
 
- Sts post introductions in forum 
- Read CZ intros 
- Post 1 reply (min) 
- Discuss (clss) about ptners 
- Forum post on local env. prob. 
(can b in prs) 
- Find out CZ prob 
- Post topic suggestion 
Figure 4. The teacher’s second workplan (transcribed next to the original notes). 
According to the workplan, the students should not decide a topic beforehand. This becomes an issue in 
the following extract. 
Extract 1. Original Version: Teacher (T), Berta (BER), Clara (CLA) (transcription key in Appendix A) 
1. BER: teacher/ (.) el podem fer sobre el soroll oi/_ 
2. T: well: have you talked to the Czech partners yet/| 
3. BER: no: hem estat pensant molt i volem fer el noise\| 
4.  T: you have to decide with the others\| 
5.  BER: (2) >yes< 
6. (T goes to another group) 
7. BER: do:ncs (.) que fem/| 
8. CLA: fem noise (.) vaig veure unes paraules que molen al fòrum (.) a veure\ ehm:: ainoi o 
alguna cosa =similar= 
9. BER:  =si si=      noi-ing com que els nois sempre parlen tant_  
10. (Both Berta & Clara laugh) 
 
Melinda Dooly Divergent Perceptions of Telecollaborative Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 79 
Extract 1. Translation (participants’ words that were originally in English are marked in bold; words 
created by the students are in cursive and underlined) 
1. BER: teacher we can work on noise right 
2. T: well have you talked to the Czech partners yet 
3. BER: no we’ve been thinking a lot and we want to work on noise 
4.  T: you have to decide with the others 
5.  BER: (2) >yes< 
6. (T goes to another group) 
7. BER: so what do we do 
8. CLA: let’s do noise I saw some cool words in the forum. let’s see hm ainoi
9. 
 or something =like 
that= 
BER: =yeah yeah= noi-ing
10. 
 since it’s boys that are always talking so much 
(Both Berta & Clara laugh) 
 
In the last two lines, the students appear to be making up a word based on annoy in English and noi in 
Catalan (which means ‘boy’). Both words have similar pronunciations. 
Following Seedhouse’s (2004, 2005) description of how interactional organisation can transform the 
pedagogical focus, it is interesting to start by looking at the case of preference organisation in this short 
extract. In the first two turns, we can see a dispreferred response by the teacher (turn two), in response to 
the students’ request to work on noise as a topic. The teacher does not answer the question directly; rather 
she delays the response and answers their question with another question. Looking at the indexicality of 
the teacher’s response, it can be seen that she is referencing the assignment as it was spelled out in the 
workplan (Figure 4): the students should decide on the topic after contacting their online partners. 
This adjacency pair is followed by the students’ own dispreferred response. Despite their direct answer to 
the teacher (“no”), Berta immediately uses a pre-positioned alignment “we’ve been thinking a lot” to 
prevent the teacher from reacting negatively to her additional information and insistence on working with 
the topic of noise (even though they have not discussed it with their Czech partners).  
The teacher continues her focus on the task in line four and, again, the indexicality of what the teacher is 
referencing highlights the importance she places on the plans she has in mind. She emphasizes the need to 
follow the steps of the task and dismisses the students’ apparent engagement and interest in the overall 
activity, signalled by the fact that they have already found a topic. The teacher’s orientation in the 
interaction underscores her relevancy on the assignment itself, rather than on the way in which the 
students are negotiating and interpreting the task (task-as-process).  
After the teacher leaves the pair to go to another group, the students discuss what they should do about the 
topic, as seen in turns 7 and 8. 
7. BER: so what do we do 
8. CLA: let’s do noise I saw some cool words in the forum. let’s see hm ainoi
9. 
 or something =like 
that= 
BERT:=yeah yeah= noi-ing
10. 
 since it’s boys that are always talking so much 
(Both Berta & Clara laugh) 
Melinda Dooly Divergent Perceptions of Telecollaborative Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 80 
Significantly, in turn eight, Clara references the forum; this indexicality foregrounds the fact that the 
students are aware of the task, however, their referencing indicates that they are interpreting it in their 
own way: going online and browsing through the Czech students’ posts and then using this information to 
decide on a topic. This was done before posting their general comments about environmental problems 
and before discussing possible topics in the F2F classroom.  
As can be seen in Figure 4, in the network of activities a student named Maria posts her introduction and 
mentions noise as an environmental problem. This topic is then discussed more in the following threads 
(these entries are considered in more detail further on). However, the F2F interaction transcribed in 
extract one took place before Clara or Berta made an entry in the forum (thus there was no physical 
evidence of their online participation, see Figure 5). However, the fact that they have clearly referenced 
the forum implies that there may be a need to reconsider what membership participation online means. 
 
Figure 5. F2F use of noise in network of activities. 
Furthermore, in their referencing of the forum, Berta and Clara make jokes—creating a new word based 
on what they had read in an entry. Belz (2002a, 2002b) shows how language learners may use their L1 as 
a mediation tool while playing or breaking rules in the target (foreign) language. As Vandergriff and 
Fuchs (2009) point out, playing with language is an authentic and legitimate way to use it and therefore 
should be considered as an element of competency. 
Returning to the original driving questions, the two snapshots reveal some indicators of language learning 
beginning to emerge for the two young students. Taking Rea-Dickins’ parameters (2006, 2007, 
December), it can be seen that the two students are able to relate a new concept (new lexicon noticed in 
their forum reading) to their own experience (making a multilingual joke); both actions indicate some 
level of metalinguistic knowledge, although these dimensions are not always acknowledged by the 
teacher. She appears to be more concerned with following the workplan (see Figures 1 and 4) than 
potentialising the students’ exploration with the target language and their obvious engagement with the 
Melinda Dooly Divergent Perceptions of Telecollaborative Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 81 
overall project. Still, it remains to be seen if the students then use the new learning concepts in different 
contexts (and modes) and whether they appear to be engaged in the overall task of language learning.  
Snapshots 3, 4, and 5: Forum interaction 
The following data segments come from the project’s forum. The entries are not only the source for new 
lexical items for Berta and Clara (they clearly referenced the forum and the word in the F2F interaction); 
the forums also display relevant student-teacher interaction. 
In her post (Figure 6 below), Maria starts a new discussion. In the subject, she announces an 
environmental topic (noise); however, in the main body of her message, she does not formally nominate 
this topic for the environmental project. Instead, she provides an explanation for why she is taking part in 
the forum; the post indicates that she is taking part in the introduction. The opening used (“Teacher say 
we”) makes it clear that she is doing what she has been told to do (explaining something about where she 
lives) and that she is engaged in the negotiation and completion of the task.  
 
Figure 6. Screenshot of task-in-action. 
Similar to the F2F interaction, the roles of teacher and students are marked. Maria calls attention to the 
fact that she is engaged in the task at hand—just as the students in the F2F interaction did. Moreover, like 
the teacher in the F2F interaction, the respondent to the post (who is a teacher, Figure 7), gives a 
dispreferred response by ignoring the main focus of the content of Maria’s intervention (which we could 
call a turn) and instead brings attention to the task-as-workplan. 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Screenshot of an interruption. 
Interestingly Maria’s forum entry is actually closer to a conversational turn because she provides an 
opening for her intervention (naming a new topic) and plainly signals the end of her turn (“Bye”) whereas 
the teacher’s turn is rather abrupt and arguably an interruption because the teacher does not align with the 
content of the message nor does she continue the conversational information-exchange tone established 
by Maria in her entry. It is recognised, of course, that an asynchronous interruption is different from a 
synchronous one and may take place for quite different reasons. Still, at this point, it appears that Maria is 
following the workplan more closely than the teacher since she is introducing herself (as was practiced 
orally in a previous class) and explaining an environmental problem (see Figure 8). 
Melinda Dooly Divergent Perceptions of Telecollaborative Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 82 
The teacher, on the other hand, is focusing on the next task: proposing a topic. In order to ensure the 
successful completion of task plans, Van den Branden (2006) suggests that teachers’ interventions must 
be carefully balanced between the teachers’ initiative and that of their learners. The teachers’ mediating 
role can help bring the task to its full potential or it can just as easily stifle the learners’ involvement with 
the task. Arguably the teachers’ reply, which indicates a clear focus on the next phase in the workplan 
(and subsequent interruption) rather than responding to Maria’s conversational tone, suppresses other 
opportunities for Maria to continue exploring the online mode of target language use. 
 
Figure 8. Student-teacher online interaction in network of activities. 
These entries are followed by several contributions by different students discussing whether noise is a 
type of pollution (not shown here) and then the Spanish teacher, Laura, asks if this should be included in 
the topic discussion. In response to this, the Czech teacher (Agnieska) answers this question affirmatively 
(“I definitely think it should be”), thereby ratifying the topic of Maria’s first intervention and guiding the 
task as plan. 
 
Melinda Dooly Divergent Perceptions of Telecollaborative Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 83 
 
Figure 9. Screenshot of appearance of lexical feature annoy. 
Moreover, there is further endorsement of Maria’s discussion about noise pollution—this time contributed 
by another student (“I agree with Maria”). This is another important node in the network of activity since 
it is the message containing the word annoying which was referenced in the F2F interaction already 
analysed above and which is eventually integrated into the two Spanish students’ communicative 
repertoire. A relationship between learner repertoires (new concepts) and tasks-as-workplan as well as 
task-as-process begins to emerge in the network of activities including the interaction with other students 
(F2F and online) as a potential source for learning. At the same time, there is evidence in both modes of 
interaction that there are divergent perceptions of the TlcLL tasks in regard to the students and teachers. 
Snapshots 6, 7 and 8: Extension of Concepts 
Additional snapshots of the network of activities illustrate how the participants begin to extend the 
targeted concepts (noise and annoy) and integrate them into their own learning process, albeit in a 
different sequence than anticipated in the task-as-workplan. Moreover, looking at Rea-Dickins’ (2006, 
2007, December) indicators of language learning, it appears that the students are quite engaged with the 
task. 
Figure 10 shows a forum intervention by Berta and Clara. This entry was posted by Berta but implicitly 
included her partner, Clara. 
 
 
Figure 10. Screenshot of students making a suggestion. 
At this point, Maria had joined the pair and the students had been assigned to work with Martina and 
Beata (Czech students). Through negotiation of the teachers (via e-mails, not shown here), the group was 
given permission to work on noise as an environmental topic. It is important to remember, however, that 
it was the students themselves who first highlighted this topic. At the stage shown here, the students were 
supposed to exchange ideas (including images and slogans) that they felt would be interesting to 
contribute to the final environmental wiki page. (The students did not have to invent their own images; 
they were allowed to look for images in the Internet.) Figure 11 shows the image that the girls sent in a 
file to their partners and how it appeared as part of the final output.  
 
Melinda Dooly Divergent Perceptions of Telecollaborative Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 84 
   
 
Figure 11. Screenshots of the use of annoying and noise. 
It is worth noting that the image the students sent appears in the final product in the wiki, alongside the 
word that had first caught their attention (annoying). Furthermore, according to the field notes taken by 
the student-teacher/researcher, the students included the same image in their final PowerPoint 
presentation and in their oral explanation of “what they had learnt” at the end of the year (unfortunately 
these presentations were not recorded). 
 
 
Figure 12. Field notes explanation (e-mail). 
Melinda Dooly Divergent Perceptions of Telecollaborative Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 85 
According to the field notes, the students not only used the words noise and annoying in their 
presentation, but when asked by a classmate about the word annoy Clara responded (perhaps jokingly) 
that annoy “es cuando algo te toca las narices” (“is when something gets up your nose”). 
The students have re-organized, expanded and transformed elements of the target language as they 
“move[d] into different contexts” (Hall et al., 2006, p. 10). They appropriated different linguistic and non-
linguistic resources to communicate during different phases of the telecollaboration, combined with 
previous knowledge of the target language. At the same time, the two students first noticed new lexical 
items through their online reading and then use.  
DISCUSSION 
The driving questions of the inquiry were: Is a relationship between learner repertoires, tasks and output 
discernable in the snapshots? Are there indicators of language learning processes in these snapshots? It is 
difficult to verify what learning actually takes place in real teaching contexts especially considering that 
interaction largely depends on the type of task and activity taking place as well as the possibility of match 
or mismatch between task-as-workplan and task-in-process: 
Any framework which attempts to portray task-based interaction in a holistic way will need to track 
the relationship between these phases as they unfold during the implementation of a task. The 
relationship may be a linear one, but this is not necessarily the case. In practice, there is sometimes a 
difference between what is supposed to happen (task-as-workplan) and what actually happens (task-
in-process). (Seedhouse & Almutairi, 2009, p. 312) 
In this particular case, the individuals’ language use indicates the different ways in which these students 
have employed their language knowledge (as well as their limitations), according to the context in which 
they are interacting. This can be seen, for instance, in the initial attention given to a specific lexeme 
(annoy) while reading (in the forum) in the target language; this lexical knowledge is later developed into 
contextualised use in monolingual output (wiki and oral presentation).  
These episodes are directly related to the next driving questions: Are these indicators recognised and 
acknowledged in the teaching process? Are there divergences between task plans and participant actions? 
These questions underscore the significance of connect/disconnect between task plans and actions in the 
learning process, and more importantly, how the learners in this study appear to have acquired some 
language outside of the parameters of the task-as-workplan. 
Perhaps what most calls one’s attention is the fact that these students were originally evaluated by their 
teacher as being mostly off-task (recorded in the graduate student’s field notes). The snapshots of the 
entire process indicate differently, however. The snapshots indicate that the learners are engaged 
throughout the process and that they display persistence (Rea-Dickins, 2006, 2007, December). These 
episodes highlight the differences between the task-as-workplan, as conceived by the teacher and the task-
as-process, as interpreted and put into play by the students. 
The fact that the activities involved in creating the monolingual product entailed a multilingual process 
does not necessarily imply that the students were off-task and not engaged in the language learning 
process. The snapshots demonstrate that the multilingual language learners accomplished the monolingual 
task while passing through various stages of target language use. They use their L1 to manage most of the 
activity in the F2F interaction but also generate some utterances in the target language (the topic word; 
one-word responses to the teacher; the use of the target language to get the teacher’s attention and to start 
a turn, etc.). They also use a hybrid form of the target language to make a joke related to their chosen 
topic. In their online, asynchronous interaction, the students use the target language, although there is no 
recorded data concerning the process leading to this use.  
Different from the initial words elicited in the initial brainstorming, the students in this case did not use 
Melinda Dooly Divergent Perceptions of Telecollaborative Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 86 
the focal language that emerged in that session. They are first exposed to and pick up on the lexical item 
that will become their topic through the online activities independent of F2F brainstorming activity. The 
“focal vocabulary needed for [the] successful task processes” (Meskill & Anthony, 2010, p. 73) was made 
available by their online partners, not the teacher. At the same time, there are a number of episodes in 
which learner talk is directly related to the performance of the tasks, indicating that they are, generally, 
engaged in the task-as-process while at times moving outside the bounds of the workplan. Furthermore, 
the task-as-outcomes do converge with the initial overall planning. 
While the various comparisons of the different actions of the teachers and students during the whole 
process highlight the divergences between intentions and expectations of the task (task-as-workplan) and 
what actually happens (task-as-process), it is interesting to note that the task-as-outcomes coincide. The 
students, as active agents in learning processes, clearly modify the activities according to their own 
intentions—modifications which do not appear to be in direct accordance with the teacher’s initial 
intentions, in particular when the students were dealing with language input from the online activities. It 
appears that the students are making use of dialogic opportunities provided by “digital learning objects” 
(Meskill & Anthony, 2007, p. 81). Different from the way it is planned by the teacher, the “public; 
malleable; unstable and anarchic” (p. 81) dimensions of technologies provided the students with 
possibilities that the teacher was not (at least at first) able to integrate into the task-as-process. 
LIMITATIONS 
This is a study that endeavours to take a micro-analytical, cross-sectional examination of several events 
that make up a whole—in this case, the design and implementation of a telecollaborative language 
learning project in a blended environment. Inevitably, micro-analysis implies the use of quite limited data 
samples; however, at the same time this analysis yields rich description of the complexity of behaviour, 
including the typology and intensity of the actions of the participants involved. Qualitative observation is 
generally limited to descriptions of what happens in small groups of people, thus limiting the ability to 
generalize the results and in this case, the article only draws on the data samples that are specifically 
linked to the chosen learning features. It is not the intention of this paper to imply any cause-and-effect 
relationships, but rather provide a detailed contextual view of an increasingly common language learning 
situation. 
FINAL WORDS 
It can be posited that much research into TlcLL has largely been focused on a-contextual, discreet 
moments of online interaction, whereas most TlcLL episodes are actually carried out in blended learning 
classroom environments and are embedded in much longer, multiple learning episodes. It is almost a 
truism to point out the increasing pressure for language teachers to use new technologies in order to teach 
students diverse knowledge (e.g., languages and intercultural competence) associated with the 21st 
century. Inevitably, requiring educators to change long-held concepts of language teaching and learning—
which are often influenced by language and teaching concepts developed in the 1980s and 1990s—in 
order to accommodate the 21st century literacy practices and context of their students is no walk in the 
park. In 1996, Warshauer warned that technology is not a panacea for challenges facing language 
teachers. “New technologies will not revolutionize, or even improve, language learning unless they are 
well understood and intelligently implemented. The Internet itself is only a tool, albeit a powerful one, in 
the hands of good or bad pedagogy” (Warschauer, 1996, p. ix).  
Meskill and Anthony (2010) propose that the “key to viewing learning as a dynamic, developmental 
process is the notion of guided participation” (p. 13). Investigating the way in which both learners and 
teachers interpret and engage with tasks (as plans and as outcomes) may reveal new learning 
opportunities in these processes, especially as new opportunities such as telecollaboration are introduced 
into language teaching. 
Melinda Dooly Divergent Perceptions of Telecollaborative Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 87 
Considering the difficulties already inherent to teaching, moving from more common (classroom-bound) 
teacher-centred strategies into open learner-centred, peer-to-peer strategies such as those facilitated by 
telecollaboration requires a closer look into the blueprints teachers use for designing these exchanges. The 
transferral of a language teaching approach (no matter how time-tested and validated in the classroom) 
into a telecollaborative approach is not foolproof nor is it always easy to carry out. This article 
underscores the need for futher research into the discourse space between online and F2F language 
learning within these learning parameters. 
 
APPENDIX A. Transcription key 
 
The first version of the transcripts were done by the student teacher, who codified the participants’ 
speech, using the standard spelling and a broad key to show some aspects of the actual speech. The 
second version of the transcripts was carried out by the researcher advisor/author in order to ensure the 
fidelity of the transcripts. The transcript key is based on the symbology regularly used by the research 
group Grup de Recerca en Ensenyament i Interacció Plurilingües (GREIP) of the Universitat Autònoma 
de Barcelona (Spain). 
 
Capitals at the beginnings of lines indicate the participant’s pseudonyms 
??? = speaker cannot be identified 
Intonation: 
descendent \ 
ascendent / 
wh question ? 
maintenance - 
|  tiny gap 
||  longer gap 
<seconds>  elapsed time 
<0> = no gap 
·  elongation of the immediately previous sound 
Overlaps: 
=text speaker 1= 
=text speaker 2= 
-_ interruptions in text_ 
[text] transcripter’s comments 
XXX unable to discern what is said 
 
Melinda Dooly Divergent Perceptions of Telecollaborative Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 88 
APPENDIX B. Types of interactions in forum 
 
Topics Header No. Threads Teacher Intervention 
Introductions 12 38 4 
Personal questions 3 5 0 
Topic Suggestion 18 17 14 
Request for clarification 5 5 2 
New Topic Suggested 2 2 0 
Content 34 15 8 
Work procedure 4 6 3 
Finalising 11 23 4 
 
NOTES 
1. The author is following the terminology and abbreviation used by Lamy and Goodfellow (2010). 
2. Blended learning refers to the use of F2F and online teaching and learning processes in formal 
classroom settings. 
3. Data sessions are described by the American Sociological Association Section on Ethnomethodology 
and Conversation Analysis (EMCA News, 2007, Summer) as a recognised method of data management in 
ethnographic/CA studies. Data sharing is an important element of networks of researchers in which audio 
and/or video data is presented for observation to a group of researchers several times for observation and 
discussion. Segments of interaction may then be singled out for attention and analysis. Observations 
about the data are shared, followed by discussion. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I would like to thank my colleagues, Dr. Paul Seedhouse, at Newcastle University (GB), Dr. Randall 
Sadler, at the University of Illinois Urbana Champaign (USA), and Dr. Carolin Fuchs at Teachers 
College, Columbia University (USA), for their valuable comments at different stages of writing the text. 
My sincerest gratitude goes to Dr. Carla Meskill for her insight on editing this article and bringing it to 
fruition. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Dr. Melinda Dooly specialises in teacher training in EFL at the Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona 
(Spain) at the Department of Language Teaching Methodology. She is a member of the research group 
GREIP (Research Group on Plurilingual Interaction and Teaching) at the same department.  
E-mail: melindaann.dooly@uab.cat 
Melinda Dooly Divergent Perceptions of Telecollaborative Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 89 
REFERENCES 
Barab, S. A., Hay, K. E., & Yamagata-Lynch, L. C. (2001). Constructing networks of action-relevant 
episode: An in situ research methodology. The Journal of Learning Sciences, 10(1/2), 36–112. 
Belz, J. A. (2002a). The myth of the deficient communicator. Language Teaching Research, 6(1), 59–82. 
Belz, J. A. (2002b). Second language play as a representation of the multicompetent self in foreign 
language study. Journal of Language, Identity, and Education, 1(1), 13–39. 
Blin, F. (2005). CALL and the development of learner autonomy: An activity theoretical study 
(Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Institute of Educational Technology, The Open University. UK. 
Borràs, E., Canals, L., Dooly M., Moore, E. & Nussbaum, L. (2009). DYLAN WorkPackage 3: 
Educational Systems. Deliverable 4: Creativity & Innovation. Unpublished manuscript. 
Breen, M. (1987). Learner contribution to the task design. In C. N. Candlin & D. Murphy (Eds.), 
Language learning tasks (Vol. 7, pp. 23–46). London: Prentice-Hall International. 
Breen, M. (1989). The evaluation cycle for language learning tasks. In R. K. Johnson (Ed.), The second 
language curriculum (pp. 187–206). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Canagarajah, S. A. (2009). The plurilingual tradition and the English language in South Asia. In L. Lim, 
& E-L. Low (Eds.), Multilingual, globalizing Asia: Implications for policy and education (pp. 5–22). 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Chapelle, C. A. (2001). Computer applications in second language acquisition: Foundations for teaching, 
testing and research. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
EMCA News (2007, Summer). Developing Data Sessions. Newsletter of the American Sociological 
Association Section on Ethnomethodology and Conversation Analysis 2(1), 1–8. 
Firth, A., & Wagner, J. (1997). On discourse, communication, and (some) fundamental concepts in SLA 
research. The Modern Language Journal, 81, 285–300. 
Firth, A., & Wagner, J. (2007). Second/foreign language learning as a social accomplishment: 
Elaborations on a reconceptualized SLA. [Special Issue]. Modern Language Journal, 91, 798–817. 
Gardner, S., & Rea-Dickins, P. (2002). Focus on language sampling: A key issue in EAL assessment. 
NALDIC Occasional Paper 15. Watford: NALDIC. 
Guth, S., & Helm, F. (Eds.) (2010). Telecollaboration 2.0: Language, literacies and intercultural 
learning in the 21st century. Bern: Peter Lang.  
Hall, J. K., Cheng, A., & Carlson, M. T. (2006). Reconceptualizing multicompetence as a theory of 
language knowledge. Applied Linguistics, 27(2), 220–240. 
Harris, J. (2002). Wherefore art thou, telecollaboration? Learning and Leading with Technology. 
Retrieved from http://virtual-architecture.wm.edu/ 
Kanno, Y., & Norton, B. (2003). Imagined communities and educational possibilities: Introduction. 
Journal of Language, Identity and Education, 2(4), 241–249. 
Kasper, G. (2004). Participant orientations in German conversation-for-learning. Modern Language 
Journal, 88(4), 551–67. 
Kitade, K. (2008). The role of offline metalanguage talk in asynchronous computer-mediated 
communication. Language Learning & Technology, 12(1), 64–84. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/ 
vol12num1/kitade/default.html 
Melinda Dooly Divergent Perceptions of Telecollaborative Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 90 
Lamy, M-N., & Goodfellow, R. (2010). Telecollaboration and learning 2.0. In S. Guth & F. Helm (Eds.), 
Telecollaboration 2.0: Language, literacies and intercultural learning in the 21st century (pp. 107–138). 
Bern: Peter Lang. 
Lamy, M-N., & Hampel, R. (2007). Online communication in language learning and teaching. 
Hampshire, UK: Palgrave MacMillan. 
Lantolf, J. P. (2000). Introducing sociocultural theory. In J. P. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and 
second language learning (pp. 1–26). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Levy, M. (1998). Two conceptions of learning and their implication for CALL at the tertiary level. 
ReCALL 10(1), 86–94. 
Levy, M., & Stockwell, G. (2006). CALL dimensions. Options and issues in computer-assisted language 
learning. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Mangenot, F. (2008). Formations hybrides utilisant Internet: l'importance du scénario de communication. 
In Atti del seminario nazionale LEND, Lingua e nuova didattica 3/2008 (Anno XXXVII), 78–88. 
Markee, N. (2000). Conversation analysis. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Masats, D., Nussbaum, L., & Unamuno, V. (2007). When activity shapes the repertoire of second 
language learners. In L. Roberts, A. Gürel, S. Tatar, & L. Marti (Eds.), EUROSLA yearbook 7 (pp. 121–
147). Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
McHoul, A. W. (1978). The organisation of turns at formal talk in the classroom. Language in Society, 7, 
183–213. 
Meskill, C. (2005). Triadic scaffolds: tools for teaching English language learners with computers. 
Language Learning & Technology, 9(1), 46–59. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num1/ 
meskill/default.html 
Meskill, C., & Anthony, N. (2007). The language of teaching well with learning objects. MERLOT 
Journal of Online Learning and Teaching, 3(1), 79–93. Retrieved from http://jolt.merlot.org/  
Meskill, C., & Anthony, N. (2010). Teaching languages online. Bristol: Multilingual Matters. 
Mondada, L., & Pekarek-Doehler, S. (2004). Second language acquisition as situated practice: Task 
accomplishment in the French second language classroom. Modern Language Journal, 88(4), 501–518. 
Müller-Hartmann, A., & Schocker-v. Ditfurth, M. (Eds.) (2008). Research on the use of technology in 
task-based language teaching. In A. Müller-Hartmann & M. Schocker-v. Ditfurth (Eds.), 
Aufgabenorientiertes Lernen und Lehren mit Medien: Ansätze, Erfahrungen, Perspektiven in der 
Fremdsprachendidaktik (pp. 12–64). Frankfurt: Peter Lang. 
Norton, B., & Kamal, F. (2003). The imagined communities of English language learners in a Pakistani 
school. Journal of Language, Identity and Education, 2(4), 301–317. 
O’Dowd, R., & Ware, P. (2009). Critical issues in telecollaborative task design. Computer Assisted 
Language Learning, 22(2), 173–188. 
Poehner, M. E., & Lantolf, J. P. (2005). Dynamic assessment in the language classroom. Language 
Teaching Research, 9(3), 233–265. 
Psathas, G. (1995). Conversation analysis: The study of talk-in-interaction. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 
Publications. 
Rea-Dickins, P. (2006). Currents and eddies in the discourse of assessment: a learning focused 
interpretation. International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 16(2), 164–168. 
Melinda Dooly Divergent Perceptions of Telecollaborative Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 91 
Rea-Dickins, P. (2007, December). Facets of classroom-based language assessment: Evidence from 
professional practice. Workshop conducted at The University of Hong Kong. 
Rea-Dickins, P., & Gardner, S. (2000). Snares and silver bullets: Disentangling the construct of formative 
assessment. Language Testing, 17(2), 215–241. 
Reinhardt, J. (in press). Accommodating divergent frameworks in analysis of technology-mediated L2 
interaction. In M. Dooly, & R. O’Dowd (Eds.), Researching online interaction and exchange in foreign 
language education: Methods and issues. Bern: Peter Lang. 
Roberts, C. (2001). Language acquisition and language socialisation in and through discourse? Towards a 
redefinition of the domain of SLA. In C. Candlin, & N. Mercer (Eds.), English language teaching in its 
social context (pp. 108–121). London: Routledge. 
Seedhouse, P. (2004). The interactional architecture of the language classroom: A conversation analysis 
perspective. Malden, MA: Blackwell. 
Seedhouse, P. (2005). “Task” as a research construct. Language Learning, 55(3), 533–570. 
Seedhouse, P., & Almutairi, S. (2009). A holistic approach to task-based interaction. International 
Journal of Applied Linguistics, 19(3), 311–338. 
Sinclair, J. M., & Coulthard, R. M. (1975). Towards an analysis of discourse. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
Stubbs, M. (1981). Scratching the surface: Linguistic data in educational research. In C. Adelman (Ed.), 
Uttering, muttering (pp. 114–133). London: Grant McIntyre. 
Van den Branden, K. (2006). Training teachers: task-based as well? In K. Van den Branden (Ed.), Task-
based language education: From theory to practice (pp. 217–248). Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Vandergriff, I., & Fuchs, C. (2009). Does CMC promote language play? Exploring humor in two 
modalities. CALICO Journal, 27(1), 26–47. 
Van Lier, L. (1988). The classroom and the language learner. London: Longman. 
Warschauer, M. (Ed.). (1996). Telecollaboration in foreign language learning. Honolulu, HI: University 
of Hawai‘i Second Language Teaching and Curriculum Center. 
Zuengler, J., & Miller, E. R. (2006). Cognitive and sociocultural perspectives: Two parallel SLA worlds? 
TESOL Quarterly, 40, 35–58. 
