Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2011/vinagremunoz.pdf 
February 2011, Volume 15, Number 1 
pp. 72–103 
 
Copyright © 2011, ISSN 1094-3501 72 
COMPUTER-MEDIATED CORRECTIVE FEEDBACK AND 
LANGUAGE ACCURACY IN TELECOLLABORATIVE EXCHANGES 
 
Margarita Vinagre, Autónoma University of Madrid 
Beatriz Muñoz, University of Applied Sciences Emden/Leer 
Recent studies illustrate the potential that intercultural telecollaborative exchanges entail 
for language development through the use of corrective feedback from collaborating 
partners (Kessler, 2009; Lee, 2008; Sauro, 2009; Ware & O’Dowd, 2008).  
We build on this growing body of research by presenting the findings of a three-month-
long research project that explored the impact of peer feedback on the development of 
learner accuracy. Our aim was to study participants’ attention to form and the relative 
effectiveness of error correction strategies. In order to do so, we organised an e-mail 
exchange between seventeen post-secondary learners of Spanish and German. Data consist 
of exchanges between the five dyads who completed the full three-month project. As 
suggested by Vinagre and Lera (2008), analysis of these data indicate that despite frequent 
use of error correction, the use of remediation led to a higher percentage of errors recycled 
and was more conducive to error recycling in later language production. 
INTRODUCTION 
Over the last forty years, a great deal of research has been conducted into the use of new technologies to 
facilitate the language development of participants in intercultural telecollaborative exchanges 
(Brammerts, 1996; Kotter, 2002; Little, Ushioda, Appel, Moran, O’Rourke & Schwienhorst, 1999; 
Vinagre, 2005; Woodin, 1997). Most of this research has focused on the importance of participants 
communicating in authentic contexts with native speakers of the language they are learning in order to 
develop fluency in the foreign language. However, less attention has been paid to the development of 
accuracy in the foreign language by instructors who employ communicative approaches where there is 
more often emphasis on fluency and authenticity, less on attention to form. However, introducing a focus 
on form in these exchanges is crucial, especially for those students with intermediate or higher levels of 
competence in the foreign language. Students who learn a foreign language, especially at university, are 
expected not only to communicate with native speakers but also to develop a command of the language 
that will allow them to use it correctly in their future working environments. Moreover, students involved 
in these types of exchanges often feel that they do not improve their language competence unless some 
form of feedback has been provided by their partners or the teacher. Thus the impetus for researchers to 
examine the potential that peer feedback in online exchanges may entail for the development of language 
accuracy (Dussias, 2006; Kessler, 2009; Lee, 2008; Muñoz, 2008; O’Rourke, 2005; Pellettieri, 2000; 
Sauro, 2009; Sotillo, 2006; Vinagre & Lera, 2008; Vinagre & Maíllo, 2007; Ware & O’Dowd, 2008). We 
build on this growing body of research by presenting the findings of a three-month-long e-mail project 
designed to explore the impact of peer feedback on the development of language accuracy. Our aim was 
to study participants’ attention to form and the relative effectiveness of error correction strategies in 
online collaborative projects. In order to do so, we replicated the study by Vinagre and Lera (2008) and 
organised an e-mail exchange between post-secondary learners of Spanish and German to discover 
whether their findings concerning participants’ attention to form in online intercultural projects through 
the use of corrective feedback were limited to their particular context as university learners of English and 
Spanish or whether they extended beyond that context.  
Margarita Vinagre and Beatriz Muñoz  Computer-Mediated Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 73 
CORRECTIVE FEEDBACK AND SECOND LANGUAGE ACQUISITION 
Research regarding error correction and its implications for second language learning is sometimes 
contradictory. Some studies suggest that positive evidence alone is sufficient for adult second language 
learning (Krashen, 1977, 1994), whilst others consider positive evidence to be insufficient for second 
language learning to occur (Long, 1983, 1996). The term “positive evidence” can be defined as the set of 
grammatical sentences the language learner has access to by observing the language production of others; 
it refers to the information available to the learner regarding which strings of words are grammatical 
sentences of the target language. As regards negative (corrective) feedback, whether it takes the form of 
explicit correction, recasts or negotiation of form, most studies seem to indicate that it facilitates the 
development of the learners’ second language (Chaudron, 1977, 1986; Lyster, 2001; Lyster, Lightbown & 
Spada, 1999; Lyster & Ranta, 1997; Morris, 2002, 2005; Myles, 2002; Panova & Lyster, 2002). There is 
general agreement that some attention to grammar through the use of corrective feedback in 
communicative online environments is necessary to foster language acquisition. Most studies that 
examine how online collaborative interaction can foster the development of learners’ grammatical 
competence are based on the application of Long and Robinson’s (1998) interaction hypothesis. 
According to these authors, negotiation for meaning elicits interactional modifications and corrective 
feedback, including recasts and noticing, which “increase input comprehensibility without denying 
learners’ access to unknown L2 vocabulary and grammatical forms” (p. 22). Corrective feedback has also 
been identified as a focus-on-form procedure. Long (1991, p. 46) defines focus-on-form as “…overtly 
draw[ing] students’ attention to linguistic elements as they arise incidentally in lessons whose overriding 
focus is on meaning or communication.” According to Morris (2005, p. 3), the support for focus-on-form 
is based on different claims about second language acquisition. First, L2 learners acquire new linguistic 
structures while attending to those forms in contexts where the primary goal is the message. Second, L2 
learners benefit from the opportunities that take place during communication to give specific attention to 
form. Third, focus-on-form can draw students’ attention to linguistic forms whilst communicating, and 
such focus can occur when a learner provides corrective feedback in response to his partner’s errors. 
Other authors suggest that “…in naturalistic as well as in formal contexts, feedback is one of the most 
important stimuli to learning” (Little & Ushioda, 1998, p. 96); “it is through giving feedback that learners’ 
metalinguistic awareness is most tellingly sharpened and refined” (Little et al., 1999, p. 52). Bartram and 
Walton (1991, p. 81) mention that “the active involvement of students in the process of dealing with 
errors is important [because] it stimulates active learning,” whilst for Hyland (1990) error correction, 
when carried out selectively, develops learners’ awareness. 
From a sociocognitive perspective, corrective feedback should be embedded in a social context in which 
students work together collaboratively to solve problems or carry out tasks (Nassaji & Swain, 2000). 
From this perspective, factors that influence students’ attention to form include the nature of the 
collaboration (Swain, 2000), the type of task (Storch, 2001), student proficiency (Leeser, 2004), personal 
learning style (Lee, 2006) and length of task discourse (Williams, 1999). Most of these studies focus on 
students’ attention to form within formal instruction settings, whilst very few studies have been carried 
out that analyse students’ attention to form in online environments. However, analyses of synchronous 
and asynchronous network-based discourse (Barker & Kemp, 1990; Dam, 1995; Kelm, 1996; 
Schwienhorst, 1998; Warschauer, 1996a, 1996b) have shown that students who are used to collaborative 
activities tend to be more receptive to receiving feedback which, in turn, can foster language learning.  
Attention to Form in Asynchronous Online Exchanges 
Attention to form in online exchanges has been the focus of a considerable amount of research in recent 
years. Some of the reasons that would explain this increase in interest refer to earlier studies which 
stressed the importance of providing students with grammatical error feedback as a means of contributing 
to second language development. Stryker (1997), for example, found that students demanded formal 
grammar instruction when grammar was eliminated from content-based instruction. In the same article, 
Margarita Vinagre and Beatriz Muñoz  Computer-Mediated Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 74 
the author suggested that students should use self-correcting techniques as a way of developing 
responsibility for their learning and use of the target language. Chavez (2002) points out that students 
often consider the “real” part of language learning to involve the study of grammar. Lee (2004) suggested 
that computer-mediated communication should balance linguistic fluency and accuracy.  
Recent studies that focus on language development through the use of corrective feedback in asyncronous 
exchanges include Vinagre and Maíllo (2007), Ware and O’Dowd (2008), Vinagre and Lera (2008) and 
Kessler (2009). Vinagre and Maíllo (2007) focused on one-to-one partnerships in which participants 
provided corrective feedback on one another’s errors via e-mail. Ware and O’Dowd (2008) reported on a 
weekly asynchronous discussion project whereby participants were to provide corrective feedback as 
either e-tutors or e-partners on their partners’ use of the target language. Kessler (2009) analysed student-
initiated attention to form in the collaborative construction of a wiki and its effect on accuracy. These 
studies suggest that students favour the inclusion of a focus on form as part of their exchanges and that 
corrective feedback may facilitate reflection and language development. Teachers, in turn, need to ensure 
that students are capable of offering corrective feedback adequately. Finally, the findings of Vinagre and 
Lera (2008) are presented in some detail below, since one of our aims in this paper is to replicate their 
study. 
Vinagre and Lera (2008) 
This study presents the findings of a year-long e-mail exchange between learners of English at Nebrija 
University in Madrid and learners of Spanish at Trinity College Dublin during the academic year 2005-
2006. The authors aimed to find out whether mutual error correction led to development in language 
competence. Using both qualitative and quantitative approaches, the authors presented data from the 
students’ e-mail content. Following James’ proposal (1998, pp. 236-237), they identified three different 
types of corrective feedback: (a) feedback (informing learners there is an error and leaving them to 
discover it and repair it by themselves); (b) correction (providing treatment or information that leads to 
revision); and (c) remediation (providing learners with information that allows them to revise or reject the 
wrong rule they were operating with, thereby inducing them to revise their mental representation of the 
rule and avoid recurrence of this type of fault). 
As regards instances of recycling/re-use of the corrections, 20 instances of recycling errors were found of 
which 3 (15%) occurred after correction and 17 (85%) after remediation. Thus, 85% of error recycling 
took place after remediation, whilst 15% occurred after correction. As regards the types of errors that 
were corrected, 10% of all recycled errors were spelling errors, 15% of all recycled errors were lexical 
errors and 75% of all recycled errors were morphosyntactic errors. The students focused on lexical and 
orthographical aspects for correction, whilst the vast majority of syntactic structures were treated by 
remediation. In their final conclusion the authors suggested that remediation, as opposed to correction and 
feedback, seemed to be more effective in fostering linguistic development. 
PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND PARTICIPANTS 
In an attempt to verify these findings, we organised a three-month-long e-mail exchange between 
seventeen post-secondary learners of Spanish at the University of Applied Sciences Emden/Leer 
(Germany) and seventeen post-secondary learners of German at the Language Centre of the University of 
León (Spain). However, for various reasons the final number of students was reduced to ten and the 
results presented in this study are based on the data analysis of the five dyads who completed the full 
three-month project. 
In age, the German group ranged from 20 to 25 years, whereas the Spanish participants ranged from 21 to 
28. The German group consisted of 3 female students and 2 male students. In the Spanish group there 
were 4 female students and 1 male student. All pairs had an A2 level in the Common European Frame of 
Reference for Languages, except for one dyad whose language proficiency level was a B2. 
Margarita Vinagre and Beatriz Muñoz  Computer-Mediated Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 75 
The students at both institutions were given the same general guidelines on e-mail tandem learning, which 
explained the importance of reciprocity and mutual help for the success of the exchange (see Appendix A). 
In addition, other relevant aspects were addressed: e-mail frequency (two a week), topics to be discussed 
(personal and culture-related such as customs and traditions, university life, going out, music, cinema and 
television, art and literature, idioms, slang and colloquial expressions, politics, holidays, stereotypes, 
traditional cuisine, festivals and a free monthly topic to be negotiated with the partner) and tasks to be 
carried out jointly (error correction). E-mails were to be written half in German and half in Spanish and 
students were given specific guidelines with regard to error correction which included an error 
classification table. The Spanish students were given Gaßdorf’s proposal (1998) for the classification of 
German errors, whilst the German students were given Steveker’s proposal (2002) for the classification of 
Spanish errors. The main reason for doing this was that error types are different in these languages and we 
wished to help students by providing them with a classification of errors that would facilitate error 
recognition and correction. Steveker (2002) divides errors into three main categories: lexical, grammatical 
and special. Lexical errors are divided into orthographic (also accentuation), wrong word choice, wrong 
expression and gender error. Grammar errors are equally divided into the following categories: relation 
errors (for instance, between the subject and the verb), wrong word building, article omission or wrong 
use, wrong pronoun choice, wrong tense choice, wrong word order in the sentence, and wrong 
construction. Finally, he mentions special errors and this category includes wrong use or omission of a 
punctuation mark, surplus words and word omission. The author offers abbreviations and examples for 
each subcategory. 
Gaßdorf (1998) divides errors into sixteen types: case error, gender error (relating to the masculine, 
feminine and neutral article in German), tense error, wrong use of an auxiliary or modal verb, wrong word 
order, wrong conjugation, wrong tense stem, wrong word, wrong expression, wrong preposition, reflexive 
pronoun omission, wrong spelling, word omission, wrong use of a connector or pronoun, unnecessary 
error, and punctuation error. The author also gives abbreviations for each error type. 
Finally, the students kept a language learning diary1 in which they were to refer to their experiences in the 
exchange, in addition to recording information about three main aspects: new vocabulary encountered, 
recycling of errors, and cultural issues. 
We placed special emphasis on the importance of the diary as an instrument to foster reflection and assess 
language and culture development, and participants were encouraged to send their diary to the coordinator 
in Germany once a month. A more detailed account of this aspect of the study can be found in Muñoz 
(2008). 
METHOD 
As previously mentioned, our aim was to replicate Vinagre and Lera’s (2008) study in order to find 
answers to the following research questions: 
1. What strategies did the online partners use to foster attention on linguistic development? In what 
ways, if any, do they differ from those suggested in the study by Vinagre and Lera?  
2. What error types were more frequently made by the students in each group? 
3. Was remediation, as opposed to correction and feedback, more effective in fostering the 
development of language accuracy since it encouraged recycling of errors? 
In order to answer these questions, data was gathered from a triangulation of instruments, including 
content from 199 e-mail messages, language learning diaries, self-evaluation questionnaires and personal 
interviews. Frequency and type of language used was analysed for personalised correction strategies and 
feedback strategies (James, 1998) and errors were classified according to Fernández (1997, pp. 44-47) 
into four main categories: lexical, grammar, discourse and spelling errors (see the Typology of errors 
Margarita Vinagre and Beatriz Muñoz  Computer-Mediated Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 76 
made by the students in Appendix C). As part of their personalised error correction strategies, students 
used different types of typographical conventions, as can be seen in Table 1 below: 
Table 1. Typographical Highlighting 
Typographical highlighting Emden León 
Colours 3 3 
Equals sign (=) 1 1 
Underlining 1 1 
One dyad selected the paragraphs that contained errors, marked the errors in red and wrote the corrections 
next to them. Another underlined the errors and wrote the correct version in brackets. The third dyad 
listed the errors at the end of each message, wrote an equals sign next to the error and then provided the 
correction. The fourth dyad marked the errors in red and wrote the corrected version at the end of the 
message. The last dyad used brackets when a word was missing, bold type to signal errors and wrote the 
corrected version at the end of each message. From the thirteenth message onwards, this last dyad 
changed the correction method and signalled errors with asterisks. This change was due to the fact that the 
German participant had started using a new computer programme. 
Once feedback strategies were analysed and errors categorised, we looked for samples of recycling of 
errors in subsequent e-mail messages and in the language learning diary. At the end of the e-mail 
exchange participants were given a self-evaluation questionnaire to complete that consisted of 54 
questions (see Appendix D). The questionnaire, which included open and closed questions, contained two 
main parts: the first dealt with demographic and contextual information and students were asked about 
their name, age, level of proficiency in other foreign languages, their studies, whether they had any 
acquaintances or friends who spoke the L2 or whether they had been to a country where the L2 was 
spoken; in the second part of the questionnaire students were asked to assess the online exchange. In order 
to do so they had to reflect about the development of their exchange and write about their worries and 
goals before taking part in the project, as well as providing a definition of what tandem meant to them and 
explaining what they had learnt during the exchange. Furthermore, they were asked about the content of 
the guidelines and encouraged to offer suggestions in order to improve future exchanges. The students 
were also invited to take part in a personal interview which took place at their respective learning sites 
and was conducted by the coordinator in Germany. This interview, which was recorded and conducted in 
the participants’ mother tongue, consisted of 13 questions dealing with error correction and the online 
exchange itself. Nine participants (5 German and 4 Spanish) were interviewed. 
FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION 
In order to answer our first research question, we analysed the types of correction techniques used by the 
participants in their e-mails. We found that the German participants provided 680 correction samples and 
75 remediation samples, whereas no feedback samples were found. Their Spanish counterparts provided 
712 correction samples, 62 remediation samples and no samples of feedback. Therefore, the participants 
used only two out of the three types of correction techniques mentioned by James (1998), namely 
correction and remediation, whereas three were found in Vinagre and Lera’s study (2008) (feedback, 
correction and remediation). Although this difference may seem significant, we do not believe it is very 
relevant since Vinagre and Lera only found one instance of feedback in their study (2008, p. 331). 
Although we are not entirely sure why participants tended to favour the use of either correction or 
remediation rather than feedback, there is a possibility that it may be linked to the participants’ 
educational background; whereas some of the German participants seemed to think receiving feedback 
equally helpful, this was not the case with the Spanish participants, who mentioned that having to rely on 
Margarita Vinagre and Beatriz Muñoz  Computer-Mediated Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 77 
feedback alone when self-correcting their language production was not sufficiently helpful. They felt that 
more specific help either in the form of correction or remediation was needed. 
As regards the second research question (i.e., error types most frequently made by the participants in each 
group) we found the following. The German group made a total of 774 errors, which, according to the 
error classification proposal adapted from Fernández (1997) (see Appendix C), would be categorised as 
follows: 108 (13.9%) were lexical errors, 452 (58.4%) were grammatical errors, 195 (25.1%) were 
spelling errors and 19 (2.4%) were discourse errors. The Spanish group made a total of 760 errors, which 
can be classified as follows: 147 (19.3%) were lexical errors, 490 (64.4%) were grammatical errors, 104 
(13.6%) were spelling errors and 19 (2.5%) were discourse errors. A comparison between the two sets of 
results can be seen in Figure 1 and in Table 2. We observed a very high percentage of grammatical errors 
in both groups, (mean score of 90.4 per student in the German group and 98 in the Spanish one); the 
German participants made more spelling errors than their Spanish counterparts, whilst we found more 
lexical errors in the Spanish group. The number of discourse errors remained the same in both groups.  
Figure 1. Total categorisation of errors. 
Table 2. Frequency of Errors Made by Participants 
 Total errors  Lexical  Grammatical  Spelling  Discourse 
 Total Mean SD  Total Mean  Total Mean  Total Mean  Total Mean 
German  
participants 
774 154.8 166.2  108 
(13.9%) 
21.6  452 
(58.4%) 
90.4  195 
(25.1%) 
39   19 
(2.4%) 
3.8 
Spanish  
participants 
760 152 183.2  147 
(19.3%) 
29.4  490 
(64.4%) 
98  104 
(13.6%) 
20.8  19 
(2.5%) 
3.8 
We will now consider the most representative error sub-categories included in each of the three main 
categories. In the German group, out of 108 lexical errors, 29 belonged to the sub-category (1.2.1) 
“lexeme with seme not interchangeable in the context” and 36 errors were “lexical items which result 
from L1 interference” (1.1.3). Regarding grammar errors, 99 errors belonged to the sub-category (2.2) 
“concordance”: 43 for gender, 32 for number, and 24 for person. In addition, 54 errors were due to the 
ungrammatical use of a preposition (2.3.5.1) and 36 errors were due to the use of the wrong verb tense 
(2.3.4.2). In the spelling category, we found 60 instances owing to the omission of an accent (4.2).  
Margarita Vinagre and Beatriz Muñoz  Computer-Mediated Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 78 
The Spanish group made a total of 147 lexical errors, out of which 63 were classified in the sub-category 
(1.2.1) “lexeme with seme not exchangeable in the context” and 27 were due to the creation of a non-
existing word in German (1.1.2). As regards grammar errors, 99 belonged to the sub-category (2.4.1) 
“word order,” 49 errors were due to the wrong use of a preposition (2.3.5.1) and 33 were due to the 
omission of a preposition (2.3.5.1). We also found a total of 143 errors that belonged to the sub-category 
(2.2) “concordance,” out of which 79 were case errors and 36 were errors in gender concordance. In the 
spelling category there were 31 errors due to the omission of a letter (4.6) and 29 due to failure to write 
the first letter of nouns in capitals (4.8). 
These findings revealed in detail those aspects that the participants found most problematic in their 
language learning. In this respect, the category “grammar errors” was the one in which most errors 
belonged. Within this category, the highest percentage of errors in both groups was due to problems with 
concordance (21.9% in the German group and 29.1% in the Spanish group). Additionally, the findings 
differed in each group; in the German group the second highest percentage of errors was due to the 
ungrammatical use of a preposition (11.9%) and the third to the use of the wrong verb tense (7.9%), 
whereas in the Spanish group the second highest percentage was due to problems with word order (21.9%) 
and the third to problems with the use of prepositions (16.7%). 
The category with the second highest number of errors differed in each group; thus, the German 
participants made more spelling errors (195) than their Spanish counterparts (104). However, the Spanish 
participants made more lexical errors (147) than their German counterparts (108). Becoming aware of 
those linguistic aspects that are language-specific and particularly problematic for the participants can be 
extremely useful for the teacher, who may decide to use some face-to-face sessions to focus on them. 
As regards other findings concerning error types, in question 27 of the final questionnaire, participants 
were asked about the kinds of errors they had usually corrected. Table 3 shows the results of the 
participants’ answers to this question: 
Table 3. Type of Errors Corrected (According to the Participants’ Answers to the Questionnaire) 
Error type German participants Spanish participants 
Lexical 3 (60%) 3 (60%) 
Spelling 3 (60%) 5 (100%) 
Grammatical 5 (100%) 3 (60%) 
Expression 3 (60%) 2 (40%) 
Style 1 (20%) 0 
Cultural 0 0 
Sociopragmatic 0 0 
Others (specify) 0 0 
These answers suggest a fairly close correlation between the participants’ perceived ideas about the type 
of error they corrected most often, the frequency of error type made by learners and the type of error 
recycled in each group. Thus, the German group responded that they had mostly corrected grammar errors 
and we can observe that these were the most prevalent errors in the Spanish group, whereas the Spanish 
group reported that they had mostly corrected spelling errors, which we found to be the second highest 
category in the German group after grammar errors. None of the participants corrected discourse or other 
error types and neither did they recycle them. When it came to error recycling, the German participants 
recycled a total of 31 errors, out of which 25 (80.6%) were recycled after receiving correction and 6 
(19.3%) were recycled after remediation. The types of errors recycled were as follows: 2 (6.4%) lexical 
Margarita Vinagre and Beatriz Muñoz  Computer-Mediated Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 79 
errors were recycled after correction, 25 (80.6%) grammar errors were recycled—19 (61.3%) after 
receiving correction and 6 (19.3%) after remediation—and 4 (12.9%) spelling errors were recycled after 
receiving correction. The German participants did not recycle any discourse errors. Figure 2 illustrates the 
percentage of errors recycled by the German participants. 
 
Figure 2. Percentages of error recycling by the German participants. 
Forty-seven errors were recycled by the Spanish participants, out of which 36 (76.5%) were recycled after 
receiving correction and 11 (23.5%) after remediation. The types of errors recycled were as follows: 12 
(25.5%) were lexical errors, out of which 8 (17%) were recycled after correction and 4 (8.5%) were 
recycled after remediation; 27 (57.5%) were grammar errors, out of which 21 (44.7%) were recycled after 
correction and 6 (12.8%) were recycled after remediation. Finally, there were 7 (17%) spelling errors 
recycled after correction. None of the discourse errors was recycled. Figure 3 shows the percentage of 
errors recycled by the Spanish participants.  
 
Figure 3. Percentages of error recycling by the Spanish participants. 
These results would seem to indicate that the German participants’ perceptions that they had mostly 
corrected grammar errors (all five participants reported that they had done so) were accurate and indeed 
their Spanish counterparts recycled no fewer than 27 grammar errors (57% of all errors recycled by the 
group). Similarly, the German participants’ perception that they had corrected a similarly large number of 
lexical and spelling errors (3 participants out of 5 reported doing so) is reflected in the Spanish 
participants having recycled 12 lexical errors (25.5%) and 7 spelling errors (17%). Both these percentages 
are significantly lower than that for the recycling of grammar errors. 
Margarita Vinagre and Beatriz Muñoz  Computer-Mediated Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 80 
As regards the Spanish group, their perceptions concerning the type of error they corrected most 
frequently did not match the German group’s recycling activity. Thus, the Spanish participants responded 
that they had mostly corrected spelling errors (all 5 participants reflected this). However, the German 
participants recycled only 4 spelling errors (12.9% of all errors recycled). The highest percentage of 
recycling was that of grammar errors (25 errors recycled, 80.6%) despite the fact that the Spanish 
participants mentioned correcting grammar errors rather less (only 3 participants stated that they had 
corrected grammar errors). Both groups’ results, however, are inconclusive, since it is possible, for 
example, that although only 3 Spanish participants mentioned correcting grammar errors, those 3 
participants may have corrected a larger number of grammar errors, thus contributing to their counterparts’ 
success in recycling this type of error. 
At first glance, these findings would appear to contradict the conclusions reached by Vinagre and Lera 
(2008) concerning research question three (i.e., that remediation, as opposed to correction and feedback, 
was more effective in fostering linguistic development since it encouraged recycling of errors), since a 
greater amount of recycling was observed after receiving correction than remediation. However, a more 
detailed analysis would indicate that a higher percentage of errors was recycled after receiving 
remediation as opposed to correction. Thus, in the German group, out of 680 correction samples, 25 were 
recycled (3.6%), whereas out of 75 remediation samples 6 were recycled (8%). Similarly in the Spanish 
group, out of 712 correction samples, 36 were recycled (5.1%), whereas out of 62 remediation samples, 
11 were recycled (17.7%), as can be seen in Table 4. Therefore, the higher amount of recycling observed 
after correction appears to be due primarily to the fact that participants were exposed to a far greater 
amount of correction samples (i.e., more error correction samples were observed than remediation 
samples). Remediation—when used by the participants—seemed to be more effective and conducive to 
error recycling. 
Table 4. Results of Error Recycling by Participants 
 
Correction  
After 
Correction  Remediation  
After 
Remediation 
 Totals Mean  Total Mean  Total Mean  Total Mean 
German 
participants 
680 136  25 (3.6%) 5  75 15  6 (8%) 1.2 
Spanish 
participants 
712 142.4  36 (5.1%) 7.2   62 12.4  11(17.7%) 2.2 
In question 26 of the final questionnaire participants were also asked about what correction method—
feedback, correction and remediation—they had negotiated and used during the exchange, whether they 
had found it useful and whether they had continued to use it until the end of the project. Participants did 
not specify which of the three methods they had used, but they wrote some relevant comments. One dyad 
wrote that they had corrected the errors without explaining them. Another dyad answered that they had 
corrected sentences which made no sense. A third dyad mentioned that they had highlighted the errors 
and explained them. Two dyads wrote that they had copied the part of the message with errors in it and 
sent back the correct version. Of these, one dyad wrote the correct word in brackets after underlining the 
wrong word and the other highlighted the error in a different colour and wrote comments with the 
corrections when necessary. Thus, according to the participants’ responses, three dyads (60%) had used 
correction to offer feedback to their partners and two dyads (40%) had used remediation throughout the 
entire exchange. This would appear to be consistent with the correction and remediation figures and 
percentages found in the data. 
Margarita Vinagre and Beatriz Muñoz  Computer-Mediated Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 81 
Finally, we examined the content of the participants’ language diaries for recycling of errors. In general, 
the use of the learning diary as a tool to encourage recycling of errors was not highly successful, since 
only two participants (one German and one Spanish) recycled errors and they only recycled a very small 
number (6 in total). Thus, one German female participant recycled 4 errors she had referred to in her diary, 
which can be seen in Table 5: 
Table 5. Errors Recycled by a German Participant in Her Diary 
Errors recycled Type of error 
gracias por la corrección 2.3.5.1 Incorrect use of preposition 
quedamos para comentar lo que nos pasó 2.5.2.2.2 Selection of conjunction (nominal) 
buenas tardes 2.2.1 Gender concordance 
la autocaravana 2.2.1 Gender concordance 
 
One Spanish female participant recycled 2 errors which she had also written in her diary—“lieber” and 
“unterhalten”—and she added the following comment: Ich spreche mit mir ≠ wir unterhalten uns, oder 
wir sprechen miteinander [I speak to myself ≠ We talk, or we speak to each other]. See Table 6 below: 
Table 6. Errors Recycled by a Spanish Participant in Her Diary 
Errors recycled Type of error 
lieber 2.5.2.1.2 Selection of conjunction (Adjectival) 
unterhalten 1.2.1 Lexeme with common semes not interchangable in the context 
In this respect, the information gathered in their learning diaries about error recycling was extremely 
disappointing, since the participants had been encouraged repeatedly to recycle the errors corrected by 
their partner in their learning diary, but only two had done so. Moreover, some of the participants’ 
reactions to having to write a learning diary were very negative, as can be observed in their answers to 
question 36 of the final questionnaire in which they were asked whether they had found the learning diary 
useful. One participant found it useful but also very hard and admitted to having toyed with the idea of 
giving up the project because of the learning diary. Two participants stated that the idea of the diary was 
good; a third student wrote that the part relating to vocabulary was, in her opinion, unnecessary, although 
possibly useful for the coordinator in Germany to know which words they had learnt. A fourth participant 
considered it a compilation of the new words that had appeared throughout the exchange. A fifth 
participant replied that he had not found the diary useful at all. A sixth participant wrote that he had not 
used the diary at all and four other participants left the question unanswered. Thus, only four participants 
found the diary useful and, out of those four, one thought about giving up the project because it was 
difficult to keep and another did not find it entirely useful. 
The participants’ general impression was that having to write the learning diary was highly time-
consuming. One of the reasons which may explain this is the fact that, although the teachers tried to 
facilitate this task by giving participants very detailed instructions, it is possible that too many questions 
were asked which led to the participants feeling overwhelmed by the amount of writing required. Another 
factor that should also be considered is that the participants did not seem to understand the use of the 
diary as a tool for self-reflection that might facilitate autonomous learning. This is reflected in a comment 
by one student who answered that the learning diary was not especially useful, except perhaps for the 
coordinator of the project. In this sense, exactly what participants are expected to write in the diary will 
Margarita Vinagre and Beatriz Muñoz  Computer-Mediated Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 82 
need to be revised for future projects, whilst a more in-depth and detailed explanation of the possible 
benefits of writing a learning diary will need to be included in the induction sessions. 
CONCLUSION 
The quantitative and qualitative findings of this study indicate that participants in this collaborative 
exchange were willing to contribute to peer correction throughout the e-mail exchange and used different 
strategies and correction techniques to foster attention to linguistic form. The students also demonstrated 
an ability to participate autonomously and to provide their partners with corrections, either in the form of 
correction or remediation (as mentioned by Vinagre & Lera, 2008), although these did not consistently 
result in recycling of errors. However, as suggested by Vinagre and Lera (2008), it would seem that 
participants in this study, despite ostensive use of error correction and a higher number of errors recycled 
after receiving correction, in fact recycled a higher percentage of errors after using remediation. Other 
findings drawn suggest that students favoured the integration of a focus on language form into their online 
exchanges, although they were not always capable of providing accurate metalinguistic explanations. 
Thus, in future telecollaborative projects with a focus on form, it would be important to explain to the 
students the difference between feedback, correction and remediation in induction sessions, whilst helping 
them improve correction skills and providing examples. Both remediation and correction seem to foster 
development of linguistic accuracy, whereas we are uncertain as to the effectiveness of feedback when it 
comes to achieving the same goal.  
We learned that the importance of the language learning diary as a tool for self-reflection should be 
explained in depth in the induction sessions. Furthermore, aspects to be written about in the diary, when a 
focus on language form is considered to be one of the main goals of the exchange, should be limited to 
error correction and recycling, leaving other aspects open to negotiation between the partners. Finally, 
online activities should be fully integrated within the contact classes and offer additional opportunities to 
encourage students to reflect on the linguistic problems that may have arisen throughout the course of the 
exchange. 
One final aspect we have not researched in this study is Vinagre and Lera’s (2008) suggestion that 
students tended to use correction mostly in order to address misspellings and lexical problems, whereas 
they provided remediation (including detailed explanations and examples) to deal with more complex 
morphosyntactic errors. In this respect, the question of whether students tend to use a specific type of 
correction to address grammatical errors of a particular nature is one that we shall leave for future 
research. 
Margarita Vinagre and Beatriz Muñoz  Computer-Mediated Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 83 
APPENDICES 
Appendix A. Tandem Learning by E-mail Guidelines2 
Spanish-German 
Coordinator in Germany: Beatriz Muñoz Vicente 
Coordinator in Spain: Nicole Hämmerle 
 
1. What is this project about? 
This project consists of pairing native speakers of Spanish with native speakers of German so that they 
can help each other with their foreign language learning (German/Spanish). It follows the conventions of 
the International E-mail Tandem Network funded by the Commission of the European Union since 1994. 
You can find more information about the International E-mail Tandem Network at http://www.slf.ruhr-
uni-bochum.de. Tandem learning can take place face to face or over the Internet (online). In this project 
we will use e-mail as our Internet tool. 
Tandem learning implies collaboration with another learner whose mother tongue you are learning. The 
main objectives of this mode of learning are: 
• Learn about the partner and his/her culture; 
• Help each other improve your knowledge of the foreign language; 
• Exchange information about the suggested topics; 
• Correct each other’s work according to the guidelines suggested in section 11; 
• Practice the language in an authentic communicative situation. 
2. What are the principles behind tandem learning? 
• The principle of reciprocity: you need to contribute equally and benefit mutually from this 
collaboration. “I help you learn you help me learn and this way we understand each other better.” 
• The principle of autonomy: each partner is responsible for his/her own learning process. “I am 
responsible for my own learning.” 
3. What Internet tools do you need? 
You only need an e-mail account and access to the Internet at least twice a week. 
If you wish to open an account in German you can do so at http://www.yahoo.de or http://www.gmx.de. 
4. Why learn a language via E-mail? 
Several characteristics/aspects of e-mail make this medium ideal for language learning. 
Messages are sent and received in a matter of minutes. Communication is fast and up to date. You have 
first hand access to a person who speaks the language you are studying. 
Certain commands such as Reply or Attach document facilitate the exchange of corrections and other 
material you would like to share with your partner. 
5. Which language should you use? 
It is important that both partners write in both German and Spanish. This will give you both a chance to 
write as well as read in the language you are learning. Reading your partner’s messages in German will 
give you a model to follow and a feeling of how German is used by native speakers. Writing will give you 
Margarita Vinagre and Beatriz Muñoz  Computer-Mediated Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 84 
a chance to put into practice what you know and discover areas in which you may have difficulties. For 
the same reasons your partner needs to write messages in Spanish and read your messages in Spanish too. 
It is therefore important that you make sure you use both languages in your e-mail exchange either by 
taking turns or by writing half the message in German and the other half in Spanish. 
6. What do you need for active learning? 
A dictionary: Have a dictionary with you every time you write an e-mail in German. This way you will 
enhance your knowledge of vocabulary by using new words/ expressions different from the ones you 
already know. You can also use online dictionaries such as http://www.pons.de or http://www.leo.org. 
A diary: Writing a diary about how your tandem exchange develops is essential, since it will help you 
evaluate how much you are learning and will allow you to make decisions regarding your own learning. 
In your diary, you can write about ALL aspects concerning the exchange, but three aspects should be 
considered regularly and described in detail:  
• Vocabulary: Make note of the new words you learn, either from your partner or from the use of 
the dictionary.  
• Errors: Make note of the errors your partner corrects for you and write down a few sentences with 
the corrected version so that it is easier for you to avoid them in the future.  
• Culture: What aspects related to your partner’s culture and way of life have you learned about? 
Compare them with your own and give your opinion briefly. 
The diary must be handed in to the coordinator in Germany once a month since it will be used to assess 
your language learning progress. 
7. What should you write about? 
The following is a list of the tasks that you will need to carry out together. Please remember that you 
should write at least two messages per week written half in German and half in Spanish. Corrections will 
be done in your mother tongue.  
Don’t forget to send a copy of all your messages to: tandem.distancia@yahoo.de writing 
Emden/León in the subject box. 
1. Week starting November 12th 
a) Personal details (Name, age, studies, hobbies, interests, place of origin). Important! In this e-mail 
you need to discuss with your partner how you are going to correct each other (100 words). 
b) What do you usually do at university? What are your plans for this weekend? 
Very important: From now on you’ll need to include in each message the corrections you have carried 
out on your partner’s previous messages. Corrections will be offered in Spanish by the Spanish 
speakers/German by the German speakers. 
2. Week starting November 19th 
Describe the place where you live (geographical location, size, what makes it special, etc.) Choose 
one of the favourite places in your city or village and describe it (100 words). 
3. Week starting November 26th 
a) What do young people do when they go out? (100 words). 
b) Read the message you have received from your partner and compare what he/she says about 
his/her country with what you do in yours (100 words). 
Margarita Vinagre and Beatriz Muñoz  Computer-Mediated Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 85 
4. Week starting December 3rd 
a) Visit your partner’s university’s Web page and tell your partner your opinion about it. Would you 
like to study at that university? Justify your answer (100 words). 
b) Look for information about the city where your partner studies and guess what are the city’s main 
problems (100 words). 
Don’t forget to send your learning diary to the coordinator in Germany. 
5. Week starting December 10th 
a) Check the glossary of student language you’ll find in the ADIEU page (Akademischer Diskurs in 
der europäischen Union). You have to work with the section entitled Spanish university in German. 
Send your partner a document with ten expressions you consider may be useful for him/her. He/she 
will send you a short story written in Spanish which includes all the terms/expressions you sent. 
You’ll do the same with the list of terms your partner will send you. 
b) Write at least 8 colloquial expressions which may be useful should your partner decide to study a 
semester in a Spanish university. You can have a look at those which appear in the section on student 
jargon. 
6. Week starting December17th3 
Our life is punctuated by holidays and celebrations of all kinds. Every country and every region has 
its own special days in addition to holidays which we may share in common. In Spain we have, of 
course, Christmas and Easter as our main religious holidays; we also have other religious holidays 
(All Saints Day, Corpus Christi, etc.). We celebrate father’s day, mother’s day, birthdays, weddings 
and so on and we take our main holidays in the summer (July/August). Some towns or regions have 
special celebrations. Valencia, for example, has the Fallas in March, Pamplona celebrates Los 
Sanfermines in July, etc. and there are many other feast holidays.  
a) Compare at least two national or regional holidays of your countries (100 words). 
b) Say what festivities you prefer and how you celebrate them (100 words). 
7. Week starting January 7th 
a) Tell your partner what you did over Christmas (100 words). 
b) Look for some information on the Web about a German city you would like to visit. Tell your 
partner what you have found out about that city and why you would like to visit it (100 words). 
8. Week starting January 14th 
a) Free topic you have to negotiate with your partner. 
b) Write a short text about your conclusions on this free topic. 
Don’t forget to send your learning diary to the coordinator in Germany. 
9. Week starting January 21st 
a) Write about music, literature or art and discuss your opinions and ideas about it (100 words). 
b) Tell your partner the plot of the last book you have read or of the last film you have seen. Explain 
why you would (wouldn’t) recommend the book or film (100 words). 
Margarita Vinagre and Beatriz Muñoz  Computer-Mediated Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 86 
10. Week starting January 28th4 
a) Ask your partner to explain to you which are the most important parties in current Spanish politics, 
the role they play and the main differences between them. 
b) Imagine that you wish to found a new party. Formulate in Spanish and German the five most 
important principles in their program. 
11. Week starting February 4th 
a) Tell your partner about your eating habits: when and with whom you usually have your meals, 
what you tend to drink and what is your favourite dish (100 words).5 
b) Send your partner the recipe of your favourite dish: ingredients, duration and cooking instructions. 
12. Week starting February 11th  
a) Say goodbye to your partner. Write to him/her and give your opinion about what you thought of the 
exchange, what you liked best and least, what you have learned concerning grammar, vocabulary, the 
culture of his/her country, etc. 
Don’t forget to send your learning diary to the coordinator in Germany. 
NOTE: Be polite and respectful when you express your opinion but do give your point of view and 
disagree when necessary. Do justify your ideas / remarks to make the exchange more interactive and 
productive. Be open to receive some positive criticism from your partner too! Your attitude towards the 
exchange should always be active; you are learning by helping someone else to learn at the same time! 
8. How can you organise the e-mail messages you receive? 
You can decide on the method which is most convenient to you: 
• Write in your notebook; 
• File the messages in a folder for future reference; 
• Regularly use the self-assessment material facilitated by the coordinator; 
• Regularly check if you are achieving the goals you and your partner have established. 
9. About the writing process 
The best way to learn how to write is by writing. For this reason this project is an ideal opportunity to 
improve your writing skills. Here are some useful tips: 
• Write down words or expressions you like the sound of. 
• Do not be afraid to correct each other, it is not rude since your aim is to learn. 
Note down in your language learning diary any new expressions that you hear or read. If you have the 
time, you can write a short text and try to reproduce what you have read or heard. 
Before you start writing your messages, you might want to ask yourself the following questions: 
• What would I like to write? 
• How can I express what I wish to write? 
• What order will I follow? 
• Is there any information my partner already knows about this topic? 
• What should I write to him/her about (what is this week’s topic?) 
Margarita Vinagre and Beatriz Muñoz  Computer-Mediated Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 87 
• What would I like to learn about him/her? 
• Is this written correctly? 
10. About errors 
Errors are an integral part of the learning process. Everybody makes mistakes and it is very important that 
we can learn from them. In order to do so you will need: 
• To make sure that you always revise your texts before sending them to your tandem partner 
(many small mistakes can be easily identified and corrected if you re-read the text carefully). 
• Identify your error: What type of error is it? (spelling, grammar, vocabulary, punctuation, etc.).  
• Jot down your errors and corrections. What errors do you make most often? Why? (possible 
reasons: lack of vocabulary, you don’t use the spell checker, you don’t know certain grammar 
rules, you translate literally from one language to the other, etc.). 
• Make a list of your most frequent errors and use it as a check-list every time you write a text (for 
example: check subject-verb concordance, subject-adjective concordance, etc.). 
11. How to correct your partner’s writing 
• Think about what you would like your partner to correct in your writing and do the same.  
• Do not try to correct everything. Pick the most important mistakes (make it no more than ten), the 
ones that prevent understanding or sound awkward (too foreign) to you.  
• Negotiate the way you are going to correct each other (using capital letters, colours, directly on 
the e-mails by clicking on reply button, etc). It is important that you come to an agreement with 
your partner so that you always correct each other in a manner that works for both of you. 
• Write comments with your corrections. You can also ask questions or suggest other ways of 
expressing something. You can also provide contextualised examples to help your partner to 
remember expressions or colloquial usage of the language. 
• Remember that in order for both of you to benefit from the exchange you should both take the 
task of correction seriously. 
• Correcting your partner’s mistakes will help develop your ability to assess your own writing. 
• Pay careful attention to your partner’s mistakes and way of formulating things in German so you 
can learn even more about the way German language works. 
• It is not advisable to mix the new messages you write to your partner with the corrections based 
on previous messages, since your primary objective is to communicate and discuss a particular 
topic. Mixing corrections with new information can make this process more difficult.  
• Encourage your partner. In addition to your corrections, it is important to let him/her know about 
those aspects in which he/she is improving. 
• Remember that making mistakes is considered a sign of progress in the process of learning a new 
language. 
RECYCLE ERRORS! Make sure you include some of the corrected errors in the following 
messages you write. If you include the errors your partner has corrected in the following e-mails you 
send to him/her, it is more likely that you will not make them again in the future. This aspect is crucial for 
the assessment of your own learning progress. 
Margarita Vinagre and Beatriz Muñoz  Computer-Mediated Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 88 
References 
Most of these guidelines have been taken from the guide that appears in the article by Vinagre and Lera 
(2008). In addition, the following references have been used: 
• Brammerts, H. and Kleppin, K. (eds.), 2001, Selbstgesteuertes Sprachenlernen im Tandem. Ein 
Handbuch. (Forum Sprachlehrforschung). Tübingen: Stauffenburg. 
• Gaßdorf, A., 1998, “Autonomes Lernen von Fremdsprachen im E-Mail Tandem: Kommunikation 
ohne Pannen – informeller und formeller Brief” [http://www.slf.ruhr-uni bochum.de/tandem/ 
sk/index.html]. 
• Roza, M.B., (coord.), 2001, Guía tándem. Metodología tándem para la enseñanza y el aprendizaje 
de lenguas en el ámbito escolar. Centro de Profesores y Recursos, Gijón. 
• Vinagre, M., and Maíllo, C. (2007). “Focus on Form in On-line Projects: Linguistic Development 
in E-mail Tandem Exchanges.” In C. Periñán, (Ed.) Revisiting Language Learning Resources. 
Cambridge: Cambridge Scholars Press. 
Margarita Vinagre and Beatriz Muñoz  Computer-Mediated Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 89 
Appendix B. Language Learning Diary  
• Date: 
• Name: 
• Name of tandem partner: 
• Language: 
• Message number: 
• Received: 
• Topic: 
 
Vocabulary: 
1. My tandem partner has used a series of expressions in German/Spanish—words, idioms, fixed phrases, 
etcetera—that I have found very interesting. In future e-mails I’ll try to use the following expressions 
(include a minimum of five): 
2. In the message sent by my partner I have found expressions in German/Spanish—words, idioms, fixed 
phrases, etc—that I did not know. What have I done in order to understand them? (You can tick more 
than one answer): 
a) I have looked them up in the dictionary 
b) I have asked my teacher 
c) I have asked my partner 
 
Errors: 
3. What errors did my partner correct? The following is a list of all the errors my partner corrected (in 
order to do this, the best thing is to copy and paste the structure from the e-mail received). 
a) vocabulary errors: 
b) grammar errors: 
c) spelling errors: 
d) discourse errors: 
 
4. Have I recently revised the vocabulary and structures found in the e-mails I received? 
5. Could I have avoided some errors? If so, how? 
6. Did I manage to recycle some of my errors? If so, which? 
 
Culture: 
7. This is what I have learned about my partner and his/her country: 
Margarita Vinagre and Beatriz Muñoz  Computer-Mediated Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 90 
Appendix C. Typology of Errors Made by the Students (Categories Modified from Fernández, 
1997) 
1. LEXICAL ERRORS Examples (correct form in brackets) 
1.1 Form  
1.1.1 Use of a similar signifier Campana (campaña); agradecer (agradar); fördern 
(fordern); Gram (Gramm) 
1.1.2 Formation of a non-existing form Examinación (examen); medical (médico); malignosa 
(maligno); Nord (Norden) 
1.1.3 Lexical items which result from L1 
interference 
Servietta (servilleta); various (varios); promenades 
(paseos); affektiert (gefühlvoll); fidel (lustig); graziös 
(anmutig) 
1.1.4 Gender El escena (la escena); una viaje (un viaje); la color (el 
color); die Baum (der Baum); der Buch (das Buch); 
der Problem (das Problem) 
1.1.5 Number La ola era suave (Las olas eran suaves); Hicimos 
mucha fotografía (Hicimos muchas fotografías); Ich 
habe einen Problem mit deiner beiliegenden Datei (Ich 
habe ein Problem mit deinen beiliegenden Dateien) 
1.2 Signified  
1.2.1 Lexemes with common semes not 
interchangable in the context 
Faltar-quedar; aprender-estudiar; tener-estar-haber; ir-
volver-venir-andar; geben-sein; lernen-studieren; 
verschieden-unterschieden; lernen-kennenlernen 
1.2.2 Changes in words derived from the same 
root or stem 
Califato (califa); un visitado (una visita); das 
Frühstücken (das Frühstück); der Polizei (der Polizist) 
1.2.3 Inappropriate register  
1.2.4 Ser-Estar (To be) Ellos son en mi país (Ellos están en mi país); 
Estábamos viajeros (Éramos viajeros) 
1.2.5 Periphrasis Limpiar el cuerpo (lavarse); punto de vista (mirador) 
1.2.6 Others Tienda de compañero (tienda de campaña); dar la 
campana (dar la hora); eine Entscheidung nehmen 
(eine Entscheidung treffen) 
2. GRAMMAR ERRORS Examples (errors underlined; correct form in brackets) 
2.1 Paradigm  
2.1.1 Gender (formation) Trabajadoro (trabajador); el artisto (el artista); la reya 
(la reina); Franzos (Franzose); die Kunde (die Kundin)  
2.1.2 Number (formation) Profesors (profesores); lunas de mieles (luna de miel); 
Laufers (Läufer); Mause (Mäuser); Konzerts 
(Konzerte) 
2.1.3 Verbs Cojó (cogió); invitieron (invitaron); podemus 
(podemos); habst (hast); gefällst (gefällt) 
2.1.4 Others (person, determiners) Ello (él); nos (nosotros); a ello mismo (a sí mismo) 
2.2 Concordances  
2.2.1 Gender Muchas luces apagados (muchas luces apagadas); la 
ambiente frío (el ambiente frío); Letztes Samstag bin 
ich ins Kino gegangen (Letzten Samstag bin ich ins 
Kino gegangen); 
ich habe einen Problem (ich habe ein Problem)  
2.2.2 Number Otro razones poderoso (otras razones poderosas); 
Margarita Vinagre and Beatriz Muñoz  Computer-Mediated Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 91 
problemas social (problema social); Es gibt Party in 
den Diskos (Es gibt Parties in den Diskos) 
2.2.3 Person Vosotros están cansado (Vosotros estáis cansados); 
Llegaron mucha gente (Llegó mucha gente); Ich wird 
ein bisschen über mich schreiben (Ich werde ein 
bisschen über mich schreiben) 
2.2.4 Case Später gehen wir zu eine Platz (Später gehen wir zu 
einem Platz) 
2.3 Use of lexical categories  
2.3.1 Article  
2.3.1.1 Use/omission Hay ___ cosa que (Hay una cosa que); Estudió la 
biología (Estudió biología); en una otra ciudad (en otra 
ciudad); in Dezember (im Dezember); nach dem 
Weihnachten (nach Weihnachten) 
2.3.1.2 Selection el/un; la/una; der/ein; die/eine Nació en el pueblo de Cataluña (Nació en un pueblo 
de Cataluña); Era un día mejor de las vacaciones (Fue 
el mejor día de las vacaciones); Ich studiere an der 
spanischen Uni (Ich studiere an einer spanischen Uni) 
2.3.2 Other determiners (selection): Este instead 
of ese or aquel 
 
 
 
2.3.3 Pronouns  
2.3.3.1 Full pronominal function/omission of 
‘man’ in an impersonal structure 
__ pasamos bien (lo); a nosotros __ gusta más España 
(nos); Einmal hat ___mir in Deutschland über dieses 
Buch erzählt (man) 
2.3.3.2 Grammaticalized or lexicalized 
‘se’/omission of the pronoun in a reflexive verb 
No tenías ganas de comerse (comer); Ich habe ___über 
Emden informiert (mich) 
2.3.3.3 Wrong selection of pronoun Diese Woche habe ich dich noch nicht geschrieben 
(dir) 
2.3.4 Verbs  
2.3.4.1 Past tense Se cayó pero no le pasaba nada (pasó); Früher hat er 
viele Freunde (hatte) 
2.3.4.2 Other forms Hemos seguido a viajar (viajando); Que lo pasas bien 
(pases); Ich muss alle Nächte gearbeitete (arbeiten) 
2.3.4.3 Verb omission Mir ___es gut (geht) 
2.3.5 Prepositions  
2.3.5.1 Incorrect use/omission Es la costumbre de japonesa (Ø); Miro__ mis hijos 
(a); Busco a unos libros (Ø); Es dauert eine Stunde zu 
die Küste (an die); 
Am Sonntagabend fuhr Peter mit dem Auto bis ___ 
die Stadt (in) 
2.3.5.2 Idiomatic values Va de pie o con coche (a, en); Aprenden en memoria 
(de); mit der Hand gemacht (handgefertigt) 
2.4 Sentence structure  
2.4.1 Word order Coreanos libros leo (Leo libros coreanos); Para mi 
creo que demasiado hay vacaciones aquí (Creo que 
hay demasiadas vacaciones aquí); In Spanien es gibt 
zwei wichtige Parteien (In Spanien gibt es zwei 
Margarita Vinagre and Beatriz Muñoz  Computer-Mediated Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 92 
wichtige Parteien); (...) und habe ich keine Zeit ((...) 
und ich habe keine Zeit) 
2.4.2 Omission of elements (not included in other 
sections) 
Voy a ________ de mi amiga (casa de); Finalmente 
conseguí _____ que se llama Carmen (saber) 
2.4.3 Excess/surplus of elements (not included in 
other sections) 
Y donde cerca de la costa (Ø) 
2.4.4 Incorrect use of elements (not included in 
other sections) 
Noch gibt es eine Kathedrale (Außerdem) 
2.4.5 Functional change Era un día ni frío ni calor (caliente); Me levanté 
frescamente (fresca) 
2.4.6 Negative sentences Yo también no fui (tampoco); Nunca no he estado (Ø); 
Ich bin nicht Deutscher (kein) 
2.5 Sentence relations  
2.5.1 Coordination  
2.5.1.1 Omission of conjunction Queremos salir____ no podemos (y); Ich gehe zum 
Strand ____ins Kino (oder) 
2.5.1.2 Polysindeton (repetition of conjunction)  
2.5.1.3 Wrong conjunction Hemos comprado siete sino ocho libros (u) 
2.5.2 Subordination Die Wahrheit glaube ich viel Unterschiede haben (Ich 
glaube die Wahrheit ist, dass wir viele Unterschiede 
haben) 
2.5.2.1 Adjectival  
2.5.2.1.1 Omission of conjunction or surplus of 
same 
Era la primera vez ____ salía al extranjero (que); Son 
los días que muy tranquilos de mi vida (Ø) 
2.5.2.1.2 Selection of conjunction Era mi amigo quien me cae muy bien (que); Pensamos 
a los musulmanes los que han construido (quienes) 
2.5.2.1.3 Verb concordance Cuando no habré guerras (habrá) 
2.5.2.2 Nominal  
2.5.2.2.1 Omission of conjunction or surplus of 
same 
No saben___ yo quiero (que); Pienso que es muy 
importante que conocer (Ø) 
2.5.2.2.2 Selection of conjunction Me preguntaron que te vas (si) 
2.5.2.2.3 Verb concordance Llamó para decirlos que no nos apetece irnos a cenar 
(apetecía) 
2.5.2.3 Adverbial  
2.5.2.3.1 Omission of conjunction or surplus of 
same 
Por ____ en aquel día me fui  
2.5.2.3.2 Selection of conjunction Pues echaba de menos a mi familia el tiempo pasó 
muy rápido (Aunque); Wann ich in Kaiserslautern 
war, hatte ich kein Fahrrad (Als) 
2.5.2.3.3 Verb concordance Si tengamos tiempo (tenemos); Como que hayamos 
decidido (habíamos) 
3. DISCOURSE ERRORS  
3.1 Global consistency  
3.2 Co-reference: deixis and anaphora  
3.3 Tense and aspect  
3.4 Linkers  
3.5 Punctuation  
Margarita Vinagre and Beatriz Muñoz  Computer-Mediated Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 93 
4. SPELLING ERRORS  
4.1 Punctuation (this includes those errors that 
result from not knowing punctuation rules; it 
excludes punctuation whose purpose is to show 
separation of ideas, which is included in the 
discourse section) 
 
4.2 Accents Llegue (llegué); pelicula (película) 
4.3 Separating/linking words Cumple año (cumpleaños); sillama (si llama); Rad 
Fahrer (Radfahrer) 
4.4 Change in letter order Madurgada (madrugada); cominucar (comunicar); 
Statd (Stadt); wiel (weil) 
4.5 Phoneme confusion  
4.5.1 e/i Decedió (decidió); catastrofi (catástrofe) 
4.5.2 o/u Ocopado (ocupado); descolpar (disculpar) 
4.5.3 b/p Balabra (palabra); pello (bello) 
4.5.4 x/g Algien (alguien); surguió (surgió) 
4.5.5 k/z Bacillas (vaquillas); tocé (toqué) 
4.5.6 r-r/l Ejempro (ejemplo); feriz (feliz); cuelpo (cuerpo) 
4.5.7 r/r Boracho (borracho); ocurió (ocurrió);  
4.5.8 s/z Cemáforo (semáforo); ocación (ocasión) 
4.5.9 s/ss Bischen (bisschen) 
4.5.10 a/ä Lauft (läuft) 
4.5.11 u/ü Mussen (müssen) 
4.5.12 ü/u Nür (nur) 
4.5.9 Others Ninos (niños); cerenonia (ceremonia); deverdido 
(divertido) 
4.6 Omission of letters or surplus of same Fa-cinado (fascinado); mo-struo (monstruo); tre-nta 
(treinta); nich (nicht) 
4.7 Confusion of grapheme for the same 
phoneme 
 
4.7.1 b-v Estube (estuve); bino (vino) 
4.7.2 g-j Extrangeros (extranjeros); mugeres (mujeres) 
4.7.3 c-z Empezé (empecé); onze (once) 
4.7.4 qu-c Quando (cuando); quarto (cuarto) 
4.7.5 h -asta (hasta); -echo (hecho) 
4.7.6 Others Emfermedad (enfermedad); esceso (exceso) 
4.8 Capitals escorial (Escorial) Lope de vega (Vega); Warm 
(warm), informationen (Informationen) 
 
Margarita Vinagre and Beatriz Muñoz  Computer-Mediated Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 94 
Appendix D. Self-Evaluation Questionnaire6 
This questionnaire is going to provide us with very useful information about the exchange. In order to 
obtain as many details as possible, we would be very grateful if you could answer the following questions 
as honestly as possible. Thank you very much for your cooperation. 
 
Personal information 
1) Student name: 
2) Name of e-tandem partner: 
3) Age (optional): If you do not wish you tell us your age, are you 
• under 20 
• between 21 and 30 
• between 31 and 40 
• between 41 and 50 
• between 51 and 60 
• 61 or over 
 
Language information 
4) Mother tongue/s: 
5) Other spoken language/s spoken (please specify level: poor, average, good, very good) 
Language Listening Reading Speaking Writing 
English     
German     
French      
Italian     
     
 
6) How long have you studied German? 
7) Why do you study German? 
8) Have you ever been to a German-speaking country? (If the answer is “no,” please proceed to question 
number 9). 
a. Where and how long? 
b. What did you do exactly? 
• Erasmus 
• Work 
• Internship 
• Holiday 
• Other (please specify): 
 
Margarita Vinagre and Beatriz Muñoz  Computer-Mediated Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 95 
Education and professional background 
9) Do you have any previous studies or did you acquire some professional training before you studied this 
degree? (If the answer is “no,” please proceed to question number 10). 
c. What did you study? 
d. When did you finish your studies? 
10) What are you currently studying? What year are you in? 
 
Language skills 
11) How good are you at  
(1 = excellent; 5 = poor) 
• reading and understanding texts?  
• listening and understanding native speakers?  
• speaking?  
• writing texts or letters?  
• doing grammar exercises? 
12) What do you find most difficult? (You can choose more than one answer). 
• speaking 
• listening 
• reading 
• writing  
13) In your opinion, how do you learn best? (You can choose more than one answer). 
• alone  
• with the teacher  
• with the whole class  
• in small groups or pairs  
• at home  
• in other ways: 
14) How often do you practice German? (Please specify number of hours). 
• every day 
• only during the week 
• only at the weekend 
• only in the German class 
Final assessment of the online exchange 
 
Before the exchange 
Margarita Vinagre and Beatriz Muñoz  Computer-Mediated Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 96 
15) What fears or doubts did you have before starting this e-tandem exchange? 
16) What kind of objectives did you have? 
• linguistic 
• cultural 
• professional 
• other:  
17) How would you explain e-tandem briefly? 
18) Have you ever taken part in a face-to-face/distance-learning exchange? (If the answer is “no”, please 
proceed to question number 19). 
If the answer is “yes”: 
• Was it face-to-face or distance-learning? 
• What language did you use? 
• When did it take place and how long did it last? 
• What topics did you discuss with your partner? 
19) What aspects of the e-tandem exchange have you liked the most? 
20) What aspects of the e-tandem exchange have you liked the least? 
21) What have you learned? 
22) What aspects can be improved in the exchange? 
23) What piece of advice would you give someone who may be interested in participating in this type of 
exchange? 
24) How can you benefit from the exchange? 
 
Corrections 
25) At the beginning of the exchange you were given a document explaining the three most commonly 
found types of correction. Did you take them into account when correcting your partner? 
26) What conventions (method) did you use to correct each other? Was it useful? Did you use the same 
until the end of the exchange? 
27) What type of error did you correct most often and why? 
• Lexical  
• Orthographic  
• Grammar  
• Discourse  
• Style  
• Cultural  
• Socio-pragmatic  
Margarita Vinagre and Beatriz Muñoz  Computer-Mediated Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 97 
• Other (please specify)  
28) Did you take into account point number 10 of the guidelines (About errors) when composing your 
messages? 
29) Did you take into account point number 11 of the guidelines (How to correct your partner’s writing) 
before writing your messages? 
30) Did you read your partner’s corrections before replying to his/her message? 
31) Did you make a list of mistakes you made most often? 
 
General guidelines 
32) At the beginning of the exchange you were sent a document by e-mail with the general guidelines, 
which included 11 points concerning the exchange (principles, technical requirements, topics, correction 
types and conventions, etc.) Did you find any aspect that was not clear? 
33) What do you think of the topics suggested in point 7 (What should you write about?)? 
Which one did you like best? Which one did you like the least? Which one would you delete from the 
list? What other topics would you include in the list for future projects? 
34) Did you follow any of the recommendations included in point 9 (About the writing process)? 
35) Before you started writing to your partner, did you take into account any of the questions suggested in 
point 9? 
In the guidelines we included two appendices: 
• A language-learning diary template 
• Gaßdorf’s (1998) proposal for error correction 
36) Was the language-learning diary useful? What sections would you exclude and which would you add? 
37) Did you classify your errors according to Gaßdorf’s (1998) proposal? 
 
General questions on the conventions/method used to correct your partner 
38) Did you visit the e-tandem Web page? 
(http://www.slf.ruhr-uni-bochum.de/etandem/etindex-de.html)? If so, did you find the information useful? 
39) Did you write your messages half in Spanish and half in German? In which proportion did you use 
both languages? 
• You wrote each message in one language. 
• You wrote each message half in Spanish half in German (50 / 50). 
• Other options: 
40) How did you organise your messages? 
• I saved them and filed them in a folder on my computer. 
• I printed them and kept them in a portfolio. 
• Other options: 
41) What resources did you use to compose your messages? 
Margarita Vinagre and Beatriz Muñoz  Computer-Mediated Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 98 
• German monolingual dictionary: which one/s? 
• Bilingual dictionary (German-Spanish): which one/s? 
• Internet pages: which one/s? 
• Reference books: which one/s? 
• Asked your teacher 
• Asked your classmates 
• Class notes 
• Other (please specify) 
 
Other aspects 
42) Did you experience any of the following: 
• Technical problems 
• My partner took a long time to reply 
• My partner did not write as often as he/she should 
• Our relationship was cold and superficial 
• I had problems understanding him/her 
• The instructions in the guidelines were not clear 
• The topics suggested were not clearly stated 
• Other problems (please specify): 
43) Would you have preferred to participate in a face-to-face e-tandem exchange? Please elaborate. 
44) Were you motivated? If the answer is negative, what did you do to overcome your lack of 
motivation/problems? 
45) Do you think that a distance e-tandem exchange can also have some disadvantages? Please elaborate. 
46) Have you achieved your learning objectives? Please write a percentage (0% = not at all, 
100% = completely) to indicate your level of satisfaction in terms of fulfilling the following objectives: 
• linguistic 
• cultural 
• professional 
• other: 
47) Did you change your objectives throughout the project? 
• I did not have any objectives 
• No 
• Yes 
If your answer is “yes”, please continue: 
Margarita Vinagre and Beatriz Muñoz  Computer-Mediated Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 99 
I gave up the following goals: 
I had to face up to new goals: 
The following goals changed throughout the exchange: 
48) What have you learned from a personal, linguistic, professional and cultural perspective?  
Do you think this tandem experience will have any effects regarding your future learning experiences? 
49) I have learned mostly: 
• vocabulary 
• grammar 
• intercultural aspects 
• fluency when writing in German 
• to overcome my fear of writing 
• to understand written texts 
50) Has your attitude to language learning changed in any way? Please justify your answer: 
• towards my mother tongue: 
• towards the foreign language: 
51) Do you think that your (learning) relationship with your tandem partner has become more personal? 
Please justify your answer. If the answer is “yes”, when did you realise that was the case and how did you 
notice? Do you think that having a more personal relationship with your partner helped you to: 
• ask questions 
• correct each other  
• negotiate 
• clarify misunderstandings 
• other (please specify): 
Please, provide any other information you may consider of interest relating to your e-tandem experience. 
52) In general, do you regard the exchange to be a positive or negative experience? Please justify your 
answer. 
53) Would you like to participate again in this kind of project? Please justify your answer. 
54) Are you going to keep in touch with your e-tandem partner? 
 
 
Thank you very much again for your cooperation and enthusiasm! 
Based on: Roza et al. (2001), Vinagre (2005), and Tandem Fundiazoa. 
 
Margarita Vinagre and Beatriz Muñoz  Computer-Mediated Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 100 
NOTES 
1. The guidelines for the language learning diary have been included in Appendix B. 
2. This is a translation of the guidelines given to the students since the ones used in this exchange were in 
Spanish and German. Most of the content of this document is a translation of Vinagre and Lera’s (2008) 
guidelines on etandem exchanges. Other sections of this document have been modified according to the 
goals of this exchange. 
3. Taken from: http://www.slf.ruhr-uni-bochum.de/tandem/esp/0305-esp.html 
4. Adapted from: http://www.slf.ruhr-uni-bochum.de/tandem/esp/0302-esp.html 
5. From: http://www.slf.ruhr-uni-bochum.de/tandem/esp/0306-esp.html 
6. This is a translation of the post-questionnaire given to the students since the ones used in this exchange 
were in Spanish and German. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
We are very grateful to Dr. Tim Lewis, for his help and support, Dr. Jesús Romero Trillo for his valuable 
comments, as well as the editors and the three anonymous reviewers for their very useful and insightful 
suggestions. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Margarita Vinagre is a Senior Lecturer at the Autónoma University of Madrid, where she teaches English 
Language and Linguistics at the Department of English Studies. She has a Ph.D. in English Linguistics. 
Her publications include research on the use of new technologies to support university language learners 
and the integration of telecollaboration into EFL courses.  
E-mail: margarita.vinagre@uam.es 
Beatriz Muñoz teaches Spanish and English at the University of Applied Sciences Emden/Leer and is a 
doctoral student at Nebrija University, Spain. Her main research topic involves tandem learning in 
asynchronous communication and mutual error correction as means of fostering language learning. She 
has coordinated online exchanges with University students from Germany, Spain and Mexico. 
E-mail: beatriz.munoz@hs-emden-leer.de 
 
REFERENCES 
Barker, T., & Kemp, F. (1990). Network theory: A postmodern pedagogy for the writing classroom. In C. 
Handa (Ed.), Computers and community: teaching composition in the twenty-first century (pp. 1–27). 
Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook Publishers.  
Bartram, M., & Walton, R. (1991). Correction: A positive approach to language mistakes. Hove: 
Language Teaching Publications. 
Brammerts, H. (1996). Language learning in tandem using the Internet. In M. Warschauer (Ed.), 
Telecollaboration in foreign language learning: Proceedings of the Hawaii symposium (pp. 121–130). 
Honolulu, HI: University of Hawai’i Second Language Teaching and Curriculum Center.  
Margarita Vinagre and Beatriz Muñoz  Computer-Mediated Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 101 
Chaudron, C. (1977). The role of error correction in second language teaching. In B. K. Das (Ed.), 
Patterns in classroom interaction in Southeast Asia (pp. 17–50). Singapore: SEAMEO Regional 
Language Centre. 
Chaudron, C. (1986). Teachers’ priorities in correcting learners’ errors in French immersion classes. In R. 
R. Day (Ed.), Talking to learn: Conversation in second language acquisition (pp. 64–84). Rowley, MA: 
Newbury House. 
Chavez, M. (2002). We say “culture” and students ask “what”?: University students’ definitions of 
foreign language culture. Die Unterrichtspraxis, 35(2), 129–140.  
Dam, L. (1995). Learner autonomy 3: From theory to classroom practice. Dublin: Authentik. 
Dussias, P. E. (2006). Morphological development in Spanish-American telecollaboration. In J. Belz & S. 
Thorne (Eds.), Internet-mediated intercultural foreign language education (pp. 121–146). Boston, MA: 
Thomson & Heinle. 
Fernández, S. (1997). Interlengua y análisis de errores en el aprendizaje del español como lengua 
extranjera. Madrid: Edelsa. 
Gaßdorf, A. (1998). Autonomes Lernen von Fremdsprachen im E-Mail Tandem: Kommunikation ohne 
Pannen, informeller und formeller Brief. Retrieved from http://www.slf.ruhr-uni-bochum.de/tandem/ 
sk/index.html 
Hyland, K. (1990). Providing productive feedback. ELT Journal, 44(4), 279–285. 
James, C. (1998). Errors in language learning and use: Exploring error analysis. Essex: Longman. 
Kelm, O. (1996). The application of computer networking in foreign language education: Focusing on 
principles of second language acquisition. In M. Warschauer (Ed.), Telecollaboration in foreign language 
learning (pp. 19–28). Honolulu, HI: University of Hawai’i Second Language Teaching and Curriculum 
Center.  
Kessler, G. (2009). Student-initiated attention to form in wiki-based collaborative writing. Language 
Learning & Technology, 13(1), 79–95. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num1/kessler.pdf 
Kötter, M. (2002). Tandem learning on the Internet: Learner interactions in virtual online environments 
(MOOs). Frankfurt: Perter Lang. 
Krashen, S. (1977). The monitor model for adult second language performance. In M. Burt, H. Dulay, & 
M. Finocchiaro (Eds.), Viewpoints on English as a second language (pp. 152–161). New York: Regents. 
Krashen, S. (1994). The input hypothesis and its rivals. In N. Ellis (Ed.), Implicit and explicit learning of 
languages (pp. 45–77). London: Academic Press. 
Lee, L. (2004). Learners’ perspectives on networked collaborative interaction with native speakers of 
Spanish in the U.S. Language Learning & Technology, 8(1), 83–100. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/ 
vol8num1/lee/default.html 
Lee, L. (2006). A study of native and nonnative speakers’ feedback and responses in Spanish-American 
networked collaborative interaction. In J. Belz & S. Thorne (Eds.), Internet-mediated intercultural foreign 
language education (pp. 147–176). Boston: Heinle & Heinle. 
Lee, L. (2008). Focus on form through collaborative scaffolding in expert-to-novice online interaction. 
Language Learning & Technology, 12(3), 53–72. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num3/lee.pdf 
Leeser, M. (2004). Learner proficiency and focus on form during collaborative dialogue. Language 
Teaching Research, 8(1), 55–81.  
Margarita Vinagre and Beatriz Muñoz  Computer-Mediated Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 102 
Little, D. & Ushioda, E. (1998). Designing, implementing and evaluating a project in tandem language 
learning via e-mail. ReCALL 10(1), 95–101. 
Little, D., Ushioda, E., Appel, M. C., Moran, J., O’Rourke, B., & Schwienhorst, K. (1999). Evaluating 
tandem learning by e-mail: Report on a bilateral project. CLCS Occasional Paper No 55. Dublin: Trinity 
College, Centre for Language and Communication Studies. 
Long, M. H. (1983). Linguistic and conversational adjustments to non-native speakers. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition, 5(2), 177–193. 
Long, M. H. (1991). Focus on form: A design feature in language teaching methodology. In D. C. K. de 
Bot, C. Kramsch & R. Ginsburg (Eds.), Foreign language research in a cross-cultural perspective (pp. 
39–52). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.  
Long, M. H. (1996). The role of the linguistic environment on second language acquisition. In W. Ritchie 
& T. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 413–468). New York: Academic Press. 
Long, M. H., & Robinson, P. (1998). Focus on form: Theory, research, and practice. In C. Doughty & J. 
Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in classroom second language acquisition (pp. 15–41). New York: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Lyster, R., Lightbown, M., & Spada, N. (1999). A response to Truscott’s “What’s wrong with oral 
grammar correction”. The Canadian Modern Language Review, 55 (4), 457–467. 
Lyster, R., & Ranta, L. (1997). Corrective feedback and learner uptake: Negotiation of form in 
communicative classrooms. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 19, 37–66. 
Lyster, R. (2001). Negotiation of form, recasts and explicit correction in relation to error types and learner 
repair in immersion classrooms. Language Learning, 51(Suppl 1), 265–301. Retrieved from http://people. 
mcgill.ca/files/roy.lyster/Lyster2001_LL.pdf 
Morris, F. (2002). Negotiation moves and recasts in relation to error types and learner repair in the foreign 
language classroom. Foreign Language Annals, 35(4), 395–404. 
Morris, F. (2005). Child-to-child interaction and corrective feedback in a computer mediated L2 class. 
Language Learning & Technology 9(1), 29–45. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num1/morris/ 
default.html 
Muñoz, B. (2008). Análisis y corrección de errores en un intercambio tandem español-alemán a través 
del correo electrónico. Unpublished dissertation. Universidad Nebrija: Madrid. 
Myles, J. (2002). Second language writing and research: The writing process and error analysis in student 
texts. TESL-EJ, 6(2), 1–20. Retrieved from http://www.tesl-ej.org/wordpress/ 
Nassaji, H., & Swain, M. (2000). A Vygotskian perspective on corrective feedback in L2: The effect of 
random versus negotiated help on the learning of English articles. Language Awareness, 9, 34–51. 
O’Rourke, B. (2005). Form-focused interaction in online tandem learning. CALICO Journal, 22(3), 433–
466. Retrieved from https://www.calico.org/html/article_144.pdf 
Panova, I., & Lyster, R. (2002). Patterns of corrective feedback and uptake in an adult ESL classroom. 
TESOL Quarterly, 36(4), 573–595. 
Pellettieri, J. (2000). Negotiation in cyberspace: the role of chatting in the development of grammatical 
competence. In M. Warschauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Network-based language teaching: Concepts and 
practice (pp. 59–86). New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Sauro, S. (2009). Computer-mediated corrective feedback and the development of L2 grammar. Language 
Learning & Technology, 13(1), 96–120. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num1/sauro.pdf 
Margarita Vinagre and Beatriz Muñoz  Computer-Mediated Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 103 
Schwienhorst, K. (1998). The “third place” - virtual reality applications for second language learning. 
ReCALL, 10(1), 118–126.  
Sotillo, S. M. (2006). Using instant messaging for collaborative learning: A case study. Journal of Online 
Education, 2(3). Retrieved from http://www.innovateonline.info/pdf/vol2_issue3/Using_Instant_ 
Messaging_for_Collaborative_Learning-__A_Case_Study.pdf 
Steveker, W. (2002). Arbeitsblatt zur Fehlergruppierung. Retrieved from http://www.wolfgangsteveker. 
de/didaktik/error1.pdf 
Storch, N. (2001). Comparing ESL learners’ attention to grammar on three different classroom tasks. 
RELC Journal, 32(2), 104–124.  
Stryker, S. B. (1997). The Mexico experiment at the Foreign Service Institute. In S. B. Stryker & B. L. 
Leaver (Eds.), Content-based instruction in foreign language education: Models and methods (pp. 177–
202). Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press. 
Swain, M. (2000). The output hypothesis and beyond: Mediating acquisition through collaborative 
dialogue. In J. P. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 97–114). Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.  
Vinagre, M. (2005). Fostering language learning via e-mail: An English-Spanish exchange. Computer 
Assisted Language Learning, 18(5), 369–388. 
Vinagre, M., & Lera, M. (2008). The role of error correction in online exchanges. In F. Zhang & B. 
Barber (Eds.), Handbook of Research on Computer-Enhanced Language Acquisition and Learning (pp. 
326–341). Hershey: IGI Publishing. 
Vinagre, M., & Maíllo, C. (2007). Focus on form in on-line projects: Linguistic development in e-mail 
tandem exchanges. In C. Periñán, C. (Ed.), Revisiting Language Learning Resources (pp. 91–112). 
Cambridge: Cambridge Scholars Publishing. 
Ware, P. D., & O’Dowd, R. (2008). Peer feedback on language form in telecollaboration. Language 
Learning & Technology, 12(1), 43–63. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num1/pdf/wareodowd.pdf 
Warschauer, M. (1996a). Computer-assisted language learning: An introduction. In S. Fotos (Ed.), 
Multimedia language teaching (pp. 3–10). Tokyo: Logos International.  
Warschauer, M. (Ed.) (1996b). Telecollaboration in foreign language learning. Honolulu, HI: University 
of Hawai’i Second Language Teaching and Curriculum Center.  
Williams, J. (1999). Learner-generated attention to form. Language Learning, 49(4), 583–625. 
Woodin, J. (1997). Email tandem learning and the communicative curriculum. ReCALL, 9, 22–33. 
