Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2011/news.pdf 
June 2011, Volume 15, Number 2 
pp. 23–26 
 
Language Learning & Technology 23 
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS 
Sponsors 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR) 
Co-Sponsor 
Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL) 
 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource 
Center (NFLRC)  
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials 
development projects and conducts workshops and conferences for language professionals among its 
many activities. 
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
Our 2011 Summer Institute on Online Learning Communities for Less Commonly Taught 
Languages will bring together faculty from participating institutions to build language-specific online 
cafés. Participants will structure thematic café content rubrics, participate in training sessions on research-
based pedagogical best practices for facilitating online learning communities, and practice technical skills 
needed to host cafés on the BRIX courseware system and to deploy tag cloud technology, skills that will 
enable them to fashion online learning communities to achieve a variety of specific purposes. 
The Chinese, Korean, and Russian Flagship Cafés will combine Flagship students at domestic sites and 
study abroad sites, allowing second-year students to act as mentors for first-year students preparing for 
their upcoming international experience, further improving their language and networking skills. The 
International Teacher Development Café for Samoan Educators will facilitate the sharing of ideas, 
research, and materials among teachers across the Pacific in the US, Samoa, and New Zealand. The 
Japanese for International Business Café will serve as a virtual support group and networking venue for 
MBA students conducting their overseas internships throughout Japan. Each café will serve as a model 
for developing similar cafés in the future. 
Interested in finding out more about online cafés or creating your own? Visit our Online Cafés resource 
Website.  
STAY IN TOUCH WITH SOCIAL MEDIA 
Did you know that the NFLRC has its own Facebook page? It’s one of the best ways to hear about the 
latest news, publications, conferences, workshops, and resources we offer. Just click on the “Like” button 
to become a fan. For those who prefer getting up-to-the-minute “tweets,” you can follow us on our 
Twitter page. Finally, NFLRC has its own YouTube channel with a growing collection of free language 
learning and teaching videos for your perusal. Subscribe today! 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 24 
NEW NFLRC PUBLICATIONS 
‘O Fāiā Fa‘atūmua o Sāmoa mai Tala o le Vavau by ‘Aumua Mata‘itusi Simanu 
More so than most other Polynesian languages, the Samoan language is highly 
stratified. The common spoken form of Samoan used among friends and peers, 
for example, would be inappropriate for public speaking at both traditional and 
non-traditional gatherings. At these kinds of events, Gagana Fa‘aaloalo (Respect 
Language) and Gagana Fa‘afailāuga (Chiefly Language/Oratory) are used. Both 
of these speech registers interweave into the language references to Samoan 
history, genealogies, and, more recently, the Christian bible. The first book in 
this series, ‘O si Manu a Ali‘i, was written primarily to provide linguistic 
background for these registers. This second book, ‘O Fāiā Fa‘atūmua o Sāmoa 
mai Tala o le Vavau, provides the core knowledge necessary to understand the 
high level of interplay in Samoan oratory between language and history. 
Check out our many other publications. 
OUR ONLINE JOURNALS SOLICIT SUBMISSIONS 
Language Learning & Technology is a refereed online journal, jointly sponsored by the 
University of Hawai‘i NFLRC and the Michigan State University Center for Language 
Education and Research (CLEAR). LLT focuses on issues related to technology and language 
education. For more information on submission guidelines, visit the LLT submissions page. 
Language Documentation & Conservation is a fully refereed, open-access journal sponsored 
by NFLRC and published exclusively in electronic form by the University of Hawai‘i Press. 
LD&C publishes papers on all topics related to language documentation and conservation. 
For more information on submission guidelines, visit the LD&C submissions page. 
Reading in a Foreign Language is a refereed online journal, jointly sponsored by the 
University of Hawai‘i NFLRC and the Department of Second Language Studies. RFL serves 
as an excellent source for the latest developments in the field, both theoretical and pedagogic, 
including improving standards for foreign language reading. For more information on 
submission guidelines, visit the RFL submissions page. 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education 
and Research (CLEAR)  
CLEAR’s mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States. 
Projects focus on materials development, professional development training, and foreign language 
research. 
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
Four professional development workshops are slated for July 2011. The application deadline is June 1, so 
hurry to choose your courses:   
• Rich Internet Applications for Language Learning: Introductory Techniques 
• Adding Variety to Reading and Vocabulary Lessons 
• Project-Based Learning in the Language Classroom 
• Using Video to Promote Language Development in the Classroom 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 25 
Detailed information on all workshops can be found on our Web site. 
NEW PRODUCT 
We have recently released our new Introductory Business Chinese CD-ROM. The software is intended 
mainly for use by those who have little or no knowledge of the Chinese language but who, for any 
number of different reasons, wish to learn more about business and economics in the Chinese 
environment.  
MATERIALS DEVELOPMENT 
CLEAR is developing several new products during our fifth funding cycle. Check our Web site for 
updates on new products and services. Some of our upcoming projects include: 
• Professional development webinars on diverse topics 
• Online videos for language teaching techniques 
• Online listening and speaking tests for LCTLs 
• Applications for language learning on mobile devices 
CONFERENCES 
CLEAR exhibits at local and national conferences year-round. We hope to see you at ACTFL, CALICO, 
MIWLA, Central States, and other conferences. 
NEWSLETTER 
CLEAR News is a free bi-yearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. 
Download PDFs of back issues and subscribe at http://clear.msu.edu/clear/newsletter/.  
The Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL)  
The Center for Applied Linguistics is a private, nonprofit organization that promotes and improves the 
teaching and learning of languages, identifies and solves problems related to language and culture, and 
serves as a resource for information about language and culture. CAL carries out a wide range of 
activities in the fields of English as a second language, foreign languages, cultural education, and 
linguistics. 
Featured Resources: 
• Language Policy Research Network (LPREN) 
CAL is pleased to host the Language Policy Research Network (LPREN), created in 2006 by the 
Research Networks committee of the Association Internationale de Linguistique Appliquée, 
(International Association of Applied Linguistics). Visit the LPREN Web site to learn more or to 
join the e-mail discussion group. 
• CAL News 
CAL News is our electronic newsletter created to provide periodic updates about our projects and 
research as well as information about new publications, online resources, products, and services 
of interest to our readers. Visit our Web site to sign up. 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 26 
• Alliance for the Advancement of Heritage Languages 
Visit the Alliance Web site to browse the Heritage Language Program Profiles, view the Heritage 
Voices Collection, and sign up to receive the quarterly electronic newsletter, Alliance News 
Flash.  
 
• Center for Research on the Educational Achievement and Teaching of English Language 
Learners (CREATE) 
Visit the CREATE Web site to learn more about CREATE, its research, free resources, and 
upcoming November 2011 conference. 
 
• CAL SIOP Professional Development Services 
CAL works with schools, states, and districts to design and deliver high-quality, client-centered 
professional development services on the SIOP Model. 
 
• CAL Solutions: Adult ESL Education 
This new Web site provides access to evidence-based resources and practical tools for 
practitioners working with the growing population of adult English language learners throughout 
the United States. 
• CAL Solutions: PreK-12 ELL Education 
CAL provides a variety of professional development and technical assistance services related to 
language education and assessment needs. In order to meet the growing demand from K-8 
educators for training material on teaching reading to English language learners, CAL continues 
to offer its successful series of institutes in Washington, DC, in June and July 2011. 
Featured Publications: 
• Connecting Diverse Cultures: A Video Guide for A New Day and Be Who You Are 
• Improving Education for English Language Learners: Research-Based Approaches 
• Education for Adult English Language Learners in the United States: Trends, Research, and 
Promising Practices 
• Foreign Language Teaching in U.S. Schools: Results of a National Survey 
• Realizing the Vision of Two-Way Immersion: Fostering Effective Programs and Classrooms 
• Using the SIOP Model: Professional Development Manual for Sheltered Instruction 
• What’s Different About Teaching Reading to Students Learning English?  
 
Visit CAL’s Website to learn more about our projects, resources, and services. 
 
