Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2011/news.pdf 
February 2011, Volume 15, Number 1 
pp. 17–20 
 
Language Learning & Technology 17 
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS 
Sponsors 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR) 
Co-Sponsor 
Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL) 
 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource 
Center (NFLRC)  
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials 
development projects and conducts workshops and conferences for language professionals among its 
many activities. 
2ND INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON LANGUAGE DOCUMENTATION & 
CONSERVATION (ICLDC): STRATEGIES FOR MOVING FORWARD (FEBRUARY 11-13, 
2011) 
The 1st ICLDC, with its theme “Supporting Small Languages Together,” underscored the need for 
communities, linguists, and other academics to work in close collaboration. The theme of the 2nd ICLDC 
is “Strategies for Moving Forward.” We aim to build on the strong momentum created at the 1st ICLDC 
and to discuss research and revitalization approaches yielding rich, accessible records which can benefit 
both the field of language documentation and speech communities.  
Conference highlights include plenary talks by Keren D. Rice (University of Toronto), Wayan Arka 
(Australian National University/Udayana University), and Larry Kimura (University of Hawai‘i at Hilo); 
three invited colloquia on “The Use of Film in Language Documentation,” “Grammaticography,” and 
“Dictionaries and Endangered Languages: Technology, Revitalization, and Collaboration;” and a wide 
assortment of optional pre-conference technical workshops (February 9-10). We hope you will join us. 
NEW NFLRC PUBLICATIONS 
Tim Murphey on NFLRC Hawai‘i YouTube Channel 
The ever-popular Tim Murphey, frequent lecturer and author of many books on foreign 
language teaching—both theory and practice—now has his own playlist on our NFLRC 
Hawai‘i YouTube channel. Here you can access over four hours of Tim’s lectures on the 
application of theory to practice. Not only does Tim draw on the work of researchers in our 
field, such as of Krashen and Swain, Long, & Allwright, but looks to research in allied fields 
such as psychology (identity, empathy, acceptance, congruence) and business (intelligent fast 
failure). Tim demonstrates techniques he has found particularly effective such as language 
learning histories, action logs, ghost discourse, speed dictation, and song and music, among 
others. 
Check out our many other publications.  
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 18 
OUR ONLINE JOURNALS SOLICIT SUBMISSIONS 
Language Learning & Technology is a refereed online journal, jointly sponsored by the 
University of Hawai‘i NFLRC and the Michigan State University Center for Language 
Education and Research (CLEAR). LLT focuses on issues related to technology and language 
education. For more information on submission guidelines, visit the LLT submissions page. 
Language Documentation & Conservation is a fully refereed, open-access journal sponsored 
by NFLRC and published exclusively in electronic form by the University of Hawai‘i Press. 
LD&C publishes papers on all topics related to language documentation and conservation. 
For more information on submission guidelines, visit the LD&C submissions page. 
Reading in a Foreign Language is a refereed online journal, jointly sponsored by the 
University of Hawai‘i NFLRC and the Department of Second Language Studies. RFL serves 
as an excellent source for the latest developments in the field, both theoretical and pedagogic, 
including improving standards for foreign language reading. For more information on 
submission guidelines, visit the RFL submissions page. 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education 
and Research (CLEAR)  
CLEAR’s mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States. 
Projects focus on materials development, professional development training, and foreign language 
research. 
CLEAR has been awarded funding for the Language Resource Centers’ 2010-14 funding cycle. We look 
forward to this fifth cycle and to continuing our service to the language education community. In 
addition, we are very pleased to continue our co-sponsorship of LLT along with our partners. 
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
Four professional development workshops are slated for July 2011:   
o Rich Internet Applications for Language Learning: Introductory Techniques 
o Adding Variety to Reading and Vocabulary Lessons 
o Project-Based Learning in the Language Classroom 
o Using Video to Promote Language Development in the Classroom 
Detailed information on all workshops can be found on our Web site: 
http://clear.msu.edu/clear/professionaldev/summerworkshops.php.  
NEW PRODUCT 
We have recently released our new Introductory Business Chinese CD-ROM. The software is intended 
mainly for use by those who have little or no knowledge of the Chinese language but who, for any 
number of different reasons, wish to learn more about business and economics in the Chinese 
environment.  
MATERIALS DEVELOPMENT 
CLEAR is developing several new products during our fifth funding cycle. Check our Web site for 
updates on new products and services. Some of our upcoming projects include: 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 19 
• Professional development webinars on diverse topics 
• Online videos for language teaching techniques 
• Online listening and speaking tests for LCTLs 
• Applications for language learning on mobile devices 
CONFERENCES 
CLEAR exhibits at local and national conferences year-round. We hope to see you at ACTFL, CALICO, 
MIWLA, Central States, and other conferences. 
NEWSLETTER 
CLEAR News is a free bi-yearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. 
Download PDFs of back issues and subscribe at http://clear.msu.edu/clear/newsletter/.  
The Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL)  
The Center for Applied Linguistics is a private, nonprofit organization that promotes and improves the 
teaching and learning of languages, identifies and solves problems related to language and culture, and 
serves as a resource for information about language and culture. CAL carries out a wide range of 
activities in the fields of English as a second language, foreign languages, cultural education, and 
linguistics. 
Featured Resources: 
• CAL News 
CAL News is our electronic newsletter created to provide periodic updates about our projects and 
research as well as information about new publications, online resources, products, and services of 
interest to our readers. Visit our Web site to sign up. 
• Alliance for the Advancement of Heritage Languages 
Visit the Alliance Web site to browse the Heritage Language Program Profiles, view the Heritage 
Voices Collection, and sign up to receive the quarterly electronic newsletter, Alliance News Flash.  
 
• Center for Research on the Educational Achievement and Teaching of English Language 
Learners (CREATE) 
Visit the CREATE Web site to learn more about CREATE, its research, and free resources. To keep 
current on CREATE activities sign up to receive its electronic newsletter, CREATE News.  
 
CAL SIOP Professional Development Services 
CAL works with schools, states, and districts to design and deliver high-quality, client-centered 
professional development services on the SIOP Model. 
 
• CAL Solutions: Institutes on Teaching Reading to English Language Learners 
CAL is continuing its successful series of institutes on teaching reading to English language learners 
in Washington, DC in 2011. CAL provides a variety of professional development and technical 
assistance services related to language education and assessment needs.  
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 20 
Featured Publications: 
• Connecting Diverse Cultures: A Video Guide for A New Day and Be Who You Are 
• Improving Education for English Language Learners: Research-Based Approaches 
• Education for Adult English Language Learners in the United States: Trends, Research, and 
Promising Practices 
• Foreign Language Teaching in U.S. Schools: Results of a National Survey 
• Realizing the Vision of Two-Way Immersion: Fostering Effective Programs and Classrooms 
• Using the SIOP Model: Professional Development Manual for Sheltered Instruction 
• What’s Different About Teaching Reading to Students Learning English?  
 
Visit CAL’s Web site to learn more about our projects, resources, and services.  
 
