Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2011/yang.pdf 
February 2011, Volume 15, Number 1 
pp. 122–146 
 
Copyright © 2011, ISSN 1094-3501 122 
LEARNER INTERPRETATIONS OF SHARED SPACE IN 
MULTILATERAL ENGLISH BLOGGING 
 
Yu-Feng (Diana) Yang, National Sun Yat-Sen University 
This qualitative study aims to understand how English learners interpret shared space in an 
online multilateral English blogging context and how their interpretations of shared space 
contribute to their multilateral exchange experience. Twenty-four Asian learners of 
English from two different universities—one in Japan and one in Taiwan—participated in 
this study. These learners worked on their individual blogs and interacted on both their 
own blogs and on those of their partners. Data sources include surveys, online interaction 
records, class assignments, reflective journals, and interviews. 
Guided by Kramsch’s (2009c) analogy of the mindsets of the structuralist and post-
structuralist approaches in culture and communication, this study reported that students in 
this multilateral English blogging project interpreted shared space from two perspectives 
(a) commonality, and (b) relativity. While students who interpreted shared space from the 
perspective of commonality valued pre-existing shared personal interests, mutual 
understanding, and similar personal experiences as a prerequisite for inter-class blogging, 
students who interpreted shared space from the perspective of relativity tended to draw 
relative positions from a dialogue between their and their inter-class peers’ historicity or 
cultural memories through re-contextualization and re-positioning. This study suggests 
that although students who interpreted shared space from the commonality perspective 
were able to engage in inter-class blogging, they faced difficulties in exploring other 
possibilities in relating to the blog content, the blog discussions, and the bloggers, when 
commonality was absent. However, for students who interpreted shared space from the 
relativity perspective, they were able to form relationships of possibility in mediating 
encounters through uses of heterogeneous semiotic resources. Future research on what 
barriers can hinder students’ development due to interpretation of shared space and how 
students develop uses of symbolic resources can contribute to understanding students’ 
construction of shared space for communication.  
INTRODUCTION 
Studies in digitally mediated communication have explored how language learners co-construct and co-
mediate with each other in telecollaboration or online exchange projects. On what common ground and 
conditions they can work together successfully is of concern in these studies (Basharina, 2007, 2009; Belz, 
2002; Hauck, 2007; Lee, 2008; O’Dowd, 2005; 2006; Ware, 2005; Ware & Kramsch, 2005; Ware & 
O’Dowd, 2008). The importance of shared space has frequently been suggested (Darhower, 2007; 
Schneider & von der Emde, 2006; Ware & Kramsch, 2005). The term, shared space is not taken literally 
in this paper; it does not refer to a physical space (e.g., an online platform or blogosphere) in which the 
participants gather together to carry out a task. Rather, it is viewed as a metaphorical space where human 
beings sense their relations with others in the act of communication. Thus, exploring how language 
learners interpret and approach shared space can assist researchers in gaining insight into how language 
learners create relationships between themselves and others for co-construction and co-mediation in 
digitally mediated communication.  
The purpose of this study is to explore English language learners’ interpretation of shared space in an 
online multilateral context and to examine how their interpretations of shared space contribute to their 
online experience. It aims to expand the current perspective on shared space in which commonality and 
sharing are emphasized through probing language learners’ perspectives. 
Yu-Feng (Diana) Yang Shared Space in Multilateral English Blogging  
 
Language Learning & Technology 123 
Theoretical Groundings of Shared Space 
The concept of shared space originates from discussions of language, thought and communication. To 
describe how interlocutors coordinate the act of communication, Rommetveit (1974, 1979) coined the 
notion of intersubjectivity, describing it as a communication achievement that interlocutors attain on the 
basis of their original shared presuppositions (i.e., state of intersubjectivity). Wertsch (1984, 1985) 
discusses the notion of situation definition in relation to intersubjectivity, explaining how interlocutors 
sequentially bridge their differences by defining objects and recognizing significant behaviors of others. 
Wertsch bases his work on the Vygotskian concept of interpsychological functioning, highlighting three 
levels of intersubjectivity that interlocutors achieve in the process of assisting one another.  
In studies of communication that involve speakers with diverse cultural backgrounds, theoretical 
groundings that guide the interpretations of shared space reside in cultural mindsets. Kramsch’s 
discussions (2009c) about structuralist approaches and post-structuralist approaches in communication 
and culture can be useful in understanding how the interpretation of shared space is framed in the current 
literature.  
Kramsch (2009c) argues that structuralist approaches consider culture as a stable, fixed, and bounded 
system, in which citizens of a nation or members of a speech community function with common linguistic 
codes, values, beliefs, and behaviors.1 Rooted in the belief of “one language (or way of speaking) = one 
culture (or social background)” (Kramsch, 2009c, p. 242), each national culture or each speech 
community culture is considered to be homogenous and independent. Only monolingual and 
monocultural members can be found in that specific national culture or speech community. Thus, the 
dichotomous nature of cultures or speech communities is often highlighted in studies framed by 
structuralist approaches.  
A structuralist approach to bounded speech communities (i.e., one culture, one language), guides 
researchers to approach their interpretation of shared space with an emphasis on misunderstanding and 
conflict due to cultural differences of the interlocutors. How language learners bridge and minimize the 
differences between their (self) and the target speakers’ (other) cultural and speech communities is 
discussed within this tradition. Moreover, foreign language learners are often viewed as deficient in 
comparison to native speakers or language learners with greater language proficiency. The focus is on 
ameliorating language proficiency and minimizing differences between learners and the target speech 
community.  
From the structuralist perspective, self and other are located in two separate private worlds. Consequently, 
engagement in peer collaboration and co-construction lies in overlapping subjectivities or prolepses, in 
which agreement and consensus of the members are attained (de Guerrero & Villamil, 2000; Rommetveit, 
1979, 1985).2 For example, in their study regarding corrective feedback, Aljaafreh and Lantolf (1994) 
highlight how a collaborative frame is formed for the tutor and the tutee to create mutually accepted 
conditions for error corrections when the tutor serves as a partner to the tutee. Rommetveit’s (1979, 1985) 
notion of the state of intersubjectivity stresses the moment and the temporarily shared social world in 
which two persons are in sync or in tune with each other during a joint activity. Rommetveit believes that 
such a state of intersubjectivity is established when: (a) a here-and-now consensus about the topics, 
intentions, and goals of the joint activity; (b) a mutually agreed definition and perception of the situation; 
and (c) an allied anticipation of each others’ reciprocal roles are achieved among interlocutors. In addition, 
Wegerif’s (1998) proposal of thresholds highlights the initial engagement of an outsider who appropriates 
and approximates the discourse and beliefs of a community in order to become an insider in that 
community. Thus, from a structuralist perspective, shared space is viewed as a social accomplishment, in 
which knowledge, beliefs, or assumptions, are held in common and shared. Engagement in peer 
collaboration and co-construction lies at the establishment of shared space. 
Yu-Feng (Diana) Yang Shared Space in Multilateral English Blogging  
 
Language Learning & Technology 124 
The overlapping subjectivities, or prolepses, however, are not often owned by the interlocutors in the first 
place. To establish such overlapping shared space, language learners have to negotiate and move from 
their own private worlds to others’ in order to locate shared knowledge and some common ground 
(Rommetveit, 1979, 1985). De Guerrero and Villamil (2000) demonstrated how two college ESL students 
established and maintained intersubjectivity based on their shared common knowledge when one worked 
as a reader and the other as a writer during peer correction for their narrative texts. In this sense, the 
notion of self-other is viewed as part of binary relations (either-or), and the transcendence of the private 
worlds of self and others serves as a driving force for the formation of shared space. 
Post-structualist perspectives, however, problematize the notion of stable, fixed and bounded speech 
communities that emphasize monolingual and monocultural cultural practice (Blommaert, 2005; 
Pennycook, 2007; for a discussion, see Kramsch, 2009a, 2009c). The argument is that in the age of 
globalization where international communication, partnerships, migration, and networking increasingly 
take place, the practice of cultures is now hybridized, intermingled and pluriculturalized. Multilinguals 
and multiculturals perform transcultural communication practice with the use of heterogeneous semiotic 
resources that are available to them across multiple global and local speech communities (Kramsch, 
2009b; Lam, 2009b; Pennycook, 2007). The territorialized and monolingual view of culture may no 
longer reflect all the cultural practices in current society. Further, while “culture is seen as heterogeneous, 
fluid, conflictual, it is seen as a mode, not a place of belonging” (Kramsch 2009c, p. 247).  
Post-structualist perspectives guide researchers to frame their interpretation of shared space by exploring 
how learners serve as creative agents to mediate the connections between themselves and others through 
the use of heterogeneous semiotic resources while communicating. Bakhtin’s dialogism often informs 
interpretation of shared space in that the self and other are viewed as dialogic (Iddings, Haught, & Devlin, 
2005; Kramsch, 2009b; Kramsch & Whiteside, 2008). From the Bakhtinian view of simultaneity, Iddings 
et al. (2005) argue that the self and the other must not be viewed as absolute concepts with binary 
relations (either-or). Instead, the self and the other “are always relative to each other through 
simultaneous unity of differences in the event of an utterance” (Holquist, 1990, pp. 36, cited in Iddings, et 
al., 2005), and “the self cannot exist without the other; the other is what gives meaning to the self” 
(Iddings, et al., 2005, p. 36). Kramsch and Whiteside (2008) elaborate that the self is not unitary but 
pluralistic and multiple in that it contains the voices of the self as a subjective insider and of others as 
objective outsiders. Therefore, the utterance that one produces is always double-voiced as part of self-
other dialogues. Thus, from a post-structuralist perspective, shared spaces exist in a form of relativity that 
speakers employ as contact zones. 
How one “mediate(s) complex encounters among interlocutors with different capacities and cultural 
imaginations” (Kramsch & Whiteside, 2008, p. 646) in joint activities can serve as the focus for post-
structuralist accounts of shared space. Kramsch and Whiteside (2008) discuss the notion of “relationships 
of possibility” (p. 668), highlighting the possible connectedness through historicity in multilingual 
environments. Examination of multilingual speakers demonstrates how moments of interaction can be 
intersected with their choice of languages (e.g., English, Spanish, Maya, and Chinese), in a way that may 
resonate with the cultural memories of those speakers. For example, when DF (the volunteer tour guide 
for the study) introduced Whiteside as his teacher to a Chinese clerk, the Chinese clerk chose to speak in 
English, a language that enacted his memories of learning English in the United States, together with his 
embodied interpretation of which languages should be learned by Maya-speaking immigrants from 
Yucatan, Mexico, living in San Francisco, California at the time of the study. The encounter was 
mediated by the fact that a relative shared space existed in part due to his past language learning 
experience and the other’s current language learning situation. The clerk spoke in his limited English, 
assuming that Whiteside was teaching DF English, the predominant language in San Francisco, and 
attempted to create an English-only environment for DF’s English learning through using his experience 
of learning English in the United States. Thus, the Chinese clerk’s interpretation of what a “teacher” was 
Yu-Feng (Diana) Yang Shared Space in Multilateral English Blogging  
 
Language Learning & Technology 125 
became embodied in his interpretation of what the Yucatan people would need for language learning. 
Together with his cultural memories of English learning, the Chinese clerk’s perception of the word 
“teacher,” his interpretation of Whiteside who was an Anglo, and DF as a Maya-Speaking immigrant 
from Yucatan, and his understanding of the English language as the predominant language in San 
Francisco were used as symbolic resources, assisting him in developing a relative shared space of the self-
other dialogue. Kramsch and Whiteside’s discussions of such processes imply that with the use of 
language as a symbolic resource, intersubjectivity does not usually exist in here-and-now utterances. It 
can be “found in the shared memories, connotations, projects, and inferences elicited by the various sign 
systems we use in concert with others” (Kramsch, 2009b, p. 19). Therefore, learners’ recognition of 
relationships of possibility can enrich what they can achieve in their social practice. 
In relation to the construction of relationships of possibility, van Lier’s discussion of affordance (van Lier, 
2004, p. 105) stresses the importance of a person’s ability to interpret objects and their relative historicity 
when used as semiotic resources in social activities. In a social activity in which multilateral exchanges 
are involved, language learners’ abilities to act as intercultural mediators (Byram, 2008) play an important 
role in approaching their multilateral partners and thus participating as a community. It is through their 
creation of cultural affordances that their and others’ relative nature can emerge from their participation in 
a situational context. Thus, it is useful to understand how learners from different backgrounds work with 
others in a joint social activity as intercultural mediators to construct meanings of their relative shared 
spaces through the use of their and others’ symbolic resources.  
Shared Space in Internet-Mediated Communication via E-mails, Text Chats, Discussion Forums or 
Videoconferencing 
Many studies concerning digitally mediated communication in instructional settings have investigated 
shared space in the context of telecollaboration via e-mails (Belz, 2002; Thorne, 2003), text chats (Belz, 
2002; Darhower, 2007, 2008; Lee, 2008; Schneider & von der Emde, 2006), discussion forums 
(Basharina, 2007, 2009; Furstenberg, Levet, English, & Maillet, 2001; O’Dowd, 2005; Ware, 2005; Ware 
& Kramsch, 2005; Ware & O’Dowd, 2008), and videoconferencing (Hauck, 2007). These studies often 
examine the notion of shared space from a structuralist perspective. Tensions and conflicts that hinder the 
development and maintenance of the commonality and sharing of the participants are often viewed as 
dysfunctions and obstacles to successful communication in these studies. Clashes in linguistic convention, 
technological affordances, and interpretation of the content of discussions are reported as barriers to the 
development or maintenance of shared space. 
Some studies suggest differences in learner perceptions of linguistic convention can lead to tensions in 
online communication (Basharina, 2007; Kramsch & Thorne, 2002; Ware, 2005). In her study of tridem 
learning via a WebCT bulletin board, Basharina (2007) indicated a genre clash (i.e., a difference in 
linguistic convention) as one source of intercultural miscommunication between students in Mexico, 
Japan, and Russia, leading to learner dissatisfaction regarding peer behaviors in joint communications. 
Kramsch and Thorne (2002) reported a similar genre clash in a French-American e-mail exchange project 
during which the French students employed factual and impersonal discourse, whereas the U.S. students 
implemented forms of personal socialization. They concluded that students’ habitual genre norms, 
residing in their home institution, lead to their interpretations of what discourse genres are appropriate in 
online communication and in turn mediate their use of different discourse genres in online communication.  
In terms of contradictions in technological affordances, Thorne (2003) and Basharina (2007) both 
discovered that different cultural interpretations of technological affordances (i.e., culture-of-use), can 
create tensions that hinder the development and maintenance of intercultural communication. In his e-
mail study, Thorne (2003) concluded that in an online communicative activity, technology is no longer a 
neutral object for intercultural encounters. Participants interpreted it as a cultural tool for a specific 
context to which was assigned particular cultural meaning. Therefore, differences in cultural 
Yu-Feng (Diana) Yang Shared Space in Multilateral English Blogging  
 
Language Learning & Technology 126 
interpretations of technological affordances can also hinder the development and establishment of 
intersubjectivity. 
In terms of the possible dichotomies in linguistic meanings, Ware and Kramsch (2005) analyzed the 
misunderstanding that arose in German-US intercultural communication. They report how Rob (a U.S. 
student who was learning German), and Marie (a German student who was learning English), experienced 
conflicts in their discussions about the history of East-West German relations. Marie’s misinterpretations 
of Rob’s ambiguous questions in his first post led her to offer him in-depth explanations of the history of 
East-West German relations. Her use of the word “little” in her responses appeared to insult Rob who 
later withdrew from the discussions.  
The above studies approached language learners’ communication by emphasizing differences between 
cultural groups. Without mutually shared expectations, perceptions, or understanding of a situation or 
social activity, telecollaboration partners can often experience cultural contradictions and conflicts that 
lead to miscommunication or failed communication (O’Dowd & Ritter, 2006). However, as online 
language or cultural exchanges often attempt to involve diverse participants who reside in different 
geographical and regional locations, and come from distinct cultures and contexts, it may not be 
reasonable to presuppose that the participants always share common ground. Instead, it appears 
unavoidable for learners to experience tensions and conflicts in the process of intercultural 
communication. It may therefore be useful for researchers to view these conflicts and tensions as potential 
learning opportunities (Agar, 1994). However, little is known about how students can take advantage of 
such opportunities, find ways to relate to others in a specific situation, or coordinate the heterogeneous 
perspectives of culturally diverse groups online.  
In their study of German-US synchronous text discussions, Schneider and von der Emde (2006) 
demonstrated how conflicts and disagreement can mediate productive dialogues in a joint discussion. In 
their discussions about gun control, the German students, Christina and Ingrid, suggested that Americans 
are too liberal with their guns, proposing that the U.S. should have stricter laws for gun control. The U.S. 
students, Felicity and Nora, challenged Christina and Ingrid to provide evidence about their claims rather 
than discussing this issue based on their assumptions. Schneider and von der Emde’s study implied that 
conflicts and disagreements in online space may not necessarily be an obstacle to communication. If 
learners are able to seize the opportunity and exercise their agency in establishing affordances for conflict, 
disagreements can turn in to a mediational means for productive dialogue. Understanding how language 
learners succeed in doing this can shed light on the co-construction and co-mediation of shared space in 
online intercultural communications.  
Shared Spaces in Internet-Mediated Communication via Blogs 
Different from e-mails, text chats, discussion forums, and videoconferencing, blogs, a type of Web 2.0 
technology for Web publishing, can be used by language learners to develop personalized homepages 
with multiple entries displayed in reverse chronological order. Bloggers typically publicly post their 
opinions and ideas. Resources for blogging can include text, images, audio, videos, maps, hyperlinks, 
hypertexts, and so forth.  
Feedback is usually welcomed on blogs. Blog visitors may react and respond to the blog entries created 
by the blog owners through the function of “comment” for discussions and social interaction. However, 
the interactions on blogs are typically viewed as one-to-many, as the comment button is only displayed at 
the bottom of each blog entry and the blog visitors tend to respond to blog owners only. In addition, the 
chronological displays of the comments and the absence of a threaded discussion format may reinforce 
the notion of one-to-many interaction on blogs. Thus, it is often perceived that blog visitors merely 
respond to the blog owner rather than to other blog visitors. 
Yu-Feng (Diana) Yang Shared Space in Multilateral English Blogging  
 
Language Learning & Technology 127 
It is believed that blogging can enhance the ownership and responsibility of the writer, that is, the blog 
author (Oravec, 2003; Pinkman, 2005), facilitate self-expression and self-empowerment (Blood, 2002), 
encourage student participation in reading and writing activities (Godwin-Jones, 2006), promote self-
reflection (Ducate & Lomicka, 2008; Lee, 2009), motivate community building (Lee, 2009), and expand 
socialization opportunities with authentic audiences beyond classroom settings (Godwin-Jones, 2003; Lee, 
2009). These benefits have encouraged L2 instructors to utilize blogs for projects designed for 
intercultural exchange (Ducate & Lomicka, 2005; Lee, 2009), cross-cultural understanding and awareness 
(Elola & Oskoz, 2008), creative and reflective writing (Murray & Hourigan, 2008), peer interaction 
around feedback (Dippold, 2009), writing reflections and peer interaction (Lee, 2010), and writing 
fluency (Bloch, 2007). 
Few studies concerning telecollaboration (Ducate & Lomicka, 2008; Elola & Oskoz, 2008; Lee, 2009), 
however, are currently available on shared spaces in relation to blogs. Lee (2009) reported that students 
gained cultural understanding and had positive experiences when working within a Spanish-US 
intercultural exchange project via blogs and podcasts. Elola and Oskoz (2008) also cited growth of 
students’ intercultural competence in a blogging exchange project composed of students abroad and at 
home on the basis of Byram’s (2000) intercultural competence criteria. However, neither of their studies 
explained how students in the project worked with each other in relation to shared space. Ducate and 
Lomicka’s (2008) study on a German-French blogging project of student-selected and teacher-assigned 
topics showed that blog readers found parallel interests and hobbies with their inter-class peers. Rather 
than focusing on the factual information presented in the blog, they read the blog entries of the inter-class 
peers to learn about the bloggers as people. Although the end-of-semester class research requirement of 
describing their blogger partner may have influenced their role as blog readers, this study sheds light on 
some possible connections on which blog readers may draw in relation to the blog owner. More studies 
are necessary to understand how students interpret shared space in blogging and how their interpretations 
relate to their blogging experience. 
In sum, the notion of shared space is a potentially useful construct for research regarding joint activities. 
Whereas the structuralist perspective sees shared space as transcendence of the private world of self and 
that of others to attain agreement and consensus of a given situation, the post-structuralist perspective sees 
shared space as variable relative positioning of self and other, stressing the dynamic self-other dialogue.  
This study attempts to explore learners’ interpretation of shared space in an online multilateral context, 
and to examine how their reported interpretation of shared space contributes to their online multilateral 
exchange experience. Two research questions guided the design of this study: 
1. How do English language learners interpret shared spaces in multilateral English blogging? 
2. How do their interpretations of shared spaces contribute to their multilateral English blogging 
practice? 
METHODOLOGY 
This qualitative study followed the guidelines of ethnographic research. Ethnographic study is often used 
to explore how a particular group of people, such as English learners in an English multilateral blogging 
project, defines reality, what symbols and tools they use, how they work with other members in their 
group, and how their values and beliefs intersect with their behaviors (Fetterman, 1998). When 
participants have opportunities to undergo a new cultural experience or new cross-cultural communication, 
ethnographic study can be applied to capture the voices, struggles, and adaptations of the participants and 
to understand the forces of the cultures they have been in contact with. Because the goal of this study was 
to explore English learners’ interpretations of shared space when blogging and how they worked with the 
multilateral partners through the shared space, the use of ethnographic research can assist the researcher 
Yu-Feng (Diana) Yang Shared Space in Multilateral English Blogging  
 
Language Learning & Technology 128 
in developing understanding of the underlying forces of the blog interactions from the perspectives of the 
participants.  
Research Context  
This nine-week partnership English blogging project was conducted throughout the spring semester of 
2008 in two different courses in two different universities; one in southern Taiwan and one in northern 
Japan. The objective of the course in Taiwan, Freshman English Writing, was to develop students’ writing 
skills in narrative genres. Through the English blogging project, the instructor aimed to develop students’ 
awareness of readers in the process of their writing, motivate them to write, and encourage them to 
connect their writing experience with their personal interest in the theme that they had chosen. Students 
were asked to make their blog posts “discussable” and accessible to their readers. The course in Japan, 
Media and Society English Seminar, aimed to improve students’ English skills while learning about 
media. Students were guided to use English to study about the media and how it impacts society and 
individuals. They also learned how to create their own contributions to the world through media. Thus, in 
the English blogging project the Japanese instructor attempted to help students understand the medium of 
blogging and how blogs are and can be used as media tools to connect with others.  
Both courses included the English blogging project as a required course assignment. The blogging 
assignment was 20% of the course grade in the course in Taiwan (TW). The TW instructor assessed the 
students’ blogging performance based on their efforts in making their blogs discussable and in reaching 
out to their inter-class peers. In the course in Japan (JP) this assignment was 15% of the course grade. The 
JP instructor evaluated students’ blogging performance based on the regularity of their blog posts and 
their effort at commenting on the blogs of students in the partnership class (hereafter, inter-class) and the 
blogs of students in their own class (hereafter intra-class). 
The researcher was the instructor of the course in Taiwan and was a friend of the instructor of the course 
in Japan. The researcher was a non-native speaker teacher of English and the instructor of the course in 
Japan was a native English speaker. 
Participants 
Participants in this study included 24 learners of English who studied in these two different universities: 
17 from the university in Taiwan and 7 from the university in Japan. Although the majority of the 
students in these two classes were Taiwanese (n = 16) and Japanese (n = 5), they also included students 
from Malaysia (n = 1) and Mainland China (n = 1), and a student who grew up in the US and moved to 
Taiwan with her family when she entered college (U.S. Immigrant) (n = 1). Students in this project were 
all in their early 20s. The majors of the participants were diverse. Students in Taiwan (hereafter, TW 
students) were all first year English majors who enrolled in the class “English Writing” (required course) 
during the study. Students in Japan (hereafter, JP students), however, were non-English majors who 
studied in the medical school, the dental department, and the engineering department. Except for the 
student from China, all of them were second year students. They enrolled in the Media and Society 
English Seminar as an elective course. 
The participants’ online language experience varied. Prior to the project, the TW students had had 
experience writing in English blogs online as their course assignment the previous semester. However, 
except for one, none of the JP students had blogged in English in their previous classes or other contexts.  
Procedures 
The entire project for TW students lasted approximately 12 weeks, from mid-March to mid-June. JP 
students, however, carried out the project for 10 weeks, from mid-April to the first week of July. The 
partnership exchange lasted approximately 9 weeks, from mid-April to the mid-June. Students in both 
classes underwent a preparation phase before working on their blogs in this project. 
Yu-Feng (Diana) Yang Shared Space in Multilateral English Blogging  
 
Language Learning & Technology 129 
Preparation Phase 
The preparation phase of the project lasted for approximately two weeks for each class. The TW class 
began to prepare for the project in mid-March while the JP class started out their preparation in mid-April 
due to differences in their school calendars. In order to help students understand how to approach English 
blogging, both TW students and JP students analyzed blogs of their own choice within their own class 
prior to the partnership exchange. In addition, students in both classes submitted a blog proposal for their 
English blogging project before they started to blog in English. Topics students selected included travel 
(backpacking, biking), tourism (foods, night markets, curry, restaurants, night clubs), astronomy, arts and 
entertainment (rock and roll music, music and drama, films, Japanese cartoons), sports (athletes, baseball), 
Shanghai daily life (interactions with foreign students, volunteer experience), dogs, and social issues 
(animal protection, human psychology and behaviors). Tutorials for building a blog site were also offered 
in both classes during the preparation phase. 
Students in both classes selected the platform they would like to use for the blog project. Most of the 
students created their blogs with the use of Blogger, while a few blogged in Xanga, Pixnet, and MySpace. 
Although some students reported their interest in using e-mail or Microsoft Messenger (MSN), none of 
them connected with others through these tools. 
English Blogging Phase  
TW students started to work on their English blog at the end of March and ended the partnership 
exchange in the middle of June. JP students joined the project in the middle of April and completed the 
blogging project in the first week of July. The partnership exchange lasted approximately 9 weeks, from 
the middle of April to the middle of June. Due to the difference in the school schedules and national 
holidays, TW students started to develop their blogs and write their first blog post approximately three 
weeks prior to the JP students.  
Each instructor designed a class Web site/blog for her own class. Links to students’ blogs were provided 
for intra-class interaction and the partner class Web site was listed for inter-class interaction. 
During the project students were asked to design and write their own blogs independently. The 
requirement on blog entries was 5 for TW students. No specific requirement was set for the JP students. 
In addition, because the purpose of the project was to motivate students to write English in their own style, 
neither of the instructors provided an explicit format or guideline for students to write their blogs. Neither 
instructor provided comments or error corrections to students’ blog entries. However, intra-class peer 
reviews and students’ reflective writing were often carried out in the TW class to encourage the students 
to examine their blogging progress and that of their partners. 
Both the TW and the JP students were asked and encouraged to visit the blogs of their classmates and 
their partnership class and to post their comments and responses to others regularly. Students mainly 
worked on the project outside of class. However, both instructors took the students to the computer lab for 
blogging when their schedules allowed. 
Data Collection 
Data collection procedures and content of the data sources are listed in Table 1. Due to the schedule of the 
JP students, I was unable to interview them. However, their final reflections and thoughts about the 
project were documented in Survey III. Some JP students filled in the survey in Japanese, and their survey 
was translated from Japanese to English. Class discussions and interviews of the TW class were recorded, 
transcribed in Chinese, and then translated into English.  
Yu-Feng (Diana) Yang Shared Space in Multilateral English Blogging  
 
Language Learning & Technology 130 
Table 1. Data Collection Procedures and Content of Data Sources 
Data Collection 
Procedures 
Content of Data 
Sources 
Taiwan Japan 
Data Source Number Data Source Number 
Beginning Basic Information, 
Online Language 
Experience, and 
Cultural Experience 
Survey I 17 Survey I 7 
Middle Ongoing Progress 
and Reflections of 
Experience in the 
Project 
Reflective Journal 
Entries 
75 Survey II 5 
Class Discussions 
Class Assignment 
2 
17 
End Final Reflections 
and Thoughts about 
Experience in the 
Project 
Class Debriefing  1 Survey III  5 
Project Final 
Reflections 
16 
Individual/ 
Joint Interviews 
8 
Throughout the 
Whole Process 
Blog Writing and 
Student Interactions 
Blog Posts 97 Blog Posts  28 
Weekly Blog 
Interaction 
Records on Their 
Own Blog 
51 Weekly Blog 
Interaction 
Records on Their 
Own Blog 
42 
  Weekly Blog 
Interaction 
Records on 
Others’ Blogs 
179 Weekly Blog 
Interaction 
Records on 
Others’ Blogs 
19 
 
Data Analysis 
Data analysis employed a constant comparison method (Glaser & Strauss, 1967) and focused on learners’ 
perspectives and experience of shared space. To understand how students interpreted and developed 
shared space, I first located their attempts at working with their partner class, tracing the patterns of their 
actions and signs of struggle (e.g., confusions, frustration and problems, and resistance in participation). 
Their attempts and behaviors were observed and understood with the use of students’ blogs, weekly 
interaction records, class discussions, class assignments, surveys, and reflective journals supplemented by 
students’ participation trends. For example, when students approached others in their blogs or reported 
their concerns about their partner class or when the amount of their comments changed, I listed these as 
potential key events (Fetterman, 1998). These key events were sorted and compared with each student 
and within student groups to locate students’ recurrent actions and signs of struggle (Fetterman, 1998). 
The recurrent key events of the data analysis included eagerness to make friends, frustration with limited 
responses, excitement about shared interests, excitement about shared experience, use of languages or 
symbols other than English, content appropriation, accommodations made for students in partnership 
class, attempts of minimizing differences, insufficient background knowledge, inadequate familiarity with 
the topic, attempts of making inferences, inferences from cultural memories, and importance of historical 
events.  
Yu-Feng (Diana) Yang Shared Space in Multilateral English Blogging  
 
Language Learning & Technology 131 
FINDINGS 
Participants in this study generated 125 blog posts and 291 blog comments or replies in total. Among 
these, the TW students developed 97 blog posts on their own blogs and 230 blog comments/replies on 
their own and their peers’ blogs. The JP students developed 28 blog posts on their own blogs and 61 blog 
comments/replies on their own and their peers’ blogs (See Table 2).  
Table 2. Participants’ Overall Blog Contributions 
 Total M SD M SD 
 Taiwan Japan Taiwan Taiwan Japan Japan 
Blog Posts 97 28 5.71 1.10 4.00 2.24 
Blog Comments/Replies 230 61 13.53 8.39 8.71  9.27 
 
Inter-class and intra-class interaction demonstrated that students in both groups had interacted both on 
their own blogs and on those of others (see Table 3). However, there was a difference between the TW 
students and the JP students in terms of the initiative they took in making comments on others’ blogs. 
Whereas the TW students took the initiative to comment on the blogs of the JP students on 93 occasions 
(M = 5.47; SD = 3.66), the JP students only commented on the blogs of the students in Taiwan 8 times (M 
= 1.14; SD = 1.35). In addition, the TW students also initiated more interaction (TW-TW, 86 times, M = 
5.06; SD = 3.03) than the JP students (JP-JP, 11 times, M = 1.57, SD = 2.44) on the blogs of students in 
their own class. 
Moreover, it was found that most of the JP students remained on their own blogs when interacting with 
the TW students (See Table 3). 37 replies (M = 5.29, SD = 6.29) were discovered on their own blogs, 
while only 8 blog interactions (M = 1.14, SD = 1.35) were generated on the blogs of the TW students. 
Table 3. Participants’ Blog Interaction with Interclass and Intraclass Peers 
  Commenting on Others’ Blogs  Replying to Others in Own Blog 
  Total M SD  Total M SD 
Taiwan Taiwan-Taiwan 86 5.06 3.03  47 2.76 3.85 
 Taiwan-Japan 93 5.47 3.66  4 0.24 0.56 
 Combined total 179    51   
         
Japan Japan-Taiwan 8 1.14 1.35  37 5.29 6.29 
 Japan-Japan 11 1.57 2.44  5 0.71 0.95 
 Combined total 19    42   
 
Students’ Interpretations of Shared Spaces in English Blogging 
This study found that most of the students in this English blogging project tended to interpret shared 
spaces on the basis of commonality. Only two students reported their connections with their inter-class 
peers from the perspective of relativity.  
Yu-Feng (Diana) Yang Shared Space in Multilateral English Blogging  
 
Language Learning & Technology 132 
Commonality Views on Shared Spaces 
Many students reported that they valued pre-existing shared personal interests, mutual understanding, and 
similar personal experiences as the prerequisite for making connections with inter-class peers. In their 
views, these three ingredients catalyzed the rapport between them and their inter-class peers, making them 
feel that they had something in common when they attempted to respond to the blog owners, or to make 
decisions about whose blogs to visit. 
Students who regarded shared personal interests as the basis for peer connection reported that sharing 
served as common ground between them and their peers. Makoto (JP), a student who chose backpacking 
as the theme of his blog, indicated that he visited Ya-Lin’s (TW) blog about traveling most frequently 
because “she is also interested in backpacking” (Makoto, Survey III). Such sharing inspired him to 
recognize his connection with Ya-Lin as a friend who held a similar interest to his. Cheng-Hong (TW) 
who constructed a blog around rock music, also reported a similar reason for visiting Jamal’s (JP) World 
Athletes blog: 
…I decided to pick this guy, Jamal, to be my partner of English blogging. We shared the same 
interest—sports. I’m kind of into football (soccer) and a few NBAs, and the former one was discussed 
in his first post. Although I have no idea whether if he would shake his head with the guitar riffs or 
not, at least there will always have one common point between us which will keep our conversations 
from dying out. (Cheng-Hong, class assignment, May 20, 2009). 
Cheng-Hong (TW) realized that his interest in football (soccer) was shared by Jamal (JP, Malaysian) and 
that such sharing could serve as common ground for the development and continuation of their 
conversation.  
In addition to having shared personal interests, some students believed that the intersubjectivity among 
them and their inter-class peers lay in pre-existing mutual understanding and shared knowledge. These 
students brought in information that they believed their inter-class peers were familiar with, attempting to 
demonstrate to their inter-class peers that no difference existed in what they understood or knew. Pei-Ling 
(TW), a student who included the content of a Japanese pet TV show in her blog about animal protection, 
explained the reasons behind her actions: 
I was thinking that if I want to get them to leave a message for me, I’ll need to accommodate their 
needs…we should write something they know to make them feel interested…I started to think about 
some possible ways…like the Japanese pet program [i.e., Pochitama ] I watched the show and the 
smart red panda in Japan-the kind of red panda that can stand still…I actually learned about it from 
the Japanese pet TV show and I know it is very famous [in Japan]. I think they [the Japanese] should 
all know about it…so at least they will tell me “I know it, too” or tell me other information about 
it… (Translated interview with Pei-Ling, June 19, 2009; researcher’s clarification in brackets). 
To Pei-Ling, her presentation about the red panda attempted to demonstrate to her inter-class peers that 
she held shared knowledge with them. She believed that such mutual understanding about the red panda 
could assist her in establishing a rapport between her and her inter-class peers, encouraging further 
interactions between them. 
Xiao-Ting (TW) revealed a similar reason for mentioning Kobe Bryant in her response to Jamal’s blog 
entry about Michael Jordan. Perceiving Jamal as a member who was knowledgeable about both the old 
and new generations of the National Basketball Association’s (NBA) celebrities, she posted her question, 
“What do you think about Kobe Bryant? I wonder. : )” hoping to receive a response from Jamal. She 
believed that Jamal should be able to use his knowledge about the NBA’s celebrities and respond to her 
questions without any difficulty. Thus, their pre-existing mutual understanding about the NBA was 
supposed to serve as the basis for their conversation. Unfortunately, Jamal did not respond to her 
comments. 
Yu-Feng (Diana) Yang Shared Space in Multilateral English Blogging  
 
Language Learning & Technology 133 
Shared personal experience was also regarded as an ingredient of peer rapport for students who valued the 
commonality of shared spaces. Hui-Yu (TW) and Kengo (JP) revealed that their common personal 
experience and knowledge about the Japanese anime, Doraemon (see Appendix A) assisted them in 
developing a connection with each other. In his first blog entry, Kengo introduced the Japanese anime, 
Doraemon , which illustrated a blue round-faced robot cat named Doraemon who traveled back in time 
from the 22nd century to assist a boy, Nobita. Kengo stated that Doraemon was a well-known character in 
Japan (Appendix A: Kengo’s Blog Post). Hui-Yu echoed this in her response, stating that the same 
phenomenon also existed in Taiwan (Appendix A: Turn 1: Doraemon is well-known in Taiwan. It has 
been broadcast since my childhood. XD) and highlighting her friend’s positive attitudes towards 
Doraemon (Appendix A: Turn 1: I have a friend who like[s] Doraemon very much because of its chubby 
face and cute shape). Kengo was excited to learn that Hui-Yu and her friend knew about Doraemon from 
the TV channels in Taiwan, and felt in tune with them (Appendix A: Turn 2: We may have watched [the] 
same cartoons at the same time :D Viewed in this light, I feel a bond with you!!! ). He illustrated 
Doraemon’s face with the use of symbols in his comments, highlighting his excitement about finding a 
soul mate who knew about Doraemon by using capitals:  
“DORAEMON:” ((≡ ゜♀゜≡)) (←DORAEMON!!) 
The above examples demonstrate that the participants of this multilateral blogging project interpreted the 
presence of a pre-existing shared understanding or common knowledge as providing common ground for 
peer discussions. Through the sharing and commonality of personal interests, the mutual understanding of 
a subject, and shared personal experience, students felt that they were able to communicate and initiate 
interaction with their inter-class partners. However, some students’ interpretation of the importance of the 
commonality of shared spaces brought about frustration and difficulties when they attempted to make 
connections with their inter-class peers. They often suggested that they had trouble locating the common 
ground with their inter-class peers, and did not feel in tune with each other when they started the 
conversation.  
Difficulties in responding to others’ blogs were commonly reported when common knowledge and 
experience were absent. Students discussed lack of knowledge and familiarity with the topic as two major 
reasons that hindered them from initiating interaction with their inter-class peers. Shu-Fen (TW) 
described her difficulties in leaving a comment on unfamiliar topics:  
Leaving a comment sometimes could be difficult also. A good comment requires lot of materials. 
When I know very little about the theme, I can only say some shallow words, and that usually 
decreases my desire to leave a comment. Lots of really hard-working blog like Cheng-Hong’s and 
Jamal’s are great; however, due to my limited knowledge to rock music or sport celebrities, I didn’t 
reply to them. Comments, then, can only be given in a restrained way. (Shu-Fen, class assignment, 
May 20, 2009). 
Stacy also elaborated on how her unfamiliarity with the sports that Jamal (JP Class, Malaysian) blogged 
about constrained what she could say in her responses and discouraged her from making a connection 
with Jamal: 
Interviewer: Why don’t you like the sports blog? 
Stacy: Because he only included…he only talked about baseball and 
running…I don’t know. I just don’t feel like visiting the site and 
commenting on it. 
Interviewer: What types of sports do you like better? 
Stacy: Basketball and football. That is more interesting. The rest are… 
Interviewer: haha…so it has to be specific types of sports. 
Yu-Feng (Diana) Yang Shared Space in Multilateral English Blogging  
 
Language Learning & Technology 134 
Stacy: Yes. 
(Translated interview with Stacy, August 15, 2009) 
Therefore, for students who interpreted shared space as a territory of commonality the difficulties in 
understanding content and familiarity with the content and topics between them and their inter-class 
partners were often regarded as barriers for discussion and engagement, leading them to abandon or skip 
the blogs they were visiting.  
Relativity Views on Shared Spaces 
Two students reported that they relied on the relative positions with their inter-class peers when making 
connections with those peers. Such relative positions were often drawn from a dialogue between the 
historicity or cultural memories of the students themselves and the inter-class peers they were 
communicating with. For example, Tin-Jun (TW), a participant who was recognized as a distinguished 
member of the project for her successful connections to her inter-class partners by her peers, explained 
how she interpreted the connections between a Malaysian squash player and a Taiwanese baseball player: 
In his second post, I found out that he comes from Malaysia. He mentioned that Malaysian squash 
player won the first prize in a world game. His sharing remind me of Wang,3 I told him that it is really 
excited to our country people performed very well in the world. (Tin-Jun, class assignment, May 20, 
2009). 
Different from her peers who focused entirely on the facts or the events in their discussions she was able 
to approach a rather deeper issue by relating the cultural contexts that were meaningful to her with the 
messages behind Jamal’s post (JP, originally from Malaysia). Her emphasis on national pride and glory in 
her connection with the athletes from Jamal’s and her own country, demonstrated that she re-
contextualized herself in the cultural memories of Wang, a baseball pitcher who performed very well for 
the New York Yankees in Major League Baseball in the United States during the time of the study, and 
that the Malaysian professional squash player, Nicol Ann David, who was ranked number one in the 
world in women's squash, as mentioned in Jamal’s post, resonated with her. In this process of re-
contextualization, Jamal’s words were no longer viewed as linguistic codes within a closed structure or 
facts in universal contexts. Instead, Tin-Jun assigned meanings to the names of the athletes and treated 
them as semiotic signs in the relative shared space of this communication experience.   
Tin-Jun’s interpretations of shared space in regard to relativity afforded her the opportunity to create a 
relative space in dialogue with others during the discussions. Instead of simply removing herself from 
discussions of unfamiliar topics, Tin-Jun was constantly observed relating herself to her inter-class 
partners, even if commonality was absent. In a joint interview she explained how she approached the 
unfamiliar content in Jamal’s (JP) blog of the world athletes: 
Pei-Ling: I don’t want to go to the site because after I read the posts, I still couldn’t 
understand anything about the sports…I don’t know how to ask for 
something as I don’t always understand…so I didn’t think of replying to 
him. 
Tin-Jun: I didn’t understand what he wrote about some of the sports, either, but I 
went ahead and looked them up, and then I figured…that’s what he meant. 
Pei-Ling: You worked so hard, you even researched about it?! (laughing). 
Tin-Jun: That way we could have something to talk about…Otherwise, I couldn’t 
come up with anything to say… (laughing). 
Pei-Ling: Eh, I should have done that…haha… 
(Translated joint interview with Pei-Ling and Tin-Jun, June 19, 2009) 
Yu-Feng (Diana) Yang Shared Space in Multilateral English Blogging  
 
Language Learning & Technology 135 
Tin-Jun’s own research about the sport squash and her ability to interpret some symbolic meaning in 
Jamal’s message allowed her to sense a relative discussion space between her and Jamal. While others, 
such as Pei-Ling, tended to abandon discussions due to a lack of commonality and insufficient familiarity, 
Tin-Jun seemed to serve as an intercultural mediator to read the messages behind the linguistic codes and 
to relate her contexts to Jamal’s. In fact, she was the only student who held discussions with Jamal about 
squash and sports in Taiwan (see Appendix B).  
Besides Tin-Jun, Stacy (TW class, former U.S. immigrant who moved back to Taiwan) also approached 
her interpretation of shared space from the perspective of relativity. She demonstrated that her 
interpretation of shared spaces resided in the symbolic meaning of the historical events she had 
experienced in relation to how she perceived the experiences of the participants in Japan. She blended 
Japanese with English in her comments on Makoto’s post “Eating in Vietnamese Market,” describing his 
unforgettable experience in Vietnam of tasting a boiled egg containing a partially-developed chicken 
embryo: 
Excerpt 1 
1 Stacy to Makoto (June 05, 2009) 
I can't believe that you are dear to swallow that “alien”. Seriously, what do you 
think before you put it in your mouth? Kuwaii desuka? But really, I am appreciated 
you are willing to try certain different dish. 
by Stacy 
 
2 Makoto to Stacy (June, 10, 2009) 
Stacy!!!I ate that “alien”. and that was kowai experience 
Stacy used a polite form of the Japanese expression, kuwaii desuka [correct form: kowai] (English 
translation: scary), to express her shocked reaction to Makoto’s post, being eager to know if he 
considered eating the “alien” unborn chick in an egg, as terrible an experience as she thought it might 
have been. Rather than viewing Japanese as linguistic codes or a shared language between her and 
Makoto, she in fact considered the Japanese language as a symbolic tool that could be used to create a 
context with specific meaning, resonating with what she had experienced as a U.S. immigrant. She 
reported that her attempt to include Japanese language in her comments to Makoto (JP) was to create a 
less foreign environment for her inter-class partners, because her experience as a U.S. immigrant signified 
this importance:  
…When I first surrendered by the completed strange environment with indefinable language and 
faces; the extreme horror came upon me…that was the moment I felt foreign and scared in the United 
States. The conversation is surely a great issue for me so I can totally understand how difficult might 
be for the Japanese to work with foreigners like us, especially the clash of cultural differences which 
will affect the language we are used to say.… I have been thinking to include some Japanese terms 
that I know which can help Makoto to have more understanding of what I am comment him for. At 
least we won’t have problem of understanding each comment. Therefore we can move our 
conversation into more deeply and more interesting. (Stacy, Class Assignment, May 20, 2009). 
Thus, Stacy’s choice of the Japanese language, blending in sentences written in English, presented her 
relative position toward Makoto in the context of English blogging as a former immigrant who had been 
exposed to a context in which a foreign language intensified her feelings of hopelessness. Perceiving 
English blogs as foreign spaces that constituted English, it seems Stacy defined Makoto as a virtual 
immigrant in an English environment just as she had been in the US. For Stacy, the use of Japanese as 
part of her past experience provided her with a way to enter the conversation. Her use of the Japanese 
language in her comments made on Makoto’s post were responded to (see Excerpt 1), although Makoto 
Yu-Feng (Diana) Yang Shared Space in Multilateral English Blogging  
 
Language Learning & Technology 136 
(JP) approached her with a rather different focus, correcting her errors in the Japanese form kuwaii that 
Stacy included in her comment to kowai.  
Both Tin-Jun and Stacy demonstrated their interpretation of shared space from the perspective of 
relativity. By re-contextualizing themselves and conceptualizing the symbolic meaning of the historicity 
of the self and the other they were able to draw inferences and make projections from their past memories 
and cultural imaginations in dialogues with others and sense a relative shared space during the discussions.  
DISCUSSION 
Patterns of Blogging Participation 
It is interesting to note that this study reported that TW students took more initiative in commenting on 
both the blogs of their inter-class and intra-class peers in comparison to the JP students. Reasons for such 
a difference can be complex, particularly as the class instructors, assignment requirements, and students’ 
English proficiency levels were not identical. However, the previous English blogging experience of the 
TW students and the number of students who participated in this English blogging project may have 
played an important role in this difference. Prior to this study, the TW students had had a semester-long 
English blogging experience in which they responded to their peers’ English blogs in addition to working 
on their own English blogs. This experience may have provided them with some knowledge about how to 
leave messages on others’ English blogs. However, as first-time English bloggers some JP students 
reported that they had difficulties leaving a comment on a TW student’s blog. Kengo (JP) commented that, 
“I’ve tried hard to visit Taiwanese friends’ blogs every week, but it was really hard to give feedback to 
their posts” (Kengo, Survey III). In this case, it was not surprising that only 4 JP students wrote comments 
on the blogs of TW students with 3 out of the 4 of them only contributing one comment. 
The differences in the numbers of students who participated in this project may also play a role in the 
distinct numbers between inter-class comment initiatives. While there were 17 students from the 
university in Taiwan participating in the English blogging project, only 7 students from the university in 
Japan participated in this activity. Therefore, the number of comments that each JP student received 
tended to be much higher than the amount each TW students received. Makoto (JP), whose blog was 
popular among TW students, reported that he felt overwhelmed with the amount of comments he received 
from the TW students, “…many people gave me comments, and I was very glad, but it was too many, so I 
felt burden in this project” (Makoto, Survey III). Thus, it became less likely for JP students to take the 
initiative and comment on TW students’ blogs, as much of their attention was given to the overwhelming 
comments received from the TW students.  
Student Interpretations of Shared Space 
The results of this study showed that the students in this multilateral English blogging project reported 
that the presence of pre-existing shared interests, mutual understanding, or shared personal experience 
serves as common ground for peer discussions. Their interpretations of the importance of the 
commonality of shared space, guided them to acknowledge their inter-class peers in: (a) their consensus 
and agreement of topics (e.g., the topics or content in your blog are also interesting or important to me) 
or a given situation (e.g., I had the same feelings as you did about what you described); and (b) their 
identities as insiders of their inter-class members’ community (e.g., I have also experienced what you 
experienced before; What you are familiar with is something with which I am familiar). For example, 
through her blog discussions of the red panda in the Japanese pet TV show, Pei-Ling (TW) worked to 
demonstrate that she had knowledge of Japanese culture and that she could therefore be considered a 
member of the Japanese community. While students in this study tended to interpret shared space from 
the perspective of commonality, it is not surprising that they recognized shared personal interests, mutual 
understanding, and shared personal experiences as common ground for inter-class connections. 
Yu-Feng (Diana) Yang Shared Space in Multilateral English Blogging  
 
Language Learning & Technology 137 
This finding contributes to the literature of shared space of joint activities from a learner’s perspective. It 
demonstrates that learners’ interpretations of shared space tend to echo the commonality perspective of 
shared space, which emphasizes interlocutors’ consensus about topics, intentions, and goals of a joint 
activity, as well as the mutually agreed definition of a situation (Rommetveit, 1979, 1985; Wegerif, 1998). 
However, it is important to note that some students in this study seemed to situate their interpretation of 
intersubjectivity in their remembered or imagined cultural contexts (Kramsch, 2009b) and were in 
dialogue with the encounters they experienced or imagined when interacting with their inter-class peers. 
For example, Pei-Ling’s (TW) actions of including the cultural artifacts of the Japanese pet TV program, 
Pochitama, portrayed the inferences she had made from her imagined Japanese context, which was that 
she believed that all Japanese people knew about Pochitama. This finding does not echo Rommetveit’s 
(1979, 1985) proposal of the here-and-now nature of intersubjectivity which emphasizes those messages 
delivered at the time of the speech. That is, when she brought in Pochitama in the blogging interaction, 
Pei-Ling may have been engaged in dialogue with her remembered or imagined encounters rather than in 
a reply to what a previous speaker had written. In this case, the commonality of shared space can be 
difficult to achieve. 
The Search for Affinity Space 
This study demonstrated that many students took initiatives to connect with their inter-class peers through 
common interests or experiences after reading their inter-class peers’ blogs. Similar to Ducate and 
Lomicka’s (2008) blog study that encouraged German and French students to read and follow native 
speakers’ blogs that the instructors selected for their blogger description research project in the first 
semester, students in this study also emphasized the interests, hobbies, or experiences parallel to their 
inter-class peers while browsing others’ blogs. For example, Makoto (JP) highlighted his discovery of 
Ya-Lin (TW) and his shared interest in traveling and how this discovery encouraged him to visit Ya-Lin’s 
blog frequently. Hui-Yu (TW) and Kengo (JP) were excited about their shared experience with Doraemon 
and stressed how it helped them to connect to each other. Thus, students’ emphasis on common interests 
or experience for their blog connections can be seen as an important phenomenon in blogging 
communication. This conclusion is also supported by Guzzetti and Gamboa’s (2005) study of youth 
blogging taking place in non-instructional settings.  
This finding sheds light on the intentions of the students who participated in this multilateral English 
blogging project. Students’ emphasis on shared personal interests, mutual understanding, and shared 
personal experiences as common ground hinted at their search for affiliated members who can gather 
around a common passion, interest, or endeavor (Gee, 2004, 2007) while blogging with their inter-class 
peers. Their use of specialist languages or symbols such as Manchester United, MU, the red panda, Kobe 
Bryant, Doraemon, and ((≡゜♀゜≡)) resonate with one important feature of Gee’s (2004, 2007) notion 
of affinity space. Gee argued that in affinity space members bring in special knowledge and languages of 
a specialist domain (e.g., professional field, an interest or hobby), gained from their outside social 
experience, and utilize them to form social networks of attachment. Research exploring specific 
communities such as fan-fiction (Black, 2008; Thomas, 2007), animation and manga forums (Lam, 
2009a), philosophy forums (Lam, 2009a), and video gaming (Gee, 2004; Steinkuehler, 2007) have 
discussed the specialist languages used in youth’s affinity spaces of some special domains. However, in 
an open environment such as blogs in which the topics of interest and community endeavors are usually 
not pre-defined or pre-structured, to what extent students’ search for affinity space can be fulfilled can be 
uncertain and challenging. More research needs to be done to understand the uncertainty and challenges 
experienced by bloggers who have or have not been a part of affinity spaces of a specific domain and 
their successful stories in searching for affinity spaces through blogging communication. 
The Constraints of Learner Interpretation on the Commonality of Shared Space 
This study also found that students who regarded shared spaces from the perspectives of commonality 
only responded to those who held the same interests, understanding, and personal experience but not to 
Yu-Feng (Diana) Yang Shared Space in Multilateral English Blogging  
 
Language Learning & Technology 138 
others with whom they felt no initial common rapport. This finding supports the previous literature on the 
rise of missed communication (Ware, 2005), failed communication (O’Dowd & Ritter, 2006), or 
communication tensions (Basharina, 2007; Kramsch & Thorne, 2002; Ware & Kramsch, 2005) when 
commonality and sharing are absent. However, as Kramsch and Ware (2005) suggest, differences are 
unavoidable in cross-cultural or intercultural communication since such communication brings in 
interlocutors of historical, cultural, and educational varieties (Kramsch, 1995; Ware & Kramsch, 2005). It 
is through the varieties existing in cross-cultural or intercultural communication, however, that students 
can obtain the opportunity to experience unfamiliarity and embrace difference. It is for this reason that 
Lam (2009b) highlights the importance of encouraging students to develop diverse communicational links 
with people of different socio-cultural positions with the goal of assisting students in realizing diverse 
ideas, viewpoints, and knowledge in the current distributed society. Therefore, while the interpretation of 
shared spaces toward commonality can afford students who hold shared interests, experience, and 
knowledge a basis for interaction, it can also prevent them from exploring other opportunities for 
communication when they focus only on content. How to enable students who mainly value the 
commonality of shared space to establish alternative communicational relations with others is of 
importance for language teachers.  
The Role of Symbolic Competence in Learner Interpretations of the Relativity of Shared Space 
Two students reported that they approached shared space from the perspective of relativity and relied on 
the relative positions between them and their inter-class peers when making connections with those peers 
in this study. Similar to Kramsch and Whiteside’s (2008) research on multilingual speakers, students who 
interpreted shared space from the perspective of relativity in this study often drew relative positions from 
a dialogue between their and their inter-class peers’ historicity or cultural memories through re-
contextualization and re-positioning. For example, Tin-Jun (TW) demonstrated that she re-contextualized 
herself in the cultural memories of the national glory recognized in Taiwan, about her countryman, a 
professional baseball player (i.e., Wang), echoing the achievement of the Malaysian squash player 
mentioned in Jamal’s post (JP class, originally from Malaysia). Stacy (TW class, the U.S. immigrant who 
moved back to Taiwan) presented her relative position toward Makoto (JP) by re-positioning Makoto (JP) 
as a virtual immigrant in an English environment, projecting her past memories as a U.S. immigrant. 
However, it is important to note that only two students in this study approached shared space from the 
perspective of relativity and served as creative agents to mediate their and others’ encounters in order to 
form relationships of possibility (Kramsch & Whiteside, 2008) or to create affordances (van Lier, 2004) 
with the use of heterogeneous semiotic resources in their repertoire. This finding hints at the importance 
of symbolic competence (Kramsch, 2006, 2008) in the exploration of the relationship of possibility from 
the perspective of the relativity of shared space. Kramsch (2008) argued that the relationship of possibility 
would be created only if the language learners could exercise symbolic competence as a frame of mind in 
the act of communication; that is, “they [language learners] learn to see themselves both through their 
own embodied history and subjectivity, and through the history and subjectivity of others” (p. 403). 
However, many language learners may not have the capacity to perceive the symbolic meanings of their 
and others’ encounters and historicity (van Lier, 2004). Thus, how language teachers can best support 
language learners to learn to read people, situations, and events embedded in historicity and the cultural 
imagination in the self-other is important as learners try to construct relationships of possibility and create 
affordances (Kramsch, 2006, 2008) from the perspective of the relativity of shared space. 
CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS 
This study investigated how learners interpret shared space in a multilateral English blogging project. It 
showed that most students in the project interpreted shared space from the perspective of commonality. 
Although such views can enable students who hold shared interests, experience, and knowledge to find 
Yu-Feng (Diana) Yang Shared Space in Multilateral English Blogging  
 
Language Learning & Technology 139 
common ground for blog interactions, it can also constrain them from exploring other possibilities in 
relation to the blog content, the blog discussions, and the bloggers, when commonality is absent. 
In this study, only two students reported that they relied on the relative positions between themselves and 
their inter-class peers in order to make connections with their inter-class peers. Such relative positions 
assisted them in applying objects and historicity as symbolic resources, and allowed them to mediate and 
develop an alternative communicative shared space while blogging. Their experience helped the 
researcher to achieve some understanding about the possible roles of intercultural mediators in 
intercultural communication. Embracing differences and finding relative positions between students and 
“others” can assist them in gaining cultural experience in multilateral English blogging projects so that 
they can then take advantage of the differences and unfamiliarity they experienced and therefore negotiate 
and co-construct meaning with their partners via multiple pathways.  
Detailed empirical research is necessary to investigate how the abilities of perceiving the relativity of 
shared space are developed. As most English language learners in this project seemed unable to draw 
diverse views on shared space and to approach their partners with respect to those diverse views, it can be 
useful to understand the barriers in their development in relativity interpretation. In addition, case studies 
or narrative inquiries investigating students who have demonstrated a relativity view of shared space can 
be valuable in understanding how these students learned to perceive symbolic resources and to connect 
these resources to establish alternative communicational links with others.  
Pedagogically, it may be useful for teachers to facilitate students’ understanding of the role of relativity in 
shared space, and thus enable them to locate possible relationships in such projects. For example, teachers 
can invite students with the relativity view of shared space to present how they develop connections with 
their inter-class peers. They may also brainstorm with the students about what they could do with inter-
class interactions, when commonality between them and their inter-class peers is absent. This does not 
mean that instructors should force students to connect to something that they are not interested in or 
someone with whom they do not wish to interact. However, it is important to explain to students that 
abandoning or missing opportunities for intercultural communication due merely to a lack of 
commonality and familiarity can deprive them of the valuable opportunity of experiencing historical, 
cultural, and educational diversity.  
Yu-Feng (Diana) Yang Shared Space in Multilateral English Blogging  
 
Language Learning & Technology 140 
APPENDIX A. Excerpt 2: Interaction between Kengo (JP) and Hui-Yu (TW)  
 
1 Kengo’s Blog Post (May, 12, 2009) 
DORAEMON!! 
Do you know doraemon?? 
I think, almost all of Japanese know what doraemon is. 
Doraemon is a blue robot which looks like a cat. 
And he (it?) comes from 21th centry. 
So he has a lot of funny [fun] inventions. 
Most of the time, he uses these inventions to help Nobita. 
Although most of these inventions are very very useful, Nobita can't command these 
inventions as Nobita likes. 
Far from it, Nobita compounds problems by use of these useful inventions. 
In these respects,『DORAEMON』 is one of the most interesting cartoon. 
 
2 Hui-Yu-->Kengo (May, 19, 2009) 
Hello! I'm Hui-Yu from Taiwan. Nice to meet you! I am also fascinated by 
cartoons!! …Our entertainment programs are affected by Japan deeply. Usually in 
dinner time, cartoons are broadcasted, and it also cultivates my habits of watching 
cartoons. … I like to watch cartoons rather than read comic books, since I think 
animated films with sound effects are more realistic than reading comic book. By 
the way, do you like to watch cartoons rather than read comic books? Besides, 
Doraemon is well-known in Taiwan. It has been broadcast since my childhood. XD I 
have a friend who like Doraemon very much because of its chubby face and cute 
shape. 
Ha ha... It seems that I express my opinion too much hoping you will not mind. 
 
The following are my blog site --- http://xxx.blogspot.com/ My theme of blog is 
university life. Although my blog is not relevant to yours totally, I still hope you can 
come to visit my blog and give me some opinion, and then I will thank you very 
much. I am willing to make friends with you and welcome your visit.^^ 
 
3 Kengo-->Hui-Yu (May, 21, 2009) 
To Hui-Yu 
Hello, Hui-Yu! I'm Kengo from Japan. Nice to meet you, too!! I've heard that 
cartoons made in Japan like Doraemon are broadcasted in Taiwan 
((≡゜♀゜≡)) (←DORAEMON!!) We may have watched same cartoons at the same 
time :D Viewed in this light, I feel a bond with you!!!To answer your question, I like 
to watch cartoons rather than read comic books. This is because cartoons have an 
uplifting feeling! 
 
I'll visit your blog and give you some opinions ((≡゜♀゜≡)) hahaha I'm also willing 
to make friends with you!!!Thank you for visiting my blog:] 
 
Note: Researcher’s emphasis in italics. Texts in brackets indicate researcher’s correction for clarifications. 
Yu-Feng (Diana) Yang Shared Space in Multilateral English Blogging  
 
Language Learning & Technology 141 
APPENDIX B. Excerpt 3: Interaction between Tin-Jun (TW) and Jamal (JP)  
1 Tin-Jun-->Jamal (May 15, 2009) 
It is really excited and inspired to see some of our own country people performed 
excellently in the world. I am also happy to hear the good news about Nicol. In 
fact, we don't play squash much in Taiwan. After I searched some basic 
information about squash. It seems that it requires lots of technique. How about 
you, Jamal, do you play squash?^^ 
 
2 Jamal-->Tin-Jun (May 15, 2009) 
haha...im not interest to squash..but prefer to volley and soccer...so, what they 
most play at Taiwan? and how about u? 
 
3 Tin-Jun-->Jamal (May 16, 2009) 
Frankly speaking, I am not quite sure what sports we play most here. However, I 
would like to share my own experience with you.^^ I like to play badminton. 
Speaking of volleyball, we have a volleyball team in our department. When I was 
in primary school, we played basketball and baseball. When I was in junior high 
shcool[school], we played basketball and badminton. When I was in high school, 
we played basketball, volleyball, badminton, ping-pong and soccer. Now, we play 
basketball, volleyball, badminton, ping-pong and softball. Sorry, I could not 
answer your question precisely. 
 
4 Jamal-->Tin-Jun (May 17, 2009) 
tin-jun, u [don’t] need to feel sorry....im very impressed with ur answer...u told 
everything..i like it...maybe we can share our experience about anything...glad to 
know u 
 
5 Tin-Jun-->Jamal (May 18, 2009) 
Jamal, sure. I am willing to share my experience with you as well.^^ By the way, I 
missed one thing, that is, I like to play badminton but I like to watch tennis games. 
Ha~ha~XDDD 
 
Note: Researcher’s emphasis in italics. Texts in brackets indicate researcher’s correction for clarifications. 
 
NOTES 
1. For example, in textbooks of intercultural communication (e.g., Jandt, 2010; Samovar & Porter, 2004), 
westerners and easterners are often categorized as individualist and collectivist in relation to Value 
Orientation Theory. In addition, African Americans, Spanish-speaking Americans, and Caucasians are 
considered as different speech communities in the United States due to the variations in their word use, 
grammar rules, and interaction patterns. 
2. These studies, framed in sociocultural perspectives, reported that rather than exercising frequent 
negotiation of meaning in the structured initiation-response-feedback (IRF) sequence proposed by 
Sinclair and Coulthard (1975), learners in a joint activity participate in a reciprocal dialogue in which they 
practice meaningful conversation and offer collaborative support to one another (Foster & Ohta, 2005; 
Lantolf & Thorne, 2006; Ohta, 2001). Thus, peer assistance can arise in the process of co-construction 
and collaboration in addition to communication breakdowns and failure in negotiation of meanings during 
social interactions (Foster & Ohta, 2005; Ohta, 2001; Swain, 2000). 
Yu-Feng (Diana) Yang Shared Space in Multilateral English Blogging  
 
Language Learning & Technology 142 
3. Wang (Chien-Ming Wang) is a baseball pitcher for Major League Baseball in America. He was at his 
peak performance while at the New York Yankees when the study was carried out. Wang was born in 
Taiwan, and many people in Taiwan regard him with national pride and glory. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This paper reports on partial results of research projects funded by the National Science Council in 
Taiwan (NSC 97-2410-H-110-037; NSC 98-2410-H-110-040). I would like to thank Emily Liu, Sasha 
Wu, and Claire Yang for their assistance in transcribing and organizing the research data, as well as the 
anonymous reviewers and the editors at LLT for their invaluable comments on an earlier draft of this 
article. I am very grateful to the students who participated in this study and the instructor in Japan who 
guided her students in this project.  
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Yu-Feng (Diana) Yang, Ph. D. in Literacy Education, is an assistant professor at National Sun Yat-sen 
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. Her research, often framed in sociocultural perspectives, explores 
participation of net generation in internet-mediated communication and their engagement in new literacies 
practices. 
E-mail: dyang@faculty.nsysu.edu.tw  
 
REFERENCES 
Agar, M. (1994). Language shock: Understanding the culture of conversation. New York: William 
Morrow. 
Aljaafreh, A., & Lantolf, J. P. (1994). Negative feedback as regulation and second language learning in 
the zone of proximal development. The Modern Language Journal, 78, 465-483. 
Basharina, O. K. (2007). An activity theory perspective on student-reported contradictions in international 
telecollaboration. Language Learning & Technology, 11(2), 82–103. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/ 
vol11num2/basharina/default.html 
Basharina, O. K. (2009). Student agency and language-learning processes and outcomes in international 
online environments. CALICO Journal, 26(2), 390–412. 
Belz, J. A. (2002). Social dimensions of telecollaborative foreign language study. Language Learning & 
Technology, 6(1), 60–81. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/belz/default.html 
Black, R. W. (2008). Adolescents and online fan fiction. New York: Peter Lang. 
Bloch, J. (2007). Abdullah's blogging: A generation 1.5 student enters the blogosphere. Language 
Learning & Technology, 11(2), 128–141. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num2/bloch/default.html 
Blommaert, J. (2005). Discourse: A critical introduction. Cambridge: Cambridge.  
Blood, R. (2002). The weblog handbook: Practical advice on creating and maintaing your blog. 
Cambridge, MA: Perseus Publishing.  
Byram, M. (2000). Assessing intercultural competence in language teaching. Sprogforum, 18(6), 8–13. 
Yu-Feng (Diana) Yang Shared Space in Multilateral English Blogging  
 
Language Learning & Technology 143 
Byram, M. (2008). From foreign language education to education for intercultural citizenship: Essays 
and reflections. Clevedon: Multilingual Matters. 
Darhower, M. A. (2007). A tale of two communities: Group dynamics and community building in a 
Spanish-English telecollaboration. CALICO Journal, 24(3), 561–590. 
Darhower, M. A. (2008). The role of linguistic affordances in telecollaborative chat. CALICO Journal, 
26(1), 48–69. 
de Guerrero, M., & Villamil, O. S. (2000). Activating the ZPD: Mutual scaffolding in L2 peer revision. 
The Modern Language Journal, 84(1), 51–68. 
Dippold, D. (2009). Peer feedback through blogs: Student and teacher perceptions in an advanced 
German class. ReCALL, 21(1), 18–36. 
Ducate, L. C., & Lomicka, L. L. (2005). Exploring the blogosphere: Use of web logs in the foreign 
language classroom. Foreign Language Annals, 38(3), 410–422. 
Ducate, L. C., & Lomicka, L. L. (2008). Adventures in the blogosphere: From blog readers to blog writers. 
Computer Assisted Language Learning, 21(1), 9–28. 
Elola, I., & Oskoz, A. (2008). Blogging: Fostering intercultural competence development in foreign 
language and study abroad contexts. Foreign Language Annals, 41(3), 454–477. 
Fetterman, D. M. (1998). Ethnography (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Foster, P., & Ohta, A. S. (2005). Negotiation for meaning and peer assistance in second language 
classrooms. Applied Linguistics, 26(3), 402–430. 
Furstenberg, G., Levet, S., English, K., & Maillet, K. (2001). Giving a virtual voice to the silent language 
of culture: The cultura project. Language Learning & Technology, 5(1), 55–105. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num1/furstenberg/default.html 
Gee, J. P. (2004). Situated language and learning: A critique of traditional schooling. New York: 
Routledge. 
Gee, J. P. (2007). What video games have to teach us about learning and literacy: Revised and updated 
edition. New York: Palgrave. 
Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for qualitative 
research. Chicago: Aldine. 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2003). Emerging technologies: Blogs and wikis environments for on-line 
collaboration. Language Learning & Technology, 7(2), 12–16. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/ 
vol7num2/emerging/default.html 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2006). Tag clouds in the blogosphere: Electronic literacy and social networking. 
Language Learning & Technology, 10(2), 8–15. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num2/ 
emerging/default.html 
Guzzetti, B., & Gamboa, M. (2005). Online journaling: The informal writings of two adolescent girls. 
Research in the Teaching of English, 40(2), 168–206. 
Hauck, M. (2007). Critical success factors in a TRIDEM exchange. ReCALL, 19(2), 202–223. 
Holquist, M. (1990). Dialogism: Bakhtin and his world. London: Routledge. 
Iddings, A. C. D., Haught, J., & Devlin, R. (2005). Multimodal representation of self and meaning for 
second language leaners in English-dominant classroom. In J. K. Hall, G. Vitanova, & L. Marchenkova 
Yu-Feng (Diana) Yang Shared Space in Multilateral English Blogging  
 
Language Learning & Technology 144 
(Eds.), Dialogue with Bakhtin on second and foreign language learning: New Perspectives (pp. 33–53). 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Jandt, F. E. (2010). An introduction to intercultural communication: Identities in a global community (6th 
ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Kramsch, C. (1995). Context and culture in language teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Kramsch, C. (2006). From communicative competence to symbolic competence. The Modern Language 
Journal, 90(2), 249–252. 
Kramsch, C. (2008). Ecological perspectives on foreign language education. Language Teaching, 41(3), 
389–408. 
Kramsch, C. (2009a). Cultural perspectives on foreign language learning and teaching. In K. Knapp & B. 
Seidlhofer (Eds.), Handbook of foreign language communication and learning (pp. 219–245). Berlin: 
Walter de Gruyter. 
Kramsch, C. (2009b). The multilingal subject: What foreign language learners say about their experience 
and why it matters. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Kramsch, C. (2009c). Third culture and language education. In V. Cook (Ed.), Contemporary applied 
linguistics: Language teaching and learning (Vol. 1, pp. 233–254). London: Continuum. 
Kramsch, C., & Thorne, S. L. (2002). Foreign language learning as global communicative practice. In D. 
Block & D. Cameron (Eds.), Globalization and language teaching (pp. 83–100). London: Routledge. 
Kramsch, C., & Whiteside, A. (2008). Language ecology in multilingual settings: Towards a theory of 
symbolic competence. Applied Linguistics, 29(4), 645–671. 
Lam, W. S. E. (2009a). Literacy and learning across transnational online spaces. E-learning and Digital 
Media, 6(4), 303–324. 
Lam, W. S. E. (2009b). Multiliteracies on instant messaging in negotiating local, translocal, and 
transnational affiliations: A case of an adolescent immigrant. Reading Research Quarterly, 44(4), 377–
397. 
Lantolf, J. P., & Thorne, S. L. (2006). Sociocultural theory and the genesis of second language 
development. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Lee, L. (2008). Focus-on-form through collaborative scaffolding in expert-to-novice online interaction. 
Language Learning & Technology, 12(3), 53–72. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num3/ 
default.html 
Lee, L. (2009). Promoting intercultural exchanges with blogs and podcasting: A study of Spanish-
American telecollaboration. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 22(5), 425–443. 
Lee, L. (2010). Fostering reflective writing and interactive exchange through blogging in an advanced 
language course. ReCALL, 22(2), 212–227. 
Murray, L., & Hourigan, T. (2008). Blogs for specific purposes: Expressivist or socio-cognitivist 
approach? ReCALL, 20(1), 82–97. 
O’Dowd, R. (2005). Negotiating sociocultural and institutional contexts: The case of Spanish-American 
telecollaboration. Language & Intercultural Communication, 5(1), 40–56. 
O’Dowd, R. (2006). The use of videoconferencing and email as mediators of intercultural student 
ethnography. In J. A. Belz & S. L. Thorne (Eds.), Internet-mediated intercultural foreign language 
education (pp. 86–120). Boston, MA: Thomson Heinle. 
Yu-Feng (Diana) Yang Shared Space in Multilateral English Blogging  
 
Language Learning & Technology 145 
O’Dowd, R., & Ritter, M. (2006). Understanding and working with ‘failed communication’ in 
telecollaborative exchanges. CALICO Journal, 61(2), 623–642. 
Ohta, A. S. (2001). Second language acquistion processes in the classroom: Learning Japanese. Mahwah, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Oravec, J. (2003). Blending by blogging: Weblogs in blended learning initiatives. Journal of Educational 
Media, 28(2/3), 225–233. 
Pennycook, A. (2007). Global Englishes and transcultural flows. London: Routledge. 
Pinkman, K. (2005). Using blogs in the foreign language classroom: Encouraging learner independence. 
The JALT CALL Journal, 1(1), 12–24. 
Rommetveit, R. (1974). On message structure: A framework for the study of langauge and 
communication. London: John Wiley & Sons. 
Rommetveit, R. (1979). On the architecture of intersubjectivity. In R. Rommetveit & R. M. Blakar (Eds.), 
Studies of language, thought, and verbal communication (pp. 93–108). London: Academic. 
Rommetveit, R. (1985). Language acquistion as increasing linguistic structuring of experience and 
symbolic behavior control. In J. V. Wertsch (Ed.), Culture, communication, and cognition: Vygotskian 
perspectives (pp. 183–204). New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Samovar, L. A., & Porter, R. E. (2004). Communication between cultures (5th ed.). Belmont, CA: 
Wadsworth/Thomson Learning. 
Schneider, J., & von der Emde, S. (2006). Conflicts in cyberspace: From communication breakdown to 
intercultural dialogue in online collaboration. In J. A. Belz & S. L. Thorne (Eds.), Internet-mediated 
intercultural foreign language education (pp. 178–206). Boston, MA: Thomson Heinle. 
Sinclair, J. M., & Coulthard, R. M. (1975). Towards an analysis of discourse. London: Longman. 
Steinkuehler, C. (2007). Massively multiplayer online gaming as a constellation of literacy practices. E-
Learning, 4(3), 297–318. 
Swain, M. (2000). The output hypothesis and beyond: Mediating acquisition through collaborative 
dialogue. In J. P. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 97–114). Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
Thomas, A. (2007). Youth online: Identity and literacy in the digital age. New York: Peter Lang. 
Thorne, S. L. (2003). Artifacts and cultures-of-use in intercultural communication. Language Learning & 
Technology, 7(2), 38–67. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/thorne/default.html 
van Lier, L. (2004). The ecology and semiotics of language learning: A sociocultural perspective. Boston: 
Kluwer Academic. 
Ware, P. D. (2005). “Missed” communication in online communication: Tensions in a German-American 
telecollaboration. Language Learning & Technology, 9(2), 64–89. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/ 
vol9num2/ware/default.html 
Ware, P. D., & Kramsch, C. (2005). Toward an intercultural stance: Teaching German and English 
through telecollaboration. The Modern Language Journal, 89(2), 190–205. 
Ware, P. D., & O’Dowd, R. (2008). Peer feedback on language form in international telecollaboration. 
Language Learning & Technology, 12(1), 43–63. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num1/ 
wareodowd/default.html 
Yu-Feng (Diana) Yang Shared Space in Multilateral English Blogging  
 
Language Learning & Technology 146 
Wegerif, R. (1998). The social dimensions of asynchronous learning networks. Journal of Asynchronous 
Learning Networks, 2(1). Retrieved from http://www.aln.org/  
Wertsch, J. V. (1984). The zone of proximal development: Some conceptual issues. New Directions for 
Child and Adolescent Development, 23, 7–18. 
Wertsch, J. V. (1985). Vygotsky and the social formation of mind. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press. 
 
 
