Language Learning & Technology 
http:/llt.msu.edu/issues/february2011/review2.pdf 
February 2011, Volume 15, Number 1 
pp. 24–28 
 
Copyright © 2011, ISSN 1094-3501 24 
REVIEW OF ONLINE INTERCULTURAL EXCHANGE: AN 
INTRODUCTION FOR FOREIGN LANGUAGE TEACHERS 
 
Online Intercultural Exchange: An Introduction for 
Foreign Language Teachers 
  
Robert O’Dowd (Ed.) 
 
2007 
ISBN: 978-1-84769-008-1 
US $150.00 
286 pp. 
 
Multilingual Matters 
Clevedon, UK 
 
 
 
Review by Dawn Bikowski, Ohio University 
Online cultural exchanges are becoming increasingly popular as technologies allow for more interaction, 
negotiation of meaning, and authentic communication with native speakers of a target language. Goals of 
these projects generally move beyond learning linguistic components of a language to developing 
students’ intercultural communicative competence (Byram, 1997), often called intercultural competence 
(IC) as well. Networked technologies are seen as a primary means of accomplishing these goals, 
particularly as they allow learners to engage in projects with native speakers. Yet, more understanding 
about these online exchanges is needed, particularly regarding intercultural competence. Even three years 
after the publication of this collection, Dervin (2010) notes that in most language departments, 
intercultural competence is still often not understood by teachers or learners and is not being sufficiently 
developed in curricula. The need for integrating IC into language classes continues to be great, as neither 
simply having repeated contact with people from a country nor having a strong command of a foreign 
language is sufficient for its development (Zarate, 2003). Thus, telecollaborative exchanges focusing on 
this aspect of communication are crucial. 
Online Intercultural Exchange: An Introduction for Foreign Language Teachers, consisting of 18 
chapters and edited by Robert O’Dowd (2007), aims to fill this need. As number 15 in the series 
Languages for Intercultural Communication and Education (edited by Michael Byram and Alison 
Phipps), this particular collection seeks to examine via research and practice what online intercultural 
exchange involves pedagogically as well as what promises and challenges it offers. As such, it will be of 
use for foreign language educators, teacher trainers, graduate students, and classroom researchers. This 
collection is overall very comprehensive and in general covers many aspects and topics that other sources 
fail to provide; given the difficulties of working within the page limitations of an edited collection, the 
chapters within this book do quite well in their topic coverage and examples. 
There are four parts in the collection, moving from an introduction to the topic and models for online 
exchanges to examples of specific projects and technologies. In “Part 1: Introduction to this Volume and 
its Theme,” O’Dowd defines online intercultural exchange (also referred to as telecollaboration) as “the 
activity of engaging language learners in interaction and collaborative project work with partners from 
other cultures though the use of online communication tools such as e-mail, videoconferencing and 
discussion forums” (p. 4). Chapter 1, “New Challenges in Foreign Language Education,” includes a 
discussion on the origins of online exchange, current areas of research and debate, and issues that face 
Dawn Bikowski Review of Online Intercultural Exchange 
 
Language Learning & Technology 25 
teachers in these projects. His reminders that project-based distance cultural exchanges have existed since 
the beginning of the 20th century and that contact alone is not sufficient in these exchanges are both worth 
keeping in mind today. In the second chapter, “Foreign Language Education and the Rise of Online 
Communication: A Review of Promises and Realities,” O’Dowd sets out to answer key questions about 
the role of CMC in foreign language education. He notes that educators must take their learners’ current 
online practices into account and consider the electronic literacies they may need. He very usefully 
encourages educators to allow students to use online spaces to engage in genuine intercultural dialogue in 
order to confront their prejudices and reminds us that online communication is most effective when 
teachers are willing to explore new ways of teaching that focus on the learners’ needs. O’Dowd’s call for 
a realistic approach to the use of technology in foreign language education, his acknowledgment of 
technology’s limitations, and his specific guidelines provide a useful starting point for educators engaged 
in online cultural exchanges. 
“Part 2: Models of Online Intercultural Exchange” provides discussion on three telecollaboration models: 
eTandem, Cultura, and eTwinning. As Breffni O’Rourke notes, eTandem learning is built on the concepts 
of openness and learner autonomy and involves two native speakers reciprocally providing support and 
instruction. Many suggestions to decrease the likelihood of eTandem failures are included, but also useful 
would have been suggestions on how to structure eTandem projects for maximum student performance 
and discussions on possible teaching objectives and assessment possibilities. In their chapter, Jesús 
Suárez García and James Crapotta compare eTandem learning with Cultura, which is a highly-structured 
yet student-centered model in which students work in their native and target languages to analyze 
practices within a culture in order to develop intercultural competence. Discussions on the risks of the 
Cultura model (e.g., increased stereotyping) are very useful, but also raise the question of whether IC may 
be developed by other means (e.g., via students collaborating on real-world projects that allow them to 
perceive their own and the other culture more inductively). Part 2 closes with Antonia Domínguez 
Miguela’s chapter on eTwinning, which is a European network of primary and secondary schools in 
which students collaborate on cross-curricular international projects that develop a feeling of linguistic 
diversity within a European identity, promote pedagogic innovation, and integrate technology into 
education. In general, Part 2 includes an emphasis of the theories and practices of the three models over 
specific technologies, which leads to a more comprehensive guide for educators and a longer shelf life for 
the collection.  
“Part 3: Issues and Questions in Online Intercultural Exchange” is the longest section and begins with 
Paige Ware and Maria Luisa Pérez Cañado’s chapter on integrating language form into authentic, 
contextualized telecollaboration projects. Their very practical recommendations regarding constructing 
the educational context with a language focus, identifying and meeting participants’ needs, guiding 
participants though giving peer language-related feedback, structuring interaction, and helping students 
maintain communication are very useful and would have been nicely supplemented with a discussion on 
how to help students interpret peer feedback. Julie Belz, in her chapter on telecollaborative partnerships 
that develop intercultural communicative competence, also provides suggestions for carefully structured 
tasks and student training. Focusing on intercultural communication in telecollaboration, her discussion 
on Byram’s intercultural communicative competence (ICC) framework is not only concise and clear, but 
also includes examples of student work. The examples are very useful, though it would have been 
beneficial to include a more complete discussion on what makes a particular piece of speech match one of 
Byram’s five ICC principles.  
In Chapter 8, Andreas Müller-Hartmann discusses the crucial and central role of teachers in 
telecollaborative projects, including tips on establishing, organizing, and facilitating these projects across 
different contexts and on handling the challenges they present. More concrete information on assessment 
within these projects would be useful, given that often teachers and students bring different expectations 
and needs to the project. However, Müller-Hartmann points out one very important but often overlooked 
Dawn Bikowski Review of Online Intercultural Exchange 
 
Language Learning & Technology 26 
fact, which is that in order for teachers to guide students through an IC project, they themselves must also 
possess this competence. Isabel Pérez Torres and Margarita Vinagre in Chapter 9 discuss using email for 
intercultural exchanges with secondary school-age learners. While many suggestions on structuring 
exchanges are offered, two rather important considerations would have benefited from discussion: 
obtaining parental or administrative permission and techniques to minimize inappropriate or bullying 
behavior that may arise in student communication. Choosing and integrating the appropriate 
communication tools for exchange projects is discussed by Melinda Dooly, with a discussion of needs 
analysis, questions to consider before implementing a telecollaborative project, and a reminder of the 
importance of efficiency with tool use. Part 3 proves to be quite extensive in what it covers, though 
including more research-based and data-driven information that might convince a reluctant administration 
or faculty that these projects are worth the time and resources that they require would be useful. 
“Part 4: Practical Accounts and Experiences of Online Exchange” begins with a foreword by O’Dowd 
and moves to a collection of seven chapters on different telecollaborative projects from a variety of 
contexts. The Tandem Network project between English- and Spanish-speaking university students 
discussed by Margarita Vinagre provides useful assignments and guidelines for students; also interesting 
would be a discussion on how to move beyond what appears to be rather teacher-controlled autonomy and 
allow students to practice their emergent autonomy on their own (e.g., see Kessler, 2009, on students 
practicing autonomy in online environments). In Chapter 13, Mirjam Hauck and Tim Lewis outline a 
Tridem project which links learners from the UK, the US, and France, hoping that having three groups 
participate would broaden intercultural learning and reduce risks of stereotypes and confrontations.  
In Chapter 14, Christopher Chase and Paul Alexander explain the Japan-Korea Culture Exchange Project, 
which provides an opportunity for participants to use English as a lingua franca in a project with many 
political and cultural ramifications. Project objectives place less priority on deep cultural or historical 
issues and center more on developing trust and friendship. This chapter touches on aspects which are very 
important to consider in exchanges involving non-Western cultures (e.g., the importance of sharing gifts 
in high-context cultures); it would have also been interesting if reflections had been included on the 
potential opportunities and challenges that Japanese and/or Korean instructors may have experienced in 
directing the project. This chapter reminds the reader of how important it is that international educators 
understand a variety of cultural perspectives. Alfred Markey’s chapter “Using the Moodle Platform in 
Online Exchanges” provides thoughts on structuring these exchanges and raises some interesting 
observations on factors determining success (e.g., partner compatibility regarding interests and personal 
character), though more on what is offered in terms of Moodle itself (e.g., its features, strengths, or 
weaknesses) would have been beneficial. The book closes with a chapter by Eva Wilden on using voice 
chats to help teachers explore IC via the model of the ABC’s of Cultural Understanding and 
Communication; a chapter by Christine Develotte, François Mangenot, and Katerina Zourou on “Le 
français en (premiére) ligne” Project, which paired pre-service teachers of French as a foreign language 
and learners of French as a foreign language in an online exchange mainly via discussion boards and 
course management systems; and a chapter by Lina Lee on the nuts and bolts of communicating via 
desktop videoconferencing. 
This very practical collection succeeds in showing that, as Hauck and Lewis note in their chapter, 
“telecollaboration takes many forms” (p. 250). Many topics are covered in depth and with practical 
insights. Given the importance of this topic, perhaps a second volume could be written. It could include 
information such as the many forms of IC, as intercultural competence has models beyond that put forth 
by Byram (e.g., see Deardorff, 2006, p. 242, for a list of IC definitions). Also useful would be views that 
cause us to consider aspects of IC in today’s changing world (e.g., Zarate, 2003), that show us how 
technology can help move students away from the idea that culture is synonymous with country (e.g., 
Neuner, 2003), or that question some of the cultural assumptions that are often embedded in the Western 
concept of IC (e.g., Paramenter, 2003). A second volume could also include projects that take the 
Dawn Bikowski Review of Online Intercultural Exchange 
 
Language Learning & Technology 27 
development of IC out of classroom-only contexts and place it into real-life practices (e.g., Jaeger, 1995a) 
that occur between learners of a foreign language and native speakers of that language who are interested 
in learning about intercultural competence more than about the foreign language (e.g., Bikowski, 2008), 
or that help make the learning of intercultural competence more interdisciplinary and intermethodological 
in nature (as called for by Jaeger, 1995b, or Søderberg, 1995). As it is, however, the collection is quite 
useful in what it provides to educators, particularly with its emphasis on the collaboration that is needed 
in online intercultural exchanges and the variety of contexts it presents to readers. It will be an asset to all 
who read it. 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER  
Dawn Bikowski is the Director of the English Language Improvement Program in the Linguistics 
Department at Ohio University. Her PhD is in Instructional Technology and her research has focused on 
technology and intercultural competence, writing in CALL environments, and writing at the graduate 
level. 
E-mail: bikowski@ohio.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Bikowski, D. (2008). The discourse of relationship building in an intercultural virtual learning 
community. (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations and Theses Database. (AAT 
3302714). 
Byram, M. (1997). Teaching and assessing intercultural communicative competence. Clevedon, UK: 
Multilingual Matters. 
Deardorff, D. K. (2006). Identification and assessment of intercultural competence as a student outcome 
of internationalization. Journal of Studies in International Education, 10(3), 241–266.  
Dervin, F. (2010). Assessing intercultural competence in language learning and teaching: A critical 
review of current efforts in higher education. In F. Dervin & E. Suomela-Salmi (Eds.), New approaches 
to assessing language and (inter-)cultural competences in higher education (pp. 157–174). Frankfurt, 
Germany: Peter Lang. 
Jaeger, K. (1995a). Learning Landeskunde in higher education. In A. A. Jensen, K. Jaeger, & A. 
Lorensten (Eds.), Intercultural competence: A new challenge for language teachers and trainers in 
Europe. Volume II (pp. 155–172). Aalborg, Denmark: Aalborg University Press. 
Jaeger, K. (1995b). Teaching culture—State of the art. In A. A. Jensen, K. Jaeger, & A. Lorensten (Eds.), 
Intercultural competence: A new challenge for language teachers and trainers in Europe. Volume II (pp. 
19–28). Aalborg, Denmark: Aalborg University Press. 
Kessler, G. (2009). Student-initiated attention to form in wiki-based collaborative writing. Language 
Learning & Technology, 13(1), 79–95. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num1/kessler.pdf 
Neuner, G. (2003). Socio-cultural interim worlds in foreign language teaching and learning. In M. Byram 
(Ed.), Intercultural competence (pp. 15–63). Strasbourg, France: Council of Europe Publishing. 
Dawn Bikowski Review of Online Intercultural Exchange 
 
Language Learning & Technology 28 
Paramenter, L. (2003). Describing and defining intercultural communicative competence—International 
perspectives. In M. Byram (Ed.), Intercultural competence (pp. 119–147). Strasbourg, France: Council of 
Europe Publishing. 
Søderberg, A. M. (1995). Teaching (inter)cultural awareness. In A. A. Jensen, K. Jaeger, & A. Lorensten 
(Eds.), Intercultural competence: A new challenge for language teachers and trainers in Europe. Volume 
II (pp. 285–305). Aalborg, Denmark: Aalborg University Press. 
Zarate, G. (2003). Identities and plurilingualism: Preconditions for the recognition of intercultural 
competences. In M. Byram (Ed.), Intercultural competence (pp. 85–118). Strasbourg, France: Council of 
Europe Publishing. 
