Language Learning & Technology 
http:/llt.msu.edu/issues/february2011/review4.pdf 
February 2011, Volume 15, Number 1 
pp. 36–40  
 
Copyright © 2011, ISSN 1094-3501 36 
REVIEW OF LIVEMOCHA 
 
Title Livemocha 
Platform Windows 7, Vista, or XP; Mac OSX 10.4+; Java 
Minimum hardware 
requirements 
128 MB RAM (256 MB recommended) 
Internet access at 56k or above 
Soundcard w/microphone and speakers 
Software requirements Updated Java 
Developer  Shirish Nadkarni; supported by Pearson and Collins 
Price Unlimited use for basic functions in 35 languages; scaled fees for fully 
developed courses in five languages (English, French, German, Italian, and 
Spanish) 
Publication Year 2007 
 
Review by Meei-Ling Liaw, National Taichung University 
Livemocha’s founder, Shirish Nadkarni, had the idea of a social networking site (SNS) for learning 
languages while on a trip to Spain with his children (Schmidt, 2009). He watched as his teenage children, 
after years of studying Spanish in formal settings, were not able to engage in basic conversations with 
native speakers and would instead log on to social network sites upon returning to the hotel room. Against 
this backdrop, the concept of taking advantage of online social networks to facilitate practical language 
learning was born. In Livemocha’s language exchange model, learners are linked voluntarily with native 
speakers of their target language via Web 2.0 technologies. The platform encourages users to interact and 
speak with one another in order to practice language skills, while fostering an environment of sharing and 
reciprocation. Livemocha intends to make language learning more accessible and effective, especially for 
people who cannot afford classroom instruction or to immerse themselves in a foreign country through 
extended stays or travel. 
Livemocha prides itself on being one of the most advanced systems in terms of social learning and the 
largest online learning site in the world. The number of registered Livemocha users is growing very 
rapidly. In February 2009, it had an estimated 350,000 users from over 200 countries (Harigunami, 2008). 
In 2010, its members have exceeded 6 million and it offers the learning of over 35 languages online 
(http://www.livemocha.com/learn-english). Despite its popularity, very few reviews or studies have been 
conducted to look into if or how the system is living up to its ambition. This review, in addition to 
introducing its general features, critically delves into its usability, learning materials, and functionality of 
assisting language learning1 to provide language educators and learners with helpful information to 
understand the strengths and weakness of the system and ways to take advantage of its affordances.       
EVALUATION 
Usability 
To register as a Livemocha member only takes a few steps and has various pricing options, starting at a 
free membership for learning 35 different languages as well as the option to take more fully developed 
courses for a fee in five languages (English, French, German, Italian, and Spanish). The user-friendly 
Web site itself is in 11 languages (English, simplified Chinese, Spanish, Portuguese, French, Italian, 
Japanese, Korean, Turkey, Polish, and Russian). The layout and design of the Web site are 
straightforward so navigating the Web site and accessing its various functions is easy. Livemocha also has 
a virtual keyboard, aligned with the language being learned, that pops up when the user is working on 
writing exercises. This is especially useful for people learning a language that their own computer 
keyboards do not support. However, the virtual keyboard is currently only available in a few languages 
Meei-Ling Liaw Review of Livemocha 
 
Language Learning & Technology 37 
(e.g., French, Italian, German, etc.).  
Users simply log on to the Web site (http://www.livemocha.com) to sign up. An email message will then 
be sent to the user to activate the account. There are four sections in Livemocha: My Profile, Learn and 
Practice, Help Others, and Store. The profile uses the learners’ native language and preferred target 
language to suggest partners as friends for the user to invite to chat and share exercise submissions. The 
Learn and Practice section is the area in which the user enrolls in her/his selected courses and works on 
exercises. The free membership level allows the user to take basic through intermediate level courses with 
learning, reviewing, writing, and speaking exercises. Learn and review exercises are automatically and 
immediately graded. Speaking and writing exercises can be submitted and reviewed by native speakers 
for comments to improve. Learning progress is visually presented so the user can monitor advancement. 
A reward system, called Mochapoints, is used to track users’ activities. By working on course work and 
submitting speaking and writing exercises, users earn Mochapoints. When Mochapoints are accumulated 
to a certain amount, medals will then be awarded. Audio, PDF, and video downloads of the course 
material are also available for users to study offline.  
Learning materials 
In terms of the content of learning materials and activities, those of the paid courses and free ones are 
vastly different. The learning materials of the free courses, for example, are organized into units. In each 
unit, learners have multiple exposures to target vocabulary and sentence structures, as well as to listening 
and reading input. Exercises start with matching words or phrases to images, and dragging and dropping 
words or phrases to form sentences. The game-like matching and drag-and-drop exercises require no 
overt output and should be less stressful for learners to complete. However, these exercises require 
memorization more than comprehension. After several tries, even without real understanding of the 
language, learners can easily get high scores. In terms of the content, these activities focus on grammar 
with little or no context provided for the language. No real communication skills are involved in the 
learning tasks or exercises in these lessons; even the speaking exercises involve only recitation of 
provided phrases or sentences.  
Another point worth noting is the duplication of the organizational structure across the different languages 
that are available for free. Irrespective of the language chosen, the learning units have the same topics, 
grammar points, vocabulary, exercises, and even graphs and photos. Such a one-size-fits-all approach 
does not consider specific demands or structures of particular languages (for example, whether or how to 
change the forms of singular nouns to plural nouns), so learners might feel at a loss when trying to make 
sense of the language being learned.  
The materials of the paid courses however, differ considerably. In the paid courses, arrangement of the 
course content basically follows the principles of the functional-notional syllabus (Finocchiaro & 
Brumfit, 1983). The global concept of language is broken down into units of analysis in terms of 
communicative situations in which they are used and in the effort of fostering the development of 
learners’ communicative competence in real-life contexts. In each unit, the introduction of new language 
is highly contextualized, and a range of exercises are provided. The language is presented with a video 
clip in which various dialogues are carried out among characters. Users have the chance to hear and see 
the target vocabulary or sentence structures being used in situational, communicative contexts. A 
transcript of the dialogue is available in both the language being studied and the native language of the 
user in a pop-up window with the click of a button. After viewing, users answer multiple-choice questions 
to check their comprehension of the dialogue. Explanations of grammar points are provided before form-
focused practices. Users are even given chances to create their own video conversations and submit them 
for expert reviews.  
Meei-Ling Liaw Review of Livemocha 
 
Language Learning & Technology 38 
It is obvious the learning materials in the paid courses are much livelier and the language more 
authentic than the free ones. More diverse tasks are provided for users to engage in the learning 
of the different language skills. The study of the four language skills is better balanced and 
integrated in exercises and quizzes as well. Having access to feedback from expert reviewers is 
an advantage over having volunteer but untrained native speakers comment on them. Although 
with its current content, some find it not worth paying for (e.g., Gallen, 2008), and some have 
concerns about the tension between “formal” aspects of language learning (e.g., grammar 
practice and vocabulary learning) and the “informal” social networking model, overall the social 
networking aspect of the system has earned praises (Jee & Park, 2009; Stevens & Shield, 
2007/2009).  
Functionality of assisting language learning 
As its name suggests, Livemocha intends to create a relaxing Web-based environment similar to that of a 
coffee shop where its members interact and support one another in language-learning (Harrison & 
Thomas, 2009). Social-networking sites (SNSs) are becoming increasingly popular, particularly with the 
younger generation (Forlano, 2009). SNSs are usually built to allow people to express themselves and to 
interact socially with others. Self-expression and social interaction are some of the most important 
contexts for language acquisition (McBride, 2009). Researchers have also pointed out that the sense of 
“flow” often causes some users of SNSs to become fully engaged in an activity and lose track of time 
(Egbert, 2005; Tufekci, 2008). Thus, if pedagogically sound language learning experiences can be 
integrated into SNS activity design, then language learners can be similarly involved in these activities, 
resulting in higher motivation and interest in learning new languages. Furthermore, once students gain 
skills in communicating and connecting with others through SNSs in the target language, they can 
establish relationships with other speakers of the target language and form a supportive online learning 
community (Harrison & Thomas, 2009; McInnerney & Roberts, 2004; Tu & Corry, 2002). Also, as 
indicated in the final report of the study regarding the impact of information and communications 
technology (ICT) and new media on language learning in EU countries, the use of technologies offers 
flexibility and autonomy, as well as opportunities for self-improvement in studies/work (Stevens & 
Shield, 2007/2009). SNSs hold the potential to foster independent, autonomous language learning. With 
all the aforementioned benefits of social networking considered, utilizing the affordance of SNSs for 
language learning seems to be a logical step to take.  
How Livemocha is exploiting its social networking functionality for language learning deserves a close 
look. First, in terms of self-expression and social interaction, Livemocha does allows various forms of 
interactions within the community such as giving and receiving feedback for speaking and writing 
submissions from native speakers and Livemocha experts, sending and accepting invitations to form 
partner groups, and interacting with other community members via asynchronous and synchronous 
modes. This “show[ing] appreciation by helping other members learning their native language” is 
seemingly an “innovative but instinctively human way to learn a new language” (Schmidt, 2009). 
However, a study examining the uses of Livemocha by a group of students in Japan in 2007 revealed that 
most of the users deliberately used pseudonyms instead of real names and inputted false information 
about themselves including countries of origin and native languages; at the end of the project, the intimate 
social bonds as described in the research literature were unfounded (Harrison & Thomas, 2009). Although 
the findings of this case may not be generalizable to all uses of Livemocha and the semester-long 
investigation might have been too short to draw definite conclusions, the findings do reveal that in order 
to fulfill the ideal of creating a supportive online learning community, Livemocha would need to have a 
more sophisticated impression management system that allows users to set levels of exposures to others 
and that puts its members at ease about self-disclosure.  
Meei-Ling Liaw Review of Livemocha 
 
Language Learning & Technology 39 
According to Egbert (2005), CALL activities that are intrinsically rewarding can cause people to push 
themselves to higher levels of performance. Social contact is a powerful intrinsic motivator and 
combining contribution with social contacts with other contributors can cause members to contribute 
more (Kraut & Resnik, 2008). Livemocha leverages the native language expertise of its members by 
allowing them to make contributions to the content of courses. Performance feedback from other 
community members who are native speakers of the target language is also a motivator (Forlano, 2009). 
In addition to receiving feedback for submissions, Livemocha sends weekly progress reports to keep users 
informed of their status or score. The score system which leads to a publicly-displayed reward system of 
Mochapoints can enhance motivation and performance. Although the points do not account for tangible 
rewards, having medals does warrant the member a degree of prestige among the Livemocha community 
and thus also creates an external reward.  
Interacting with native speakers of the target language is not without its downsides. First, users should not 
assume that all native speakers are capable of providing helpful feedback. Although Livemocha provides 
guidelines for giving reviews, there is no way to prevent receiving sloppy or inadequate feedback (Lewis, 
2010). There is also a possibility that the reward system actually encourages quick review for earning 
more points faster. Another problem is that receiving feedback in the target language from native speakers 
would not be helpful if the learner’s target language proficiency is far too basic to understand the 
comments.  
Summary 
Livemocha, with its carefully designed learning materials and integration of Web 2.0 technologies into 
learning activities, creates an interactive, authentic, and meaningful language learning environment that 
many traditional language instruction contexts can not provide. Despite some of the specific concerns 
discussed in relation to Livemocha, the social networking aspect of the system undoubtedly plays a key 
role in making the learning interesting and attractive to its users worldwide. In fact, Livemocha is only 
one of a growing number of SNSs available for language learning (e.g., Babble, Busuu, VoxSwap, 
XLingo, Yabla, Ning, etc.). However, while Livemocha and other related SNSs and applications are 
quickly emerging, empirical research in this area is scarce, leaving open questions about many aspects, 
such as the proportion of users who have actually completed courses, the length of time required for an 
online language learning community to mature, the development and uptake of user-generated materials, 
and the relationship between language learning and cultural learning in an online SNS context. In short, 
although SNSs like Livemocha seem promising, much is yet to be learned about the dynamics being 
generated within the online learning community and how such experiences might lead toward or detract 
from satisfactory, efficient, useful, or culturally sensitive language learning experiences.       
 
NOTE 
1. These three are the most relevant to this review of the five evaluation criteria of English learning 
websites developed by Liu, Liu, and Hwang (2011). 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER  
Meei-Ling Liaw is professor in the Department of English at National Taichung University. Her research 
focuses on using computer technology to facilitate EFL teaching and learning, teaching EFL reading and 
writing, and teacher education. 
E-mail: meeilingliaw@gmail.com 
Meei-Ling Liaw Review of Livemocha 
 
Language Learning & Technology 40 
 
REFERENCES  
Egbert, J. (2005). Flow as a model for CALL research. In J. Egbert & G. M. Petrie (Eds.), CALL research 
perspectives (pp. 129–140). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Finocchiaro, M. & Brumfit, C. (1983). The functional-notional approach. New York, NY: Oxford 
University Press. 
Forlano, D. (2009). Social networking for language learning. The Language Educator, 4(1), 41–44. 
Gallen, M. (2008). LiveMocha – language learning and social networking. Retrieved from Michael 
Gallen’s thoughts on e-learning – what’s new, what works and what’s plain daft: 
http://www.liquidelearning.com/2008/01/livemocha-language-learning-and-social.html 
Harigunami, P. (2008). Livemocha eyes one million users this year. Retrieved from 
http://www.ciol.com/News/News-Reports/Livemocha-eyes-one-million-users-this-year/1408104872/0/ 
Harrison, R., & Thomas, M. (2009). Identity in online communities: Social networking sites and language 
learning. International Journal of Emerging Technologies & Society, 7(2), 109–124. 
Jee, M. J., & Park, M. J. (2009). Livemocha as an online language-learning community, CALICO 
Journal, 26(2), 448–456.  
Kraut, R. E., & Resnick, P. (2008). Evidence-based social design: Mining the social sciences to build 
successful online communities. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. Retrieved from http://www.cs.cmu.edu/ 
~kraut/ 
Lewis, B. (2010). Busuu review and LiveMocha review. Retrieved from http://www.fluentin3months. 
com/busuu-livemocha-review/ 
Liu, G.-Z., Liu, Z.-H., & Hwang, G.-J. (2011). Developing multi-dimensional evaluation criteria for 
English learning websites with university students and professors. Computers & Education, 56(1), 65-79. 
McBride, K. (2009). Social-networking sites in foreign language classes: Opportunities for re-creation. In 
L. Lomicka & G. Lord (Eds.), The next generation: Social networking and online collaboration in foreign 
language learning (pp. 35–58). San Marcos, TX: Computer Assisted Language Instruction Consortium 
(CALICO).  
McInnerney, J. M., & Roberts, T. S. (2004). Online learning: Social interaction and the creation of a sense 
of community. Educational Technology & Society, 7(3), 73–81. 
Schmidt, C. (2009). Livemocha and the power of social language learning. International House Journal 
of Education and Development, 28(4), Retrieved from http://ihjournal.com/livemocha-and-the-power-of-
social-language-learning 
Stevens, A., & Shield, L. (Eds.) (2007/2009). Study on the impact of information and technology (ICT) 
and new media on language learning: Annexe IV case studies. EACEA: European Commission.  
Tu, C., & Corry, M. (2002). Research in online learning community. Electronic Journal of Instructional 
Science and Technology, 5(1). Retrieved from http://www.ascilite.org.au/ajet/e-jist/docs/Vol5_No1/ 
chtu_frame.html 
Tufekci, Z. (2008). Grooming, gossip, Facebook and MySpace. Information, Communication & Society, 
11, 544–564. 
 
