Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2011/commentary.pdf 
February 2011, Volume 15, Number 1 
pp. 3–9 
 
Copyright © 2011, ISSN 1094-3501 3 
SPECIAL ISSUE COMMENTARY 
MULTILATERAL ONLINE EXCHANGES FOR LANGUAGE AND 
CULTURE LEARNING 
Tim Lewis, The Open University  
Thierry Chanier, Université Blaise Pascal  
Bonnie Youngs, Carnegie Mellon University   
This special issue of Language Learning & Technology gathers five studies that deal with a recent 
development in CALL: multilateral online exchanges for learning language and culture. Multilateral 
exchanges reflect the changing reality of language learning in a globalized world where prolonged and 
intensive contact with one additional culture has given way to more fleeting encounters with multiple 
cultures, mediated by Web-based communication tools.  
In the case of four of this special issue’s articles, multilateral exchanges bring together groups of 
participants from two different institutions and countries. In recent years efforts have been made to 
expand the bilateral format to accommodate a multiplicity of partners and a more pluralistic approach to 
intercultural learning (see Hauck, 2007; Hauck & Lewis, 2007; Hauck & Youngs, 2008). A drawback for 
bilateral partnerships is an inherent risk that participants will see themselves and their partners as 
“representatives” of a given culture. In a multilateral exchange, however, learners’ relationships with their 
own and other languages and cultures are more nuanced. With appropriate task design, their role is no 
longer to act solely as a “guide” to their own culture, but also to mediate between other cultures. In this 
special issue just such a four-way intercultural exchange, the LITERALIA Project, is examined by Stickler 
and Emke. This shift away from traditional bilateral online intercultural exchanges is, moreover, tied to 
the fact that fewer and fewer major societies are culturally homogeneous. In a diverse world, 
contemporary experience of culture is increasingly tribal (in the postmodern sense of the term) rather than 
national (see Maffesoli, 1988). Consequently, participants no longer fit neatly into the traditional binary 
schema of bilateral telecollaborative exchanges. In this issue, for example, Diana Yang provides an 
account of a bilateral English language exchange between students from Taiwanese and Japanese 
institutions in which the cultural identities of the learners themselves are not quite as uniform as one 
might assume. One of the students Yang features due to her relativistic attitude to shared online space is 
Stacy. Stacy’s approach to linguistic and cultural exchange is coloured by the experience of having spent 
part of her life in the US. Likewise, one of the students from Yang’s Japanese partner university whose 
World Athletes blog engages the interest of several Taiwanese partners is Jamal, a Malaysian fan of both 
soccer and basketball. Such intercultural affinities and identities are ever more frequent in today’s world 
outdating notions of rigid bilateralism. 
Roles for Teachers 
In online learning exchanges roles for teachers differ from those in traditional classrooms. In the initial 
stages of a project the teacher is responsible for preparing learners for the challenges to come; designing 
tasks which will enable them to engage productively with members of another culture; selecting the right 
tools for the project; setting basic rules; establishing a clear timeframe and providing the space necessary 
for learners to reflect periodically (see Müller-Hartmann, 2007). Once a project has started, the teacher’s 
role shifts. Rather than being responsible for imparting knowledge (which in some cases she may not 
possess), her task is to scaffold the construction by learners of shared knowledge “because the point is not 
to provide the right answer or to say which group members are right, but to perform a minimal 
pedagogical intervention…in order to redirect the group work in a productive direction or to monitor 
which members are left out of the interaction” (Dillenbourg, 1999, p. 8). Especially in Web-based 
collaborative exchanges for intercultural learning “the teacher cannot be the voice of authority. The 
Tim Lewis, Thierry Chanier, & Bonnie Youngs Special Issue Commentary 
 
Language Learning & Technology  4 
teacher’s role is … not to ‘teach culture’ in the traditional sense but to help students bring patterns to light 
and gradually put together the culture puzzle—in other words, to teach the students to ask the right 
questions themselves and to facilitate the experience of self-learning” (Furstenberg, 2010, pp. 330-331). 
In short, the aim of a telecollaborative exchange is to create a virtual learning community. In this “the 
facilitator plays a critical role in modeling social presence and identity for students. The facilitator can set 
the tone for the community and aid the development of trust and social bonds among learners” (Augar, 
Raitman, Lanham, & Zhou, 2006, p. 79). As is reflected in the special issue articles, task design and e-
facilitation are particularly challenging in a telecollaborative setting. 
Roles for Learners 
What are roles for learners in such exchanges? Learners’ roles may include individual tasks (preparation, 
diaries, personal logs, etc.), but the collective work, which is the main goal of collaboration, is also 
dependent on the individual who has a prominent role to play in the formation, coordination, development 
and adaptation of the group (Arrow, McGrath, & Berdahl, 2000). It should be noted that the collaborative 
group can be a fragile entity. “Group participation can involve risks and thus requires trust between 
participants” (Kling & Courtright, 2004, p. 102). As well as readiness to take risks, learners’ other 
contributions are vital. Depending on their specific areas of expertise, they may be mentors or apprentices 
and are often simultaneously both (Riel & Polin, 2004). Within a socio-cultural framework, they will 
ideally participate as co-designers of an exchange and of its constituent tasks (Schwen & Hara, 2004). 
Perhaps the principal transformation for which they must be prepared is from consuming knowledge to 
constructing knowledge. In intercultural exchanges “the use of technology…generates a new 
methodology, where students themselves, by virtue of being involved in a dynamic, interactive process 
with their foreign peers, gradually construct their knowledge and understanding of the other culture” 
(Furstenberg, 2010, p. 331). For the learners, collaborative processes and outcomes eventually become 
their motivation and they willingly support the online learning situation as planned and modified—often 
with learner input—by task designers. It is important to note, however, that the backbone of the 
collaboration is not the assembly of pieces (e.g., software, hardware, exercises, learners, tutors), but the 
process and result of a shared collaborative goal (Augar, Raitman, Lanham, & Zhou, 2006, p. 81). This is 
a particular challenge to designers of telecollaborative exchanges and, through the examination of 
students’ posts and reflections, the focus of this special issue’s authors.  
Roles for Technology 
Telecollaborations are, by definition, mediated by technology. Communication tools are constantly 
evolving with a plethora currently available. Organizers of online exchanges combine asynchronous and 
synchronous media, text, audio, or video in monomodal or multimodal platforms (see Chanier & Vetter, 
2006). Increasingly the environments that are developed for educational purposes are synchronous 
multimodal audiographic conferencing systems, combining an audio-conference, text chat, shared word 
processor, and white board, and offering multiple “virtual classrooms” (see Ciekanski & Chanier, 2008; 
Lamy & Hampel, 2007). The integration of a range of communicative and collaborative task-oriented 
modalities within a single environment makes possible the more or less simultaneous performance of a 
range of tasks which can be immensely supportive of joint language production. At the same time, social 
networking and file-sharing sites, as well as virtual worlds (e.g., Second Life) are increasingly being used 
for the construction and evaluation of joint content and the building of online communities in what Guth 
and Helm conceptualize as “telecollaboration 2.0” (see Coleman, Hampel, Hauck, & Stickler, in press; 
Guth & Helm, 2010). Moreover, Learning Management Systems (LMS) such as Moodle (see Stickler and 
Emke, this issue) also offer a range of collaborative tools some of which may have specific benefits for 
those engaged in the sharing of linguistic and cultural knowledge. 
Tim Lewis, Thierry Chanier, & Bonnie Youngs Special Issue Commentary 
 
Language Learning & Technology  5 
The choice of technology, however, is not culturally neutral, nor are the spaces provided by online 
environments. Particular media are value-loaded. E-mail in particular may be experienced by younger 
participants as appropriate for vertical but not “peer-to-peer” communication (Thorne, 2006, pp. 20-21). 
In the studies included in this issue, technology choice appears somewhat conservative. Tools used are all 
or in part text-based. Three projects used only asynchronous communication. None used audio or video. 
Two made use of Learning Management Systems (WebCT and Moodle), two used Web 2.0 tools (blogs 
and wikis) and two combined synchronous and asynchronous media. Arguably, a range of media may be 
needed to support development of all four language macro-skills.  
Language(s) Used 
Given differing purposes and individual approaches to telecollaborations, there are also differing opinions 
about appropriate language use. For example, the Cultura project team argues that learners should use 
their first language in order to focus attention on cultural content and intercultural comparison (see 
Furstenberg, 2010; Furstenberg, Levet, English, & Maillet, 2001). However, four of the projects reported 
in this issue adopt the principles of Tandem learning whereby the development of L2 communication 
skills accompanies that of intercultural competence. Tandem practitioners advocate equal use of first and 
target languages (Brammerts, 2003, p. 32). Moreover, online exchanges increasingly use English as a 
Lingua Franca for intercultural communication. Such is the case with Yang’s study in this special issue. 
The Special Issue Articles 
The papers assembled for this special issue have two broadly different points of emphasis. Three of them 
focus on the mechanics of telecollaborative second language learning. The other two deal with different 
aspects of cultural learning in online exchanges.  
The three papers that deal primarily with telecollaboration as a tool for second language development use 
different online modes for the exchanges they report and their data is differently compiled. Consequently, 
direct comparisons are not possible. Nonetheless, the papers offer some interesting parallels and points of 
divergence. The learning exchange described by Vinagre and Muñoz in Computer-Mediated Corrective 
Feedback and Language Accuracy in Telecollaborative Exchanges uses e-mail, a conventional and well-
established asynchronous tool. For their project, Kabata and Edasawa, Tandem Language Learning 
through a Cross-Cultural Keypal Project, learners use a Web CT- based discussion board. Bower and 
Kawaguchi in Negotiation of Meaning and Corrective Feedback in Japanese/English eTandem, on the 
other hand, employ a complex combination of text chat (used in three intensive 30 minute sessions) and e-
mail, the latter being reserved for the provision of follow-up feedback. This requires learners to convert 
text chat logs into word files in order to undertake error correction. These are then sent as e-mail 
attachments (see Appendix A, pp. 63-64). 
Bower and Kawaguchi specify the rates of error correction in their project. In synchronous text chat the 
rates of error correction are extremely low. In English, 0.8% of errors are corrected and in Japanese only 
4.1% (p. 54). The reasons for this appear to relate to the choice of online communication mode. As the 
authors point out, they are in line with previous studies of synchronous online exchanges (p. 61). In the 
asynchronous e-mail follow-up exchange, they are significantly higher, with 61.9% of errors being 
corrected in English and 65.8% in Japanese. Bower and Kawaguchi also indicate having chosen 
synchronous text chat for its increased potential for focus on form. Arguably, text chat does afford 
learners greater opportunity for noticing, processing, planning and producing language than face-to-face 
oral interaction (see Sauro, 2009, pp. 100-101). But this is equally, if not more so the case with 
asynchronous online discussion. As Bower and Kawaguchi emphasize, while nearly devoid of corrective 
feedback, students’ synchronous text chat logs reveal high levels of negotiation of meaning (see also 
O’Rourke, 2005). This takes the form of clarification requests or confirmation checks, a significant 
proportion of which were triggered by comprehension difficulties rather than actual errors. Thus in 
Tim Lewis, Thierry Chanier, & Bonnie Youngs Special Issue Commentary 
 
Language Learning & Technology  6 
English, 6.6% of text chat negotiation was due to problems of communication, while only 0.6% was 
provoked by errors, with corresponding figures for Japanese 16.7% and 3.3% (p. 53). It seems likely that 
this kind of interaction is fostered by the relative rapidity of response offered by synchronous tools rather 
than by the time learners have to read and construct their posts. 
All three papers discuss the main types of error made and corrected in these online exchanges. In overall 
terms, the raw numerical data suggest that grammatical errors are two or three times more likely to occur 
and to be corrected than lexical, or spelling (or typographical) errors. Morphological errors appear to be 
more frequent than syntactic ones. Vinagre and Muñoz cite concordance errors as being most prominent 
in their data (p. 78). Bower and Kawaguchi likewise identify the most prominent errors made by their 
learners as “subject-verb agreement, tense, articles and singular-plural problems in English and the use of 
inappropriate case-marking particles [and] problems of verb/adjective conjugation and connections in 
Japanese” (p. 49). Higher-level pragmatic, idiomatic, and discourse errors are identified only rarely and 
correction of them is equally infrequent. 
Some of the errors made by learners and singled out for correction relate to the nature of the language 
being learned. Bower and Kawaguchi, for example, report a significant proportion of errors in Kanji 
among their Australian learners of Japanese. For Spanish learners of German, errors of word order and 
preposition use were high on the list of what was corrected (Vinagre and Muñoz, this issue, p. 78). Other 
types of errors identified and corrected appear to be determined by the modalities of the particular 
exchange. For example, Bower and Kawaguchi point to a series of studies of synchronous CMC 
exchanges where “lexical errors receive more corrective feedback than grammatical errors” (p. 62). In 
Kabata and Edasawa’s asynchronous, meaning-focused exchange, though grammatical errors were the 
type most corrected by native speaker partners, learners themselves indicated that most of their actual 
learning was lexical and from other sources. 
With regard to methods of correction, these three papers give some consideration to the different methods 
of error correction used in the exchanges they report. To some extent, these relate to the mode being used. 
In synchronous text chat, the learning partners studied by Bower and Kawaguchi employed recasts and 
negotiation (i.e., confirmation and clarification checks). In asynchronous e-mail feedback, however, the 
same learners made exclusive use of explicit negative feedback. Both Kabata and Edasawa and Vinagre 
and Muñoz analyze data drawn from student learning logs. This gives some indication of which methods 
of error correction were the most salient for learners since what is recorded are those corrections which 
have, by definition, been attended to. Their evidence suggests that online learners notice explicit error 
correction more readily than implicit error correction. Kabata and Edasawa point out, however, that once 
implicit or negotiated corrections were “noticed” by learners, they tended to incorporate them in their 
subsequent output (pp. 116-117). This appears to suggest that the effectiveness of error correction may be 
best judged not in terms of its implicitness or explicitness, but by the degree to which learners themselves 
are cognitively engaged and thereby recycle corrected items. In apparent corroboration of Kabata and 
Edasawa, Vinagre and Muñoz demonstrate through their research that, though less frequent, rectifications 
of errors by remediation are more than twice as likely to be incorporated by learners in their future 
production (p. 80). Whether this remains the case over time, is unclear (see Sauro, 2009). 
While these three papers deal with relatively small samples, they do suggest that in order to develop both 
formal and semantic aspects of language, a combination of negative feedback and negotiation of meaning 
may be required. Achieving this implies incorporating both asynchronous and synchronous modes in 
online exchanges. Kabata and Edasawa suggest that “incidental learning” is (a) primarily lexical and (b) 
highly dependent on learners having achieved a level of L2 proficiency (p. 117). Consequently, there is 
strong need for error correction to be explicit, especially for formal language development by learners 
with relatively low levels of L2 proficiency. At the same time, partners in such exchanges need to be 
informed of and trained in techniques of remediation and/or negotiation.  
Tim Lewis, Thierry Chanier, & Bonnie Youngs Special Issue Commentary 
 
Language Learning & Technology  7 
Yang’s article, Learner Interpretations of Shared Space in Multilateral English Blogging, reports a study 
of an online exchange between Japanese and Taiwanese learners of English. Using personal blogs, 
students were given the option of visiting whichever blogs they wanted and of leaving comments for the 
blog owners. In this way, learner-driven communication was examined and research data archived from 
blogs and interviews with the students. As Yang reports, “students in this multilateral English blogging 
project reported that the presence of pre-existing shared interests, mutual understanding, or shared 
personal experience serves as common ground for peer discussions” (p. 136). Communication online 
therefore takes place in a shared space in which students can choose which blogs to respond to based on 
commonality (e.g., a student would pick a blog to respond to because of shared interests and experiences). 
Interestingly, the blogs indicate that learners strove to make connections with the blog owners, accessing 
cultural information that was both perceived and actual in order to establish rapport with other students. 
In addition, focusing on the definition of affinity space which includes ‘members’ of a shared knowledge 
community by the use of symbols or abbreviations, Yang illustrated how her students used blogs to 
express affinity as well as for the development of a shared foreign language, thereby facilitating the 
building of social language networks. 
In LITERALIA: Towards Developing Intercultural Maturity Online, Stickler and Emke explore adult 
learners’ uses of combined online communication and actual live visits for intercultural learning as an 
extension of their ongoing formal or informal study of a foreign language. In order to examine learners’ 
experiences, the authors employ a multiperspectival ethnographic approach and combine theories of adult 
learning with existing models of intercultural competence to generate a concept they refer to as 
intercultural maturity. Learning partners from the UK, Italy, Germany, and Poland took part in this EU-
funded project. The study focuses on their changing attitudes to national cultures. But these were not the 
only cultural adjustments participants had to make. For many of these older learners, working online 
required a second, equally significant cultural adaptation. As the authors note, “Cultural information 
(savoirs) was gathered via the online tools”, while “on a communication level learners engaged in the 
online culture practising multilateral communication. At the highest level of intercultural maturity 
learners had not just developed a critical intercultural awareness and reflective attitude but were also able 
to select the different online tools to best fit their communication intentions” (p. 157). 
Future Directions 
The success of future research on multilateral online exchanges requires first of all that more language 
educators assume the laborious but rewarding task of organizing, researching, and reporting on them. 
Such exchanges have a wide diversity of potential purposes, ranging from straightforward language 
practice, through the development of intercultural communicative competence, to the learning of specific 
skills, such as interpreting and multicultural teamwork. Each will require appropriate research methods. 
While experimentally derived quantitative data can provide illuminating insights into second language 
acquisition, less interventionist methodologies will be needed to trace the transformation of attitudes and 
behaviours that constitutes the growth of intercultural competence. It is no coincidence, therefore, that the 
two studies in this issue which deal with aspects of culture both draw on ethnographic models. Another 
non-interventionist alternative is offered by corpus-based methodologies, made all the more viable by the 
increasing ease with which it is possible to capture multimodal electronic corpora. Diachronic analysis of 
discussion threads, or in virtual environments the use of online space, will continue to provide evidence of 
change (see Audras & Chanier, 2008). 
Tim Lewis, Thierry Chanier, & Bonnie Youngs Special Issue Commentary 
 
Language Learning & Technology  8 
REFERENCES 
Arrow, H., McGrath, J. E., & Berdahl, J. L. (2000). Small groups as complex systems: Formation, 
coordination, development, and adaptation. London: Sage. 
Audras, I., & Chanier, T. (2008). Observation de la construction d’une compétence interculturelle dans 
des groupes exolingues en ligne. Apprentissage des Langues et Système d’Information et de 
Communication (ALSIC), 11(1), 175–204. Retrieved from http://alsic.revues.org/index865.html 
Augar, N., Raitman, R., Lanham, E, & Zhou, W. (2006). Building virtual learning communities. In M. 
Zongmin (Ed.), Web-based intelligent learning systems: Technologies and applications (pp. 72–100). 
Hershey PA: Information Science Publishing. 
Brammerts, H. (2003). Autonomous language learning in Tandem: The development of a concept. In T. 
Lewis & L. Walker (Eds.), Autonomous language learning in Tandem (pp. 27–36). Sheffield: Academy 
Electronic Press. 
Chanier, T., & Vetter, A. (2006). Multimodalité et expression en langue étrangère dans une plateforme 
audio-synchrone. Apprentissage des Langues et Système d’Information et de Communication (ALSIC), 
9(1). 61–101. 
Ciekanski, M., & Chanier, T. (2008). Developing online multimodal verbal communication to enhance 
the writing process in an audio-graphic conferencing environment. ReCALL, 20(2), 162–182. 
Coleman, J. A., Hampel, R., Hauck, M., & Stickler, U. (in press). Collaboration and interaction: The keys 
to distance and computer-supported language learning. In G. S. Levine, A. Phipps, & C. Blythe (Eds.) 
AAUSC: Critical and intercultural theory and language pedagogy. Boston MA: Thomson Heinle. 
Dillenbourg, P. (Ed.). (1999). Collaborative learning: Cognitive and computational approaches. Oxford: 
Elsevier. 
Furstenberg, G. (2010). Making culture the core of the language class: Can it be done? The Modern 
Language Journal, 94(2) 329–332. 
Furstenberg, G., Levet, S., English, K., & Maillet, K. (2001). Giving a virtual voice to the silent language 
of culture: The Cultura project. Language Learning & Technology, 5(1), 55–102. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num1/furstenberg/default.html  
Gass, S. M. (1997). Input, interaction, and the second language learner. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Guth, S., & Helm, F. (Eds.). (2010). Telecollaboration 2.0: Language literacies and intercultural 
learning in the 21st
Hauck, M. (2007). Critical success factors in a TRIDEM exchange. ReCALL, 19(2), 202–223. 
 Century. Bern: Peter Lang. 
Hauck, M., & Lewis, T. (2007). The Tridem project. In R. O’Dowd (Ed.), Online intercultural exchange: 
An introduction for foreign language teachers (pp. 250–258). Clevedon, England: Multilingual Matters. 
Hauck, M., & Youngs, B. (2008). Telecollaboration in multimodal environments: The impact on task 
design and learner interaction. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 21(2), 87–124. 
Kling, R., & Courtright, C. (2004). Group behaviour and learning in electronic forums: A socio-technical 
approach. In S. A. Barab, R. Kling, & J. H. Gray (Eds.), Designing for virtual communities in the service 
of learning (pp. 91–119). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Lamy, M.-N., & Hampel, R. (2007). Online communication for language learning and teaching. 
Basingstoke, England: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Tim Lewis, Thierry Chanier, & Bonnie Youngs Special Issue Commentary 
 
Language Learning & Technology  9 
Maffesoli. M. (1988). Le Temps des Tribus: le déclin de l’individualisme dans les sociétés de masse. 
Paris: La Table Ronde. 
Müller-Hartmann, A. (2007). Teacher role in telecollaboration: setting up and managing exchanges. In R. 
O’Dowd (Ed.), Online intercultural exchange: An introduction for foreign language teachers (pp. 167–
192). Clevedon, England: Multilingual Matters. 
O’Dowd, R. (2006). Telecollaboration and the development of intercultural communicative competence. 
Munich: Langenscheidt. 
O’Rourke, B. (2005). Form-focused interaction in online tandem learning. CALICO Journal, 22(3), 433–
466. 
Riel, M., & Polin, L. (2004). Online learning communities: Common ground and critical differences in 
designing technical environments. In S. A. Barab, R. Kling, & J. H. Gray (Eds.), Designing for virtual 
communities in the service of learning (pp. 16–50). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Sauro, S. (2009). Computer-mediated corrective feedback and the development of L2 grammar. Language 
Learning & Technology, 13(1), 96–120. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num1/sauro.pdf  
Schwen, T. M., & Hara, N. (2004). Community of practice: A metaphor for online design. In S. A. Barab, 
R. Kling, & J. H. Gray (Eds.), Designing for virtual communities in the service of learning (pp. 154–178). 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Thorne, S. (2006). Pedagogical and praxiological lessons from Internet-mediated intercultural language 
education research. In J. Belz, & S. L. Thorne (Eds.), Internet-mediated intercultural foreign language 
education (pp. 2–30). Boston, MA: Thomson Heinle. 
Vetter, A., & Chanier, T. (2006). Supporting oral production for professional purpose, in synchronous 
communication with heterogeneous learners. ReCALL, 18(1), 5–23. 
  
