Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2011/review1.pdf 
October 2011, Volume 15, Number 3 
pp. 32–36 
 
Copyright © 2011, ISSN 1094-3501 32 
REVIEW OF TASK-BASED LANGUAGE LEARNING AND TEACHING 
WITH TECHNOLOGY 
Task-Based Language Learning and Teaching with 
Technology  
 
Michael Thomas and Hayo Reinders (Eds.) 
 
2010 
ISBN: 978-1-4411-0153-2 
US $140.00 
272 pp. 
 
Continuum 
London 
 
 
Review by Jim Ranalli, Iowa State University1 
It is interesting to consider that task-based learning and teaching (TBLT) and computer-assisted language 
learning (CALL) both originated in the 1980s, were long considered marginal to mainstream language 
education (though this has thankfully changed), and more recently have been the focus of increasing 
scholarly attention, and yet to date no book has explicitly addressed the potential links between these two 
fields. What antecedents and principles do they share, and how can they mutually inform each other’s 
contributions to second language pedagogy and research? Task-based language learning and teaching 
with technology, edited by Michael Thomas and Hayo Reinders, attempts to answer such questions and 
“initiate a closer dialogue between these areas of theory, research and practice in order to explore 
synergies and differences as well as potential future directions” (p. 1). 
The book consists of 11 chapters contributed by researchers and practitioners in Canada, Japan, Germany, 
the UK, and the US. Although the editors do not specify a target audience, they have focused on recent 
research rather than practical guidelines, so the book will likely be of primary interest to researchers and 
graduate students rather than language teachers. The predominance of research studies in the collection, 
as opposed to reviews of research or theory, means there is overlap of topics across several chapters and a 
lack of attention to some areas. The result is a thought-provoking if somewhat fragmentary perspective on 
technology-mediated tasks.  
A challenge for anyone working in TBLT is to define task. In the opening chapter, Thomas and Reinders 
adopt the six criteria identified by Ellis (2003): 
tasks involve a plan for learner activity; they have a primary focus on making meaning; they 
engage with real-world authentic language use; they focus on any or all of the four language 
skills; they engage learners in cognitive skills in order to accomplish them; and they have a 
defined communication-based learning outcome. (pp. 9-10) 
The editors further clarify that they prefer task-based learning and teaching to task-based language 
teaching, noting the importance of learner interpretation in the implementation of tasks, and the fact that 
technology tends to deconstruct the traditional roles of learner and teacher. They also mention the book’s 
Jim Ranalli Review of Task-based Language Learning and Teaching with Technology  
 
scope will be limited to micro- rather than macro-level concerns—that is, to the design, use and 
evaluation of tasks in particular teaching contexts, rather than to issues of needs analysis, syllabus and 
curriculum design, because with respect to these, CALL “remains on the periphery” (p. 4). 
Following the introductory chapter, the remainder of the book is divided into two parts. Part I, including 
Chapters 2-6, is entitled Research on Tasks in CALL, which the editors say will be used to “map the 
broader theoretical questions shared by L2 task-based research and their influence on computer-mediated 
communication”; Part II, comprising Chapters 7-11, is called Applying Technology-Mediated Tasks and 
focuses on “design, development and application” (p. 8).  
Part I begins with Chapter 2, in which Andreas Müller-Hartmann and Marita Schocker-v. Ditfurth 
summarize recent research on telecollaboration to illustrate the value of sociocultural theory in general, 
and Activity Theory (AT) in particular, as frames for investigating TBLT in CALL. Citing Samuda and 
Bygate (2008), the authors note how task-based research often neglects the instructional dimensions of 
tasks and leads to a one-way transmission of imperatives from researchers to teachers. The authors argue 
that AT affords multiple perspectives and levels of analyses for studying important task-related 
phenomena, such as the distinction between task-as-workplan and task-as-process; that is, the differences 
in the way a teacher or researcher envisages a task versus how it is actually engaged in by learners. While 
informative, this chapter may present a challenge for readers unfamiliar with AT’s terms and concepts. 
Sociocultural theory is discussed again in Chapter 3, in which Mark Peterson combines a sociocultural 
account of interaction (based on mediation, scaffolding and intersubjectivity) with a psycholinguistic 
account (based on negotiation of meaning and focus on form). Using this dual perspective, Peterson 
reviews nine studies addressing interaction in tasks used for text-based synchronous CMC. While 
confirming earlier findings that this technology facilitates negotiation of meaning, the review also 
highlights shortcomings related to focus on form, such as a high frequency of errors and little evidence of 
self-correction. Peterson suggests these issues might arise from the researchers’ use of tasks designed for 
the classroom, and as remedies he proposes new designs that “fully maximize the potential of interaction 
in the online medium” (p. 59), as well as learner training. 
Theories make way for a more technology-driven discussion in Chapter 4, in which Mathias Schulze 
summarizes the relevance of intelligent CALL (iCALL) for task-based learning. This is no easy task, 
given that iCALL—which comprises natural language processing (NLP), user modeling, expert systems, 
and intelligent tutoring systems—can be viewed as an essentially form-focused endeavor, in sharp 
contrast to TBLT. iCALL’s potential contributions are grouped into pre-task activities and those suitable 
for “during-task and post-task support” (p. 73). Regarding the latter, Schulze provides examples of 
iCALL tools that can be used during reading tasks to provide contextualized access to online dictionaries 
and “inflectional paradigms of words generated on the fly” (p. 74); with writing tasks, learners can be 
encouraged to notice errors or particular linguistic features via automated text annotation. Pre-task 
activities might include NLP-based grammar and vocabulary practice. This final point in particular 
requires a much more inclusive definition of TBLT than many of its proponents may be willing to 
concede, but regardless, Schulze’s chapter offers plenty of food for thought. 
In Chapter 5, we return to the domain of CMC to examine how, in its synchronous versus asynchronous 
modes, differential effects are seen on the accuracy, complexity and discourse features of learner 
language. Glenn Stockwell describes a within-subjects study of tertiary-level Japanese learners of EFL 
which found, among other things, that although vocabulary and spelling exhibited no significant 
differences across modes, language was generally more syntactically complex in the asynchronous forum 
postings and more accurate in synchronous text-chat, contrary to some previous research. A potential 
limitation of this study is that slightly different tasks were employed for each modality and the 
assignments to which they were related were graded differently. It is thus possible that the design may 
have confounded the effects of modality, task type and task condition. While this may be considered 
Language Learning & Technology 33 
Jim Ranalli Review of Task-based Language Learning and Teaching with Technology  
 
hairsplitting, given the topic of this book, some discussion of these issues seems warranted.  
Chapter 6 takes up synchronous CMC once more, this time to focus exclusively on the issue of 
complexity, with proficiency introduced as a dependent variable. Karina Collentine describes a within-
subjects study involving intermediate and advanced L2 learners of Spanish at a U.S. university. The task 
was an opinion exchange in which students had to solve a fictitious murder by first collecting information 
from characters in a Flash-based activity and then discussing their findings in dyads via text-based chat. 
Complexity was manipulated by displacing production differently across two conditions; in the first, 
information gathering was interrupted at regular intervals for the exchange of opinions, while in the 
second, all information gathering was completed before the opinion exchange. Collentine’s findings 
provide some support for the hypothesis that less time pressure leads to greater complexity, although the 
specific indicators of complexity differed between levels. This study is noteworthy for, among other 
things, a detailed description of the task input and conditions employed.  
Part II begins with Chapter 7, in which Regine Hampel broaches the topic of task design in distance 
foreign-language courses conducted through Virtual Learning Environments (also known as Learning 
Management Systems). To frame the discussion, Hampel uses a three-level model of CALL task 
development based on Richards and Rodgers (1986/2001), which covers approach (theories of learning 
and language), design (syllabus, task types and teacher/learner roles) and procedure (actual 
implementation and use of tasks by learners). Hampel describes some of the approach- and design-level 
decisions her team made in creating an intensive German course offered through the Open University 
(UK). The chapter illustrates the challenges institutions face as they increasingly turn to distance and 
blended language courses, most notably “the apparent conflict between adopting a centralized approach to 
task design that presupposes a linear format, while also using Web 2.0 tools that are based on a 
decentralized and anti-linear style of teaching and learning” (p. 150). It is regrettable that a procedure-
level analysis of the tasks employed could not be included because the course was still ongoing at the 
time of writing.  
Thomas Raith and Volker Hegelheimer take up task-based learning, technology and teacher development 
in Chapter 8. Their focus is the use of e-portfolios to implement standards-based reflective practice of 
TBLT among student teachers in Germany. Like traditional portfolios, e-portfolios usually include 
artifacts documenting a teacher’s learning processes, such as lesson plans, teaching reflections, and 
examples of student work. Used in the context of Web 2.0 tools, however, they can also integrate 
supervisor feedback with more objective, video-based self-assessments and the support of a community of 
peers. Qualitative data from the study showed, however, that even technology-enhanced reflection can fall 
short without standards grounded in theory. Some of the study’s participants were found to be engaging in 
critical analysis of their teaching, but the analysis was not informed by TBLT principles. This 
shortcoming was addressed by adding more explicit categories to reflection tasks to help student teachers 
connect theoretical knowledge to experience. This chapter contains a thought-provoking review of 
research on task-as-process; although the context is face-to-face teaching, it raises important questions 
about teacher competencies for TBLT in CALL as well.  
Chapter 9 is a case study of TBLT through virtual reality and virtual worlds. Kenneth Reeder describes a 
CD-ROM based simulation called Edubba, which puts learners in the role of intern newspaper reporters 
in a fictional city where they are tasked with collecting information from numerous sources about a 
pressing municipal water issue. Like most simulations, Edubba features a number of possible outcomes 
with different costs and benefits. What makes the program unique, however, is the NLP engine used to 
power its interactions with learners. In contrast to the iCALL systems in Chapter 4, Edubba’s is not 
designed to provide feedback on form. Rather, the linguistic aim of the whole enterprise is to teach the 
stages of process writing. Simulation tasks are linked to classroom activities such as writing conferences 
with teachers and peers. This is one of the few cases in the book in which technology is used primarily as 
task input rather than the medium of communication. Reeder helpfully frames this chapter as a response 
Language Learning & Technology 34 
Jim Ranalli Review of Task-based Language Learning and Teaching with Technology  
 
to the question of whether and to what extent Edubba qualifies as a task in a TBLT sense. 
In Chapter 10, Mirjam Hauck returns to the themes of telecollaboration and teacher development to 
discuss factors that shape task design and enactment. The setting was a four-way telecollaboration among 
pre- and in-service trainee teachers of EFL in the U.S. and Germany, as well as L2 learners of German in 
the UK and Poland. Hauck focuses on a single, three-part task implemented over three weeks, whose aim 
was to raise participants’ awareness about the unique affordances of written, spoken, and visual 
modalities in Web 2.0 technologies, as well as their impact on communication and meaning making, by 
means of a “hands-on analysis of web resources” (p. 201). Problems arose when one of the collaborating 
teacher-researchers faced student resistance to the project. As a result, the task had to be modified and the 
original aims of developing e-literacy skills were marginalized. The abundance of innovations here means 
this chapter may also challenge some TBLT-oriented readers’ conceptualization of task. 
In the final chapter, Gary Motteram and Michael Thomas address the present and the future of 
technology-mediated tasks. The present is illustrated through “vignettes” about two European 
Commission-funded projects: LANCELOT, which investigated language instruction through desktop 
videoconferencing (or ‘virtual classrooms’); and AVALON, which did the same thing for multi-user 
virtual environments, specifically Second Life. Two interesting frameworks for designing and 
implementing tasks in these complex environments, which were among the outcomes of the projects, are 
presented and discussed. Next, the authors highlight three main criticisms of TBLT and show how the use 
of technology can go some way towards addressing them. They conclude with a reminder to keep 
expectations realistic about what can be achieved through technology and task-based learning, and with a 
call for these fields to continue to inform and challenge each other. 
No book is perfect, and this one might be taken to task (to further abrade a well-worn pun) for equating 
Chapelle’s concerns regarding SLA in CALL (2001) with the concerns of task-based learning, as occurs 
in the first and last chapters. It goes without saying that while task-based research and SLA have a great 
many things in common, their concerns are not coextensive. In a similar vein, the use of even a well-
designed task in a study should not mean we automatically consider it task-based research. Ellis says one 
of the goals of such research is “to establish what language and cognitive processes are likely to occur 
when input, conditions, and procedures are systematically varied” (2003, p. 20; italics added). This 
suggests that researchers’ descriptions of tasks must go further than simple categorizations such as 
“jigsaw” or “open-ended discussion,” and that their decisions regarding task selection and implementation 
must be treated as more than “an unproblematic fait accompli” (O’Dowd & Ware, 2009, p. 174). While 
this collection makes a very persuasive case that task-based research can no longer afford to marginalize 
technology-mediated tasks, it also demonstrates that CALL research must do more to burnish its task-
based credentials. Regardless, it is recommended reading for anyone interested in research from a CALL 
or TBLT perspective. 
 
NOTE 
1. The reviewer wishes to acknowledge that one of the contributors to this book, Dr. Volker Hegelheimer, 
is his co-major professor. 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Jim Ranalli is a PhD candidate in Applied Linguistics and Technology at Iowa State University. His 
research interests lie at the intersection of L2 vocabulary, technology, and self-regulated learning. 
E-mail: jranalli@iastate.edu 
Language Learning & Technology 35 
Jim Ranalli Review of Task-based Language Learning and Teaching with Technology  
 
Language Learning & Technology 36 
REFERENCES 
Chapelle, C. A. (2001). Computer applications in second language acquisition: Foundations for teaching, 
testing and research. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Ellis, R. (2003). Task-based language learning and teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
O’Dowd, R., & Ware, P. (2009). Critical issues in telecollaborative task design. Computer Assisted 
Language Learning, 22(2), 173–188. 
Richards, J. C., & Rodgers, T. S. (1986/2001). Approaches and methods in language teaching. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Samuda, V., & Bygate, M. (2008). Tasks in second language learning: Research and practice in applied 
linguistics. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
