Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2011/bowerkawaguchi.pdf 
February 2011, Volume 15, Number 1 
pp. 41–71 
 
Copyright © 2011, ISSN 1094-3501 41 
NEGOTIATION OF MEANING AND CORRECTIVE FEEDBACK  
IN JAPANESE/ENGLISH eTANDEM 
 
Jack Bower, Hiroshima Bunkyo Women’s University 
Satomi Kawaguchi, University of Western Sydney 
This paper presents a comparative analysis of corrective feedback provided by participants 
in an eTandem interaction between university students in Japan and Australia who were 
learning each other’s language. Corrective feedback provided to tandem partners during 
interaction via text-based Synchronous Computer Mediated Communication (SCMC) is 
compared to corrective feedback provided to tandem partners post-chat utilizing logs of 
the chat interaction. Results show that implicit corrective feedback on NNS errors 
occurred in the text-based SCMC interaction but not frequently. On the other hand, 
negotiation of meaning occurred most often to overcome communication problems during 
chat exchange rather than in direct relation to errors. This is a crucial element for L2 
development since the learner finds himself/herself in the sort of context that allows for 
recognition of developmental gaps. Further, explicit corrective feedback utilizing 
conversation logs and exchanged by email achieved high rates of correction both in 
English and Japanese sessions. The strategy of sending post-chat corrective feedback is 
shown to be an effective eTandem language learning strategy providing learners with 
opportunities to focus on form in their L2.  
INTRODUCTION 
Advancements in communication technology have created opportunities for foreign language learners to 
access more authentic communication than is available in classroom interaction. The Internet now makes 
instant communication possible across vast distances for minimal cost. Synchronous computer-mediated 
communication tools (SCMC) allow learners to practice real-time communication online with native 
speakers of their target language. These possibilities have led to a rich and growing field of research into 
the application of such technology for second language learning. Previous research has explored 
intercultural communication and has analysed learner communications from an interactionist perspective. 
Text-based SCMC has received a lot of attention because logs of participant interactions can be accessed 
easily. Log data has proved to be an invaluable resource providing researchers with insights into learner 
interlanguage development. However, little attention has been paid to the use of logs for language 
learners to reflect on form. This paper looks at telecollaboration in the form of eTandem conducted 
between Japanese/English tandem partners. In addition to exploring negotiation and corrective feedback 
provided during tandem exchanges via text-based SCMC, this paper also examines the novel strategy of 
corrective feedback using logs which are sent post-chat by email. Research questions we attempt to 
answer in the study are: 
1. What kinds of negotiations occur during synchronous English and Japanese chat sessions? How 
do the amount and types of negotiations compare to those in previous research? 
2. Does corrective feedback on Non-Native Speaker (NNS) errors occur during synchronous 
English and Japanese chat sessions and in subsequent asynchronous email correction? If so, what 
types of error (e.g., lexical grammatical, pragmatic, idiomatic, typographical, other) receive 
most/least corrective feedback from the tandem partner in the tutor role?  
3. Are there any quantitative and/or qualitative differences between synchronous and asynchronous 
corrective feedback in NS-NNS interaction (e.g., chat versus email feedback)?  
Jack Bower and Satomi Kawaguchi Negotiation of Meaning and Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 42 
What follows is first a brief overview of research to date on telecollaboration and language learner 
interactions via synchronous text-based CMC. The literature review then covers the unique affordances of 
text-based CMC for language learning. Previous research on corrective feedback in synchronous and 
asynchronous CMC is detailed, followed by a description of the tandem project conducted between 
Kanda University of International Studies (KUIS) and University of Western Sydney (UWS). The 
remainder of the paper details the methodology, results, discussion and conclusion, and finally 
recommendations for further research.  
LITERATURE REVIEW 
As interest in telecollaboration has grown, many studies have appeared which focus on intercultural 
aspects of communication and developing intercultural competence (Belz, 2003; O’Dowd, 2003, 2007, 
Ware & Kramsch, 2005). Other studies have taken an interactionist perspective analyzing participant 
interactions in terms of Long and Robinson’s (1998) interaction hypothesis, which hypothesizes that 
negotiation of meaning will lead to interlanguage development (Blake, 2000; Blake & Zyzik 2003; Kötter, 
2003; Smith, 2003, 2005; Sotillo, 2000). Recently, however, it has been argued that there is a need for a 
focus on language form in research on telecollaboration (Ware & Cañado, 2007), as fewer studies have 
looked into corrective feedback and focus on form in telecollaboration (Iwasaki & Oliver, 2003; Lee, 
2006; Sotillo, 2005; Ware & O’Dowd, 2008). This study aims to add to this growing field by analyzing 
and contrasting synchronous and asynchronous feedback types provided during an eTandem exchange 
between learners of Japanese and learners of English. 
Text- based SCMC 
Text-based SCMC is an umbrella term covering a host of technologies that allow for almost instant 
transfer of text messages between users on different computers. These technologies include Internet Relay 
Chat, which requires that users connect via a server; network based programs that allow users to 
communicate across a local computer network; instant messenger programs allowing users to connect 
across the Internet; chat rooms in which multiple users can meet online; and learner interactions in virtual 
online environments (MOOS) in which users can not only chat but also change textual descriptions of 
rooms and objects. Text-based SCMC has several features that may make it an especially useful media for 
language learning. These features are outlined in the next section.  
Unique Affordances of Text-based SCMC for Language Learning 
Researchers have argued that text-based SCMC has unique potential as a language-learning tool. Features 
of text-based SCMC that may be beneficial to language learning are: the real-time nature of the 
communicative interaction, the textual nature of output, and chat logs. In contrast to asynchronous forms 
of textual communication such as email and bulletin boards, with text-based SCMC there is a need for 
quick replies to maintain the flow of conversation. In this way text-based SCMC is similar to spoken 
communication. In fact, SCMC is the “most interactive end of the CMC spectrum” (Paramskas, 1999, p. 
17). Learners are forced to produce quick output in order to maintain their interlocutor’s interest. In 
addition, as in spoken communication, language learners often need to modify their output in order to be 
properly understood by their interlocutor. Research has shown that like face-to-face (F2F) communication, 
communication via text-based CMC can result in varied amounts of negotiation of meaning both between 
NNS/NNS pairs (Blake, 2000; Pellettieri, 2000; Smith, 2003, 2005) and NS/NNS pairs (Iwasaki & Oliver, 
2003; Kötter, 2001, 2003, Lee, 2006; O’Rourke, 2005; Tudini, 2003). One consistent finding of 
investigations of negotiation of meaning in text-based CMC is that lexical negotiations are far more 
common than grammatical negotiations (Blake, 2000; Lee, 2006; Pellettieri 2000; Tudini, 2003; Smith 
2003), and negotiations focus more on overall meaning than on structure (O’Rourke 2005).  
Jack Bower and Satomi Kawaguchi Negotiation of Meaning and Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 43 
Although text-based SCMC is in some ways similar to spoken communication, there is also evidence to 
suggest that because of its textual nature, text-based SCMC has more potential for learners to notice gaps 
in interlanguage than does spoken communication. Discourse analysis of text-based SCMC has indicated 
it is a hybrid form of communication that has both some features of spoken language and some features of 
written language (Kern, 1995; Pellettieri 2000). It has also been shown that learners perceive 
communication via text-based SCMC to be a hybrid form (Kötter, 2003). The hybrid nature of text-based 
SCMC may combine the language learning benefits of the spoken and written forms of communication. It 
is possible that learners benefit not only from negotiation of meaning, which occurs in F2F conversation, 
but also from an increased potential for noticing of form that occurs with the written medium (O’Rourke, 
2005).  
In text-based SCMC learners are able to see the language that they just produced in the chat window, 
which gives increased opportunities for immediate self-correction. Two studies provide evidence for 
increased noticing in text-based SCMC. Lai and Zhao (2006) conducted a study comparing noticing of 
linguistic errors by L2 learners communicating face to face and by Internet chat and found that the 
learners who communicated by Internet chat were able to recall more instances of noticing than those who 
communicated F2F. Shekary and Tahirin (2006) looked at interactions between pairs of Persian learners 
of English online and found that the ratio of Language Related Episodes (LREs) was higher than in 
previous studies for F2F communication. They also investigated learning of noticed forms through post-
tests targeting the forms focused on in the LREs. They found that more than three quarters of LREs were 
remembered in posttests 1-5 days after the interactions and around 57% were remembered in posttests 
three weeks after the interactions. Their study provides evidence that noticing in text-based SCMC may 
lead to acquisition. 
Researchers have even reported that text-based SCMC can lead to increased L2 oral proficiency. A study 
by Payne and Whitney (2002) found a significant difference between the oral proficiency of a group that 
spent two of four hours of classroom time per week in a chat room, and a control group who did not have 
the chat time. The chat room group demonstrated greater gains in oral proficiency than the control group. 
They claim that in text-based SCMC L2 learners gain greater benefit from slower language processing 
while using similar cognitive processing as in face-to-face communication. Slower interaction has an 
effect of reducing the burden on working memory, which enables the learner to utilise more attentional 
resources on L2 lexicon and forms while maintaining the same interaction. 
Another aspect of text-based synchronous CMC with special potential for language learning is that users 
can save and print a log of their conversation. Such logs have been used extensively by language 
researchers to analyse learner interactions both from the interactionist and sociocultural perspectives. 
Although the use of logs as a primary source of data has recently been criticized for missing some aspects 
of learner self-repair (Smith, 2008) and for only offering a limited picture of learner experience 
(O’Rourke, 2008), logs remain the primary data source for many tellecollaborative studies.  
However, little attention has been paid to how learners can use conversation logs as a language-learning 
tool. Schwienhorst (2003) found that learners in his eTandem project did not consult logs of their 
interactions even though they had access to such logs “partly because there was no task that required them 
to do so” (p. 438), and also because logs were an unfamiliar tool. He writes that logs could offer great 
benefits to language learners but “are too far removed from the learners’ autonomous behaviour to be 
taken up” (p. 440). Schwienhorst goes on to say: “This is a tool that presents huge opportunities as a 
future learning resource, but which is not used by learners of their own account” (p. 440). In addition, 
Sotillo (2005) states that “L2 learners could also benefit from carefully examining chat logs” (p. 491). 
Although researchers have noted the great potential of logs as language learning tools, no research to date 
has examined strategies for using logs. Our research begins to explore this area by investigating how 
learners provide eTandem partners with corrective feedback using logs as a source of their partners’ 
language production. 
Jack Bower and Satomi Kawaguchi Negotiation of Meaning and Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 44 
Types of Corrective Feedback 
Corrective feedback in Second Language Acquisition (SLA) is a corrective response to a language 
learner’s non-targetlike production (Li, 2010). Corrective feedback has the potential to draw language 
learner attention to non-targetlike aspects of language output. Corrective feedback is generally divided 
into explicit and implicit types. Explicit corrective feedback gives an overt indication that a learner’s 
output is wrong. Implicit corrective feedback on the other hand encourages learners to modify their output 
without overtly indicating that a mistake has been made. Implicit corrective feedback can take the form of 
recasts and negotiation strategies. Recasts are a reformulation of a learner’s erroneous output into a 
targetlike form, for example: 
A: He like soccer. 
B: He likes soccer. 
Negotiation strategies on the other hand draw learner attention to a mistake in output without providing a 
correct targetlike form. Four types of implicit corrective feedback can be grouped together under the 
category of negotiation strategies (Oliver, 1995): 
1. clarification requests 
2. repetition 
3. confirmation 
4. comprehension checks 
Clarification requests encourage the language learner to rephrase their output. For example “I don’t 
understand” or “What do you mean?” Repetition occurs when the interlocutor repeats a learner’s 
erroneous output, for example: 
A: He go to school? 
B: Go to school? 
Confirmation is when interlocutors check to see if their understanding of a learner’s statement is correct. 
For example: 
A: Tennis is enjoyment. 
B: So you like playing tennis? 
Comprehension checks are used to check if the interlocutor understood. For example, “Do you 
understand?” 
Corrective Feedback and SLA 
Corrective feedback is thought to be effective because it provides language learners with negative 
evidence. While some researchers (Krashen, 1981; Schwartz, 1993; Truscott 2007) maintain that all that 
is needed for second language learning is positive evidence or examples of correctly formed language; 
other researchers believe that negative evidence or examples of incorrectly formed language is necessary 
for second language learning. Theoretical support for the role of negative evidence in SLA comes from 
the Interaction Hypothesis (Gass & Mackey, 2007) and the Noticing Hypothesis (Schmidt, 1990).  
The Interaction Hypothesis maintains that corrective feedback resulting from negotiation of meaning is 
important for SLA. Negotiation of meaning is triggered when a breakdown in communication occurs in 
conversation leading to a modified utterance either from the L2 learner or their interlocutor. Either the 
learner needs to change what is said (i.e., modified output) in order to be understood by the native speaker 
or the NS needs to simplify speech (i.e., modified input) in order to be understood by the NNS. Both 
Jack Bower and Satomi Kawaguchi Negotiation of Meaning and Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 45 
modified input and modified output may lead to noticing of gaps in learner interlanguage. Such noticing 
may improve chances of subsequent acquisition of the noticed form. White (1987) argues that it is the 
“incomprehensible input” which promotes second language acquisition because such input creates 
opportunities for a language learner when he/she notices the gap between his/her current state of 
interlanguage and the target language. Further, Swain’s Output Hypothesis (1985, 1993, 1995) claims that 
L2 input itself is not sufficient for language acquisition:  
Second language output may trigger certain cognitive processes necessary for second language 
learning. Negotiation of meaning is able to help this process because by becoming consciously aware 
of one’s own production, output can serve the metalinguistic function of helping to internalize 
linguistic form. (1995, p. 128)  
Researchers have found strong empirical evidence to support the hypothesis that oral communication is 
beneficial to learner language development because it fosters negotiation of meaning (e.g., Gass & 
Mackey, 2007). Corrective feedback, including that arising from negotiation of meaning, provides 
opportunities for language learners to focus on specific linguistic forms and thus may lead to incidental, 
implicit language learning, which has been shown to be effective in increasing communicative 
competence (Long, 1996). Farrar (1992) reported that, in L1 acquisition, children’s linguistic errors 
receive corrective recast at a rate of 22%. Oliver (1995) found that in L2 face-to-face conversation 
between NS and NNS children (8-13 years old), NNS children received a total of 61% negative feedback 
on NNS errors: 22% of implicit negative feedback involving recast and 39% of other corrections such as 
clarification requests and confirmation checks.  
Schmidt’s Noticing Hypothesis (1990) further claims that “noticing” of linguistic form by adult learners 
is especially important for language acquisition to occur. This claim is based on his own experience of 
learning Portuguese and on his analysis of his own language development with a native speaker 
researcher (Schmidt & Frota, 1986), where they found that Schmidt was able to produce linguistic items 
which were both included in input he received AND noticed by him in the output of people around him, 
(i.e., he was able to produce a form only after he noticed that people were using it, although these 
linguistic forms might have been actually taught in Schmidt’s language class previously). Schmidt 
therefore claims that corrective feedback is able to play an important role in promoting “noticing” in adult 
L2 learning. Schmidt has gone so far as to postulate that noticing may be necessary for converting input 
into uptake in second language learning. Corrective feedback is one way to foster such noticing. 
The effectiveness of corrective feedback for second language acquisition has been confirmed in a recent 
meta-analysis by Li (2010). Li’s meta-analysis of 33 studies, both published and unpublished, which 
examined the effects of corrective feedback found a “medium overall effect for corrective feedback and 
the effect was maintained over time” (p. 309). Other research has shown that explicit corrective feedback 
is more effective than implicit corrective feedback (Ellis, 2006; Varnosfadrani & Basturkmen, 2009) 
Given these findings it is important to explore ways in which language learners can be exposed to both 
implicit and explicit corrective feedback in order to foster their L2 development. 
Corrective Feedback and Text-based SCMC 
Several studies have examined corrective feedback in text-based SCMC by looking at what types of 
errors receive corrective feedback and the type of corrective feedback delivered. Different participants 
and contexts have produced varied results. Iwasaki and Oliver (2003) examined implicit corrective 
feedback in NS/NNS interactions in Japanese. They reported around 22% of the NS responses to NNS 
non-targetlike turns contained corrective feedback. Of those non-targetlike turns that received corrective 
feedback more than a quarter resulted in modified output from the learner to a targetlike or closer to 
targetlike form. Morris (2005) looked at interactions between juvenile learners of Spanish completing a 
jigsaw task. He found no instances of explicit corrective feedback. Around 56% of learner errors received 
Jack Bower and Satomi Kawaguchi Negotiation of Meaning and Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 46 
implicit corrective feedback, and over 60% of learner errors receiving corrective feedback were repaired 
by the learner. Recasts made up only 5% of error corrections and the rest were negotiation strategies. Lee 
(2006) examined interactions between teachers of Spanish and learners of Spanish engaged in open-ended 
question and goal oriented activities. She found very high rates of corrective feedback on learner errors 
(73.2%) and a high rate of learner uptake (50%). Finally, Sotillo (2005) examined corrective feedback 
provided by both NS and NNS graduate students who were enrolled in a teaching certification course. 
The graduate students engaged in communicative and problem solving activities via Yahoo! Messenger 
with NNS learners. In Sotillo’s study the overall correction rate of learner errors was 33%. Direct 
corrective feedback was quite high at 44% of all corrections, while 56% of corrective feedback was 
indirect. Of all correction episodes 37% resulted in successful uptake. 
Corrective Feedback in Asynchronous CMC 
Ware and O’Dowd (2008) examined asynchronous corrective feedback provided by peers in partnerships 
between learners of Spanish in the USA and learners of English in Spain and Chile. The pairings were 
divided into two treatment groups. One treatment group was dubbed e-tutoring and was required to 
provide weekly corrective feedback to their partner. The other treatment group was called e-partnering 
and was not required to provide corrective feedback. The study found much greater provision of 
corrective feedback provided by the e-tutoring partners than by those in the e-partnering condition. For 
the e-tutoring pairs overall 14.7% of total words were involved in LREs whereas for the e-partnering pairs 
a mere 0.003% of words were involved in LREs. 
Although some studies have examined implicit corrective feedback in text-based SCMC (Iwasaki & 
Oliver, 2003; Lee, 2006; Morris, 2005; Sotillo, 2005), and other studies have looked at explicit corrective 
feedback in asynchronous CMC (Ware and O’Dowd, 2008; Zourou, 2008); no study to date has compared 
peer corrective feedback in text-based SCMC to asynchronous peer corrective feedback based on chat 
logs. This paper represents an exploratory study in this area. 
SETTING 
eTandem 
The type of telecollaboration chosen for this project was eTandem (Cziko, 2004). Tandem language 
learning is a form of collaborative learning in which a pair of language learners team up to tutor their L1 
and learn their partner’s L2. The novice/expert language relationship of tandem can also be accomplished 
between non-native speakers provided that each partner in the L2 tutoring role has a much better 
command of the L2 than the partner in the learner role (see Lewis & Walker, 2003, for detailed 
explanations of tandem language learning).  
Participants 
The tandem partnerships for this project were made up of 21 students from a first-year general English 
class at Kanda University of International Studies (KUIS) in Chiba, Japan and 21 students from a second-
year Japanese class at the University of Western Sydney (UWS) in Sydney, Australia. Two second-year 
English students from KUIS also volunteered to participate along with four third-year Japanese students 
from UWS in order to match the number of participants when some students were unable to participate. 
The L2 ability of the KUIS students was generally higher than the L2 ability of the UWS students, as all 
the KUIS students had studied English for six years in high school before the project, whereas the 
majority of the UWS participants were in their third semester of Japanese study at university and had not 
studied Japanese in high school. The participants from KUIS were all Japanese and ranged in ages from 
18-21. The UWS participants on the other hand had a much greater range of ages and cultural 
backgrounds. Seven of the UWS participants were aged 17-20, six of them were 21-24, six were 25-29, 
Jack Bower and Satomi Kawaguchi Negotiation of Meaning and Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 47 
one was over 30, and five chose not to reveal their age. More than half of the UWS class was made up of 
either international students (ten individuals) or ethnic migrants to Australia who identified themselves as 
such (four individuals). The remainder of the class identified themselves as Australians.  
Project Organization and Data 
The project operated within a narrow time window due to differences between the timing of semester one 
at KUIS and UWS. The two semesters overlapped by just six weeks. This gave the participants about two 
weeks to prepare for, arrange a meeting time, and carry out each of the three chat sessions. 
The tandem language learning sessions were conducted over the Internet using the freely available 
software, MSN Messenger. MSN Messenger was chosen due to its ready availability, ease of use and 
popularity among young adults in Japan and Australia. MSN Messenger allows for text-based instant 
messaging, voice calls, and video conferencing as well as transfer of computer files over the Internet. 
Participants in this project, however, were only shown how to use the messaging function and were asked 
to use this function for their conversations. Japanese L2 participants practised word processing in 
Japanese prior to the tandem sessions, although most of them already knew how to type characters and 
sentences in Japanese. 
The tandem pairs were first asked to write a short introduction about themselves outlining their name, age, 
interests and ambitions. Pairs were then assigned by the organizers in an attempt to match learners of 
similar ages and interests. The first session was conducted in the class time of the KUIS participants, 
while the UWS participants volunteered to gather in a computer laboratory outside of their class time. 
Unfortunately, a few UWS students were unable to attend the first session meaning that some triads had 
to be formed of two KUIS students with one UWS student for the first session only.  
The second two sessions were arranged through email by tandem pairs outside of class time. Students 
were instructed to chat for half of the time in Japanese and for half of the time in English in an effort to 
encourage bilingualism, and were told to spend at least 30 minutes chatting in each language. For the first 
tandem session students were asked to chat about themselves and to find out some general information 
about their partner. In the second session students were asked to find out about their partner’s university 
life, and for the final session students were asked to find out about their partner’s culture. In the final 
session, we also encouraged them to talk about current, controversial issues if they felt confident to do so 
in their L2.  
Participants were also instructed to send some language corrections to their partner based on a review of 
the chat logs via email after chat sessions 2 and 3. A copy of the instructions given to students is included 
in Appendix A. However some students ignored the instruction to send corrective feedback. A total of 13 
email corrections for English were sent by UWS students for the second session out of a total of 23 
tandem meetings, and a total of 12 email corrections were sent out of a total of 21 tandem meetings in the 
third session. A few students also sent e-mail corrections for the first session. On the other hand, a total of 
11 e-mail corrections for Japanese were sent by KUIS students for the second sessions out of a total of 
221 tandem meetings while a total of 12 e-mail corrections were sent out of a total of 21 tandem meetings 
in the third session. For this study we chose the 11 tandem pairs for data analysis who met the same 
partner across all three chat sessions. Therefore, the relevant data in our study are (a) 33 synchronous 
MSN logs in English and Japanese (i.e., 11 pairs x 3 sessions) and (b) asynchronous e-mail corrective 
feedback on 21 English chat logs and 17 on Japanese chat logs.  
In order to illustrate some of the characteristics of text chat and intercultural exchanges, an excerpt from 
English session 2 and an excerpt from Japanese session 3 by a pair, Leo2 and his Japanese partner 
Mayumi, is reproduced in Appendix Ba and Bb respectively. The native speaker’s feedback via e-mail on 
the partner’s English/Japanese use is also provided in the right column. In the English session the pair is 
talking about Mother’s Day, while they are conversing on the issue of whaling in the Japanese session. 
Jack Bower and Satomi Kawaguchi Negotiation of Meaning and Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 48 
METHODOLOGY 
Analysis of Chat Logs 
In order to answer the research questions listed in the introduction, we analysed the chat logs both 
qualitatively and quantitatively. To find the overall proportion of turns devoted to negotiation of meaning 
we utilized Varonis and Gass’ model of negotiation of meaning (1985), which has also been followed in 
other studies (Blake, 2000; Lee, 2006; O’Rourke, 2005; Smith, 2003). We identified instances of 
negotiation of meaning consisting of up to four consecutive turns as shown in Table 1.  
Table 1. A Model of Negotiation of Meaning (after Gass & Varonis, 1985) 
Trigger  Resolution 
T  S  R  RR 
Utterance 
involving 
problem(s) 
 Signal  Response  Reaction to 
response 
Speaker  Hearer  Speaker  Hearer 
 
An example of trigger, signal, response and reaction to response from our Japanese data with English 
translation is provided in Chat Excerpt 1. In this example, M (native speaker of Japanese) and L (learner 
of Japanese) were talking about regional differences between Tokyo and Osaka in Japan. 
Chat Excerpt 1. An Example of Negotiation of Meaning from a Japanese Chat Session  
 Text exchange in Japanese and 
Romanised transliteration 
 
English translation 
Trigger M: あとは   なまりとか。それくら
いかな？ 
(Ato-wa namari toka. Sore kurai 
kana?) 
 Another difference is namari. Maybe 
that’s all. 
Signal L: なまり？どういういみ？ 
(Namari? Dooiu imi?) 
 Namari? what does it mean? 
Response M: なまり＝dialect or different accent 
(Namari=dialect or different accent) 
 Namari = dialect or different accent 
Reaction to 
Response 
L: ほうげん.  
(Hoogen.) 
 Dialect 
 
According to this model, a negotiation of meaning typically commences when the Hearer encounters an 
incomprehensible or ambiguous utterance (Trigger). Triggers may or may not be related to linguistic 
errors. When such a communication problem occurs, it may be indicated by the Hearer (Signal). Signals 
are a form of implicit corrective feedback also known as negotiation strategies and can take the form of 
clarification requests (What do you mean?), confirmation checks (Do you mean X?), comprehension 
checks (Do you understand?) and repetition.  
Jack Bower and Satomi Kawaguchi Negotiation of Meaning and Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 49 
A signal may lead to a response from the Speaker. The response can take the form of modified output in 
which the Speaker makes an utterance with the same meaning and different form, or an explanation in 
which the speaker explains the meaning. When the Speaker has knowledge of the Hearer’s L1, as in 
tandem language learning, the response can also involve code-switching. Finally, the “reaction to 
response” of the Hearer indicates if the Hearer has understood the Response. For example “I understand.” 
In the example given in Chat Excerpt 1, as Speaker, M’s use of the word “namari” triggered a negotiation 
of meaning. The Hearer repeated the word signalling a communication problem and requested an 
explanation of the word explicitly (clarification request). Then the Speaker code-switched and gave a 
meaning of the Japanese word namari in English, “dialect or different accent.” Finally, the Hearer 
acknowledged that communication problem was solved and indicated understanding by giving the word 
hoogen (“dialect”), which is a synonym of namari. 
In the context of NS/NNS interaction, both signals and responses can include recasts in which linguistic 
error in the speaker’s utterance is corrected while the meaning is preserved. An example of recast from 
our data is given in Chat Excerpt 2 from an English chat session: 
Chat Excerpt 2. An Example of a Recast from a NS to a NNS in an English Chat Session 
Negotiation Parts  Chat log 
Trigger  NNS: 
NNS: 
we didnt intend to bully him. 
because he looked so duty. 
Signal (Recast)  NS: dirty? 
Response (Uptake)  NNS: yes, dirty 
 
Note that in text-based SCMC a negotiation sequence can be interrupted by some unexpected turns due to 
the delay between the time of posting a message and the time receiving the response. Sometimes 
participants will move on to a new topic before a negotiation is resolved by either modified input or 
modified output. 
In our study, instances of negotiation of meaning are coded according to who initiated the instance: (a) 
Native Speaker (NS) initiated and (b) Non-native speaker (NNS) initiated. For NS initiated negotiations, 
we further divided instances according to whether or not the source of negotiation relates to NNS errors. 
Also, we counted the number of turns used for negotiation of meaning and involving Trigger-Signal-
Response-Reaction to Response. 
In order to classify errors receiving implicit corrective feedback during negotiation of meaning the system 
utilized by Iwasaki and Oliver (2003) was chosen for our analysis. Each of the NNS turns was rated either 
target like (TL) or not target-like (NTL) first, then NTL forms were further subdivided into typographical 
errors, lexical errors or grammatical errors. In addition to Iwasaki and Oliver’s classification of errors, we 
added two more error types: pragmatic and idiomatic errors. Lexical errors for the English portion of the 
chats include incorrect word choice, incorrect word form, and collocation errors. Grammar errors include 
subject-verb agreement, tense, articles and singular-plural problems in English and the use of 
inappropriate case-marking particles, problems of verb/adjective conjugation and connections in Japanese. 
For English, spelling mistakes were classified as typographical errors, however, abbreviations and 
acronyms that are commonly accepted as part of the chat and instant messaging genres such as “TTYL” 
(Talk To You Later) were not counted as typographical errors. Pragmatic errors involve interpretive 
errors. One example of such error was found in our data in relation to Japanese nominal ellipsis where an 
English speaker may use a pronoun instead. In this example from a conversation about pets, a NNS of 
Japanese responded by giving his own name instead of his pet’s name to the NS’s question 
“名前は何ですか？” namae-wa nan desu ka (name-TOP what copula Question (lit. “What is (the) 
Jack Bower and Satomi Kawaguchi Negotiation of Meaning and Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 50 
name?”)). Finally, idiomatic error or unnatural usage concerns the expressions that may be grammatical 
but may not be accepted in the target language, as idiomatic expressions should be used instead. An 
example from one of the Japanese sessions is an expression of ikani arimasu ka (literal translation: “How 
are you?”): this expression is not accepted but instead a NS would say genki desu ka (lit translation: “Are 
you well?”). Where a turn contained more than one type of error or multiple errors of the same type all 
NTL forms were counted separately. 
NS responses to NNS errors were classified as either ignoring or providing corrective feedback (CF). CF 
was further subdivided into recasts and negotiation strategies. A response was counted as negotiation 
strategy if it was a clarification request, for example “What do you mean?”; a confirmation check, for 
example, “Do you mean X?”; a comprehension check “Do you understand?”; or a repetition of erroneous 
output. In an effort to assess the extent to which students were successfully able to adopt the role of 
language “tutor,” the chat logs were examined and classified into successful and unsuccessful negotiation 
episodes. A negotiation episode was considered successful if the tandem partner in the role of learner 
produced modified output or acknowledged a correction. If there was no evidence of the learner having 
noticed the corrective feedback or modified input then the negotiation episode was classified as 
unsuccessful. Examples of successful and unsuccessful negotiations from the English portions of the 
exchanges follow in Chat Excerpts 3 and 4: 
Chat Excerpt 3. An Example of a Successful Negotiation in an English Chat Session 
Negotiation Parts  Chat log 
Trigger  NS: 
NS: 
Though beef is very popular. So is lamb. 
so it is the terrible problem about enviroment. 
Signal  NNS: please tell me the meaning of LAMB 
Response  NS: Lamb. It’s a baby Sheep. 
Reaction to Response   NNS: 
NNS: 
oh thanks a lot!! 
i like lamb!! of couse eating 
  NS: 
NS: 
No problem! 
Do you like lamb? I know not many people like it because of the 
strong taste and smell. 
Evidence of uptake 
indicating successful 
negotiation 
 NNS: 
NNS: 
but in japan, lamb isn’t so strong smells & taste. 
so, i like lamb very much !! 
 
In the above example of a successful negotiation the NS indicated that she did not understand a word used 
by her tandem partner (lamb). The partner was quick to offer an English explanation of the word and the 
partner in the role of L2 learner promptly acknowledged the modified input “oh thanks a lot!!” The L2 
learner used the new vocabulary item three times after receiving the explanation, which is evidence of 
uptake. Some researchers hypothesize that uptake may lead to acquisition (Ellis, Basturkmen, & Loewen, 
2001). 
Chat Excerpt 4. An Example of an Unsuccessful Negotiation in an English Chat Session 
Negotiation Breakdown  Chat log 
  NS: I’m 19...do you like to snowboard? 
Trigger  NNS: I’ve never played. Is it fan? 
Signal  NS: yes it is a lot of FUN 
Jack Bower and Satomi Kawaguchi Negotiation of Meaning and Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 51 
No response  NS: I want to do it this winter. how often do you go snowbording? 
 
In the example of unsuccessful negotiation above the native speaker has deliberately recast a 
typographical error and has used capitalization to emphasize the corrective feedback (“FUN”). However, 
the NNS continued the conversation without either acknowledging the correction or using the corrected 
form in subsequent turns. It is impossible to tell from the log whether or not the NNS even noticed the 
corrective feedback. Due to the lack of either acknowledgement or modified output such negotiations are 
classified as unsuccessful.  
Analysis of E-mail Corrective Feedback 
Tandem partners were asked to review chat logs after sessions two and three and to correct their partners 
L2 errors. Corrective feedback based on the logs was all explicit corrective feedback as tandem partners 
were aware that the e-mails were sent for the purpose of correction. The same coding system used to 
classify error type for synchronous corrective feedback is used. E-mail corrective feedback is categorized 
as correct reformulation, incorrect reformulation and partial correct reformulation. We also noted if an 
error was ignored and whether or not a metalinguistic explanation was given with the correction. 
Examples of each corrective feedback category from corrections provided by UWS partners to their 
Japanese partners are given in the example below. 
 E-mail Excerpt 1. Examples of E-mail Corrective Feedback on English Errors 
Corrective Feedback 
Category L2 Learner Output 
Tutor-role Participant 
Corrective Feedback Notes 
Correct Reformulation They are 3 years older 
me 
3 years older than me  
Incorrect 
Reformulation 
really, cuz this whole 
world is being strange 
lately.. 
has being  
Partial Correct 
Reformulation 
Japan doesn’t have like 
Australian day 
Japan doesn’t have like 
Australian national 
day. 
Indefinite article “a” is 
missing from 
correction along with 
the comparison with 
Australia 
Metalinguistic 
Explanation 
so in australia, is group 
very important?  
you need a determiner 
‘the group’ or you can 
make it non specific 
and use plural ‘are 
groups very important’  
 
RESULTS 
Data Summary for Synchronous CMC (i.e., Chat) 
Our data is summarized in Tables 2a and b below. It is comprised of 2000 turns in English sessions and 
1613 turns in Japanese sessions. Turns were counted as each message produced when a participant 
pressed the “enter” key to send their message to the chat window. Unlike in face-to-face conversation in 
which a listener hears a message as it is produced, with text-based SCMC there is a delay between typing 
and sending a message. Faster typists may be able to send several messages while their interlocutor is still 
typing. Thus slow typists may need to choose between two or three different conversation threads for 
their response. In English sessions more turns were taken by NSs than NNs 1104 (55.2%) and 896 (44.8%) 
Jack Bower and Satomi Kawaguchi Negotiation of Meaning and Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 52 
respectively while in Japanese sessions NNSs took slightly more turns than NSs: 850 (52.7%) to 763 
(47.3%).  
Table 2. Data Summary for Synchronous eTandem (Chat) 
a. Turn Counts of English-Japanese Tandem Learning 
Session Total No. of NS turns Total No. of NNS turns Total No. of turns 
English  1104 (55.2%) 896 (44.8%) 2000 (100%) 
Japanese  763 (47.3%) 850 (52.7%) 1613 (100%) 
 
Table 2b presents a breakdown of NNS turns. In English sessions 500 (55.8%) turns were target-like (TL), 
and 376 turns (41.96%) were non target-like (NTL), in just 20 (2.23%) of NNS turns in English parts of 
sessions code-switching took place. In the Japanese sessions, there were total of 850 NNS turns which are 
composed of 457 TL turns (53.8%) and 329 NTL turns (38.7%). Within 329 NTL turns, 391 errors were 
identified. Further, there were 64 turns (7.5%) where NNSs code-switched to English when they were 
supposed to converse in Japanese. 
b. Breakdown of NNS Turns 
Session 
No. of Targetlike 
turns 
No. of Non-targetlike turns 
and non-targetlike items Code-switched turnsa Total 
English 500 (55.8%) Turns 376 (41.96%) 
Items 634 
20 (2.23%) 896 
Japanese 457 (53.8%) Turns 329 (38.7%) 
Items 391 
64 (7.5%) 850 
aCode-switched turns mean changing the language to Japanese in English sessions and to English in Japanese 
sessions.  
The ratio of English:Japanese turns in our data is 1.24:1. This is a more balanced ratio than reported in 
previous studies of eTandem souch as O’Rourke (2005), which reported a ratio of 5.3:1 of English to 
German among tandem learners. Task-type may be an important factor here as in O’Rourke’s study 
participants engaged in a writing/reformulation task, while in our study participants engaged in free 
conversation around suggested topics. It may be easier for participants to maintain a balance of tandem 
languages in relatively free conversation than when there is pressure to produce a written product. The 
writing/reformulation task may pressure learners into using the stronger L2. 
Data Summary for Asynchronous CMC (i.e., E-mail Feedback) 
A data summary for ACMC is given in Tables 3a and b where e-mail feedback was given on 21 English 
chat logs and 17 Japanese chat logs. For the English chat logs there were a total of 1471 turns of which 
662 were NNS turns. There were a total of 301 NTL turns containing 541 errors. The Japanese logs 
comprised 1048 turns of which 552 turns belonged to NNSs: there were 315 TL turns, 198 NTL turns and 
39 code-switched turns. Japanese chat logs involved 237 erroneous items. 
Jack Bower and Satomi Kawaguchi Negotiation of Meaning and Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 53 
Table 3. Data Summary for Asynchronous eTandem ( E-mail) 
a. Turn Counts of English-Japanese in the Chat Logs 
Session Total No. of NS turns Total No. of NNS turns Total No. of turns 
English  809 (55.0%) 662 (45.0%) 1471 (100%) 
Japanese  496 (47.3%) 552 (52.7%) 1048 (100%) 
b. Breakdown of NNS Turns 
Session No. of Targetlike turns 
No. of Non-targetlike turns 
and non-targetlike items 
Code-switched 
turns Total 
English 341 (51.5%) Turns 301 (45.5%) 
Items 541 
20 (3.0%) 662 
Japanese 315 (57.1%) Turns 198 (35.9%) 
Items 237 
39 (7.1%) 552 
 
In the following sections, we present our data analysis on corrective feedback on NNS errors, in eTandem 
chat sessions, followed by an analysis of negotiation of meaning unrelated to NNS errors. Finally, we 
give an analysis of e-mail corrective feedback.  
Corrective Feedback on NNS Errors in Chat 
Previous studies reported that corrective feedback was provided in online chat, although its extent was 
less frequent than in F2F conversation (Iwasaki & Oliver 2003). In our analysis, the number of turns 
related to NNS errors are counted according to whether the turn involves negotiation of meaning or not. 
Turns of negotiation involve “trigger,” “signal,” “response,” and “reaction to response” (Gass & Varonis, 
1985), as explained earlier. Turns of negotiation of meaning are further divided into two categories, 
namely whether the negotiation turns are related or unrelated to errors. Table 4 summarises eTandem 
turns according to whether the turns are devoted to negotiation of meaning.  
In English parts of tandem sessions a mere 12 turns or 0.6% of turns were spent on negotiating language 
errors. More time was spent negotiating communication difficulties that did not arise from language 
errors (6.6%). In Japanese sessions 20% of turns were used for Negotiation of Meaning (NoM) of which 
3.3 % were related to errors and 16.7 % were unrelated to errors.3 Therefore, both in English and Japanese 
sessions the total number of turns spent on negotiation was much higher for communication difficulties 
unrelated to language errors. 
Table 4. Turn Counts on Negotiation of Meaning 
Session 
No. of 
negotiation turns 
on errors 
No. of negotiation turns 
unrelated to NNS language 
errors 
No. of turns which do 
not involve 
negotiation Total turns 
English 12 (0.6%) 132 (6.6%) 1856 (92.8%) 2000 (100%) 
Japanese 54 (3.3%) 269 (16.7%) 1290 (80.0%) 1613 (100%) 
 
Rates of negotiation are noticeably higher in the Japanese language parts of tandem sessions than in the 
English parts. It is likely that this is a result of the different L2 ability levels of the tandems, as the L2 of 
the English learners in Japan was more advanced than the L2 of the Japanese learners in Australia. 
Jack Bower and Satomi Kawaguchi Negotiation of Meaning and Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 54 
Tables 5a and b display NS reactions to NNS NTL forms in English and Japanese sessions respectively. 
Only few instances of corrective feedback on errors were observed: just five out of 636 errors in English 
portions of chat sessions and 16 out of 391 errors in Japanese portions of chat sessions received corrective 
feedback from NSs. In our data less than 0.8 % and only 4.1% of the errors in English and Japanese 
portions of chat sessions respectively received corrective feedback such as confirmation checks and 
clarification requests. There was no single instance of recast in our Japanese data. 
Table 5a. Percentage of NS Reaction to NNS NTL Forms in English Sessions 
Type of NTL 
forms 
Corrective 
feedback 
(CF) 
frequency CF (%) 
Ignore 
frequency Ignore (%) 
Total 
frequency Total (%) 
Typographical 3 2.4 120 97.6 123 100 
Lexical 1 0.9 110 99.1 111 100 
Grammatical 1 0.25 401 99.75 402 100 
Pragmatic 0 0 0 0 0 100 
Idiomatic 0 0 0 0 0 100 
Other 0 0 0 0 0 100 
Total 5 0.8 631 99.2% 636 100 
Table 5b. Percentage of NS Reactions to NNS NTL Forms in Japanese Sessions 
Type of NTL 
forms 
Corrective 
feedback 
(CF) 
frequency CF (%) 
Ignore 
frequency Ignore (%) 
Total 
frequency Total (%) 
Typographical 8 4.9 155 95.1 163 100 
Lexical 2 2.9 67 97.1 69 100 
Grammatical 3 1.9 151 98.1 154 100 
Pragmatic 1 50 1 50 2 100 
Idiomatic 1 50 1 50 2 100 
Other 1 100 0 0 1 100 
Total 16a 4.1 375 95.9 391 100 
aOf 16 instances, 13 involve implicit corrective feedback and 3 are explicit correction. 
Next we will detail NNS responses to NS signals on errors as summarized in Table 6. In English sections 
of tandem sessions just five language errors received corrective feedback. Two of these efforts at 
corrective feedback on typographical errors appear to have been ignored by the NNS. Two other instances 
of corrective feedback, one on a lexical error and one a grammatical, error were acknowledged by the 
NNS, but did not lead to modified output, while the only instance of corrective feedback leading to 
modified output from the NNS was for a typographical error. In Japanese sessions, among the 16 
instances of NS signals for NNS errors, three instances were ignored by the NNS while 13 instances were 
responded to by either modified output, acknowledgement or both. Although the frequency of NS 
corrective feedback is small, most feedback led to successful negotiation outcomes by NNSs (13/16 
instances, i.e., 81.3%). Thus we can say that corrective feedback was effective when it was provided for 
Jack Bower and Satomi Kawaguchi Negotiation of Meaning and Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 55 
NNS errors. There were also three instances where NNSs corrected their own errors without NS 
corrective feedback, but they are not included in the count. 
Table 6. NNS Responses to NS Corrective Feedback 
Session 
Frequency and Category of NNS Responses 
to NS Corrective Feedback Ignore 
Total No. of NS Non-
targetlike triggers 
English 3 (60%) 
- Acknowledgement 2 
- Modified output/self-correction 1 
2 (40%) 5 (100%) 
Japanese 13a (81.3%) 
- Modified output/self-correction 7 
- Acknowledgement 8 
3 (18.8%) 16 (100%) 
aIn the Japanese sessions, there were two instances where NNSs responded with both modified output and 
acknowledgement to NS signals. 
Negotiation of Meaning Unrelated to Errors 
Next we will detail negotiation of meaning unrelated to L2 learner errors. Although such negotiations do 
not fit the definition of corrective feedback given by Li (2010) because they do not respond to errors in 
learner output, we feel it is important to include negotiation of meaning unrelated to learner errors in this 
analysis as modified input arising from this type of negotiation can also make learners aware of gaps in 
interlanguage (White, 1987). At least one researcher (Lee, 2006) has counted negotiation strategies 
employed by NNSs as a form of implicit corrective feedback.  
An examination of the data shows that a number of negotiations of meaning unrelated to errors occurred. 
These were related to communication problems or lexical items unknown to the hearer. One example of a 
communication problem in an English session follows: 
Chat Excerpt 5. An Example of Negotiation of Meaning Unrelated to NNS Error in an English Session 
NNS: How was your GW holiday? 
NS: what’s GW? 
NNS: GW is Golden Week. Isn’t there GW in Australia? 
NS: i thought that’s what you meant. We don’t have GW in Australia...unfortunately 
 
In this example the NNS has used a common Romanized abbreviation (GW) for a string of Japanese 
national holidays called Golden Week. The NS of English was unfamiliar with the Japanese abbreviation 
and gave a signal in the form of a clarification request. The NNS responded by explaining the 
abbreviation, which the NS acknowledged understanding. 
Another example from a Japanese session is related to the issue of time difference between Japan and 
Australia where a pair needed to find out whether the time in question is Japan time or Australia time as 
in Chat Excerpt 6. 
 
Jack Bower and Satomi Kawaguchi Negotiation of Meaning and Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 56 
Chat Excerpt 6. An Example of Negotiation of Meaning Unrelated to NNS Error in a Japanese session  
(The pair is organising the time for the next chat) 
NNS: ８３０でしょう？ (830 deshoo? “Is 8:30 OK?”) 
NS: ８：３０はにほんじかん？ (8:30 wa Nihon jikan? “Is 8:30 Japan time?”) 
NNS: 日本時間 (Nihon jikan “Japan time”) 
NNS: そう (soo “yes”) 
NS: ok ありがと (ok arigato “ok thanks”) 
 
Table 7 below displays results of NoM according to type of negotiation. Frequency counts are given for 
both NS-initiated and NNS-initiated instances. In English sessions, there are 33 instances of which 15 and 
18 instances were initiated by NSs and NNSs respectively where clarification requests was the most 
frequent negotiation strategy type. 
In Japanese sessions, we identified that nearly double the frequency of negotiation of meaning instances 
were initiated by NNSs (21 instances initiated by NSs versus 38 instances-initiated by NNSs). Regarding 
the type of negotiation, NSs used clarification requests and confirmation checks most frequently (7 times 
each) followed by comprehension checks (4 times), while NNSs used confirmation checks most 
frequently (26 times) followed by clarification requests (9 times). It is important to point out that the 
success rates of negotiation of meaning are very high (Tables 7 and 8): 86.6 % with NS-initiated and 88.9% 
of NNS-initiated negotiation of meanings in the English portion of chat sessions and 95.2 % with NS-
initiated and 89.5 % with NNS-initiated negotiation of meaning in Japanese portion of chat sessions. 
Table 7. Negotiation of Meaning Unrelated to NNS Errors 
Session  
Clarification 
request 
Confirmation 
check 
Comprehension 
check Other Total 
English NS-initiated NoM 
NNS-initiated NoM        
Total 
10 
13 
23 
2 
4 
6 
1 
1 
2 
2 
0 
2 
15 
18 
33 
Japanese NS-initiated NoM 
NNS-initiated NoM 
Total 
7 
9 
16 
7 
26 
33 
4 
2 
6 
3 
1 
4 
21 
38 
59 
Table 8. Outcomes of Negotiation of Meaning 
Session  Successfully negotiated Unsuccessfully negotiated Total instances 
English NS-initiated NoM 
NNS-initiated NoM 
Total  
13 (86.6%) 
16 (88.9%) 
29 (87.9%) 
2 (13.3%) 
2 (11.1%) 
4 (12.2%) 
15 (100%) 
18 (100%) 
33 (100%) 
Japanese NS-initiated NoM 
NNS-initiated NoM 
Total 
20 (95.2%) 
34 (89.5%) 
54 (91.5%) 
1 (4.8%) 
4 (10.5%) 
5 (8.5%) 
21 (100%) 
38 (100%) 
59 (100%) 
Detailed analysis on successful instances of negotiation of meaning initiated by NNSs is shown in Table 9 
where we can see that “explanation” in the target language is the most frequently provided response by 
NSs.  
Jack Bower and Satomi Kawaguchi Negotiation of Meaning and Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 57 
Table 9. NS Responses to NNS Signals of Communication Problems 
Session English Japanese 
Successful 
Outcomes 
 
Explanations in English (11) 
 
Code-switch (translation into 
Japanese) (3) 
 
Reformulation (1) 
 
Acknowledgement (2) 
 
Ignore (1) 
 
(18 in total) 
Explanations in Japanese (16) 
 
Code-switching (explanation or translation in 
English) (14) 
 
Metalinguistic explanation (1) 
 
Acknowledgement (2) 
 
Ignore (no chance to reply because no time) (1) 
 
(34 in total) 
Unsuccessful 
Outcomes 
NNS did not react to NS response so 
success of negotiation is 
undetermined (2) 
 
(2 in total) 
Explanation in Japanese (4)a 
 
 
 
(4 in total) 
aTwo cases are related to proper nouns (waraji matsuri (“Waraji festival”) and Morujibu (“Moldives”) and one case 
is related to a Japanese movie which were popular three years ago. The last case constitutes an example of topic 
change before L2 Japanese speaker answers a question by NS Japanese speaker. 
We noted earlier that, in online chat, corrective feedback on errors was scarce especially in English 
sessions. However, our analysis shows that overall, online chat provided reasonable opportunities for 
NoM. In particular, NNSs took the initiative to signal communication problems in order to resolve them. 
This indicates that NNSs were actively involved in eTandem and NSs provided important information to 
resolve communication problems with NNSs. Some negotiations were ambiguous as to whether or not the 
NNS understood, as the NNS did not provide modified output or acknowledgement. Such negotiations 
were classed as unsuccessful. 
E-mail Corrective Feedback 
Participants in this eTandem project were requested to review the L1 portion of their transcripts and to 
send e-mail corrective feedback on errors within a week after sessions two and three. Table 10a shows a 
breakdown of NS e-mail corrective feedback on NNS errors for the English parts of chats. Table 10b 
shows e-mail corrective feedback for Japanese sessions. Note that all metalinguistic feedback for the 
Japanese sessions was followed by correct reformulation. However, for the English sessions there were 
four instances of metalinguistic explanation unaccompanied by reformulation.  
An example of an e-mail correction for Japanese is shown in e-mail Excerpt 2 where the first sentence of 
the NS correction provides correct reformulation of the NNS’s Japanese and the second two sentences 
provide metalinguistic explanation in English.  
 E-mail Excerpt 2. Correction to a NNS Sentence  
NNS Mistake 
“わたしはかんぎをよむのがよくへたです。” (Watashi-wa kangi-o yomuno-ga yoku heta desu). 
 
Jack Bower and Satomi Kawaguchi Negotiation of Meaning and Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 58 
NS Correction  
わたしはかんじをよむのがにがてです。You made a spelling mistake. And if you want to say “‘Im 
poor at ...”, then you should use this collocation,”にがてです” . 
 
Results of e-mail corrective feedback are summarized in Tables 10a and 10b: 
Table 10a. English E-mail Corrective Feedback on NNS Errors by NSs 
Error Type 
Error 
Count Ignore 
Metalinguistic 
Explanation 
Correct 
Reformulation 
Incorrect 
Reformulation 
Partial Correct 
Reformulation 
Typographical 105 
(100%) 
35 
(33.3%) 
0 70 
(66.6%) 
0 0 
Lexical 93 
(100%) 
43 
(46.2%) 
2 
(2.1%) 
48 
(51.6%) 
1 
(1.1%) 
0 
Grammar 342 
(100%) 
127 
(37.1%) 
25 
(7.3%) 
201 
(58.8%) 
8 
(2.3%) 
3 
(0.9%) 
Pragmatic 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Idiomatic 1 
(100%) 
1 
(100%) 
0 0 0 0 
Total 541 
(100%) 
206 
(38.1%) 
27 
(5.0%) 
319 
(59%) 
9 
(1.7%) 
3 
(0.6%) 
 
Table 10b. Japanese E-mail Corrective Feedback on NNS Errors by NSs 
Error Type 
Error 
Count Ignore 
Correct 
Reformulation 
Followed by 
Metalinguistic 
Explanation 
Correct 
Reformulation 
Incorrect 
Reformulation 
Partial Correct 
Reformulation Othera 
Typographical 94 
(100%) 
32 
(34.0%) 
6 
(6.4%) 
56 
(59.6%) 
0 0 0 
Lexical 40 
(100%) 
15 
(37.5%) 
5 
(12.5%) 
19 
(47.5%) 
0 1 
(2.5%) 
0 
Grammar 99 
(100%) 
33 
(33.3%) 
12 
(12.1%) 
51 
(51.5%) 
1 
(1.0%) 
0 2 
(2.0%) 
Pragmatic 2 
(100%) 
0 0 1 
(50.0%) 
0 0 1 
(50.0%) 
Idiomatic 2 
(100%) 
1 
(50.0%) 
0 0 0 0 1 
(50.0%) 
Total 237 
(100%) 
81 
(34.2%) 
23 
(9.7%) 
127 
(53.6%) 
1 
(0.4%) 
1 
(0.4%) 
4 
(1.7%) 
aInstances of “other” include a NS’s indication that she could not understand the NNS’s sentence signalled 
orthographically (i.e., “?”) and by highlighting the sentence in red to show that the sentence has some problem. 
Jack Bower and Satomi Kawaguchi Negotiation of Meaning and Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 59 
In both English and Japanese sessions overall NSs provided some form of error feedback to almost two 
thirds of the NNS errors. 65.8 % of errors in Japanese received corrections (i.e., only 34.2% of errors 
were ignored), while 61.9% of errors in English received correction.  
It is interesting to note that the English chat feedback included 11 corrections to unnatural sounding 
though not grammatically incorrect phrases as follow:  
1. Used a more common non-count form of a noun that can be both count and non-count 
2. Changed verb tenses to a more appropriate tense (2) 
3. Added an adverb of quantity 
4. Omitted an unnecessary word 
5. Inserted a modal verb (2) 
6. Changed an adverb to a comparative 
7. Advised the NNS not address people in the third person 
8. Changed a subordinate clause to a single word 
9. Inserted an adjectival phrase 
 E-mail feedback on Japanese errors contained 16 instances of NS corrective feedback unrelated to errors 
(which hence are not included in Table 6 above). They are:  
1. Changed polite expressions to casual ones (6) 
2. Improved expressions such as particle omission (8) 
3. Changed NNS expression to more idiomatic one (1) 
4. Misunderstanding by the NS, thus wrong correction (1) 
It should also be noted that there were large individual differences in rates of e-mail corrective feedback 
between tandem pairs. Some partners attempted to correct nearly all of their partner’s errors while other 
partners selected just a few errors for corrective feedback. Two Japanese participants in the tutor role also 
corrected their own errors in the e-mail feedback, probably in an effort to provide a better model for their 
chat partner. 
The amount of e-mail corrective feedback in both Japanese and English sessions is in stark contrast with 
the text-based SCMC corrective feedback where only 4.1% of Japanese errors and 0.8% of English errors 
received correction. Perhaps 30 minutes of chat was not long enough to provide corrective feedback when 
a particular topic was given to the participants to converse within a limited time, as participants needed to 
focus primarily on communication. In addition, it is possible that participants felt that error correction 
would disturb the conversation flow. Finally, it may be that participants’ awareness that they would send 
corrective feedback after a chat session freed them to focus more on meaning than on their partners’ form 
during synchronous sessions.  
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
We have presented qualitative and quantitative analyses of negotiation of meaning in chat transcripts 
involving two languages, English and Japanese. The eleven partnerships that completed all three chat 
sessions were used as the corpus for data analysis for SCMC (33 chat logs each for English and Japanese 
sessions for a total of 66) and 38 chatlogs (21 English and 17 Japanese) for data analysis for ACMC. It 
can be seen from the data that many partnerships took advantage of the possibilities of text-based SCMC 
Jack Bower and Satomi Kawaguchi Negotiation of Meaning and Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 60 
for focusing on form. Unfortunately, some pairs missed part of this opportunity by failing to send e-mail 
corrections to their partner. 
On the basis of an exhaustive analysis of this data the three research questions posed in the introductory 
section may now be answered as follows: 
Question 1 asks whether negotiation of meaning occurs in our chat sessions and how the types and 
amounts of negotiation compare to previous studies. Our data shows that negotiation of meaning did 
occur in synchronous chat sessions in both English and Japanese. 7.2% and 20 % of the total turns in 
English and Japanese sessions respectively turned out to be used for negotiation of meaning. It is useful to 
compare these overall rates of negotiation to other tellecolaborative studies that have reported on total 
turns devoted to negotiation.  
Studies which have had NNS/NNS learners engage in more structured tasks have resulted in higher rates 
of negotiation than found in our data. Smith’s (2003) study which had learners engage in jigsaw and 
decision making tasks resulted in around 30% of turns devoted to negotiation of meaning. Similarly 
Pellettieri’s (2000) study which had learners engage in open discussion and jigsaw tasks reported an 
overall negotiation rate of 34%. On the other hand Tudini’s (2003) study which examined Italian L2 
learner interactions with Italian native speakers in chat rooms yielded an overall negotiation rate of just 
9%. In Tudini’s study “Students were simply asked to chat with NSs with a view to evaluating the live 
chat as a possible teaching and learning tool” (p. 148). It is apparent that task type can have a strong effect 
on overall rates of negotiation. 
Tellecollaboration can have many benefits apart from language learning such as increased intercultural 
awareness (Belz, 2003; O’Dowd, 2007; Ware & Kramsch, 2005) and positive effects on motivation 
(Kötter, 2003; Leahy, 2001). However, for those teachers wishing to expose their learners to language 
learning benefits arising from negotiation of meaning, structured tasks such as jigsaw are likely to foster 
more negotiation than free conversation or discussions around simple topics.  
An imbalance in the rate of NoM between the two L2s of the tandem pairings in our study is evident (7.2% 
of English session turns and 20% of Japanese session turns). This imbalance is most likely due to the 
different L2 ability levels of the tandem partners. From the perspective of tandem language learning in 
which it is often very difficult to match learners of similar L2 ability, careful choice of different tasks for 
each target language might mitigate an imbalance of negotiation arising from asymmetrical L2 abilities. 
To give a somewhat extreme example; if one class of tandem participants has beginner L2 ability while 
the other class has advanced L2 ability, simple tasks such as finding out basic information about your 
partner’s daily life may result in ample negotiation for the weaker L2, whereas more complex tasks such 
as debating a controversial topic or jointly preparing a presentation may be necessary to give rise to 
sufficient levels of negotiation in the stronger L2. 
Regarding types of NoM, our data suggest that NoM to overcome communication difficulties was much 
more frequent than NoM related to errors. It is possible that this occurrence arises from a reluctance by 
participants to take on a didactic role. Participants may be more comfortable asking for help in their L2 
when they don’t understand than they are in pointing out their partner’s L2 language errors. Kötter (2003) 
put forward similar reasoning for a lack of recasts and repeats in his corpus of interactions between North 
American learners of German and German learners of English. He states that one reason learners were 
reluctant to correct their partners was that they did not want to appear “more knowledgeable or more 
proficient than the other participants in a conversation” (p. 158). 
Question 2 relates to corrective feedback. According to our analysis, corrective feedback was provided at 
a very low rate in synchronous eTandem learning: just 0.8% of total errors in English sessions and 4.1 % 
of total errors in Japanese sessions. Hence, it is not possible to establish “what types of error (e.g., lexical 
grammatical, pragmatic, idiomatic, typographical, other) receive most/least negative feedback from the 
Jack Bower and Satomi Kawaguchi Negotiation of Meaning and Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 61 
NS?” Indeed, only 16 errors received six different types of corrective feedback in the Japanese sessions. 
Yet the correction percentage turns out not to be a valid measurement for the purpose of comparing 
corrective feedback across error types for this study. Thus idiomatic errors received 50% of corrective 
feedback, which looks like a good result. However, the raw number of occurrences of idiomatic errors is 
two, with only one of those errors receiving corrective feedback. 
The overall ratio of corrective feedback in this study is notably lower than that of other studies that have 
counted L2 learner errors and partner corrections in CMC to calculate a ratio of corrective feedback on 
errors. A comparison with other studies indicates that age, educational background, and social 
relationship between participants may be important factors mediating the type and amount of corrective 
feedback provided. In Lee’s (2006) study NS Spanish teachers were paired with NNS Spanish learners 
and 73% of learner errors received corrective feedback. Similarly, in Sotillo’s (2005) study pairing 
graduate students in a teaching course with L2 learners, NNS graduate students provided corrective 
feedback on 48% of learner errors while NS graduate students provided feedback on 29% of learner errors. 
It is likely that perceived role of learner/teacher in these studies led to more corrective feedback being 
provided. Language teachers are also likely to be more confident and comfortable providing corrective 
feedback. 
Iwasaki and Oliver’s (2003) study looked at chat in Japanese with similar chat pairings to our study. 
Australian university students learning Japanese as a second language were paired with Japanese, adult 
native speakers in Japan. In their study around 14% of NNS non-targetlike forms received implicit 
corrective feedback from Japanese NSs. This is also much higher than in our study. It is possible that the 
NS in this study perceived themselves to be in more of a tutor role than participants in our eTandem. Task 
type may also be a factor. However, Iwasaki and Oliver do not make explicit the exact instructions that 
they gave to participants and whether or not their participants were encouraged to provide corrective 
feedback, saying just that “Both NNSs and NSs had the instructions for “chatting” on a handout and this 
was written in their native language” (p. 64). 
It is important to note that the relationship between learners in eTandem is quite different to that of the 
experimental studies outlined above. In eTandem the power relationship between learners is equal as 
tandem partners are expected to spend equal amounts of time in language learner and language expert 
roles (Brammerts, 2003). Zourou (2009) points out that the symmetrical power relationship of eTandem 
tends to lead to less corrective feedback than studies like those above which have an asymmetrical power 
relationship of NS/NNS or teacher/learner.  
The almost total absence of explicit corrective feedback during text-based SCMC in our study is 
consistent with previous studies. Only three instances of explicit corrective feedback were found in our 
corpus. Morris (2005) also found no instances of explicit feedback amongst young learners of Spanish. 
Similarly, Iwasaki and Oliver (2003) did not report any explicit corrective feedback in their study and Lee 
(2006) found very few instances explicit corrective feedback (2.5%). Interestingly in Sotillo’s (2005) 
study NS tutors gave very little explicit corrective feedback (3%) whereas NNS tutors provided a good 
deal of explicit corrective feedback (34%). There are two possible reasons for the generally low rates of 
explicit feedback in text-based SCMC. One factor may be that participants do not wish to interrupt the 
flow of conversation by giving explicit corrective feedback. Another reason may be cultural. Sotillo 
speculated that perhaps “NS partners were following politeness forms of American culture that 
discourage the correction of regional or foreign language use patterns” (p. 486). Aspects of Australian, 
Japanese and the other varied cultures of participants from UWS may also have influenced the provision 
of corrective feedback. However, a detailed survey of participant attitudes to providing corrective 
feedback would be needed to shed light on this factor. 
Question 3 compares synchronous and asynchronous corrective feedback. Striking differences in type and 
amount of corrective feedback between synchronous and asynchronous eTandem modes are apparent. 
Jack Bower and Satomi Kawaguchi Negotiation of Meaning and Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 62 
NNS non-targetlike turns receiving corrective feedback from tandem partners in the synchronous and 
asynchronous modes were 0.8% to 60.4% respectively in English sessions and 4.1% to 65.8 % in 
Japanese sessions. Thus our analysis indicates that tandem partners tended not to provide corrective 
feedback in online sessions, whereas post-chat corrective feedback on synchronous textual output resulted 
in quite high rates of correction.  
In the asynchronous mode (i.e., e-mail) NSs provided metalinguistic explanations in addition to 
reformulation of ungrammatical items/forms. The rate of metalinguistic explanation was about 5% of total 
corrective feedback for learners of English and about 10% of total corrective feedback for learners of 
Japanese. Ware and O’Dowd (2008) also noted that in their asynchronous tellecolaborative pairings of 
American learners of Spanish and Spanish learners of English, Spanish partners provided much more 
metalinguistic commentary in corrections (60.1%) than did the American partners (5.5%). Ware and 
O’Dowd stated that the “Spanish students’ greater familiarity with metalinguistic terminology may be 
related to their participation in foreign language classes throughout elementary and secondary education” 
(p. 51). It is possible that the same factor may have contributed to Japanese partners providing nearly 
double the metalinguistic explanations than their counterparts in Australia in our study. Japanese learners 
of English must take English language classes all through junior high school and high school and these 
classes have a strong grammar-translation focus. In Australia on the other hand, foreign language classes 
are not a curricular priority (Mueller, 2003). In addition, it is possible that the Japanese participants knew 
more about their L1 grammar than Australian participants as a result of their elementary and high school 
education. In Australian education, Dulay and Burt (1973) overstepped their findings of “natural 
sequences” in children’s acquisition of ESL and made claims about the uselessness of grammar teaching. 
This led Australian education authorities to remove grammar from curricula (Dyson, 1996). As a result, 
the teaching of traditional English grammar in Australian schools disappeared in the 1960s and 1970s 
(Mulder & Thomas, 2009), and has only made a comeback in recent years with traditional grammar to be 
taught as part of the national English curriculum starting in 2011 (Ferrari, 2009, 2010). 
One special advantage of providing corrective feedback in the asynchronous mode for tandem partners in 
the L2 tutor role is that they have more time to identify and explain their partner’s L2 errors, while 
partners in the L2 learner role also have plenty of time to consider corrections to their output. E-mail 
corrective feedback may promote language awareness not only for the NNSs but also for NSs about their 
own mother tongue. Otsu (2005) hypothesizes that understanding one’s mother tongue structures and 
functions may play an important role in analyzing and using second language. 
Another advantage that asynchronous corrective feedback based on chat logs seems to have over feedback 
provided during text-based SCMC is that ASCMC feedback provided a more balanced correction ratio 
across different error types. As was noted in the literature review several studies have shown that lexical 
errors receive more corrective feedback than grammatical errors in text-based SCMC (Blake, 2000; Lee, 
2006; Pellettieri 2000; Tudini, 2003; Smith 2003). The asynchronous corrective feedback in our study, 
however, showed a fairly well-balanced ratio of feedback across different error types. Japanese 
participants receiving asynchronous corrective feedback on their English benefited from corrections on 67% 
of typographical errors, 54% of lexical errors and 63% of grammatical errors. Participants in Australia 
received e-mail corrective feedback on around 60% of Japanese typographical errors, 63% of lexical 
errors and 67% of grammatical errors.  
Our study was not free of problems, however. For instance, the overall rate of participation in sending 
feedback by e-mail was just over 50% of all participants (23 corrective feedback e-mails to 44 transcripts 
in English sessions and 23 corrective feedback e-mails to 43 transcripts in Japanese sessions). Given the 
significance we attribute here to corrective feedback provided by reviewing chat logs, more research is 
needed into ways of ensuring that learners take advantage of chat logs when they have the opportunity. 
Jack Bower and Satomi Kawaguchi Negotiation of Meaning and Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 63 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FURTHER RESEARCH 
One interesting strand for further research is to investigate how task type can affect the balance of 
languages between eTandem pairings with uneven L2 abilities. It is evident that choice of task may play a 
role in the balance of languages used in eTandem. Research revealing how task type affects L2 ratio in 
eTandem for pairings with asymmetrical L2 ability would be of great benefit to teachers in planning 
future eTandem projects. 
Research is also needed to assess the efficacy of post-chat e-mail corrective feedback. While the provision 
of such feedback seems to present a great opportunity for learners to reflect on errors and gaps in their 
output, learners may not necessarily take advantage of this opportunity. As L2 writing teachers know, 
corrective feedback often ends up gathering dust on a shelf after receiving only a perfunctory glance from 
learners. Just as it appears to be necessary to push learners to give corrective feedback in telecollaboration 
(Ware & O’Dowd, 2008), it may also be necessary to push learners to reflect deliberately on corrective 
feedback. Longitudinal studies are also needed to investigate if post-chat corrective feedback based on 
chat-logs which are reviewed by students actually facilitates long-term changes in interlanguage. 
In conclusion, a combination of learner interaction via synchronous text-based CMC combined with post-
chat corrective feedback seems to be a CALL learning strategy with great potential for improving both L2 
communicative competence and accuracy. It may offer “the best of both worlds” combining the benefits 
of negotiation of meaning and resultant implicit corrective feedback in the synchronous mode with 
explicit corrective feedback in the asynchronous mode. This learning strategy certainly merits further 
investigation. 
 
APPENDIX A 
Tandem Language Learning Project 
Last Wednesday you finished your first chat session with your tandem language learning partner in 
Australia. You will need to complete two more chat sessions with your partner as part of your coursework 
this semester.  
What should I do? 
For each chat you will need to go through the following steps: 
1. Prepare discussion questions to ask your partner. 
2. Use e-mail to organize a meeting time with your partner. 
3. Chat for at least 30 minutes in English and 30 minutes in Japanese. (If you chat for longer that’s 
good!) 
4. Save your chat transcript as a Word document. 
5. Use your chat transcript to send some language corrections to your partner within a week so that both 
you and your partner have a chance to revise and improve their English/Japanese before the next 
session. 
6. Write a reflection on your tandem language learning experience and make a plan to improve your 
next tandem language learning session. 
What should I hand in? 
After each chat session you will need to e-mail the following to your teacher: 
Jack Bower and Satomi Kawaguchi Negotiation of Meaning and Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 64 
1. A copy of your discussion questions. 
2. A copy of your chat saved in a Word document.  
3.  E-mail a copy of your language suggestions and corrections to your partner as well as to Jack.  
4.  E-mail your reflections and plan to your teacher.  
5. It is up to you to organize a chat time with your partner. Make sure to finish your chat and e-mail all 
of your documents to your teacher by the following deadlines. 
 
Chat 1 documents: Friday, May 11 
Chat 2 documents: Friday, May 25 
Chat Topics 
For chat two you should find out some more information about your chat partner. You should prepare 
questions in English about your partner’s background and life. You might ask about his or her family, 
friends, favorite pastimes, daily routine, future dreams, best memory, worst memory, growing up etc. 
For chat three you should discuss culture. You will need to prepare questions in English to ask about 
Australian culture. You might ask about festivals, popular sports, popular music, ceremonies, holidays etc. 
You should also be ready to answer your partner’s questions about Japanese culture. 
 
APPENDIX B 
a. A chat log excerpt from English session 3 with Leo (L=native speaker) and Mayumi (M=learner of 
English) with language corrections via e-mail 
Turn 
No. Typist Chat log 
L’s feedback on M’s use of English via e-
mail 
1 M: hi!  
2 L: Hi M  
3 M how are you?  
4 L: great thanks, so do you know what topics you 
want to talk about 
 
5 M: yeah,  
6 M: i prepeare  ‘   
7 L: today is cultural right  
8 L: ?  
9 M: cultural right?  
10 M: for example?  
11 L: well i think we have to discuss australian and 
japanese culture 
 
12 L: so it could be anything  
13 L: music, food, holidays  
14 M: ok.  
15 L: etc  
Jack Bower and Satomi Kawaguchi Negotiation of Meaning and Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 65 
16 M: do you know the mother’s day? ‘Do you know what mothers day is?’ or 
‘Have you heard of mother’s day?’ 
17 L: yeah we have it today  
18 L: how about in japan?  
19 M: yes! is there in australia? Make sure you don’t miss the ‘subject’. Is 
there (mothers day) in Australia? 
20 L: yes today  
21 M: today is the mother’s day, When talking about special days like 
Christmas, Easter or Mothers day, we 
don’t need a determiner ( the ) 
22 L: im at my mothers house now  
23 M: i thought it’s only japanese culture. Remember tense. Because this is past you 
need to write ‘it was’ rather than ‘it’s’. 
Also a useful phrase to remember is; 
( something ) is a part of Japanese culture.  
24 L: no they have it in europe, england, japan, america 
and even korea 
 
25 L: but in korea i think its parents day  
26 M: oh,really?  
27 M: thats great!  
 
b. A chat log excerpt from Japanese session 3 with Leo (L=learner of Japanese) and Mayumi (M=Native 
Speaker) with language corrections via e-mail 
Turn 
No. Typist 
Chat log (Romanized transliteration & English 
translation) 
M’s feedback on L’s use of Japanese via e-
mail 
1 M: オーストラリアではくじらのにくをたべない
のですか？  
(Oosutoraria-dewa kujira-no niku-o tabenaino 
desu ka?)  
“Don’t you eat whale in Australia?” 
 
2 L: 問題は日本とノルウェーしかたべないよ
(Mondai-wa nihon-go noruwee-shika tabenai yo)  
“The problem is that no one but Japan and 
Norway eats [whale].” 
 
3 L: アメリカとかオーストラリアはほげいをやめ
てほし 
(Amerika toka Oosutoraia-wa hogee-o yamete 
hoshi)  
“America and Australia want to stop whaling”. 
やめてほしい 
4 M: でも 日本でもすーぱーとかで くじらのにく
をうってるの みたことないよ 
(Demo nihon-demo suupaa toka-de kujira-no 
niku-o utteruno mitakoto nai yo)  
“But in Japan I have never seen whale meat sold 
at supermarkets and places like that.” 
 
Jack Bower and Satomi Kawaguchi Negotiation of Meaning and Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 66 
5 L: けど日本人はくじらのにくをまだたべたい 
(Kedo nihonjin-wa kujira-no niku-o mada 
tabetai) 
 “But Japanese still want to eat whale.” 
くじらのにくをまだたべたがっている
（食べたがっている） 
6 M: むかし せかいで ほげいがきんしされたよね  
(mukashi sekai-de hogee-ga kinshi sareta yo ne)  
“A long time ago, whaling was banned in the 
world.” 
 
7 L: その時オーストラリアもほげいしたよ  
(sono toki Oosutoraria-mo hogee shita yo)  
“At that time, Australia was also engaged in 
whaling.” 
 
8 M: くじらにくの せんもんてんみたいのはすこ
しあるよ  
(kujira niku-no senmonten mitai no-wa sukoshi 
aru yo)  
“There are a few shops that specialize in [the sale 
of] whale meat.” 
 
9 L: けどにくたべてない けどにくはたべてない  
(kedo niku tabete nai kedo niku-wa tabete nai) 
“But (we) didn’t eat meat, but didn’t eat meat.” 
けどにくはたべてない 
10 L: くじらのあぶらをつかいました  
(kujira-no abura-o tsukaimashita) 
 “We used whale oil.” 
 
11 M: ほげいして どうしたの？ がいこくに うった
の？？ 
(hogee shite doo shita no? Gaikoku-ni utta no??)  
“So what did you do after catching whale? Did 
you sell it to foreign countries?” 
 
12 M: なんのために あぶらを つかったの？ 
(nan-no tame-ni abura-o tsukatta no?)  
“What did you use [whale] oil for?” 
 
13 L: あぶらの lamp  
(abura-no lamp) 
 “Oil lamps.” 
 
14 M: いま ほげいしているくにが すくないから、 
くじらが ふえすぎているってきいたよ  
(ima hogee shite iru kuni-ga sukunai kara kujira-
ga fuesugite irutte kiita yo)  
“I heard that the number of whales is increasing 
excessively because there aren’t many countries 
which practice whaling.” 
 
15 M: ああ あぶらのランプね  
(aa abura-no ranpu ne)  
“Ohh oil lamp.” 
 
Jack Bower and Satomi Kawaguchi Negotiation of Meaning and Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 67 
16 L: そうよ  
(soo yo) 
“That’s right.” 
 
17 M: なんで ほげいをやめてほしいの？ 
(nan-de hogee-o yamete hoshii no?) 
“Why do you want [people] to stop whaling?” 
 
18 M: くじらがすきなの？？ 
(Kujira-ga sukina no?) 
“Is it because you like whales?” 
 
 
19 L: だから私の意見は一年で日本じｎ  
(dakara watashi no iken-wa ichinen-de nihonjin) 
“So my opinion is in one year Japanese” 
 
20 L: は１０００とか２０００くじらをつかまても
いい  
(wa 1000 toka 2000 kujira-o tsukamaete mo ii) 
“are OK to catch 1000 or 2000 whales.” 
１０００とか２０００匹くじらをつか
まえてもいいと思う 
私の意見は～～です。or 私は～～だと
思う。 
 
NOTES 
1. There is one more English session than Japanese (23 vs. 22) because in one session the pair chatted in 
English but ran out of time for chatting in Japanese. They agreed to meet again to chat in Japanese, but 
were unable to do so. 
2. Both Leo and Mayumi are fictitious names. 
3. Examples of NoM unrelated to errors can be found in Excerpts 5 and 6. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We would like to thank students of Kanda University of International Studies, Japan, and the University 
of Western Sydney, Australia, who participated in this study. We also thank both Universities for 
supporting our eTandem learning project. The Japanese L2 part of this project was partly supported by the 
Learning and Teaching Action Plan (LTAP) and School of Humanities & Languages at the University of 
Western Sydney. The English L2 part of this project was supported by the Research Institute of Language 
Studies (RILS) at Kanda University of International Studies. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Jack Bower is a senior lecturer in the Bunkyo English Communications Center at Hiroshima Bunkyo 
Women's University. He is also the coordinator of the Global Communication Department English 
language program. He has lived and worked in Japan for nine years. His research interests include tandem 
language learning and technology assisted language learning.  
E-mail: jbower@h-bunkyo.ac.jp 
Jack Bower and Satomi Kawaguchi Negotiation of Meaning and Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 68 
Satomi Kawaguchi teaches Japanese and second language acquisition at the University of Western 
Sydney. She is also the coordinator of Honours Program in Languages and Linguistics. She has published 
many journal articles and book chapters on Processability Theory and language learning, particularly 
Japanese L2. She is interested in developing theory-practice connections in language learning. 
E-mail: s.kawaguchi@uws.edu.au 
 
REFERENCES 
Belz, J. (2003). Linguistic perspectives on the development of intercultural competence in 
telecollaboration. Language Learning & Technology, 7(2), 68–117. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/ 
vol7num2/belz/default.html 
Blake, R. (2000). Computer mediated communication: A window on L2 Spanish interlanguage. Language 
Learning & Technology, 4(1), 120–136. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/blake/default.html  
Blake, R., & Zyzik, E. (2003). Who’s helping whom?: Learner/heritage speakers’ networked discussions 
in Spanish. Applied Linguistics, 24(4), 519–544.  
Brammerts, H. (2003). Autonomous language learning in tandem: The development of a concept. In T. 
Lewis & L. Walker (Eds.), Autonomous language learning in tandem (pp. 27–37). Sheffield: Academy 
Electronic Publications. 
Cziko, G. (2004). Electronic tandem language learning (eTandem): A third approach to second language 
learning for the 21st century. CALICO Journal, 22(1), 25–39.  
Dulay, H., & Burt, M. (1973). Should we teach children syntax? Language Learning 23, 245–258. 
Dyson, B. (1996). The debate on form-focused instruction: A teacher’s perspective. Australian Review of 
Applied Linguistics, 19(2), 59–78. 
Ellis, R. (2006). Modelling learning difficulty and second language proficiency: The differential 
contributions of implicit and explicit knowledge. Applied Linguistics, 27(3), 431–463. 
Ellis, R., Basturkmen, H., & Loewen, S. (2001). Learner uptake in communicative ESL lessons. 
Language Learning, 51(2), 281–318. 
Farrar, M. J. (1992). Negative evidence and grammatical morpheme acquisition. Developmental 
Psychology, 28(1), 90–98. 
Ferrari, J. (2009, May 8). National English curriculum to include grammar guide. The Australian. 
Retrieved from http://www.theaustralian.com.au/news/grammar-syllabus-spelt-out/story-e6frg6no-
1225710578133  
Ferrari, J. (2010, February 27). National English curriculum: what all children will learn. The Australian. 
Retrieved from http://www.theaustralian.com.au/higher-education/national-english-curriculum-what-all-
children-will-learn/story-e6frgcjx-1225834607940  
Gass, S., & Mackey, A. (2007). Input, interaction, and output in second language acquisition. In B. 
VanPatten & J. Williams (Eds.), Theories in second language acquisition (pp. 175–200). London: LEA. 
Gass, S., & Varonis, E. (1985). Task variation and nonnative/nonnative negotiation of meaning. In S. 
Gass & C. Madden (Eds.), Input in second language acquisition (pp. 149–161). Cambridge, MA: 
Newbury House. 
Jack Bower and Satomi Kawaguchi Negotiation of Meaning and Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 69 
Iwasaki, J., & Oliver, R. (2003). Chat-line interaction and negative feedback. Occasional Thematic Issue 
of the Australian Review of Applied Linguistics (ARAL), 17, 60–73. 
Kern, R. (1995). Restructuring classroom interaction with networked computers: Effects on quantity and 
characteristics of language production. The Modern Language Journal, 79, 457–476. 
Kötter, M. (2001). MOOrituri te salutant? Language learning through MOO-based synchronous 
exchanges between learner tandems. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 14(3-4), 289–304. 
Kötter, M. (2003). Negotiation of meaning and codeswitching in online tandems. Language Learning & 
Technology, 7(2), 145–172. Retrieved from llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/kotter/default.html 
Krashen, S. (1981). Second language acquisition and second language learning. Oxford: Pergamon. 
Lai, C., & Zhao, Y. (2006). Noticing and text-based chat. Language Learning & Technology, 10(3), 102–
120. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num3/laizhao/default.html  
Leahy, C. (2001). Bilingual negotiation via email: An international project. Computer Assisted Language 
Learning, 14(1), 15–41. 
Lee, L. (2006). A study of native and nonnative speakers’ feedback and responses in Spanish-American 
networked collaborative interaction. In J. Belz & S. Thorne (Eds.), Internet-mediated intercultural foreign 
language education (pp. 147–176). Boston: Thomson Heinle. 
Lewis, T., & Walker, L. (Eds). (2003). Autonomous language learning in tandem. Sheffield: Academy 
Electronic Publications. 
Li, S. (2010). The effectiveness of corrective feedback in SLA: A meta-analysis. Language Learning, 
60(2), 309–365. 
Long, M. (1996). The role of the linguistic environment in second language acquisition. In W. C. Ritchie 
& T. K. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of language acquisition. Vol.2: Second language acquisition (pp. 413–
468). New York: Academic Press. 
Long, M. H., & Robinson, P. (1998). Focus on form: Theory, research and practice. In C. Doughty & J. 
Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in second language acquisition (pp. 15–41). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Morris, F. (2005). Child-to-child interaction and corrective feedback in a computer mediated L2 class. 
Language Learning & Technology. 9(1), 29–45. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num1/morris/ 
default.html  
Mueller, F. (2003, July). Learning languages in Australia – too much like hard work? Curriculum 
Leadership. Retrieved from http://www.curriculum.edu.au/leader/default.asp?issueID=9691&id=4711  
Mulder, J., & Thomas, C. (2009, July). Accessing grammar in senior secondary English: A Victorian 
exemplar. Paper presented at The National Conference for Teachers of English and Literacy. Retrieved 
from http://www.englishliteracyconference.com.au/files/documents/hobart/conferencePapers/ 
refereed/Mulder-Thomas.pdf 
O’Dowd, R. (2003). Understanding the ‘other side’: Intercultural learning in a Spanish-English e-mail 
exchange. Language Learning & Technology 7(2), 118–144. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/ 
odowd/default.html  
O’Dowd, R. (2007). Evaluating the outcomes of online intercultural exchange. ELT Journal 6(2), 144–
152. 
Oliver, R. (1995). Negative feedback in child NS-NNS conversation. Studies in Second Language 
Acquisition 17, 459–81. 
Jack Bower and Satomi Kawaguchi Negotiation of Meaning and Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 70 
O’Rourke, B. (2005). Form-focused interaction in online tandem learning. CALICO Journal, 22(3), 433–
466. 
O’Rourke, B. (2008). The other C in CMC: What alternative data sources tell us about text-based 
synchronous computer mediated communication and language learning. Computer Assisted Language 
Learning, 21(3), 227–251. 
Otsu, Y. (2005). 小学校での英語教育は必要ない！(Shoogakkoo de no eigo kyooiku wa hitsuyoo nai! 
“English education is not necessary in primary schools!”). Tokyo: Keiogi Daigaku Publishing Company. 
Paramskas, D. M. (1999). The shape of computer-mediated communication. In K. Cameron (Ed.), 
Computer assisted language learning: Media, design and applications (pp. 14–31). Lisse: Swets & 
Zeitlinger. 
Payne, S., & Whitney, P. (2002). Developing L2 oral proficiency through synchronous CMC: Output, 
working memory, and interlanguage development. CALICO Journal, 20(1), 7–32. 
Pellettieri, J. (2000). Negotiation in cyberspace: The role of chatting in the development of grammatical 
competence. In M. Warschauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Network-based language teaching: Concepts and 
practice (pp. 59–86). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Schmidt, R. W. (1990). The role of consciousness in second language learning. Applied Linguistics, 11, 
129–158. 
Schmidt, R. W., & Frota, S. N. (1986). Developing basic conversational ability in a second language: A 
case study of an adult learner of Portuguese. In R. Day (Ed.), Talking to learn: Conversation in second 
language acquisition (pp. 237–326). Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
Schwienhorst, K. (2003) Learner autonomy and tandem learning: Putting principles into practice in 
synchronous and asynchronous telecommunications environments. Computer Assisted Language 
Learning, 16(5), 427–443. 
Schwartz, B. (1993). On explicit and negative data effecting and affecting competence and linguistic 
behavior. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 15, 147–163. 
Shekary, M., & Tahirin, M. H. (2006). Negotiation of meaning and noticing in text-based online chat. The 
Modern Language Journal, 90(4), 557–572. 
Smith, B. (2003). Computer-mediated negotiated interaction: An expanded model. The Modern Language 
Journal, 87(1), 38–57. 
Smith, B. (2005). The relationship between negotiated interaction, learner uptake, and lexical acquisition 
in task-based computer-mediated communication. TESOL Quarterly, 39(1), 33–58. 
Smith, B. (2008). Methodological hurdles in capturing CMC data: The case of the missing self-repair. 
Language Learning & Technology, 12(1), 85–103. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num1/smith/ 
default.html  
Sotillo, S. M. (2000). Discourse functions and syntactic complexity in synchronous and asynchronous 
communication. Language Learning & Technology, 4(1), 82–119. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/ 
vol4num1/sotillo/default.html  
Sotillo, S. (2005). Corrective feedback via Instant Messenger learning activities in NS-NNS and NNS-
NNS dyads. CALICO Journal, 22(3), 467–496. 
Swain, M. (1985). Communicative competence: Some roles of comprehensible input and comprehensible 
output in its development. In S. M. Gass & C. G. Madden (Eds.), Input in second language acquisition 
(pp. 235–253). Rowley, MA: Newberry House. 
Jack Bower and Satomi Kawaguchi Negotiation of Meaning and Corrective Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 71 
Swain, M. (1993). The output hypothesis: Just speaking and writing aren’t enough. Canadian Modern 
Language Review, 50, 158–164. 
Swain, M. (1995). Three functions of output in second language learning. In Cook, G. (Ed.), Principle 
and practice in applied linguistics: Studies in Honor of H. G. Widdowson (pp. 125–144). Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Truscott, J. (2007). The effect of error correction on learners’ ability to write accurately. System, 16, 255–
272. 
Tudini, V. (2003). Using native speakers in chat. Language Learning & Technology, 7(3), 141–159. 
Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num3/tudini/default.html  
Varnosfadrani, A., & Basturkmen, H. (2009). The effectiveness of implicit and explicit error correction 
on learners’ performance. System, 37, 82–98. 
Varonis, E. M., & Gass, S. M. (1985). Non-native/non-native conversation: A model for negotiation of 
meaning. Applied Linguistics, 6(1), 71–90. 
Ware, P., & Cañado. M. (2007). Grammar and feedback: Turning to language form in telecollaboration. 
In R. O’Dowd (Ed.), Online intercultural exchange: An introduction for foreign language teachers (pp. 
107–126). Clevedon: Multilingual Matters. 
Ware, P., & Kramsch, C. (2005). Toward an intercultural stance: Teaching German and English through 
telecollaboration. The Modern Language Journal, 89(2), 190–205. 
Ware, P., & O’Dowd, R. (2008). Peer feedback on language form in telecollaboration. Language 
Learning & Technology, 12(1), 43–63. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num1/wareodowd/ 
default.html  
White, L. (1987). Against comprehensible input: The input hypothesis and the development of second 
language competence. Applied Linguistics, 8, 95-110. 
Zourou, K. (2008). Towards a typology of corrective feedback moves in asynchronous distance language 
learning environment. Proceedings of CLaSIC 2008 conference: Media in Foreign Language Teaching 
and Learning, pp. 651–668. 
Zourou, K. (2009). Corrective feedback in tellecollaborative L2 settings: Reflections on symmetry and 
interaction. The JALT CALL Journal, 5(1), 3–20.  
