Language Learning & Technology 
http:/llt.msu.edu/issues/june2011/review4.pdf 
June 2011, Volume 15, Number 2 
pp. 42–43 
 
Copyright © 2011, ISSN 1094-3501 42 
REVIEW OF CORPUS-BASED CONTRASTIVE STUDIES OF ENGLISH 
AND CHINESE 
Corpus-Based Contrastive Studies of English and 
Chinese (Routledge Advances in Corpus Linguistics)  
 
Richard Xiao and Tony McEnery 
   
2010 
ISBN: 978-0415992459   
US $117.57 (hardcover) 
201 pp.  
 
Routledge  
London & New York 
 
 
Review by Zhang Xiaojun, Shaanxi Normal University 
Contrastive research of English and Chinese, particularly in mainland China, has attracted great attention 
since the late 1970s. Corpus-Based Contrastive Studies of English and Chinese makes an important 
contribution to this body of work. Richard Xiao and Tony McEnery provide an examination of a number 
of grammatical categories, including aspect markers, temporal adverbials, quantifiers, passives, and 
negation structures in English and Chinese. The book is organized into six main chapters framed by an 
introductory and summary chapter. 
The corpora used in this book are introduced in Chapter 1 and include the Freiburg-LOB corpus (FLOB), 
the Lancaster Corpus of Mandarin Chinese (LCMC), and the Freiburg-Brown corpus (Frown). FLOB is 
an update of LOB (Johansson, Leech, & Goodluck, 1978) which sampled texts published in 1991–1992. 
LCMC was designed as a Chinese match for FLOB, representing written Chinese published in China in 
the early 1990s (McEnery, Xiao, & Mo, 2003). 
The first of the chapters in the main text, “Aspect Marking in English and Chinese,” provides a 
contrastive study of aspect marking in English and Chinese and concludes that while Chinese and English 
are typologically different, aspect markers in the two languages show a strikingly similar distribution 
pattern. The authors counted and contrasted the frequencies of perfective and imperfective aspect markers 
in English and Chinese corpora. In Chinese, they found that the particles ‘-le, -guo, zai, and -zhe’ are 
regarded as aspect markers, of which the first two markers represent the perfective aspect and the other 
two refer to the imperfective aspect. In English, perfective meaning is “most commonly expressed by the 
simple past, though the perfect can also mark perfectivity” (p.14). Comparing the frequencies of 
perfective and imperfective aspect markers in different languages is a feasible way to set up such 
contrastive language studies. 
Chapter 4, “Quantifying Constructions in English and Chinese,” shows that Chinese employs numeral-
classifier constructions obligatorily in quantification, whereas in English a classifier is only required when 
non-count nouns are quantified. Classifiers are motivated cognitively, pragmatically, and conventionally 
in both English and Chinese. Normally, Chinese is recognized as a classifier language while English is 
not, but the two languages show striking similarities in their classifier systems in spite of the different 
terms used and in spite of several quantitative differences. The authors found that a cross-linguistic 
difference exists because Chinese is a non-inflectional language, whereas nouns in English inflect for 
Zhang Xiaojun Review of Corpus-Based Contrastive Studies of English and Chinese 
 
Language Learning & Technology 43 
plurality morphologically. The authors illustrate eight semantic categories of classifiers that exist in both 
Chinese and English and point out that classifiers in the two languages differ in a number of ways. For 
example, classifiers are significantly more common in Chinese; unit classifiers and verbal classifiers are 
characteristic of Chinese while collective classifiers are more diversified in English.  
Chapter 5, “Passives in English and Chinese,” is concerned with passive constructions in English and 
Chinese. The authors indicate that while passive constructions in English and Chinese express a basic 
passive meaning, they also show a range of differences in terms of overall frequencies, syntactic features 
and functions, semantic properties, and distributions across genres. By statistically contrasting these, 
several conclusions were drawn. First, passive constructions are nearly ten times as frequent in English as 
in Chinese. Also, a major distinction between passive constructions in the two languages is that Chinese 
passives are more frequently used with an inflictive meaning than English passives. There are clearly 
genre variations in the distribution of passive variants in both languages, and the passive is primarily used 
to mark an impersonal, objective and formal style in English, whereas it is typically an “inflictive voice” 
in Chinese. 
The next two chapters each examine negation structure: “Negation in English and Chinese: Variants and 
Variations” (Chapter 6) and “Negation in English and Chinese: Special Usages” (Chapter 7). The 
discussion in Chapter 6 provides various negative forms and their language-specific features in English 
and in Chinese and focuses on the differences and similarities of explicit not and no-negation structures in 
English as well as bu and mei negations in Chinese. Chapter 7 discusses the scope and focus of negation 
and also contrasts special usages such as transferred negation, double negation, and redundant negation. 
In conclusion, this book seeks to provide a systematic account of several grammatical categories in 
English and Chinese on the basis of written and spoken corpus data of the two languages. In the final 
chapter, “Challenge and Promise, and the Way Forward,” the authors construct a model of contrastive 
corpus linguistics that helps bring together the strengths of contrastive analysis and corpus analysis. This 
synergy expands the field of corpus linguistics, translation studies, and second language acquisition 
research by providing a bridge that links all of these research areas.  
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER  
Zhang Xiaojun is an associate professor in computational linguistics at the School of Foreign Languages 
of Shaanxi Normal University, China. He is an academic visitor at the Center of Translation and 
Intercultural Studies (CTIS), University of Manchester, from September 2010 to August 2011. His 
published work includes Semantic Combination and Machine Translation (in Chinese) and ‘The Fuzzy 
Integrated Evaluate Method of Translation Quality’. Address for correspondence: Zhang Xiaojun, No. 
199 South Chang’an Road, School of Foreign Languages, Shaanxi Normal University, 710062 Xi’an, 
China (P.R.C.). 
E-mail: andy_zxj@126.com 
 
REFERENCES  
Johansson, S., Leech, G., & Goodluck, H. (1978). Manual of information to accompany the Lancaster-
Oslo/Bergen Corpus of British English for Use with Digital Computers. Oslo: University of Oslo. 
McEnery, T., Xiao, R., & Mo, L. (2003). Aspect marking in English and Chinese: Using the Lancaster 
Corpus of Mandarin Chinese for contrastive language study. Literary and Linguistic Computing, 18(4), 
361–378. 
