Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2011/pasfieldneofitou.pdf 
June 2011, Volume 15, Number 2 
pp. 92–108 
 
Copyright © 2011, ISSN 1094-3501 92 
ONLINE DOMAINS OF LANGUAGE USE: SECOND LANGUAGE 
LEARNERS’ EXPERIENCES OF VIRTUAL COMMUNITY AND 
FOREIGNNESS 
Sarah Pasfield-Neofitou 
Monash University 
This paper examines the use of CMC in both Japanese and English dominated domains by 
Australian learners of Japanese. The natural, social online communication of 12 Australian 
university students with 18 of their Japanese contacts was collected for a period of up to 
four years, resulting in a corpus of approximately 2,000 instances of blogs, e-mails, SNS 
interactions, chat conversations, game profiles, and mobile phone communications. To 
supplement this data, interviews were conducted to further explore participants’ Internet 
communication and L2 use. These interviews, paired with evidence from the corpus of 
collected data, are analysed using Sealey and Carter’s (2004) social realism framework in 
order to explore questions of language selection, identity construction and nationality, as 
well as what it means to be a foreigner online. 
INTRODUCTION 
Since the early years of the Internet, discussion of virtual communities has been at the forefront of much 
research (Crook & Light, 2002; Johnston & Johal, 1999; Matei, 2005; Rheingold, 1993; Zorn, 2004). 
Clodius (1997, January) points out that online, shared interests and self-identification of belonging are 
viable alternatives to simply defining community on the basis of geography or patterns of residence. This 
of course has important implications for second language (L2) uses of computer-mediated communication 
(CMC), which may serve as opportunities for immersion in a virtual, target-language-speaking 
community. 
It has often been claimed that online, particularly in text-based communication, it is largely optional to 
signal one’s ethnicity, gender, age, or mother tongue. One early Internet adopter quoted in Turkle’s 
pioneer research stated: 
You can be whoever you want to be. You can completely redefine yourself if you want. You don’t 
have to worry about the slots other people put you in as much. They don’t look at your body and 
make assumptions. They don’t hear your accent and make assumptions. All they see are your words. 
(Turkle, 1995, p. 184) 
Similarly, Sundén (2003) argues that online, we write ourselves into being. This has important 
implications for the L2 user. Do L2 users approach online communication as an opportunity to hide their 
body and accent and appear less foreign? Are all linguistic domains equally accessible to native (NS) and 
non-native (NNS) speakers alike? Given the prevalent view of CMC as a useful tool for language practise 
outside the classroom, these questions appear worthy of further exploration. This paper presents some 
evidence emerging from interviews with L2 learners, and the analysis of their online communication in 
NS communities, which suggest that although some virtual communities provide a sense of immersion in 
a certain culture, they may also foster feelings of foreignness. As one participant in the present study 
commented, a specific domain may be simultaneously “a place where you can be surrounded by the 
language” and a place where “you’re always gonna be a JSL (Japanese as a Second Language) student.” 
As such, participants’ sense of identity was found to be affected in the present study on the basis of the 
linguistic domain they inhabited at the time. 
In the introduction to her influential book, Life on the Screen, Turkle (1995) defined identity in a 
computer-mediated environment as multiple, fluid, and constituted in interaction via technology. Yet a 
decade later, Hewling (2005) argued that CMC research has often taken a narrow, nationality-based view 
Sarah Pasfield-Neofitou Online Domains of Language Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 93 
of culture, and suggests instead that identity or identities be viewed as a site of ongoing negotiation. Such 
negotiation, Hewling states, is visible online in the form of CMC discourse. Thus, analysis of L2 learners’ 
online language use across a variety of domains may provide greater insight into the nature of 
constructing identity via an L2 online, in particular, in terms of ethnicity, nationality, and 
nativeness/foreignness, and the effects of communicating in certain domains on opportunities for 
language learning and use. 
Past Research on CMC 
Miller and Slater (2000) criticize the first generation of Internet literature for viewing the Internet as a 
gigantic, placeless cyberspace. Much of this early research on CMC tended to view the Internet as a 
monolithic space that was somehow “more egalitarian, democratic, and liberating than face-to-face 
interactions” (Sproull and Kiesler, 1986; McGuire, Kiesler, & Siegel, 1987; Dubrovsky, Kiesler, & 
Sethna, 1991; cited in Watt, Lea, & Spears, 2002, p. 63). Simon even described the Internet as having an 
“inherent support of democracy” (2002, p. 101). Hanna and de Nooy categorize such views as subscribing 
to the borderless world (2004, p. 259) perception of Internet communication, in which the Internet is 
deemed to remove cultural difference. Of course, these perspectives have had an important impact on 
research in the areas of L2 use and acquisition also. 
Past research on L2 use and acquisition points to a variety of benefits of the online environment. A 
reduction in anxiety in comparison to face-to-face speech and greater opportunities for language 
production have been claimed as some of the most important implications of CMC for L2 learners. 
Itakura and Nakajima (2001) found that the use of CMC assisted language learners in gaining an authentic 
audience, provided them with the flexibility to compose e-mails at their leisure, gave them a record of 
communication, fostered independent learning and provided opportunities for the negotiation of meaning, 
which can lead to language learning. Yoshimura and Miyazoe-Wong (2005) also found that 
communication with NSs via CMC could help students to amend stereotypes, and Kano (2004) claims 
that such interactions can expose learners to language variation in the form of popular grammar, slang, 
and regional dialects. 
A body of work on young people’s use of CMC for social purposes in a first language setting has been 
carried out by boyd1 and others (boyd, 2007; boyd & Ellison, 2007; boyd & Heer, 2006, January), who 
found that participation online is increasingly seen as an essential part of teenage social lives. However, 
online participation is influenced by physical location and (offline) social relationships, with students who 
live with roommates or alone more likely to engage in Social Networking Site (SNS) use than those who 
live with their parents (Hargittai, 2007). The current study shows that in addition to one’s immediate 
environment (e.g., being physically located at home, school, or in a net café or library), one’s broader 
socio-political geographical environment at the national level, and the similar borders manifested online, 
also influence online participation, especially intercultural communication. 
Recent studies are beginning to challenge assumptions of the Internet as a monolithic, placeless space, 
pointing out, for example, the dominance of English, but domains in which languages other than English 
preside appear neglected. Hanna and de Nooy (2004) also argue that little systematic attention has been 
paid to intercultural online communication. So far, the question of how participation in online 
communication affects opportunities for language acquisition, particularly of an Asian language, in a 
naturalistic setting has not yet been adequately explored, despite the widely accepted benefits of CMC use 
for language practise outside of the classroom. 
The present study utilises a social realist frame to investigate the informal use of CMC by NSs of English 
and Japanese in terms of language choice, identity display, conceptions of nationality and the perceived 
ownership of online spaces. Importantly, it describes some CMC users who identify themselves online as 
foreigners, in stark contrast with the idea of the Internet as a placeless space. 
Sarah Pasfield-Neofitou Online Domains of Language Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 94 
METHOD 
In the present study, 12 Australian university students of Japanese were recruited, who in turn invited 
their Japanese contacts to participate. In total, data was collected from 30 participants, and some Japanese 
participants were contacts of more than one Australian participant. 
Table 1. Australian and Japanese Participants 
Australian Participant Japanese Contact(s) 
Cindy Mei  
Genna Tokio  
Scott Kieko  
Lucas Hisayo  
Zac Fumie 
Oscar Yoshio 
Kaylene Chikae, Daishi, Ikuko, Junko, Ruriko, Ukiko, Watako 
Kaylene & Jacob Kō 
Ellise Atsuko, Sae 
Ellise & Alisha Eri 
Alisha Noriko 
Hyacinth No current Japanese contacts at time of study 
Noah No current Japanese contacts at time of study 
In contrast to many previous studies, volunteers were not paired with NSs in order to complete tasks, but 
instead data was collected from participants in existing relationships. The collection resulted in over 2,000 
instances of naturally occurring language use via blogs (including Ameba and Mixi), e-mails (via both PC 
and mobile phone), SNSs (including Facebook, Mixi, and MySpace), online videos, chat messages, video 
game interactions, and Website or forum posts. Data from the social networking sites Mixi and Facebook, 
as will be further elaborated in the findings section, are focused on in particular as case studies in the 
current paper. 
Background interviews were also completed (face-to-face and audio-recorded with the Australian 
participants, and via e-mail with the Japanese participants) to gain insight into participants’ language and 
computing histories. Participants were also invited to take part in a follow-up interview, focusing on their 
most recent interaction, in order to obtain more detailed information about their language use in context. 
As three of the Australian participants moved to Japan part-way through the data collection period, a 
small number of fieldwork focus group sessions were also conducted, which gave the researcher the 
opportunity to interview both the Japanese and Australian participant in a pair simultaneously. The use of 
Sealey and Carter’s (2004) social realism framework allowed for a holistic approach to the analysis of the 
interviews and CMC data. 
Sealey and Carter’s approach combines elements of applied linguistics and sociology to facilitate the 
investigation of issues which incorporate both social and language acquisition factors. It places emphasis 
on situated activity (e.g., the act of engaging in CMC), social structure (e.g., the social and other networks 
present, and the differential distribution of life chances within these groups), participant 
psychobiographies (i.e., participants’ histories with computer use and language learning), and contextual 
resources (i.e., the physical, conceptual and linguistic tools made use of). The social realism framework 
has been successfully applied to a range of applied linguistic and sociolinguistic research, as well as its 
Sarah Pasfield-Neofitou Online Domains of Language Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 95 
more specific use in the analysis of CMC by Belz and others (Belz, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, July, 2005; 
Belz & Müller-Hartmann, 2003; Belz & Reinhardt, 2004). While Belz’s research concentrates on CMC 
use in a formal educational setting, the framework is equally applicable to students’ use of CMC outside 
of teacher directed activity. 
In an investigation of the social dimensions of telecollaborative foreign language study involving e-mail, 
synchronous chat, and the construction of Websites, Belz (2002) provides a useful summary of the realist 
position from both a theoretical and methodological perspective. Theoretically, the social realist position 
views social action as shaped by the interplay of social and systemic phenomena (Archer, 1995, p. 11). 
Social action is seen as embedded within history (Belz, 2002, p. 61). Methodologically, the social realist 
approach reflects the complex and layered nature of the empirical world, relying on an exploratory, multi-
strategy approach. Layder summarises the central aim of realism as “an attempt to preserve a ‘scientific’ 
attitude towards social analysis at the same time as recognising the importance of actors’ meanings” 
(1993, p. 16). 
While social realism is not tied to a proscriptive methodological program, in order to analyse participants’ 
meanings, both the background and follow-up interviews were coded using the qualitative data analysis 
software package NVivo, in a comparative analysis, according to the methods outlined in Grounded 
Theory (Glaser & Strauss, 1967). This entailed a massive amount of detailed, layered coding, where 
individual nodes were organised under larger concepts. Three levels of coding, as suggested by Richards 
(2005) were employed, namely descriptive, topic, and analytical:  
1. Descriptive Coding – The identification of attributes such as a participants’ age, average hours 
of computer use daily, and so on which describe a case. 
2. Topic Coding – The organization of passages of text by topic, for example, allocating a section 
of an interview that describes chat usage to a node named chat. 
Auto Coding – The use of software (such as NVivo) to identify key concepts via a crude analysis 
of specific words in a text, or by grouping the answers to the same question across a variety of 
participants to the same node. Only the latter has been employed in the present research. 
3. Analytical Coding – Coding that results from interpretation and reflection on meaning—such as, 
what is this particular passage about? What categorie(s) properly represent that passage? What 
context should be coded? 
In Vivo Coding – a term from Grounded Theory which refers to categories named by words the 
participants themselves use. 
(Richards, 2005, pp. 90–95) 
In vivo coding, as described above, preserves the importance of actors’ meanings, as described by Layder 
(1993), and one particular in vivo coding, that of domains, will be the main focus of the current paper. 
Participants’ CMC data was analysed at the level of the e-turn, a unit of analysis proposed by Thorne 
(1999). The e-turn, while based on the turn, does not include the notions of linear sequencing and 
juxtaposition, but instead may be defined as a freestanding communicative unit, taking its form from the 
way the program receives and orders input, and the form and content of the message, as typed by the user. 
In the analysis of participants’ interaction data, Nishimura’s (1992, 1997) identification of Basically 
English and Basically Japanese varieties also proved useful. Each e-turn was categorized as either 
English (containing no code switching to Japanese), Mostly English: (where borrowings or code switches 
occurred within an English environment, that is, following English grammatical rules), Japanese 
(containing no switches to English), Mostly Japanese (where borrowings or switches to English occurred 
within a Japanese environment), or Other (including No language where, for example, participants posted 
a blog containing a photo and no linguistic content, or where languages other than Japanese and English 
Sarah Pasfield-Neofitou Online Domains of Language Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 96 
were used). Overall, the Australian participants’ use of Japanese and English with their Japanese 
interlocutors online was fairly balanced. English or Mostly English e-turns accounted for 47% of the e-
turns sent by Australian participants, while 48% were composed in Japanese or Mostly Japanese (the 
remaining 5% were categorized as Other). 
FINDINGS 
Second Language Use According to Linguistic Domain 
As mentioned above, participants in the present study made use of a broad range of CMC mediums with 
their contacts. Yet despite often communicating with the same Japanese contacts via a number of different 
mediums, participants’ language selection and identity performance differed across mediums. Nowhere 
was this difference more pronounced than on Mixi and Facebook, two SNSs. Table 2 demonstrates the 
large difference in language choice on these two sites, as well as the proportions of language use on other 
mediums used by more than one participant. 
Table 2. Language Choice According to Domain 
Domain 
Type of domain 
according to 
participants’ 
interview comments 
Language choice 
(Mostly) 
English 
(Mostly) 
Japanese Other 
Facebook English 84% 16% 0% 
E-mails Neither 62% 25% 13% 
MSN Chats Neither 62% 36% 2% 
Ameba Blogs Japanese 35% 62% 3% 
Mixi Japanese 25% 63% 12% 
English, or a Mostly English variety was used on Facebook between the Australian and Japanese 
participants in 84% of instances of their communication (including both private Facebook messages, and 
public wall comments), while Japanese or a Mostly Japanese variety was used only 16% of the time. 
Conversely, English or Mostly English was used only 25% of the time on Mixi, while Japanese or a 
Mostly Japanese variety was used in 63% of interactions. A further 12% of interactions on Mixi blogs, 
messages and comments were categorised as Other. 
When only messages sent by the Australian participants are considered, the contrast appears even starker. 
The Australian learners of Japanese used Japanese or Mostly Japanese in only 6% of their private 
messages to Japanese contacts, and in 15% of their wall postings to Japanese contacts on Facebook. On 
Mixi, however, Japanese or Mostly Japanese was used in 63% of Australian participants’ messages to 
Japanese contacts and in 82% of their blogs. This clear difference in language choice appears to be a 
result of participants viewing these SNSs as discrete linguistic domains2, as will be elaborated in the 
section that follows. 
The two examples of Mixi and Facebook described above will be utilised in the present paper as a case 
study of the ways the linguistic domain in which communication is located was found to affect 
participants’ language use, and identity construction. Mixi was used by half of the Australian participants 
in the current study (6/12 participants), while Facebook was used by three-quarters (8/12 participants). 
Ameba blogs, while also viewed as a Japanese domain and while exhibiting similar patterns of language 
choice, was only used by three participants, and will be addressed later. 
Language Choice According to Domain 
Sarah Pasfield-Neofitou Online Domains of Language Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 97 
When participants were asked to reflect upon their language selections, the concept of language-specific 
domains quickly emerged. Kaylene explained her choice to use a mostly Japanese variety in her 
communication on Mixi, commenting, “I think I always use Japanese on the actual blogs, because it feels 
like a Japanese domain, and so I feel like I should.” Ellise said, “I tend to view Mixi as a Japanese forum 
… most of the people on there, in fact, 99% of people on there can’t actually read English.” Even Sae, 
one of Ellise’s Japanese contacts, said that she used Japanese with Ellise on Mixi precisely “because it’s 
Mixi.” 
While Mixi was identified as a Japanese domain, Facebook was conversely viewed as an English domain, 
in which English language use was the norm for participants. This is evidenced in Zac’s comment that 
Mixi was the “Japanese version of a Facebook” (Zac Interview 1, 29/07/08), clearly locating Facebook as 
the English language equivalent. 
Interlocutors According to Domain 
Participants’ disparate language selections on Mixi and Facebook may in part be explained by Ellise’s 
comment above, that “most of the people on there, in fact, 99% of people on there can’t actually read 
English,” (Ellise Interview 2, 10/03/08). Although most of Ellise’s contacts, and the contacts of other 
participants, had some understanding of English, Japanese was certainly the primary language for the vast 
majority of the Australian participants’ Mixi contacts. All 42 of Ellise’s contacts on Mixi were Japanese, 
as were all 12 of Zac’s contacts. Only Alisha had more non-Japanese than Japanese contacts on Mixi, 
with the non-Japanese outweighing the Japanese by just one person (3 Japanese, 4 non-Japanese). 
Overall, 88% (84/95 contacts) of the Australian participants’ contacts on Mixi were Japanese, as Table 3 
demonstrates. 
Table 3. The Australian Participants’ Mixi Friends (MyMiku) 
Participant Total number of 
contacts on Mixi 
Number of 
Japanese contacts 
on Mixi 
% of Japanese 
Contacts on Mixi 
Noah 11 8 72.7 
Ellise 42 42 100.0 
Zac 11 11 100.0 
Alisha 7 3 42.9 
Oscar 13 10 76.9 
Kaylene 11 10 90.9 
Total 95 84 88.0 
The demographic makeup of participants’ Facebook networks was almost a mirror image, as shown in 
Table 4. One participant, Hyacinth, had no Japanese contacts on her Facebook friend list, despite having a 
total of 108 contacts. The participant with the highest proportion of Japanese contacts was Kaylene, who 
notably worked in Japan during the time of data collection. Even so, Kaylene’s proportion of Japanese 
contacts on Facebook (24.2%) is still considerably lower than her total on Mixi (90.9%), and even lower 
than Alisha’s Mixi total (42.9%), which was the lowest proportion of Japanese contacts on Mixi overall. 
Sarah Pasfield-Neofitou Online Domains of Language Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 98 
Table 4. The Australian Participants’ Facebook Friends 
Participant Total number of 
contacts on 
Facebook 
Number of 
Japanese contacts 
on Facebook 
% of Japanese 
Contacts on 
Facebook 
Lucas 1 3 2.1 
Ellise 311 41 13.2 
Hyacinth 108 0 0.0 
Zac 254 12 4.7 
Jacob 136 28 20.6 
Alisha 38 3 7.9 
Oscar 131 3 2.3 
Kaylene 33 8 24.2 
Total 1152 98 8.5 
Participants’ perceptions of Mixi and Facebook as Japanese and English domains respectively appears to 
have been influenced by the demographic makeup of their social networks on these sites. These 
perceptions, in turn, informed language selection. Kaylene termed Mixi a Japanese forum and stated that 
this influenced her language choice: “I tend to view Mixi as a Japanese forum. I’ve only used English 
here in the couple of phrases that I wasn’t sure about, and when I was talking about the English 
language.” Indeed, 16 of Kaylene’s total of 17 Mixi blogs were written entirely in Japanese. 
Importantly, it appears that it was not simply the increased presence of NSs of Japanese on Mixi, but also 
the fact that Mixi was an area of the Internet dominated by and moderated in Japanese that influenced 
participants’ perceptions of Mixi as a virtual L2 community, and their language choice. Taking Alisha’s 
communication with her Japanese friend Eri as an example, it is clear that the environment in which a 
message was produced had an important impact on the language selected. On Mixi, Alisha composed a 
total of five blogs that were collected for the present study, two of which were commented on by Eri. Eri 
too wrote a blog which was commented on by Alisha, to which she replied. Finally, Eri also sent Alisha a 
private message, giving a total of 10 instances of data. 
All five of Alisha’s blogs were in Japanese (4/5 blogs) or Mostly Japanese (1/5 blogs) varieties. Eri’s 
blog, too, was written in the Mostly Japanese variety, with some Mandarin use. Likewise, all three of 
Eri’s comments were written in Japanese (2/3 comments) or Mostly Japanese (1/3 comments), and 
Alisha’s only comment was also in Japanese. Overall, all of Alisha and Eri’s communication on Mixi 
was carried out in Japanese or Mostly Japanese. 
On Facebook, however, although the interlocutors (Alisha and Eri) and topics of discussion (daily life and 
university) remained the same, their language choice was reversed. Alisha and Eri each commented on 
each other’s walls using the Mostly English varieties. Other participants followed a similar pattern of 
language selection. Ellise, who also communicated with Eri, used Mostly English (3/4 wall posts) on 
Facebook, but almost exclusively Japanese (9/10 blogs) on Mixi. 
With the exception of Lucas, whose use of Japanese with his friend Hisayo increased over time, as part of 
a determined effort to practise his L2, Japanese proficiency did not appear to be linked to language 
choice. Medium choice, or more importantly, the linguistic domain in which that medium is seen as 
located, the nature of communication, and interpersonal factors, such as relationship and interlocutor’s 
language choice, were found to have a far greater influence. 
The Benefits of Virtual Community and Language Immersion 
Sarah Pasfield-Neofitou Online Domains of Language Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 99 
Given the popularity of the term virtual community, it was unsurprising that several participants made 
reference to this concept in the interviews, in relation to linguistic domains. However, not all of their 
comments were positive. This section concentrates on Mixi, the medium participants most frequently 
used in Japanese, with some additional illustrations from other data. 
The Australian learners of Japanese described both positive and negative experiences and perceptions of 
Japanese domains. One of Alisha’s comments in particular illustrates the conflicting views of Japanese 
domains that she held. Alisha said: 
[I]n my everyday life, I don’t use the language a lot unless I do it online. It’s a place where you can 
be surrounded by the language, without being in a place where you’re surrounded by the language! 
It’s a virtual community …. but when it comes to it, you’re always gonna be a JSL, I guess, a 
Japanese as a Second Language student, so it’s gonna be a struggle. 
“A Place Where You Can be Surrounded by the Language” 
Like Alisha, many other Australian participants saw CMC as a surrogate for face-to-face interaction in the 
target language. Zac stated that he supplemented his eight hours of Japanese classes at university each 
week with participation in a conversation group and online communication, saying “uni doesn’t have 
enough hours to study a language.” Kaylene, too, commented that before she moved to Japan, she used 
Mixi frequently, “as Japanese practise, because I felt like I wasn’t getting enough.” Later, Kaylene 
remarked: 
I think I’ve made one post [on Mixi] since I came to Japan, and since then, I’ve sort of slacked off … 
now I’m working at the museum, and get to talk to people every day in Japanese, I guess it’s not as 
necessary. 
Even though most participants’ main goal in communicating with their Japanese contacts was social 
rather than educational, use of CMC for Japanese practise among the Australian participants was very 
common. Participation in Japanese domains such as Mixi, and other, less frequently used domains like 
Ameba (a blogging site) and WebKare (or Web Boyfriend, http://web-kare.jp an online game) provided 
participants with not only increased opportunities to communicate with NSs of Japanese (due to the 
higher proportion of Japanese users of these sites), but also the opportunity to be surrounded by the 
language, as Alisha describes. Sites which are moderated in Japanese require the user to actively navigate 
the site using the language, and those that are sponsored by Japanese companies provide opportunities for 
exposure to authentic advertising. 
The Australian participants were also able to view messages posted to their Japanese contacts by other 
Japanese users of the sites, and to gain admission to other online spaces via their membership of these 
communities. Alisha accessed Japanese Websites advertised on Mixi, and Cindy, Genna and Hyacinth 
obtained information on their favourite Japanese pop stars by reading their blogs on Ameba. As 
mentioned above, the immersion-like effect of being surrounded by one’s target language also motivated 
the Australian participants to read and write more using their L2. Yet although entering a Japanese 
domain may have had numerous positive effects, validating Itakura and Nakajima’s (2001) claims 
regarding the importance of an authentic audience for language learning, some participants nonetheless 
retained a strong sense of being an outsider. 
“You’re Always Gonna be a JSL” 
In one of her interviews, Ameba and WebKare user Hyacinth commented that she had heard “a lot of 
negative feedback from people who weren’t Japanese” about certain Japanese domains. Based on 
feedback from other NNSs of Japanese on the blog site LiveJournal, Hyacinth became wary of attempting 
a number of online activities, such as a blogging tool that focused on drawing, one of her main interests. 
In the interview, Hyacinth said that she had wanted to try using this blog until she heard negative 
feedback from non-Japanese who were ostracized from “the Japanese online circles [and] communities.” 
Sarah Pasfield-Neofitou Online Domains of Language Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 100 
Hyacinth also heard similar reactions to a video site that she described as being “for Japanese people.” 
She said: 
I remember them [non-Japanese posters on a forum] saying one person posted a video of them self, 
and they were mocked to the ends of the earth, and felt really ashamed, because they weren’t 
Japanese. I think there’s a kind of pride that comes with them [being Japanese], especially online. 
Hyacinth was also warned off 2chan, a very popular Japanese Internet forum famous for its distinctive 
vocabulary and appearance in the film Densha Otoko, saying that she thought it was “dangerous to try as 
a non-Japanese speaker.” Again, she had heard that “if you say one word out of line, something wrong, no 
one will look at you or respect you or anything.” 
Although it is important not to over-emphasize the benefits of the Internet at the expense of ignoring the 
less positive aspects, Hyacinth’s experiences were by no means representative of the group as a whole, 
and her reluctance to participate online seems to have at least in part been affected by her own self-
consciousness and lack of confidence in her Japanese. Even though communicating with one’s university 
teachers in Japanese was common practice among the Australian participants in general, Hyacinth stated 
that she never emailed any of her teachers in Japanese, and was frightened of doing so. Nevertheless, it 
must be remembered that such negative experiences do occur, and while Hyacinth’s reports were not 
representative of the group, this may be because the others have not ventured into the various online 
spaces she did. 
A final example of a negative experience for Hyacinth occurred on the forum of an online game. Almost 
two months after her final interview, Hyacinth contacted the researcher to describe an experience, this 
time, on a medium she had decided to attempt using, called WebKare, an online dating simulator with a 
forum attached. While Hyacinth read the forum postings often, she decided not to contribute due to the 
abusive nature of some posts. Although a large number of Japanese users were welcoming and helpful to 
Japanese learners, some were dissatisfied about the use of other languages, particularly Chinese and 
Korean, or the poor use of Japanese on the Website. While it is difficult to find examples of the more 
abusive posts as the moderators have been vigilant about censoring as many as possible, hostility towards 
language variation on the WebKare forum is evident, for example, in the following post from an 
anonymous user written in Japanese, which Hyacinth pointed out as typical of the debate: 
Extract 1. Japanese WebKare Posting Example 
日本語で書きなさい。 
ここは日本人のためのサービスです。 
日本語が理解できないなら日本のサービスを受ける資格はありません。 
中国だの韓国だのそれぞれの国で勝手に暴れなさい。 
(Write in Japanese. 
This is a service for Japanese people. 
If you cannot understand Japanese you have no right to use Japanese services. 
Whether you’re from China or Korea, go act like savages in your own country.) 
(Anon. 20/09/2008) 
Despite its aggressive wording, Hyacinth showed some sympathy to this writer’s point of view, stating 
that she did not understand why people would use a Japanese site “if you only want to talk in another 
language.” She said, “some Japanese users mentioned that some foreign users use ‘I don’t understand 
Sarah Pasfield-Neofitou Online Domains of Language Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 101 
Japanese/I’m foreign’ as an excuse to avoid confrontation.” 
After such dissatisfaction among some users about the use of languages other than Japanese on the forum, 
the moderators announced a split, segregating the forum into two separate boards, Oekaki Japanese and 
Scribble International. (The announcement is viewable at: http://web-kare.jp/information/news/view/15). 
While this move may have appeased a number of users who wanted a Japanese-only forum, 
dissatisfaction is still obvious among users of the international board, which was developed with an 
English interface, although the majority of posts appear to be in Chinese. As another anonymous user 
commented in English on the newly-formed international board: 
Extract 2. English WebKare Posting Example 
First of all; WEB-KARE's oekaki [the Japanese forum] is good so why people won't 
use it? ;o; 
Second; Chinese is over-rated! Let's use English too so that us non-asian people can 
also understand! (to tell the truth, I like more being in JP BBS since at least I can 
UNDERSTAND that. >__>) 
(Anon. 29/09/2008) 
It is evident from this user’s comment that despite her desire to use Japanese, the new forum setting did 
not facilitate this desire, and furthermore, the introduction of a new international board has not gone far to 
alleviate tensions over the use of Chinese. For Hyacinth, an Australian-Chinese-background learner of 
Japanese, hostility towards Chinese affected her motivation to engage in interaction on the forums. 
Even so, Hyacinth saw the reaction of the hostile Japanese as symptomatic of their online space being 
invaded: “I think the frustrations are the invasion of a domain that [is] mostly Japanese.” When asked 
what made the Website a Japanese domain, Hyacinth responded “Generally, the Website being 
completely in Japanese to me suggests that a level of Japanese is required to play it…especially with 
instructions in Japanese.” Thus, in addition to the nationality of users, the language of moderation appears 
to contribute to perceptions of linguistic domains also. 
It is important to note that most of the conversation on the forum regarding the use of WebKare in 
languages other than Japanese was carried out by anonymous users who, as in the two messages above, 
chose not to attach their name or avatar. Levy and Stockwell (2006) state that while anonymity in CMC 
can have positive effects such as giving L2 speakers more confidence to participate than they may have in 
face-to-face communication (as noted by Shibanai, 2007), negative effects, such as the flaming (hostile or 
insulting comments) seen above, are also fostered by the affordance of anonymity. 
As mentioned earlier, the sense of anonymity afforded by some types of online communication has also 
led to claims that, so long as language use does not indicate otherwise, the signaling of race, ethnicity, 
sex, gender, or indeed any other aspect of identity online appears to be at the user’s discretion (Burkhalter 
1999; Herring 2003). Despite this commonly held view, none of the Australian participants in the current 
study attempted to hide or disguise their nationality, or their self-selected identity as language learners. 
On the contrary, participants took pains to emphasise their L2 identities online. 
Language “Learners?” “Users?” “Foreigners?” 
Rather than hiding their L2 learner or L2 user identities, the Australian participants in the present study 
instead brought them to the fore, through the use of both linguistic and visual means. In some cases, 
participants even identified themselves as foreigners, in stark contrast with the idea of the Internet as a 
placeless space, and instead, highlighting the extent to which participants viewed Japanese domains as 
Japanese-owned spaces. 
Sarah Pasfield-Neofitou Online Domains of Language Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 102 
Critics of traditional applied linguistics research have problematised the distinction that has been made 
between native- and non-native speakers, as if these were given, absolute categories. Perhaps the most 
famous call for consideration of these terms was made by Firth and Wagner (1997), arguing that 
mainstream theory skews our view of language learners/users by focusing on them as NNSs who strive to 
reach NS-like competence. In this view, other social identities of individuals are in danger of being 
overlooked. 
Sealey and Carter (2004), too, have highlighted the danger of selective measurement whereby the 
researcher makes use of a preconceived concept, such as NNS or learner, already infused with theoretical 
notions. Sealey and Carter outline their approach to social categories by identifying two types: those 
constituted by involuntaristic characteristics, and those characterised by a degree of choice on the part of 
their members, emphasising that “actors’ understandings are a central element in the theoretical 
description of social collectives” (2001, p. 7). 
Rather than the researcher imposing the categories of learner or native-speaker, in the present study, 
participants identified themselves as learners or native-speakers, as is evidenced in their interview data, 
and sometimes, in their online interactions themselves. However, as identity is fluid, Firth and Wagner’s 
(1997) point that these identities may not always be the most relevant in a given interaction, is taken into 
consideration. Drawing on the case studies of participants’ Facebook and Mixi use, this section will 
examine the fluidity of participants’ identities across different language domains online through an 
analysis of SNS profiles. 
As previously outlined, half of the Australian participants in the current study (Alisha, Ellise, Kaylene, 
Noah, Oscar, and Zac) were members of Mixi, and for five of them, Mixi was their most commonly used 
CMC medium in Japanese. Mixi profiles typically consist of a display photo, a list of basic information, a 
self-introduction, and a list of likes and interests, all of which are optional to complete. 
All six participants who were members of Mixi clearly stated in their profiles that they were not Japanese, 
or that they were studying Japanese. All listed 海外オーストラリア(Overseas: Australia) as their current 
address. This is a set expression included in a list on the site, in which countries other than Japan are 
automatically prefixed Overseas. Yet, of course, providing one’s current country of residence alone does 
not differentiate a student of Japanese as a foreign language from a NS from Japan currently living 
overseas, for example. So in addition to this, Noah and Oscar also added Australia as their birthplace. 
Furthermore, Alisha, Ellise, and Zac all explicitly stated their nationality in the body of their profiles. This 
information often took precedence over other biographic details or participants’ interests. 
Alisha’s profile opened with the statement 「オーストラリア人だ」 (I am Australian). Ellise’s profile 
also started with a statement of nationality: 「私はオーストラリア人とイギリ ス人ですけれども今
オーストラリアに住んでいます！」 (I am Australian and English, however I am living in Australia at 
the moment!). Zac’s profile read 「ザックです。オーストラリア人 で２３歳です」 (I’m Zac. I am 
Australian and 23 years old). Kaylene’s approach was a little less direct, simply implying her foreignness 
by stating 「この日記は、きっと下手で外国人 っぽいな日本語か「ケイリー語」になっちゃうご
めんね」(I’m sorry, this blog will probably end up being very badly written and the Japanese is that of a 
foreigner, or even Kaylese), referring to herself as a foreigner, and her own idiolect as Kaylese (ケイリー
語). 
Furthermore, some participants were also careful to emphasise the fact that they are still studying 
Japanese. Ellise’s second line was 「今は大学で日本語を勉強しています」 (I am studying Japanese 
Sarah Pasfield-Neofitou Online Domains of Language Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 103 
at university at the moment). Similarly, Oscar stated 「今、日本語と中国語を勉強しています」(At 
the moment, I am studying Japanese and Chinese). Noah included a lengthy description of his language 
learning history, excerpted below. 
Extract 3. Noah’s Mixi Profile 
私は２００６年から今まで日本語を勉強しています。最初はＲ大学で日本語の勉強を始ま
ったんですが後八ヶ月に卒業しました。短いコースでしたけどすごく楽しくて興味深った。
今はＭ大学で勉強しています。もちろん日本語の勉強を続けています。 
(I have been studying Japanese since 2006 up to now. At first, I began studying Japanese at R 
University, but I graduated after eight months. It was a short course, but a lot of fun and I was very 
interested. Now, I am studying at M University. Of course, I am continuing with my Japanese study.) 
Finally, several participants also used the Interests section to further focus on language. Four out of six 
participants, Ellise, Noah, Oscar, and Zac, all listed 「語学」 (language study) as a hobby. 
Although a major theme of all six profiles, it would be erroneous to presume that being a foreigner / 
language learner was the only identity at the forefront of participants’ profile construction. Another 
observable pattern concerns interest in Japanese culture, something all participants took pains to 
emphasise. Four of the six participants used Japan-related photographs for their display picture; Alisha, a 
photo of herself in the snow in Japan, Zac, likewise, a photo of himself with a snow sculpture in Japan. 
Ellise used a purikura (Print Club photo sticker) of herself and a Japanese friend, complete with Japanese 
graffiti, and Oscar’s profile photo was a snapshot of the neighborhood he lived in while on exchange in 
Japan. 
All six also listed Japanese-related likes and interests. This may appear unsurprising, given that an interest 
in Japanese culture is hardly remarkable among students of Japanese, or even among the youth population 
of Australia more generally, as Larson (2003) notes. However, interesting comparisons can be drawn 
between participants’ English domain SNS profiles (in this case, Facebook), and their Japanese domain 
(Mixi) profiles. None of the participants mentioned any of the Japanese-specific interests that they 
displayed on Mixi (Japanese television dramas, karaoke, anime cartoons, manga comics, shogi chess, 
Japanese alcohol and foods, or even language learning), in their English Facebook profiles. This 
demonstrates the context-specifity of participants’ identity displays as shown in Table 5. 
Lastly, although all six participants went to great lengths to foreground their non-native status, and 
emphasise their interest in Japanese culture, this does not mean that they cast themselves in a wholly 
subordinate role. This is clearest in the case of Noah, who positioned himself as a learner of Japanese, but 
an expert in English: 
「私は日本で英語の教師にたりたいんです。…feel free to ask me for help with English」 
(I want to become a teacher of English in Japan…) 
Zac also divulged his aspirations to become an English teacher, and offered to speak in English or 
Japanese with anyone interested: 
「私の夢は日本で英語教師になりたいです。そのためにいっぱい日本人の友達を作って、
日本語と英語で話したいです。」 
(My dream is that I want to become an English teacher in Japan. Therefore I want to make a lot of 
Japanese friends, and talk in Japanese and English.) 
 
Sarah Pasfield-Neofitou Online Domains of Language Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 104 
Table 5. Australian Participants’ Interests on Mixi and Facebook Profiles 
Participant Mixi Interests Facebook Interests 
Alisha  Swimming, Japanese anime and 
music  
None listed  
Ellise  Sports, karaoke, band, cooking, sake, 
shopping, driving, language study, 
Japanese TV dramas and video 
games, ice skating, AFL, tantanmen 
noodles, the 300 Yen Bar  
Acting, singing, travelling, reading, 
talking, shopping  
Kaylene  Travel, art, language study, reading, 
Internet  
Stuff, music  
Oscar  Movies, sport, food, travel, language 
study, reading, TV, video games, 
Internet, Japanese chess  
None listed  
Noah Language study, manga No profile 
Zac Watching movies, sport, watching 
sport, listening to music, cooking, 
sake, driving, travel, language study, 
manga, TV, video games, Internet  
No profile 
Lucas No profile Sleeping 
Eating 
Video gaming 
DISCUSSION 
It is apparent from both participants’ interview comments and from the evidence of opportunities for 
language acquisition (expanded upon in more detail in Pasfield-Neofitou, 2010) that there are a number of 
benefits of participation in Japanese domains for learners of Japanese. One important benefit is greater 
access to the language, as Japanese domains tend to be populated predominantly by NS. The presence of 
Japanese NS also leads to opportunities for learners to view NS-NS communication, which can later be 
used as a model for their own language use. Participation in language-specific virtual communities may 
also act as a springboard for greater access to popular culture and other authentic materials via links 
posted by other users and advertising from Website sponsors. 
Perhaps most importantly though, a sense of virtual immersion and of being in someone else’s space, may 
develop L2 learners’ motivation to use the target language, due to actual or perceived audience 
demographics. However, simultaneously, a feeling of being a foreigner or of trespassing on someone 
else’s space can also result in severe effects on a learner’s desire to attempt communication in their L2. 
The identification of language-specific domains was based not only on the analytical coding of the 
interaction data collected, but also an in vivo coding of interviews with participants. This finding was 
particularly related to interaction spaces aimed at groups such as SNSs, like Facebook and Mixi, and also 
Websites or forums, rather than typically one-on-one interaction channels such as private e-mail, which 
tended to be viewed more neutrally, and have more even language choice patterns3. Thus, in this respect it 
appears that networks or domains are influenced and continuously sustained by the social interaction of 
individuals. 
The domain in which any given interaction is perceived as being situated was found to affect participants’ 
situated activity in terms of language choice, and use of contextual resources. A sense of being immersed 
Sarah Pasfield-Neofitou Online Domains of Language Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 105 
in someone else’s space had both positive and negative effects regarding opportunities for language 
acquisition, as summed up in Alisha’s comments. She stated that the Internet environment gave her an 
opportunity to be surrounded by the language, but also made her feel that she would always be a Japanese 
as a second-language speaker. Positive effects included Alisha’s sense of virtual immersion or perception 
of joining a virtual community, and greater exposure to Japanese. This greater exposure led to some 
participants drawing on the communication between NSs they saw as models, and gave them greater 
access to authentic cultural materials, as well as to linguistic assistance from NSs. Some of the negative 
effects documented include intolerance towards other languages or ethnic groups. However, the 
Australian participants were also found to create their own Japanese-specific spaces and Japanese-learner 
identities via their profiles, of which they had ownership, with social networking profiles constituting an 
important site for the ongoing construction of identities. 
Participants’ self-identification as foreign or non-native may have been beneficial in a number of ways. 
The main goals participants had for using their L2 online were social and educational. By constructing 
their identities online as learners of the language, they mitigated any potential loss of face due to their 
language competency, and by construing themselves as experts in English or as foreigners, they may have 
made themselves more attractive to Japanese members who were actively looking for a foreign or 
English-speaking contact. In fact, at least one participant in the present study met her closest Japanese 
friend in this way. Secondly, by describing themselves as learners, they invited correction and other forms 
of repair, which were surprisingly frequent in the public forum of Mixi in particular, as further described 
in Pasfield-Neofitou (2010). 
Being a part of a virtual community, in particular, gaining access to an authentic audience, was the most 
important source of motivation for L2 production identified in the present study. A sense of being heard 
and understood appeared to increase participants’ sense of achievement, and increase the likelihood of 
their continued engagement in L2 use online. This suggests that Blood’s (2002) observations with respect 
to the importance of an authentic audience in a monolingual first-language blog environment holds true in 
L2 settings also. 
Being an L2 learner was also found to be an important identity for many participants in their online 
interactions, as evidenced in their foregrounding of this aspect in their profiles. Furthermore, their 
identification of themselves as foreigners online is further evidence of their perception of Japanese-owned 
and moderated domains such as Mixi as Japanese domains, and themselves as outsiders. This finding 
challenges views of Internet communication as neutral, equalising or more democratic, and demonstrates 
that it is possible to feel like a foreigner (and to be treated as one) even in what has been viewed as a 
gigantic, placeless cyberspace. 
 
NOTES 
1. danah boyd’s name is spelled in all lowercase in all of her publications; her preferred format has been 
retained here. 
2. The term domain is an in vivo code description which emerged from participant’s observations, and is 
distinct from the technical use of the term domain to refer to a component of URLs that indicates 
ownership or control of a Website or other online resource (although this may be a relevant factor in 
user’s perceptions). Mixi, for example, is owned by a Japanese company, and Facebook, an American 
company, yet the perceived ownership of Facebook extends beyond the national boundary of the US and 
across the West.  
3. Although English use dominated participants’ e-mail communication (62% compared to 25%), this 
ratio was influenced by the fact that the Australian students’ university e-mail accounts at the time of data 
collection did not support Japanese. If the e-mails sent to or from an Australian university e-mail address 
Sarah Pasfield-Neofitou Online Domains of Language Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 106 
are excluded, the figure is much more balanced (54% English or Mostly English, 46% Japanese or Mostly 
Japanese). 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Sarah Pasfield-Neofitou is a lecturer at Monash University. Her recent doctorate research focuses on 
Japanese as a second language learners’ social computer medicated communication with native speakers. 
Her past research projects have examined language use in intercultural chat, and the use of electronic and 
online dictionaries and other digital resources. 
E-mail: sarah.pasfieldneofitou@monash.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Archer, M. (1995). Realist social theory: The morphogenetic approach. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Belz, J. A. (2001). Institutional and individual dimensions of transatlantic group work in network-based 
language teaching. ReCALL, 13(2), 213–231. 
Belz, J. A. (2002). Social dimensions of telecollaborative foreign language study. Language Learning & 
Technology, 6(1), 60–81. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/pdf/belz.pdf 
Belz, J. A. (2003). Linguistic perspectives on the development of intercultural competence in 
telecollaboration. Language Learning & Technology, 7(2), 68–99. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/ 
vol7num2/pdf/belz.pdf 
Belz, J. A. (2004, July). Telecollaborative language study: A personal overview of praxis and research. 
Paper presented at the National Foreign Language Resource Center Symposium: Distance Education, 
Distributed Learning, and Language Instruction. Retrieved from http://nflrc.hawaii.edu/NetWorks/ 
NW44/index.htm 
Belz, J. A. (2005). Intercultural questioning, discovery and tension in Internet-mediated language learning 
partnerships. Language and Intercultural Communication, 5(1), 3–39. 
Belz, J. A., & Müller-Hartmann, A. (2003). Teachers as intercultural learners: Negotiating German-
American telecollaboration along the institutional fault line. The Modern Language Journal, 87(i), 71–89. 
Belz, J. A., & Reinhardt, J. (2004). Aspects of advanced foreign language proficiency: Internet-mediated 
German language play. International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 14(3), 324–362. 
Blood, R. (2002). The weblog handbook: Practical advice on creating and maintaining your BLOG. 
Cambridge: Perseus Publishing. 
boyd, d. m. (2007). Why youth (heart) social network sites: The role of networked publics in teenage 
social life. In D. Buckingham (Ed.), Youth, identity, and digital media (pp. 119–142). Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press. 
boyd, d. m., & Ellison, N. B. (2007). Social network sites: Definition, history, and scholarship. Journal of 
Computer-Mediated Communication, 13. Retrieved from http://jcmc.indiana.edu/ 
boyd, d. m., & Heer, J. (2006, January). Profiles as conversation: Networked identity performance on 
Friendster. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the Hawai‘i International Conference on System 
Sciences (HICSS-39), Kauai, HI. 
Sarah Pasfield-Neofitou Online Domains of Language Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 107 
Burkhalter, B. (1999). Reading race online: Discovering racial identity in Usenet discussions. In M. Smith 
& P. Kollock (Eds.), Communities in Cyberspace (pp. 59–74). London: Routledge. 
Clodius, J. (1997, January). Creating a community of interest: “Self” and “Other” on DragonMud Paper 
presented at the Combined Conference on MUDs. Retrieved from http://www.dragonmud.com/people/ 
jen/mudshopiii.html 
Crook, C., & Light, P. (2002). Virtual society and the cultural practice of study. In S. Woolgar (Ed.), 
Virtual society? Get real! Technology, cyberbole, reality (pp. 153–175). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Dubrovsky, V., Kiesler, S., & Sethna, B. (1991). The equalization phenomenon: Status effects in 
computer-mediated and face-to-face decision-making groups. Human Communication Research, 6, 119–
146. 
Firth, A., & Wagner, J. (1997). On discourse, communication, and (some) fundamental concepts in SLA 
research. The Modern Language Journal, 81(iii), 285–300. 
Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for qualitative 
research. New York: Aldine. 
Hanna, B. E., & de Nooy, J. (2004). Negotiating cross-cultural difference in electric discussion. 
Multilingua, 23, 257–281. 
Hargittai, E. (2007). Whose space? Differences among users and non-users of social network sites. 
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 13. Retrieved from http://jcmc.indiana.edu/ 
Herring, S. C. (2003). Computer-mediated discourse. In D. Tannen, D. Schiffin & H. Hamilton (Eds.), 
Handbook of Discourse Analysis (pp. 612–634). Oxford: Blackwell. 
Hewling, A. (2005). Culture in the online class: Using message analysis to look beyond nationality-based 
frames of reference. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 11(1), Article 16. 
Itakura, H., & Nakajima, S. (2001). IT jidai niokeru nihongo kyōiku: Honkon-Kagoshima no denshi mēru 
sōhōkōkei purojekuto wāku no kokoromi [Teaching Japanese education for the era of IT: Research 
findings from an e-mail project between Hong-Kong and Kagoshima]. Sekai no nihongo kyōiku [Current 
report on Japanese-Language Education Around the Globe], 6, 227–240. 
Johnston, K., & Johal, P. (1999). The Internet as a ‘virtual cultural region’: Are extant cultural 
classification schemes appropriate? Internet Research: Electronic Networking Applications and Policy, 
9(3), 178–186. 
Kano, Y. (2004). Nisōhōkō bideo kaigi shisutemu to intānetto fōramu wo riyōshita jyūrai no kurasu wo 
koeta nihongo kōsu: Nihonjin daigakusei to no kōryū no yūkō riyō [Going beyond the classroom with 
videoconferencing and Internet discussion forum: Effective use of peer editing from Japanese college 
students]. Sekai no nihongo kyōiku [Current report on Japanese-language education around the globe], 
7, 239–256. 
Larson, P. (2003). Rethinking Japanese language pedagogy. ADFL Bulletin, 34(3), 18–20. 
Layder, D. (1993). New strategies in social research. Cambridge: Polity Press. 
Levy, M., & Stockwell, G. (2006). CALL dimensions: Options and issues in computer assisted language 
learning. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Matei, S. A. (2005). From counterculture to cyberculture: Virtual community discourse and the dilemma 
of modernity. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 10, Retrieved from 
http://jcmc.indiana.edu/ 
McGuire, T. W., Kiesler, S., & Siegel, J. (1987). Group and computer-mediated discussion effects in risk 
decision making. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 917–930. 
Sarah Pasfield-Neofitou Online Domains of Language Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 108 
Miller, D., & Slater, D. (2000). The Internet: An ethnographic approach. Oxford: Berg. 
Nishimura, M. (1992). Language choice and in-group identity among Canadian Niseis. Journal of Asian 
Pacific Communication, 3(2), 97–113. 
Nishimura, M. (1997). Japanese/English code-switching: Syntax and pragmatics. New York: Peter Lang 
Publishing. 
Pasfield-Neofitou, S. E. (2010). An analysis of L2 Japanese learners’ social CMC with native speakers: 
Interaction, language use and language learning (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). School of 
Languages, Cultures and Linguistics, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia. 
Rheingold, H. (1993). The virtual community: Homesteading on the electronic frontier. Reading: 
Addison-Wesley. 
Richards, L. (2005). Handling qualitative data: A practical guide. London: Sage Publications. 
Sealey, A., & Carter, B. (2001). Social categories and sociolinguistics: Applying a realist approach. 
International Journal of the Sociology of Language, 152, 1–19. 
Sealey, A., & Carter, B. (2004). Applied linguistics as a social science. London: Continuum. 
Shibanai, Y. (2007). Shiron to yoron no henkan sōchi – ‘Netto seron’ no yukue [The transformation of 
personal opinion and public opinion - The future of “mainstream opinion on the net”]. In A. Kitada & N. 
Ōtawa (Eds.), Kodomo to nyū media [Children and new media] (pp. 346–363). Tokyo: Tokyo Tosho 
Center. 
Simon, L. D. (2002). Conclusion. In L. D. Simon, J. Corrales, & D. R. Wolfensberger (Eds.), Democracy 
and the Internet (pp. 96–102). Washington, DC: Woodrow Wilson Center Press. 
Sproull, L., & Kiesler, S. (1986). Reducing social context cues: Electronic mail in organizational 
communication. Management Science, 32(11), 1492–1512. 
Sundén, J. (2003). Material virtualities: Approaching online textual embodiment. New York: Peter Lang. 
Thorne, S. L. (1999). An activity theoretical analysis of foreign language electronic discourse 
(Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Graduate School of Education, Language Literacy and Culture, The 
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA. 
Turkle, S. (1995). Life on the screen: Identity in the age of the Internet. New York: Longman. 
Watt, S. E., Lea, M., & Spears, R. (2002). How social is Internet communication? A reappraisal of 
bandwidth and anonymity effects. In S. Woolgar (Ed.), Virtual society? Technology, cyberbole, reality 
(pp. 61–77). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Yoshimura, Y., & Miyazoe-Wong, Y. (2005). Vācharu kyōshitsu ni okeru nihongo kōryū – denshi mēru 
kōkan jyugyō no susume [Japanese interaction in a virtual classroom - An invitation to the e-mail 
exchange class]. In R. Takahashi, Y. Miyazoe-Wong, T. Yamaguchi & M. Leung (Eds.), Nihon kenkyū to 
nihongo kyōiku ni okeru gurōbaru nettowāku [Global networking in Japanese studies and Japanese 
language education] (Vol. 2, pp. 171–181). Hong Kong: Honkon Nihongo Kyooku Kenkyuukai. 
Zorn, I. (2004). Vifu: Virtual community building for networking among women. Gender, Technology 
and Development, 8(1), 75–95.
