Language Learning & Technology 
http:/llt.msu.edu/issues/june2011/review2.pdf 
June 2011, Volume 15, Number 2 
pp. 34–38 
 
Copyright © 2011, ISSN 1094-3501 34 
REVIEW OF TEACHING LITERATURE AND LANGUAGE ONLINE 
Teaching Literature and Language Online 
 
Ian Lancashire (Ed.) 
   
2009 
ISBN-10: 9781603290579  
US $40.00 (hardcover) 
$25.00 (paperback) 
460 pp. 
 
Modern Language Association 
New York 
 
 
Review by David Malinowski, University of California, Berkeley 
As Ian Lancashire points out in the Introduction to this most recent entry in the Modern Language 
Association’s Options for Teaching series, blended and fully online learning models are in wide and 
growing use. Writing in 2009, he notes that in the fall 2006 term, almost 3.5 million students and 20% of 
all higher education students in the U.S. took an online course (p. 2). The Sloan Consortium’s most recent 
(2010) report on the state of online learning in the U.S. indicates that as of fall 2009, these numbers had 
increased to 5.6 million and almost 30% of higher education students, with 63% of 2,500 colleges and 
universities surveyed saying that online learning “was a critical part of their institution’s long term 
strategy” (Allen & Seaman, 2010, p. 2). Considering the frequent and varied use of technology in blended 
online and offline foreign and second language classes (see, for example, Blake, 2008), and the growing 
tendency in this direction for university literature courses as well (Introduction, p. 17), Lancashire’s 
volume is a timely and welcome contribution. And, in light of the release of the MLA’s own report 
questioning the governance structures that keep university language and literature curricula separate 
(MLA 2007, p. 2), Teaching literature and language online can be read as a discussion point in this wider 
conversation. 
With close to thirty chapters written from the perspectives of teachers in university language and 
literature departments in the U.S. and Canada, this volume speaks both to beginning instructors and to 
instructors beginning to contemplate teaching courses partly or wholly online. In his introduction 
Lancashire recommends that, in part because of the many approaches to online education and varied 
contexts in which it takes place, teachers should make themselves part of professional communities of 
practice and, through exploration and judicious selection of practices and tools, develop their own unique 
“signature pedagogy” (p. 11). In this sense, Teaching literature and language online represents a step in 
this direction: after a series of chapters in Part I (“Overview”) orienting the reader to issues and 
approaches in online education “for MLA disciplines” (p. 3), Parts II and III present collections of case 
studies that speak to a range of experiences in language and literature classes, respectively. Together, the 
diversity of courses and projects narrated bear witness to Lancashire’s contention that, while teaching an 
online course can require more work than teaching face-to-face (e.g., p. 14), it provides an invaluable 
extension of the mission of higher education. 
Following Lancashire’s Introduction, Robert Blake presents data comparing proficiency gains in 
traditional Spanish classrooms and distance and blended courses, finding that distance education is a 
David Malinowski Review of Teaching Literature and Language Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 35 
“reasonable and responsible option” (p. 34) for teaching linguistic proficiency and oral skills, especially 
for beginning learners and in less commonly taught languages. In the next chapter, Kristine Blair draws 
on Lee Shulman (2005)’s concept of “signature pedagogies” and Chickering and Gamson (1987)’s 
“Seven Principles for Undergraduate Education,” arguing for the need for the writing and composition 
profession to take up a measured debate about principles and best practices for online education, while 
also focusing upon the contentious but often under-represented issue of instructors’ labor conditions. 
Elizabeth Hanson-Smith, meanwhile, provides guidelines for teachers of ESOL (ESL and EFL) to 
integrate technology into their teaching of language through literature; she presents evidence that “more 
student interaction, both with the instructor and with peers, can take place online than in class” (p. 55) and 
discusses integrated classroom environments like Moodle and Blackboard, literature-based content on 
Project Gutenberg and other sites, and tools for oral and written communication as they enable project-
based and group-centered learning. In the following chapter, “Teaching World Languages Online,” Mary 
Ann Lyman-Hager reviews developments in language teaching beliefs and practices in the latter half of 
the 20th century, beginning with the audiolingual (Army) method of the postwar period. Pointing to 
Warschauer and Kern (2000)’s periodization of language learning technologies, then, she suggests that 
the most recent sociocognitive paradigm is particularly apt for intercultural e-learning environments that 
connect communities and foster collaborative tasks. In “Humane Studies in Digital Space,” Jerome 
McGann is likewise concerned with mapping an historical evolution; his interest, however, is with the 
transition from a book-based to a digitally-based culture of critical inquiry in the face of the 
commercialization of knowledge. Noting that inherent in the mission of the university today is “the self-
conscious understanding that culture and critical reflection are shared activities and social acts” (p. 101), 
McGann introduces three digital tools (IVANHOE, Juxta, and Collex) designed to lead students to critical 
engagement with texts. Rounding out Part I, Stéfan Sinclair and Geoffrey Rockwell bring an interest in 
the use of tools for digital textual analysis so as to combine “both linguistic and literary sensibilities” (p. 
104). They note that CALL applications, in particular, have often missed the opportunity to allow 
students to do just the kind of nuanced interpretation that McGann and others advocate, and introduce 
several text analysis techniques useful for the language and literature classroom. 
Part II comprises five essays under the title “Case Studies in Language”. The first, by Stephen Tschudi, 
David Hiple, and Dorothy Chun, investigates cohesion in dialog and community formation through the 
use of online forums in an advanced Chinese writing class. While one feels hard-pressed to accept that 
students in this study shared feelings of “belonging” and “commitment” on the basis of the evidence 
presented, the reference to Halliday and Hasan’s (1976) notion of students’ dialogic cohesion as the 
“creation of a single text” (p. 124) in an online context was helpful. Also pursuing questions of 
community formation online, Diane Formo and Kimberly Robinson Neary present success stories from 
the use of Online Response Groups (ORGs) in the second language writing classroom. Making the 
analogy to the peer-to-peer writing center, they suggest several ways for instructors to use ORGs to help 
students organize their writing processes and give “honest” feedback and assistance. Next, Nike Arnold 
describes a “literacy-based curriculum in a foreign language class” (p. 165) through which she had her 
3rd year German composition and conversation class interact online in relatively unstructured written 
exchange with native speaker guests. She writes that student survey results indicated that this exchange 
realized the literacy principles of situated practice, overt instruction, critical framing, and transformed 
practice (cf. New London Group, 1996); a lack of evidence in the chapter makes this claim difficult to 
validate. Following this essay are two chapters that describe the development of learning resources that, 
once online, assumed multiple and at times unpredicted functions. Gillian Lord’s essay on Aymara on the 
Internet is noteworthy for its descriptions of the innovations required to bring a communicative approach 
to the rote grammar exercises of a decades-old language textbook, usable both by language learners and 
linguists interested in documentation and revitalization. Meanwhile, Douglas Morgenstern’s chapter 
describes the history and use of MITUPV, an open online environment for Spanish-English cultural and 
linguistic exchange. Unlike an online textbook, MITUPV was not designed with pre-given learning 
David Malinowski Review of Teaching Literature and Language Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 36 
outcomes in mind; Morgenstern notes that open registration and user-generated content have led to a 
pedagogical orientation that is “decidedly bottom-up” (p. 191), where content generation and even 
community formation become benchmarks for success (ibid.). A tension underlying this and other studies 
of online, open social sites for language learning is how the use of such environments articulates with the 
goals and structures of the classroom; with Morgenstern stating that “all required class-related projects are 
somewhat coercive and artificial” (p. 199) while Websites like MITUPV “[approximate] the serendipitous 
nature of authentic language immersion” (p. 198), the task of the classroom teacher seems monolithic. 
Part III, “Case Studies in Literatures”, comprises 16 chapters; here I depart from the order of the original 
text in favor of four thematic groupings of chapters. First, and noticeable as well in previous sections of 
the book, is the visibility of an array of innovative tools developed to foster new forms of textual analysis 
and linguistic proficiency. Seemingly a holdout from Part II of the book, Noriko Nagata’s study 
(appearing near the end of the volume) outlines the functioning and impact of Robo-Sensei, an online 
Japanese textbook using natural language processing to analyze beginning students’ written input on the 
sentence level, while generating feedback and instruction tailored to their structural errors. Meanwhile, 
Gerald Lucas describes the evolution of digital tools tried out over years of teaching his online world 
literature course World.Lit. Discussing the merits of using student and teacher blogs, a wiki, a discussion 
forum, and a content management system for aggregating these tools together, Lucas foregrounds the 
need for literature instructors online to engage students in discussions about course expectations and 
procedures, while explicitly teaching computer literacy. In another chapter introducing a novel tool 
developed on-site, Haun Saussy describes his detailed selections, re-orderings and annotations of the 
classical Chinese text Shang Shu, incorporated into a late-1990s hybrid Introduction to the Humanities 
course in order to lead students to deeper textual analysis and comparison. Finally, introducing the open-
access networked resource Decameron Web, Papio and Riva present a vision of the ‘outmoding’ and 
evolution of a now 17-year-old tool for teaching and researching late medieval and early modern Italian 
studies. The authors convey a fundamental tension between the hierarchical concerns of the academic 
community (where research and publication are protected domains) and “virtual collaborative space[s] 
where multiple activities can take place simultaneously, in an ongoing and self-enriching dialogue” (p. 
353). 
Of course, reading this collection of essays in the 2010s, many people may feel that the ‘home-grown’ 
sites in the studies above simply offer features that have become commonplace in the corporate-owned 
and often freely available blogs, wikis, online games, virtual worlds and other online media (for a review, 
see Thorne & Black, 2007). Indeed, several chapters in Part III address the benefits offered and 
constraints imposed by such tools in the online literature classroom. Kathleen Fitzpatrick’s contribution, 
“The literary machine: Blogging the literature course,” is a narrative of the successes and failures that she 
experienced using blogging in a 2003 literature class; she finds that “the open-endedness of the blog” (p. 
211) is among the reasons why literature instructors need to make their expectations clear, provide model 
posts, give guidelines for comments, and otherwise structure student blogging. Kathy Cawsey and Ian 
Lancashire’s essay reports on the success of the chat medium in an online Reading Poetry class as it 
encouraged distally located students to discover and explore subtle meanings in the texts at hand; drawing 
from an extended chat transcript on Seamus Heaney’s poem “Punishment”, they argue that “the 
interaction among committed students and their teachers improves markedly in a virtual classroom (chat 
room, bulletin board, e-mail) over what is possible in a physical classroom” (p. 311). In “Seeking the best 
of both worlds: Online and off-line Shakespeare”, Michael Best draws from his experience using the 
resource Website Shakespeare’s Life and Times and a variety of online media in his classroom teaching, 
arguing that together, they enact “a method of communication that is both effective and democratic” (p. 
266)—this despite the challenges of dealing with plagiarism, development costs, and technological 
change while paying greater attention to the critical evaluation of sources and materials.  
Several chapters in this volume demonstrate that, together with the introduction and use of new tools in 
David Malinowski Review of Teaching Literature and Language Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 37 
the online classroom, the very technologies of the online literature classroom—the changing ecologies of 
pedagogical structures, procedures, and relationships—are in flux. In his chapter, “Old English online at 
the University of Calgary”, Murray McGillivray writes that his mandate in creating an entirely online 
course was to improve on what he terms the “humiliation” students undergo in class when called upon to 
do direct grammar translation, and out-of-class when reading source texts and their annotations; he argues 
that teachers online need to make explicit the structures for students’ participation, performance and 
evaluation that are often left implicit (or absent) in the face-to-face classroom. In an essay on teaching 
undergraduate and graduate online courses on Shakespeare, James Fitzmaurice presents a seeming 
contradiction in that a preponderance of “highly motivated students in the virtual classroom” might be 
motivated in part because they feel “deprived” at not being able to be physically in the face-to-face 
classroom (pp. 275–276). Meanwhile, Martha Wescott Driver, in a chapter on her multimedia course 
bridging Middle English readings and text interpretation with student multimedia projects, relays her 
students’ singing praises of the online medium and surmises that the fact of their sense of “expanded 
audiences” for online work pushes them to collaborate and focus in new ways. Finally, Kathryn 
Grossman, an instructor of both language and literature courses, echoes the interest of authors from Part II 
in the formation of classroom communities online. In moving from the offline medium to online 
instruction, she finds that “students working collaboratively in my hybrid course submitted much better 
and more writing overall” (p. 337); she concludes by offering numerous recommendations for literature 
and language instructors to use collaborative work to heighten student involvement, while simultaneously 
reducing the teacher’s workload.  
The last strand of chapters I note in Part III is one that opens up questions of textuality, representation, 
and teaching online to greater and greater degrees of self-scrutiny and doubt. Laura Bush’s chapter 
“Solitary confinement: Managing relational angst in an online classroom,” for example, seems to double 
backwards and begin to question the very humanity of the humanities online. Where she spends the first 
part of her essay pragmatically outlining “four distinct areas” of competence necessary for faculty to 
teach literature effectively online, in the second part she describes a pervasive sense of isolation that 
besets online teachers and students who lack the robust social presence of the face-to-face classroom. 
Devoid of angst but marveling nonetheless at human transformations amidst changed knowledge relations 
online, Ian Lancashire’s “The open-source English teacher” describes the fate of the online instructor. The 
“open-source teacher,” he says as creator and editor of the Web-based archive Representative Poetry 
Online, makes the fruits of her or his intellectual labor available to the general public through Websites, 
interactive databases, and other online resources, and so enters into an asynchronous and unstructured 
relationship with faceless students who are only occasionally made visible through the impromptu email 
(p. 418). As with Representative Poetry Online, in her two chapters Martha Nell Smith reflects on new 
modalities of knowledge and collaboration engendered by humanist research and instruction with the 
Dickinson Electronic Archives and other large-scale projects. With respect to the Archive in particular, 
she highlights the textual indeterminacies and creative processes that are, she says, frequently hidden 
within the legacy technology of the book. The online medium, on the other hand, allows the learner to 
maintain a processual orientation to textual meaning—the very approach that she claims Dickinson 
herself took toward her own writing (p. 281). Lastly, in “Hybrid world literature: Literary culture and the 
new machine”, William Kuskin reflects on his WebCT-delivered “Hybrid English” course that was, on the 
surface, successful in “delivering record student credit hours” (p. 359). However, the problem of online 
courses, and the challenge that online instructors must work against, Kuskin says, is that online courses 
such as his “[reduce] the problems of online and traditional learning to the single issue of information 
management” (p. 359), a discourse of control already present in the notion of “record student credit 
hours”. The fundamental challenge of the online teacher of literature, Kuskin contends, is rather to lead 
students to an awareness of a fundamental contradiction that runs through their humanistic inquiry online: 
that while the realm of the literary is traditionally understood to be figural and never fixed, he writes 
(invoking imagery from the science fiction hit The Matrix), “the logic implied by digitization, by the 
David Malinowski Review of Teaching Literature and Language Online 
 
Language Learning & Technology 38 
green veil of computer code, by the various downloads and uploads that constitute the curriculum, was 
that literary knowledge can be entirely encased in computer technology” (p. 361). 
Overall, the chapters from this and the first two parts of Teaching literature and language online present 
many useful lessons, while provoking thought about the pedagogical and institutional challenges that 
arise with the use of technology; they are well worth reading individually with these practical goals in 
mind. Taken together, however, I found that they give occasion to an urgent question of an altogether 
different nature. As Kuskin reminds us, language and literature teachers alike ought to share a concern 
with what it means to be human online: 
The future of online education for the humanities, therefore, involves not only the implementation of 
online teaching but also our understanding of the process of symbolic production of ourselves as 
human in the history of textual technology (p. 360). 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
David Malinowski is a doctoral candidate in Education in Language, Literacy, Society and Culture at the 
University of California, Berkeley, and a research assistant with the Berkeley Language Center. His 
research interests include distance and blended learning in foreign language education, multimodal 
literacies, and semiotic landscapes. 
E-mail: daveski@berkeley.edu 
 
REFERENCES  
Allen, I. E., & Seaman, J. (2010). Class difference$: Online education in the United States, 2010. Sloan-
C. Retrieved from http://sloanconsortium.org/publications/survey/class_differences 
Blake, R. (2008). Brave new digital classroom: Technology and foreign language learning. Washington, 
DC: Georgetown University Press. 
Chickering, A. W., & Gamson, Z. F. (1987). Seven principles for good practice in undergraduate 
education. AAHE Bulletin, 39, 3–7. 
Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1976). Cohesion in English. London: Longman. 
MLA (Modern Language Association; Ad Hoc Committee on Foreign Languages). (2007). Foreign 
languages and higher education: New structures for a changed world. New York: Modern Language 
Association. Retrieved from http://www.mla.org/flreport 
New London Group. (1996). A pedagogy of multiliteracies: Designing social futures. Harvard 
Educational Review, 66(1), 60–92. 
Shulman, L. S. (2005). Pedagogies of uncertainty. Liberal Education, 91(2), 18–25. 
Thorne, S. L., & Black, R. W. (2007). Language and literacy development in computer-mediated contexts 
and communities. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 27, 133–160.  
Warschauer, M., & Kern, R. (Eds.). (2000). Network-based language teaching: Concepts and practice. 
New York: Cambridge University Press. 
