Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2011/news.pdf 
October 2011, Volume 15, Number 3
pp. 28–31 
 
Language Learning & Technology 28 
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS 
Sponsors 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR) 
Co-Sponsor 
Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL) 
 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource 
Center (NFLRC) 
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials 
development projects and conducts workshops and conferences for language professionals among its 
many activities. 
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
The National Foreign Language Resources Center (NFLRC) and the National Resource Center East Asia 
(NRCEA) at the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa, together with Hamilton College, will host the 7th 
International Conference and Workshops on Technology and Chinese Language Teaching in the 
21st Century (TCLT 7) from May 25 through 27, 2012 in Honolulu, Hawai‘i. Initiated by Hamilton 
College in 2000, this biennual event aims to bridge the gap between technology and teaching 
methodology and curriculum as well as enhance the exchange on technology-based Chinese language 
learning and instruction. The combination of in-depth panel discussions on technology-enhanced Chinese 
language teaching and hands-on workshops on new technologies for Chinese language teaching is a 
hallmark of TCLT conferences, which have made outstanding contributions to the field of Teaching 
Chinese as a Second Language. Over the years, 178 institutions in 17 countries have sent hundreds of 
professionals to join TCLT.  
TCLT 7 will place emphases on frontier research topics: mobile learning, cloud technology, and 
application of Chinese computational linguistic research. The program will include keynote speeches, 
panel discussion sessions, paper presentations, hands-on workshops, computer program demonstration, 
and a technology-based educational product exhibition. Supported by more than 100 institutions 
worldwide, TCLT 7 will bring together about 250 academics for discussions and hands-on workshops. 
For more information as it becomes available, please visit http://nflrc.hawaii.edu/prodev.cfm 
STAY IN TOUCH WITH SOCIAL MEDIA 
Did you know that the NFLRC has its own Facebook page? It’s one of the best ways to hear about the 
latest news, publications, conferences, workshops, and resources we offer. Just click on the “Like” button 
to become a fan. For those who prefer getting up-to-the-minute “tweets,” you can follow us on our 
Twitter page. Finally, NFLRC has its own YouTube channel with a growing collection of free language 
learning and teaching videos for your perusal. Subscribe today! 
 
 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 29 
NEW NFLRC PUBLICATIONS 
Tala Fa'asāmoa e faitau fa‘atasi, Samoan stories to read together, by Fa‘afetai Lesā  
These three charming stories—“Speak to Me in Samoan,” “The Girl Who Plays Golf,” and 
“Lani and Lili”—depict everyday situations for a typical Samoan-American family in 
Hawai‘i. These generously illustrated stories are intended for families to read together. 
Each picture panel is accompanied by a sentence or two describing the action and one or
two comprehension questions. Appropriate for children of all ag
 
es. 
 
In partnership with UH Manoa ScholarSpace, NFLRC offers hundreds of language and research 
resources, all free for the download. 
 
Check out our many other publications. 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education 
and Research (CLEAR) 
CLEAR’s mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States. 
Projects focus on materials development, professional development training, and foreign language 
research. 
CONFERENCES 
CLEAR exhibits at local and national conferences year-round. We hope to see you at ACTFL, CALICO, 
MIWLA, Central States, and other conferences. 
We will be presenting sessions at at MIWLA 2011, ACTFL 2011, and Central States 2012. We hope to 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
meet you in person! 
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
We are planning to launch a series of webinars this fall! These low-cost, online, interactive workshops 
will allow language teachers from around the country (and the world) to access CLEAR’s professional 
development on demand. The initial webinars will focus on CLEAR’s Rich Internet Applications, and 
future planned webinars include content on language assessment, culture in the classroom, and other 
topics of interest to language educators. Webinar participants will be able to apply for State Board 
Continuing Education Units. Detailed information on all webinars will be posted on our Web site. Also 
watch for the launch on our Facebook page. 
MATERIALS DEVELOPMENT 
CLEAR is developing several new products during our fifth funding cycle. Check our Web site for 
updates on new products and services. Some of our upcoming projects include: 
 Expansion of our Rich Internet Applications for language learning on mobile devices 
 Professional development webinars on diverse topics (see above) 
 Online videos for language teaching techniques 
 Online listening and speaking tests for LCTLs 
NEWSLETTER 
CLEAR News is a free bi-yearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. 
Download PDFs of back issues and subscribe at http://clear.msu.edu/clear/newsletter/.  
The Center for Applied Linguistics (CAL) 
The Center for Applied Linguistics is a private, nonprofit organization that promotes and improves the 
teaching and learning of languages, identifies and solves problems related to language and culture, and 
serves as a resource for information about language and culture. CAL carries out a wide range of 
activities in the fields of English as a second language, foreign languages, cultural education, and 
linguistics. 
Featured Resources: 
 Language Policy Research Network (LPREN) 
CAL is pleased to host the Language Policy Research Network (LPREN), created in 2006 by the 
Research Networks committee of the Association Internationale de Linguistique Appliquée, 
(International Association of Applied Linguistics). Visit the LPREN Web site to learn more or to 
join the email discussion group. 
 CAL News 
CAL News is our electronic newsletter created to provide periodic updates about our projects and 
research as well as information about new publications, online resources, products, and services 
of interest to our readers. Visit our Web site to sign up. 
 Alliance for the Advancement of Heritage Languages 
Language Learning & Technology 30 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 31 
Visit the Alliance Web site to browse the Heritage Language Program Profiles, view the Heritage 
Voices Collection, and sign up to receive the quarterly electronic newsletter, Alliance News 
Flash.  
 
 Center for Research on the Educational Achievement and Teaching of English Language 
Learners (CREATE) 
Visit the CREATE Web site to learn more about CREATE, its research, free resources, and 
upcoming November 2011 conference. 
 
 CAL SIOP Professional Development Services 
CAL works with schools, states, and districts to design and deliver high-quality, client-centered 
professional development services on the SIOP Model. 
 
 CAL Solutions: Adult ESL Education 
This new Web site provides access to evidence-based resources and practical tools for 
practitioners working with the growing population of adult English language learners throughout 
the United States. 
 CAL Solutions: PreK-12 ELL Education 
CAL provides a variety of professional development and technical assistance services related to 
language education and assessment needs. In order to meet the growing demand from K-8 
educators for training material on teaching reading to English language learners, CAL continues 
to offer its successful series of institutes in Washington, DC, in June and July 2011. 
Featured Publications: 
 Connecting Diverse Cultures: A Video Guide for A New Day and Be Who You Are 
 Improving Education for English Language Learners: Research-Based Approaches 
 Education for Adult English Language Learners in the United States: Trends, Research, and 
Promising Practices 
 Foreign Language Teaching in U.S. Schools: Results of a National Survey 
 Realizing the Vision of Two-Way Immersion: Fostering Effective Programs and Classrooms 
 Using the SIOP Model: Professional Development Manual for Sheltered Instruction 
 What’s Different About Teaching Reading to Students Learning English?  
 
Visit CAL’s Web site to learn more about our projects, resources, and services. 
