Language Learning & Technology 
http:/llt.msu.edu/issues/february2011/review3.pdf 
February 2011, Volume 15, Number 1 
pp. 29–35  
 
Copyright © 2011, ISSN 1094-3501 29 
REVIEW OF WIMBA VOICE 6.0 COLLABORATION SUITE 
 
Title Wimba Voice 6.0TM 
Platform Windows 7, Vista, or XP; Mac OSX 10.4+; Java 
Minimum hardware 
requirements 
128 MB RAM (256 MB recommended) 
Internet access at 56k or above 
Soundcard w/microphone and speakers 
Software requirements Updated Java  
Developer  Wimba, Inc. (now Blackboard Collaborate) 
Support offered 24/7 live and online; ASP Services responsible for server hosting, 
monitoring, and maintenance 
Price Unlimited use; licensed annually based on school or department’s full-time 
enrollment 
Publication Year 1998 
 
Review by Elena Cotos, Iowa State University 
OVERVIEW 
Wimba Voice 6.0TM is a component of the Wimba Collaboraton SuiteTM 6.0, which is a set of tools for 
online communication that combines a series of interactive technologies. Wimba Voice allows teachers to 
complement their pedagogical approaches with five web-based applications: Voice Authoring, Voice 
Board, Voice Podcaster, Voice Presenter, and Voice Email. These applications add audio and video 
components to asynchronous communication and can be easily integrated into different course 
management environments (e.g., Angel, Blackboard, Moodle, WebCT). Consequently, Wimba Voice has 
attracted the interest of an increasing number of language educators who are striving to enhance teaching 
and learning through online oral instruction, practice, and collaboration. Its features allow for the creation 
of computer-assisted language learning (CALL) tasks that are justified by second language acquisition 
(SLA) tenets and can target various skills, although due to its audio and video capabilities, they may have 
greater appeal for listening, speaking, and pronunciation practice.  
DESCRIPTION 
Wimba Voice Authoring  
Voice Authoring is a basic one-way communication feature that allows users to record and listen to 
recordings embedded directly into a web page. It has a clear and user-friendly interface that consists of a 
Record, Play, Pause, Stop, and Save buttons, which is similar to all other Wimba Voice applications.  
 
 
Figure 1. Screen shot of Wimba Voice Authoring. 
Elena Cotos Review of Wimba Voice 6.0 
 
Language Learning & Technology 30 
Wimba Voice Board  
Wimba Voice Board (Figure 2) is a voice-based discussion tool that allows for posting threaded voice 
messages that can be accompanied by text. These audio- and text-based threaded discussions provide 
students with opportunities for interaction with their teacher and for collaboration with their peers. Both 
teachers and students can create threads. One-on-one communication between the teacher and a student is 
also possible when the threads are set as private, in which case the students can view only the teacher’s 
and their own replies. Due to its potential for asynchronous interactivity, the Voice Board is often used 
for class and small group discussions on given topics, short student presentations, audio journals, 
collecting audio recorded assignments, threaded conversations with individual students, or individual 
feedback.  
 
Figure 2. Screen shot of Wimba Voice Board 
Wimba Voice Podcaster  
The Wimba Voice Podcaster (Figure 3) is a tool that makes it possible to create and distribute podcasts 
(i.e., audio recordings delivered online). Podcasts can be created and posted as audio files in different 
formats, or they can be subscribed to. Students automatically receive the audio postings made by their 
teacher, and they can listen to them directly in the Voice Podcaster, download audio from the feed to their 
ipod or itunes, or subscribe using a preferred RSS reader. Students may also be granted the option of 
authoring audio recordings and contributing materials to the podcast themselves.  
Elena Cotos Review of Wimba Voice 6.0 
 
Language Learning & Technology 31 
 
Figure 3. Screen shot of Wimba Voice Podcaster. 
Wimba Voice Presenter 
Wimba Voice Presenter is somewhat similar to the Voice Board in that it allows for large group 
discussions, but it is more advanced because it can integrate web pages. This feature enables teachers and 
students to create and comment on web-based slides that combine audio, text, and web content and to 
produce audio-enhanced online slideshows. Students can use Voice Presenter to author online 
presentations by linking to multimedia content and annotating it with their voice, and teachers can turn a 
Voice presentation into an asynchronous discussion by having students respond with comments on given 
slides. One-on-one communication and individual feedback are also possible since private conversation is 
one of the multiple options available.  
 
Figure 4. Screen shot of Wimba Voice Presenter. 
Elena Cotos Review of Wimba Voice 6.0 
 
Language Learning & Technology 32 
Wimba Voice Email  
The Wimba Voice Email tool allows for sending an audible message accompanied by text to email 
addresses. It can be created as a one-time voice email or as an email with a reply option. Voice Email uses 
the email feature of the course management system employed, and the email message contains a clickable 
link to the audio (see Figures 5a and 5b). If the audio reply option is made available to the students, the 
email can become a sub-set of the voice board in which a discussion based on the voice email recording 
can be initiated. 
 
Figure 5a. Screen shot of Wimba Voice Email audio 
 
Figure 5b. Screen shot of Wimba Voice Email message. 
Table 1 summarizes the functions of the Wimba Voice applications and outlines their additional options.  
Table 1. Functions and Options of Wimba Voice Applications 
Wimba Voice 
application Description of functions Options 
Voice Authoring  
 
Allows for recording and playback of 
audio on a web page; integrates into CMS 
course pages 
• Public access to audio 
• Download & save audio 
• Publish audio to a web page with 
playback/recording controls 
Voice Board 
 
Allows for posting voice messages and 
playback within asynchronous audio and 
text-based threaded discussion; can be set 
as a private conversation 
• Play on click 
• Continuous play 
• Expand/collapse threads 
• Refresh/import/export content 
• Publish Voice Boards to a web page 
• Publish individual messages on the 
web (teachers only) 
• Reorder messages 
Elena Cotos Review of Wimba Voice 6.0 
 
Language Learning & Technology 33 
Table 1. Functions and Options of Wimba Voice Applications (continued) 
Wimba Voice 
application Description of functions Options 
Voice Podcaster  
 
Allows for uploading, distribution, and 
playback of audio files on computers and 
portable media players; allows for both the 
creation and subscription to podcasts using a 
preferred RSS reader  
• Play on click 
• Continuous play 
• Edit/delete message 
• Subscribe to podcast 
• Expand/collapse threads 
• Refresh/import/export content 
• Save audio messages 
Voice Presenter 
 
Allows for creating and commenting on 
slides that combine audio, text, and web 
content; can be set as a private conversation 
• Edit/reorder slides 
• Play on click 
• Continuous play 
• Expand/collapse threads 
• Refresh/import/export content 
Voice Email 
 
Allows for sending audio messages to email 
address(es) 
• Archive voice messages 
• Publish voice message 
• Detach a voice e-mail form 
EVALUATION 
Although the Wimba Voice suite was not designed and developed specifically for language learning 
purposes, it is evaluated here in view of how its features can be utilized to create CALL tasks 
theoretically grounded in instructed SLA. Chapelle (2009) suggests that “the most useful for guidance 
concerning how CALL tasks might promote second language learning are the cognitive and social 
processes through which learners acquire a second language” (p. 137). She discusses the effectiveness of 
CALL tasks in terms of the learning potential they may have depending on the kind of input they provide 
and the opportunities for interaction and linguistic output they offer. Wimba Voice tools possess features 
that allow for the design of tasks that can create such learning conditions and enhance cognitive and 
social processes necessary for language acquisition (e.g., comprehension, attention to meaning and form, 
planning, production, communication, interaction, negotiation of meaning). 
Input 
A major tenet in SLA is that learners need to be exposed to linguistic input and that the features of the 
input are more likely to be acquired if they are noticed and comprehended (Gass & Mackey, 2006). An 
advantage of the Wimba Voice applications is that they allow for providing input through different 
modes: aural, textual, and, in the case of Voice Presenter, video. The texting option of the Wimba Voice 
applications, for example, allows for modifying the input in more traditional ways such as simplification, 
explanation, translation, definition, clarification, repetition, and elaboration. However, glosses, hypertext, 
and images are not possible unless the task is in Wimba Presenter and is connected to a web-based 
resource with such input enhancements. Also, visually marking the linguistic features that the learners 
would be expected to attend to can be difficult. One way to accomplish this would be to use capital 
letters, as there are no other means within Wimba such as underlining, bolding, italicizing, or highlighting 
text. On the other hand, it may be possible to ensure salience by orally emphasizing or repeating the target 
aspects in the linguistic input.  
Elena Cotos Review of Wimba Voice 6.0 
 
Language Learning & Technology 34 
Interaction  
Ellis (1999) summarizes the value of face-to-face interaction from a number of perspectives: interaction is 
helpful if it directs learners’ attention to language form (interactionist perspective); interaction is helpful 
if it is conducive to meaning making (sociocultural perspective); interaction is helpful if it engages 
learners in deep mental processing (cognitive perspective). Chapelle (2009) further extrapolates these 
concepts to learner-computer interaction, arguing that with respect to “technology-mediated tasks, the 
value posited for interaction might be expressed as a means for getting better input, for receiving the 
assistance needed in knowledge and understanding, and for activating deep processing of input” 
(Chapelle, pp. 153-154). 
Wimba Voice has the potential to allow for creating CALL tasks that stimulate interpersonal interaction 
with the following tools that include the reply feature: Voice Board, Voice Presenter, Voice Email. For 
instance, learners can interact with both their teacher and their peers (locally or distally located) by 
engaging in threaded asynchronous discussions. They can also receive feedback that can scaffold their 
language production. However, due to the asynchronous nature of Wimba-based communication, it would 
be somewhat difficult to design CALL tasks that would create a favorable environment for learners to 
negotiate meaning in ways that simulate face-to-face or real-time chat interactions online. Also, learner-
computer interaction may be possible, but is likely to be limited because many Wimba Voice features 
(with the exception of Voice Presenter) cannot incorporate interactional enhancements that would clearly 
point to a connection between form and meaning. Consequently, since learner-computer interaction is key 
to stimulating learners’ attention to linguistic form as well as their internal mental capacities and 
cognitive processing of input during the completion of CALL tasks, intrapersonal interaction through 
Wimba Voice tools may not be one of the strengths. 
Output 
Interaction, particularly interpersonal interaction, presupposes production of linguistic output during 
which learners may notice problematic aspects of their language use and attempt to modify it in order to 
make it more comprehensible (Swain, 1985). The cognitive perspective suggests that planning before the 
production of output and self-correction can enhance the value of L2 production.  
Not all Wimba Voice applications lend themselves as readily to the creation of tasks that afford 
opportunities for output production. However, creative language teachers can find ways to utilize the 
different features. For example, Voice Board, Voice Email, and Voice Presenter provide learners with 
opportunities for planning before production by offering the text typing and re-recording options. The 
same options may be useful for learners’ correcting their output. Self-correction of linguistic problems 
may result from learners’ reading and listening to their output for self-evaluation, or it may be prompted 
by the input or feedback provided by their teacher or peers. What these Wimba Voice tools do not afford 
due to the limitations of the asynchronous communication environment are opportunities for guidance 
during the production of linguistic output, which may also confine negotiation of meaning.  
Potential of Wimba Voice for Language Learning 
The overall potential of Wimba Voice applications for language learning depends on the extent to which 
instructors can integrate the features to enhance input, interaction, and output in the design of CALL 
tasks; therefore, depending on the goal of instruction, some of the applications have more potential than 
others based on the descriptions and analysis provided. The characteristics of the input may range, for 
example, from only aural salience to a combination of aural, textual, and multimedia salience, 
modification, and/or elaboration. The type of interaction may include inter-personal and, possibly, 
learner-computer and intrapersonal. The tasks designed may elicit output that can be planned or 
unplanned and prompt self-correction, but only asynchronously. Voice presenter seems to have promise 
for designing tasks that would contain rich input and potentially lead to both inter- and intra-personal 
Elena Cotos Review of Wimba Voice 6.0 
 
Language Learning & Technology 35 
interaction and output generation.  
Although this evaluation suggests the overall potential of the Wimba Voice suite, each tool will find its 
use for implementation, possibly complementing another tool. Some can be used separately for specific 
activities, but teachers using Wimba Voice should design the overall learning task in a way that would 
operationalize input, interaction, and output by focusing on the strengths of each application. For instance, 
Voice Authoring or Voice Podcaster may be used to provide the necessary type of input, and then Voice 
Board, Voice Email, or Voice Presenter can be used to stimulate interaction and output production. Task 
design with Wimba Voice will require careful planning, keeping in mind factors such as instructional 
needs and context, teaching goals, targeted language skills, learner characteristics, and expected 
outcomes.  
In conclusion, the Wimba Voice suite may be very appealing to language practitioners because it affords 
various options that enhance asynchronous communication with audio and video modes. It may also be 
potentially useful for language learners, depending on how principled and theoretically informed the 
pedagogical implementations of Wimba Voice are. Its usefulness for language learning will depend on the 
effectiveness of the tasks; therefore, the tasks in Wimba Voice should create a favorable language 
learning environment by ensuring meaningful interaction and purposeful outcomes for learners. 
 
NOTE 
The screenshots exemplifying the use of language learning tasks created in Wimba Voice are taken from 
the speaking course for international teaching assistants (English 180) at Iowa State University. The 
author is grateful to the instructors of this course."  
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER  
Elena Cotos (Ph.D., Iowa State University) teaches in the TESL/Applied Linguistics and Technology 
Program at Iowa State University and directs the Graduate College Program for international teaching 
assistants. Her research focuses on automated writing evaluation, intelligent/computer-assisted language 
learning and assessment, genre analysis, and learner corpora. 
E-mail: ecotos@iastate.edu 
 
REFERENCES  
Chapelle, C. A. (2009). The potential of technology for language learning. In P. Hubbard (Ed.), Computer 
Assisted Language Learning: Critical concepts in linguistics, volume I. (pp. 134–169). New York: 
Routledge. 
Ellis, R. (1999). Learning a second language through interaction. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Gass, S., & Mackey, A. (2006). Input, interaction and output: An overview. AILA Review, 19, 3–17. 
Swain, M. (1985). Communicative competence: Some roles of comprehensible input and comprehensible 
output in its development. In S. Gass and C. Madden (Eds.), Input in second language acquisition (pp. 
235–256). Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
