Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2011/editors.pdf 
February 2011, Volume 15, Number 1 
pp. 1–2 
 
Copyright © 2011, ISSN 1094-3501 1 
 
FROM THE EDITORS 
Welcome 
Happy 2011 to all our contributors, reviewers, and readers. We hope that 2011 will be a 
challenging and productive year for all of you. We are happy to report that LLT received 
a record number of 179 submissions in 2010, up from 139 in 2009. Our readership is up 
too, with 57,000 visitors from 177 countries/territories in 2010, as compared to 15,000 
visitors in 2009. 
News 
2011 will bring big changes to our editorial team. Matt Prior, our multitalented and 
indefatigable Managing Editor, has officially stepped down as of the end of 2010. We 
thank Matt for his numerous invaluable contributions to our journal and wish him 
success in his future academic career. Daniel Jackson, a doctoral candidate in the Second 
Language Studies program at the University of Hawaii, is taking over as Managing 
Editor. We welcome Daniel to the new position. 
Irene Thompson, co-editor of LLT will be stepping down in August 2011. Mark 
Warschauer, the original founder of LLT, will become the new co-editor along with 
Dorothy Chun. 
This issue 
We are pleased to introduce Volume 15 number 1, a special issue that deals with 
multilateral exchanges for learning language and culture, guest edited by Tim Lewis, 
Thierry Chanier, and Bonnie Youngs. We wish to thank them for an excellent job of 
identifying, selecting, and editing the articles. This issue contains an introductory 
commentary by the guest editors, five articles, an Emerging Technologies Column, and 
four reviews. 
Our Emerging Technologies Column contributed by Joseph Terantino, describes how 
the process of creating, watching, and sharing videos on YouTube, one of the favorite 
pastimes of the younger generation, can be integrated into the learning of foreign 
languages and cultures. 
Our Reviews Column edited by Paige Ware contains two book and two software 
reviews, all of which complement the theme of this special issue. Olga Basharina 
reviews Telecollaboration 2.0: Language, Literacies, and Intercultural Learning in the 
21st Century edited by Sarah Guth and Francesca Helm. The volume discusses the 
impact of the shift from Web 1.0 to Web 2.0 on the development of new online 
literacies, intercultural communicative competence, and language learning. Dawn 
Bikowski reviews Online Cultural Exchange: An Introduction for Foreign Language 
Teachers edited by Robert O’Dowd. The articles in this edited collection examine 
pedagogical applications of online intercultural exchanges, as well as their promises and 
challenges. Elena Cotos reviews Wimba Voice 6.0TM, a set of online communication tools 
that combines web-based interactive technologies which add audio and video 
components to asyncronous communication and which can be integrated into different 
course management systems. Meei-Ling Liaw reviews Livemocha, one of an increasing 
number of social networking sites designed for langauge learners. 
We invite all our readers to support LLT by becoming a subscriber by clicking the 
Subscribe button on our home page. You will have the option of being notified by e-mail 
every time a new issue is released. In addition, having information about our subscribers 
 From the Editors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 2 
 
will allow us to demonstrate to our funding agencies the amount of support we have, and 
thus will assist us in continuing to get institutional support for the journal. 
LLT continues to be a free journal, and we invite you to show monetary support by 
clicking on the Contribute button on our homepage. We thank you for your support! 
Sincerely, 
Irene Thompson and Dorothy Chun  
Editors-in-Chief 
 
 
