Language Learning & Technology 
http:/llt.msu.edu/issues/february2011/review1.pdf 
February 2011, Volume 15, Number 1 
pp. 21–23  
 
Copyright © 2011, ISSN 1094-3501 21 
REVIEW OF TELECOLLABORATION 2.0: LANGUAGE, LITERACIES, 
AND INTERCULTURAL LEARNING IN THE 21st CENTURY 
 
Telecollaboration 2.0: Language, Literacies, and 
Intercultural Learning in the 21st Century 
  
Sarah Guth & Francesca Helm (Eds.) 
 
2010 
ISBN: 978-3-0343-0440-5 
US $97.95 
475 pp. 
 
Peter Lang 
New York, NY 
 
 
 
Review by Olga Basharina, University of New Mexico 
With the development of a new generation of Web services and applications known as Web 2.0, it is 
imperative to shift towards new pedagogies and approaches for language and intercultural learning. The 
edited volume by Guth and Helm (2010), entitled Telecollaboration 2.0 Language, Literacies and 
Intercultural Learning in the 21st Century, discusses the educational shift from Web 1.0 to Web 2.0 
within the context of telecollaboration and focuses on the development of new online literacies, 
intercultural communicative competence, and language learning.  
The strengths of the book are manifold. The contributors to the book are widely recognized leaders in the 
field of telecollaboration and language learning who seek to address aspects of telecollaboration that have 
not yet been dealt with in the Web 2.0 literature (see e.g., Lomicka & Lord, 2009; Thomas, 2009). 
Mainly, they explore the roles of instructors and students, appropriate forms of assessment and 
evaluation, successful transfer of Web 2.0 tools from social and leisure lives of students to academic 
contexts, and task design and monitoring. In the introduction, Guth and Helm argue that telecollaboration 
2.0 is especially prominent for developing new online literacies, a goal which is often neglected. This 
book fills in the gap by articulating clearly the goals of new online literacies. The contributors 
conceptualize Web 2.0 from the critical language educators’ standpoint, focusing not only on 
linguacultural and technological gains, but also on how teachers and learners may use the concepts and 
ideologies behind Web 2.0 to promote their learning. In addition, this book focuses on telecollaboration 
involving people who are not necessarily language learners but also on exchanges that are bilingual or 
monolingual and both bi-lateral or multi-lateral. Discussions about important pedagogical issues and 
neglected aspects of Telecollaboration 2.0 and about an extended view of telecollaboration make this 
book a significant contribution to the field. 
The book consists of 4 parts: (a) new trends and environments in telecollaboration, (b) new trends and 
competences for the language learner 2.0, (c) new skills and competencies for the language teacher 2.0, 
and (d) case studies of implementation of Telecollaboration 2.0. It is comprised of an introduction, 11 
articles, and 8 case studies. Each contribution to the book focuses either on theory, on research, or on 
practice. 
 
Olga Basharina Review of Telecollaboration 2.0 
 
Language Learning & Technology 22 
Several chapters provide a strong theoretical focus that presents newly developed or adapted theoretical 
frameworks and models. First, Helm and Guth provide a critical review of Byram’s (1997) intercultural 
communicative competence (ICC) model. They adapt it to fit in online contexts and provide the 
framework for the objectives in Telecollaboration 2.0 contexts, using three overlapping dimensions— 
operational, critical, and cultural—in order for students to develop multimodal communicative 
competence. They then focus on task-based language learning, which they view as a methodological 
approach for telecollaboration. Finally, they relate the design of effective tasks for Telecollaboration 2.0 
to pedagogy of mulitliteracies (New London Group 1996, 2000). Next, Lamy and Goodfellow argue that 
the field of telecollaboration and language learning suffers from “an under-conceptualization of 
‘intercultural’, a misunderstanding over ‘communicative competence’ and a misplaced confidence in the 
reality of ‘collaborative learning’” (p. 121). They call for deconstruction of intercultural practices and 
creation of an inter-collective model with a social conscience. They suggest that it is important to shift 
away from telecollaboration as purely pedagogical practice to viewing it in a broader sense as an 
educational culture. Next, Guerin and colleagues outline the skills necessary for the “Learner 2.0” to 
master in order to use them for cognitively dense learning. Hughes then discusses aspects of a 
multilingual Internet including multilingual online communication, the adaptation of writing systems to 
technological constraints, language choice, and code-switching. Finally, Dooly argues that bridging the 
gap between the use of Web 2.0 telecollaboration tools outside and inside a classroom entails finding 
effective teaching strategies. She presents useful frameworks of characteristics of the task for 
Telecollaboration 2.0 and of comparison between collaborative learning and group work. She views tasks 
as part of “a carefully programmed sequence of tasks, subtasks, products and sub-products which are 
orchestrated by the teacher and which lead up to a relevant final product” (p. 287). She points at the 
importance of new teacher competencies that implement language learning activities taking place within 
“the triangulation of task, context, and the structure of interaction” (p. 293). 
Several classical research papers are included as chapters and combine both a strong theoretical 
background as well as research. First, Thorn explores engagement with multilingual online games and fan 
fiction remix composition practices in informal settings and the dynamics of language use and learning 
they afford. He raises an important question of how language educators can “orient themselves toward the 
challenge of deciding which emerging communicative practices to include in instructed L2 curricula that 
extend beyond historically sanctioned formal registers” (p. 156). Thorn argues that familiarizing students 
with Internet specific genres of language use should become an explicit goal of formal instruction. To 
implement this goal he suggests the “bridging activities” framework (Thorne and Reinhardt, 2008), which 
builds upon the concept of multiliteracies and promotes linguistic pluralism. Next, drawing on Halliday’s 
(2002) social semiotic framework, Hauck explores the relationship between multimodal and intercultural 
communicative competence. Her research has implications for task design that should make appropriate 
use of various channels of communication. Halliday’s field-tenor-mode framework, for example, can be 
used for designing task goals and questions and can help highlight the cultural dimension of technology 
use in telecollaborative exchanges. Next, O’Dowd argues that assessment of telecollaboration 2.0 should 
be in line with the goals of Web 2.0, such as development of intercultural awareness, new online 
literacies, and communicative language competence. He focuses on issues which emerge when educators 
consider how to evaluate online foreign language activity, including the ethical issues of assessing the 
attitudes and skills of ICC, the practical issues of calibrating intercultural skills and new online literacies 
into levels, and the pedagogical issues involved in rewarding certain types of online interaction and 
behavior over other tasks. He then reviews the main evaluation techniques such as assessment rubrics and 
portfolios.  
Finally, several chapters contribute a strong practical focus with extensive descriptions of Web 2.0 
technologies. Guth and Thomas discuss the differences between Web 1.0 and Web 2.0 and between 
institutionally controlled Learning Management Systems and Web 2.0 as platforms for telecollaboration 
Olga Basharina Review of Telecollaboration 2.0 
 
Language Learning & Technology 23 
2.0. They provide practical description of the most commonly used Web 2.0 tools including social 
networking, wikis, and blogs. Panichi and colleagues introduce the publicly available 3D multi-user 
virtual world Second Life and explore the nature of the relationship between virtual worlds and foreign 
language education for learning in general and learning L2 in particular. Furstenberg and Levet describe 
an intercultural Cultura project and provide some suggestions for its evaluation. They focus on the 
interplay between online and classroom work to form a coherent whole. Finally, eight case studies of 
practical implementation of new forms of telecollaboration in different sociocultural contexts are 
presented in the last section. Web 2.0 tools used to implement the described projects include the virtual 
world of Second Life, wiki, Skype, video-web communication, and social networking. The focus is both 
on successes and challenges of implementing such projects. 
The main theme that runs across most of the chapters is how the more successful practices of the informal 
setting can usefully be incorporated into formal learning. One author, Thorne suggests a practical solution 
to this problem by providing his “bridging activities” framework. This area points to a direction of future 
research: the investigation and development of practical/theoretical models of how to bridge formal and 
institutionalized use of Web 2.0 tools with more informal and personal uses. 
Without reservation, this book is a must-read for practitioners and researchers working in different 
educational contexts with various Web 2.0 services and applications. Given the depth and breadth of 
topics discussed as well as the optimal balance of theory and practice of telecollaborative language 
learning presented in the book, it may serve as an excellent textbook in educational technology and 
language courses. 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER  
Olga Basharina is an adjunct faculty member at the department of Foreign Languages and Literatures at 
the University of New Mexico. Her research interests include language and literacy development in a 
socio-cultural context, telecollaborative language learning, and teaching foreign languages and cultures.  
E-mail: okb@unm.edu  
 
REFERENCES  
Byram, M. (1997). Teaching and assessing intercultural communicative competence. Clevedon: 
Multilingual Matters. 
Halliday, M. (2002). Linguistic studies of text and discourse. London: Continuum. 
Lomicka, L., & Lord, G. (2009). The next generation: Special networking and online collaboration in 
foreign language learning. CALICO Monograph Series.  
The New London Group (1996). A Pedagogy of multiliteracies: Designing social futures. Harvard 
Educational Review, 66(1), 60–92. 
Thomas, M. (Ed.) (2009). Handbook of research on Web 2.0 and second language learning. Hershey: 
IGI. 
Thorne, S.T., & Reinhardt, J. (2008). “Bridging activities,” new media literacies and advanced foreign 
language proficiency. The Calico Journal, 25, 558–572. 
