Language Learning & Technology 
http:/llt.msu.edu/vol15num2/review1.pdf 
June 2011, Volume 15, Number 2 
pp. 27–33 
 
Copyright © 2011, ISSN 1094-3501 27 
REVIEW OF MOODLE 2.0 
 
Title Moodle 2.0 
Platform Mac OS X, Windows, Linux 
Minimum hardware 
requirements 
Disk Space: 160MB free (min) 
Memory: 256MB (min), 1GB (recommended) 
Publisher (with contact 
information) 
http://moodle.org 
Support offered Context help, Moodle Docs, Moodle Tracker, Moodle.org Forum, Moodle 
Partners, self-help tutorials, and Moodle on social network sites 
Target language Multiple languages (more than 70 languages) 
Target audience Any level of students 
Price Free 
 
Review by Tsun-Ju Lin, Washington State University 
INTRODUCTION 
With the rapid increase of digital technologies and the popularity of the Internet in recent years, a new 
definition of literacy has emerged. “New literacies” extend beyond traditionally held views of literacy as 
the ability to read and write to include an expanded definition, which includes a wide range of skills: the 
ability to locate and evaluate information effectively and efficiently; facility with making meaning by 
aligning new information with prior knowledge; and an ability to synthesize, critically analyze, and create 
new information within the context of larger social practices (Coiro, 2003; Coiro, Knobel, Lankshear, & 
Leu, 2008; Greenhow, Robelia, & Hughes, 2009). In order to help students acquire new literacies, it is 
essential to engage learners in developing deep cognitive processing, to activate their prior knowledge, to 
promote collaborative inquiry, and to encourage creativity in all language skills (Cummins, Brown, & 
Sayers, 2007). This review evaluates the potential of Moodle 2.0 for helping students master such a wide 
range of abilities and competencies by examining Moodle 2.0 using the following guiding criteria adapted 
from Cummins and his colleagues (2007):  
1. Providing cognitive challenges and opportunities for deep processing of meaning 
2. Relating instruction to prior knowledge and experiences 
3. Promoting active self-regulated collaborative inquiry 
4. Encouraging extensive involvement in all language skills  
5. Developing multiple strategies for effective language learning  
6. Promoting identity investment  
WHAT IS MOODLE 2.0 ABOUT? 
Moodle (Modular Object-Oriented Dynamic Learning Environment) is a free and open-source course 
management system based on the social constructionist model of pedagogy. The design of Moodle 
emphasizes creating collaborative interaction and student-centered online learning environments. The 
open network allows any interested users to contribute their ideas, information, and support, and also to 
create additional modules and features that allow unlimited innovation. Moodle has been described as 
software “created through participation rather than via publishing” (Lankshear & Knobel, 2006, p. 45). 
Due to the involvement of the community, a newer version of Moodle (Moodle 2.0) was released in 2010, 
and this revised version includes many new features. Although itemizing every change is beyond the 
scope of this review, the new features have resulted in a management system that is more personalized 
Tsun-Ju Lin Review of Moodle 2.0 
 
Language Learning & Technology 28 
(e.g., my private files, and an improved My Moodle page); more user-friendly (e.g., portfolio support, 
repository support file picker, and a new HTML editor); more organized (e.g., themes, quiz navigation, 
flagging questions, question bank, tagging, and blocks); more educationally challenging (e.g., course 
completion and prerequisites, rewritten Wiki and workshop modules, and enablement of conditional 
activities); and more collaborative (e.g., comments, ratings, and community hubs).  
EVALUATION OF MOODLE DESIGN 
Examining Moodle 2.0 with the six principles proposed by Cummins et al. (2007) reveals several positive 
strengths and some potential challenges. 
Providing Cognitive Challenges and Opportunities for Deep Processing of Meaning. 
Opportunities for cognitively challenging activities can be provided in different Moodle modules and 
plug-ins that instruct language learners to think about and represent particular topics in multiple ways. To 
take just one example, the glossary module gives opportunities for participants to create and organize a 
list of definitions, such as an online word library. Individuals can determine how the information is 
organized (e.g., keywords and categories) and represented in post-typographic formats (e.g., videos, 
graphics, audios, texts, etc.) in order to make a shared sense or meaning for the community (see Figure 1 
for an example of a glossary module). With Moodle 2.0, multiple glossary definitions can be rated and 
commented on by users to negotiate and evaluate each other’s work. The active and in-depth processing 
of new or unfamiliar vocabulary promotes both “higher-order thinking” and “lower-order thinking” 
(Cummins et al., 2007). This instruction of vocabulary via the learners arguably helps them develop depth 
and breadth of vocabulary knowledge. 
 
Figure 1. Example of a glossary module used in a Spanish class. 
In another example, a forum module is a useful space for stimulating discussion by using post-
typographical formats. The main contribution of this module is that learners get to decide the flow of the 
content, while the role of the instructor can be as facilitator rather than as primary information giver. This 
module can enable learners to bring different perspectives and knowledge to a theme, thus promoting the 
abilities of meaning negotiation and critical thinking.  
Additionally, instructors can also have learners create questions to assess each other’s comprehension by 
utilizing a quiz module, including a variety of question types (e.g., multiple-choice, matching, short 
answer, ordering, true/false, and more). The process of student creation provides an opportunity for 
Tsun-Ju Lin Review of Moodle 2.0 
 
Language Learning & Technology 29 
students to synthesize, critically analyze, and create new ways of transforming information. Notably, the 
activity not only allows students to decide what is important but also can potentially empower them as 
learners and thinkers by offering opportunity for greater autonomy. However, to create such a meaningful 
problem-solving activity is complicated, time-consuming, and may require technical support (e.g., basic 
HTML knowledge). 
Relating Instruction to Prior Knowledge and Experiences. 
Tools such as the mindmap module and questionnaire module can facilitate student brainstorming and 
prediction of content as students build background knowledge in a new area. A mindmap module is a type 
of mapping/graphic organizer that can be used by teachers to create warm-up activities for students to link 
new information with prior knowledge and for instructors to determine what additional knowledge needs 
to be developed before introducing the main topic. For example, the teacher may have students develop 
ideas relevant to Alzheimer’s and then provide articles that discuss perspectives not/rarely mentioned in 
the activity. Instructors can also create a survey activity by utilizing the questionnaire module to set up 
specific connections for students to activate their prior knowledge (see Figure 2 for an example of a 
questionnaire module).  
The examples above illustrate a reliance on the teachers’ ability to provide clear instructions and to be 
aware of prior knowledge held by learners. A major challenge for Moodle 2.0 might be the extra effort 
required by course designers to provide appropriate instructions, although Moodle 2.0 offers a space for 
teachers to develop meaningful activities. The majority of participants in MoodleDocs are developers, 
administrators, or/and teachers. However, little support is designed specifically for language learners to 
ask related questions. Features that would enhance the learners’ experience might include a list of 
frequently asked questions, technical support for students, or a set of instructions for various basic 
activities such as participating in a module, uploading files, or importing/exporting files from other 
sources. 
 
Figure 2. Example of a questionnaire module. 
In short, Moodle contains several useful tools for teachers to evaluate students’ prior knowledge and 
experiences but the effort to provide clear instructions needs further consideration. 
Promoting Active Self-regulated Collaborative Inquiry 
Collaboration and social interaction can be embedded in almost every module and block via chat (e.g., 
Tsun-Ju Lin Review of Moodle 2.0 
 
Language Learning & Technology 30 
chat room), discussion (e.g., forum and comment functions), or work with peers to get ideas (e.g., Wiki). 
The new Wiki module now is more consistent with other Wiki formats such as Wikipedia. It provides 
more administrative options to enable instructors to easily and effectively provide a “knowledge-
building” environment for students to develop, create, and share information together while online 
(Scardamalia & Bereiter, 2006) (see Figure 3 for an example of an interactive Wiki module). The 
particular challenge for the Wiki type of tool is that it requires users to maintain it properly and for 
teachers to build a learning environment which recognizes it as a valuable source.  
  
Figure 3. Example of a Wiki module.  
Encouraging Extensive Involvement in All Language Skills 
According to Cummins et al. (2007), involvement is the key to the development of proficiency. Design 
that encourages active involvement in all language skills is elaborated in Moodle 2.0. For instance, the 
RSS feeds block enables instructors to link to authentic reading materials (e.g., online newspapers and 
articles) from external Websites. The voice device NanoGong (not yet compatible with Moodle 2.0) can 
be embedded in almost every module. Another audio and video recording device PoodLL Language 
Laboratory package (will be compatible with Moodle 2.0 soon) includes two assignments, two activities 
and three questions types. This means that listening and speaking activities can be created anywhere to 
encourage practice of these language skills. Besides, with the new repository support in Moodle 2.0, 
authentic resources such as YouTube and Flickr can be easily integrated into a Moodle site. Writing 
opportunities can also be created in any of the following modules: assignment module, lesson module, 
personal profile, journal module, blog module, and forum module. All these features not only encourage 
students to practice language skills but also to make language learning happen in more “real-world” 
settings. Additionally, creating activities by incorporating different modules can be easily achieved, so 
different language skills can be linked; for example, a chat session transcript can be analyzed for grammar 
and spelling errors in a Wiki or forum module. 
Developing Multiple Strategies for Effective Language Learning  
Language learners need to know how to use a range of strategies before, during, and after learning, such 
as self-management, self and peer evaluation, and the use of post-typographic materials to fit a variety of 
learning styles. Moodle 2.0 provides multiple opportunities for teachers to develop tasks during which 
students can practice such skills.  
Tsun-Ju Lin Review of Moodle 2.0 
 
Language Learning & Technology 31 
Organization 
The first feature that allows users to practice organizing effective information is page layout. A Moodle 
page is organized in blocks to enable users to track important information. In Moodle 2.0, however, all 
blocks are consistently implemented in every page and can be customized by users. Another change in 
Moodle 2.0 from Moodle 1.9 is in two settings of its interface: navigation block and setting block. A 
navigation block helps users quickly and easily access items, such as site pages, courses, my profile, 
etcetera. With the setting block, users can directly locate items they have permission to edit across the 
Moodle site. Second, the new development of My Private File provides opportunities for users to 
integrate personal or external documents and media (initial plug-ins include: Alfresco, Flickr, 
GoogleDocs, Picasa, and YouTube) (see Figure 4 for a sample of My Private File). In My Private File, 
students can easily arrange the appropriate materials to effectively represent information through post-
typographic materials. 
Evaluation Strategies 
Moodle 2.0 supports a wide variety of evaluation strategies, providing built-in comment boxes for 
instructors to provide feedback, user ratings, a quiz module, and a workshop module. 
 
Figure 4. Sample of My Private File.  
The workshop module has been completely redesigned for Moodle 2.0 and emphasizes peer assessment 
activities. It contains multiple types of assessment forms and allows the learner, peers, and instructors to 
evaluate the quality of one’s work. The quiz module allows users to design a variety of question types and 
store these in a question bank to be re-used or modified for multiple quizzes. It also includes quiz reports 
and statistics to give students instant feedback, so they can compare results to their own goals. Another 
major improvement from Moodle 1.9 in the module is the possibility of flagging questions during a quiz 
attempt (see Figure 5 for the flagging example). This function allows students to go back to review 
answers they are unsure of. Thus, users can monitor what needs to be further understood. These functions 
allow easy access to both qualitative and quantitative assessments. With this function, users can easily 
track or arrange important or interesting information. According to this criterion, teachers can utilize 
Moodle 2.0 to facilitate students’ development of multiple learning strategies. 
Tsun-Ju Lin Review of Moodle 2.0 
 
Language Learning & Technology 32 
 
Figure 5. Example of flagging in a Chinese course. 
Promoting Identity Investment 
Tools to support involvement and identity are available in several blocks on Moodle. Cummins et al. 
(2007) state that it is critical to carry out “identity texts insofar as students invest their identities in these 
texts (written, spoken, visual, musical, or combination in multimodal form) that then hold a mirror up to 
students in which their identities are reflected back in a positive light” (p. 219). The My Moodle page 
outlines learner profiles, activity reports, tags, notes, and their private files, as well as records the user’s 
way of thinking, responding, and acting in each task. Also, Moodle 2.0 allows student identity to be 
represented in multiple ways, including visual or iconic images, letter identification, voice, videos, or a 
combination of these. 
CONCLUSION 
Moodle 2.0 is a powerful software package that can be used for language learning. Its primary strength 
lies in its technical features. It is important to note here that the tools mentioned above are just some of 
Moodle 2.0’s capabilities, and more modules, blocks, and plug-ins can be added. Many of the technical 
issues mentioned in this review in need of improvement will undoubtedly become part of the next set of 
issues addressed by the many Moodle developers and users (often called “Moodlers”). In its current 
iteration, however, Moodle 2.0 has strong pedagogical potential and allows instructors flexibility in 
creating activities based on the perceived needs, intentions, cognitive traits, and learning strategies of 
their students. Moodle 2.0 has the power to enhance efforts by teachers to provide carefully designed 
learning environments so that their students can be successful. 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER  
Tsun-Ju Lin is a doctoral student in Language and Literacy Education in the Department of Teaching and 
Learning at Washington State University. While pursuing her degree, she is working as an online 
language course developer and education technology consultant in the Department of Foreign Languages 
and Cultures at WSU. Her research interest is supporting learner engagement in technology to facilitate 
FLLs’ language competence.  
E-mail: tsunjulin@gmail.com 
Tsun-Ju Lin Review of Moodle 2.0 
 
Language Learning & Technology 33 
REFERENCES  
Coiro, J. (2003). Reading comprehension on the Internet: Expanding our understanding of reading 
comprehension to encompass new literacies. The Reading Teacher, 56(5), 458–464. 
Coiro, J., Knobel, M., Lankshear, C., & Leu, D. (2008). Central issues in new literacies and new literacies 
research. In J. Coiro, M. Knobel, C. Lankshear, & D. J. Leu (Eds.), Handbook of new literacies research 
(pp. 1–22). New York: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Cummins, J., Brown, K., & Sayers, D. (2007). Literacy, technology, and diversity: Teaching for success 
in changing times. Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon/Pearson. 
Greenhow, C., Robelia, B., & Hughes, J. (2009). Web 2.0 and classroom research: What path should we 
take? Educational Researcher, 38(4), 246–259. doi:10.3102/0013189x09336671  
Lankshear, C., & Knobel, M. (2006). New literacies: Everyday practices and classroom learning (2nd 
ed). London: Open University Press. 
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (2006). Knowledge building: Theory, pedagogy, and technology. In K. 
Sawyer (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of learning sciences (pp. 97–118). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press. 
