Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2011/lee.pdf 
October 2011, Volume 15, Number 3 
pp. 87–109 
 
Copyright © 2011, ISSN 1094-3501 87 
BLOGGING: PROMOTING LEARNER AUTONOMY AND 
INTERCULTURAL COMPETENCE THROUGH STUDY ABROAD 
Lina Lee 
University of New Hampshire 
The current study explores closely how using a combined modalities of asynchronous 
computer-mediated communication (CMC) via blogs and face-to-face (FTF) interaction 
through ethnographic interviews with native speakers (L1s) supports autonomous learning 
as the result of reflective and social processes. The study involves 16 American 
undergraduate students who participated in blogs to develop their intercultural competence 
over the course of one-semester study abroad. The results show that blogs afforded 
students the opportunity to work independently (e.g., content creation) and reflect upon 
cross-cultural issues. Critical reflection, however, relied on the teacher’s guidance and 
feedback, as most of the students were cognitively challenged by not being able to clearly 
articulate different points of view. It is likely that students were not accustomed to 
reflecting. The findings also indicate that task type fostered autonomy in different ways. 
While free topics gave students more control of their own learning, teacher-assigned topics 
required them to critically think about the readings. Lack of access to Internet at the host 
institution and family also contributed to a limited level of social interaction. The study 
concludes that well-designed tasks, effective metacognitive and cognitive skills, and the 
accessibility to Internet are essential to maximize the potentials of blogs for learner 
autonomy and intercultural communication. 
Keywords: Computer-Assisted Language Learning, Learner Autonomy, Task-based 
Instruction 
INTRODUCTION  
The traditional teacher-driven classroom has become pedagogically limited in making language learning a 
student-centered instruction that stresses learners’ capacity to learn autonomously. According to Little 
(2003), autonomy entails decision-making, critical reflection and social interaction. Autonomous learners 
are responsible for their own learning and are actively involved in the learning process by setting personal 
goals, planning and executing tasks, and reviewing their progress (Dam, 1995; Little, 1996). Teachers 
play a supportive and facilitative role in the autonomous learning by encouraging students to take an 
active part in decision-making and problem solving, and offering them guidance. From a social 
constructivist view, the development of autonomy is a result of interplay between social and reflective 
processes (Little, 2003). Benson (2003) notes that during social interaction, students work collaboratively 
with others through which they develop high order thinking skills by observing, analyzing and evaluating 
information. 
While there are many ways to foster autonomous learning, computer-assisted language learning (CALL) 
is increasingly recognized as a powerful means for developing learner autonomy (Benson, 2004, Lee, 
2005; Murphy, 2006; O’Rourke & Schwienhorst, 2003). The advent of Web 2.0 technologies (wikis, 
blogs, podcastings) brings new dimensions to online learning. Blogs, for example, are used in various 
ways depending on their pedagogical purposes. Personal blogs are collections of online journals that 
foster self-expression and self-reflection (e.g., Lee, 2010; Yang, 2009), whereas collective blogs 
involving an entire class or small groups promote interactive and collaborative learning (Lee, 2009b). 
Blogging fosters learner autonomy, as students take charge of making their own decisions as to what, how 
much and when to publish their work (Lee, 2010). Accordingly, students develop the awareness of their 
ability to plan, understand and regulate their own learning (Baggetun & Wasson, 2006; Ward, 2004). 
Lina Lee Blogging: Promoting Learner Autonomy 
 
Given that blogs are asynchronous CMC, students construct knowledge at their own pace, which enables 
them to reflect on the content (Armstrong & Retterer, 2008; Campbell, 2003; Murray & Hourigan, 2006; 
Richardson, 2005). In addition, Lee (2010) points out that blogs increase students’ participation and 
motivation because they are intended not only for a sole instructor but rather for a broad audience. While 
blogging presents pedagogical potentials with regard to autonomous learning, the accessibility to 
networking influences participation levels (Belz, 2002; Lee, 2004). Lacking Internet access at home or in 
school creates learner stress and frustration. Consequently, the level of engagement diminishes and the 
quality of work suffers (Peterson, 1997). 
With the aforementioned benefits, blogs have been increasingly implemented in L2 instruction across 
contexts. Research findings have shed light on our understanding of the effectiveness of blogs for 
developing reading and writing skills (e.g., Bloch, 2007; Churchill, 2009; Ducate & Lomicka, 2008; Lee, 
2010; Murray & Hourigan, 2006). To promote intercultural learning, blogs have been incorporated into 
conventional classes and study abroad programs (e.g., Elola & Oskoz, 2008; Lee, 2009b; Sun, 2009). 
Existing CALL research, however, has not yet given much attention to issues of autonomy, as suggested 
by L2 researchers (Benson, 2006; Blin, 2004; Chapelle, 2001; White, 2003). To gain new insights 
regarding the emergence of autonomy beyond the classroom, the current study explored how blogs in 
conjunction with ethnographic interviews foster learner autonomy. Using a social constructivist approach, 
this study involved 16 American undergraduate students who participated in a blog project to develop 
their intercultural competence over the course of one-semester of a study abroad program. As a course 
requirement, the blog project aimed to use (a) personal blogs to give students individual spaces to write 
and reflect upon their experiences with the host culture and people on a regular basis, and (b) a class blog 
to open a social place where both students and L1s shared and exchanged cross-cultural perspectives 
using teacher-assigned topics. Real-time ethnographic interviews with local L1s as part of the class blog 
afforded abroad students additional opportunities for FTF intercultural exchanges. The combination of 
two modes of communication (CMC and FTF) was used to optimize students’ learning potential 
according to their learning styles and personal needs. Importantly, blogs and ethnographic interviews 
enabled students to develop cultural insights independently and collaboratively outside of class. The study 
examined the impact of reflective blogs on self-directed learning from students’ perspectives. 
Furthermore, factors that affected autonomous learning within the virtual learning environment were 
explored. 
REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE 
Learner Autonomy in Language Learning 
In recent years, interest in learner autonomy has grown considerably in the field of language education 
(e.g., Benson, 2003; Hurd & Murphy, 2005; Lamb & Reinders, 2008; Little 2001; White, 2003). Despite 
the fact that autonomy has been defined in a number of ways, it emerges from the concept that an 
individual’s taking control of his or her own learning and is often manifested by the ability to take 
initiative, monitor progress and evaluate learning outcomes (Benson, 2001; Benson & Voller, 1997; 
Holec, 1981; Little, 2003). According to Little (1994), learner autonomy is “the product of 
interdependence rather than independence” (p. 435), which underscores the dynamics between collective 
and individual actions. Similarly, Benson (2001) maintains that autonomy is supported by the social 
constructivism of active learning. Autonomy does not mean that learners work in isolation. Rather, they 
socially construct knowledge by actively engaging in the process of learning. Through social interactions, 
learners develop a capacity to analyze, reflect upon and synthesize information to create new 
perspectives. In this view, Little (1996) stresses that critical reflection depends on “the internalization of a 
capacity to participate fully and critically in social interactions” (p. 211). The process of internalization 
makes the individual become a self-regulated learner who takes a proactive role in the learning process 
rather than simply reacting to external stimuli (Dörnyei, 2005). 
Language Learning & Technology 88 
Lina Lee Blogging: Promoting Learner Autonomy 
 
Other researchers highlight the importance of self-management (Rubin, 2001), self-motivation 
(Dickinson, 1995; Lamb, 2004; Ushioda 2006), self-confidence (Wenden, 2002) and learning strategies 
(Oxford, 2003) for learning autonomy. The challenge, however, lies in engaging learners in the cognitive, 
metacognitive, social, and affective dimensions of language learning (Little, 2001; Reinders, 2006). 
Effort, therefore, needs to be placed on training students to learn autonomously with teacher intervention 
guidance and support (Benson, 2001; Dam, 1995; Little, 2007). As shown in the aforementioned concepts 
and skills, the notion of autonomy covers a relatively large number of constructs widely accepted by L2 
practitioners as pedagogical principles. For the purpose of the current study, self-directness, critical 
reflection and cognitive engagement through social interactions are the key principles of autonomous 
learning for the blog project. The following discussion focuses on autonomy in CALL for out-of-class 
learning supported by a social constructivist approach. 
Social Constructivism for L2 Learning and Autonomy in CALL 
Over the years, research on CALL has shifted away from learners’ interaction with computers to 
interaction with human beings through a computer (Warschauer, 2003). Consequently, a constructivist 
paradigm of language learning which emphasizes the shared and social construction of knowledge has 
been employed as the theoretical framework to support CALL (e.g., Hauck & Youngs, 2008; Lee, 2007, 
2008). According to Duffy and Cunningham (1996), “[l]earning is a social, dialogical process of 
construction by distributed, multidimensional selves using tools and signs within context created by the 
various communities with which they interact” (pp. 181-182). Rather than learning residing in one-way 
delivery of knowledge from a teacher, it is an active, social, and collaborative process through which 
learners use a system of symbols (language) or a material tools (computers) to construct knowledge with 
others in order to accomplish a joint task (Lee, 2004; Pavlenko & Lantolf, 2000). L2 knowledge is 
constructed through collaborative scaffolding (Kenning, 2010; Lee, 2008). Scaffolding, being assisted by 
an expert (e.g., a teacher or a native speaker), enables the learner to expand their zone of proximal 
development (Vygotsky, 1978)—the distance between what they can achieve by themselves and what 
they can achieve with assistance from others. As a result, the learner becomes self-regulated and works 
independently (e.g., Donato, 2000; Lee, 2008).  
Within the social constructivist framework, researchers advocate that CALL provide catalytic conditions 
for active involvement in constructing knowledge, critical reflection on content, and collaborative 
interaction with peers (Benson, 2001; Blin, 2004; Leahy, 2008; Meskill & Ranglova, 2000; Murphy, 
2006; Schwienhorst, 2008). As such, Dang (2010) claims that these elements are prerequisites for the 
development of autonomous learning. Among other CALL applications, electronic tandem language 
learning (e-Tandem) permits L1s of two different languages to work together via the Internet in order to 
study each other’s language and culture. Over the years, many e-Tandem projects have been created in 
European countries including Germany and Spain. E-Tandem is underpinned by principles of reciprocity 
and autonomy, which allow both parties to benefit equally from the exchange and hold each party 
responsible for their own learning by deciding what, when, and how to execute learning tasks (see 
Brammerts, 2001 for review). Within the CMC context, researchers view online learning as an extension 
of classroom-based learning, which gives students more control of their own learning and promotes 
greater interaction and cognitive engagement (e.g., Hewitt, 2000; Jeong, 2004; Lee, 2005; Sykes, Oskoz, 
& Thorne, 2008). Unlike real-time CMC, asynchronous communication gives students more time to 
reflect on their ideas, which fosters critical thinking (e.g., Abrams, 2005; Arnold & Ducate, 2006; 
Jonassen, 2003; Lamy & Goodfellow, 1999). Lee (2009a), for example, reported that a discussion board 
enabled student teachers to gain an in-depth understanding of teaching principles and practices through 
critical reflections on others’ postings. While critical reflection on the content is crucial for promoting 
learner autonomy, Lamy and Hassan (2003) stress that such an expectation needs to be explicitly 
explained to students. In addition to cognitive and social dimensions of language learning, affective 
factors, such as attitudes toward learning tasks, affect how learners engage in online learning. Thus, tasks 
Language Learning & Technology 89 
Lina Lee Blogging: Promoting Learner Autonomy 
 
need to be attainable and take into account students’ interests and motivation in order to inspire learner 
autonomy (Dang, 2006; Lee, 2002; Levy & Stockwell, 2006). 
Developing Intercultural Competence: Blogs and Ethnographic Interviews 
The need for language learners to develop intercultural communicative competence (ICC) has been 
strongly advocated as an essential component in L2 instruction. Byram’s (1997) ICC model which 
presents a conceptual framework consisting of four-interrelated components—knowledge, skills, attitudes 
and awareness—appears to be the most frequently adapted approach to develop intercultural competence 
(see pp. 50-63 for details). Within this framework, the goal is to promote cultural learning that goes 
beyond a superficial “facts only” approach. To become competent intercultural speakers, learners need to 
be open-minded to people of other cultures so that they understand cross-cultural perspectives with non-
judgmental attitudes and respect (Bennett, 1993). In the process of developing ICC, learners are 
encouraged to reflect upon the cultural similarities and differences, and further develop the ability to 
tolerate differences that allow them to handle situations encountered with L1s. Common belief suggests 
that formal classroom instruction alone is not sufficient and close interaction with L1s is vital for students 
to gain ICC. 
Among other approaches to intercultural learning, blog technology has been increasingly used to foster 
cross-cultural communication and awareness (e.g., Carney, 2007; Ducate & Lomicka, 2008; Elola & 
Oskoz, 2008; Lee, 2009b). Research findings have revealed that blogs afford students the opportunity to 
gain cultural knowledge from different perspectives (Elola & Oskoz, 2008; Pinkman, 2005). For example, 
using task-based activities, Lee (2009b) in her recent study of Spanish-American telecollaboration 
demonstrated how group blogs empowered students by raising cultural awareness through ethnographic 
interviews. Despite the favorable results, Carney argues that blogs open a new online discussion forum 
rather than a deeper cultural exchange due to the post-comment structure of blogs that results in brief 
exchanges and lack of continuity. Thus, teachers need to find ways, such as using guided questions, to 
stimulate students’ high order thinking to build upon further discussions. 
Another prominent approach to develop ICC is the use of ethnographic interviews, which have been 
implemented in both CMC and FTF settings. Ethnographic interviews foster real-world interaction in 
which an insider perspective is revealed in order to better understand cross-cultural differences. Most 
importantly, ethnography relies primarily on an understanding of the values, beliefs and attitudes 
underlying behaviors of others through first-hand observations (Allen, 2000). Research findings in FTF 
settings show that ethnography promotes learners’ openness and curiosity toward the target culture and 
raises cross-cultural awareness (e.g., Bateman, 2002). Jackson (2008), for example, reported on a case 
study of Chinese students who engaged in ethnographic interviews. The results showed that the majority 
of the students increased their intercultural sensitivity and awareness after a 5-week overseas program. 
Within the CMC context, Lee (2009b) and O’Dowd and Ritter (2006) reported that students gained cross-
cultural perspectives through interacting with L1s. A recent CMC study conducted by Jin and Erben 
(2007) indicated that students of Chinese developed greater intercultural sensitivity and showed respect 
for cultural differences when using an instant messenger (IM), a text-based chat tool. IM allowed both the 
students of Chinese and L1s to interact and exchange ideas in real-time. The process of analyzing and 
reflecting on L1 informants’ perspectives enables students as outsiders to learn about the cultural 
framework governing the what, how, and why of insiders’ expressions in everyday interactions (O’Dowd, 
2006). 
Based on these research findings, it appears that the use of combined modes of CMC via blogs and FTF 
interaction with L1s holds great potential for fostering self-directed learning1 within the context of study 
abroad. This study investigates the role of learner autonomy and its pedagogical impact. The study was 
designed to address three major questions using social constructivism as a theoretical framework: 
1. How do students view the effectiveness of using CMC (blogs) and FTF (ethnographic interviews) 
Language Learning & Technology 90 
Lina Lee Blogging: Promoting Learner Autonomy 
 
for intercultural learning in support of self-directed learning? 
2. To what extent do blogs promote learner autonomy through social and cognitive engagement?  
3. What factors affect how students learn independently and collaboratively within the virtual 
learning environment? 
METHODOLOGY 
Context of the Study 
The project involved the students from the U.S. who participated in two study abroad programs sponsored 
by the Center of Modern Languages (CML) at the University of Granada in Spain. The researcher and a 
partner teacher were resident directors and they taught similar courses regarding the language and culture 
of Spain. To provide students with increased opportunities to explore the target culture and interact with 
L1s outside of class, they worked closely to design the project for intercultural learning. The project 
consisted of three major blog tasks outlined in the syllabus which were worth 60% of the course work 
(see the Tasks section for details). Blog technology was used to foster critical reflection on cross-cultural 
issues, whereas FTF interviews offered real-time intercultural dialogue with L1s. Within this context, it 
was hoped that the combined CMC and FTF modalities would empower students to take charge of their 
own learning through a socially mediated learning environment. A course management system—
Blackboard—was used to supplement course materials and organize assignments. Blogger, a free 
software blogging program, was adopted to create blogs because they were not available in Blackboard at 
the researcher’s institution. A training session on how to use Blogger was provided to the students in a 
computer lab and a class discussion of how to conduct ethnographic interviews took place at the 
beginning of the semester. 
Participants 
Sixteen American students from two study abroad programs in Spain participated in the project in the fall 
of 2009. All participants completed a questionnaire concerning their personal, educational, and linguistic 
backgrounds. They ranged from 18 to 22 years of age. The students consisted of sophomores (n = 7), 
juniors (n = 8) and one senior. The majority of the students were either Spanish majors (n = 7) or minors 
(n = 6). The majority of the students had three years of Spanish in high school and completed one full 
year of college-level intermediate Spanish. Thus, they had sufficient language skills2 to participate in the 
project. None of them had used blogs prior to the project. Most of them did not have the experience of 
interacting with L1s prior to the study abroad. During the course of one-semester abroad, students lived 
with host families, took classes at the CML, and participated in cultural activities arranged through the 
study aboard programs. 
L1s (n = 26) ranging in age from 17 to 64 from the local communities and the University of Granada, 
Spain were invited to participate in the project. More than 70% of the L1s (n = 19) had experience dealing 
with American students, as they were host family members of study abroad students or were conversation 
exchange partners from the CML. In addition to regular interactions with the students at home or outside 
of class, the L1s consulted with them in the ethnographic interviews3 and participated in the class blog 
discussions. 
Tasks 
Three types of blogs were created for the project: (1) PERSONAL blogs, (2) a CLASS blog and (3) a 
PROJECT blog using a combination of free and teacher-assigned topics. Teacher-assigned topics were 
used to engage students in discussing and debating on cross-cultural issues, whereas free topics gave them 
a certain degree of freedom in decision-making and personal choice. Table 1 summarizes blog tasks that 
students carried out within the allocation of time for each part of the project. 
Language Learning & Technology 91 
Lina Lee Blogging: Promoting Learner Autonomy 
 
Table 1. Description of Three Types of Blogs 
Blog Type Description of Task Time Period 
Personal blog 
 
Each student is responsible for keeping a personal blog. The blog 
serves as a personal diary in which you write reflective observations 
about various aspects of the Spanish culture and address cultural 
differences from your own perspectives. To make meaningful cross-
cultural observations, you should pay attention to current events, 
popular culture, native speakers’ behaviors and attitudes and your 
surroundings (e.g., at home, on the street or in school). You are 
required to write three entries per week through which you reflect on 
the chosen topics. Each entry should have approximately 150-200 
words. You are strongly encouraged to take pictures from cultural 
activities and incorporate them into your blog. 
September 2nd 
to October 29th 
 
  
Class blog 
 
After completing weekly assignments on readings, cultural activities 
and/or ethnographic interviews, you should post a 200-word entry to 
share your observations. You are strongly encouraged to ask 
questions regarding the assigned topic and/or make comments on 
others’ postings. Be sure to upload each interview to the blog for 
others to view. It is recommended that you use external resources 
(e.g., YouTube video clips, external links) to support the content.  
September 3rd 
to November 
19th 
 
  
Project blog 
 
 
For this project, you choose a topic that interests you the most and 
create a blog to compile and share information. You are required to 
read a minimum of 3 articles and conduct a minimum of 2 
interviews with expert speakers to find out their own perspectives 
about the topic. You analyze the readings and interviews, and then 
write about your own observations. Be sure to upload the interviews 
and add additional sources (e.g., newspapers, podcasts, videos) to 
the blog. 
November 10th 
December 8th 
  
Procedure 
At the beginning of the semester, the instructor informed the students that they were required to use blogs 
to carry out various tasks in order to develop their intercultural competence (see Table 1 for the 
description of each blog task). Students spent two weeks designing their personal blogs and posting the 
first three entries. Upon completion of the initial assignments, the instructor collected the blog addresses 
and made them available in Blackboard. For this assignment, no specific instructions were given to 
students. They, however, were asked to focus on cross-cultural comparisons through which they would 
bring their own perspectives to underlying values of the host culture. For corrective feedback, the 
instructor wrote comments on incorrect usage of lexical items and grammatical structures on students’ 
entries. The entries were then returned to the students via Digital DropBox in Blackboard or e-mail. After 
receiving the instructor’s feedback, students made error corrections by editing the entries on their blogs. 
Given that personal blogs were to promote self-reflection rather than idea exchange, students were not 
asked to read and make comments on each other’s blogs.  
In addition to personal blogs, the researcher set up a class blog to open an exchange space where students 
shared and negotiated their understanding of intercultural issues through responses with comments.4 For 
weekly assignments, students read topic-specific readings, participated in cultural activities (e.g., film, 
play, excursions) and/or conducted interviews with L1s. For example, one of topics addressed immigrants 
in Spain. Students first read a poem written by the Spanish poet Luis García Montero entitled Piénsalo 
(Think about it), and viewed YouTube video clips regarding the immigration issues. They then attended 
Language Learning & Technology 92 
Lina Lee Blogging: Promoting Learner Autonomy 
 
the play about immigrants, La vida por delante, in a local theater. Finally, they interviewed their native 
speaker (L1) partners to gain individual perspectives on immigration issues. To facilitate the interviewing 
process, the instructor provided students with guidelines and they spent one class practicing interview 
techniques, such as asking structural and contrast questions (see Spradley, 1980 for information). All 
interviews were recorded using a digital audio or video recorder.5 Students uploaded the recorded 
interviews to the class blog for viewing. Finally, students spent five weeks conducting a cultural project 
after choosing a topic that interested them the most. 
Data Collection and Analysis 
Data collected from blog entries, reflective reports, and post surveys were used to report the affordable 
and challenging aspects of the blog project in relation to learner autonomy and intercultural learning. 
Selective postings from class blogs6 were analyzed to find occurrences of cognitive presence during social 
interactions. Analyses were undertaken by means of descriptive statistics and content analysis. The 
coding for the content analysis was derived from the Four-Phase Practical Inquiry Model created by 
Garrison, Anderson, and Archer (2001). Because it is designed for asynchronous CMC analysis, the 
framework was employed to investigate whether blogs promoted critical reflection through social 
engagements in the development of autonomy. Significantly, the four phases entail the progression of 
cognitive presence from lower to higher order thinking to capture students’ thinking processes in the 
postings. Table 2 illustrates each phase of the model with examples7 taken from the current study. During 
Phase 1, students were able to indentify problems and ask questions for further discussion, whereas in 
Phase 2, they exchanged ideas, clarified problems and offered suggestions. In Phase 3, students began to 
find solutions to the problems and finally, were able to apply new ideas and articulate their views. 
Fourty-six blog entries with comments and responses were read and analyzed for quality by the researcher 
and a trained graduate student. To maintain consistency, both coders first worked on 10% of the data to 
identify speech segments, “the smallest unit of delivery, linked to a single theme, directed at the same 
interlocutor” (Henri & Rigault, 1996, p. 62) and established a inter-rater reliability of 91%. They then 
used the criteria indicated in Table 2 to code cognitive instances in the same blog transcripts. The two 
coders compared and discussed the discrepancies until they reached the final agreement (Inter-rater 
reliability = .87). The rest of the data (90%) was equally divided into two sections and each coder 
analyzed one of the sections, which made up 45% of the data. 
Students wrote a one page reflective paper to report on their experience with the project. The primary goal 
was to empower students to evaluate their own learning using the retrospective method (Cohen, Manion, 
& Morrison, 2007). The following questions designed to elicit comments on different aspects of learner 
autonomy (e.g., self-regulation, interactive reflection) were used to guide students’ writing:8  
1. How did you carry out your personal blog? Briefly explain the major steps you went through to 
undertake and maintain your blog. Was the use of the personal blog a worthwhile experience? 
Why and why not?  
2. In your view, did the project (blogs and interviews) allow you to interact with others in a 
meaningful way? Why and why not? Use examples to justify your answers.  
3. Did you enjoy participating in blog discussions? Did you find peer comments useful? If so, in 
what ways?  
4. What did you gain from carrying out the project? How satisfied were you with the project? Did 
you experience any difficulties? Write any additional comments. 
Language Learning & Technology 93 
Lina Lee Blogging: Promoting Learner Autonomy 
 
Table 2. Four-Phase Practical Inquiry Model (adapted from Garrison et al., 2001) 
Descriptor/Indicator Sociocognitive 
processes 
Example 
Phase 1/Triggering  Identifying 
potential 
problems  
Asking questions 
to prompt more 
discussions 
“I’ve noticed that here most people don’t give tips. One 
night I was in a bar with a couple of Spanish friends. They 
told me that Spain as a society is not big on tipping. I’m not 
sure I like the idea. What do you think about not tipping 
people?” 
Phase 2/Exploration  Exchanging ideas 
Discussing 
ambiguities  
Offering 
suggestions  
“For me, it is strange that Spaniards would eat cookies for 
breakfast and have a piece of fruit or yogurt after the meal. 
My host mom often gives me a banana after lunch. I would 
eat it in the morning. She probably finds it weird. I’m 
curious to find out more about the Spanish culture.” 
Phase 3/Integration  Connecting ideas 
to construct new 
meanings 
Incorporating 
information from 
other sources  
Creating 
solutions  
“I find your point quite interesting. I also had the same 
experience. I don’t understand why Spaniards would speak 
to us in English. Maybe they just see us as a bunch of 
tourists who do not understand Spanish. Or they want to 
impress us with their English to get tips. Maybe we should 
just insist on speaking Spanish to them.” 
Phase 4/Resolution  Applying new 
ideas 
Critically 
assessing and 
defending 
solutions 
“Although I agree with what you have said, I still think that 
it is important for us to speak Spanish with local people. It’s 
so easy to just give up and switch to English. I’m here to 
improve my Spanish not English. I’ve learned things that I 
would never have learned from a textbook like No pasa 
nada (It is not a big deal) or venga (come on move or bye at 
the end of conversation). The point is that we need to take 
advantage of being in the target country. How many of us 
would have the opportunity to live in Spain again?”  
A conceptual content analysis of students’ reflective reports was used to identify factors that afforded and 
challenged students to carry out the project. Reflective reports were read and analyzed using ‘open 
coding’ to identify the recurring themes that emerged in the reports. The common themes were 
subsequently sorted into three major categories: sources of self-directedness (e.g., making plans, taking 
initiative, level of commitment, assessing progress), gains from the project (e.g., critical thinking, 
community building, peer support), and hindrances for the project (lack of time, Internet access, 
instructor’s intervention).  
Students voluntarily completed an online survey hosted by SurveyMonkey.com to gauge their reactions to 
the project relating to various aspects of autonomous learning. The purpose of the post survey was to find 
out students’ perceptions of benefits and/or challenges of using blog activities. The descriptive statistics 
shown in Table 3 provided a layer of interpretive triangulation to support the qualitative analysis. The 
online survey consisted of 12 statements using a 5-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 
5 (strongly agree) to elicit students’ responses in four areas; metacognitive (items 1-3), cognitive (items 4-
6), social (items 7-9) and affective (items 10-12) dimensions of online learning (Table 3). 
Language Learning & Technology 94 
Lina Lee Blogging: Promoting Learner Autonomy 
 
Table 3. Students’ Perceptions of Blog Assignments in Relation to Learner Autonomy 
Statements of the Survey Mean SD 
1. Using blogs gave me more freedom and control of my own learning. 4.43 0.63 
2. I often developed a plan and found the best way for me to complete blog tasks. 3.13 0.51 
3. I was able to monitor my own progress by revisiting my own blog and made 
changes based on the instructor’s feedback. 
4.06 0.68 
4. Blogging allowed me to actively engage in the process of reflection on my writing 
about cross-cultural observations. 
3.81 0.54 
5. By regularly writing reflective blogs, I was able to understand, generate and 
analyze cross-cultural issues. 
3.69 0.60 
6. Reading others’ postings helped me gain diverse cultural perspectives and reflect 
further about my own beliefs. 
4.25 0.77 
7. Social networking via blogs was an effective way to share knowledge and 
exchange ideas with others. 
4.31 0.70 
8. I found peer comments interesting and informative. 3.56 0.63 
9. I gained intercultural knowledge and communication skills through working with 
my peers and native speakers. 
4.13 0.72 
10. I found blog assignments stimulating and meaningful.  4.19 0.75 
11. I felt comfortable sharing my ideas and interacting with my peers and native 
speaker partners via blogging. 
4.06 0.93 
12. Using blogs was a motivational tool for me to learn about the Spanish culture and 
people. 
4.19 0.91 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
To answer the first research question, the effectiveness of blogs and ethnographic interviews for 
intercultural learning from students’ points of view was considered by exploring key constructs of learner 
autonomy using post surveys and reflective essays in conjunction with quotes from personal blogs. Class 
blog postings were analyzed for evidence of cognitive engagement to address the second research 
question. By discussing affordances and challenges that students perceived while carrying out the blog 
project, various factors that affected how they learned independently and collaboratively in the virtual 
learning environment were identified to respond to the third research question. 
It should be noted that due to the limited space permitted in this paper to include a detailed discussion of 
each student’s blog entries, project blogs were excluded and quotes from personal blogs were used to 
support the qualitative findings. 
Students’ Perceptions of Self-Directed Learning: Affordances and Challenges 
Self-regulation, metacognition and motivation are vital for self-directed learning (Long, 2000). The 
overall survey findings show that the project created affordable conditions to support learner autonomy. 
The high ratings of Statements 1 (M = 4.43) and 3 (M = 4.06) indicate that most students considered 
themselves to be self-managed and problem solvers. They acknowledged that writing blog entries on a 
regular basis required them to be self-directed, as this student wrote in her reflective paper: 
Writing three entries per week was not easy for me. At the beginning I waited  
Language Learning & Technology 95 
Lina Lee Blogging: Promoting Learner Autonomy 
 
until the last minute to post my entries which gave me no time to check what I had written. Pretty 
soon I realized that I needed to get organized and make good plans for my assignments. After 
that, I was able to mange my time and meet the deadlines. I also needed to find ways to overcome 
the problems, such as finding Internet access close to my host house. I think blogging made me 
become a more independent and active learner. 
The finding suggests that procrastination and the lack of easy computer access contributed to the student’s 
perception of learner autonomy. Moreover, a few students were frustrated by not being able to participate 
actively in the blogs. One student, for example, expressed her disappointment in the reflective essay: 
My host family did not have Internet access. Many times I had to look for an Internet café so I 
could work on my blog and I ended up spending money for the Internet service. I wasn’t happy 
about that. I couldn’t really participate in blog discussions because I had limited access to 
Internet. 
The comments confirms those reported in previous studies of CMC indicating that the accessibility of the 
Internet becomes essential for network-based learning and further affects students’ motivation (Thorne, 
2003; Ware, 2005).  
Students were instructed to take part in blogging as part of course requirements. Yet, they had the power 
to take an active role in their own learning. More than 60% of the students reported that they often 
thought about how to complete the blog assignments (Statement 2). One student, for example, reflected 
that blogging held her accountable for her own learning by requiring here to make her own decisions as to 
what, how much, and when to write. From another student’s point of view, the personal blog gave her the 
independence and freedom to choose cultural topics to build on her area of interest, while the class blog 
cultivated her ability to write and respond critically to a diversity of ideas. To this end, the students 
perceived that contributing to different types of blogs empowered them to become autonomous learners, 
as they made the informed choice of being self-regulated by working individually and collaboratively 
with others. Less self-regulated students, however, found maintaining three weekly entries challenging, as 
they acknowledged that they often failed to complete the assignments in a timely manner. Others students 
(n = 5) experienced difficulties expressing themselves fully using the L2. Consequently, they admitted 
that they failed to post blog entries in productive ways and were less motivated to participate in blog 
discussions. The findings indicate that the degree of autonomy was affected by the lack of willingness and 
self-determination to perform actively in learning tasks. Furthermore, the results suggest that the use of 
L1 should be an option because it would allow students to better reflect on their cross-cultural 
perspectives, as argued by CMC researchers (Elola & Oskoz, 2008; O’Dowd, 2006). The decision 
whether or not to use L1 should be subject to learning objectives. In this case, blogging was to develop 
cultural insights rather than linguistic gains. Thus, it would be appropriate to allow for the use of the L1 
option.  
Interestingly, nearly one third of the students (n = 6) noted in their reflective reports that it was not 
necessary for them to make plans as to ‘what’ to write since they were given the freedom to choose their 
own topics for the personal blogs. Rather, they had difficulty deciding ‘how’ to organize their ideas, as 
this student reflected: 
Although blogging gave me a personal space to write about different cultural topics, I must admit 
that at times it was challenging for me to put my thoughts in order. I wasn’t exactly sure what I 
should focus on. I guess I needed more directions. 
A few students suggested that the instructor should have discussed strategies for online posting along with 
writing samples with the students prior to the project. Although most of the students demonstrated a 
Language Learning & Technology 96 
Lina Lee Blogging: Promoting Learner Autonomy 
 
capacity for taking initiative and control of their own learning, there is a certain disparity among students 
which suggests that some learners managed their learning more effectively than others. Learners’ self-
regulation differs depending on personal style, skills and competence. The results may have been affected 
by the students’ learning styles. It would be worthwhile to conduct a follow-up study of how different 
learning styles affect the way students perform various types of tasks. 
One of the beneficial effects of the blog project was the development of critical thinking. More than 70% 
of the students found that blogs allowed them to engage in the process of self-reflection (Statement 4) that 
helped them understand, generate and analyze cross-cultural similarities and differences (Statement 5). 
The following quotation illustrates the student’s positive view of using reflective blogs:  
Blogging is the best way to keep track of your thoughts over time. It’s like writing a personal 
online journal that gives you freedom to express yourself and reflect upon everyday experiences. 
Looking back what I wrote early, I now realize how much my perceptions of stereotypes have 
changed. I think every study abroad student should keep a personal blog. 
The chronologically archived entries that recorded her writing enabled her to view changes in her own 
cultural perspectives from the fourth week to the seventh week, as illustrated in the following personal 
blog:  
Here I’m constantly reminded that I should not take a shower for more than five minutes and I 
cannot use Internet for more than two hours a day. I don’t really understand why. It seems that 
there are a lot of rules in the house. (Week 4)  
By the seventh week, she showed a better understanding of host living conditions that led her to reflect on 
her own culture: 
Now I understand that water and electricity are so expensive in Spain. I was not aware of this at 
all until I lived with my host family. I do think we Americans should pay more attention on things 
like this and we waste too much of everything. (Week 7) 
The above posts demonstrated that the student manifested a reflective attitude and critical intercultural 
awareness. In addition, as shown on Statement 6 (M = 4.25), students believed that they benefited from 
reading each other’s blog entries through which they gained different cultural perspectives and further 
reflected on their own. Therefore, based on survey responses, blogging strengthened reflective thinking as 
a key element in the development of autonomous learning, as suggested by other studies (Lee, 2010; 
Yang, 2009). 
Individual reflection through social interaction supports the development of learner autonomy (Little, 
2003). Students believed that social networking increased their autonomy by allowing them to share 
knowledge and exchange ideas with their peers and L1 partners (Statement 7). Overwhelmingly, nearly 
90% of the students (n = 14) agreed that they gained cross-cultural perspectives from interacting with 
L1s. The following comments drawn from the reflective reports illustrate their optimistic experiences:  
It was so interesting to learn about the host culture from personal views shared by real people not 
from a textbook. I became more aware of how I feel about my own culture by listening to and 
analyzing the information that emerged from the interviews. For me, it is the best way to get to 
know people from other cultures. 
In my view, interviews created optimal conditions for me to interact socially with native speakers 
from whom I learned about their everyday lives, words and expressions that I would never have 
Language Learning & Technology 97 
Lina Lee Blogging: Promoting Learner Autonomy 
 
learned from sitting in a regular class.  
The above examples illustrate that learning the target culture from L1 perspectives is more meaningful 
than the surface learning of a set of simple facts about the target culture in a traditional classroom setting 
(Hauck & Youngs, 2008; O’Dowd & Ritter, 2006). As mentioned, the increased understanding of cultural 
norms and practices enabled students to become aware of their own beliefs and values, as illustrated in the 
following personal blog:  
One of my favorite phrases is ‘it’s not a big deal’ It’s a very interesting expression that my 
interview partner explained to me. He told me that in Spain people try to enjoy life as much as 
possible. They don’t worry much about anything. I like this attitude a lot. I think we Americans 
obsess on living so perfectly that we have missed things that make us happy. Spain has taught me 
to relax more …  
The above quotation demonstrates the positive result of using ethnographic interviews, as reported in 
Bateman’s study (2002) showing “an increase in understanding of and respect for Spanish speakers” (p. 
327). It is evident that the student showed the ability to compare and contrast the two cultures, which is 
fundamental for the development of ICC. 
Comments gathered from the reflective reports reveal that most students enjoyed participating in blog 
discussions, although they commented that reading blog entries was a time consuming task. As a result, 
students perceived that they gained cross-cultural awareness and intercultural communication skills 
(Statement 9). One student, for example, wrote: “The discussion about the immigration issues in Spain, 
especially in the southern region of Andalusia was very informative. Blogs gave everyone a voice to 
express opinions and concerns. I’ve learned so much from reading others’ comments about this debatable 
topic.” The same student enthusiastically wrote in her personal blog how she experienced a self-discovery 
and personal interest during the reflective period:  
I was excited at the chance to learn more about immigration in Spain. Participating in blog 
discussions was so helpful. It was an eye opening experience for me to learn about immigration in 
Granada that I knew little about. I became more interested and passionate about this topic. After 
reading anecdotes about the lives of Moroccan immigrates posted by the Spaniards, I was 
intrigued with their own experiences as immigrants. I decided to spend more time in Elvira street 
where Moroccan shops and people are so I can get to know them. 
More than 30% of the students (n = 5), however, did not find peer feedback useful to generate critical 
thinking (Statement 8). The following quotations taken from the students’ reflective essays exemplify this 
sentiment:  
Most people made similar comments about the readings and some of them were repetitive. It 
seemed like people just ran out of things to say.  
I was disappointed by the quality of the comments made by some of my peers. Their comments 
tended to be short and brief and were not terribly informative. They mostly praised each other’s 
work, which was fine but I think they could have given more feedback on the content.  
The results coincide with the findings found in studies conducted by Carney (2009) and by Lee (2010), 
who found that the comments did not show in-depth discussions of the content but rather surface level 
issues. The findings suggest that while students were capable of socializing with each other through 
discussing cross-cultural topics, they had limited ability to engage in high-order thinking. It is possible 
that the lack of continuity due to the post-comment structure of blogging may have affected the quality of 
Language Learning & Technology 98 
Lina Lee Blogging: Promoting Learner Autonomy 
 
critical reflection, as argued by Carney (2007). Garrison et al. (2001) suggest that teacher presence and 
scaffolding play a facilitative role in giving subject matter expertise and guidance to students during 
social interactions. To this view, teachers could use guided questions to cultivate reflective thinking to 
foster further discussions.  
High motivation and positive attitudes towards the learning context including the learning task and 
affective support promote learner autonomy (Dörnyei, 2005; Ushioda, 2006). The results shown in Table 
3 indicate that nearly 90% of the students found tasks stimulating (Statement 10). Students repeatedly 
pointed out in their reflective reports that they enjoyed using both teacher-assigned and free topics. For 
example, this student noted: “I really liked how free topics allowed me to write about issues that 
interested and concerned me the most and teacher-assigned readings drew my attention to focus on 
specific aspects/issues of the Spanish culture.” Topic choice appears to be motivational to the students. 
Despite the fact that blog tasks created affordable opportunities for students to share and exchange 
intercultural information, a few students (n = 4) commented that they put a lot of effort into the project 
and participated actively in blog discussions because the high percentage of the course grade was based 
on the project (60%). In this case, having a good academic record motivated the students to become self-
directed and self-regulated. The finding appears to support the claim made by Ushioda (2006) regarding 
the impact of academic success on students’ autonomous motivation in engaging in learning tasks.  
Little (1996) argues that social interaction plays a key role in autonomy, as learners develop a capacity to 
participate fully and critically in learning tasks through interacting with others. The better the social 
interpersonal rapport the group has, the more willing each member is to share perspectives, seek help, and 
offer support (Lee, 2009a).  
When asking students whether they felt comfortable working with their peers and L1 partners (Statement 
11), they responded favorably to the virtual learning environment. Many students felt connected and 
gained a sense of community where they worked collaboratively to construct cultural knowledge and 
receive support from each other. This student, for example, made a supportive comment about blogging:  
I think technology has become part of our daily life. I’m quite comfortable with social 
networking. I personally use Facebook and Twitter to connect with my family and friends. 
Having the opportunity to use the class blog to share and exchange cross-cultural observations 
made me feel emotionally connected. I was able to relate to some of the feelings expressed by my 
classmates …  
It is not surprising that students felt less intimidated writing and responding to comments made by their 
own peers than by L1s, as most of them were well acquainted with each other. Nevertheless, students 
remarked that questions raised by the L1 partners made them become more aware of cultural norms and 
practices. One student stressed that she would not have learned about intangible cultural practices (little 
c9), if expert speakers had not shared their personal viewpoints about their own culture (Byram, 1997). A 
number of students agreed that blogging was a motivational tool for them to learn about the host culture 
and people (Statement 12). Similar to the finding shown in Lee’s (2010) recent blog study, students 
commented on their reflective papers that they felt compelled to write when they knew that their peers 
and L1 partners, rather than a sole instructor, would read and respond to their entries. It is likely that 
students viewed their L1 partners as experts, facilitators or consultants, rather than authority figures, with 
whom they felt less anxious and more confident in expressing themselves. 
Cognitive and Social Knowledge Construction via Blogging  
Critical reflection through online collaborative interaction promotes learner autonomy (Schwienhorst, 
2008). The results displayed in Table 4 reveal that students produced a total of 219 cognitive events 
through social interactions. 14% of them consisted of triggering events, whereas more than 50% occurred 
Language Learning & Technology 99 
Lina Lee Blogging: Promoting Learner Autonomy 
 
in the exploration phase. 27% of cognitive presence belonged to the integration phase and only 6% of the 
blog segments reached the resolution phase.  
Table 4. Students’ Cognitive Presence in Class Blog 
Indicator/Descriptor Number  Percentage 
Phase 1/Trigger  31 14% 
Phase 2/Exploration 117 53% 
Phase 3/Integration 58 27% 
Phase 4/Resolution 13 6% 
Total  219 100% 
Similar to the results reported in asynchronous CMC research (Arnold & Ducate, 2006; Liaw & Bunn-Le 
Master, 2010), the high rate of the exploration stage (53%) indicates that students mainly engaged in 
exchanging cultural information and brainstorming ideas. A typical example is shown in the following 
posting:  
The truth is that not everyone watches or goes to bullfighting shows. I am against the idea of 
killing animals. The same thing can be said about flamenco. Some people cannot stand flamenco 
music. I have a friend who dances flamenco in a local bar near Elvira street. She also teaches 
flamenco if you are interested in taking flamenco dance lessons. 
The student simply added his thoughts about the bullfight and flamenco music to previous messages 
without using sources to support his opinions. He then offered a suggestion for dance lessons but did not 
question or challenge others’ ideas. During the exploration stage, students were able to compare and 
contrast the two distinct cultures by sharing their perspectives with L1s, as shown in the following blog 
exchange: 
Student: “I found the meals quite different from what we have in the U.S. Here people would eat 
a large midday meal but would start the day with a small breakfast. My host mom would give me 
Maria cookies for breakfast. In fact, I always find myself hungry in the morning. At home, we 
have all kinds of food for breakfast like eggs, sausage, French toast and cereal.” 
L1: “That’s quite interesting. I guess because we eat so late at night. Most people are probably 
not hungry in the morning. The lunch (comida) is the main meal in Spain and it is always made 
with fresh ingredients and care. We don’t like the frozen food or TV dinners. Do you like finger 
food (tapas)?”  
Despite the fact that students gained cultural knowledge and awareness from online exchange, the 
findings confirm the previous concerns raised by the students about the lack of substantial comments to 
generate critical thinking. It is possible that students were not accustomed to reflecting. They may also 
have felt reluctant to express their candid thoughts in an open source blog platform because they did not 
wish to make others feel uncomfortable or to provoke an unfriendly learning situation.  
According to Garrison et al. (2001), the integration phase shows that the previous ideas are integrated into 
a new concept to construct meanings or solutions. Integration is the second highest cognitive presence 
(27%) found in the study. In this stage, students expanded on the discussion and develop a justified 
hypothesis, as shown in the following posting exchange:  
Language Learning & Technology 100 
Lina Lee Blogging: Promoting Learner Autonomy 
 
Student A: “I was curious about how Spaniards view gay marriage. During my interview with 
Isabel, my exchange partner, I learned that the president Zapatero actually supported marriage 
rights for gays and lesbians. I was thrilled to hear about that. In fact, many young Spaniards I 
know have no problem with gay couples. I think Spain is going more liberal after a long time 
under a conservative dictator, Franco.” 
Student B: “I agree with you. I think Spanish people are open to gay marriage. Based on 
Wikipedia, it has been legal since 2005. My host father told me that some people in Spain are 
concerned about same sex couples; especially those who are faithful Catholics. I don’t think there 
is any damage to the family in allowing gay couples to get married. Maybe people just need to be 
more open-minded.” 
The above student built on the message that her partner composed to construct new meanings by using 
information from other sources, such as Wikipedia and personal communication. At the end she proposed 
a solution by suggesting that people need to be more open to gay marriage.  
Controversial topics, such as immigration, appear to engage students in different phases of cognitive 
engagement. The following interactive exchange reveals how the participants constructed knowledge 
through sharing, questioning and seeking a solution to the debate on immigration issues:  
L1: “The number of immigrants in Spain has increased rapidly. I personally am not against any 
immigrants who live legally in this country. I think they contribute a lot to the society. My family 
is originally from Italy. We have lived in Granada for more than 20 years. However, I am 
opposed to an estimated 300,000 undocumented migrants. I think these people bring all kinds of 
problems to the society. Some of them live on the streets, selling and using drugs, etc.”  
Student A: “But if the government is not willing to help them become legal in the country, how 
can they work and support themselves? In the U.S. we have people enter with visas as non-
immigrants and stayed illegally. Sadly, some lost their lives by crossing the border illegally. I just 
think people have the right to seek a better life and we should find ways to help them. Any 
suggestions?”  
Student B: “To be honest. I have mixed feelings about this issue. I know immigrants come to our 
country for different reasons. We need them but we really don’t know what to do with them once 
they enter the country. I also think it is not feasible to deport millions of people. Perhaps, the best 
solution is to grant them guest worker permits.”  
In the above excerpt, while Student A expressed her point of view by bringing the source from her own 
country, Student B offered a solution to the debatable issue. The findings are in line with other studies 
(Lee, 2009a; Pawan, Paulus, Yalcin & Chang, 2003) showing that topic selections affect the degree of 
social presence and the level of cognitive engagement. Moreover, the blog data reveal that expert 
scaffolding played a facilitative role in challenging students’ critical reflection by raising further 
questions, such as “What would you do if you …?” or “Why do you think …?” As a result, despite the 
fact that certain tasks were cognitively demanding, students managed to engage in further discussions. 
The following is an example of how the student responded to her L1 partner:  
You have raised an interesting question concerning raising children by gay couples. I think it 
depends on the quality of the living conditions. If parents are providing a loving and caring 
environment, the sexual orientation does not make a difference. For example, Jodie Foster, the 
famous actress was raised by lesbian mothers. I really don’t have a problem with the idea. At 
Language Learning & Technology 101 
Lina Lee Blogging: Promoting Learner Autonomy 
 
least these are my two cents of thought!! 
In the above example, the student was able to construct new meanings by answering her L1 partner’s 
question and giving an example to support her viewpoint.  
Regarding the final stage of sociocognitive processes, the findings show that resolution was the cognitive 
activity that least frequently occurred (6%) during the social interaction. Given that the majority of the 
topics were based on cultural themes and most students had no prior knowledge of the content, it was 
challenging for them to engage in further discussions. Nevertheless, in the discussion about teaching 
methods used in Spain, one student successfully evaluated the solution proposed by his peer and offered 
an alternative solution, which was later accepted by others:  
I agree with you that teaching methods are too traditional and it’s hard to sit in class for two or 
three hours without interaction with others. I like your idea of having group discussions. 
However, I wouldn’t want the whole class based on discussions. From my own personal 
experience, spending too much time on working in groups is a waste of time!! I would ask 
students to come with questions prepared before the class and spend the last ten minutes having 
students exchange ideas in small groups. I would then have them write an essay as homework to 
reflect upon the discussion. I think this is a better way to encourage class discussion. 
This finding is not congruent with those of Pawan et al. (2003), who found that students who participated 
in asynchronous threaded discussions did not challenge other’s ideas and simply exchanged information. 
However, the low rate of resolution suggests that most of the students were cognitively challenged by not 
being able to clearly articulate different points of view. The instructor’s intervention plays a vital role in 
providing students with guidance and feedback to encourage critical reflection, as suggested by Garrison 
et al. (2001) in their study. 
LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE STUDIES  
Although the findings of this study have shed light on our understanding of the affordances and 
challenges of using blogs along with FTF interviews with L1s to foster learner autonomy through 
intercultural learning, much more research is still needed. As suggested by Lamb and Reinders (2008), it 
would be worthwhile to explore the role of teacher autonomy in online learning environments using 
personal reflections. One limitation of this study is that the data collection included only one type of Web 
2.0 tool. Further studies might consider the investigation of learners’ perceptions of autonomous online 
learning using other social networking tools, such as wikis or Tweets. The study included only L1s from 
Spain. Future research might include L1s from other Spanish-speaking countries, such as those of Latin 
America. This would illuminate how the target culture influences the way students socially construct 
meaning with others (e.g., sociolinguistic issues and lexical variation). In addition, given the complexity 
of self-directed learning, it is not possible to generalize from the findings of the current study which 
aspects of autonomous learning are the most prominent in the context of CMC. Replicating the study with 
the inclusion of other variables (e.g., gender, language proficiency level, intrinsic vs. extrinsic motivation, 
learning styles and strategies) would enhance the conclusions. Finally, a follow-up study might consider 
instructor intervention at the various stages of monitoring students’ blog comments to determine its 
impact on the critical thinking process. 
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION  
The blog project examined how students engaged in cognitive, metacognitive, social and affective 
dimensions of autonomous online learning. The project for the development of ICC presented both 
promises and challenges for the study abroad students. Overall, students found that blogging supported 
Language Learning & Technology 102 
Lina Lee Blogging: Promoting Learner Autonomy 
 
self-directed learning, as they individually and socially constructed meanings to develop their 
intercultural knowledge and skills. According to the post-survey findings, blogging promoted learner 
autonomy through self-regulation and self-management. In addition, students maintained that using blogs 
gave them a sense of belonging, as they collaboratively shared and exchanged cultural perspectives. 
However, a few students experienced difficulty in putting their ideas in order and suggested that the 
instructor should take a more active role in assisting students during the execution of the project. 
Furthermore, the results reveal that lack of access to the Internet at the host institution and family 
contributed to a limited level of participation. Consequently, some students were frustrated by not being 
able to participate actively in the blog discussions. The findings corroborated those reported in previous 
studies of CMC indicating that the accessibility of networking is essential for network-based learning and 
influences students’ motivation to connect and interact with others (Lee, 2004; Ware, 2005).  
Critical reflection as one of the major aspects of self-directing learning was manifested through 
collaborative interaction. Similar to Abrams’s (2005) and Lee’s (2009a) CMC findings, expert scaffolding 
played a facilitative role in cultivating critical thinking. The results of the study show that L1 partners 
went beyond offering cultural information and explanation of students’ understandings. Their questions 
challenged students to think further about the cross-cultural issues. As a result, students strove for more 
in-depth discussions. However, some students did not find peer comments stimulating enough to generate 
further discussion. The analysis of selected blog entries for cognitive presence affirms that students 
mostly exchanged cultural information rather than challenging others’ viewpoints by asking pertinent 
questions, as concluded in the recent CMC study of Liaw & Bunn-Le Master (2010). Despite the fact that 
all phases of cognitive presence were found in the blog entries, the exploration and integration occurred 
more frequently than the triggering and the resolution. According to Arnold and Ducate (2006), 
“individual resolutions were often based on collaborative integrations” (p. 57). Thus, teachers should 
make students aware of all four stages of sociocognitive processes and encourage them to actively engage 
in online exchange in order to take full advantage of their shared virtual space. Moreover, the findings 
suggest that topic selection (e.g., controversial issues vs. current events) and language proficiency (e.g., 
L1 vs. L2) may have affected the degree of interaction and quality of cognitive engagement. The option 
of using L1 should be considered to allow less proficient learners to fully express themselves. 
In closing, this study contributes to the field of using digital technology for intercultural learning and its 
impact on learner autonomy, although the results reported from this study cannot be generalized to other 
settings. Without a doubt, the combination of CMC via blogging and FTF through interviews with L1s 
offered promising benefits to study abroad students, as they individually and collaboratively participated 
in blog activities. The findings show that the students’ perceptions toward blogging have offered valuable 
insights into our understanding of its effectiveness for self-directed learning. Blogs as a mediated tool for 
intercultural learning outside of class have the potential to create a stimulating online learning community 
that is conducive to collaborative learning and reflective thinking. In addition, the use of free and teacher-
assigned tasks contributes to the success of a blog project. The study concludes that well-designed tasks, 
effective metacognitive, and cognitive skills are essential to maximize the potential of blogs for 
stimulating learner autonomy and intercultural communication. 
 
NOTES 
1. For the purpose of the study, self-directed learning refers to learners’ taking responsibility for planning, 
monitoring and evaluating their own learning. Learners are given certain freedom to make informal 
decisions and are encouraged to engage in critical thinking and collaborative interaction.  
2. Students were required to take a proficiency-based test designed by the faculty of the CML and the 
majority of the students attained an intermediate level of Spanish proficiency to enroll in Hispanic 
Language Learning & Technology 103 
Lina Lee Blogging: Promoting Learner Autonomy 
 
Studies.  
3. While the majority of students interviewed the same informants throughout the course of the project, 
others changed their partners due to scheduling difficulty. 
4. It should be noted that native speakers were invited to participate in the class blog. However, only 46% 
of them (n = 12) regularly read postings and wrote comments due to the low accessibility to Internet and a 
lack of technological skills. 
5. As the majority of students own a laptop with video capability, some of them used iMovie (Mac users) 
or Movie Maker (PC users) to record interviews. 
6. According to Darhower (2002) data reduction is necessary to maintain consistent and systematic data 
analysis. Therefore, group blogs from the third, fifth and seventh sessions were selected to reduce the 
sizable corpus of data. In addition, the selected sessions were chosen because they included the 
ethnographic interviews in order to fully capture the participants’ behavior.  
7. All examples were translated from Spanish to English. 
8. It should be noted that students were allowed to use English to write reflective essays in order to fully 
express themselves.  
9. Culture with a little c centers on the behavioral patterns and lifestyles of everyday people (see Byram, 
1997). 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Lina Lee (PhD, University of Texas, Austin) is Professor of Spanish at the University of New Hampshire 
where she teaches courses in second language acquisition, applied linguistics and foreign language 
methodology. She has conducted research and published articles on language pedagogy, computer-
mediated communication and discourse analysis. 
E-mail: lina.lee@unh.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Abrams, Z. (2005). Asynchronous CMC, collaboration and the development of critical thinking in a 
graduate seminar in applied linguistics. Canadian Journal of Learning and Technology, 31(2), 23–47. 
Allen, L. Q. (2000). Culture and the ethnographic interview in foreign language teacher development. 
Foreign Language Annals, 33(1), 51–57. 
Armstrong, K., & Retterer, O. (2008). Blogging as L2 writing: A case study. AACE Journal, 16(3), 233–
251. 
Arnold, N., & Ducate, L. (2006). Future foreign language teachers’ social and cognitive collaboration in 
an online environment. Language Learning & Technology, 10(1), 4266. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num1/arnoldducate/default.html 
Baggetun, R., & Wasson, B. (2006). Self-regulated learning and open writing. European Journal of 
Education, 41(3-4), 453–472. 
Bateman, B. (2002). Promoting openness toward culture learning: Ethnographic interviews for students of 
Spanish. The Modern Language Journal, 86(3), 318–331. 
Language Learning & Technology 104 
Lina Lee Blogging: Promoting Learner Autonomy 
 
Belz, J. (2002). Social dimensions of telecollaborative foreign language study. Language Learning & 
Technology, 6(1), 60–81.  
Bennett, M. (1993). Towards ethnorelativism: A development model of intercultural sensitivity. In M. 
Paige (Ed.), Education for the intercultural experience (pp. 21–71). Yarmouth, ME: Intercultural Press. 
Benson, P. (2001). Teaching and researching autonomy in language learning. London: Longman.  
Benson, P. (2003). Learner autonomy in the classroom. In D. Nunan (Ed.), Practical English language 
teaching (pp. 289–308). New York: McGraw Hill. 
Benson, P. (2004). Autonomy and information technology in the educational discourse of the information 
age. In C. Davison (Ed.), Information technology and innovation in language education (pp. 173–192). 
Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press.  
Benson, P. (2006). (Ed.). Learner autonomy 8: Insider perspectives on autonomy in language teaching 
and learning. Dublin: Authentik. 
Benson, P., & Voller, P. (1997). Autonomy and independence in language learning. London: Longman. 
Blin, F. (2004). CALL and the development of learner autonomy: Towards an activity-theoretical 
perspective. ReCALL, 16(2), 377–395.  
Bloch, J. (2007). Abdullah’s blogging: A generation 1.5 student enters the blogosphere. Language 
Learning & Technology, 11(2), 128–141. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num2/bloch/default.html 
Brammerts, H. (2001). Autonomes Sprachenlernen im Tandem: Entwicklung eines Konzepts. In H. 
Brammerts & K. Kleppin (Eds.), Selbstgesteuertes Sprachenlernen im Tandem: Ein Handbuch (pp. 9–
16). Tübingen: Stauffenburg Verlag. 
Byram, M. (1997). Teaching and assessing intercultural communicative competence. Clevendon, UK: 
Multilingual Matters.  
Campbell, A. P. (2003). Weblogs for use with ESL classes. TESL Journal, IX(2). Retrieved from 
http://iteslj.org/Techniques/Campbell-Weblogs.html 
Carney, N. (2007). Language study through blog exchanges. Paper presented at the Wireless Ready 
Symposium: Podcasting Education and Mobile Assisted Language Learning, NUCB Graduate School, 
Nagoya, Japan. Retrieved from http://wirelessready.nucba.ac.jp/Carney.pdf 
Carney, N. (2009). Blogging in foreign language education. In M. Thomas (Ed.), Handbook of research 
on Web 2.0 and second language learning (pp. 292–312). IGI Global.  
Chapelle, C. (2001). Computer Applications in Second Language Acquisition: Foundations for teaching, 
testing and research. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Churchill, D. (2009). Educational applications of Web 2.0: Using blogs to support teaching and learning. 
British Journal of Educational Technology, 40(1), 179–183. 
Cohen, L., Manion, L., & Morrison, K. (2007). Research methods in education. London: Routledge. 
Dam, L. (1995). Learner autonomy 3: From theory to classroom practice. Dublin: Authentik. 
Dang, H. V. (2006). Learner-centeredness and EFL instruction in Vietnam: A case study. International 
Education Journal, 7(4), 598–610. 
Dang, T. T. (2010). Learner autonomy in EFL studies in Vietnam: A discussion from sociocultural 
perspective. English Language Teaching, 3(2), 3–9. 
Darhower, M. (2002). Interactional features of synchronous computer-mediated communication in the 
Language Learning & Technology 105 
Lina Lee Blogging: Promoting Learner Autonomy 
 
intermediate L2 class: A sociocultural case study. CALICO Journal, 19(2), 249–277. 
Dickinson, L. (1995) Autonomy and motivation: a literature review. System, 23(2), 165–174.  
Donato, R. (2000). Sociocultural contributions to understanding the foreign and second language 
Classroom. In J. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 27–50). Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
Dörnyei, Z. (2005). The psychology of the language learner: Individual differences in second language 
acquisition. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.  
Ducate, L., & Lomicka, L. (2008). Adventures in the blogosphere: From blog readers to blog writers. 
Computer Assisted Language Learning, 21(1), 9–28. 
Duffy, T. M., & Cunningham, D. J. (1996). Constructivism: Implications for the design and delivery of 
instruction. In D. H. Jonassen (Ed.), Educational communications and technology (pp. 170–199). New 
York: Simon & Schuster Macmillan. 
Elola, I., & Oskoz, A. (2008). Blogging: Fostering intercultural competence development in foreign 
language and study abroad contexts. Foreign Language Annals, 41(3), 454–478. 
Garrison, D. R., Anderson, T., & Archer, W. (2001). Critical thinking, cognitive presence and computer 
conferencing in distance education. American Journal of Distance Education, 15(1), 7–23. 
Hauck, M., & Youngs, B. (2008). Telecollaboration in multimodal environments: The impact of task 
design and learner interaction. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 21(2), 87–124. 
Henri, F., & Rigault, C. R. (1996). Collaborative distance learning and computer conferencing. In T. Liao 
(Ed.), Advanced educational technology: Research issues and future potential (pp. 45–76). Berlin: 
Springer Verlag. 
Hewitt, B. L. (2000). Characteristics of interactive oral and computer-mediated peer group talk and its 
influence on revision. Computers and Composition, 17, 265–288. 
Holec, H. (1981). Autonomy and foreign language learning. Oxford: Pergamon.  
Hurd, S., & Murphy, L. (2005). (Eds.). Success with languages. London: Routledge.  
Jackson, J. (2008). Language, identity, and study aboard: Sociocultural perspectives. London: Equinox.  
Jeong, A. (2004). The combined effects of response time and message content on growth patterns of 
discussion threads in computer-supported collaborative argumentation. Journal of Distance Education, 
19(1), 36–53. 
Jin, L., & Erben, T. (2007). Intercultural learning via instant messenger interaction. CALICO Journal, 
24(2), 291–311.  
Jonassen, D. H. (2003). Using cognitive tools to represent problems. Journal of Research in Technology 
in Education, 35(3), 362–381. 
Kenning, M. (2010). Collaborative scaffolding in online task-based voice interactions between advanced 
learners. ReCALL, 22(2), 135–151.  
Lamb, M. (2004). Integrative motivation in a globalizing world. System, 32, 3–19. 
Lamb, T., & Reinders, H. (2008). (Eds.). Learner and teacher autonomy: Concepts, realities and 
responses. AILA Applied Linguistics Series, Vol. 1. Amsterdam: Benjamins. 
Lamy, M. N., & Goodfellow, R. (1999). Supporting language students’ interactions in web-based 
conferencing. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 12(4), 457–477. 
Language Learning & Technology 106 
Lina Lee Blogging: Promoting Learner Autonomy 
 
Lamy, M. N., & Hassan, X. (2003) What influences reflective interaction in distance peer learning? 
Evidence from four long-term learners of French. Open Learning, 18(2), 39–59. 
Leahy, C. (2008). Learner activities in a collaborative CALL task. Computer Assisted Language 
Learning, 21(3), 253–268. 
Lee, L. (2002). Enhancing learners’ communication skills through synchronous electronic interaction and 
task-based instruction. Foreign Language Annals, 35(1), 16–23.  
Lee, L. (2004). Learners’ perspectives on networked collaborative interaction with native speakers of 
Spanish in the US. Language Learning & Technology, 8(1), 83–100. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/ 
vol8num1/lee/default.html 
Lee, L. (2005). Using web-based instruction to promote active learning: Learners’ perspectives. CALICO 
Journal, 23(1), 139–156.  
Lee, L. (2007). Fostering second Language oral communication through constructivist interaction in 
desktop videoconferencing. Foreign Language Annals, 40(4), 635–649.  
Lee, L. (2008). Focus-on-form through collaborative scaffolding in expert-to-novice online interaction. 
Language Learning & Technology, 12(3), 53–72. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num3/lee.pdf 
Lee, L. (2009a). Scaffolding collaborative exchanges between expert and novice language teachers in 
threaded discussions. Foreign Language Annals, 42(2), 212–228.  
Lee, L. (2009b). Promoting intercultural exchanges with blogs and podcasting: A study of Spanish-
American telecollaboration. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 22(5), 425–443.  
Lee, L. (2010). Fostering reflective writing and interactive exchange through blogging in an advanced 
language course. ReCALL, 22(2), 212–22.  
Levy, M., & Stockwell, G. (2006). CALL dimensions: Options and issues in computer assisted language 
learning. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.  
Liaw, M.-L., & Bunn-Le Master, S. (2010). Understanding telecollaboration through an analysis of 
intercultural discourse. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 23(1), 21–40.  
Little, D. (1994). Learner autonomy: A theoretical construct and its practical applications. Die Neuren 
Sprachen, 93(5), 430–442.  
Little, D. (1996). Freedom to learn and compulsion to interact: promoting learner autonomy through the 
use of information systems and information technologies. In R. Pemberton, S. L. Edward, W. W. F. Or, & 
Pierson, H. D. (Eds.), Taking control: Autonomy in language learning (pp. 203–219). Hong Kong: Hong 
Kong University Press. 
Little, D. (2001) Learner autonomy and the challenge of tandem language learning via the Internet. In A. 
Chambers & G. Davies (Eds.), ICT and language learning: A European perspective (pp. 29–38). Lisse: 
Swets & Zeitlinger.  
Little, D. (2003). Learner autonomy and second/foreign language learning. Subject Centre for Languages, 
Linguistics and Area Studies, Guide to Good Practice. Retrieved from http://www.llas.ac.uk/resources/ 
gpg/1409 
Little, D. (2007). Language learner autonomy: Some fundamental considerations revisited. Innovation in 
Language Learning and Teaching, 1(1), 14–29. 
Long, M. (2000). Second language acquisition theories. In M. Byram (Ed.), Encyclopedia of language 
teaching (pp. 527–534). London: Routledge. 
Language Learning & Technology 107 
Lina Lee Blogging: Promoting Learner Autonomy 
 
Meskill, C., & Ranglova, K. (2000). Sociocollaborative language learning in Bulgaria. In M. Warschauer 
& R. Kern (Eds.), Network-based language teaching: Concepts and practice (pp. 20–40). New York: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Murphy, L. (2006). Supporting learner autonomy in a distance learning context. In D. Gardner (Ed.), 
Learner autonomy 10: Integration and support (pp. 72–92). Dublin: Authentik. 
Murray L., & Hourigan, T. (2006). Using micropublishing to facilitate writing in the foreign language. In 
L. Ducate & N. Arnold (Eds.), Calling on CALL: From theory to research to new directions in foreign 
language teaching (pp. 149–179). Texas: CALICO Monograph Series.  
O’Dowd, R. (2006). Combining networked communication tools for students’ ethnographic research. In J. 
Belz & S. Thorne (Eds.), Internet-mediated intercultural foreign language education (pp. 147–176). 
Boston: Thomsen & Heinle. 
O’Dowd, R., & Ritter, M. (2006). Understanding and working with ‘failed communication’ in 
telecollaborative exchanges. CALICO Journal, 61(2), 623–642. 
O’Rourke, B., & Schwienhorst, K. (2003). Talking text: Reflections on reflection in computer-mediated 
communication. In D. Little, et al. (Eds.), Learner autonomy in foreign language classrooms: Teacher, 
learner, curriculum and assessment (pp. 47–62). Dublin: Authentik. 
Oxford, R. L. (2003). Toward a more systematic model of L2 learner autonomy. In D. Palfreyman & R. 
C. Smith (Eds.), Learner autonomy across cultures: Language education perspectives (pp. 75–91). 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Pavlenko, A., & Lantolf, J. P. (2000). Second language learning as participation and the (re)construction 
of selves. J. L. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 155–178). Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
Pawan, F., Paulus, T. M., Yalcin, S., & Chang, C. F. (2003). Online learning: Patterns of  engagement and 
interaction among in-service teachers. Language Learning & Technology, 7(3), 119–140. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num3/pawan/default.html 
Peterson, M. (1997). Language teaching and networking. System, 25 (1), 29–37. 
Pinkman, K. (2005). Using blogs in the foreign language classroom: Encouraging learner independence. 
The JALT CALL Journal, 1(1), 12–24. 
Reinders, H. (2006). Supporting self-directed learning through an electronic learning environment. In T. 
Lamb & H. Reinders (Eds.), Supporting independent learning: Issues and interventions (pp. 219–238). 
Frankfurt: Peter Lang.  
Richardson, W. (2005). Blogs, wikis, podcasts, and other powerful web tools for classrooms. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Corwin Press. 
Rubin, J. (2001). Language learner self-management. Journal of Asia-Pacific Communication, 11(1), 25–
37.  
Schwienhorst, K. (2008). Learner autonomy and CALL environments. New York: Routledge. 
Spradley, J. (1980). Participant observation. Fort Worth: Harcourt Brace. 
Sun, Y.-C. (2009). Voice blog: An exploratory study of language learning. Language Learning & 
Technology, 13(2), 88–103. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num2/sun.pdf 
Sykes, J., Oskoz, A., & Thorne, S. L. (2008). Web 2.0, inmersive environments, and the future of 
language education. CALICO Journal, 25(3), 528–546. 
Language Learning & Technology 108 
Lina Lee Blogging: Promoting Learner Autonomy 
 
Language Learning & Technology 109 
Thorne, S. (2003). Artifacts and cultures-of-use in intercultural communication. Language Learning & 
Technology, 7(2), 38–67. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/pdf/thorne.pdf 
Ushioda, E. (2006). Motivation, autonomy and sociocultural theory. In P. Benson (Ed.), Learner 
autonomy 8: Insider perspectives on autonomy in language teaching and learning (pp. 5–24). Dublin: 
Authentik. 
Vygotsky, L.S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.  
Ward, J. (2004). Blog assisted language learning (BALL): Push button publishing for the pupils. TEFL 
Web Journal, 3(1). Retrieved from http://www.citeulike.org/group/378/article/327972 
Ware, P. (2005). “Missed communication” in online communication: Tensions in fostering successful 
online interactions. Language Learning & Technology, 9(2), 64–89. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu 
/vol9num2/ware/default.html 
Warschauer, M. (2003). Technology and social inclusion: Rethinking the digital divide. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press. 
Wenden, A. (2002). Learner development in language learning. Applied Linguistics 23(1), 32–55. 
White, C. (2003). Language learning in distance education. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Yang, S.-H. (2009). Using blogs to enhance critical reflection and community of practice. Educational 
Technology & Society, 12(2), 11–21. 
