Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2011/review4.pdf 
October 2011, Volume 15, Number 3 
pp. 47–49 
 
Copyright © 2011, ISSN 1094-3501 47 
REVIEW OF TEACHING AND RESEARCHING LANGUAGE LEARNING 
STRATEGIES  
Teaching and Researching Language 
earning Strategies L
 
Rebecca Oxford 
 
2011 
ISBN-13: 9780582381292  
US $39.00 
360 pp. 
 
Longman 
Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA 
 
 
Review by Mehreen Ahmed, University of Queensland  
An exhaustive book, Oxford’s Teaching and Researching Learning Strategies is an in-depth study of 
learning strategies in the acquisition of a second language. It is divided into four sections and nine 
chapters with sub-sections in each chapter that explore issues and types of strategies. One of the key 
issues addressed is the use of strategies for self-regulation to enable learners to become independent so 
that they can be in control of their own learning. Notably, Oxford’s previous writings (1990) are echoed 
throughout this book, however this provides a fresh organization of ideas, detailed analysis of her 
research, and a demonstration of her knowledge of the wider research base on strategy instruction. The 
current book’s contribution demonstrates concepts of the meta or general level, drawing heavily on 
learners’ meta-knowledge. 
The following review provides a brief synopsis of the topics of meta-strategies and strategies covered in 
chapters two and three; of theories and concepts from chapters five and six; and of mapping and further 
exploration in chapters seven and eight. 
Chapter one elaborates on the three major traditions of learning theory and research, namely 
psychological, socio-cognitive and socio-cultural theories. It contains four sub-sections that both define 
and justify the need for strategic self-regulation. Although the concept of self-regulation is often 
synonymous with autonomous or discovery-based learning in which learning might take place through 
exploration, Oxford takes the concept further by arguing that the learner has control over learning in the 
sense that he or she manages her lessons without the teacher’s aid. Self-regulation includes ‘self-
adjustment,’ meaning that if something goes wrong or needs improvement, the learner may very well 
manage that unaided. 
In chapter two, Oxford argues that learners need to develop skills from strategic learning that will enable 
them to develop an understanding of the task that can help them in the decision-making process. She 
explains cognitive dimensions and strategies for remembering and processing language. This chapter 
provides a detailed analysis of cognitive strategies, schema theories, and eight meta-cognitive strategies, 
including explicit examples of students’ use of meta-cognitive strategies. A potential useful addition 
might have been examples in which students might have tried to use a strategy but with limited success. 
In chapter three, Oxford introduces the use of strategies to manage affective aspects such as emotions or 
Mehreen Ahmed Review of Teaching and Researching Language Learning Strategies 
 
motivations at a meta level. The affective dimension encompasses learners’ emotions, beliefs, attitudes 
and motivation in relation to their emotive experiences in the L2 environment that effect behavioral issues 
rather than schematic issues discussed above. What follows then are strategies integrated into meta-
strategies such as cognitive strategies within the meta-cognitive, affective strategies within the meta-
affective and social strategies within the meta-social strategies. Again in this chapter, items are broken 
into discrete components and pinpoint which strategies are employed by students at the meta-level.  
Chapter four deals with the component of meta-knowledge which deals with culture or socio-cultural 
interaction. This relates to how to get communication activities to take place within the immediate context 
concerning all cultural, social, cognitive and political aspects of an individual learner. The eight meta-
strategies discussed here are the same ones discussed in the previous chapters as well, but these are 
related to socio-cultural interaction or communication. Also covered are familiar strategies discussed 
previously in the literature such as paraphrasing, borrowing, code switching and avoidance tactics. 
Oxford provides her definition of discourse and extends it by making it more inclusive and integrating 
within its boundaries both linguistic as well as socio-cultural/socio-political aspects.  
In chapters five and six Oxford explores various cultural models, also discussed in her earlier work (e.g., 
Oxford & Crookall, 1989). Culture here has been deemed as a factor in strategy assistance (p. 176), which 
is also promoted by Holliday (2003), in that the teachers of L2 should be more cognizant of the learning 
strategies used in other cultures and at the same time should also introduce effective new ones. In this 
case, cultural strategies have been associated with memorization, but misunderstood by uninformed 
teachers as learning by memorization. As with Holliday, Oxford argues that teachers are encouraged to be 
more discerning of cultural differences in their teaching practices. A potential strategy would be to try and 
incorporate any strategies that are already prevalent in the learning cultures of the students, even if not in 
the teacher’s repertoire. 
In chapters seven and eight, Oxford reflects on current and future research in learning strategies, and in 
chapter nine explains what “intellectual geography” is and provides resources for further exploration. This 
chapter highlights how important mapping is for autonomous learners. It is essential because it gives them 
the proper direction as to how to reach the target outcome successfully. Such maps as demonstrated in this 
chapter are related to the strategic use of the cognitive dimension (i.e., tactics used for the development of 
schema and issues related to affective and socio-cultural interactive dimensions). This map is a record of 
the intellectual plan which would eventually enable learners to meet specific goals. 
In a short review such as this, it is not always possible to discuss the book in its entirety, but overall the 
book is praiseworthy despite the potential limitations discussed. As an analytical study of learning tools 
or strategies, it provides sufficient insight into various components of meta-knowledge and self-
regulation. It is comprehensive and takes into account all the disparate strands of issues and synthesizes 
them. Teachers can use the book as a resource with helpful guidelines, as strategy instruction is necessary 
so that learners are able to avail themselves of appropriate strategies according to their needs (e.g., age, 
culture, interests). In the lead-up to empowering them, what needs to be done then is to “conduct a 
strategy instruction or brainstorming session with students to raise meta-cognitive awareness or (MAR) to 
help them organize information and take ownership of it” (Oxford, 2011, p. 178). 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
With publications appearing in Computer Assisted Language Learning Special Issue, ISTE, and On-Call, 
Mehreen Ahmed has twelve years of experience writing and teaching English Literature and ESL in 
Bangladesh, Canada and Australia. She has two MA degrees in English (Dhaka University) and in 
Computer Assisted Language Learning (University of Queensland, Australia). 
Language Learning & Technology 48 
Mehreen Ahmed Review of Teaching and Researching Language Learning Strategies 
 
Language Learning & Technology 49 
E-mail: mehreen10@gmail.com 
 
REFERENCES 
Holliday, A. (2003). Social autonomy: Addressing the dangers of culturism in TESOL. In D. Palfreyman 
& R. C. Smith (Eds.), Learner autonomy across cultures (pp. 110–126). London: Palgrave. 
Oxford, R. L. (1990). Language learning strategies: What every teacher should know. Boston: Heinle. 
Oxford, R. L., & Crookall, D. (1989). Research on language learning strategies: Methods, findings, and 
instructional issues. Modern Language Journal, 73, 404–419. 
 
