Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2011/review2.pdf 
October 2011, Volume 15, Number 3 
pp. 37–40 
 
Copyright © 2011, ISSN 1094-3501 37 
REVIEW OF LEARNING LANGUAGES THROUGH TECHNOLOGY 
Learning Languages through Technology 
 
Elizabeth Hanson-Smith & Sarah Rilling, Eds. 
 
2007 
ISBN: 978-193118536-3 
US $49.95 
332 pp. 
 
TESOL 
Baltimore, MD, USA 
  
 
Review by Carmen Tomas, Nottingham Trent University 
Learning Languages through Technology, edited by Elizabeth Hanson-Smith and Sarah Rilling, examines 
language learning and technology covering a wide range of technological applications from e-mail, chats, 
blogs, and the use of multimedia. It also has geographic representation from different regions including 
the Americas, Europe, and Asia and includes examples from both secondary and tertiary education. 
Previous books have also captured the pervasive role of technologies in language learning (Cameron, 
1999; Dudeney & Hockly, 2007; Richardson, 2006), but this book places special emphasis on the 
practitioner’s perspective. Each chapter contains a chapter preview and initial questions, theoretical 
underpinnings, and application and implementation. Each chapter contains a theoretical rationale for the 
activities designed that address principles of language learning and also establish the role of technology. 
However, the most interesting part in each chapter is how the practitioners relate their experiences sharing 
their good practices as well as the reality and challenges of implementing any technology-related 
initiative, which is an aspect that will be useful to others learning to plan activities. The chapters reveal 
how to deal with typical issues such as resource scarcity, time constraints, and technical help as well as 
issues of a different nature such as poor student engagement. The chapters include academic style 
accounts, narratives and practical guidance, all of which make practitioners new to the use of technologies 
an appropriate audience. 
The volume is divided into four sections detailed below. Each section contains a number of chapters and 
ends with a chapter on a special issue. This end of each section addresses important questions that emerge 
from the practice discussed in that section (e.g., student engagement, autonomy, or the teacher’s role). 
Each section ends with further questions for reflection and resources for practitioners. 
Elizabeth Hanson-Smith and Sarah Rilling introduce the book in the Chapter 1. They describe parameters 
of good practice in language learning and describe the field of CALL as mature on the grounds of the 
acumen of research in this field, which raises the expectation that the chapters are informed by research.  
The first section, Language Development Online: Skill Building through Technology, contains five 
chapters dealing with key language learning skills: speaking, reading, writing and listening. Dafne 
Gonzalez in Chapter 2 deals with speaking and the role of chat rooms for communicative learning. 
Technology’s role in this case is to add connectivity with real international audiences by providing 
motivation and an incentive for students to practice the target language. This chapter provides a lot of 
Carmen Tomas Review of Learning Languages through Technology 
 
detail on how to organise activities using the medium in an effective way (jigsaw activities, video chat, 
online presentations, and international guests). Marti Sevier in Chapter 3 presents the use of a 
concordancing tool (Compleat lexical tutor) for reading and vocabulary development in the context of 
reading. In Chapter 4 Randi Reppen and Camilla Vasquez present a broad range of tools to support 
foreign language students in academic writing. They present the development of an online module to 
support a range of writing sub-skills: paraphrasing with the use of colours, use of referencing, evaluating 
online sources, and grammar and adverbials using concordancers. In-Seok Kim in Chapter 5 addresses 
listening skills via a Web-based listening course. This chapter contains practical descriptions of the 
process of designing and implementing the course. The course includes a range of tools to develop 
listening: matching images and oral descriptions; video lectures on sounds; and the use of transcripts. The 
chapter unfolds covering skills other than listening and presents a full course that encompasses all skills 
(reading in Hot Potatoes, ancillary visual resources, writing in bulletin boards). The section finishes with 
Thomas Robb (Chapter 6) discussing the issue of technology and non-autonomous learners. This is an 
interesting reflection on the problem of independent learning brought about by technology use. The 
proposed solution is enhanced tracking of student activity.  
The second section is Content-Based and Task-Based Learning: Collaborative CALL. Theresa J. 
Kennedy in Chapter 7 describes the use of an Internet-based programme for Science teaching. Through a 
range of activities, schools can communicate across the world with other schools and look at other 
countries’ data, hold international videoconferences and chats. In Chapter 8, Bernard Susser describes a 
range of word processing and Internet browsing related activities in the context of Tourism, Culture and 
Technology. The activities cover Internet-based reading, use of word processing to structure essays, Web 
searches, concordancers, communication via e-mail, and creating brochures. Nicolas Gromik in Chapter 9 
presents a project-oriented activity in which students make a movie. The chapter includes many tips and 
practical guidelines on how to structure activities and assessment. Sarah Rilling in Chapter 10 considers 
the role of the teacher as facilitator in English for special purposes and how to provide feedback to help 
students. She describes the importance of helping students identify errors with the use of colour codes and 
the use of e-mail as a communication tool. Future developments are the use of bulletin boards and 
concordancers. Maggie Sokolik in Chapter 11 reports on students expectations of technology. The chapter 
reports on a survey of students’ use of technology and their perceptions of their teachers’ aptitude and use 
of technologies. The chapter concludes with a set of goals to improve use of technologies for 
communication with students, help students evaluate material, and create more variety in the classroom. 
The third section covers Authentic Audience in a Web-Based World. In Chapter 12 Teresa Almeida Eca 
exemplifies the use of technologies from simple to complex applications. She starts with the use of e-mail 
and goes on to describe authoring tools (Hot Potatoes) and ends with exploring blogs and net-based 
exercises. Mary Jewell in Chapter 13 proposes the creation of brochures in an authentic context with the 
use of generic tools such as PowerPoint and Word with the use of templates. Graham Stanley (Chapter 
14) is written differently from other chapters that are written as narratives and instead more directly 
reports tips for the effective use of blogs derived from his own experience. The chapter also explores the 
affordances of the tool in relation to language learning. Latricia Trites (Chapter 15) presents the dilemmas 
faced by the teacher and the amount of tutor input. The chapter also incorporates, in a narrative style, the 
decisions made in the design of a course. 
The fourth section focuses on Constructivism in Professional Development. Anne Dahlman and Sarah 
Tahtinen show the creation of a network of teachers in their first year after training (Chapter 16). The 
network is established via e-mail exchanges, e-forum (to support with interaction) and a Web site to 
support with resources. Klaus Gommlich and Theresa Minick (Chapter 17) present the creation and 
design of a Master’s degree in teacher education. It incorporates a project in which training teachers 
develop a module for students online. This hands-on project is valued by trainee teachers as it ends with 
reflection and evaluation of the experience. In Chapter 18, Andreas Schramm and Ann Mabbott present 
Language Learning & Technology 38 
Carmen Tomas Review of Learning Languages through Technology 
 
generic considerations in converting a face-to-face traditional course to online and describes programme 
level and management issues. Vance Stevens (Chapter 19) narrates the development in the past decade of 
the Webheads in action. It describes how teachers can put into practice things they learnt in a Web-based 
community of practice by addressing the challenge of the paucity of skills sometimes found in 
educational settings. 
Generally, the book will serve practitioners well who seek to start using and integrating technologies in 
their teaching. The strength of the book is the communication of practitioner experiences that will help 
others plan in advance to set realistic goals. Providing such descriptive and practical information was a 
challenging aspect to convey in this written format. Most chapters provide narratives, contextual 
descriptions and guidelines. However, the balance between these elements is varied in different chapters. 
The scope of the book is broad as it goes beyond specific applications to include student-teachers 
development in the final section of the book. The issues raised at the end of each section are also 
interesting and open up spaces for reflection on key issues. Notwithstanding this, the scope of the book in 
terms of the technological applications covered inevitably reflects the state of the field in 2005 prior to its 
publication. In a fast-moving field such as language learning and technology, the book might feel 
outdated to experienced practitioners in the application of technology in their teaching. Although the book 
covers a wide range of technological applications, blogs and bulletin boards are portrayed in some 
chapters as the next or future avenues for exploration.  
In Chapter 1 the expectation of a strong research-informed focus is raised, and this expectation is met 
with varying success by different authors. In particular, Graham Stanley in Chapter 14 addresses research 
beyond foreign language learning. For the most part, however, the theoretical rationale for the use of 
technologies does not meet the expectations set at the start. All chapters revisit well-established foreign 
language learning constructs (input, interaction, autonomy, authenticity). When dealing with the crucial 
question of providing the rationale for the use of a particular application, most chapters focus on 
motivation, authenticity, or improved communication and draw only modestly from published research in 
the field of learning and technology. A pedagogical rationale based on motivation and improved 
communication could be criticised as insufficient. A rationale based on more aspects of student learning 
would be much stronger. 
The book is well structured but some of the content feels repetitive. The reader wonders at some point 
about the relationship between section headings and content of some chapters. For example, in the first 
section of the book the titles suggest a specific focus on a language skill (reading, writing, speaking or 
listening). However, some of these chapters in the first section reflect much more than one particular skill 
(speaking or listening, for example) and deal with a greater range of skills in the development of full 
courses. This aspect of course and module development becomes repetitive as it is encountered in other 
sections of the book. In addition, either implicitly or explicitly, a number of chapters throughout the book 
deal with engaging with authentic audiences and for authentic purposes and hence, some of the elements 
of the third section are not strictly exclusive to the section but have been dealt with elsewhere in the book.  
As stated at the start of the review, practitioners will benefit from sections on challenges and future 
directions, in which authors provide realistic accounts of their experiences. The issues raised for reflection 
are informative and no less important today than they were in 2006. 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Carmen Tomás received her PhD from the University of Nottingham and focuses her research on foreign 
language reading and the uses of ICT in educational settings. She received a postdoctoral fellowship at 
the Learning Sciences Research Institute at the University of Nottingham. She currently works in 
Language Learning & Technology 39 
Carmen Tomas Review of Learning Languages through Technology 
 
Language Learning & Technology 40 
Research and Development in HE at Nottingham Trent University. Prior to this she has collaborated on 
multiple research and teaching initiatives involving the use of technology. 
E-mail: carmen.tomas@ntu.ac.uk 
 
REFERENCES 
Cameron, K. (Ed.) (1999) CALL and the learning community: Proceedings of the Eighth Biennial Exeter 
CALL Conference. Exeter: Elm Bank Publications. 
Dudeney, G. & Hockly, N. (2007) How to teach English with technology (with CD-Rom). Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Pearson Longman. 
Richardson, W. (2006) Blogs, Wikis and other powerful Web tools for classrooms. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Corwin Press.  
 
