Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2011/emerging.pdf 
October 2011, Volume 15, Number 3 
pp. 4–11 
 
Copyright © 2011, ISSN 1094-3501 4 
EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES 
AUTONOMOUS LANGUAGE LEARNING 
Robert Godwin-Jones 
Virginia Commonwealth University 
Interest in learner autonomy has increased substantially in the last decade. Given the emphasis on student-
centered pedagogy and on accommodating student diversity, this is not surprising. What is also both 
driving and, to some extent, enabling this approach to learning are new directions and developments in 
technology. The dramatic increase in online resources, network services, and educational software, 
together provide new opportunities for self-directed learning. In the last few years, developments in 
mobile technology and the explosion in social media use have accelerated the level of interest. 
LEARNING TO LEARN  
The concept of learner autonomy of course pre-dates computing, traceable at least back to the 
enlightenment thinkers and likely to a much earlier period. Interestingly, its importance for language 
educators parallels the growth of computer-aided language learning (CALL), with the two intersecting 
increasingly in recent years. Most accounts reference Henri Holec’s work for the Council of Europe in the 
late 1970’s as the starting point for language educators’ work in this area. From the beginning it’s been 
recognized that developing learner autonomy does not just involve putting appropriate learning materials 
in front of a student, but necessitates helping the student develop the skills and mindset that can lead to 
successful self-guided language study. Part of that effort has a psychological side; the student needs to 
have the proper motivation for independent study. Partly the process is political and has to do with 
educational or school policies and the degree of individual freedom afforded learners to engage in 
autonomous learning, which may well entail making choices and taking actions that go counter to 
prevailing educational or cultural norms/guidelines. 
The starting point for enabling language learning autonomy is for the student to develop effective 
strategies for pursuing individual learning, while being willing and able to change and improve those 
strategies over time, as the language learning progresses. Writing learner diaries has traditionally been 
one of the ways used to help learners develop this kind of metacognitive knowledge. Leni Dam has 
written extensively about “logbooks” used for this purpose, both by students and teachers. Writing works 
well for this purpose, as it invites self-reflection, an important component of learning to learn. Today, 
online writing through class or personal blogs, can serve this purpose, with the added benefits of sharable 
diaries, potential for resource linking, and inclusion in an electronic portfolio. Another possible tool is an 
online editor such as Google Docs. Documents created are by default private but can be shared as well, 
allowing learning diaries, as appropriate, to be read by teachers or peers. Dam herself sees the future as e-
logs. 
E-portfolios can be an effective means to document both personal achievements and learning trajectories. 
They serve a variety of purposes: personal, educational and vocational. The European Language Portfolio, 
as does the LinguaFolio on which it is based, includes a language biography, self-assessments based on 
the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages, and a collection of learner-created 
language samples. Portfolios of this kind, in addition to their more formal role, can perform a powerful 
pedagogical function, in encouraging both further language study and learner autonomy. They give the 
student concrete evidence of achievement and build confidence in one’s ability, an important component 
in language learning success. As is the case for other mechanisms to encourage autonomous language 
learning, use of language portfolios works best if separated both from an educational setting and from a 
proprietary platform, so that the portfolios can be seen as personal documents (not a school assignment) 
and can be used long after schooling has been completed. The IMS ePortfolio project is an effort to 
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Autonomous Language Learning 
 
encourage a helpful development, namely compatibility of electronic portfolios across systems. Currently 
import/export of portfolios from systems such as Blackboard Learn is problematic.  
THE TEACHER’S ROLE  
It’s not only learner diaries that are being digitized, but so too are instruments for assessing student 
metacognitive and social-affective readiness for language learning. The widely used Motivated Strategies 
for Learning Questionnaire (MSLQ) and the Strategy Inventory for Language Learning (SILL) are 
available online. Mei-Mei Change (2010) has written about her use of the online MSLQ. Karen Bond has 
created a Web accessible version of a questionnaire on successful language learners, broken down in 
sections dealing with language background, learning strategies, and motivational factors. Learning style 
questionnaires are available online as well. Such information is useful for all language learners but it is 
especially so in a distance learning environment. The higher percentage of students who drop or fail 
online courses compared to face-to-face courses points to the lack of preparedness of many students in 
terms of time management, online skills, and effective learning strategies. More studies such as that by 
Elke Stracke (2007) on why students drop online or hybrid language courses could be informative. 
Students in her study reported major concerns in the areas of support and course structure, factors which 
to a large extent are under the teacher’s control. Part of the difficulty in cultivating learner autonomy may 
be cultural. In many cultures, education is entirely teacher-centered. Students may well have difficulty 
breaking the mold of passivity. The difficulty may well lie on the teacher side as well; the loss of control 
that may accompany increased learner autonomy can be unsettling. 
Most distance learning today is delivered in an environment that is not always conducive to autonomous 
learning, namely through a learning management system (LMS, also called a virtual learning 
environment, or VLE). Some LMS’s such as Moodle—popular in language learning—are more flexible 
and customizable than others. A recent study from Thailand discusses how one institution customized 
Moodle for delivery of language instruction (Wright & Wright, 2011). There are also examples of LMSs 
custom-designed for language learning. The CNAI Center in Pamplona has used their own LMS that 
incorporates not only administrative and content retrieval functions but also features a personal learning 
portfolio with student notes and individual vocabulary lists. The English Language Self-Access Centre 
(ELSAC) at the University of Auckland uses a similar system which includes student monitoring, 
enabling language advisors to base recommendations on actual student language performance. A Thai 
LMS called My English features an inviting user interface with nine different learning modules 
(Darasawang & Reinders, 2010). 
Yet even if they incorporate language-specific tools or collaborative services, LMSs are essentially a 
teacher-centered tool. It is rare that anyone other than the teacher makes the decisions on what is 
presented in the LMS course Web site, how the materials are organized, and how the learner is expected 
to progress through the course. An alternative some teachers are beginning to embrace is to use a more 
flexible and customizable tool such as a personal learning environment (PLE). PLEs such as netvibes or 
pageflakes are designed to serve as containers for modules or widgets which can be added or deleted as 
the user wishes. This allows an instructor to create a master Web page or site, which can then be 
customized by individual learners, who might add resources they find useful. An example of this kind is 
the Laowai site, for learning Mandarin Chinese, created using iGoogle. Another benefit of PLE’s is the 
ability to add modules that may not be related to language learning at all but which are personally 
important to the learner, such as a twitter feed, messaging service, or webcam video. Widgets are built in 
Flash or HTML/JavaScript and are available for many different services and can be found in collector 
sites such as WidgetBox.  
One of the primary roles teachers can play in enabling and encouraging learner autonomy in a face-to-
face or online context, is to provide students with guidance on recommended online tools and services. 
For instructors lucky enough to have a language lab or self-access center, this role may be played by the 
Language Learning & Technology 5 
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Autonomous Language Learning 
 
language professionals working there. Some such centers also do language advising, which can go 
considerably beyond the frequent role of administering a language placement exam, to include one-on-
one counseling on possible approaches and resources appropriate to a student’s language interest and 
proficiency level. The Language Center at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology created 
an electronic advising service, Virtual English Language Advice (VELA), which enables students to 
develop individual learning plans with the help of the VELA system and in conjunction with center staff 
(Lázaro & Reinders, 2007). 
Individual teachers can also play a useful role in helping students find and evaluate appropriate online 
resources. One of the folders I include in each of my language course Web sites provides links to the 
many online resources now available for learning German, including translation tools, online dictionaries, 
grammar sites, German language news, proofing tools, flashcard programs, and links to how-to-learn 
sites. Particularly useful for students who are interested in working with language materials beyond class 
assignments are sites which offer pedagogically assisted authentic content such as news broadcasts 
slowed down or articles with vocabulary aids and audio versions. For German, all of these are available 
from the Deutsche Welle. We know from second language acquisition (SLA) research how useful such 
enhanced input is to the learning process, but these resources also enable greater learner autonomy, 
encouraging students to go beyond course assignments. Teachers can also play an important role in 
demonstrating how specific online tools can best be used. Instead of discouraging use of a tool such as 
Google Translate, for example, teachers might discuss its use, point out how it works (mostly parallel 
corpus-based) and illustrate its benefits/problems with some sample translations. Some discussion of 
proofing tools (grammar and spelling) even at early stages of language study can also be very helpful. It 
would be nice to see more studies, such as that by Rimrott and Heift (2005) on the use of generic 
spellcheckers. Not unexpectedly, their study shows that a spelling tool designed for first language users 
has problems with second language errors. Studies on the effectiveness of students consulting online 
dictionaries are also helpful.  
AUTONOMOUS, NOT ALONE  
In addition to the teacher-student dynamic, another critical component in the development of effective 
learner autonomy is a peer network. Contrary to what the term might evoke in popular usage, learner 
autonomy does not involve secluding oneself in a cork-lined room with a mountain of learning materials. 
This is all the more true for the social phenomenon of human speech. Computer interactions can simulate 
aspects of this process, but it is not nearly the same as direct human-to-human communication. This 
aspect of autonomous language learning occupies a prominent place in published studies. The essays in 
the collection Maintaining Control: Autonomy and Language Learning (2009), an excellent introduction 
to the topic, virtually all highlight the social dimensions of learner autonomy. Edith Esch in that volume 
succinctly lays out how this use is often addressed in recent research, “Language teachers and researchers 
need to make a choice between two roads to guide their future practice and research: the road giving 
prominence to individual personal autonomy or the road giving prominence to autonomy as the capacity 
to exercise critical thinking about learning as a participant in a social milieu” (Kindle e-book location 
731, emphasis in original). It is in fact “in the social milieu” that developments have accelerated in recent 
years. Improvements in network access and speed in the last 20 years have enabled a plethora of services 
for language learners to connect with peers. Not all are conducive necessarily to building language 
autonomy, and their use is one of personal choice (if not mandated by a class assignment). There is a 
great deal of difference in the approaches used by online services, ranging from the highly interactive 
immersive environment in Second Life to a predominantly email exchange system in tandem learning 
networks. Common to most computer mediated communication (CMC) is the possibility of moving 
beyond text exchanges, to include audio or video. Voice chat is a powerful addition to Second Life, as 
video conferencing is to tandem exchanges.  
Language Learning & Technology 6 
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Autonomous Language Learning 
 
While teachers may provide the initial setup and basic guidance for CMC, the participants themselves 
ultimately determine how useful the communication becomes for language learning. Many studies, 
including a recent analysis by Lai and Li (2011), have shown that engagement in CMC helps learners to 
create a positive second language persona. As the authors discuss, this development may arrive 
incidentally to the pursuit of other online activities, such as multi-player gaming. Studies have shown that 
the changes taking place in CMC often provide, through peers, the kind of scaffolding helpful in guiding 
learners towards greater self-confidence and autonomy. We know from SLA research that enabling 
language learners to teach others provides a powerful mechanism for deep language acquisition. This is a 
process that peer exchanges in CMC can make possible. 
Françoise Blin (2004) has pointed out, in reference to tandem learning and other online tools and services, 
that “some CALL applications may...promote the development and the exercise of learner autonomy, 
provided that learners are already significantly autonomous” (p. 381). Case studies in recent years of 
CMC tend to emphasize the importance of providing up-front guidance both on the use of the tool or 
service as well as on ways to leverage its use for the purpose of improving language skills. A crucial part 
of that process is leading students to be self-reflective in their use of language in CMC. This is not an 
easy thing to do, leading Schwienhorst (2007) in his recent study of MOOs (text-based online multi-user 
virtual reality systems) to wonder if creators of CALL tools might consider forcing users to do planning, 
reflection and self-assessment. Greg Kessler’s use of wikis in language learning (2009) also points to the 
difficulties in that environment of having students writing move beyond an exclusive concern with 
content editing to examine language forms, even if, as in his case, the users were aspiring language 
teachers. Kessler points to an important consideration in respect to CMC and linguistic accuracy, “[i]t 
may be important to provide students with varied contexts in which they can interact. They may benefit 
simultaneously from autonomous contexts in which they do not feel compelled to strive for accuracy as 
well as contexts that provide explicit demands for accuracy” (p. 92). Using multiple kinds of online 
writing is helpful as well in having students learn about different registers, and the appropriateness of 
language constructions in different contexts. 
SELF-DIRECTED STUDY 
From the beginning CALL programs have provided some degree of choice to the learner, but in the early 
days that was generally limited to the pace of program prompts or the mode of presentation. Today’s 
individualized CALL such as adaptive CALL (also called intelligent tutors) offers a wide variety of 
choice and an extensive set of tools for independent learning. They also can include advanced features 
such as voice recognition and multiple feedback options. Here, too, the challenge has been to convince 
users to take advantage of the multiplicity of choices as well as the available help mechanisms. The 
personalizing advantages are only available if the user actively selects them. As Carol Chapelle (2005) 
has pointed out in reference to reading and listening comprehension aids in CALL applications, the act of 
choosing to use such help leads to deeper mental processing that promotes language acquisition. Moving 
students to the point where they will take advantage of feedback and comprehension aids involves 
enhancing their metacognitive knowledge about language learning. If they can learn how to build on 
existing knowledge, how to profit from errors, how to examine more closely the forms they are using, this 
can only have a salutary effect on their language ability and on their capacity for autonomous learning. 
Some individualized CALL programs have a wide sweep, aiming at virtual language and culture 
immersion. This is the case for the Operational Language & Culture Training Systems (from alelo) such 
as Tactical Iraqi Arabic. Less ambitious are the more common CALL projects which target individual 
learner improvement in discrete areas such as grammar and vocabulary. In these programs, too, guidance 
is seen as needed to help users to “notice” forms . Often such vocabulary and grammar training programs 
are language corpus based. Concordancers can be especially useful for working in an area that often gets 
short shrift in classroom instruction, namely collocations. Dealing directly with a corpus through use of a 
Language Learning & Technology 7 
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Autonomous Language Learning 
 
concordancer or key word in context (KWIC) interface can be a demanding proposition for many 
learners. We are starting to see more experimentation on the use of concordances in different ways so as 
to make access available for students at all levels. The CANDLE project, for example, draws on a parallel 
corpus for constructing a bilingual concordancer, which may be easier to use for less advanced students 
(Liou et al., 2006). Chang and Sun (2009) effectively deployed a concordancer in lower level language 
instruction by supplying abundant scaffolding. The Intelligent Academic Discourse Evaluator (IADE) is a 
corpus-based automated writing tool aimed at improving writing and good grammar usage through 
providing extensive color-coded feedback (Cotos, 2011). Vickers and Ene (2006) used typographical 
elements to make it easy for learners to compare usage of particular forms in their own writing and in a 
passage by a native speaker. 
Many such studies show a marked improvement for individual learners compared to other methods. 
Geraughty and Quinn (2009) found their method for helping users learn Japanese characters through a 
Flash vocabulary program to be twice as effective as a paper approach. On the other hand, Jarvis and 
Szywczk (2010) in their study of students working with English grammar, found paper materials to be 
preferred to computer tutorials. Interestingly, one of the reasons for their preference was the portability of 
the print materials. This was also a concern expressed by students in Stracke’s (2007) study of students in 
a hybrid elementary language class. It would be interesting to see if the availability of easy to carry but 
powerful mobile devices causes a shift in favor of those devices. 
Students preferring print materials also highlighted their ease of use, probably indicating navigational, 
logical, and structural issues with online resources. Ease of use and the inherent device-encouraged single 
focus have helped to make the Apple iPad a phenomenal commercial success. Developers for mobile 
devices including smartphones and tablets have reduced screen real estate at their disposal, which forces 
them to be more efficient in their content presentation and navigational structure. Debra Hoven and 
Agnieszka Palalas’ recent study (2011) indicates that not all design issues in the mobile setting have been 
solved, as students in their study, using iPod Touches, reported good experiences using multimedia, but 
not with text. Hoven and Palalas highlight another important aspect of design for mobile devices, namely 
the unique combination they offer of a highly personal device with powerful networking capabilities. This 
is ideal for enabling what they call “ecological constructivism,” focusing equally on the individual and on 
the group. By their nature mobile devices feature on-demand flexibility, adjusting automatically and 
instantaneously to new information. Hoven and Palalas advocate building on this environment to 
personalize learning by allowing for continual and dynamic content creation and modification. 
OUTLOOK  
For students mobile devices integrate real-life interests and academic roles. If learner autonomy is about 
personal choice, then mobile should serve as an ideal enabler. Examples of personal choice in action, that 
is, case histories of individual learner stories, can be an effective method for exploring how individual 
choice can work in a variety of circumstances. This kind of case history research is illustrated by Gao’s 
story of Zhang Haidi (2010), the disabled Chinese woman who famously learned English on her own 
during the Cultural Revolution, or Murray’s story (2011) of the Japanese student who becomes motivated 
to study English after falling for a Norwegian girl (like a Rosetta Stone ad come true). Murray highlights 
the role of imagination in the process. Both Gao and Murray’s learners imagine a second self (in Zhang’s 
case an English girl from Yorkshire, inspired by Jane Eyre) that helps them to learn. Learner autonomy 
ultimately should provide the ability to choose modes of learning of significance to the individual. As Phil 
Benson has written (2009), learner autonomy viewed in this way has a socio-political significance: 
Do we view autonomy as a matter of the production of responsible, active, flexible and adaptable 
worker-learners who are capable of fitting into and matching the demands of the new economic 
order? Or do we view autonomy as a matter of learner agency—the production of critically aware 
Language Learning & Technology 8 
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Autonomous Language Learning 
 
learners who are capable of controlling their own learning and lives and of participating in the 
authoring of the worlds in which they live?” (Kindle e-book location 595). 
“Critically aware learners” are the ones who will do well in a fast-changing world, in which knowledge is 
far from being fixed. In that sense, the capacity for autonomous learning can prepare students for a 
fulfilling future while also providing the flexibility and skills for the variety of work environments and 
demands they are likely to face in their lives. 
In addition to individual learner stories, we are seeing as well compelling case histories of autonomous 
language learning in challenging social and economic conditions. One recent account (Kuchah & Smith, 
2011) recounts the experience of teaching more than 200 African teenagers, engaging them in group work 
under trees, while striving to empower their learning without the help of textbooks. Learner autonomy is 
often seen as a Western concept, but more and more accounts are emerging that highlight successes 
around the world. An account from Vietnam (Dang, 2010) highlights achieving local and individual 
autonomy despite a variety of community constraints. A good number of studies have been published in 
recent years discussing autonomous learning projects in India and China. David Dixon’s recent review 
(2011) of projects promoting autonomous language learning world-wide discusses a number of such 
projects.  
Learner autonomy will look different in different cultures, and teachers need to adopt to local, regional 
and national contexts. In the USA, for example, the emphasis on standardized testing has sent a chill 
through efforts to encourage student and teacher autonomy. Nevertheless, it seems likely that autonomous 
language learning will grow in importance as we continue to see increased interest in language learning 
and language maintenance for both personal and professional reasons. It would be helpful in that respect 
to see studies on learner autonomy and multilingualism. What benefits are there in having gone through 
learning a second language to the process of learning a third or fourth language? Desirable as well would 
be studies that show more evidence of how enhanced metacognition leads to actual language proficiency. 
Françoise Blin points out (2004) that there needs to be more attention paid in evaluating CALL projects 
not just to the effectiveness of the individual features and functions they incorporate but also to what 
extent they can be used effectively in wider contexts and how they might contribute to building learner 
autonomy. It would be useful too to have more studies/reviews of the increasing number of commercial 
Internet language learning services such as livemocha or byki from these perspectives as well. As we 
approach the 10-year anniversary of the decision by Drake University to abolish its language departments, 
in part in the name of self-directed learning, we can only hope that more emphasis on autonomous 
language learning results in empowering learners, not sacking teachers. 
REFERENCES 
Benson, P. (2009). Making sense of autonomy in language learning. In Pemberton, R., Toogood, S. & 
Barfield, A., (Eds.). Maintaining control: Autonomy and language learning. Hong Kong: Hong Kong 
University Press. 
Blin F. (2004). CALL and the development of learner autonomy: Towards an activity-theoretical 
perspective. ReCALL, 16(2), 377–395. 
Chapelle, C. (2005). Interactionist SLA theory in CALL research. In J. Egbert and G. Petrie (Eds.), Call 
research perspectives (53–64), Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Chang, M. (2010). Effects of self-monitoring on web-based language learner’s performance and 
motivation. CALICO Journal, 27(2), 298–310. 
Chang, W., & Sun, Y. (2009). Scaffolding and web concordancers as support for language learning. 
Computer Assisted Language Learning, 22(4), 283–302. 
Language Learning & Technology 9 
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Autonomous Language Learning 
 
Cotos, E. (2011). Potential of automated writing evaluation feedback. CALICO Journal, 28(2), 420–459. 
Dang, T. (2010). Learner autonomy in EFL studies in Vietnam: A discussion from sociocultural 
perspective. English Language Teaching, 3(2), 3–9. 
Darasawang, P., & Reinders, H. (2010). Encouraging autonomy with an online language support system. 
CALL-EJ Online, 11(2). Retrieved from http://callej.org/journal/11-2/darasawang_reinders.html 
Dixon, D, (2011). Recent literature concerning the support of initiatives promoting language learner 
autonomy around the world. Language Teaching, 44(2), 266–276. 
Esch, E. (2009). Crash or clash? Autonomy 10 years on. In Pemberton, R., Toogood, S. & Barfield, A., 
(Eds.). Maintaining control: Autonomy and language learning. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press.  
Gao, X. (2010). Autonomous language learning against all odds. System, 38, 580–590. 
Geraughty, B., & Quinn, M. (2009). An evaluation of independent learning of the Japanese hiragana 
system using an interactive CD. ReCALL, 21(2), 227–240. 
Hoven, D., & Palalas, A. (2011). (Re)conceptualizing design approaches for mobile language learning. 
CALICO Journal, 28(3), 699–720. 
Jarvis, H., & Szymczyk, M. (2010). Student views on learning grammar with web and book-based 
materials. ELT-J, 64(1), 32–44. 
Kessler, G. (2009). Student-initiated attention to form in wiki-based collaborative writing. Language 
Learning & Technology, 13(1), 79–95. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num1/kessler.pdf 
Kuchah, K., & Smith, R. (2011). Pedagogy of autonomy for difficult circumstances: From practice to 
principles. Innovation in Language Learning & Teaching, 5(2), 119–140. 
Lai, C., & Li, G. (2011). Technology and task-based language teaching: A critical review. CALICO 
Journal, 28(2), 498–521.  
Lázaro, N., & Reinders, H. (2007). Innovation in self-access: Three case studies. CALL-EJ Online, 8(2). 
Retrieved from http://callej.org/journal/8-2/lazaro_reinders.html 
Liou, H, Chang, J., Chen, H., Lin, C., Liaw, M., Gao, Z.,…You, G. (2006). Corpora processing and 
computational scaffolding for a web-based English learning environment: The CANDLE Project. 
CALICO Journal, 24(1), 77–95.  
Murray, G. (2011). Metacognition and imagination in self-access language learning. In D. Gardner (Ed.), 
Fostering autonomy in language learning (5–16). Gaziantep: Zirve University. Retrieved from 
http://ilac2010.zirve.edu.tr 
Pemberton, R., Toogood, S., & Barfield, A. (Eds). (2009). Maintaining control: Autonomy and language 
learning. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press. 
Rimrott, A., & Trude, H. (2005). Language learners and generic spell checkers in CALL. CALICO 
Journal, 23(1), 17–48. 
Schwienhorst, K. (2007). Learner autonomy and CALL environments. London: Routledge. 
Stracke, E. (2007). A road to understanding: A qualitative study into why learners drop out of a blended 
language learning (BLL) environment. ReCALL, 19(1), 57–78.  
Vickers, C., & Ene, E. (2006). Grammatical accuracy and learner autonomy in advanced writing. ELT-J, 
60(2), 109–116. 
Wright, G., & Wright, P. (2011). Using Moodle to enhance Thai language learning: Instructor and learner 
Language Learning & Technology 10 
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Autonomous Language Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 11 
perspectives. The Journal of Kanda University of International Studies, 23, 375–398. 
RESOURCE LIST 
Learner Autonomy  
 Learner autonomy - EduTech Wiki  
 CALL-EJ Online: Encouraging Autonomy with an Online Language Support System  
 Learning for Life  
 ALL project  
 CALPER: Center for Advanced Language Proficiency Language and Research  
Metacognition  
 Logbooks (PDF)  
 Google Docs 
 One to One Consultations  
 European Language Portfolio  
 LinguaFolio - National Council of State Supervisors for Languages  
 IMS GLC: ePortfolio Specification  
 MSLQ Motivated Strategies for Learning Questionnaire (PDF)  
 SILL Strategy Inventory for Language Learning (PDF)  
 Identifying the Characteristics, Strategies & Techniques of Successful Language Learners  
 LEARNING STYLE INVENTORY  
 Index of Learning Styles Questionnaire  
 Comparing Electronic Dictionary Functions and Use - CALICO Journal  
Computer-mediated Communication  
 Tandem Server Bochum - language learning exchange partnerships - eTandem  
 Language Exchange Community - Practice and Learn Foreign Languages  
 VoiceThread - Group conversations around images, documents, and videos  
Self-directed learning  
 Operational Language & Culture Training Systems | Tactical Iraqi, Tactical Pashto, Tactical Dari, 
Tactical French  
 CALPER: Center for Advanced Language Proficiency Language and Research  
 netvibes  
 pageflakes 
 Laowai Chinese 老外中文 
