Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2011/emerging.pdf 
February 2011, Volume 15, Number 1 
pp. 10–16 
 
Copyright © 2011, ISSN 1094-3501 10 
EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES 
YOUTUBE FOR FOREIGN LANGUAGES: YOU HAVE TO SEE THIS 
VIDEO 
Joseph M. Terantino 
Kennesaw State University 
INTRODUCTION 
“Have you seen this video?”  
“You have to see this video.”  
For the students belonging to the digital natives (Prensky, 2001), these phrases are used frequently to 
express their enthusiasm and overwhelming interest in new and fascinating videos that they have found 
via the Internet. These commonplace phrases also demonstrate their genuine desire to share and discuss 
what they have found.  
Inspired by Chinnery’s (2008) column in which he describes Google-Assisted Language Learning, this 
column aims to accomplish a similar feat with regard to YouTube. The descriptions offered here are 
geared towards integrating the practice of creating, watching, and sharing YouTube videos, which appeals 
to the current generation of students, into foreign language teaching and learning. To accomplish this, 
there is a description of the brief history of YouTube and its impact on society, and of the defining 
characteristics of the digital natives and their unique educational needs. This is followed by an 
explanation of how YouTube can be used to bridge the gap between satisfying the particular educational 
needs of the students and meeting the demands of foreign language education.  
THE HISTORY OF YOUTUBE 
In February of 2005, Steve Chen, Chad Hurley, and Jawed Karim founded YouTube with the domain 
name http://www.youtube.com. The site was created as a forum for people to create and share short video 
clips online. One year later Google purchased YouTube for $1.65 billion. How popular is YouTube now? 
Consider that on a daily basis there are more than two billion views (YouTube Facts & Figures). In 
addition, 51 percent of YouTube viewers go to YouTube weekly, and 52 percent of 18 to 34 year-olds 
often share videos with other people (YouTube Fact Sheet). 
Solomon and Schrum (2007) describe “The World’s First Web Band” as a microcosm for the impact 
YouTube has had on society as a whole. Consider that the members of this Web band never met each 
other in person, created a music video, and recruited a drummer completely online. Initially, they did not 
even know each other’s names. To date there have been over 2 million views of their first YouTube 
video, Internet Killed the Video Star. In closing, Solomon and Schrum ask the question also posed by this 
article, “what does this mean for education?”  
Obviously, YouTube is used for varying purposes, the majority of which are not educationally relevant. 
For example, many people use YouTube simply as a form of entertainment. Someone records a person in 
a funny prank, posts it to YouTube, and others go to check it out. In some cases there are hundreds of 
thousands, if not millions, of viewers. For other users YouTube is a venue for sharing family videos, 
posting a work demonstration, advertising a company or product, or providing students access to media 
from across the globe. It is this educational value of YouTube that will be explored here with particular 
emphasis on foreign language education. 
 
Joseph M. Terantino Emerging Technologies: YouTube for Foreign Languages 
 
Language Learning & Technology  11 
ABOUT THE DIGITAL NATIVES 
Who are the Digital Natives? In 2001, Marc Prensky coined the term digital native to refer to a person 
who has grown up with digital technology. These digital natives have habits and interests that are 
drastically different from those of previous generations. With the advent of the Internet and digital 
technologies, what were once considered normal daily activities are now replaced by video games, 
socializing on the net, and text messaging. Consider that 93 percent of the teenagers in the United States 
go online, 73 percent of these teens use social networking Web sites, and 75 percent have a cell phone 
(Lenhart, Purcell, Smith, & Zickuhr, 2010). As these authors state, “The internet is a central and 
indispensable element in the lives of American teens and young adults.” (p. 5). 
With these societal patterns in mind, there is a need to modify instructional methods and activities to take 
advantage of the unique interests of these students. What do the digital natives want? Much of what they 
want educationally relates to their growing interest in and use of Web-based technologies. Prensky (2001) 
presents the following list of digital natives’ wants for education: 
1. To receive information at twitch speed 
2. To be able to multi-task 
3. To have hands-on activities 
4. To have graphics before text 
5. To have random access to information 
6. To be networked socially 
7. To play games rather than do serious work 
8. To have frequent rewards 
The problem with meeting these educational needs is the disconnect between what the digital natives 
want and what many teachers are able to provide. The remainder of this article will describe how utilizing 
YouTube videos for foreign language instruction may aid in bridging this gap. 
BRIDGING THE GAP WITH YOUTUBE 
After considering the basic premise behind YouTube and the specific needs of the digital native students, 
the next logical question is: can the use of YouTube videos in the foreign language classroom satisfy 
students and teachers?  
The answer is yes. YouTube offers fast and fun access to language and culture-based videos and 
instruction from all over the globe. It provides an outlet for student and teacher-created videos, and most 
importantly, YouTube videos provide students with an opportunity to engage meaningfully in the target 
language.  
From a research perspective, there are several advantages to using video clips educationally. Berk (2009) 
describes a review of theoretical and research-based studies related to the use of videos and the brain. He 
discusses how the use of videos has been found to benefit students by connecting to multiple 
intelligences, both hemispheres of the brain, and to the emotional sense of the students. He also refers to 
the “picture superiority effect”, which explains that concepts or ideas are more likely to be remembered if 
they are presented as pictures rather than words.  
From a practical perspective, the idea of utilizing YouTube in language classes is similar to what Randy 
Pausch refers to as the “head fake” (Last Lecture), in which a parent or educator shifts the focus of an 
activity while simultaneously teaching the targeted content. The result for the students is learning without 
initially realizing that they were learning. The poignant part of this approach is that the students are more 
Joseph M. Terantino Emerging Technologies: YouTube for Foreign Languages 
 
Language Learning & Technology  12 
likely to remember the lesson after the fact. Foreign language students may be temporarily distracted or 
entertained by a YouTube video clip, but they will gain real linguistic knowledge and skills at the same 
time. 
YOUTUBE FOR FOREIGN LANGUAGES 
Building on the brief history of YouTube, the needs of the digital natives, and the benefits of using video 
clips, the focus of this article will now shift towards presenting YouTube as an instructional tool for 
foreign languages. The following is an explanation of several general methods in which YouTube videos 
can be utilized.  
YouTube for Providing Content and Information  
YouTube videos can serve many purposes for foreign languages; however, the majority of uploaded 
videos are used to provide linguistic and cultural content and information in and related to the target 
language. Many of these videos are created by individuals or instructional institutions. For example, 
consider a series of videos produced by Señor Mara to educate his high school students on the Spanish 
language, Conjugations Back and Cry Me a Verb. In these videos Señor Mara uses current hip hop songs 
with revised lyrics to demonstrate how to conjugate Spanish verbs. For those who teach foreign 
languages, these videos are a must see. 
Utilizing YouTube videos in an informative manner is also beneficial for illustrating a concept, presenting 
an alternative viewpoint, stimulating a learning activity, and motivating the students (Berk, 2009). As 
such, these videos may be used for inspiring or motivating students to learn. Consider the video Foreign 
Language Study Benefits, which aims to encourage students to learn a foreign language by describing the 
potential benefits. Other videos may motivate the students by catching their attention, much like 
entertainment: French Man Tries to Say Hamburger, Learn Another Language, German Coast Guard - 
Lost in Translation, Paris At Last - I Love Lucy, One Semester of Spanish - Love Song. Each of these 
videos highlights the comedic value of language learning or linguistic misunderstandings. 
Videos for Less Commonly Taught Languages 
Perhaps one of the most advantageous uses of YouTube videos for foreign language education is for less 
commonly taught languages (LCTLs) for which some of these videos provide access to spoken samples, 
instructional units, and reading and writing practice. They provide users around the world with access to 
linguistic information for a specific target language that may not be accessible otherwise. See Table 1 for 
an overview of videos that are available for Arabic, Hebrew, Korean, Swahili, and more. This table is not 
intended to be an all inclusive list for LCTL’s. It is merely a sample of the types of videos that are 
available via YouTube.  
Culture-Based Videos 
In addition to linguistic and motivational purposes, another foreign language use for YouTube videos is to 
deliver insights into or representations of cultural information. Such culture-based videos serve as 
valuable resources for content courses, which may focus on culture and civilization. For example, Table 2 
provides a general overview of the types of culture-based videos that are available via YouTube. These 
videos allow language learners to experience portions of other cultures including artifacts, history, and 
politics without physically traveling to the target country. Again, the videos listed here offer only a 
glimpse of what is available. 
Many of these culture-based videos are documentaries posted by individuals, or short clips excerpted 
from larger documentary projects funded by companies such as ABC, BBC, NBC, or National 
Geographic. Regardless of how the documentary was produced it is important to encourage foreign 
language students to view it objectively. Last, other videos on YouTube are excerpts from live recorded 
Joseph M. Terantino Emerging Technologies: YouTube for Foreign Languages 
 
Language Learning & Technology  13 
performances. Consider the African music video AFRICAN MUSIC - hiphop from Tanzania, Live in Denmark 
- Mzungu Kichaa (SWAHILI) or the French play L'ETRANGER de Albert Camus - Live Theatre (French 
Language), stemming from the literary work of Albert Camus. 
Table 1. Overview of YouTube Videos for Less Commonly Taught Languages 
Language Video Description 
Arabic Learn Arabic Letters of the Alphabet, Alif 
Ba.tv 
Video clip from Alifba.tv site for teaching 
Arabic to children 
Chinese Learn Chinese , Hobbies in Mandarin Creative instructional video for Chinese 
hobby vocabulary 
Hebrew Learn Hebrew - Animals Picture-based video for Hebrew animal 
vocabulary 
Japanese Learn Japanese - Learn to Introduce Yourself 
in Japanese! 
Instructional video for Japanese with focus 
on grammar and pronunciation 
Korean Learn Korean - Learn How to Read and 
Write Hangul 
Instructional video for Korean-Hangul 
characters 
Portuguese Learn Portuguese Language Phrases - Useful 
Expressions 
Text-based video for Portuguese expressions 
accompanied by music 
Russian Learn Russian: Food (Russian 
vocabulary) 
Instructional video with a focus on 
pronunciation for Russian food vocabulary 
Swahili Swahili - Learn the Greetings & Intros Series of instructional videos for Swahili 
 
Table 2. Overview of YouTube Videos for Cultural Information 
Cultural 
Information Videos Description 
Cultural 
Artifacts 
Travel Documentary - Journey to East Africa (Kenya) 
 
Video clip of one man’s 
travels through Kenya 
German culture Pictorial look at Germany’s 
culture and history 
History The story of India - amazing BBC documentary series part 
(1 of 7) 
Documentary of India’s 
history with a look at historical 
events  
EGYPT - Mother of the World Pictorial look at Egypt’s 
culture and history 
Politics ABC television interview with Hugo Chavez 
 
Video clip of Barbara Walter’s 
interview with Hugo Chavez 
20/20 Fidel Castro interview - Barbara Walters [4of6] Video clip of Barbara Walter’s 
interview with Fidel Castro 
Popular 
Figures 
SIGMA - 淚奔 Running with Tears MV (English subs + 
Pinyin + Chinese) 
Popular Chinese music video 
 
French bestselling author, in a New York state of mind Video clip of brief interview 
with French author Marc Levy 
Traditions Introduction to Manga Video focusing on Japanese 
Manga comics 
La Tomatina - Spain Documentary of Spain’s 
annual tradition 
 
Joseph M. Terantino Emerging Technologies: YouTube for Foreign Languages 
 
Language Learning & Technology  14 
YouTube for Student-Created Videos 
Beyond presenting information to students via videos, YouTube also gives them an opportunity to create 
their own presentations in the target language. By creating their own videos students can apply the target 
language to real-world situations, which can be easily recorded and posted to YouTube. In the following 
examples, the students play the role of the teacher to create instructional video lessons: Learn French! - 
Lesson #1 and French Podcast - Future Tense. 
For foreign language students YouTube is a simple tool for creating and editing video clips that 
approximate a professionally-made presentation. By integrating student-created YouTube videos into the 
foreign language classroom, language educators are also fostering student creativity and freedom of 
expression, further encouraging them to utilize the target language. 
YouTube for Collaboration 
In addition to allowing students to create and edit language-based video clips, YouTube videos provide an 
opportunity for multiple students to collaborate on a language-based project. For example, YouTube hosts 
many collaborative projects created by foreign language students. Several common themes are news 
projects, (See Spanish Newscast created by heritage speakers), and short skits in the target language, (See 
German Skit). These types of projects allow the students to work together to create a final linguistic 
product. 
YouTube also provides a worldwide venue for the students to share their work. In this manner viewers 
can “like” or “dislike” the video. The site also allows others to respond to the videos by posting a text or 
video response. Thus, students can get real feedback. Last, students and teachers can also subscribe to 
certain channels maintained by individuals and companies from around the world to keep up with their 
videos. Consider the Foreignlanguagehouse Channel. 
CONCERNS 
Although YouTube as described here seems potentially beneficial, there are several concerns to consider. 
First and foremost, there are issues of privacy and safety with relation to posting student-created videos 
online. It is important to note that YouTube does provide several posting options. If privacy is an issue 
videos can be posted under the unlisted setting, which provides a specific site address that can only be 
accessed by those possessing the URL. Also, the private setting shares the video only with users who 
have been granted access to the video. 
Another potential concern for student-created videos is ensuring the appropriateness of the videos created 
and posted online. For this purpose it is important to create a clear video policy and explicit instructions 
for the students to follow in the process of completing their video-based assignments. Last, in many 
school settings access to YouTube and other social networking sites is restricted. After putting specific 
policies and guidelines in place for such language-based video assignments, perhaps this policy should be 
reconsidered on a setting-by-setting basis. 
Last, there is the potential problem of accessing the videos online. It is important to maintain a good 
Internet connection. Users may access the direct link for the video, search for the video by keywords, or 
embed the videos directly into another location using the embed codes provided when uploading the 
video. Even with a good Internet connection, it is still possible to experience volatility with regards to clip 
availability. With this in mind there are several tools that can be used to ensure that the clip is available 
when needed. Tools such as Easy YouTube Video Downloader and Clip Extractor may be downloaded 
and installed easily. These tools enable downloading and converting FLV YouTube video files to other 
file formats such as MP4, AVI, and MOV. In fact, there are even YouTube videos available for learning 
how to use these tools. See Convert YouTube Video To MP4, FLV, 3GP To Put Onto Your iPod, Phone, Or 
Computer and How to convert YouTube videos to MP4, MP3, AVI, MOV, 3GP. Once the video files have 
Joseph M. Terantino Emerging Technologies: YouTube for Foreign Languages 
 
Language Learning & Technology  15 
been downloaded and converted to a playable format, they are more portable and do not require an 
Internet connection. 
CONCLUSION 
The concept of utilizing videos in the foreign language classroom is not novel by any means. However, 
the opportunity for student-created videos and social networking provided by YouTube presents a radical 
new approach to providing linguistic input and encouraging students to engage in the target language. 
Utilizing this approach to learning foreign languages concentrates on the defining characteristics of the 
digital natives for whom digital technologies and social networking have become commonplace and 
indispensable in their daily lives. 
It is undeniable that foreign language teaching will remain a delicate balancing act; however, YouTube is 
a tool that can help tilt the scales in favor of teachers. Integrating the use of YouTube videos in foreign 
languages is a valuable resource for teachers and students. In addition, YouTube provides a powerful, 
social venue in which the potential reach is exponential (Prensky, 2009). Typically, foreign language 
teachers may share with their fellow teachers in the same school, possibly with others in the same district. 
By posting a useful video to YouTube there is unlimited access to instructional videos and the potential 
benefit across the globe is much higher. Consider Conjugations Back, nearly 300,000 views, Internet 
Killed the Video Star, more than 2 million views, and Randy Pausch’s Last Lecture, over 12 million 
views worldwide.  
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Joseph M. Terantino is Director of the Foreign Language Resource Collection and Coordinator for Online 
Learning and the Critical Languages Program at Kennesaw State University. He is Assistant Professor of 
Spanish and Foreign Language Education. His research interests are related to CALL, FLED, and the 
integration of technology in teaching. 
E-mail: jteranti@kennesaw.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Berk, R. A. (2009). Multimedia teaching with video clips: TV, movies, YouTube, and mtvU in the 
college classroom. International Journal of Technology in Teaching and Learning, 5(1), 1–21. Retrieved 
from http://www.sicet.org/journals/ijttl/issue0901/1_Berk.pdf 
Chinnery, G. M. (2008). You’ve got some GALL: Google-assisted language learning. Language Learning 
& Technology, 12(1), 3-11. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num1/pdf/net.pdf 
Lenhart, A., Purcell, K., Smith, A., & Zickuhr, K. (2010). Social media & mobile Internet use among 
teens and young adults. Retrieved from Pew Research Center Website http://uploadi.www.ris.org/ 
editor/1267315614PIP_Social_Media_and_Young_Adults_Report.pdf 
Pausch, R. (2007, December 20). Last lecture: Achieving your childhood dreams [Video file]. Retrieved 
from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ji5_MqicxSo 
Prensky, M. (2001). Digital natives, digital immigrants. In On the Horizon, 9 (5), MCB University Press. 
Retrieved from http://www.marcprensky.com/writing/ 
Prensky, M. (2009). Make those YouTubes! Retrieved from http://www.marcprensky.com/writing/ 
Joseph M. Terantino Emerging Technologies: YouTube for Foreign Languages 
 
Language Learning & Technology  16 
Solomon, G., & Schrum, L. (2007). Web 2.0: New tools, new schools. Washington, D.C.: International 
Society for Technology in Education. 
Siteimpulse. (2010, May 17). YouTube facts & figures [Web log post]. Retrieved from 
http://www.website-monitoring.com/blog/2010/05/17/youtube-facts-and-figures-history-statistics/ 
YouTube Fact Sheet. Retrieved from http://www.youtube.com/t/fact_sheet 
