Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2011/review3.pdf 
October 2011, Volume 15, Number 3 
pp. 41–46 
 
Copyright © 2011, ISSN 1094-3501 41 
REVIEW OF EN UNA PALABRA: SEVILLA, ESPAÑA, CÓRDOBA, 
ARGENTINA, AND PUEBLA, MÉXICO 
En una palabra: Sevilla, España 
Emmanuel Paris-Bouvret & Ana Pérez-Gironés 
 
2006 
ISBN: 9781589011366 
US $29.95 (CD-ROM) 
   
En una palabra: Córdoba, Argentina 
Emmanuel Paris-Bouvret & Ana Pérez-Gironés 
 
2007 
ISBN: 9781589011861 
US $29.95 (CD-ROM) 
 
En una palabra: Puebla, México 
Emmanuel Paris-Bouvret, Ana Pérez-Gironés, & Octavio Flores-Cuadra 
 
2010 
ISBN: 9781589016477 
US $29.95 (CD-ROM) 
 
Minimum Technical Requirements (for all): 
Windows: 
Pentium II or III, 64 MB RAM or higher, QuickTime 
Macintosh: 
Power Mac G3 with OS 10.1.5 or higher, 128 MB RAM, QuickTime 
 
Georgetown University Press 
Washington, D.C. 
 
 
Review by Zahir Mumin, University at Albany, State University of New York (SUNY) 
INTRODUCTION 
The video series En una palabra provides teachers with an innovative multimedia resource for teaching 
Spanish culture and language to second language learners. Paris-Bouvret, Pérez-Gironés, and Flores-
Zahir Mumin Review of En una Palabra 
 
Language Learning & Technology 42 
Cuadra’s main objective is to develop students’ cultural competence and linguistic knowledge by 
exposing them to authentic Spanish language conversations about the following ten general concepts: 
ambición (ambition), amigos (friends), libertad (freedom),  familia (family), felicidad (happiness), 
individualismo (individualism), éxito (success), orgullo (pride), país (country), and trabajo (work). Each 
CD-ROM includes a diverse group of fifteen native speakers from different educational, socioeconomic, 
employment, and generational backgrounds who define and interpret the meaning of these concepts 
according to their personal experiences. The authors demonstrate that these definitions and interpretations 
facilitate students’ acquisition of language use in different contexts—a variety of sociocultural 
circumstances which influence how speakers use language. All of these CD-ROMs exhibit the same 
structure of content which constitutes the following: a summary of pedagogical objectives; quick guide 
instructions; historical information about Seville, Spain, Cordoba, Argentina, and Puebla, Mexico; 
phonetic speech tendencies; interactive word transcriptions of speech; an interactive glossary of key 
terms; tab functions for the aforementioned ten concepts; and photo images of the fifteen speakers 
featured in informal interview conversations. Below is a sample screen shot which shows the structure of 
content on the main page of the Seville, Spain CD-ROM. 
 
Figure 1. Screen shot of Sevilla, España. 
The authors chose these various regions in order to capture semantic and phonetic differences amongst 
three general dialect varieties of Spanish: Southern Spain Spanish, Southern Mexican Spanish, and 
Central Argentinian Spanish. The authors support their selection of these different Spanish-speaking 
populations by implying that in the near future, users should expect more, similar interactive CD-ROMs 
which depict native Spanish speakers from other regions.  
SUMMARY OF PEDAGOGICAL OBJECTIVES 
In the este programa (this program) section of the CD-ROMs, the authors provide a brief description of 
the general objectives for using this interactive language learning resource. They contend that the 
spontaneous definitions given by the native Spanish speakers from the same and different regions enhance 
Zahir Mumin Review of En una Palabra 
 
Language Learning & Technology 43 
students’ knowledge of cultural connotations. The authors strengthen this argument by offering students a 
wide variety of explanations of words such as ambición (ambition), individualismo (individualism), and 
trabajo (work). For example, Omar Coyopol Polis, featured in the Puebla, Mexico CD-ROM, expresses 
opposing arguments regarding ambición (ambition): 
…La palabra ambición me suena así como alguien que quiera más. Y puede ser alguien que 
quiera más para bien o para mal…[…The word ambition sounds to me like someone who wants 
more. And it can be someone who wants more for better or for worse…]. (En una palabra, 
Puebla, México, 2010) 
On the other hand, María Paz Conde Martín, depicted in the Seville, Spain CD-ROM, contends that 
ambición (ambition) is extremely negative:  
…Pienso que es más bien un afán desmesurado, y generalmente no controlado de querer 
conseguir algo, con lo cual lleva también a sentirse mal, a provocar cierto estado de ánimo de 
intranquilidad y descontento [I think that it is rather an immeasurable desire and generally 
uncontrolled in getting something, which also leads to feeling bad, to provoking a certain 
restlessness and discontent mood]. (En una palabra, Sevilla, España, 2006) 
These examples are effective for students’ language acquisition because they allow them to analyze how 
language is used differently by different people. However, the CD-ROMs could be enhanced by providing 
students with specific learner objectives such as having students summarize and compare definitions and 
interpretations of speakers from the three different regions to help make explicit these language use 
differences. 
QUICK GUIDE INSTRUCTIONS 
The este programa (this program) section of the CD-ROMs also helps users learn how to use the different 
functions of this interactive program. The authors employ square-shaped message boxes with arrow 
pointers to describe how to operate different functions such as returning to the main program menu by 
pressing entrar (to enter), opening the word transcription box by clicking transcripción (transcription), 
and by pressing on images of speakers in order to listen to their definitions. They also provide written 
instructions that emphasize that the interactive glossary only includes definitions for words such as apoyo 
(support), juventud (youth), and inalcanzable (unattainable). Adding voice-over instructions spoken in 
Spanish would enhance students’ learning experience because they could easily associate the sounds of 
basic Spanish words with their corresponding meaning while they manage different program functions. 
HISTORICAL INFORMATION 
Easy access to the historical information is obtained by clicking on the city name: Sevilla, Córdoba, or 
Puebla. Each CD-ROM provides students with solid background information regarding the foundation of 
these cities, important churches, universities and monuments, and Web links to governmental resources 
and online newspapers. The authors expose students to this background information in order to stimulate 
their cultural understanding of the development of Spanish-speaking cultures. For example, they clearly 
arouse students’ interest in this development in their description of the Reales Alcazáres (Royal Alcazar) 
palace which exhibits an architectural design with both Arabic traits from the 12th century and Christian 
traits from the 14th century (En una palabra, Sevilla, España, 2006). The authors also include a photo 
image of this palace, as in other descriptions with historic information, to activate students’ internalization 
of historic facts. Although integral background information is provided in this section of the interactive 
program, it would be enhanced with the inclusion of footnote translations of vocabulary words such as 
afán (desire), arroyo (stream), and  destacado (notable or prominent) which may be difficult for first and 
Zahir Mumin Review of En una Palabra 
 
Language Learning & Technology 44 
second year L2 Spanish students to understand. This historic information section is quite useful for 
beginner, intermediate, and advanced-level L2 Spanish students who might need to learn facts about the 
general historic development of Spanish-speaking cultures. 
PHONETIC SPEECH TENDENCIES 
The authors foster students’ language acquisition of Spanish sounds by discussing the most common 
phonetic characteristics of native speakers from Seville, Spain, Cordoba, Argentina, and Puebla, Mexico 
and furnishing audio examples of these characteristics: aspiration and deletion of the /s/ at the end of a 
syllable está (is) [eh-tá]1 [eØ-tá]2 and at the end of a word padres (parents) [pá-ðeh]3 [pá-ðeØ]4  in 
Seville, Spain; deletion of the /d/ in word-final position felicidad (happiness) [fe-li-si-ðáØ]5 in Cordoba, 
Argentina; and the elongation of vowels in the last syllable at the end of a word esposo (husband) [es-pó-
so:]6 in Puebla, Mexico. The authors also employ short audio clips of the actual interview conversations 
in their explanations of phonetic characteristics to raise students’ consciousness about differences and 
similarities in Spanish-speaking dialects. One suggested improvement to the materials might be to 
supplement audio examples with detailed phonetic transcriptions, such as those provided above, in order 
to assist students who have previous experience using such phonetic transcriptions. They would likely be 
able to more coherently differentiate between allophones (phonetic variants of phonemes), graphemes 
(letters), and semantics (meanings of words and sentences). 
INTERACTIVE WORD TRANSCRIPTIONS 
Clicking on the transcripción (transcription) function while listening to the native Spanish speakers 
enlivens students’ interactive experience because they simultaneously view the words spoken while they 
hear spontaneous conversations. The authors’ use of word transcriptions of speech successfully underpins 
students’ listening and reading comprehension skills. Whenever students are unsure of what speakers are 
saying, they can quickly refer to the word transcriptions that appear directly beside the video clips they 
watch to facilitate their comprehension skills. These word transcriptions are most useful for beginner- and 
intermediate-level students because the majority of the speakers talk at a fast rate for students who do not 
have an advanced or superior level of linguistic competence in L2 Spanish. Whilst most of the word 
transcriptions are accurate representations of what speakers say, there are some inconsistencies. For 
example, when discussing ambición (ambition), the word transcription of Ramón Pérez Rueda says the 
following: 
…Pero puedes ambicionar el más rico de tu calle o de tu bario, y entonces, es más, en fin, 
espúreo, que lo veo yo [But you can aspire the richest one of your street or of your barium, and 
so, it is more, in short, spurious, that is how I see it]. (En una palabra, Sevilla, España, 2006) 
However, Ramón Pérez Rueda actually says the following, with differences marked in bold: 
…Pero puedes ambicionar ser el más rico de tu calle o de tu barrio, y entonces, y aquí, un 
poquito más, en fin, espúreo, que lo veo yo. (En una palabra, Sevilla, España, 2006) 
The clear inconsistencies between the word transcription and the oral speech manifested in this example 
are the lack of the Spanish verb ser (to be), the use of the word bario (barium)7 instead of barrio 
(neighborhood), and the lack of the phrases y aquí (and here) and un poquito más (a little more). These 
inconsistencies may negatively affect students’ language acquisition process, especially in the case of 
bario (barium), because native English-speaking students often have difficulty with their pronunciation of 
the multiple vibrant /r/ sound of Spanish (Azevedo, 2009; Hualde, Olarrea, Escobar, & Travis, 2010) 
which is necessary to correctly pronounce the word barrio (neighborhood). On the other hand, this sound 
may not be problematic for students whose L1s encompass languages such as Italian, Polish, and Czech 
Zahir Mumin Review of En una Palabra 
 
Language Learning & Technology 45 
because these languages have vibrant /r/ sounds that are similar to those of the Spanish language 
(Bussmann, 1998; Clark, Yallop, & Fletcher, 2007). Despite the aforementioned inconsistencies, Paris-
Bouvret, Pérez-Gironés, and Flores-Cuadra supplement students’ interactive experience by including 
speakers’ interjection remarks such as ¡puf! (ugh!) ¡uy! (oops!) and ¡olé! (bravo!). Including these 
remarks helps solidify the authors’ main objective to increase students’ levels of cultural competence 
because they are exposed to authentic conversation tendencies exhibited in spontaneous conversations. 
INTERACTIVE GLOSSARY OF TERMS 
The interactive glossary of terms furnishes students with definitions of words that appear in the word 
transcription box. Pressing on different words in the word transcription box activates the appearance of 
either definitions of these words or of the sentence No hay definición disponible para esta palabra (There 
is not an available definition for this word). The authors employ this glossary of terms in order to buttress 
students’ listening comprehension when watching the interview conversations. They also provide students 
with definitions and/or explanations of common Spanish expressions such as estar a punto de (to be about 
to), al menos (at least), and siempre y cuando (as long as). These additional definitions and explanations 
enhance the quality of the glossary because they encourage students to think beyond the use of individual 
words in context. A vivid example of some common expressions related to the word vez (time) appear 
when clicking on this word: cada día más (everyday more and more), cada vez más (more and more), una 
vez que (once), En el momento en que (at the moment in which), and cada vez (each time) (En una 
palabra, Córdoba, Argentina, 2007). Their use of common Spanish expressions in the glossary of terms is 
effective for students’ learning because this use highlights the importance of Spanish terminology in both 
conversational and written Spanish. The authors’ decision to use the Real Academia Española online 
dictionary (http://www.rae.es) for the definitions included in the glossary is appropriate for maintaining 
semantic coherence amongst these definitions. This glossary is suitable for students at the beginner, 
intermediate, and advanced levels of L2 Spanish. 
TAB FUNCTIONS AND PHOTO IMAGES 
One of the most dynamic aspects of user-friendliness of this interactive program deals with the interplay 
between the tab functions of the ten general concepts (see “introduction” above) and the photo images 
that depict the fifteen native speakers. The authors made an effective decision to include an innovative 
pop-out window feature which tells users to choose a speaker after they choose a concept or vice versa. 
Users can toggle to different speakers discussing this same topic by clicking on the corresponding image. 
The flexibility to rapidly switch to different speakers discussing the same concept allows students to 
receive enough input which will allow them to objectively understand how Spanish words are interpreted 
by native speakers with different sociocultural backgrounds. The authors’ use of tab functions and photo 
images to gain access to and view different interview conversations develops students’ awareness of the 
relationship between the cultural diversity of Spanish speakers’ backgrounds and the pragmatic 
knowledge necessary to understand their definitions and interpretations of the ten general concepts. 
CONCLUSION 
En una palabra is an enthralling video series which intrigues students who are simultaneously learning 
about Spanish language and culture. It also fascinates teachers who would like to expose students to 
authentic spontaneous conversations which illuminate the variety of cultural connotations exhibited when 
concepts are interpreted by different speakers. Overall, this is an innovative interactive program suitable 
for any L2 Spanish language classroom because it comprises important historic facts, examples of 
common linguistic phenomena, and authentic spontaneous speech. This En una palabra series, which 
exclusively uses the target language to enhance students’ acquisition of Spanish, is different from other 
interactive programs such as the Fluenz (2009) Spanish video series which uses both English and Spanish 
Zahir Mumin Review of En una Palabra 
 
Language Learning & Technology 46 
to enhance students’ acquisition of Spanish. Fluenz (2009) assists students’ learning through direct one-
on-one bilingual interactive tutoring as if they were in a classroom setting. En una palabra assists 
students’ learning by exposing them to authentic Spanish language used in exclusively Spanish-speaking 
environments. 
 
NOTES 
1. The phonetic and phonemic transcriptions of this word are identical. The authors provide a phonemic 
transcription of this word indicated by the oblique bars: /ehtá/. All syllabifications in these transcriptions 
are provided by Zahir Mumin to facilitate the understanding of the examples.  
2. This demonstrates the difference between deletion and aspiration of the /s/ at the end of a syllable. 
3. The authors phonetically transcribe only the /s/ sound in this word: /padreh/. 
4. This phonetic transcription shows the difference between deletion and aspiration of the /s/ at the end of 
a word. 
5. The authors do not provide a transcription for this word. 
6. The authors do not provide a transcription for this word. 
7. bario (barium) is a chemical element. 
All of the English translations of Spanish words and phrases are provided by Zahir Mumin. All three CD-
ROMs exclusively use the Spanish language. 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Zahir Mumin teaches Spanish courses at the University at Albany, SUNY, USA, and conducts research in 
the fields of linguistics and language teaching. His primary research interests include teaching with 
technology, sociolinguistics, phonetics, phonology, language acquisition, language contact, bilingualism, 
multilingualism, and language change. 
E-mail: zm227418@albany.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Azevedo, M. (2009). Introducción a la lingüística española (3rd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice 
Hall. 
Bussman, H. (1998). Routledge dictionary of language and linguistics. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Clark, J., Yallop, C., & Fletcher, J. (2007). An introduction to phonetics and phonology (3rd ed.). Malden, 
MA: Blackwell Publishing. 
Fluenz. (2009). Fluenz versión F2: Spanish 1+2+3+4+5 with supplemental audio CDs and podcasts. 
Hollywood, FL: Fluenz. 
Hualde, J. I., Olarrea, A., Escobar, A. M., & Travis, C. E. (2010). Introducción a la lingüística hispánica 
(2nd ed.). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
Schwegler, A., Kempff, J., & Ameal-Guerra, A. (2010). Fonética y fonología españolas (4th ed.). 
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons Incorporated. 
