Language Learning & Technology 
http:/llt.msu.edu/issues/june2011/review3.pdf 
June 2011, Volume 15, Number 2 
pp. 39– 41 
 
Copyright © 2011, ISSN 1094-3501 39 
REVIEW OF TEACHING ENGLISH LANGUAGE LEARNERS THROUGH 
TECHNOLOGY 
Teaching English Language Learners through 
Technology 
 
Tony Erben, Ruth Ban & Martha Castañeda  
 
2009  
ISBN: 978-0-415-95768-7  
US $36.95  
240 pp. 
  
Routledge 
New York, USA  
 
 
Review by Jesús García Laborda & Mary Frances Litzler, Universidad de Alcalá (Madrid, Spain) 
Teaching English Language Learners through Technology is contextualized in the U.S. American 
educational system, but as will be discussed in this review, many of the concepts can easily be used 
beyond these geographical boundaries. The authors themselves state in the introduction that the book is 
intended for practitioners in all content areas, and the book includes explicit links among theoretical 
background information, recent research, and case studies to illustrate how the pedagogical implications 
can extend beyond just the U.S. context.  
An early indication of the U.S. context is in the use of the term English Language Learner (ELL), which 
is frequently used in discussions among educators at the elementary and secondary levels in the United 
States. The term is often viewed as interchangeable with English as a Second Language, in that it refers to 
learners who are geographically located in a place where English is the dominant language, in contrast to 
English as a Foreign Language. However, the omission of “second” indicates an acknowledgement that 
English may well be a second, third or new language for immigrant students. A second indication that the 
U.S. context is the primary audience for the book is in the intended audience of pre-service and in-service 
elementary and secondary (Kindergarten through grade 12) teachers. These teachers often do not have 
formal training as language teachers, but they must learn to teach language as part of their profession as 
their classrooms become more linguistically diverse. 
This reader-friendly book is divided into three parts. Part 1 presents an overview of ELL teaching and 
learning in order to provide “guidance for the informed use of instructional strategies in the teaching of 
ELLs” (p. 7); part 2 provides empirical evidence for the use of technology in differentiated instruction 
while also emphasizing the role of social constructivism; and part 3 addresses the use of technology inside 
and outside the classroom through examples and also suggests strategies and exercise plans for the use of 
technology in differentiated instruction.  
Part 1 is divided into eight chapters preceded by a general introduction, which explains ethical values, the 
aim of the book, the target audience, and an extensive description of five principles for integrating 
technology. These principles focus on creating effective second language learning environments around 
which learning should happen: (a) ELLs must be given many and varied opportunities to read, write, 
listen to and discuss oral and written English; (b) attention should be drawn to English language structural 
Jesús García Laborda & Mary Frances Litzler Review of Teaching English Language Learners through Technology 
 
Language Learning & Technology 40 
patterns; (c) students should be given classroom time to practice their English usage productively; (d) 
opportunities need to be offered for ELLs to notice their errors and correct their English; and (e) 
maximum opportunities should be provided for ELLs to interact with others in English.  
Part 1 continues by covering a wide range of issues that provide a backdrop for the rest of the book. 
Issues of equal opportunity and recent U.S. educational legislation are addressed and call for ELLs to 
receive adequate resources and individual attention from educators. Other aspects include an overview of 
principles of second language acquisition and theoretical applications of the five principles listed above, 
descriptions of ELL programs, developmental stages in acquisition, specific intercultural developmental 
stages, the parents’ role, and applications and models of ELL instruction for ELLs with special cognitive 
and socio-cultural needs. 
Part 2 introduces the intersection of technology and ELL instruction. It emphasizes the role of social 
constructivism in the teaching of ELLs. For example, it presents the application of Vygotsky’s theory 
(1962, 1978) on the student’s zone of proximal development (ZPD) as well as the role of regulation in 
language learning for the classroom. Classroom applications are provided by discussing differentiated 
instruction, project-based learning, and constructivist pedagogy principles. The next three chapters 
illustrate ways to integrate and accommodate technology into lessons and discuss principles that should 
guide the use of technology in the classroom. 
Part 3 is the most practical part of the book. The authors describe activities for middle and high school 
students with a view towards putting into practice the principles from the first two parts of the book. The 
activities are divided into four levels (Preproduction, Early Production, Speech Emergence and 
Intermediate Fluency), which correspond to common categories used to describe ELLs language skill 
levels. The activities are presented in the form of lesson plans, learning activities, and Web-based 
resources. Also included are special sections entitled “Teaching Tips,” “Classroom Implications,” and 
“Teaching Help” boxes. As in the rest of the book, most of the activities do not require the teacher to be 
experienced in the use of technology, to have computer labs, or to teach in classrooms with highly 
sophisticated technology. Instead, the existence of one or two computers with a minimal capacity can 
serve in many cases. For instance, Chapter 3.2 introduces what the authors call E-creation tools and self-
made computer-based resources, such as podcasts, Power Point, moviemakers, audiomakers, and Web 
publishing, all of which permit students to develop their creativity with limited resources. In describing 
and suggesting tools, the authors use easily accessible and often free resources such as Hot Potatoes (p. 
102), Audacity (p. 106), and a range of communicative facilitating e-tools such as e-mail, instant 
messaging, and listservs.  
The final sections are devoted to improving ELLs’ literacy in the four skills areas through creative 
activities such as using the whiteboard, creating wikis, and using and designing blogs, webquests, 
podcasts, and audioblogs. This section includes what we believe to be the most interesting part of the 
book because it covers informal performance-based assessments that serve both formative and summative 
purposes. In this highly practical section, the authors suggest the use of e-portfolios, e-surveys, e-quizzes, 
and e-rubrics. The authors also provide a brief foray into virtual learning environments such as Nicenet.  
The book concludes with an extensive, well-annotated list of resources, which makes it valuable for 
CALL-intensive environments, as well as for classrooms that are in the early phases of technology 
integration. It also has a very clear and useful glossary, a student grouping chart for the classroom, and a 
well-organized list of references. 
FINAL COMMENTS  
Some parts of this book are similar to other volumes (cf., Dudeney & Hockly, 2007; Sharma & Barret, 
2007), but it appears to be more practical. While the first two parts are more theoretically than practically 
based, the theory can be of benefit to those teachers who have limited knowledge or experience with 
Jesús García Laborda & Mary Frances Litzler Review of Teaching English Language Learners through Technology 
 
Language Learning & Technology 41 
ELLs, and it is well-illustrated by case studies and real-life examples. In fact, the theory is presented in an 
accessible way; for instance, readers may not want to miss the excellent synthesis of the natural approach 
(Krashen & Terrell, 1983). Another asset of this book is that it introduces emotional perspectives, which 
are less frequently discussed in language texts, through exemplified cases and also considers educational 
stakeholders such as the parents. 
To conclude, although this book is aimed at practitioners working with ELLs, its applications and uses are 
also valid in general ESL and EFL courses, given the quality and variety of the resources described. Its 
pedagogical approach makes it especially useful as a textbook for educational technology for both general 
and bilingual education. For a broader, international context, the book may be attractive for content 
teachers working in Content Language Integrated Learning (CLIL). Teachers who may lack knowledge in 
language learning but need to integrate second (or subsequent) language learning into their content will 
likely find that the theoretical underpinnings and practical recommendations will facilitate their work. All 
in all, this is an accessible volume that integrates theory and practice. 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWERS  
Jesús García Laborda, PhD & EdD, is an associate professor at Universidad de Alcalá (Madrid, Spain). 
His main interests are educational technology, low-stakes language testing and English for Specific 
Purposes. He has published broadly in all three areas in such journals as Computers & Education and 
Educational Technology & Society. As a reviewer, his works have been included in many educational 
journals including Language Learning & Technology.  
E-mail: jesus.garcialaborda@uah.es  
Mary Frances Litzler has taught English to adults for some 25 years. She currently works at Universidad 
de Alcalá (Madrid, Spain) and the British Council (Madrid, Spain), but she also has experience working 
in the United States, Japan and France. Her research interests are CALL and medieval text editing. She 
will defend a PhD thesis on medieval medical prologues in June 2011.  
E-mail: mf.litz@uah.es  
 
REFERENCES  
Dudeney, G., & Hockly, N. (2007). How to teach English with technology (with CD-Rom). Cambridge: 
Pearson Longman. 
Krashen, S. D., & Terrell, T. D. (1983). The natural approach: Language acquisition in the classroom. 
London: Prentice Hall Europe.  
Sharma, P., & Barrett, B. (2007). Blended learning: Using technology in and beyond the language 
classroom. Cambridge, UK: Macmillan. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1962). Thought and language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press. 
