Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2011/cross.pdf 
June 2011, Volume 15, Number 2 
pp. 44–68 
 
Copyright © 2011, ISSN 1094-3501 44 
COMPREHENDING NEWS VIDEOTEXTS: THE INFLUENCE OF THE 
VISUAL CONTENT 
Jeremy Cross 
Nanyang Technological University 
Informed by dual coding theory, this study explores the role of the visual content in L2 
listeners’ comprehension of news videotexts. L1 research into the visual characteristics 
and comprehension of news videotexts is outlined, subsequently informing the 
quantitative analysis of audiovisual correspondence in the news videotexts used. In each of 
five lessons, ten pairs of Japanese EFL learners participated in a sequence of tasks in 
which they listened to, and discussed various facets of their comprehension of news 
videotexts. The pairs’ dialogue acted as the unit of analysis for exploring the effect of 
visual information on their comprehension. The qualitative analysis illustrated that various 
attributes of the visual content, such as audiovisual correspondence, impacted on 
comprehension. Moreover, other influences of the visual content found were its general 
utility in facilitating comprehension, inhibiting of attention to, and processing of audio 
information, and stimulation of learners’ expectations and inferencing of content. Based 
on these findings, learner variability aspects and several implications for related L2 
listening pedagogy are discussed. 
INTRODUCTION 
Advances in satellite, digital video and broadband technology mean that news videotext services are 
readily available to viewers across the globe. L2 users form a large part of the world-wide audience, with 
news videotexts providing them with an authentic sociocultural, linguistic and educational resource which 
can be exploited for language learning inside and outside the classroom. However, the intrinsic 
audiovisual nature of news videotexts means that L2 users not only have to deal with the challenges to 
listening comprehension1 that they typically encounter which are associated with the audio channel (e.g., 
unfamiliar vocabulary, speech rates, prosody and syntactic structures), but also need to cope with the 
vagaries of content presented in the accompanying visual channel if they are to process, understand, and 
respond to the message news videotexts are crafted to convey. A number of publications point to the 
correspondence between audio and visual information as one potentially important factor affecting L2 
learners’ comprehension (Meinhof, 1994, 1998). However, while such intuitions regarding the influence 
of visual elements seem valid, there is very little empirical research which is informative in such respects. 
Moreover, apart from Gruba’s (2004, 2006) studies, little is known about how L2 listeners strategically 
exploit visual content in news videotexts to facilitate comprehension. Given that the use of news 
videotexts in second and foreign language classrooms and self-access centres is increasingly common 
practice (particularly with more advanced listeners), there is a need for related research which promotes 
understanding of the influence of the visual content in L2 listeners’ comprehension of this videotext 
genre. This paper reports on a study which draws on relevant L1 and L2 theory and empirical research to 
address this issue. 
BACKGROUND 
Audiovisual Processing 
In line with L1 research into the processing of audiovisual information in multimedia (Mayer & 
Anderson, 1991; Mayer & Sims, 1994) and in news videotexts in particular (Walma van der Molen & 
Van der Voort, 2000; Walma van der Molen, 2001), the theoretical perspective underpinning this study is 
dual coding theory. In his seminal work, Paivio (1971, 1990, 2007) proposes dual coding theory as a 
Jeremy Cross Comprehending News Videotexts 
 
Language Learning & Technology 45 
theory of cognition, which is distinguished from other common-coding theories of cognition (e.g., 
propositional representation) by its modality-specific nature. That is, it provides a coherent account of 
how separate verbal and nonverbal mental representations are collectively processed. The basic premises 
of dual coding theory most recently presented by Paivio (2007), which builds on his own early work and 
also research in association with several colleagues (Clark & Paivio, 1991; Sadoski & Paivio, 2001), are: 
• Both verbal and nonverbal systems are specialized and distinct, and mental representations 
associated with each system preserve the properties of the sensorimotor events which trigger 
them;  
• The verbal system encompasses written, auditory, and articulatory verbal codes; 
• The nonverbal system includes images for environmental sounds, activities, and events; 
• While written, aural and articulatory input is each typically processed sequentially by the verbal 
system, the nonverbal system processes information simultaneously as a whole, for a single 
mental image comprises a multitude of details; 
• The verbal and nonverbal systems are joined by referential connections as part of a complex 
associative network (e.g., imagery may evoke word representations and vice versa); 
• Associative connections are another type of link within each of the verbal and non verbal systems 
(e.g., a word or an image may activate associated words or images, to create complex 
configurations of mental representations); 
• The activation of mental representations in either system may or may not be a conscious 
experience; 
• Patterns of connection activation are influenced by contextual factors (e.g., a particular task such 
as showing pictures may prime the nonverbal system and promote the production of mental 
images); 
• Verbal and nonverbal mental representations and their interconnections differ for each individual 
due to their diverse past experiences; 
• And, nonverbal processing is affected by an individual’s propensity and capability to use 
imagery. 
As a hypothetical example of dual coding theory in the context of this study, a visual scene/shot and its 
accompanying audio content in a news videotext would activate, depending on the individual’s capacity, 
corresponding mental representations in both verbal and nonverbal systems, some of which are conscious. 
Spreading activation through associative and referential connections would occur within and between the 
two systems generating an intricate and idiosyncratic pattern of mental representations which need to be 
filtered to formulate a correct interpretation. Extending this hypothesis further, verbal and imagery 
representations activated by complementary stimuli would potentially generate relatively less complex 
mental patterns than when incongruence is evident, with associated positive and negative consequences 
for cognitive loading, respectively. 
Videotexts 
A videotext is broadly defined here as a multimodal text consisting of contiguous, dynamic, and 
interwoven sounds (verbal, musical and/or background) and visual images (still, moving, text and/or 
graphic) which can be presented using a range of media. Movies, game and talk shows, dramas, music 
videos, documentaries, and news are all prevalent genres of videotexts, and are representative of the 
multitude of such material which is accessible around the world in many languages, through both satellite 
and terrestrial television and the Internet, to an increasingly visually-oriented populace (Meinhof, 1998). 
Jeremy Cross Comprehending News Videotexts 
 
Language Learning & Technology 46 
Videotext genres differ in the extent to which they aim to entertain and/or inform an audience. Broadly 
speaking, for example, movies and music videos are primarily entertainment focused, whereas 
documentaries and news are essentially purveyors of factual information. Videotexts also vary in their 
degree of structure. For instance, movies and music videos are at the less-structured end of the continuum, 
while news, talk shows, and soap operas are notably tightly structured in contrast (Meinhof, 1998). Also, 
while there are format similarities in the more-structured videotexts mentioned, their production and 
construction reflects the sociocultural values and norms of the country or region from which they emanate 
(Meinhof, 1998). 
In terms of language teaching and learning, the exploitation of videotexts is commonplace. Reasons for 
using videotexts are that the visual channel provides learners with opportunities to see and hear the target 
language in use and shows many aspects (e.g., landscapes, locations, fashion, food, gestures, way of life) 
of the target culture and society, both of which can raise learners’ interest levels (Harmer, 2001; Sherman, 
2003). In addition, videotexts have ecological validity, as learners are highly likely to listen to another 
language through this multimodal medium (Guichon & McLornan, 2008).  
As with other major genres of videotexts, news videotexts (both authentic and non-authentic) are a 
valuable and widely used resource for advancing language learners’ listening abilities, and a growing 
number of publications continue to offer suggestions for exploiting this material in the classroom (Gruba, 
2005; Harmer, 2001; Lynch, 2009; Meinhof, 1998; Sherman, 2003). Nonetheless, despite the utility and 
prevalence of news videotexts in foreign and second language learning contexts, it is only recently that L2 
researchers have again, following an early study by Brinton and Gaskill (1978), begun to empirically 
investigate ways to facilitate learners comprehension of this genre (Cross, 2009; Rivens Mompean & 
Guichon, 2009). As yet, however, little research has concentrated on understanding the influence on L2 
learners’ news videotext comprehension of the associated visual content, which is a central element of the 
message this genre is fashioned to communicate, but one which is often dismissed as less important than 
the aural content (Graddol, 1994). Prior to exploring related L2 research, L1 research informative to this 
study is presented. 
The Visual Content of News Videotexts 
L1 Research 
In one of the first publications to cover news videotext comprehension, Gunter (1987) states that the 
reasons behind inserting visual content (rather than just including a newscaster) in news production are 
that it increases the overall impact of the news broadcast, serves to emphasize specific aspects of the 
narrative (e.g., who was involved and where the story occurred), gives the audience the impression they 
are being allowed to witness the reported events first-hand as they unfold, and triggers an emotional 
reaction. Gunter (1987) reviewed early studies from the 1960s to 1980s on the influence of the visual 
channel. Generally, findings from the studies presented did not offer conclusive support for visual content 
in enhancing information assimilation and retention in news videotexts, but the degree of redundancy 
between the content of the two channels was identified as an important variable in information 
processing. 
In subsequent research, Brosius, Donsbach, and Birk (1996) suggest that the visual content of news 
videotexts largely consists of ‘standard scenes’, that is, shots of buildings, shoppers strolling in the street, 
or employees at work, which typically carry little information, and merely have a thematic 
correspondence with the audio content. Brosius, et al. (1996) investigated the effect of such standard 
scenes on the quality of information recalled by L1 users, representing how well the content had been 
conveyed, compared to three other conditions: (a) audiovisual correspondence, (b) audio content only, 
and (c) audiovisual divergence. The researchers found that the uptake of information was highest for 
audiovisual correspondence, followed by standard scenes and audio only, which both had similar recall 
quality. Audiovisual divergence hindered uptake the most. This outcome highlights that visual content has 
Jeremy Cross Comprehending News Videotexts 
 
Language Learning & Technology 47 
the potential to facilitate news videotext comprehension when it is convergent with the audio information 
(see also Reese, 1984; Walma van der Molen & Van der Voort, 2000), but seems to be detrimental when 
there is some degree of divergence.  
A more recent L1 study by Walma van der Molen (2001) also considered audiovisual correspondence in 
terms of introducing and applying a coding scheme to enable a more systematic analysis of this attribute 
than provided by general judgments of correspondence across whole news videotexts in previous studies. 
Walma van der Molen evaluated audiovisual correspondence of information presented in ‘shots’, that is, 
the visual content between ‘edits’ (a change to a similar scene) and ‘cuts’ (a change to a different visual 
scene), within news videotexts. Informed by earlier related research (Brosius et al., 1996; Lang, 1995), 
she developed four categories to establish and code the degree of semantic overlap between audio and 
visual channels in shots. Three of these categories are classified on a correspondence continuum ranging 
from Direct, through Indirect, to Divergent. In accordance with Walma van der Molen (2001), the Direct 
category is used to classify audio and visual content which both express the same propositional meaning 
(i.e., information in the two modalities is essentially semantically redundant); the Indirect category is used 
to classify audio and visual content which is only partly related (as in standard scenes); and the Divergent 
category is used to classify audio and visual content which is not related or even contradictory. The fourth 
category, Talking head, refers to a scene in which typically only the top half of a newsreader, reporter, or 
interviewee is shown as they speak, and is considered a separate category as it neither reflects conflicting 
audio and visual content, nor transparent semantic relatedness between the two. However, a Talking head 
is categorized as one of the other three categories when additional visual information is available in the 
background, for example, behind an interviewee. Examples of each category from a BBC news videotext 
about UK forces in Iraq entitled Basra Deaths are presented in Table 1 for clarification. 
Walma van der Molen (2001) utilized her coding system to good effect in examining a sample of Dutch 
news videotexts. She summarized in writing the visual content of shots and the concurrent verbal content, 
and noted the duration in seconds for each shot. Two coders then used the four-category scheme to code 
audiovisual correspondence using the written information as well as the actual news videotexts. Walma 
van der Molen reported a very strong inter-rater reliability (Cohen’s Kappa was .81) for the two coders, 
which suggests her coding system is a valid and reliable method for determining the level of audiovisual 
correspondence in news videotexts. Her taxonomy was used in this study for the analysis of the news 
videotexts. 
Other related L1 news videotext research has focused on graphics, such as computer-generated texts 
(CGTs) and computer-generated animations (CGAs). These are features which are typically used to 
present numerical details, and are utilized to facilitate understanding of complicated events or processes. 
Fox, Lang, Chung, Lee, Schwartz, and Potter (2003) investigated the comparative amount of 
comprehension for seven science-related news videotexts in three modified versions which contained a 
CGA, a CGT, or no graphics. The researchers reported that comprehension was worst for the no graphics 
version, though there was little difference between the CGA and CGT versions. Moreover, when the 
perceived complexity of the news videotext was included as a factor, comprehension was not affected for 
easier or harder content by the presence of a CGA or CGT, but more difficult content resulted in 
significantly less comprehension when no graphics were included. 
In summary, this discussion illustrates that variations in audiovisual correspondence can impact on the 
processing of news videotexts by skilled L1 users. For L2 listeners, it seems safe to hypothesize that such 
factors will also be influential, as well as be potentially compounded due to linguistic deficiencies, 
working memory constraints, and a lack of familiarity with the culture-bound visual content, style, and 
conventions of news videotexts geared to the L1 audience (Meinhof, 1994). 
 
Jeremy Cross Comprehending News Videotexts 
 
Language Learning & Technology 48 
Table 1. Examples of the Four Coding Categories in Basra Deaths 
Verbal content Visual content 
Talking head 
The death of two British soldiers in a roadside 
bombing in Iraq has raised further questions about 
the level of equipment used by British troops and 
whether it’s enough to fight insurgents with their 
increasingly sophisticated weaponry. From Iraq, 
David Lauren reports now. 
  
  
Direct 
This Land Rover was hit…  
 
  
Divergent 
…as British troops were escorting construction 
workers north of Basra this morning. 
 
  
Direct 
Wreckage was strewn across the road…  
  
Indirect 
…in an area where there have been similar attacks 
before. 
  
L2 Research 
Regarding L2 learning, there is a growing body of research which has investigated the influence of the 
visual content in videotexts primarily in terms of the role of kinesic cues (e.g., hand gestures and lip 
movements), and still images in lectures, and to a lesser degree dialogues, in an academic listening 
context (see Ginther, 2002; Ockey, 2007; Sueyoshi & Hardison, 2005; Wagner, 2007, 2008, 2010a, 
2010b). The general findings of these studies were that kinesic and contextual visual cues appeared to 
either facilitate or inhibit understanding, and that variability was apparent in learners’ orientation to, and 
Jeremy Cross Comprehending News Videotexts 
 
Language Learning & Technology 49 
perceived usefulness of, such visual cues. In many of the studies cited, the authors could only offer 
intuitive insights based on test items and responses, questionnaires, and interviews to suggest how visual 
content might have affected learners’ comprehension. However, Ockey (2007) and Wagner (2008) 
specifically focused on eliciting learners’ online processing of audiovisual information through verbal 
reports to determine the influence of the visual content on understanding in tests of academic listening 
ability. Ockey’s study involved 6 ESL test takers who were asked to report their use of visual cues, and 
the impact those cues had on their comprehension during pauses inserted at essentially regular intervals in 
two lecture videotexts, one containing moving images, and the other still images. Five of the six test 
takers used hand and body gestures or facial cues in the videotext with moving images to facilitate 
comprehension. Few of the test takers found the still images in the lecture distracting, and all were rarely 
found to observe the still images in any case. There was a fairly even split between test takers who 
broadly found visual content either helpful, both helpful and distracting, or primarily distracting. Overall, 
Ockey found limited use of the still images by test takers in that version of the videotext, and that there 
was considerable variability in the videotext with moving images in how test takers reported utilizing the 
visual content, or generally considered it to be helpful or distracting. 
Wagner also collected verbal reports using a pause insertion methodology. Eight ESL learners verbalized 
their comprehension processes at predesignated pauses as they worked through an academic dialogue and 
a lecture videotext, and completed the corresponding tests. Most learners reported using hand gestures in 
the lecture to interpret relevant parts of the videotext. In addition, several learners mentioned utilizing the 
body language of the speakers in the academic dialogue to help develop their interpretations of its 
content. Furthermore, some of the learners exploited contextual information in the academic dialogue to 
discern who the speakers were, and to monitor and interpret what the speakers were doing at the start of 
the dialogue. Similar to Ockey (2007), Wagner concluded that learners vary widely in how they attend to 
and exploit visual content to understand videotexts. 
Although there has been comparatively less research with news videotexts than with academic lecture 
videotexts, it is an area that has been, and continues to be, the focus of interest for L2 researchers. For 
example, in several publications aimed at informing classroom practice, Meinhof (1994, 1998) describes 
and exemplifies the interrelations between visual and audio content in news broadcasts in terms of 
Overlap, Displacement, and Dichotomy. These three categories are analogous to the Direct, Indirect and 
Divergence categories, respectively, proposed by Walma van der Molen (2001). As in the present study, 
Meinhof (1994) adopts the view that by understanding how L1 users process, and are influenced by, 
vagaries in audiovisual content, we can come to understand their potential effects on L2 users’ 
comprehension. 
In empirical terms, Guichon and McLornan (2008) investigated aspects of multimodality (i.e., audio only, 
audio and visual, and the addition of L1 or L2 subtitles) in a BBC news videotext. The authors counted 
semantic units in learners’ written summaries as a measure of what they had comprehended. In attempting 
to account for the differences in comprehension that were evident across the modality conditions of visual 
content with or without subtitles, the authors suggested that learners’ comprehension may have been 
negatively affected at times due to a ‘split-attention’ effect (Chandler & Sweller, 1992), that is, the 
division of attention to different modes of input which increases the working memory load and reduces 
understanding. Importantly, and perhaps counterintuitively, a ‘redundancy’ effect has also been noted by 
Chandler and Sweller (1991), whereby the processing of simultaneous audio and visual content which is 
congruous has potentially negative consequences for understanding. This occurs because an increase in 
working memory load is associated with processing two simultaneous sources of information and 
attempting to establish if they are related (Sweller, 2002). 
In a more extensive study of how visual content affects L2 listeners’ comprehension of news videotext, 
Gruba (2004) investigated the ways in which learners utilized the visual content of Japanese news 
videotexts. Through examining the retrospective verbal reports of twelve tertiary learners of Japanese, 
Jeremy Cross Comprehending News Videotexts 
 
Language Learning & Technology 50 
Gruba (2004, p. 63) identified seven aspects related to the role of visual information during news 
videotext comprehension: 
• Listeners utilize visual elements to identify text type;  
• Listeners may utilize decoded written text to form an initial macrostructure; 
• Listeners may utilize visual elements to generate a number of tentative hypotheses; 
• Listeners may utilize visual elements to confirm an emerging interpretation;  
• The presence of a visual element may help listeners narrow an interpretation from amongst other 
plausible meanings;  
• Visual elements may confuse or hinder interpretation; 
• At times, visual elements add little to the development of a macrostructure. 
Gruba (2006) also explored learners’ verbal reports and semi-structured interview responses related to 
listening to Japanese news videotexts from a media literacy perspective, and again illustrated the 
influence of the visual content on listening. Regarding aspects relevant to this study, Gruba reported a 
case study of one learner, Abby, who was given the opportunity to replay sections of the news videotexts 
to create and build her understanding of content. Abby reported using visual elements to determine 
signposts (key visual content) and boundaries (segmentation) as a means of facilitating her search for 
comprehension. In addition, she became aware that aural and visual elements did not necessarily 
correspond. Where discrepancies existed, she attended to the audio content and ignored the visual 
information. When the two content sources matched, she was able to exploit this to realize greater 
understanding. Other learners in the study also commented in their interviews that the visual content 
helped reduce their anxiety, heightened motivation, and gave them a sense of connectedness with the 
cultural context represented on-screen. 
Given this rather small body of research into news videotexts, and that only Gruba (2004, 2006) has thus 
far provided tangible insights into the way visual elements are processed and how they function in news 
videotext comprehension, there appears a need for further investigation to inform conceptual 
understanding and pedagogical practice, as well as generally broaden our knowledge of the influence of 
this key aspect of videotexts on language learners’ comprehension. Thus, the research question for this 
study was: What is the influence of visual content on L2 listeners’ comprehension of news videotexts? 
THE STUDY 
Overview 
This research was part of a broader study examining the listening processes of twenty EFL learners 
studying at a language school in central Japan. Five BBC news videotexts were examined using Walma 
van der Molen’s (2001) four-category coding system, and their audiovisual characteristics were 
accordingly quantified. A different news videotext was then utilized in each of five 90-minute lessons 
over five weeks. The news videotexts were edited into segments, and learners worked in pairs to complete 
a sequence of tasks in a pedagogical cycle for each segment (six per news videotext) at their own pace 
guided by a prompt sheet. The pairs did not receive any prior training in discussing their comprehension 
processes, nor did they receive any input from the researcher throughout the study to avoid manipulating 
the direction and content of their dialogue. The researcher’s role was only to ensure that the pairs adhered 
to the task sequence and to control the playing of the news videotexts. All interaction between learners 
was carried out in English, reflecting the requisite use of the L2 in their regular lessons. Each pair’s 
dialogue was audio recorded, transcribed, and acted as the unit of qualitative analysis.  
Jeremy Cross Comprehending News Videotexts 
 
Language Learning & Technology 51 
Participants  
The twenty volunteers were Japanese females aged between 22 and 55. All were attending an advanced-
level English language course. A comparison of course level versus IELTS band scales using the 
language centre’s approximation table indicated that participants were at approximately IELTS band scale 
7.0. All names are pseudonyms. 
Materials Preparation and Analysis 
The five news videotexts used in the study were drawn from free-to-air televised BBC news broadcasts. 
The initial criterion for choosing the news videotexts was that they were under two minutes in length to 
ensure that the amount of preparation time required for editing each of the news videotexts into segments 
was not overly excessive. In addition, among the news videotexts selected, a range of common tradecraft 
features, such as interviews with members of the general public, CGTs, and CGAs, should be represented 
to expose learners to the typical components of this type of videotext. Furthermore, news videotexts 
consisting of a sequence of short segments were preferred, with each segment consisting of one or a series 
of images of the same scene plus accompanying audio and well-defined visual cuts between segments. 
This provided for ease of editing and consistency of material through the study. Each news videotext was 
edited into short segments according to visual scene change and shift in audio content focus, a natural 
discourse boundary in news videotext (see Appendix). Due to lesson time constraints, only the first six 
segments of each news videotext were presented in the ‘classroom’ phase of the study. The length of 
segments ranged from 6 to 22 seconds, with the average length being 14 seconds. The order of 
presentation and content of the five news videotexts examined in the study are summarized in Table 2.  
Table 2. Overview of the Titles, Topics and Lengths of the Five News Videotexts 
News Item Title Topic Length (seconds) 
Term-time Holidays School holidays in the UK 126.1 
Green Grocer Food packaging in the UK 124.5 
Elderly Abuse  Aged-care in the UK 129.9 
Job Losses Unemployment in the UK 118.3 
Basra Deaths UK forces in Iraq 130.5 
To explore the nature of the information presented in these five news videotexts, verbal and visual content 
in each videotext for all segments was analyzed according to the four categories suggested by Walma van 
der Molen (2001)—Direct, Indirect, Divergent, and Talking head. The coding method employed was 
similar to Walma van der Molen’s. A coding form was prepared in which the verbal script was given 
alongside images of associated shots and a brief written statement describing the shots. During the 
analysis, one of the four coding categories was selected and noted on the coding form for the given 
audiovisual information. However, Walma van der Molen used shot duration to calculate the time for 
each category. Instead, in this study, the time for a category was calculated based on the duration of the 
utterances accompanying associated shots. Pauses before and after utterances were excluded, as only 
visual content was being presented. Measurements were made using Praat Version 4.3.22 
(http://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/praat/). A colleague acted as a second coder for coding agreement checks. An 
inter-coder reliability analysis using the Kappa statistic was performed with SPSS Version 18.0 
(http://www.spss.com/). Inter-coder reliability was .79. Differences in coding were then resolved by 
discussion to enable the analysis of the prevalence of each of the four categories. 
Elicitation and Analysis of Dialogue 
To provide the framework for eliciting learners’ dialogue for subsequent analysis based on the first six 
Jeremy Cross Comprehending News Videotexts 
 
Language Learning & Technology 52 
segments of each news videotext, a pedagogical cycle proposed by Vandergrift (2007) was used (see 
Cross, in press, for details). Pairs watched a segment on a TV set, and then made notes after the segment 
finished. Next, learners shared their understanding of the segment, discussed how they had tried to 
understand the content, and considered ways to understand more of the segment. Specific written prompts 
were provided to elicit learners’ responses, such as, “What strategies did you use to try to understand the 
segment?” The learners discussed their comprehension processes at designated pauses inserted in the 
news videotext, akin to the manner in which Ockey (2007) and Wagner (2008) collected verbal protocols. 
The same segment was then replayed, learners added to their notes, shared their understanding, and 
reported on how they had tried to understand the segment. Following this, learners worked together to 
produce a written summary of main ideas they had jointly comprehended. On average, they spent 
approximately fifteen minutes working on each segment. On finishing a segment’s summary, the learners 
signaled to the researcher to play the next segment.  
The qualitative analysis by the author of each pair’s ‘dialogic recalls’ (Cross, 2011) using QSR NVivo 
Version 8 (http://www.qsrinternational.com/) aimed to establish the influence of the visual content on 
their comprehension of the given news videotexts. Excerpts in which a learner’s report referred to the 
visual content were firstly identified and grouped for each news videotext. These excerpts of dialogue 
were then individually cross-referenced to the coding form (see previous section) to establish the category 
of the relationship (i.e., Talking head, Direct, Indirect, and Divergent) of the audiovisual content that had 
been the focus of learners’ dialogue. Excerpts of dialogue related to the visual content in the news 
videotexts which were more general in nature and could not be linked to any of Walma van der Molen’s 
four coding categories, were collated and given provisional labels for each pair. Excerpts with related 
labels were then matched across the ten pairs, and the categories iteratively consolidated. Isolated 
excerpts which could not be cross-matched were excluded from further consideration. A colleague again 
acted as a second coder, and was asked to use the categories established (i.e., positive or negative effect, 
inferencing, and predicting) to code the excerpts which did not relate to the coding form content. An 
inter-coder reliability analysis using the Kappa statistic was conducted with SPSS. Inter-coder reliability 
was .83. Coding differences were subsequently resolved by discussion. 
FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION  
The initial concern of this study was to draw on L1 research to establish the nature of the audiovisual 
content in the BBC news videotexts utilized. Using Walma van der Molen’s (2001) audiovisual coding 
system, all of the segments in each of the five news videotexts used in this study were analyzed and the 
amount of time in seconds and as a percentage of the total time for each of the four categories was 
quantified. Table 3 shows the findings of the analysis for each of the news videotexts. 
Table 3 highlights that the Talking head category was the most common, with each news videotext 
containing two or three of such segments. Overall, the majority of the audio and visual content for each of 
the five news videotexts was classified as Indirect or Divergent. This supports the generally held view 
that redundancy between audio and visual modes in news videotexts is rare (Meinhof, 1998; Walma van 
der Molen, 2001). Two of the news videotexts contained a CGT segment (Elderly Abuse and Job Losses) 
and one a CGA segment (Basra Deaths), and these segments exhibited a notable level of audiovisual 
correspondence. Hence the higher percentages for the Direct category compared to the other two news 
videotexts (i.e., Term-time Holidays and Green Grocer). The implication for the L2 listeners in this study 
was that the prevalence of at least partial audiovisual discrepancy in the five BBC news videotexts clearly 
had the potential to create comprehension difficulties, much as it had affected uptake in the L1 study by 
Brosius, et al. (1996) discussed above. 
To examine the manner of influence of the audiovisual content on learners’ comprehension, excerpts of 
dialogue from each pair were cross-referenced to the relevant shots they were referring to in their 
dialogue, and the coding of those shots as Talking head, Direct, Indirect or Divergent. The influence of 
Jeremy Cross Comprehending News Videotexts 
 
Language Learning & Technology 53 
the visual content on learners’ comprehension is now discussed in terms of each of these four audiovisual 
correspondence categories. 
Table 3. The Types of Visual Content and Their Distribution in Seconds and as a Percentage for Each of 
the Five News Videotexts 
News Item Title Types of visual content Distribution of visual content 
(seconds) (%) 
Term-time Holidays Talking head 41.7 37 
 Direct 2.9 3 
 Indirect 30.0 26 
 Divergent 38.8 34 
 Total 113.4 100 
Green Grocer Talking head 39.0 35 
 Direct 0.0 0 
 Indirect 33.2 30 
 Divergent 39.6 35 
 Total 111.8 100 
Elderly Abuse Talking head 44.9 41 
 Direct 15.7 14 
 Indirect 20.8 20 
 Divergent 27.0 25 
 Total 108.4 100 
Job Losses Talking head 35.9 33 
 Direct 19.9 18 
 Indirect 17.3 16 
 Divergent 35.3 32 
 Total 108.4 100 
Basra Deaths Talking head 24.6 24 
 Direct 20.6 20 
 Indirect 36.0 34 
 Divergent 23.4 22 
 Total 104.6 100 
Note: Pauses in audio content, which meant only visual content was presented, were excluded from time calculations in each 
category. 
Talking Head 
This category refers to close-up shots of the head and upper body of newscasters, reporters, and 
interviewees which did not contain background scenes of semantic significance. In this study, each of the 
news videotexts began with a Talking head segment in which the newscaster can be seen introducing the 
news story. Four of these segments also included a caption identifying the title and, therefore, the theme 
Jeremy Cross Comprehending News Videotexts 
 
Language Learning & Technology 54 
of the news videotext (see Appendix, Segment 1). In addition, three of the news videotexts included 
Talking head segments in which an interviewee offered their views. Each interviewee was identified with 
a caption (see Appendix, Segment 3). None of the learners’ reports contained comments about the 
Talking head shots of the newscasters. Thirteen learners (in ten excerpts) mentioned the visual content in 
segments with Talking head shots of interviewees. Three learners reported just focusing on the audio 
content as the visual content in the Talking head segment was not felt to be semantically informative. For 
instance, Nao reported that the Talking head shot merely showed the woman talking (see Appendix, 
Segment 3), and so she had concentrated on what the interviewee was saying. 
Nao: uhm about for the visual points  
Midori:  mm 
Nao: a woman is just talking about 
Midori: mm mm  
Nao: just talking, so I concentrated on the words 
Midori: mm 
Nao: I I I can catch 
However, two learners reported using the captions identifying an interviewee to orientate themselves to 
who the actual speaker was. Interestingly, three learners also reported not noticing the captions, despite 
their appearance on screen for most of the duration of the given segments. An excerpt from Azusa and 
Yoko’s dialogue with respect to the female interviewee (see Appendix, Segment 3) illustrates both of 
these aspects, with Yoko mentioning she used the caption, whereas Azusa reported not seeing it. 
Yoko: ah I first of all who is speaking  
Azusa:  uhuh 
Yoko: the head teacher 
Azusa: eh eh how did you know she’s the head teacher  
Yoko: the subtitles subtitles   
Azusa:  [ah you saw the subtitles I didn’t see that point  
Yoko: and ah this is the head teacher 
In summary, several learners’ reports reflected that they felt visual content in Talking head shots provided 
little of semantic value to facilitate their understanding, and thus they tended to direct their attention to the 
contiguous aural content. The captions identifying interviewees did help to orientate a few learners to the 
name/position of the speaker, but this feature could also go unnoticed. 
Direct Category 
This category describes instances in which there was a high degree of semantic equivalence between aural 
and visual information. Apart from excerpts linked to the CGT and CGA segments, there was one excerpt 
each from the dialogue of four pairs in which learners discussed the influence of audiovisual content 
classified in this category. All of the learners mentioned that the visual content had supported their 
understanding of audio content in relation to a scene from Basra Deaths in which parts of a vehicle 
destroyed in an explosion are seen on the road (see Table 1). For example, Jun mentions that seeing the 
wreckage on the road had facilitated her understanding of this part of the segment. 
Jeremy Cross Comprehending News Videotexts 
 
Language Learning & Technology 55 
Jun: uhm if ah when I saw the pic- erh the image of erh the                                           
wreckage parts are strew- strewn around across the road  
Kaori:    [uhuh                              [ah yes yes  
Jun: that was very helpful to understand the the what’s happening  
Kaori  [mm                      yes          mm   
Jun: at that time 
Kaori: yes on the road  
This part of the segment was notably short (1.9 seconds), yet the audiovisual correspondence appeared to 
be particularly apparent to several of the learners, and drew comment. It is unclear as to why no other 
excerpts were related to audiovisual content in the Direct category (other than for the CGT and CGA 
segments). It may be that the brief duration of each example of such content in general (the average time 
of audiovisual content in the Direct category was 2.6 seconds), or that just under half of the examples 
were only a partial component of a proposition (e.g., see the two examples of the Direct category in Table 
1), made it difficult for learners to recognize and exploit the semantic overlap in the audio and visual 
content. Alternatively, audiovisual redundancy may not have been recalled as associated content was 
unconsciously processed, or because it was one small part of the complex process of comprehending a 
segment’s propositional content (typically each segment contained three propositions). 
The CGT and CGA segments contained audiovisual content which exhibited redundancy. The CGT 
segment in Elderly Abuse consisted of a sequence of numbers and on-screen text, and around half of this 
segment’s content exhibited semantic overlap. Table 4 shows the content which was categorized as 
Direct. 
Table 4. Examples of the Direct Category in the CGT from Elderly Abuse 
Verbal content Visual content 
In more than two hundred cases the person was 
abused in their own home. 
 
  
There have been just five prosecutions.  
 
  
Seven pairs commented on the effect on their comprehension of the CGT visual content in ten excerpts. 
This was primarily regarding facilitating understanding of numerical details which is typically difficult 
for L2 listeners. For example, Yoko reported using the number graphic, recognizing it was linked to the 
audio content, and thus being able to comprehend the information presented. 
Yoko: I tried to follow the numbers appearing on the screen  
Azusa:                             [mm                                 uhuh 
Yoko: and the sound is connected with that number 
Azusa: uhuh 
Jeremy Cross Comprehending News Videotexts 
 
Language Learning & Technology 56 
Yoko:  so I could understand what this number is what 
The CGA in Basra Deaths, shown in Table 5, also contained audiovisual content which was redundant. 
This segment primarily portrayed an explosive attack on a vehicle, with the voiceover describing how 
such an attack proceeds. 
Table 5. Examples of the Direct Category in the CGA from Basra Deaths 
Verbal content Visual content 
But shaped bombs are designed to focus the 
force of the explosive into a small area, forcing 
a hard projectile through the light armour of a 
Snatch Land Rover. 
  
 
  
Excerpts of dialogue from seven pairs illustrated that this CGA appeared to have either a positive or 
negative influence on learners’ comprehension. Of eighteen related excerpts, ten were positive. For 
instance, both Emi and Kana reported that their understanding of the military technology shown in the 
segment had been facilitated by the animation.  
Emi: yes in my case I I watched the illustration that something 
weapons attacked to the land rover mm:: so I think it helps 
me to understand the weapons how weapons how sophisticated 
the weapon mm 
Kana: mm yeah erh well in my case I uhm thanks for the clear  
illustration illustrations I thought I could understand the basic 
concepts of the weapons 
However, Masako and Satsuki were among the learners who reported the CGA had inhibited or impaired 
their comprehension irrespective of audiovisual correspondence because of the nature and amount of 
information it contained. Satsuki reported being absorbed in the visual content and forgetting to attend to 
the audio content, while Masako stated that her attempts to exploit more of the visual content had led to 
increased confusion. 
Satsuki: I was I was I was so so attracted by the scene 
Masako: mm 
Satsuki: the truck land rover and the explanation and illu- and 
illus- illustration 
Masako: mm mm mm 
Satsuki: and and so I forgot to listen to erh what announcer said  
Masako:                                   [oh:: mm    
Jeremy Cross Comprehending News Videotexts 
 
Language Learning & Technology 57 
  mm mm mm 
Satsuki: so 
Masako: ok so I I tried to get more information  
Satsuki: mm  
Masako: from screen 
Satsuki: mm 
Masako: but ah:: mm:: it made me more confused confused 
Overall, there was a fairly even split between the number of learners who reported that the graphics in the 
CGA had been beneficial to their comprehension or had impaired it. The difficulty for learners seemed to 
be in concurrently coordinating their attention, decoding and integration of the on-screen animation and 
the details presented aurally. This was a procedure which possibly overwhelmed their cognitive resources. 
Therefore, it seems that despite redundancy between audio and visual content, the sheer volume of 
information from different sources (i.e., written text, audio, animated visual scenes) in CGAs, which is 
designed to assist L1 users’ understanding of complicated events or processes in news videotexts, could 
possibly confuse some L2 listeners and make it difficult for them to build connections between audio and 
visual sources of information. Alternatively, learners’ cognitive resources could have been overloaded as 
they tried to establish that correspondence existed between the multiple sources (i.e., a ‘redundancy’ 
effect, see Chandler & Sweller, 1991; Sweller, 2002). This did not appear to be as problematic with the 
CGT as the visual content consisted only of written text accompanied by redundant audio information, so 
it may be that the ‘moving picture’ aspect of CGAs adds an extra element of complexity for learners. 
Indirect Category 
This category refers to audio and visual content which has partial semantic redundancy. One example of 
this type of audiovisual correspondence was when a reporter was seen using hand gestures and 
simultaneously referring to on-screen items or locations. This use of gestures by a reporter occurred in 
two of the five news videotexts. For instance, in a segment from the Green Grocer news videotext shown 
in Table 6, the reporter is seen holding and gesturing towards some packaging and a plastic bag as he is 
talking about them.  
Table 6. Examples of the Hand Gestures from Green Grocer 
Verbal content Visual content 
Sainsbury’s argue that the natural products in 
this packaging will break down very quickly in 
compost…  
  
…whereas the degradable plastic used by some 
rivals is still oil-based and will take a couple of 
years to break down completely. 
  
Four pairs discussed the visual information in this segment. For example, Tomoko reported on the way in 
which the visual content influenced her understanding. She stated how the reporter had explicitly drawn 
Jeremy Cross Comprehending News Videotexts 
 
Language Learning & Technology 58 
attention to objects using his hands, and how this had helped her to recognize that he was making a 
comparison between objects. 
Tomoko: when they did some comparison between sainsbury’s  
and other retailers rivals like when he talked about the  
sainsbury’s products he used I I think he  
Nami: mm:: uhuh 
Tomoko: drew up our attention to the sainsbury’s products and  
when he talked about plastic bags or biodegradable bags  
by other retailers he hold the bags visually we could notice  
that he was comparising  
Nami: mm:: 
Tomoko: huh comparising comparing sorry comparing something  
with something  
This representative example illustrates that the semantic overlap achieved through the use of hand 
gestures for comparing and contrasting by the reporter helped to orientate some of the learners to, and 
facilitate their understanding of, the aural content2. This is in line with Wagner’s (2008) findings that 
hand gestures can help learners to interpret information in videotexts, and supports the perceptions of the 
learners in Coniam’s (2001), Ockey’s (2007) and Sueyoshi and Hardison’s (2005) studies regarding the 
usefulness of a speaker’s gestures in aiding listening comprehension. 
Visual content in the Indirect category in the form of standard scenes (i.e., visual content which has a 
thematic correspondence with the audio content) informed learners’ contextual/thematic orientation. All 
ten pairs commented on this aspect in relation to various segments of each videotext, and there were thirty 
three associated excerpts in their dialogues. For instance, in Job Losses, the visual content shows 
employees at work in a call-centre in India, as shown in Table 7, and the audio information is about office 
jobs being shifted to India. 
Table 7. Example of the Standard Scene from Job Losses 
Verbal content Visual content 
Indian workers able to do the same office jobs 
more cheaply. 
  
Manami and Keiko discussed this visual content, and their dialogue illustrates that it had enabled Manami 
to achieve situational orientation. She reported she was able to notice the disparity in the visual scene and 
this had helped her recognize the related context of the information being presented in the segment. 
Manami: the first thing I noticed is that the the visual was very  
parallel to to the one we saw in the segment four 
Keiko: parallel 
Jeremy Cross Comprehending News Videotexts 
 
Language Learning & Technology 59 
Manami: it was similar but different to the one taken in britain 
Keiko: mm 
Manami: it was the similar office 
Keiko: mm mm mm mm 
Manami: but something was different 
Keiko: mm 
Manami: people were different the partition and the configuration  
were was different so in a way it helped me that to to to  
notice that this is the situation in India or the uhm the  
exported situation 
In summary, excerpts related to the reporter’s use of hand gestures indicated that this aspect helped to 
orientate several learners to items or locations being depicted. In addition, the presence of standard scenes 
appeared to have a positive influence on some learners’ comprehension through activating and informing 
contextual/thematic orientation and helping them to refine their interpretations of the given news 
videotexts as they formed and developed a macrostructure representation (Gruba, 2004). 
Divergent Category 
With respect to this category, which refers to audio and visual content which is unrelated or possibly 
contradictory, there were only four related excerpts evident in the pairs’ dialogues. Two pairs commented 
on audiovisual divergence when it was patently apparent. A segment in Term-time Holidays, shown in 
Table 8, contains visual content of children running around a gym mostly showing their legs, while the 
audio information is an explanation of a court case. 
Table 8. Examples of the Divergent Category from Term-time Holidays 
Verbal content Visual content 
The issue has been brought to the fore again 
because of a court case involving a mother from 
Kent. 
  
She was prosecuted after taking her children on 
holiday twice without their schools permission. 
After a legal battle, the High Court ruled that 
she’d broken the law.  
  
One example illustrates Azusa mentioning to Yoko how the divergent visual and audio information 
affected her ability to concentrate and listen, and how she felt the visual content of the children running 
around had hindered her concentration and comprehension. 
Azusa: I think I watched very concentratedly con- co- concentrate  
on the tv so  
Jeremy Cross Comprehending News Videotexts 
 
Language Learning & Technology 60 
Yoko: [mm 
Azusa: that’s why I couldn’t catch a lot 
Yoko: mm:: 
Azusa: because I wh- while I was listening I always thought what is 
what are those why are they running running so that bothered 
my concentration and listening 
This representative excerpt illustrates that when the audio and visual content is particularly incongruous 
and also, in this case, peculiar in terms of the camera technique, it becomes apparent to some learners and 
can create confusion. A possible reason for why few excerpts of dialogue related to content classified as 
Divergent is that, although other segments contained disparate audio and visual content, the storyline of 
the audio and the associated visual images (excluding Talking head shots) were related to previous 
segments in the news videotext, and it is possible that learners were able to orientate themselves to the 
continuing thread of the storyline as their tentative macrostructure of the news videotext evolved (Gruba, 
2004). This was not the case for the segment content in Table 8, and may have been why learners felt it 
was problematic. 
Other Influences 
In the qualitative analysis of each pair’s dialogue, a number of other general influences related to the 
visual content emerged across a number of pairs. Firstly, in twenty three excerpts, learners in all pairs 
mentioned in broad terms that they found that visual content had facilitated their comprehension at some 
stage, as in this example: 
Satsuki: we:: this time uhm the visual points helped us very much I think  
Masako:             [mm                                       [mm::            ah yes 
Satsuki:  mm:: and erh I think uhm we we cou- we have got a lot of information  
Masako: mm 
Satsuki: erh from the visual points  
Masako:                [mm mm mm yes yes 
However, this needs to be qualified, as there were eighteen excerpts in the dialogue of seven of the pairs 
which illustrated that when they attended to the visual content in a segment, it impaired their ability to 
attend to the accompanying audio content. For instance, Hiromi stated that she recognized that her 
attention to the visual information had inhibited processing of the concurrent audio input. 
Hiromi: mm:: mm:: I tried concentrate only on the screen so  
  actually sound did not enter 
Naoko: really 
Hiromi:          [my brain 
Naoko: ah:: 
Another interesting aspect was that the initial scene in a segment (i.e., the post-cut shot) was used by 
learners to generate expectations about possible audio content. There were fourteen excerpts related to 
this in the dialogue of five pairs. For example, Manami reported that the initial image of a child in a 
segment from Term-time Holidays (see Appendix, Segment 2) had created an expectation regarding the 
context, which she felt had assisted her comprehension. 
Jeremy Cross Comprehending News Videotexts 
 
Language Learning & Technology 61 
Manami: ah:: but you know when I first see I first saw the head of  
of a child I I immediately  
Keiko: [mm 
Manami: knew they were going to talk about the classroom and it 
helped me 
Keiko: [mm:: ah:: 
A further influence of the visual content was that it aided inferencing by learners of a segment’s 
information. There were thirteen related excerpts among six pairs. One example shows Emi reporting that 
the visual scene had been the stimulus for guessing the content. She mentioned concentrating on the 
visual content and seeing parts of a vehicle on the road in Basra Deaths (see Table 1), and using this 
information to conclude that the vehicle had exploded. 
Emi: erh I watched on the screen carefully and yes I I saw a car  
Kana:                                                [uhuh                  mm 
Emi: and some metal things such as coil  
Kana:                         [mm      mm 
Emi: and the metal plate on on the on the place so I I guessed the cars 
Kana:                      [mm:: 
Emi: exploded exploded and mm::  
In summary, learners considered that visual content could both promote and impede their understanding 
of the accompanying verbal material. Other studies have also found in broad terms that visual content can 
be both helpful and distracting. Regarding the latter, as with a number of the participants in Coniam’s 
(2001) and Ockey’s (2007) studies, the visual content seemed to exclusively absorb learners’ attention at 
times, causing them to fail to allocate resources to processing the simultaneous audio information. In 
addition, using the initial visual content of a segment helped learners to predict or create expectations 
about the possible information presented in that segment. Although this could be a risky strategy, just 
over half of post-cut shots were good indicators of the focus of segment content. A further strategy 
learners felt had facilitated their comprehension was inferencing based on the visual content (see also 
Gruba, 2004). The visual content possibly provided a tentative frame of reference which learners used to 
organize the parts of the audio content they could comprehend and create coherent propositions. Of 
course, this does not imply that their inferences were necessarily always correct, especially as there was a 
high proportion of content in the news videotexts that lacked audiovisual redundancy. 
Learner Variability 
Ockey (2007), Sueyoshi and Hardison (2005), and Wagner (2008) have commented that the influence of 
the visual content on comprehension of videotexts is notably variable for each learner, and the findings of 
this study also illustrate that this is so. While L2 listening comprehension is primarily an idiosyncratic 
process and, as such, one would expect differences to be evident among learners regarding their 
frequency and degree of use of visual content in videotexts (as reflected in their verbal reports), it is 
informative to account for how such variability possibly arises. Wagner (2008) suggests that one reason 
for the variability is because visual content tends to be automatically processed, so learners are not 
conscious of doing so. Hence, it is not available for reporting by the given learner. However, it is 
debatable that the socioculturally-bound visual content in videotexts requires little conscious effort on the 
part of L2 learners to extract the semantic notions being conveyed. Rather, the analysis of each pair’s 
Jeremy Cross Comprehending News Videotexts 
 
Language Learning & Technology 62 
dialogue in this study revealed that some variability can be more plausibly explained from a dual coding 
theory perspective, which advocates distinct verbal and nonverbal systems (Paivio, 2007). Given that the 
multimodality of news videotexts places excessive demands on an individual’s limited short-term 
memory capacity (Lang, 1995), a number of learners appeared to employ a coping mechanism in which 
they intentionally directed their attention to either the visual content or the audio content, with the 
incumbent loss of information presented in the non-attended content source. Moreover, eight learners 
reported deliberately switching their attention across the two listenings to each segment, primarily 
attending to the visual content in the first listening to a segment, and focusing on the audio content in the 
second listening. As such, these learners were likely to comment on the visual content following the first 
listening only, particularly when they did not find the visual content initially useful. For example, Masako 
reported that the visual information had not aided her understanding during the first listening so she had 
decided to attend to the audio content in the second opportunity to listen. 
Masako: mm:: on the screen there is no there’s no tips I mean 
Satsuki:   yeah 
Masako:   hints 
Satsuki: yeah mm 
Masako:  so it’s quite difficult to  
Satsuki:   mm 
Masako:  mm to guess from the visual in the part  
Satsuki:                                    [yeah mm yeah 
Masako:  so next time I’m going to concentrate on erh the the listening 
Satsuki:   mm:: 
Similarly, in the following excerpt, whereas Manami mentioned using visual information in the second 
listening to a segment, Keiko reported that she had consciously not attended to the visual content the 
second time she listened to the segment and had focused on the audio content. 
Manami: this time I tried to use the visual  
Keiko: mm mm mm and I yeah I this time I ignored the visual 
Manami:                                                                                   [right yeah 
Keiko:  and concentrate to hear 
Gruba (2004) also noted the tendency of learners to primarily attend to the visual content in the first 
listening to formulate an initial impression, and then develop a more complete understanding by attending 
to the aural content as they listened again. Therefore, it appears that conscious attention to either, but not 
simultaneously to both, the audio or visual content is a way learners attempt to overcome processing 
issues they encounter, such as when a ‘split attention’ or ‘redundancy’ effect overwhelms their short-term 
memory resources. 
In relation to learners focusing their attention on either source of content, there was evidence that while 
all learners were observed to ‘look’ at the screen when listening, this was, at times, possibly a ‘blank 
stare’—an unfocused look that does not involve the processing of what is seen (Garland-Thomson, 2009). 
The visual information in the news videotext was not necessarily being utilized, and learners concentrated 
on processing the audio content alone. For example, the following excerpt illustrates that Naoko adopted 
this type of behavior. 
Jeremy Cross Comprehending News Videotexts 
 
Language Learning & Technology 63 
Naoko: so some sometimes I I point my eyes on the screen but not exactly focus on 
Hiromi: ah:: blankly you look at ok 
Naoko: yeah so next 
These findings have implications for studies in which researchers have measured the time learners spent 
observing the visual content (e.g., Ockey, 2007; Wagner, 2007, 2010a). Although learners are seen to be 
orienting to the screen, this study shows that it does not necessarily mean they are attending to and 
exploiting (consciously or unconsciously) the visual elements displayed. 
Overall, then, it appears that the visual content in news videotexts, irrespective of the degree of 
audiovisual correspondence, creates a further significant strain on learners’ limited cognitive resources. 
Learners may try to deal with this issue through directing their attention at different times to information 
from only one source in preference to the other. This may depend on which source the individual learner 
feels can best be effectively exploited to interpret and ascertain meaning in the news videotext, and seems 
to be one important reason for why variability in the use of visual content exits across learners3. 
IMPLICATIONS FOR PEDAGOGY 
Despite a number of limitations of this study, including the participants being a rather homogenous group, 
the news videotext segmentation possibly distorting normal discourse processing, and potential issues 
with using dialogic recalls as verbal reports (see Cross, 2011), several implications for L2 listening 
pedagogy arise from the findings. Firstly, it was evident that not all learners recognized congruence and 
discrepancies between the aural and visual elements as they strove for understanding. This suggests that 
such aspects need to be made explicit to learners if they are to better deal with the audiovisual vagaries of 
news videotexts. One technique for achieving this is to present learners with a range of segments and ask 
them to compare the transcript of the aural content with the visuals they see, and determine and discuss 
the extent of audiovisual correspondence. Another approach is to have learners predict the kind of visual 
content they think corresponds to the transcript of the audio content of a news videotext, and then ask 
them watch the videotext and reflect on the degree of audiovisual correspondence that was evident. In 
particular, it seems apposite to raise learners’ awareness of the utility of hand gestures used by reporters, 
and the potentially facilitative effect of numbers and/or captions presented in Talking head, CGT and 
CGA segments. Furthermore, several studies have shown the facilitative nature of speakers’ lip 
movements and facial expressions for understanding (Ockey, 2007; Sueyoshi & Hardison, 2005). Talking 
head segments are a common element of news videotexts, and it would be useful to draw learners’ 
attention to such features with respect to newscasters and interviewees. 
In addition, from a media literacy standpoint, Gruba (2006) points to the importance of learners being 
able to identify segment boundaries using visual elements. This skill helps listeners to keep pace with 
shifts in content focus as the news videotext progresses. For this study, boundaries were predetermined to 
enable separate segments of the news videotexts to be presented one-by-one. However, in a classroom 
context, learners could initially be introduced to the notion of segmentation through visuals in news 
videotexts and how it operates. A complete news videotext could then be presented (with or without 
sound) and learners asked to discuss and justify the number of segments they feel it contains. This could 
be facilitated by asking them to mark segment boundaries on a transcript of the news videotext. Drawing 
learners’ attention to the regularity of the generic macrostructure of news videotexts (Meinhof, 1998) is 
also important for developing media literacy. In the BBC news videotexts used in this study, we first see 
the anchor in the studio, and this is followed by a sequence of short multimodal segments. Viewpoints 
presented are supported through interviews with ‘stakeholders’ (i.e., members of the general public, 
politicians, victims), and the final segment often shows the correspondent at the scene or contains the 
correspondent’s voiceover indicating current consequences and future directions. Of course, it is 
important to note that the macrostructure and content of BBC news videotexts are culture-bound. In 
Jeremy Cross Comprehending News Videotexts 
 
Language Learning & Technology 64 
contrast, Japan’s NHK news, for example, has a different macrostructure and content (see Botting, 2003). 
In addition to raising awareness of the macrostructure, learners’ knowledge of the defining features of 
news videotexts according to particular themes (e.g., politics, war, crime) may be enhanced by using 
worksheets to guide and maximize their listening experience (see Lynch, 2009). Furthermore, as Gruba 
(2005) suggests, learners can predict the meaning of the visual content in a news videotext and compare 
their ideas. Through doing so, they can become aware that visual content may have ‘polysemic’ 
interpretations (i.e., an array of diverse meanings, Gruba, 2005). 
CONCLUSION 
This study identified and examined the various audiovisual characteristics of (BBC) news videotexts 
using a four-category system and coding method developed by Walma van der Molen (2001). It was 
evident that audiovisual correspondence in the news videotexts was non-equivalent to varying degrees. 
Subsequent analysis focused on learners’ dialogue to explore the effect the four different categories of 
shot types had on learners’ listening comprehension. Talking head visual content seemed to have little 
influence on comprehension, though captions did help with speaker identification. The effect of the visual 
content classified as Direct was typically facilitative of comprehension, but the multimodality of 
contiguous information in CGAs could be detrimental to understanding. Indirect audiovisual 
correspondence, as reflected in the hand gestures of the reporter and in standard scenes, influenced 
comprehension positively, whereas Divergent audio and visual content seemed particularly problematic 
when it was notably incongruous with the evolving news videotext storyline. 
In addition, the analysis revealed other influences of the visual content on comprehension such as its role 
in facilitating comprehension; inhibiting of attention to, and processing of, audio content; and triggering 
of learners’ expectations and inferencing of content. Dual coding theory provided a useful perspective for 
explaining possible reasons for why there is notable variability among learners in the degree to which 
they report exploiting the visual content in news videotexts, and it is hoped the implications for L2 
listening pedagogy presented offer a way forward for practitioners using news videotexts (or other types 
of videotexts) in their listening lessons.  
 
NOTES 
1. Listening comprehension is defined here as “an active process in which listeners select and interpret 
information which comes from auditory and visual [this author’s italics] clues” (Rubin, 1995, p. 7). 
2. The audiovisual correspondence was coded as Indirect as the visual information presented includes the 
supermarket interior, the shopping aisle, and items in a trolley. 
3. Other potential reason for learner variability in reports of their use of visual content include the 
tendency for this information to evoke polysemic interpretations (Gruba, 2005), and the disparate visual 
literacy, spatial ability, and background knowledge of learners (Chun & Plass, 1997). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jeremy Cross Comprehending News Videotexts 
 
Language Learning & Technology 65 
APPENDIX. Example of a segmented news videotext 
Segment verbal content Segment visual content 
Segment 1 
Now, if you think you could save a tidy sum by 
taking your kids on holiday in term time, you 
could be in for a nasty surprise. In a test case, the 
High Court has a backed the law which says it’s 
schools who decide if these trips are OK. So, what 
exactly are parents allowed to do? Judith Morris 
has been finding out. 
  
  
Segment 2 
These children at school in Manchester are all 
present and correct, but that’s not the case 
everywhere. Most teachers marking the register 
have had the experience of pupils taking time off 
to go on holiday. It can be a tug of war between 
parents and schools. 
 
 
 
  
  
Segment 3 
It’s escalating in the number of families that are 
actually taking children out of school. Parents 
now …erh… expect to take probably more than 
one holiday a year. I do have a sympathy with 
parents because the guidelines are not clear. And 
it’s left too much onto head teachers. 
  
  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
I wish to acknowledge Major Matthew Bacon, who is mentioned in the Basra Deaths news videotext used 
in this study, and who lost his life on 11th September, 2005 while serving in Iraq. 
 
 
Jeremy Cross Comprehending News Videotexts 
 
Language Learning & Technology 66 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Jeremy Cross is an Assistant Professor of Applied Linguistics at the National Institute of Education, 
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. His primary research interest is L2 listening. He mainly 
teaches postgraduate courses on ELT methodology for listening and speaking. 
E-mail: jertzy7@hotmail.com 
 
REFERENCES 
Botting, G. (2003, February 18). Japan’s TV news in a world of its own. The Japan Times Online. 
Retrieved from http://search.japantimes.co.jp/cgi-bin/fl20030218zg.html 
Brinton, D., & Gaskill, W. (1978) Using news broadcasts in the ESL/EFL classroom. TESOL Quarterly, 
12(4), 403–414. 
Brosius, H-B., Donsbach, W., & Birk, M. (1996). How do text-picture relations affect the informational 
effectiveness of television newscasts? Journal of Broadcasting and Electronic Media, 40, 180–195. 
Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (1991). Cognitive load theory and the format of instruction. Cognition and 
Instruction, 8, 293–332. 
Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (1992). The split-attention effect as a factor in the design of instruction. 
British Journal of Educational Psychology, 62, 233–246. 
Chun, D., & Plass, J. (1997). Research on text comprehension in multimedia environments. Language 
Learning & Technology, 1(1), 60–81. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/chun_plass/ 
default.html 
Clark, J., & Paivio, A. (1991). Dual coding theory and education. Educational Psychology Review, 3(3), 
149-210. 
Coniam, D. (2001). The use of audio or video comprehension as an assessment instrument in the 
certification of English language teachers: A case study. System, 29, 1–14. 
Cross, J. (2009). Effects of listening strategy instruction on news videotext comprehension. Language 
Teaching Research, 13(2), 151-176. 
Cross, J. (2011). Utilizing dialogic recalls to determine L2 listeners’ strategy use. Innovation in Language 
Learning and Teaching, 5(1), 81–100. 
Cross, J. (in press). Metacognitive instruction for helping less-skilled listeners. ELT Journal. 
Fox, J., Lang, A., Chung, Y., Lee, S., Schwartz, N., & Potter, D. (2003). Picture this: Effects of graphics 
on the processing of television news. Journal of Broadcasting and Electronic Media, 48(4), 646–674. 
Garland-Thomson, R. (2009). Staring: How we look. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Ginther, A. (2002). Context and content visuals and performance on listening comprehension stimuli. 
Language Testing, 19(2), 133–167. 
Graddol, D. (1994). The visual accomplishment of factuality. In D. Graddol & O. Boyd-Barrett (Eds.), 
Media texts: Authors and readers (pp. 136–59). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Gruba, P. (2004). Understanding digitized second language videotext. Computer Assisted Language 
Learning, 17(1), 51–82. 
Gruba, P. (2005). Developing media literacy in the L2 classroom. Sydney: Macquarie University, 
Jeremy Cross Comprehending News Videotexts 
 
Language Learning & Technology 67 
National Centre for English Teaching and Research. 
Gruba, P. (2006). Playing the videotext: A media literacy perspective on video-mediated L2 listening. 
Language Learning & Technology, 10(2), 77–92. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num2/pdf/ 
gruba.pdf 
Guichon, N., & McLornan, S. (2008). The effects of multimodality on L2 learners: Implications for 
CALL resource design. System, 36(1), 85–93. 
Gunter, B. (1987). Poor reception: Misunderstanding and forgetting broadcast news. Hillsdale, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Harmer, J. (2001). The practice of English language teaching. Essex, UK: Longman. 
Lang, A. (1995). Defining audio/video redundancy from a limited-capacity information processing 
perspective. Communication Research, 22, 86–115. 
Lynch, T. (2009). Teaching second language listening. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Mayer, R. E., & Anderson, R. B. (1991). Animations need narrations: An experimental test of a dual-
coding hypothesis. Journal of Educational Psychology, 83, 484–490. 
Mayer, R. E., & Sims, V. K. (1994). For whom is a picture worth a thousand words? Extensions of a 
dual-coding theory of multimedia learning. Journal of Educational Psychology, 86, 389–401. 
Meinhof, U. (1994). Double talk in news broadcasts: A cross-cultural comparison of pictures and texts in 
television news. In D. Graddol & O. Boyd-Barrett (Eds.), Media texts: Authors and readers (pp. 212–
223). Clevedon: Multilingual Matters. 
Meinhof, U. (1998). Language learning in the age of satellite television. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
Ockey, G. (2007). Construct implications of including still image or video in computer-based listening 
tests. Language Testing, 24(4), 517–537. 
Paivio, A. (1971). Imagery and verbal processes. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. 
Paivio, A. (1990). Mental representations: A dual coding approach. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Paivio, A. (2007). Mind and its evolution: A dual coding theoretical interpretation, Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. 
Reese, S. (1984). Visual-verbal redundancy effects on TV news learning. Journal of Broadcasting, 28, 
79–87. 
Rivens-Monpean, A., & Guichon, N. (2009). Assessing the use of aids for a computer-mediated task: 
Taking notes while listening. JALT CALL Journal, 5(2), 45–60. 
Rubin, J. (1995). An overview to A guide for the teaching of second language listening. In D. 
Mendelsohn & J. Rubin (Eds.), A Guide for the teaching of second language listening (pp. 7–11). San 
Diego, CA: Dominie Press. 
Sadoski, M., & Paivio, A. (2001). Imagery and text: A dual coding theory of reading and writing. 
Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Sherman, J. (2003). Using authentic video in the language classroom. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Sueyoshi, A., & Hardison, D. (2005). The role of gestures and facial cues in second language listening 
comprehension. Language Learning, 55, 661–699. 
Jeremy Cross Comprehending News Videotexts 
 
Language Learning & Technology 68 
Sweller, J. (2002). Visualisation and instructional design. Workshop paper for the IWM Knowledge 
Media Research Center. Retrieved from http://www.iwm-kmrc.de/workshops/visualization/sweller.pdf 
Vandergrift, L. (2007). Recent developments in second and foreign language listening comprehension 
research. Language Teaching, 40, 191–210. 
Wagner, E. (2007). Are they watching? An investigation of test-taker viewing behavior during an L2 
video listening test. Language Learning & Technology, 11(1), 67–86. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/ 
vol11num1/wagner/default.html 
Wagner, E. (2008). Video listening tests: What are they measuring? Language Assessment Quarterly, 5, 
218-243.  
Wagner, E. (2010a). Test-takers’ interaction with an L2 video listening test. System, 38(2), 280–291. 
Wagner, E. (2010b). How does the use of video texts affect ESL listening test-taker performance? 
Language Testing, 27(4), 493–510. 
Walma van der Molen, J. (2001). Assessing text-picture correspondence in television news: The 
development of a new coding scheme. Journal of Broadcasting and Electronic Media, 45(3), 483–498. 
Walma van der Molen, J., & Van der Voort, T. (2000). The impact of television, print, and audio on 
children’s recall of the news: A study of three alternative explanations for the dual-coding hypothesis. 
Human Communication Research, 26(1), 3–26. 
