Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2012/action.pdf 
June 2012, Volume 16, Number 2 
pp. 14–23 
 
Copyright © 2012, ISSN 1094-3501 14 
ACTION RESEARCH 
BUILDING COMPUTER TECHNOLOGY SKILLS  
IN TESOL TEACHER EDUCATION 
Margo DelliCarpini, Lehman College, The City University of New York 
This paper reports on an action research study that investigated factors influencing TESOL 
(teaching English to speakers of other languages) teacher candidates’ (TCs) selection and 
use of technology in the English as a second language (ESL) classroom and the influence 
of explicit training in context in the use of computer technology for second language 
learners at the PreK-12 grade level. The data suggest that developing these skills in a 
highly contextualized setting enhances ESL teachers’ knowledge, skills, and beliefs in 
terms of the use of technology in the ESL classroom. 
Keywords: Technology in Teacher Education; TESOL Teacher Education 
INTRODUCTION 
The use of technology in education can no longer be thought of as a choice to be made on the part of 
teachers, nor can it be considered an add-on to the curriculum or reserved for special occasions in the 
classroom. It has been argued that there is a gap that continues to widen between the types of knowledge 
and skills students learn in U.S. schools and the actual types of knowledge and skills they need to be 
successful in the 21st century workforce and global economy (Partnership for 21st Century Skills, 2005). 
The U.S. federal government, under the umbrella of the No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB), has made 
attempts to address this gap. NCLB, through the Enhancing Education Through Technology Act of 2001, 
requires states to provide evidence that “every student is technologically literate by the time the student 
finishes the eighth grade, regardless of the student’s race, ethnicity, gender, family income, geographic 
location, or disability” (U.S. Department of Education, 2001, p. 247). 
In addition to federal initiatives, the national technology standards (ISTE, 2008), calls for meaningful and 
competent integration of technology to be infused within the educational context, and TESOL 
International provides Technology Standards for both English language learners (ELLs) and English 
language teachers (Healey, Hanson-Smith, Hubbard, Ioannou-Georgiou, Kessler, & Ware, 2011). The 
authors, through a review of the relevant literature, address the underlying issues that necessitate the 
development/revision of the standards (pp. 8-10): 
1. Research shows that there are important benefits to be gained from the use of technology in 
language learning and teaching. 
2. Technology should be incorporated into teaching pedagogy so that students will not only 
effectively acquire a second language but will also develop electronic literacy skills. 
3. Research shows that technology in language learning is not being used to its full potential and 
that inadequate teacher training and learner training are some of the main reasons for this. 
The TESOL Technology standards for language teachers are comprised of four goals:  
Goal 1: Language teachers acquire and maintain foundational knowledge and skills in technology for 
professional purposes. 
Goal 2: Language teachers integrate pedagogical knowledge and skills with technology to enhance 
language teaching and learning. 
Goal 3: Language teachers apply technology in record-keeping, feedback, and assessment. 
Margo DelliCarpini Technology in TESOL Teacher Education 
 
Language Learning & Technology 15 
Goal 4: Language teachers use technology to improve communication, collaboration, and efficiency. 
Together with the above mentioned issues, these goals give clear guidance in terms of the importance of 
technology use in the language classroom and the types of skills that language teachers need to develop in 
order to meet the needs of their ELLs, and provide guidance to teacher education programs about the 
experiences teacher candidates (TCs) should be exposed to during their professional education programs.  
In addition to the aforementioned initiatives and policy calls, the Common Core State Standards (CCSSI, 
2010, a & b), which have been adopted by 45 U.S. states and the District of Columbia, mention the use of 
technology throughout the documents related to all content subjects. An example of the requirements for 
technology use as defined in the CCSS is as follows: “students employ technology thoughtfully to 
enhance their reading, writing, speaking, listening, and language use” (p. 7), and students “use 
technology, including the Internet, to produce and publish writing and to interact and collaborate with 
others” (p. 18).  
Based on the aforementioned focus on teachers’ ability to teach using a number of current technologies, 
the present research seeks to develop an understanding of the ways in which TCs in a TESOL teacher 
education program think about and use technology with ELLs. If, as was suspected at the outset of this 
research as a result of a review of classroom observation data, a gap exists between TCs’ underlying 
knowledge of the importance of integrating technology and their actual facility in the classroom with a 
variety of current technologies, what role can the teacher education program play in closing this gap?  
CALL and English Language Learners 
When teachers effectively integrate technology into the curriculum ELLs receive direct benefits. 
Emerging technologies and Computer Assisted Language Learning (CALL) used with ELLs are “ideal for 
fostering reading and writing skills in the target language” (Johns & Torrez, 2001, p. 11). Use of 
technology with ELLs can develop language, literacy, and technological literacy skills. It can help 
teachers differentiate content, process, and product for ELLs so the issues of language proficiency level, 
motivation, interest, background knowledge, and learning preference are addressed. This enables ELLs to 
have full access to the curriculum so they are able to reach the same goals as mainstream learners. 
Specifically related to the success of CALL, a meta-analysis of 52 studies was conducted (Felix, 2005) 
and the general findings were that there are positive effects for ELLs in terms of vocabulary development, 
reading, and writing and that generally, student perceptions of CALL are positive if the technologies are 
“stable and well supported” (p.16). This study also highlights negative aspects of CALL which include, 
“training needs in computer literacy for both students and teachers” (Felix, 2005, p. 16). Based on the 
extant research relating to ELLs and the benefits they receive when teachers integrate technology, both in 
terms of the acquisition of their second language and the development of content knowledge, the 
expectation would be that ESL teachers are proficient with a number of current technologies and are using 
technology on a daily basis to build skills in the ESL classroom. However, in spite of the positive effects 
that CALL can have on a number of outcomes for ELLs, there is a lack of effective preparation both in 
terms of the amount of exposure teacher candidates receive to CALL and the quality of the experiences 
that programs offer (Kessler, 2006; Peters, 2006). 
The Role of Teacher Education Programs 
Teacher education programs are not immune to the call for the integration of technology into curriculum 
and many have developed coursework that addresses this issue. However, the efforts are not standard 
across programs and produce variable results. Efforts have been referred to as “isolated, often 
uncoordinated, and in some cases, dysfunctional” (Fleming, Motamedi, & May, 2007, p. 208). Research 
has pointed to the need for modeling of technology in teacher education classes (Albee, 2003; Fleming, et 
al., 2007; Francis-Pelton, Farragher, & Riecken, 2000; Strudler & Wetzel, 1999) and support with the 
application of technology during student teaching and field experiences (Dexter & Riedel, 2003; Russell, 
Margo DelliCarpini Technology in TESOL Teacher Education 
 
Language Learning & Technology 16 
Bebell, O’Dwyer, & O’Connor, 2003).  
When specifically looking at CALL and the knowledge, beliefs, and practices of language teachers, 
researchers have found that the skills related to effective CALL integration must be “situated in authentic 
learning contexts” in order to change teachers’ practices (Egbert, Paulus, & Nakamichi, 2002, p. 122). 
Kessler (2006) found that graduates of TESOL teacher preparation programs were generally not satisfied 
with the type of preparation they received in terms of effective CALL and felt that there was an overall 
lack of preparation. Additionally, Kessler (2007) found that language educators, while generally confident 
in their use of technology with positive beliefs about the use of technology in language education, require 
development in specific areas of use, specifically in integration of technology in their classrooms (p. 184). 
Kessler suggests that: 
Formal CALL preparation should be at least as influential toward a teacher’s attitude toward 
technology [sic] informal training if it is to continue. To achieve this, programs of study may 
need to face revision to include a CALL component in order to adequately address the changing 
needs of language teaching professionals. Perhaps a CALL component should be introduced into 
all language teaching masters programs. Perhaps CALL could be integrated into a variety of 
pedagogical classes, thus allowing it to be introduced in a contextualized and relevant manner. 
(2007, p. 184). 
It is this direct integration that is examined in the current paper. 
METHOD 
TCs were enrolled in graduate TESOL methods courses and provided with 12 hours of explicit exposure 
to computer technology for educational purposes where they were able to deconstruct the use of 
computers as educational tools and develop a knowledge base and experience in applying their theoretical 
skills to the classroom setting. 
The following research questions are addressed by this work: 
1. What are ESL teacher candidates’ self-efficacy beliefs about and practices in the use of 
technology in ESL classrooms or in working with ELLs? 
2. What barriers do candidates report in terms of using technology in the classroom? 
3. Can candidates’ self-efficacy beliefs and practices relating to technology be influenced through 
experience, reflection, and focus on process? 
Participants 
Fifty-three teacher candidates (TCs) were enrolled in three different methods courses over a two-year 
period in an M.S.Ed. TESOL program at a public college located within the City of New York. The 
groups consisted of 46 female and 7 male TCs who ranged in age from 22 years of age to 51 years of age 
(average age 28 years). The coursework leads to a Master of Science in Education or to an Advanced 
Certificate in TESOL or Bilingual Extension (for candidates who already have a master’s degree) and to 
state certification in ESOL PreK-12 or Bilingual Education. Of the fifty-three TCs included in this 
research, three were pre-service teachers. Fifty were in-service teachers who had certifications in 
Childhood education (32), English 7-12 grade (7), Social Studies 7-12 (4), Spanish (5), Special Education 
(2). During the first semester 18 graduate students enrolled in a secondary (middle and high school level) 
ESL methods course participated in the study, during the second semester 19 TCs enrolled in a Teaching 
ESL through the Content Areas course participated, and during the third semester 16 TCs enrolled in a 
pedagogical grammar course participated. The goals of the project were as follows: 
Margo DelliCarpini Technology in TESOL Teacher Education 
 
Language Learning & Technology 17 
• Determine self-efficacy beliefs and practices of technology use in the ESL classroom. 
• Develop candidates’ skills in integrating technology in a meaningful way into their curriculum. 
• Create learning activities where technology is a natural part of the experience that enhances 
learning. 
Procedures 
Students were administered a computer self-efficacy and use survey (8 item, 5-point Likert scale) at the 
beginning and end of each semester which asked a variety of questions regarding their personal use of 
computers, their beliefs on the effectiveness of computer use in the ESL classroom, and barriers that they 
identify in integrating computer technology in their classroom practice. A set of course readings on a 
variety of issues relating to teachers’ technology use formed the foundation for the loop input component 
of the course. Loop input integrates process and content in a way that provides “experiential learning, but 
with the added advantage of involving self-descriptivity and recursion” (Woodward, 2003, p. 303). These 
readings were a supplement to the required text readings relating to the actual content of the course. Each 
weekly class included one hour of explicit instruction in using instructional technology that were 
developed using a model set forth by Mistretta (2005) during training sessions for pre-service 
mathematics teachers. In part, this study replicates Mistretta’s work with pre-service mathematics 
teachers (2005) to extend knowledge of integrating technology to other educational disciplines. Finally, 
TCs were provided with an evaluation framework, discussion points for the collaborative development of 
technology based lessons, and lesson plan criteria all adapted to the context of TESOL methods courses 
from Roblyer (2003). 
The class time set aside for this project included dedicated time in the computer lab (classes were 
scheduled in smart classrooms that had computer stations for all students and internet connections) where 
TCs were able to evaluate, use, and develop technology based lesson/unit plans. Collaborative teams 
worked throughout the semester to develop technology-based learning activities for ELLs and reflect on 
the process. Reflective discussion and writing were weekly features, which often took place online using 
Blackboard Academic Suite Inc. The course structure is outlined in Table 1. 
Table 1. Course Structure (Adapted from Mistretta, 2005) 
Session type Description Length 
Introduction Modeling of instructional technology; discussions of readings on 
technology & CALL in ESL classrooms; self-evaluation survey 
3 hours  
(3 1-hour 
blocks) 
Guided evaluation Evaluation of instructional technology, Web resources; opportunity 
to share insights & findings. (Materials included digital cameras, flip 
cameras, ipods, Skype, Websites, social networking, software) 
3 hours  
(3 1-hour 
blocks) 
Collaborative 
learning 
Collaborate /actively participate in research & evaluation of 
instructional technology & Web-based resources & create 
technology experiences for the ESL & college classroom 
3 hours  
(3 1-hour 
blocks) 
Collaborative 
lesson planning 
sessions 
Use skills and knowledge built in the course to select, create, and 
integrate appropriate technology into ESL lesson/unit plans aligned 
with the course goals: for example, grammar based units in the 
pedagogical grammar course and content based instruction in the 
‘Teaching ESL through the content areas’ course 
3 hours  
(3 1-hour 
blocks) 
 
Margo DelliCarpini Technology in TESOL Teacher Education 
 
Language Learning & Technology 18 
RESULTS 
Data Analysis 
The pre and post course survey responses were analyzed by first determining the mean and standard 
deviation for each survey item. Percentages were computed based on the raw responses. In addition, a 
paired, single tailed t-test was used to determine the difference of the means and the significance between 
pre and post course survey responses. 
Candidates’ Computer Use, Outcomes Beliefs, and Self-Efficacy 
At the beginning of each semester TCs provided information on their personal and instructional use of 
computers. Initial survey results (N = 53) showed that 47% of TCs had been using computers for personal 
use between three and five years, 15% reported using computers for less than three years, and 30% 
reported using computers for five to eight years, and eight percent reported using computers for more than 
eight years. The mean weekly use was 10.2 hours. In terms of how participants viewed their computer use 
profile, 60% of participants rated themselves as users, 20% responded that they were good users, 10% 
identified themselves as experts, 6% reported that they were novice, and 4% reported that they were non-
users (using the computer infrequently and not using email). As far as access to computers, 85% of the 
participants reported that they had access to computers and the Internet in their homes, while 100% had 
access to computers and the Internet in their homes, schools (PreK-12), or college setting. Participants 
gained their knowledge of computer use from a variety of sources. The majority, 60%, reported that they 
learned to use computers on their own. Twenty-three percent pointed to college course work requirements 
as the source of learning (not formal training in computer use but rather a need to accomplish tasks given 
for course assignments). The rest of the respondents reported that they either learned from others, but not 
from formal computer teachers (7.5%), through professional development and in-service 
education/training (6%), and from formal coursework/computer training (3.5%).  
Professional access to computers was not an issue for these TCs: 100% reported that they either had a 
computer or computers in their classrooms or the school had dedicated computer space with Internet 
access. When asked, ‘How often do you use the computer in the classroom for group learning activities 
and lessons”, 49% responded that they rarely use the computer, 30% reported that they use the computer 
on a monthly basis, 16% reported weekly use, and 4% reported daily use. 
Finally, participants were asked to identify barriers to computer use in their teaching. The majority, 87%, 
reported that knowledge of how to integrate instructional technology was a major factor in their actual use 
of the computer in their teaching. This can be related to teacher knowledge. Eighty-four percent reported 
that they experienced management issues when they used the computers, which caused them to not use it 
as frequently. This barrier can be related to teachers’ skills. Ninety-two percent of teachers who had to 
schedule time in the computer lab (as opposed to having equipment in their own teaching space) reported 
that the time was inadequate and a barrier to use. This speaks to effective use of resources. Eighty-three 
percent reported that they were unaware of the types of computer-based technologies that would be most 
effective for their learners, again, relating to teacher knowledge. Finally, 88% reported that the time and 
effort required to implement a technology component to their instruction wasn’t worth the outcome. This 
speaks directly to teacher beliefs about the effectiveness of instructional technology. 
Pre and Post Course Survey Data 
With regard to self-efficacy in the integration of computer technology in the classroom, the majority of 
participants reported very low levels of ability in all survey areas except their ability to enhance students’ 
technological skills while integrating computer technology into the classroom. 
Sixty-four percent of participants and 59% of participants respectively reported that they were either not 
skilled or somewhat skilled in their ability to address ESOL and content standards when using computer 
Margo DelliCarpini Technology in TESOL Teacher Education 
 
Language Learning & Technology 19 
technology in their lessons (Items 1 and 2). Fifty-eight percent felt that they were not skilled or somewhat 
skilled in enhancing students’ critical thinking ability with computer technology in their lessons (Item 3). 
However, 81% felt that they were skilled, very skilled, or expert in their ability to effectively enhance 
students’ technological skills through the integration of computer technology in the classroom. However, 
when it came to issues of management, Seventy-one percent of participants, nearly three quarters of the 
group, reported that they felt they were not able to manage instruction when they used computers in their 
lessons (Item 5). Participants also felt their abilities were low in terms of targeting the needs of all 
learners when using computers in their lessons (Item 6) and in their ability to select appropriate materials 
that would be used with the computer (Item 7). Participants rated their ability to facilitate the English 
language development of their ELL students (Item 8) and 53% reported that they were not skilled or 
skilled in their ability to do this. This compares to 47% of participants who felt they were skilled, very 
skilled, or expert in this area. 
At the end of the semester TCs were administered the follow-up survey and pre and post course responses 
were compared. Table 2 provides a summary of the pre and post course survey data which includes a 
single tailed t-test on the mean value of the difference for the paired data.  
Participants exhibited positive change in their self-perceived skills in the use of computer technology 
between the pre-course and post-course survey responses.  
Table 2. Comparison of Pre and Post Survey Responses (mean Likert response 0-4 scale) 
Prompt: Rate yourself in terms of your 
ability to effectively integrate computer 
technology into the classroom in a 
meaningful way that:  
Pre-
survey 
mean 
 
SD Post 
survey 
mean 
SD Mean 
difference 
Pre/Post 
t p * 
1. Addresses ESL standards 1.26 
 
1.15 
 
2.77 .67 1.51 13.74 p < .001 
2. Addresses content standards 1.34 1.27 2.77 .61 1.43 10.98 p < .001 
3. Enhances critical thinking 1.49 1.27 2.42 .95 .92 9.22 p < .001 
4. Enhances students’ technological skills 2.28 1.01 3.25 .43 .96 9.23 p < .001 
5. Allows you to effectively manage 
instruction. 
.89 1.03 2.36 .83 1.47 21.26 p < .001 
6. Targets the needs of all learners 1.42 1.22 2.21 .95 .79 9.61 p < .001 
7. Selects appropriate materials, 
resources, etc.  
1.21 1.08 2.89 .78 1.68 17.44 p < .001 
8. Facilitates the development of English 
language skills  
1.55 1.15 2.47 .95 .92 17.49 p < .001 
Note. The computed p values were expressed in negative exponentials. For example, the p-value for question number 1 is: 
3.0261E-19. The E-19 is exponential notation (a way to present very small numbers without a string of zeros) and indicates that 
the decimal place is 19 places to the left, giving us .0000000000000000003026. This is reported as p < .001. 
Participants experienced positive growth on all items relating to the effective integration of computer 
technology into their ESL lessons. In terms of their ability to address ESL and content standards, 93% and 
96% respectively reported that they felt skilled, very skilled, or expert in their ability to address standards 
when integrating computer technology in their lessons (items 1 and 2). More importantly, none of the 
participants reported that they were not skilled in either of these areas. Eighty-three percent of participants 
felt that their ability to enhance critical thinking skills of ESL students when implementing computer 
Margo DelliCarpini Technology in TESOL Teacher Education 
 
Language Learning & Technology 20 
technology into their ESL lessons was skilled, very skilled, or expert (item 3). Moreover only 17% 
reported that they were either not skilled or somewhat skilled, as compared to 58% who responded this 
way at the beginning of the course. While 81% of participants reported that they felt skilled, very skilled, 
or expert in their ability to enhance ESL students’ technological skills at the beginning of the course, the 
shift to participants feeling very skilled to expert represented 62% change in a positive direction. After the 
course participants felt they possessed the skills necessary to effectively manage instruction (Item 5) 
while integrating computer technology (58% change in a positive direction) and there was a 39% change 
in participants belief about their ability to target the needs of all learners (Item 6) when using computer 
technology in the ESL classroom. The change in beliefs about participants’ ability to select appropriate 
materials (Item 7) related to integrating computer technology positively shifted 65%. Finally, in terms of 
participants’ beliefs in their ability to develop English language skills (Item 8) there was a 30% shift 
towards enhanced efficacy beliefs among the respondents. 
DISCUSSION 
The initial setting where TCs have the opportunity to build the skills necessary to create learning 
experiences that integrate computer technology in their PreK-12 grade ESL teaching placements is in 
their teacher preparation programs. However, several sources have reported that pre-service teachers do 
not use computer technology in their preparation programs and may not be exposed to effective models of 
computer technology use during their professional education (CEO Forum on Education and Technology, 
2000; Kessler, 2006; 2007). Additionally, researchers have argued that while there have been numerous 
calls for teachers to be prepared to integrate technology in their teaching, and coursework relating to 
technology has become part of many teacher education programs, pre-service teachers have not been 
required to apply what they have learned (Albee, 2003; Dexter & Riedel, 2003; Fleming, Motamedi, & 
May, 2007; Russell, Bebell, O’Dwyer, & O’Connor, 2003). It is not surprising that previous research has 
found a strong correlation between the amount of hands-on practice with technology during teachers’ 
professional education and enhanced self-efficacy beliefs and confidence in their skills (Fleming, 
Motamedi, & May, 2007). The present study offers additional support for the importance of providing 
contextualized, hands-on practice with computer technology during pedagogy courses to authentically 
develop a strong foundational knowledge base on which to build technology into teaching and actual 
practice to facilitate the development of skills related to computer technology use in the ESOL classroom, 
as called for by Kessler (2006; 2007). Combined, these activities enhance TCs’ self-efficacy relating to 
computer technology and promote positive beliefs about the integration of computer technology into their 
ESL classrooms. 
CONCLUSION 
Although this study investigates the experiences of a small group of ESOL and TCs (N = 53) in a single 
higher educational setting, the findings reinforce previous investigations of teachers’ technology use in 
that the participants in this research used computers in their personal lives, but personal use did not 
translate to classroom use. Additionally, teachers in this study report that they experience a variety of 
barriers to successful integration of technology. Combined with these real barriers, the participants 
display low levels of self-efficacy regarding the successful integration of computer technology in their 
teaching at the start of the course. The structure of the described courses was one that had a positive effect 
on these self-efficacy beliefs. These positive changes may be a result of the contextualized nature of the 
introduction of current technologies and the inquiry-based way in which the participants approached 
learning about CALL. As Kessler recommends, “Perhaps CALL could be integrated into a variety of 
pedagogical classes, thus allowing it to be introduced in a contextualized and relevant manner” (2006, p. 
184). 
The importance of developing technological literacy skills for ELLs is critical to equitable access and 
Margo DelliCarpini Technology in TESOL Teacher Education 
 
Language Learning & Technology 21 
participation in the types of 21st Century language skills that are a requirement in our increasingly 
technological society, and this need is underscored in the TESOL technology standards (2011).  
Teacher education programs are responsible for developing pedagogical skills in their candidates, and 
computer technology is a part of the curriculum that falls within that domain. It is not enough to simply 
state that candidates are required to integrate technology in their lesson and unit planning. Teacher 
educators and programs must develop ways to build these skills in their candidates in a contextualized 
way. Like their PreK-12 grade students, those enrolled in teacher education courses need explicit 
instruction. Research has shown that there is little transfer between personal technology use and 
classroom practice, so opportunities for learning these skills must be part of the fabric of certification 
programs. In addition, the skills are best built in context rather than in a general technology course since 
the lessons learned in such courses, while valuable, may not transfer in a discipline specific way to the 
candidates’ specific subject area. 
Participants in this study were exposed to ways in which computer technology might be integrated into 
the ESOL classroom through critical readings, the collaborative construction of meaning, and example 
lessons. In addition, they were asked to evaluate themselves as computer users and teachers, which 
provided the jumping off point for a series of reflective conversations that problematized the issue of 
successfully integrating computer technology in the ESL classroom. Candidates were then able to 
investigate and evaluate a variety of computer based- resources, which then led to the creation of a class- 
created annotated bibliography which became a resource for their own instruction. Candidates then 
extended this research into a collaborative activity in which they continued their research and evaluation 
and developed a series of learning experiences for the PreK-12 communities of which they were a part. 
The course provided structured opportunities to critically analyze issues relating to the use of computer 
technology, collaboratively research and evaluate Web-based materials and software, and plan learning 
experiences aligned with content and TESOL standards. The contextualized nature of the course gave a 
framework within which to operate. For example, during the pedagogical grammar course candidates 
were investigating Web-based grammar materials and software designed to teach grammar to ESOL 
students then were required to develop lesson plans that seamlessly integrate some of the materials they 
investigated. This made the candidates’ task very focused, specific, and manageable.  
While the course structure described in this study may not solve all of the challenges related to integrating 
computer technology, the structure described does provide evidence for the positive effects such a 
structure can have on teacher candidates, and ultimately on PreK-12 grade student outcomes. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I would like to thank the TESOL graduate students who participated in the courses described in this 
article. I also thank my colleague, Orlando Alonso, for his valuable input on earlier versions of this 
manuscript. All errors are my own.  
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Margo DelliCarpini is a professor of TESOL and Chair of the Department of Middle and High School 
Education at Lehman College, CUNY. She received her Masters degree in TESOL and Ph.D. in 
Linguistics from Stony Brook University. Her research interests include TESOL teacher education and 
ESL and content teacher collaboration. 
E-mail: margo.dellicarpini@lehman.cuny.edu 
Margo DelliCarpini Technology in TESOL Teacher Education 
 
Language Learning & Technology 22 
REFERENCES 
Albee, J. (2003). A study of pre-service teachers’ technology skill preparedness and examples of how it 
can be increased. Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, 11 (1), 53–71.  
The CEO Forum on Education and Technology (2000). Teacher Preparation STaR Chart: A self-
assessment tool for colleges of education. CEO Forum. Retrieved from: http://www.ceoforum.org. 
 Common Core State Standards Initiative. (2010a). Common Core State Standards for English Language 
Arts & Literacy in History/Social Studies, Science, and Technical Subjects. Washington, DC: National 
Governors Association Center for Best Practices and the Council of Chief State School Officers.  
Common Core State Standards Initiative. (2010b). Common Core State Standards for Mathematics. 
Washington, DC: National Governors Association Center for Best Practices and the Council of Chief 
State School Officers. 
Dexter, S., & Riedel, E. (2003). Why improving pre-service teacher educational technology preparation 
must go beyond the college’s walls. Journal of Teacher Education, 54, 334–346. 
Egbert, J., Paulus, T., Nakamichi, Y. (2002) . The impact of CALL instruction on classroom computer 
use: A foundation for rethinking technology in teacher education. Language Learning & Technology, 
6(3), 108–126. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num3/egbert/default.html 
Felix, U. (2005). Analysing recent CALL effectiveness research: Towards a common agenda. Computer 
Assisted Language Learning, 18(1, 2), 1–32. 
Fleming, L., Motamedi, V., & May, L. (2007). Predicting preservice teacher competence in computer 
technology: Modeling and application in training environments. Journal of Technology and Teacher 
Education, 15(2), 207–231 
Francis-Pelton, L., Farragher, P., & Riecken, T. (2000). Content based technology: Learning by modeling. 
Journal of Technology and Teacher Education, 8(3), 177–186. 
Healey, D., Hanson-Smith, E. , Hubbard, P., Ioannou-Georgiou, S. , Kessler, G. , & Ware, P. (2011). 
TESOL technology standards: Description, implementation, integration. Alexandria, VA: TESOL 
International. 
International Society for Technology in Education. (2008). National educational technology standards for 
students: Connecting curriculum and technology. Eugene OR: ISTE. 
Johns, K. M., & Tórrez, N. M. (2001). Helping ESL learners succeed. Phi Delta Kappa, 484, 7–49. 
Kessler, G. (2007). Formal and informal CALL preparation and teacher attitude toward technology 
Computer Assisted Language Learning, 20(2), 173–188. 
Kessler, G. (2006). Assessing CALL teacher training: What are we doing and what could we do better? In 
P. Hubbard, & M. Levy (Eds.), Teacher education in CALL. Amsterdam/ Philadelphia, PA: John 
Benjamins. 
Mistretta, R. M. (2005). Integrating technology into the mathematics classroom: The role of teacher 
preparation programs. The Mathematics Educator, 15(1), 18–24. 
Partnership for 21st Century Skills. (2005). Road to 21st century learning: A policymakers’ guide to 21st 
century skills. Washington, D.C.: Retrieved from: 
http://www.21stcenturyskills.org/images/stories/otherdocs/ P21_Policy_Paper.pdf 
Peters, M. (2006). Developing computer competencies for pre-service language teachers: Is one course 
enough? In P. Hubbard & M. Levy (Eds.), Teacher education in CALL (pp. 153–165). Philadelphia: John 
Benjamins. 
Margo DelliCarpini Technology in TESOL Teacher Education 
 
Language Learning & Technology 23 
Roblyer, M. D. (2003). Integrating educational technology into teaching. Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Pearson Education Inc. 
Russell, M., Bebell, D., O’Dwyer, L., & O’Connor, K. (2003). Examining teacher technology use: 
Implications for preservice and inservice teacher preparation. Journal of Teacher Education, 54(4), 297–
310. 
Strudler, N. B., & Wetzel, K. (1999). Lessons from exemplary colleges of education: factors affecting 
technology integration in preservice programs. Educational Technology Research and Development, 
47(4), 63–81. 
Woodward, T. (2003). Loop input. ELT Journal 57(3), 301–304. 
