Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2012/news.pdf 
June 2012, Volume 16, Number 2 
pp. 24–26 
 
Language Learning & Technology 24 
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS 
Sponsors 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR) 
 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource 
Center (NFLRC)  
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials 
development projects and conducts workshops and conferences for language professionals among its 
many activities. 
3RD INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON LANGUAGE DOCUMENTATION & 
CONSERVATION (ICLDC) – CALL FOR PROPOSALS 
The 3rd International Conference on Language Documentation and Conservation (ICLDC), 
“Sharing Worlds of Knowledge,” will be held February 28-March 3, 2013, at the Hawai‘i Imin 
International Conference Center on the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa campus. 
By popular demand, the 3rd ICLDC will be a full day longer than the previous two conferences. The 
conference program will feature an integrated series of Master Class workshops. An optional Hilo Field 
Study (on the Big Island of Hawai‘i) to visit Hawaiian language revitalization programs in action will 
immediately follow the conference (March 4-5). 
This year’s conference theme, “Sharing Worlds of Knowledge,” intends to highlight the interdisciplinary 
nature of language documentation and the need to share methods for documenting the many aspects of 
human knowledge that language encodes. We aim to build on the strong momentum created by the 1st 
and 2nd ICLDCs to discuss research and revitalization approaches yielding rich records that can benefit 
both the field of language documentation and speech communities. 
We currently have an open Call for Proposals, and we welcome your abstract submissions. Abstracts are 
due by August 31, 2012, with notification of acceptance by October 1, 2012.  
For more information, visit our conference website:  http://nflrc.hawaii.edu/ICLDC/2013/ 
2013 CALICO CONFERENCE RETURNS TO THE UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI‘I AT MĀNOA 
The National Foreign Language Resource Center is pleased to once again be welcoming and hosting the 
annual Computer Assisted Language Instruction Consortium (CALICO) conference, here in Honolulu, 
Hawai‘i on May 21-25, 2013.  Conference details and its Call for Proposals will be posted on the 
CALICO website later this summer. We hope you will join us. 
STAY IN TOUCH WITH SOCIAL MEDIA 
Did you know that the NFLRC has its own Facebook page? It’s one of the best ways to hear about the 
latest news, publications, conferences, workshops, and resources we offer. Just click on the “Like” button 
to become a fan. For those who prefer getting up-to-the-minute “tweets,” you can follow us on our 
Twitter page. Finally, NFLRC has its own YouTube channel with a growing collection of free language 
learning and teaching videos for your perusal. Subscribe today! 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 25 
NEW NFLRC PUBLICATIONS 
Save the trees! Check out our other two online journals: 
  
Language Documentation & Conservation is a 
refereed, open-access journal sponsored by 
NFLRC and published by University of Hawai‘i 
Press. LD&C publishes papers on all topics 
related to language documentation and 
conservation, as well as book reviews, 
hardware and software reviews, and notes 
from the field. 
Reading in a Foreign Language is a refereed 
international journal of issues in foreign 
language reading and literacy, published twice 
yearly on the World Wide Web and sponsored 
by NFLRC and the University of Hawai‘i 
College of Languages, Linguistics and 
Literature. 
 
Check out our many other publications. 
 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education 
and Research (CLEAR)  
CLEAR’s mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States. 
Projects focus on materials development, professional development training, and foreign language 
research. 
CONFERENCES 
CLEAR exhibits at local and national conferences year-round. We hope to see you at ACTFL, CALICO, 
MIWLA, Central States, and other conferences. 
We will be presenting sessions at CALICO 2012 and ACTFL 2012. We hope to meet you in person! 
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
We debuted a series of webinars in Fall 2011, and have added more since then. These low-cost, online, 
interactive workshops allow language teachers from around the country (and the world) to access 
CLEAR’s professional development on demand. The currently available webinars focus on CLEAR’s 
Rich Internet Applications and language assessment. We hope to add to the collection in the coming 
months. Webinar participants are able to apply for State Board Continuing Education Units. Detailed 
information on all webinars is posted on the webinars page of our Web site.  
MATERIALS DEVELOPMENT 
CLEAR is developing several new products during our fifth funding cycle. Check our Web site for 
updates on new products and services. Some of our upcoming projects include: 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 26 
• Expansion of our Rich Internet Applications for language learning on mobile devices 
• Professional development webinars on diverse topics (see above) 
• Online videos for language teaching techniques 
• Online listening and speaking tests for LCTLs 
NEWSLETTER 
CLEAR News is a free bi-yearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. 
Download PDFs of back issues and subscribe at http://clear.msu.edu/clear/newsletter/. 
