Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2012/diezbedmarperezparedes.pdf 
February 2012, Volume 16, Number 1 
pp. 62–90 
 
Copyright © 2012, ISSN 1094-3501 62 
THE TYPES AND EFFECTS OF PEER NATIVE SPEAKERS’ FEEDBACK 
ON CMC 
María Belén Díez-Bedmar, University of Jaen 
Pascual Pérez-Paredes, University of Murcia 
Online collaborative writing tasks are frequently undertaken in forums and wikis. 
Variation between these two communication modes has yet to be examined, particularly 
type of feedback and its effects. We investigated the type of feedback and the impact of 
English native-speakers’ feedback on Spanish peers’ discourse restructuring in the context 
of an online collaborative writing task involving tertiary level students of English and 
Spanish as foreign languages. The collaborative task was to develop a tourist brochure in 
the foreign language in a Moodle e-learning environment. Two corpora were compiled of 
learner exchanges. The communication formats of both forums and wikis determined the 
type of feedback provided by peers in online communication tasks. Regarding the effect of 
such feedback, we can conclude that, although morphosyntactic and lexical feedback is 
largely acknowledged and incorporated, the Spanish peers seemed to accept it without 
further follow-up or discussion. Affective feedback, in the main, provoked no language-
based reaction. These effects vary, however, by forums and the wiki sub-tasks. 
Keywords: Writing, Computer-Assisted Language Learning, Collaborative Learning, 
Technology-Mediated Communication, Computer-Mediated Communication 
INTRODUCTION 
The use of computer-mediated communication (CMC) in the foreign or second language classroom has 
opened up new possibilities regarding the type and frequency of interactions between students of a 
foreign language or between students and native speakers of the target language. As stated in Lee (2008), 
the use of CMC is beneficial in terms of the quantity of the learner output, the quality of such output, and 
the possibilities offered for the students’ attention to form. 
One of these areas of attention is the role played by corrective feedback (CF) in CMC, either in 
synchronous or asynchronous environments. This is especially interesting when students do not normally 
have access to a native speaker who may help them with a task in a collaborative way. The user-friendly 
atmosphere created by CMC scenarios in which participants are students of foreign languages of the same 
age and similar interests favours their fluent communication and mutual help towards the successful 
completion of a similar task (An, Kim, & Kim, 2008; Arnold, Ducate, Lomicka, & Lord, 2005).  
Simultaneously, the use of Learning Management Systems (LMS), such as Moodle or Blackboard, has 
become widely popular in tertiary education (Schroeder, Minocha, & Schneider, 2010), speeding up the 
process of integration and normalization (Bax, 2003) of CMC in everyday language teaching. Although 
research has revealed interesting findings regarding CF in collaborative scenarios (see Literature Review 
below), research which examines collaboration and the role of peer feedback during the stages of process 
writing across different modes of communication, and which benefits from scenarios where fluent 
communication is fostered by means of a more relaxed, less academic atmosphere, has not been carried 
out (Arnold, Ducate, & Kost, 2009). 
In the case of our investigation, Spanish students of English at an intermediate level and English students 
of Spanish at the same level embarked on the writing of a tourist brochure in the foreign language by 
means of asynchronous CMC. This proved to be the first academic experience that these Spanish and 
English students had regarding the writing of text with the help of a native speaker of the target language. 
This was especially important when considering that all the students who took part in this collaborative 
María Belén Díez-Bedmar and Pascual Pérez-Paredes Types and Effects of Peer NSs’ Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 63 
experience were studying languages and tourism either in Spain or in England. Therefore, the use and 
command of the foreign language for specific purposes, in this case, tourism, is determinant in their future 
careers. For this reason, a typical genre of the tourism field, the tourist brochure, was selected as the final 
outcome of this collaborative online writing task. 
In line with previous research on the type and frequency with which students provide feedback to their 
peers, our research was interested in comparing the type and frequency of feedback provided in two 
communication scenarios, forums and a wiki. These two communicative scenarios were designed in 
combination to fulfill the writing of the brochure in the foreign language by reflecting the two main 
approaches to writing, namely writing as a process approach and writing as a product approach (Faigley, 
1986; Grabe & Kaplan, 1996; Hedge, 1988; Richards, 1990).  
Drawing on the language related episode (LRE) taxonomy used in Ware and O’Dowd (2008), or Focus on 
Form Episodes (FFE), in Ellis, Basturkmen and Loewen’s (2001) terminology, this paper analyzes 
whether there are specific differences in how and for how long two different CMC tools, namely forums 
and wikis, are used. Thus, our research questions are: 
1. What amount and type of feedback do English peers provide for Spanish students in the context 
of an online writing task?  
2. How do Spanish students react to that feedback, as seen in their linguistic behavior or written 
output?  
3. Is there any relation between the number of words used and the type of feedback provided? Is that 
relation different in forums and wikis? Does the number of days during which students can work 
on forums or the wiki affect the quantity of feedback provided? 
Literature Review 
Early insights into online intercultural exchange included the use of the terms network-based language 
teaching (Kern, 1995) and tandem learning (Stickler & Lewis, 2008), which stressed the benefits of 
international partnerships and telecollaboration in the field of language learning (Ortega, 1997). This first 
period of excitement and realization led way to a second moment which called for further reflection and 
analysis (Kern & Warschauer, 2000; Warschauer, 2000). During the early years of the 21st century, a 
plethora of studies addressed a wide range of areas involved in online intercultural exchange. In general, 
these analyses of CMC considered the use of a particular technology (Godwin-Jones, 2003, 2005) and 
how its use interacts with a variable, or sets of variables, within the broader context of SLA, negotiation 
of meaning, and the promotion of communicative competence and/or intercultural competence (Belz, 
2002, 2003; O’Dowd, 2007).  
While the uses of particular technologies such as wikis or blogs are of enormous interest in the context of 
language communication, the compartmentalized use of these technologies has given rise to difficulties in 
designing meaningful student interactions (Garrison & Arbaugh, 2007) in the context of communicative 
language teaching. At the same time, the widespread use of Web 2.0 tools is fostering a massive adoption 
of new communication habits and a new way to look at how technologies can be integrated into everyday 
teaching routines which goes beyond the aforementioned compartmentalization. For example, the most 
recent social software applications are enabling new forms of community-based collaborative learning 
(McLoughlin & Lee, 2007) as well as new ways of interaction. In this context, the emphasis on the use of 
a particular technology gives way to a scenario with more opportunities for learners to present their own 
insights and consolidate and refine each other’s contributions (Garrison & Arbaugh, 2007).  
Recent research has investigated different uses of wikis (Lund, 2008; Kessler, 2009) and forums (Kol & 
Schcolnik, 2008). For example, Trentin (2009) has explored the potential of wikis to evaluate individual 
contributions to co-writing tasks, an important issue in higher education writing courses. Miyazoe and 
María Belén Díez-Bedmar and Pascual Pérez-Paredes Types and Effects of Peer NSs’ Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 64 
Anderson (2010) investigated the simultaneous use of forums, blogs and wikis, claiming a positive effect 
on the students’ language learning progress. They state that their study takes a step forward in terms of 
how to think of online writing, as the different stages involved in writing make use of different tools and 
are still part of one single task. Apart from the above-mentioned publications on the use of CMC, research 
has also focused on the theoretical constructs in online communication and its relation with SLA. 
Ware and O’Dowd (2008) have identified three major theoretical contexts which have attracted the 
interest of researchers in online communication—mainly sociocognitive and sociocultural perspectives, 
interactionist perspectives, and studies dealing with focus-on-form. While sociocognitive and 
sociocultural perspectives have stressed the role of (a) intercultural communication and exploration (Belz, 
2003; Firth & Wagner, 1997; O’Dowd, 2003, 2006), (b) the cultural influences on online communication 
(Thorne, 2003), and (c) the concept of literacy as applied to digital communication tools (Chen, 2006), the 
interactionist perspective shifts its attention to the role of negotiation of meaning in building 
communicative or intercultural competence (Ware & O’Dowd, 2008).  
Chapelle (1997) linked the design and the evaluation of CALL tasks within SLA. She stated that 
researching the kind of language that the learner engaged in during a CALL activity should be one of the 
priorities of instructed CALL SLA. This approach underpinned the analysis of synchronous written 
interaction (Pellettieri, 2000), MOO-based synchronous exchanges (Kötter, 2003), peer-to-peer exchange 
in chat (Blake, 2000; Blake & Zyzik, 2003; Peterson, 2009; Smith, 2005; Tudini, 2003) and, among other 
areas, e-mail tandem (Greenfield, 2003; O’Dowd, 2003).  
The role of attention to linguistic form (Long & Robinson, 1998) similarly motivated an important body 
of research in foreign language teaching. Form-focused instruction is seen as the treatment of linguistic 
form in the context of communication activities (Ellis, Basturkmen, & Loewen, 2002), rather than the 
attention to declarative knowledge of grammatical or lexical nature per se. While there are different 
focus-on-form applications, namely planned versus incidental attention to form, and even a variety of 
form-focused activities labeled as focus on form and focus on forms, which stresses the need to teach 
linguistic forms isolated from communicative activities (Laufer & Girsai, 2008), the essential idea behind 
form-focused instruction is that communicative language teaching is insufficient for foreign language 
learning. At this point, attention to form attracted a renewed interest from SLA researchers. 
The role played by the use of feedback to make students aware of their errors has fostered a great deal of 
research in foreign language teaching. On the one hand, feedback has been claimed not to play any role in 
the students’ acquisition of the second or foreign language (Krashen, 1979, 1984; Truscott, 1996). On the 
other hand, the analysis of students’ progress across time has revealed that feedback fosters their positive 
progression with statistically significant results on some occasions (Chandler, 2003; Ellis, Sheen, 
Murakami, & Takashima, 2008; Ferris, 1995, 1997; Ferris & Roberts, 2001; Lalande, 1982; Robb, Ross, 
& Shortreed, 1986; White, Spada, Lightbown, & Ranta, 1991), which seems to be in line with Schmidt’s 
(1995, 2001) strong version of the noticing hypothesis, where noticing is a prerequisite for intake. 
Although the area remains largely under-researched in the field of online communication (Loewen & 
Erlam, 2006; Sachs & Suh, 2007; Sauro, 2009), various authors have explored the role of feedback in 
connection to attention to form (Appel & Mullen, 2000; O’Rourke, 2005). However, this has been done 
from different perspectives, ranging from very generic group feedback in the context of asynchronous 
collaborative process writing (Greenfield, 2003) to more specific accounts, including corrective feedback 
in synchronous text-based chat using both recast and metalinguistic information experimental conditions 
(Sauro, 2009). There is evidence that online language learners prefer feedback that focuses on concrete 
language items or episodes (Blake, 2000; Ware, 2005; Ware & O’Dowd, 2008), which supports a 
modified interactionist hypothesis (Levy & Kennedy, 2004; Ware & O’Dowd, 2008) where focus on form 
and feedback can complement each other in the context of online communication practice that adapts to 
the needs and real-life demands of learners (Warschauer, 2000).  
María Belén Díez-Bedmar and Pascual Pérez-Paredes Types and Effects of Peer NSs’ Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 65 
While Belz (2006) has investigated how learners can notice their own patterns of use and trace their own 
language output, which forces learners to survey their own communication, most of the research in the 
area has concentrated on feedback that involves interaction with peer learners. Ware and O’Dowd (2008) 
examined the effect of experimental conditions in providing feedback and found that learners are more 
likely to offer feedback to their peers if they are explicitly instructed to do so. This finding prompts 
researchers to re-examine the concepts of autonomy and reciprocity in tandem learning. Ware and 
O’Dowd (2008) developed a taxonomy of LREs which included morphosyntactic, lexical, and affective 
categories. The first type of LRE was further subdivided into specific feedback or commentary feedback. 
O’Rourke (2005) investigated tandem feedback in MOO, real-time text, and classroom-based 
conversation environments. His findings suggest that interlocutors do not show any tendency to focus on 
formal aspects of problematic utterances and that traditional research frameworks of discourse such as 
Varonis and Gass’s (1985) are to be modified in the context of online communication analysis. Although 
research in CMC lacks the maturity of more traditional SLA studies, there is room to suggest that CMC 
and traditional classroom activities may demand different analytical tools that embrace the peculiarities of 
communication exchanges in both contexts. 
The influence of task type and topic on the type of feedback elicited has been researched from different 
angles. Blake (2000) concluded that, in the context of synchronous CMC chat, jigsaw tasks promoted 
more productive negotiations than information gap tasks. According to him, lexical confusions are the 
most common form of negotiation. Smith (2004) found that language learners in his study engaged in 
negotiated interaction when they were presented with unknown lexical items during the course of task 
completion. Smith (2005) also investigated the relationship between negotiated interaction and learner 
uptake in the context of synchronous CMC chat. He investigated 24 intermediate learners and concluded 
that there is no relationship between learner uptake and lexical acquisition. Yilmaz and Granena (2010, p. 
33) have shown that LREs occur during task-based synchronous CMC and that “through meaning 
negotiation learners focus on form”. They found that the nature of the task had an impact on whether the 
LREs were explicit, in 81% of the dictogloss-related LREs, or implicit, in the case of 75% of the jigsaw-
related LREs. As regards the content of the feedback, Murphy (2010) found that learners exposed to 
elaborative feedback during Web-based reading scored higher than those receiving feedback which 
merely indicated the right answer.  
Despite the emergence of these new forms of CMC, the use of both forums and wikis for the development 
of online second language process writing in combination with the provision of feedback remains 
unexplored. In the following sections we will account for an experience which examined the role of peer, 
native-speaker feedback in the context of an online collaborative writing task which comprised the use of 
both forums and a wiki. 
METHODOLOGY 
Participants 
The collaborative experience which is described here was completed by 20 students (age range 19-21, 15 
female and five male students). The participants were 10 dyads, each comprising a British student and a 
Spanish one, taking the course Gramática Inglesa (Descriptive English Linguistics) at the Universidad de 
Jaén (Spain) and different Spanish language courses at the Language Centre, University of Leeds (UK), 
respectively. Their level of foreign language competence can be described as intermediate, as all of them 
have, at least, a B1 level in the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages (Council of 
Europe, 2001). These pairs carried out the experience for three months during the academic year 
2008/2009. The dyads remained intact throughout the online collaborative writing task.  
Online Collaborative Writing Task 
The task that the Spanish and British students had to carry out was the writing of a tourist brochure in the 
María Belén Díez-Bedmar and Pascual Pérez-Paredes Types and Effects of Peer NSs’ Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 66 
foreign language with the assistance of a peer by means of an online collaborative task. As explained 
before, this genre was selected in order to suit the task to the interests of the British and Spanish students 
(Warschauer, 2000), since both groups of students were studying subjects related to the tourism field and 
found it interesting to work on a genre which they were likely to use in their future careers (Diez-Bedmar, 
2008). In other words, these students were highly motivated to have this unique opportunity to interact 
with a native speaker of the foreign language, improve their language skills in that language, and apply 
them to the tourism field. 
The online writing task designed for the development of the students’ collaborative experience was 
created using Moodle, a Course Management System (CMS), also known as a LMS or a Virtual Learning 
Environment (VLE), a free Web application that educators can use to create online learning sites (see 
Appendix A for a screenshot). Moodle enables the design of language learning experiences by integrating 
different communication tools and technologies, such as forums, wikis, instant messages and a wide 
variety of other learning activities (Sánchez-Tornel & Pérez-Paredes, 2008). The sub-tasks or activities in 
which the online collaborative writing task was further subdivided reflected each of the stages which are 
normally followed when writing, namely pre-writing, writing and post-writing (Hedge, 1988; Seow, 
2002; Sun & Feng, 2009). To allow students to develop their skills during the pre-writing stage, a number 
of forums were designed (See Table 1 for details). In the case of the writing and post-writing stages a wiki 
was implemented. As can be seen, the forums were more process-oriented, whereas the wiki was more 
product-oriented and where learners wrote their final version of the brochure which eventually was used 
by their peers to provide feedback. 
The resulting online collaborative writing task consists of nine stages—or sub-tasks—through which each 
student is in contact with his/her peer for twelve weeks at the most. Besides the first two stages, where 
students are provided with an agreement document as well as their peer’s information, and the final stage, 
at which each student uploads his/her final text (i.e., the finished tourist brochure), the other six stages are 
distributed as follows and have different interaction patterns: 
Table 1. Distribution of the Main Stages in the Online Collaborative Writing Task 
Stage name of collaborative task CMC Interaction pattern 
3. Ice-breakers: meeting each other Forum 
4. Choosing a monument to write about Forum 
5. Brainstorming Forum 
6. Looking for information Forum 
7. Glossary  Collective glossary 
8. Paragraphing and writing Wiki 
Table 1 shows that each stage requires students to use language in different ways before delving into the 
writing of the tourist brochure. As a consequence, students are guided through the typical writing as a 
process stages so that they can later write the brochure by using the input from the previous pre-tasks. 
This is the reason why students were encouraged to complete the stages one after the other (for an average 
of 10 to 12 days each; except for the wiki, which was envisaged to take longer), even though they had 
access to all stages from the very beginning of the online collaborative writing task to cater for the 
students’ time needs. In fact, each dyad was engaged in each stage for a different number of days. 
Apart from these stages, the virtual platform also offered students practical reference information. Thus, 
on the left-hand side of the screen (see Appendix A), students were provided with links to monolingual, 
bilingual and specialized dictionaries online, as well as Web pages related to tourism. On the right-hand 
María Belén Díez-Bedmar and Pascual Pérez-Paredes Types and Effects of Peer NSs’ Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 67 
side, each student could check the deadlines for the various stages, the updates he/she had from his/her 
peer, the participants which were connected at that same time to the platform and the email address of the 
technician responsible for resolving any problems posed by the functioning of the virtual platform.  
Once the virtual platform had been piloted by the researchers to highlight any technical problems, and the 
problems found had been solved, a seminar was conducted at both universities to inform students of their 
opportunity to undertake an online writing task with native students of their target language, collect their 
signed agreement documents, and be shown how to use the virtual platform and proceed with the online 
writing experience. During this seminar, students were advised to use their foreign language instead of 
their native language; Spanish in the case of the British students, and English in the case of the Spanish 
students. Similarly, students were encouraged to provide their peers with as much feedback as they 
considered convenient—or were asked for by their peers—and as detailed as possible in order to improve 
their peers’ texts. In fact, the instructions for each subtask reminded the students to provide feedback to 
their peers at least once, as can be seen in Appendix B. Finally, students were advised to follow the 
guidance offered at the beginning of each forum and the wiki, so that they could become familiar with the 
purpose of each stage (See Appendix B). When the students had enrolled in the virtual platform after the 
seminar, the last step consisted in the establishment of the pairs who would work together during this 
online task. All the participants in the study had at least a B1 level in the foreign language, which means 
they were capable of expressing their opinions. 
Quantitative and Qualitative Analyses 
Quantitative Analysis: Data Extraction 
For the purposes of this paper, two corpora were compiled with the Spanish and the English students’ 
contributions to the forums, on the one hand, and the wiki, on the other. Since the first research question 
is ‘What amount and type of feedback do English peers provide for Spanish students in the context of an 
online writing task?’, and the second is ‘How do Spanish students react to that feedback, as seen in their 
linguistic behaviour or written output?’, each corpus was further subclassified into the language produced 
by the Spanish students and that provided by the English ones. Thus, the first corpus consists of the 6,230 
words that the Spanish students contributed to the four forums (Table 1) and the 3,050 words written by 
the English peers. Therefore, the total 9,280 words constitute a ‘peripheral type’ of learner corpus 
(Nesselhauf, 2004, p. 128), since it does not include the students’ final brochures, but rather the students’ 
asynchronous interactions while doing the pre-writing tasks. The second corpus is composed of the 
contributions to the wikis. As was the case with the forum corpus, it was further subdivided into those 
contributions made by the Spanish students and the ones by the English peers. The Spanish students’ 
section constitutes a ‘more typical’ learner corpus (Nesselhauf, 2004, p. 128), since the 9,002 words 
which the Spanish students wrote correspond to the versions of the tourist brochure handed in by the 
Spanish learners, that is, the product of the writing process. The second subcorpus consists of the 
feedback that the English students provided their Spanish peers with (1,121 words). In total, 10,123 words 
have been analyzed in this second corpus.  
The compilation of these two corpora enabled us to examine the contexts in which the students’ 
interactions took place on a textual level as well as to explore relationships between textual features and 
the feedback provided by the learners, an analysis of great interest which allows us to gain better 
methodological understanding of the analysis of learner feedback in CMC. 
Qualitative Analysis 
The qualitative analyses described below sought to explore the nature of the English students’ feedback 
provided to their Spanish peers when undertaking an online collaborative task, as well as the effect of 
such feedback on the Spanish students’ writing. The basic unit of description and analysis adopted was 
the LRE, as defined by Swain and Lapkin1 (1998, p. 326) and used in recent studies such as Ware and 
María Belén Díez-Bedmar and Pascual Pérez-Paredes Types and Effects of Peer NSs’ Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 68 
O’Dowd (2008). In fact, Ware and O’Dowd’s (2008) classification of LREs into morphosyntactic, lexical 
and affective, and the further subclassification of morphosyntactic LREs into specific or commentaries 
(Ware & O’Dowd, 2008, p. 47-48), was used to conduct a pilot study with five dyads, the purpose of 
which was to analyze if Ware and O’Dowd’s classification of LREs would suit the examination of our 
data. Once we had independently classified the LREs in our data, it was clear that some LREs could not 
be coded following the original classification. As a result, a further expanded classification of LREs was 
designed to cater for all the LREs in our learner corpora. In the new expanded taxonomy not only 
morphosyntactic, but also lexical LREs, were divided into specific and commentary types, as seen in the 
interactions2 below: 
Morphosyntactic LRE, specific: 
Spanish student’s text: “… as its name suggest…”3 
English peer’s LRE: “… as its name suggests…” (pair 4)  
Morphosyntactic LRE, commentary: 
Spanish student’s text: “The ones in the top which corresponds to…”  
English peer’s LRE: “aquí, ‘s’ es usado para la singular” [‘s’ is used here for the singular] (pair 6) 
Lexical LRE, specific: 
Spanish student’s text: “… for the bulk of the edifice” 
English peer’s LRE: “building” (pair 9) 
Lexical LRE, commentary: 
Spanish student’s text: “The finds included several coffins...” 
English peer's LRE: “findings - finds is too informal” (pair 5) 
Affective LREs were also further subclassified into those in which the students used metalanguage in a 
broad sense and those which were goal-oriented, namely, those which were provided at the end of the 
Spanish students’ texts to encourage the peer to continue on doing the task or keep in touch for the sake of 
the successful completion of the writing task: 
Affective LRE, metalanguage, commentary: 
English peer's LRE: “wow MUYYYYY BIEN, es excelente” [wow, VERRRRRY GOOD, it’s 
excellent] (pair 4) 
Affective LRE, goal-oriented: 
English peer’s LRE: “I hope you understand my correction” (pair 29) 
Apart from these LREs, the pilot study conducted on our data revealed that some LREs contained 
information on more than one of the three aspects outlined above. Therefore, compound LREs were 
introduced in the taxonomy, as can be seen in Table 2, and these are exemplified and explained below: 
María Belén Díez-Bedmar and Pascual Pérez-Paredes Types and Effects of Peer NSs’ Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 69 
 Table 2. Compound LREs 
 Compound LREs 
Specific Morphosyntactic + 
lexical 
Morphosyntactic 
+ affective 
Lexical + 
affective 
Morphosyntactic + 
lexical + affective 
(M/L/A) 
Commentary Morphosyntactic + 
lexical 
Morphosyntactic 
+ affective 
Lexical + 
affective 
Morphosyntactic + 
lexical + affective 
(M/L/A) 
Morphosyntactic and lexical LRE: 
Spanish student's text: “... such as the one we are centre on, the Blackpool Tower.” 
English peer's LRE: “no podemos decir solo CENTRE, tenemos que decir centering or focussing 
on” [one cannot only say CENTRE, we must say centering or focusing on] (pair 1) 
In this case, the English peer provides the Spanish student not only with an alternative for the word centre 
(i.e., lexical), but also cautions the Spanish student about the use of the preposition in the prepositional 
verb (i.e., morphosyntactic). 
Morphosyntactic and affective LRE: 
English peer's LRE: “Hola [name] - Es muy bueno! Hay uno o dos palabras, pero todos es bueno. 
Importante - es it's history - no es his history. Es Paul, pero los cathedral no es masculino.” [Hi 
there [name]- It’s very good! There are one or two words, but it’s all right. Important: it is it’s 
history not his history. Paul is ok but cathedral is not masculine] (pair 4) 
In the example above, the English student congratulates the Spanish one on the text (i.e., affective) and 
also corrects the use of the possessive adjective ‘his’ (i.e., morphosyntactic). 
Lexical and affective LRE: 
Spanish student: “if we have in account” 
English peer’s LRE: “Esto es gramaticalmente correcto, pero ‘if we remember’/’at the time of’ es 
mejor” [This is grammatically correct, but ‘if we remember’/’at the time of’ sounds better] (pair 
6) 
The English student’s (incorrect) claim in his LRE that the expression ‘have in account’ is correct is the 
affective part in the compound LRE, whereas the suggestion of ‘if we remember’ or ‘at the time of’ 
corresponds to the lexical part of the LRE. Finally, the last type of compound LRE is the one which 
includes morphosyntactic, lexical, and affective information. Let us consider: 
Spanish student: “As an anecdote we could mention that the real reason of building this abbey 
was because of redemption” 
English peer’s LRE: “Esto es gramaticalmente correcto, pero ‘redemption’ es muy general. Quizá 
sería preferible decir ‘the real reason for building this abbey was because Edward wanted 
redemption.’” [This is grammatically correct, but ‘redemption’ is far too general. Perhaps it is 
preferable to say ‘the real reason for building this abbey was because Edward wanted 
María Belén Díez-Bedmar and Pascual Pérez-Paredes Types and Effects of Peer NSs’ Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 70 
redemption.’] (pair 6) 
Thus, the English peer provides feedback on the use of the word ‘redemption’ (i.e. the lexical part of the 
LRE), corrects the use of the preposition “of” (morphosyntactic part), and acknowledges that the Spanish 
student’s sentence was grammatically correct (affective). 
The second research question, namely the effect triggered by the English peers’ feedback, demanded a 
learner corpus-based classification of those effects. In other words, we analyzed how Spanish students 
used the feedback provided by their peers. In order to answer this question, the brochure was used to 
check what feedback was incorporated into the students' texts.  
After the pilot study, the following classification was made (Table 3): 
Table 3. Effects of Peers’ LREs 
Effects of peers’ LREs 
Morphosyntactic and lexical LREs Affective LREs 
Feedback 
is ignored 
Learner asks 
for 
clarification 
Feedback is 
acknowledged 
Feedback 
is partially 
used 
Acknowledgement No 
reaction 
Different types of LREs had different effects on the Spanish students. Regarding morphosyntactic and 
lexical LREs, students either ignored, acknowledged, partially used LREs or asked for clarification, as 
can be seen in that order in these examples: 
No reaction: 
Spanish student's text: “The name Big Ben actually refers not to the clock-tower itself, but to...” 
English peer's LRE: “itself is not needed here” 
Spanish student's final version: “The name Big Ben actually refers not to the clock-tower itself, 
but to...” (pair 10) 
Learner asks for clarification: 
English peer: “Gracia, pero no estoy totalemente seguro que tenenmos que hacer. El fase 8 es un 
wiki??” [Thanks. But I’m not totally sure what we’re supposed to do. Is stage 8 a wiki??] (pair 4) 
Feedback is acknowledged: 
Spanish student’s text: “… are 23 feet square” 
English peer’s LRE: “… are 23 square feet” 
Spanish student’s final version: “… are 23 square feet” (pair 4) 
Feedback is partially used: 
Spanish student’s text: “Taking in mind the disposition…” 
María Belén Díez-Bedmar and Pascual Pérez-Paredes Types and Effects of Peer NSs’ Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 71 
English peer’s LRE: “Bear in mind that the disposition…” 
Spanish student’s final version: “Bearing in mind the disposition…” (pair 15) 
In the case of affective LREs, the only effects on the Spanish students were either the Spanish student’s 
acknowledgement of the English peer’s words/corrections, or the lack of a visible reaction on the part of 
the student, as exemplified below: 
Acknowledgement: 
English peer’s LRE: “I have tried to correct things that you said to me” 
Spanish student: “Thanks!!!” (pair 5) 
Lack of visible reaction: 
English peer’s LRE: “I hope you understand my correction!!!” 
Spanish student: no reaction (pair 7) 
RESULTS 
Forum Posts 
These forums reflect our process approach to writing. The number of LREs varies in each of the forums: 
10 LREs were found in the Choosing a monument and Brainstorming forums, seven in Looking for 
information and four in the Meeting each other forum. 
Regarding our first research question, although nine out of ten native speakers did provide feedback in the 
forums, the mean of LREs for the four forums analyzed is 3.1 LREs per pair. This indicates that even 
when feedback was required by the instructors, participants failed to comply with the instructions. Some 
pairs outperformed others, with English peers in pairs one and five offering 11 and nine LREs 
respectively to their non-native peers. The native speaker in pair three provided no feedback at all to his 
peer, while the remaining native speakers either offered one or two LREs in the four forums altogether. 
The other two forums, Meeting each other and Looking for information yielded four and seven LREs 
respectively, which points to the fact that providing feedback is not disconnected from the subject matter 
and the type of task of the pre-writing tasks. The lower number of LREs in the case of Meeting each other 
may be due to the main aim of this forum (i.e., an ice-breaker). Accordingly, learners may have perceived 
that there was a clash between the pragmatic nature of the forum itself and the very fact of providing 
linguistic feedback on the other. Choosing a monument and Brainstorming yielded 10 LREs each, and 
stand out as more feedback-sensitive forum-tasks than the other two forums.  
Apart from the amount of feedback provided, a key aspect in our study is the analysis of the type of 
feedback offered by the English native speakers to their Spanish peers. In the four forums altogether we 
were only able to find 31 LREs, including 28 affective goal-oriented LREs, two simple Lexical specific 
LREs, and one Compound Morphosyntactic/Lexical/Affective Commentary LRE. Table 4 summarizes 
these findings: 
María Belén Díez-Bedmar and Pascual Pérez-Paredes Types and Effects of Peer NSs’ Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 72 
Table 4. Types of Feedback in All Four Forums 
Type of feedback Number of 
LREs 
LRE words % discourse English speakers 
devoted to LREs 
Affective goal-oriented 28 462 15.0% 
Simple Lexical Specific 2 142 4.6% 
Morphosyntactic/Lexical/Affective 
Commentary 
1 15 0.5% 
Affective goal-oriented LREs in the Meeting each other forum show different long-term collaboration 
goals on the part of the British students such as: 
“no te preocupas este proyecto de momento, tenemos mucho tiempo” [don’t worry, we have 
plenty of time to finish this project] (pair 1). 
In the Choosing a monument forum, affective goal-oriented LREs focus on: 
The appropriateness of the choice by the Spanish native speakers: 
“Pienso que es una elección muy Buena” [I think it’s a very good choice] (pair 2);  
The degree of familiarity of the English native speaker with the chosen monument: 
“Hola [name], Lo siento que no he resondado mas pronto - desfase horario! […] No conozco el 
castillo de husting” [Hi there [name]. I’m sorry I didn’t get back to you earlier. I am not familiar 
with Husting Castle] (pair 5); 
Or a combination of both: 
“Pienso que Westminster Abbey es un bien elección. El edeficio es muy  interesante y hermoso. 
[…]” [I think Westminster Abbey is a good choice. The building is very interesting and 
beautiful…] (pair 6). 
In Brainstorming, the number of LREs remained the same as in the previous forum. The affective goal-
oriented LREs included: 
General goal-oriented feedback: 
“Como va su presentaion?” [How is your presentation going?] (pair 1); 
Doubts about the way to proceed: 
“Gracia, pero no estoy totalemente seguro que tenenmos que hacer. El fase 8 es un wiki?[…]” 
[Thanks but I’m not 100% sure what we’re supposed to do. Is stage 8 a wiki?] (pair 1). 
Messages to keep the partnership alive and effective: 
“Puedes escribir pronto porque necesito terminar mi proyecto en el martes 14th, gracias.” [Can 
you write back soon? I need to finish my project on Tuesday the 14th. Thanks] (pair 10). 
Some of these feedback LREs are not immediately related to the forum-specific task but rather to the 
María Belén Díez-Bedmar and Pascual Pérez-Paredes Types and Effects of Peer NSs’ Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 73 
more general task goals. In the Looking for information forum, the number of LREs decreased as 
compared with the previous forum. The goal- oriented LREs included: 
General feedback on the quality of the work so far: 
“Pienso que su presentacion es fantastic” [I think your presentation is fantastic] (pair 1); 
Suggestions to improve: 
“Tengo una sugerencia; quizás si ponerías el parte sobre el turismo al fin sería mejor?” [I have a 
suggestion: perhaps if you put the tourism section at the end, it would be better?] (pair 5). 
Simple lexical specific LREs: 
“Mas información. El seccion fondo es ‘brickwork’ and ‘Anston limestone.’ El torre es ‘cast 
iron’. El reloj es 55 metres altura. […]” [ More information. The “seccion fondo” is brickwork 
and “Anston limestone” The tower is “cast iron”. The clock is 55 metres high…] (pair 10). 
This learner has captured the essence of collaborative feedback. He has read his peer’s previous posts, 
identified problem lexical areas and provided specific feedback that can be of great use to his peer. 
There is one Compound M/L/A LRE where the English native speaker seems to praise his peer’s efforts 
while also offering morphosyntactic and lexical feedback: 
“la lengua que utliazas es muy complicado...pienso que vas a tener un bien nota” [The language 
you use is complicated. I think you will get a good grade] (pair 1). 
This is an illustration of the difficulties in assessing the types of LREs when they are not simple 
replacements of text or they involve commentaries and interaction with a peer learner. 
The second research question in this paper entailed the analysis of the type of effects on the Spanish 
peers. The data show that morphosyntactic/lexical feedback was acknowledged and incorporated. Goal-
oriented, affective feedback, however, was either responded to positively in 10 LREs or had no effect in 
18, yielding only one request for clarification. Although the amount of LREs of non-affective nature is 
low and only applies to one of the pairs, it is interesting to highlight that this feedback was promptly 
acknowledged by the Spanish peer. As regards goal-oriented feedback, 58% of the LREs triggered no 
language-based reaction, while in 35.4 % of the LREs the student thanked his/her peer for the feedback 
provided. 
Lastly, we looked at research question number 3. Thus, we analyzed LREs in terms of length, that is, in 
terms of the amount of words provided in each LRE individually. Altogether, 619 words were used in all 
the LREs in the forums, with Choosing a monument leading the count with 258 words, Brainstorming 
immediately after with 233 words and followed by Looking for information with 78, and Meeting each 
other with 50 words. This word count also allowed us to calculate a ratio which expresses the relationship 
between the number of LRE words in a forum and the number of individual LREs in that forum. 
Choosing a monument yielded a ratio of 0.03, followed by Brainstorming with a ratio of 0.04, Meeting 
each other with 0.08 and Looking for information with a ratio of 0.09, which confirms that certain 
subject-matters and collaboration goals are more likely to trigger feedback LREs and larger word counts 
than others. 
Similarly, we have considered the number of LRE words in each of the ten pairs. Figure 1 shows these 
results:  
María Belén Díez-Bedmar and Pascual Pérez-Paredes Types and Effects of Peer NSs’ Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 74 
 
Figure 1. Numbers of LREs words per pair. 
Figure 2 shows the mean of words used in LREs by the ten pairs: 
 
Figure 2. Mean of words in LREs per pair. 
Figures 1 and 2 show that while the English native speaker in pair one used 166 words in his LREs, the 
English native speaker in pair five only used 102 words for the same amount of LREs. Interestingly, the 
English native speaker in Pair 10 employed the same amount of words as his counterpart in pair one, this 
time only on two LREs. This finding shows that measures that rely on one single indicator may fail to 
offer a complete picture of the phenomena under scrutiny or, at least, need to be complemented by others.  
In the case of forum-based communication, the number of posts per forum is an indicator of the activity 
of the pair as well. Table 5 shows this information: 
María Belén Díez-Bedmar and Pascual Pérez-Paredes Types and Effects of Peer NSs’ Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 75 
Table 5. Number of Posts Per Pair 
Pair No. of 
posts 
1 24 
5 19 
2 15 
8 11 
10 11 
4 10 
9 10 
7 9 
6 5 
3 2 
Pairs one and five were the most active pairs in the sample, with 24 and 19 posts respectively, followed 
by pair two with 15 posts and pairs eight and ten with eleven posts each. This seems to be an indication 
that more posts will generate more LRE feedback, which concurs with the findings expressed above. 
However, Table 6 shows that writing more posts does not necessarily imply more words: 
Table 6. Words Written by the Spanish Peers in Each of the Forums 
Pair Meeting 
each other 
Choosing a 
monument 
Brainstorming Looking for 
information 
Total 
words 
1 149 415 196 186 946 
2 229 348 47 81 705 
3 0 0 0 0 0 
4 0 184 136 66 386 
5 375 520 173 299 1,367 
6 40 334 70 36 480 
7 38 235 73 124 470 
8 234 202 379 20 835 
9 450 435 105 92 1,082 
10 162 170 128 12 472 
This time pair five leads the count with 1,367 words, followed by pair nine with 1,082 words and pair one 
with 946.  
As for the number of days of activity (Table 7), it takes the most productive pair, number 1, longer to 
complete their tasks, that is, 78 days; 60 days in the case of pair 5, 62 in the case of pair two, and 67 in the 
case of pair 11. Pair eight completed their writing task in just 28 days while pair three spent just three 
days working on their forums, so it makes sense that their output was highly insignificant.  
María Belén Díez-Bedmar and Pascual Pérez-Paredes Types and Effects of Peer NSs’ Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 76 
Table 7. Number of Days of Activity for Each of the Forums 
Pair Forums 
 Meeting each other Choosing a 
monument 
Brainstorming Looking for 
information 
1 27 43 3 5 
2 26 26 7 3 
3 0 0 1 1 
4 0 6 9 1 
5 15 27 6 12 
6 1 33 1 1 
7 1 7 7 11 
8 19 3 3 3 
9 11 38 28 1 
10 4 33 27 3 
Pair eight offered the same amount of LREs as pair 10 in less than half the number of days, which points 
to the fact that the number of days that a forum is active is not a reliable indicator of feedback output in 
terms of LREs. 
Once the results obtained regarding the three research questions have been provided for the students’ 
interactions in forums, the findings revealed in the data in the wikis will be provided in the same order. 
Wikis 
Regarding the first research question, the results obtained when analyzing the students’ interactions in the 
wiki reveal that the 10 English students offered their Spanish peers a total of 219 LREs. As can be seen in 
Table 8, the mean of LREs is 21.9, which ranges between zero LREs in the case of pair eight and 53 
LREs provided by the English peer in pair five. 
Table 8. Number of LREs Per Pair 
Pair LREs in wikis 
1 31 
2 23 
3 22 
4 32 
5 53 
6 25 
7 19 
8 0 
9 4 
10 10 
Mean 21.9 
María Belén Díez-Bedmar and Pascual Pérez-Paredes Types and Effects of Peer NSs’ Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 77 
When analyzing the types of LREs provided by the English students, it becomes clear that 
morphosyntactic specific LREs are more frequently used (56%), followed by the use of lexical specific 
LREs (14%), and compound morphosyntactic and lexical specific LREs (10%). If simple LREs are 
considered, it can be seen that there is a tendency to just provide a substitute language item for the aspect 
of the language which is considered incorrect, instead of providing more extended feedback. In fact, the 
percentages of simple LREs are as follows: morphosyntactic specific (56%), lexical specific (14%), 
lexical commentary (9%) and morphosyntactic commentary (7%). In the case of compound LREs, there is 
a preference to use specific LRE types when the aspects of language being corrected are morphosyntactic 
or lexical (10.4% of the LREs, either simple or compound), and the percentage decreases to 0.45% when 
commentaries are used. When affective feedback is provided, specific LREs are not used at all, and 
various words are employed in commentaries, much like when feedback is provided for the use of 
language in general (simple metalanguage specific LREs). 
As our second research question was ‘How do Spanish students react to that feedback, as seen in their 
linguistic behaviour or written output?’, the data in the wikis revealed that there are some effects which 
are related to morphosyntactic and lexical aspects, and others which focus on affective feedback. To 
begin with those dealing with morphosyntactic or lexical aspects, both in simple and compound LREs, the 
effect which is most commonly found is that by means of which Spanish students attend and apply their 
peers’ feedback (76.8%). Secondly (12.7% of the cases), the Spanish students’ option was to ignore the 
feedback. Sometimes, this behavior may have been triggered by incorrect feedback. For instance: 
Spanish student’s text: “Its base is hidden by the building which houses Blackpool Tower 
Circus.” 
English peers’ correction: “It’s base is hidden by the building which houses Blackpool Tower 
Circus.” 
Spanish student’s final version: “Its base is hidden by the building which houses Blackpool 
Tower Circus.” (pair 4) 
The third type of effect involves the partial correction of the aspects pointed out in the LREs (6.8%). 
Table 9 shows the percentages of each of the effects in our data. 
Table 9. Types of Feedback Effects 
Feedback ignored Incorporated Affective 
No reaction 
Affective 
Thanks 
Partial 
correction 
12.7 % 76.8% 3.1% 0.45% 6.8% 
When students received affective LREs, their most frequent behavior was the lack of language-based 
reaction (3.1% of the cases) and only in 0.45% of the cases students thanked their peers.  
The results obtained concerning the third research question, related to the role played by other variables, 
are presented here. First, the total number of words which English students employed in their feedback 
was 1,121. As a result, the mean of words per LRE is 4.9, again showing important differences between 
pairs. Thus, pair eight has the lowest mean of words per LRE, followed by pair four (2.37) and pair 10 
(1.47), while pair six shows the highest (10.68). Table 10 shows the mean number of words used per LRE 
in wikis. 
María Belén Díez-Bedmar and Pascual Pérez-Paredes Types and Effects of Peer NSs’ Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 78 
Table 10. Mean Number of Words Used Per LRE in Wikis 
Pair Mean words/LREs in wikis 
1 3.9 
2 3.3 
3 3.0 
4 2.3 
5 6.8 
6 10.6 
7 4.7 
8 0.0 
9 8.2 
10 2.7 
Mean 4.9 
As regards the number of words per LRE type, LREs which are lexical commentaries involve a higher 
number of words (33.5%), followed by morphosyntactic specific (26.74%) and morphosyntactic 
commentaries (20.20%). The lowest number of words per type of LRE is seen in metalanguage specific 
LREs (0%), since they do not trigger any words at all (0%). As revealed in our data, in the case of lexical 
LREs, commentaries are those which involve the highest number of words, whereas in the LREs related 
to morphosyntax, the specific LREs are the ones with a higher number of words (Table 11). In fact, our 
data show that students tend to use the specific type more often, without making any comment on the 
feedback they are providing. 
Table 11. Types of Feedback in Wikis 
Type of feedback Number of 
LREs 
LRE words % discourse English speakers 
devoted to LREs 
Morphosyntactic specific 121 180 1.9% 
Morphosyntactic commentary 15 136 1.5% 
Lexical specific 28 44 0.4% 
Lexical commentary 20 226 2.5% 
Meta commentary 5 55 0.6% 
Goal-oriented 3 32 0.3% 
Finally, it is interesting to point out here that the context in which these LREs and interactions took place 
was a wiki which each pair shared and used as they considered appropriate. As a consequence, each wiki 
was active for a different number of days and consisted of a varying number of drafts by the Spanish 
student and a varying number of LREs provided by the English peer: 4.9 days is the mean number of days 
when the students used the wiki, with values ranging from one day (pair eight) to 14 (pair nine), although 
the wiki was available to them all since the very start of the task. However, students used the wikis at the 
very end of the collaborative writing experience, when the deadline was approaching, which determined 
the amount of days when the wiki was used. Closely related to the days of activity of the wiki is the 
number of LREs provided by the English peers, since it was expected that the more days the wiki was 
active, the more LREs would be provided by the English peers. However, our data reveal that, contrary to 
María Belén Díez-Bedmar and Pascual Pérez-Paredes Types and Effects of Peer NSs’ Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 79 
expectations, the pair which used the wiki for more days (i.e., pair 9), was the pair in which the English 
student provided the lowest amount of LREs, if the lack of LREs in couple eight is not considered. 
Therefore, it seems that there is not a pattern which determines a relationship between the number of days 
of wiki use and the number of LREs provided, as it can also be seen in the fact that pairs one and two 
used the wiki for three days each, but in the first one 31 LREs were provided, and in the second one 23 
LREs were offered. 
DISCUSSION 
Our research addresses online communication which integrates different technologies and interaction 
types, mainly, forum and wiki CMC. This gave us the chance to explore, for the first time in the academic 
literature, how peer feedback manifested itself in two different communication modes, forum and wiki, 
which were parts of an online collaborative writing task for the same sample of learners, and what the 
effect of this feedback was in both settings. This discussion will be divided into three subsections, namely 
the types of LREs in forums and wikis, the types of effects on the Spanish students after feedback and, 
thirdly, some methodological considerations. 
Types of LREs in forums and wikis 
In light of our data, providing feedback, or failing to do so, cannot be attributed exclusively to the peer-
group variable. In the 4-forum set altogether, all the pairs but number three were able to provide and 
process feedback. In the wiki stage, the same percentage was found, only that this time pair eight was 
providing and processing no feedback whatsoever, possibly due to the fact that the Spanish student wrote 
her material in the wiki too close to the deadline and did not allow enough time for her peer to react. 
Secondly, it seems that despite the opportunities that forum-based communication offered for the 
negotiation of meaning and the provision of feedback, in quantitative terms, that is, in terms of the 
number of feedback LREs, learners probably felt that the forum was not the place to do this, and opted for 
giving feedback in a wiki-context which, paradoxically, is less friendly for the interchange of ideas. The 
nature of the task to be conducted in the wiki (i.e. the provision of appropriate feedback during the actual 
writing of the brochure) may have been regarded as a more information gap task, where lexical and 
morphological information is somehow demanded by the learner and provided by the peer.  
Our results may suggest that if a researcher is looking for feedback of a morphosyntactic or lexical nature, 
a wiki may provide learners with plenty more opportunities to find it in the context of the type of multi-
stage writing promoted in our experience. Our data show that the forum is preferred by learners when it 
comes to offering feedback which is focused neither on morphosyntactic nor on lexical LREs, but rather 
on feedback-related, goal-achieving messages. This is confirmed by Kessler and Bikowski (2010), who 
found that interaction is favoured by flexible learning environments. Our finding confirms theories which 
highlight the ecological nature of technology (Postman, 1993), that is, the fact that the use of technologies 
influences people in such deep, personal ways that their use even in educational settings is conditioned by 
social customs. In this context, learners seem to have used forums primarily as communication platforms 
to establish bonds with their peers, finding affective, goal-oriented feedback more suitable despite the 
explicit instructions from the instructors to provide feedback on their peers’ language use. In fact, 
affective, goal-oriented feedback is provided in the wikis mainly when the English peer wants to make 
sure that his/her peer will carry on working in the platform or feels that the communicative channel has 
broken down due to the lack of interaction by the Spanish learner. In other words, this type of feedback is 
provided when there is a lack of participation of the Spanish student in the wiki because s/he fails to 
correct aspects which have been pointed out or including more data. See, for instance: 
English peer’s LRE: “es muy bien y muy interesante de leer… y la lengua que utilizas es muy 
bien. si necesitas cambiarlo otras vez no hay problema… voy a hacer el mio ahora” [It’s very 
good and very interesting to read…and the language you use is very good. if you need to change 
María Belén Díez-Bedmar and Pascual Pérez-Paredes Types and Effects of Peer NSs’ Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 80 
this again, there is no problem. I am going to do mine now] (pair 1) 
As suggested by O’Dowd (2003, p. 139), successful intercultural communication rests upon abilities such 
as “building up a personal relationship … sensitivity to their partners' needs and communicative style, and 
their capacity to produce engaging” communication. This was found in the affective, goal-oriented 
feedback provided by the English speakers to their Spanish peers in instances such as this: 
English peer’s LRE: “ahhhhh ok.....yo veo. gracias. buena suerte con su trabajo.y cuando estas 
completo, puedo tambien leerlo para ti” [Ahhhh ok…..I see. thanks. good luck with your work 
and when you have finished, I can read it for you] (pair 1) 
As seen in the example above, the type of feedback provided resembles more the type of encouraging and 
real-life interaction that takes place in successful social and professional networks. Similarly, our data 
corroborates Kol and Schcolnik’s (2008) finding that in the forum their EAP “students did not discuss the 
texts, .... rather, they used the forums to react to the ideas, the new information …” (p. 61).  
This appears to only clash with Ware and O’Dowd’s (2008) finding that learners are more likely to 
provide feedback if they are instructed to do so. In our data, this is the case only if, for morphosyntactic 
and lexical feedback, instructions are accompanied by computer interaction, i.e. a forum or a wiki, which 
is perceived as feedback-prone or information-demanding by the learners.  
These insights into the type of feedback preferred by learners in the forum and the wiki stages are of great 
interest in the development of online communication tasks, which can subsequently benefit from a multi-
purpose feedback orientation which reflects learning experiences which not only focus on form, but also 
on creating rich opportunities for the negotiation of meaning (Barbour & Collins, 2005; Cummings, 
Bonk, & Jacobs, 2002; Wu & Hiltz, 2004).  
Types of Effects of the Feedback on the Spanish Students 
When considering the effects of the feedback on the Spanish students, they varied according to the type of 
interaction in which learners were involved. In the cases in which students receive morphosyntactic or 
lexical LREs in the forums, they attend the linguistic aspects pointed out. When they were working on the 
wiki, three effects were observed, namely their ignoring the LREs, their incorporation, and the partial use 
of the feedback. Students were conscious that the final product of the collaborative writing experience, 
the tourist brochure, would be evaluated by the teacher and would add marks to their final grade in the 
course, and therefore only used their peers’ feedback when they felt it was correct and useful (see 
Methodological considerations below).On the contrary, the forums were perceived as a more friendly 
environment in which students interact with their peers not only to do their task, but also to establish a 
bond. 
This defining characteristic of forums also leads to the higher number of affective LREs. Consequently, 
the number of effects posed by affective LREs was higher in forums than in wikis. In other words, the 
Spanish students’ main interest is to receive their peers’ morphosyntactic or lexical feedback in the wiki, 
so that they could correct those aspects which they have not used properly and, thus, improved their use 
of the language to obtain a higher mark in their course, Gramática Inglesa. Although incidental learning 
(Hulstijn, 2003) might have taken place, the students’ focus on form, rather than on meaning, might 
indicate that intentional learning took place on most occasions. The Spanish students’ partial correction of 
their peers’ suggestions in morphosyntactic and/or LREs may also point to the students’ intentional 
learning, since they checked their peer’s comments in dictionaries and/or grammars when they felt it was 
necessary. 
Affective LREs in both interaction types triggered the same types of effect in decreasing order of 
frequency: either students did not show any language -based reaction or they thanked their peers. While 
María Belén Díez-Bedmar and Pascual Pérez-Paredes Types and Effects of Peer NSs’ Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 81 
the lack of language-based reaction in the wikis may be explained by the short amount of time devoted to 
the writing task in the wikis, the pressure of the deadline, and the interest in correcting the drafts with the 
peers’ feedback, the high number of occasions in which Spanish students did not react to their peers’ 
affective feedback in the forums was unexpected. Similarly, thanking their peers was not a common 
practice among our students, especially in the wikis, probably due to the same reason as stated before.  
METHODOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
Our research also sheds light on methodological issues of interest for the analysis of feedback in online 
communication. One of these affects the unit of analysis itself, that is, how to approach the analysis of 
LREs. Due to the variety of taxonomies regarding the analysis of LREs (e.g. Blake, 2000; Ellis, 
Basturkmen, & Loewen, 2001; Lyster & Ranta, 1997; Smith, 2003, 2005; Varonis & Gass, 1985; Ware & 
O’Dowd, 2008), we decided to use Ware and O’Dowd’s since it had been used in a context similar to 
ours. Therefore, drawing on their taxonomy, we have expanded it so that all the LREs in our data could be 
coded and examined. However, the most interesting discovery which emerges from our data is related to 
the ratios which affect LREs per number of words. We have found that the ratios which express the 
relationship between the number of LRE words and the number of LREs, and the number of posts per 
pair, both predict quite successfully the suitability of a particular sub-task, i.e. a forum, as a feedback 
trigger. On the contrary, the active days of a particular sub-task is not a good predictor of feedback 
providing for both forums and wikis. In the forums, we found that the number of LREs is not constant 
across all four forums, which opens up an interpretation of this fact in terms of forum subject matter and 
the type of task required as key explanatory factors. This finding may lead us to tentatively conclude that 
the more negotiation of meaning is implied in the writing task, the more chance there is for native-speaker 
feedback and language learning (Long & Robinson, 1998). Figure 3 shows that the pattern that governs 
the provision of feedback is independent of the number of words written by the Spanish peers: 
 
 
Figure 3. Words written by Spanish peers and number of LREs.  
The number of words written by the Spanish learners does not seem to determine a matching pattern in 
the provision of feedback. This finding should be taken tentatively and future research should look at this 
María Belén Díez-Bedmar and Pascual Pérez-Paredes Types and Effects of Peer NSs’ Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 82 
more closely and establish conclusions based on non-inferential statistics. In a similar way, the number of 
LREs provided in the wiki stage was not determined by the number of words written by the Spanish peers 
in their draft version, as seen in those draft versions with the highest number of words (i.e., 1,126 and 
1,876) that triggered 22 and 23 LREs respectively, whereas the highest number of LREs was given to a 
text with 1,116 words. On the contrary, a text with 476 words triggered 32 LREs.  
The quality of the feedback provided by the English peers is, in general terms, appropriate. English 
students specify where the problems are and use specific and/or commentaries to improve their peers’ 
brochures. However, two types of situations are worth pointing out. First, the cases in which the Spanish 
student notices that the feedback obtained is not accurate, as shown in the section on wikis above, and 
decides not to use it for his/her brochure or only partially use it. Second, some affective LREs provided 
by the peers congratulating the Spanish students for the specialised vocabulary they are using, even 
recognising on some occasions that they had to look words up to check that the specialised words were 
the correct ones. These two scenarios lead to a crucial issue: the distinction between being a native 
speaker of a language and mastering it. In both cases, the Spanish student feels that his/her knowledge of 
the foreign language is somehow better than that of the native speakers, which makes them feel more 
confident (Kessler, 2009) and fosters their language learning process in general. 
CONCLUSION 
Although the results of this paper are to be taken cautiously due to the number of participants (N = 20), 
given the university background in which the online collaborative experience took place, and the 
students’ culture-of-use (Thorne, 2003), interesting conclusions may be drawn. 
Regarding the effect of feedback on the learners, we can conclude that, although morphosyntactic and 
lexical feedback is largely acknowledged and incorporated, the Spanish peers in this experience seemed 
to only accept it when they perceived it as correct without further follow-up or discussion. Feedback of an 
affective nature failed to promote further discussion, perhaps due to intercultural dynamics. These effects 
varied, however, in the forums and the wiki stages, the forums triggering more thankful responses than 
the wikis. This difference may stem from the fact that, whereas the forums were viewed as a friendlier 
environment in which to establish bonds with peers in order to facilitate collaborative work in the wikis, 
students were more interested in the final product (i.e. their brochures) when attending to their peers’ 
comments in the LREs in the wikis. The pressure for time when working in the wiki may have also 
played an important role in the (almost non-existent) effect of affective LREs. Further research will be 
necessary to confirm these findings in new contexts.  
While the LRE appears to be a valid working unit of analysis in the study of peer feedback, it remains to 
be seen more conclusively how it relates to other measures of activity like the number of words per LRE, 
the total number of running words per post/wiki or even the life cycle in terms of days of a given activity. 
Our data suggest that similar results are found when using words per type of LRE or types of LRE to 
analyze the feedback provided, although the use of the former may lead to contradictions such as the 
higher percentage of words in commentary LREs, as opposed to that in specific ones (see section Wikis 
above). Future research should concentrate on the analysis of all of these variables and their effect on peer 
feedback in order to gain further knowledge on which conditions are more likely to promote successful 
peer-feedback. A replication of our study with a larger number of subjects coming from a more varied 
array of backgrounds would certainly contribute to a better understanding of the role of peer feedback in 
online communication and would help teachers and researchers make a more efficient use of CMC tools. 
Similarly, although the effect of the feedback provided by peer students was carefully analyzed in terms 
of observable language behavior, that is, discourse restructuring, an intercultural perspective together with 
attitudinal questionnaires may shed light on factors that could not possibly be taken into account in the 
context of this analysis. 
María Belén Díez-Bedmar and Pascual Pérez-Paredes Types and Effects of Peer NSs’ Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 83 
Appendix A. A snapshot of the virtual platform 
 
María Belén Díez-Bedmar and Pascual Pérez-Paredes Types and Effects of Peer NSs’ Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 84 
Appendix B. Guidelines for forums and wikis 
FORUMS 
Meeting each other 
This the place to introduce yourself to your partner. This stage is an opportunity for you to get to know 
each other before starting working hard! You may have common hobbies, interests, worries, and so on. 
You may have been to the same places on holidays! How long have you been studying the foreign 
language for? Have you ever been to Spain/England? Why don’t you use the forum to find it out? 
Choosing a monument to write about 
At this stage you need to decide which building/painting/sculpture/town you will describe in your tourist 
brochure. After you have done so, write a 300-word text explaining to your peer why you have chosen 
such building/painting/sculpture/town.  
Include the following information: 
The reasons why you have chosen that building/painting/sculpture/town 
Why you like it (artist? Period? You’ve been there?) 
The aspects you would like to focus on 
The aspects which will be difficult to describe 
Where you will look for the necessary information 
If you could not describe that building/painting/sculpture/town, which is your second option? Why? 
Read your partner's contribution and reply at least once to it giving him/her your own opinion on the 
suitability of the election. 
Brainstorming 
At this sub-stage you need to think about the aspects which will be included in your description. For 
instance, if it is a building, you need to think about the location, the architect, the style, the materials 
employed, the decoration (if any), etc. 
Please, write the necessary keywords and relate them under appropriate headings. If you have a scanner 
and you prefer to draw your brainstorming, feel free to do so. 
Read your partner's contribution and reply at least once giving him/her your own opinion on these 
keywords. 
Looking for information 
Any tourist brochure needs to be well-informed. Therefore, bibliographical information is needed to 
proceed with the writing task. You may want to have a look at the library catalogue, online resources, etc. 
In case you had any doubt on bibliographical information, please contact your instructor. Once you have 
the appropriate references, write the bibliography that you will use below. 
Reply to your partner and tell him/her your impressions on the suitability of these sources. 
WIKI 
Paragraphing and writing process 
This is the final and the most crucial stage of the whole activity. We expect you to write your contribution 
and read your partner’s and give feedback on areas such as text cohesion and coherence, grammaticality, 
style, vocabulary choice, etc.  
María Belén Díez-Bedmar and Pascual Pérez-Paredes Types and Effects of Peer NSs’ Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 85 
In order to write a good description you need to think about how you are going to organize all the 
information that you have in the text. 
Brochure 
Once you are done with the brochure, this is the site in which you should update your files in order to 
send it to the teacher. 
 
NOTES 
1. A language-related episode (LRE) is a part of a dialogue where learners “talk about the language they 
are producing, question their language use, or correct themselves or others” (Swain & Lapkin 1998, p. 
326). 
2. Translations of LREs in Spanish are provided. They are intended to show the type of interaction which 
students were engaged in but do not attempt to reproduce the type of mistakes therein. 
3. Please note that the examples of the students’ writing are verbatim transcriptions from the learner 
corpora. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The research in this paper, Computer-mediated communication (CMC): aspectos lingüísticos, 
pragmáticos e Interculturales, has been funded through a research grant from the Plan de Apoyo a la 
Investigación, Desarrollo Tecnológico e Innovación de la Univeridad de Jaén (Acción 16, bienio 2007-
2008). We authors would also like to acknowledge the editors of LL&T and the anonymous reviewers for 
their insightful comments. 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
María Belén Díez-Bedmar is Assistant Professor at the University of Jaén (Spain). She holds a PhD on 
learner corpora and assessment. She co-edited the book “Linking up Contrastive and Learner Corpus 
Research”, and is involved in various corpus-based national and international projects. She was also 
granted the Morley Scholarship at the ELI.  
E-mail: belendb@ujaen.es 
Pascual Pérez-Paredes was project coordinator of SACODEYL and now coordinates Corpora for Content 
& Language Integrated Learning. He is involved in corpus-based international projects, and has published 
in ReCALL and co-edited a volume on Software-aided analysis of language. He has just completed a 
research stay in Northern Arizona University. 
E-mail: pascualf@um.es 
 
REFERENCES 
An, H., Kim, S., & Kim, B. (2008). Teacher perspectives on online collaborative learning: Factors 
perceived as facilitating and impeding successful online group work. Contemporary Issues in Technology 
and Teacher Education, 8(1), 65–83. 
Appel, C., & Mullen, T. (2000). Pedagogical considerations for a web-based tandem language learning 
environment. Computers & Education Archive, 34(3-4), 291–308. 
Arnold, N., Ducate, L., Lomicka, L., & Lord, G. (2005). Using computer-mediated communication to 
María Belén Díez-Bedmar and Pascual Pérez-Paredes Types and Effects of Peer NSs’ Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 86 
establish social and supportive environments in teacher education. CALICO Journal, 22(3), 537–566. 
Arnold, N., Ducate, L., & Kost, C. (2009). Collaborative writing in wikis: insights from culture projects 
in German classes. In L. Lomicka & G. Lord (Eds.), The Next Generation: Social networking and online 
collaboration in foreign language learning (pp. 115–144). San Marcos, TX: CALICO. 
Barbour, M. K., & Collins, M. A. J. (2005). Online writing as an indicator of student performance. 
International Journal of Instructional Technology & Distance Learning, 2(8). Retrieved 
from http://www.itdl.org/Journal/Aug_05/article02.htm. 
Bax, S. (2003). CALL—past, present and future. System, 31(1), 13–28. 
Belz, J. A. (2002). Social dimensions of telecollaborative foreign language study. Language Learning & 
Technology, 6(1), 60–81. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/default.html. 
Belz, J. A. (2003). Linguistic perspectives on the development of intercultural competence in 
telecollaboration. Language Learning & Technology, 7(2), 68–117. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/ 
vol7num2/belz/default.html. 
Belz, J. (2006). At the intersection of telecollaboration, learner corpus analysis, and L2 pragmatics: 
Considerations for language program direction. In J. Belz & S. Thorne (Eds.), Internet-mediated 
intercultural foreign language education (pp. 207–246). Boston: Heinle & Heinle. 
Blake, R. (2000). Computer mediated communication: A window on L2 Spanish interlanguage. Language 
Learning & Technology, 4(1), 120–136. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/blake/default.html. 
Blake, R., & Zyzik, E. (2003). Who’s helping whom? Learner/heritage-speakers’ networked discussions 
in Spanish. Applied Linguistics, 24(4), 519–544. 
Chandler, J. (2003). The efficacy of various kinds of error correction for improvement of the accuracy 
and fluency of L2 student writing. Journal of Second Language Writing 12, 267–296. 
Chapelle, C. (1997). CALL in the year 2000: Still in search of research paradigms? Language Learning & 
Technology, 1(1), 19–43. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/chapelle/default.html. 
Chen, C. E. (2006).The development of e-mail literacy: from writing to peers to writing to authority 
figures. Language Learning & Technology, 10(2), 35–55. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/ 
vol10num2/default.html. 
Council of Europe. (2001). Common European Framework of Reference for Language: Learning, 
teaching, assessment. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Cummings, J. A., Bonk, C. J. & Jacobs, F. R. (2002). Twenty first century college syllabi: Options for 
online communication and interactivity. Internet and Higher Education, 5(1), 1–19. 
Díez-Bedmar, M.-B. (2008). En y hacia Bolonia: Los casos de fonética experimental y gramática Inglesa 
en dos titulaciones de la UJA. In Obra Colectiva, III Jornadas sobre Espacio Europeo de Educación 
Superior “Avanzando hacia Bolonia” (pp. 1-15). Murcia: EDINUM. 
Ellis, R., Basturkmen, H. & Loewen, S. (2001). Preemptive focus on form in the ESL classroom. TESOL 
Quarterly, 35, 407–432. 
Ellis, R., Basturkmen, H. & Loewen, S. (2002). Doing focus on form. System 30, 419–432. 
Ellis, R., Sheen, Y., Murakami, M. & Takashima, H. (2008). The effects of focused and unfocused 
written corrective feedback in an English as a foreign language context. System, 36, 353–371. 
Faigley, L. (1986). Competing theories of process: A critique and a proposal. College English, 48, 527–
542. 
María Belén Díez-Bedmar and Pascual Pérez-Paredes Types and Effects of Peer NSs’ Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 87 
Ferris, D. R. (1995). Can advanced ESL students be taught to correct their most serious and frequent 
errors? CATESOL Journal, 8(1), 41– 62. 
Ferris, D. R. (1997). The influence of teacher commentary on student revision. TESOL Quarterly, 31, 
315– 339. 
Ferris, D. R., & Roberts, B. (2001). Error feedback in L2 writing classes. How explicit does it need to be? 
Journal of Second Language Writing, 10, 161–184. 
Firth, A., & Wagner, J. (1997). On discourse, communication, and (some) fundamental concepts in 
second language acquisition research. Modern Language Journal, 81(3), 285–300. 
Garrison, D. R., Anderson, T. & Archer, W. (1999). Critical inquiry in a text-based environment: 
computer conferencing in higher education. The Internet and Higher Education, 2, 87–105. 
Garrison D. R., & Arbaugh J. B. (2007). Researching the community of inquiry framework: review, 
issues, and future directions. The Internet and Higher Education, 10, 157–172. 
Godwin-Jones, B. (2003). Blogs and wikis: Environments for on-line Collaboration. Language Learning 
& Technology, 7(2), 12–16. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/default.html. 
Godwin-Jones, B. (2005). Messaging, gaming, peer-to-peer sharing: Language learning strategies & tools 
for the millennial generation. Language Learning & Technology, 9(1), 17–22. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num1/default.html. 
Grabe, W., & Kaplan, R. B. (1996). Theory and practice of writing. London and New York: Longman. 
Greenfield, R. (2003). Collaborative e-mail exchange for teaching secondary ESL: A case study in Hong 
Kong. Language Learning & Technology, 7(1), 46–70. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7 
num1/default.html. 
Hedge, T. (1988). Writing. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Hulstijn, J. H. (2003). Incidental and intentional learning. In C. J. Doughty & M. H. Long (Eds.), The 
handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 349–381). London: Blackwell.  
Kern, R. G. (1995). Restructuring classroom interaction with networked computers: Effects on quantity 
and characteristics of language production. The Modern Language Journal, 79(4), 457–475 
Kern, R., & Warschauer, M. (2000). Introduction: Theory and practice of network-based language 
teaching. In M. Warschauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Network-Based Language Teaching: Concepts and 
Practice (pp. 1–19). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Kessler, G. (2009). Student-initiated attention to form in wiki-based collaborative writing. Language 
Learning & Technology, 13(1), 79–95. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num1/default.html. 
Kessler, G., & Bikowski, D. (2010). Developing collaborative autonomous learning abilities in computer 
mediated language learning: attention to meaning among students in wiki space. Computer Assisted 
Language Learning, 23(1), 41–58. 
Kol, S., & Schcolnik, M. (2008). Asynchronous forums in EAP: assessment issues. Language Learning & 
Technology, 12(2), 49–70. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num2/default.html. 
Kötter, M. (2003). Negotiation of meaning and codeswitching in online tandems. Language Learning & 
Technology, 7(2), 145–172. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/default.html. 
Krashen, S. D. (1979). A response to McLaughlin, ‘The monitor model, some methodological 
considerations’. Language Learning, 29, 151–167. 
Krashen, S. (1984). Writing, research, theory, and application. Oxford: Pergamon Press. 
María Belén Díez-Bedmar and Pascual Pérez-Paredes Types and Effects of Peer NSs’ Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 88 
Lalande, J. F., II (1982). Reducing composition errors: An experiment. Modern Language Journal, 66, 
140–149. 
Laufer, B., & Girsai, N. (2008). Form-focused instruction in second language vocabulary learning: A case 
for contrastive analysis and translation. Applied Linguistics, 29(4), 694–716. 
Lee, L. (2008). Focus-on-form through collaborative scaffolding in expert-to-novice online interaction. 
Language Learning & Technology, 12(3), 53–72. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num3/ 
default.html. 
Levy, M., & Kennedy, C. (2004). A task-cycling pedagogy using stimulated reflection and audio-
conferencing in foreign language learning. Language Learning & Technology, 8(2), 50–68. Retrieved 
from http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num2/default.html. 
Loewen, S., & Erlam, R. (2006). Corrective feedback in the chatroom: An experimental study. Computer 
Assisted Language Learning 19(1), 1–14. 
Long, M. H., & Robinson, P. (1998). Focus on form: Theory, research and practice. In C. Doughty & J. 
Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in second language acquisition (pp. 15–41). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Lund, A. (2008). Wikis: A collective approach to language production. ReCALL, 20(1), 35–54. 
Lyster, R., & Ranta, L. (1997). Corrective feedback and learner uptake: negotiation of form in 
communicative classrooms. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 19, 37–67. 
McLoughlin C., & Lee, M. J. W. (2007). Social software and participatory learning: Pedagogical choices 
with technology affordances in the Web 2.0 era. Paper presented at the 2007 Ascilite Conference in 
Singapore. Retrieved from http://www.ascilite.org.au/conferences/singapore07/ 
procs/mcloughlin.pdf. 
Miyazoe, T., & Anderson, T. (2010). Learning outcomes and students' perceptions of online writing: 
Simultaneous implementation of a forum, blog, and wiki in an EFL blended learning setting. System, 
38(2), 185–199. 
Murphy, P. (2010). Web-based collaborative reading exercises for learners in remote locations: the effects 
of computer-mediated feedback and interaction via computer-mediated communication. ReCALL, 22(2), 
112-134. 
Nesselhauf, N. (2004). How learner corpus analysis can contribute to language teaching: A study of 
support verb constructions. In G. Aston, S. Bernardini & D. Stewart (Eds.), Corpora and Language 
Learners (pp. 109–124). Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins. 
O’Dowd, R. (2003). Understanding the “other side”: Intercultural learning in a Spanish-English e-mail 
exchange. Language Learning & Technology, 7(2), 118–144. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/ 
vol7num2/default.html. 
O’Dowd, R. (2006). Telecollaboration and the development of intercultural communicative competence. 
Munich, Germany: Langenscheidt-Longman. 
O’Dowd, R. (Ed.). (2007). Online intercultural exchange. An introduction for foreign language teachers. 
Clevedon: Multilingual Matters. 
O’Rourke, B. (2005). Form-focused interaction in online tandem learning. CALICO Journal, 22(3), 433–
466. Retrieved from https://calico.org/i-18-Vol%2022,%20No.%203%20(My%202005).html. 
Ortega, L. (1997). Processes and outcomes in networked classroom interaction: defining the research 
agenda for L2 computer-assisted classroom discussion. Language Learning & Technology, 1(1), 82–93. 
María Belén Díez-Bedmar and Pascual Pérez-Paredes Types and Effects of Peer NSs’ Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 89 
Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/default.html. 
Pellettieri, J. (2000). Negotiation in cyberspace: The role of chatting in the development of grammatical 
competence. In M. Warschauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Network-Based Language Teaching: Concepts and 
Practice (pp. 59–86). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Pena-Shaff, J. B., & Nicholls C. (2004). Analyzing student interactions and meaning construction in 
computer bulletin board discussions. Computers and Education, 42, 243–265. 
Peterson, M. (2009). Learner interaction in synchronous CMC: A sociocultural perspective. Computer 
Assisted Language Learning, 22(4), 303–321.  
Postman, N. (1993). Technopoly: The surrender of culture to technology. New York: Vintage Books. 
Richards, J. C. (1990). The language teaching matrix. In J. C. Richards (Ed.), From meaning into words: 
Writing in a second or foreign language (pp. 100–117). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  
Robb, T., Ross, S., & Shortreed, I. (1986). Salience of feedback on error and its effect on EFL writing 
quality. TESOL Quarterly, 20, 83–93. 
Sachs, R., & Suh, B. (2007). Textually enhanced recasts, learner awareness, and L2 outcomes in 
synchronous computer-mediated interaction. In. A. Mackey (Ed.), Conversational interaction in second 
language acquisition: A collection of empirical studies (pp. 197–227). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Sánchez-Tornel, M., & Pérez-Paredes, P. (2008). The integration of social constructionist web enhanced 
language learning in Legal English: Understanding new learning skills. In P. Sánchez Hernández, P. 
Pérez-Paredes, P. Aguado Jiménez. & R. Criado Sánchez (Eds.), Researching and teaching specialized 
languages: New contexts, new challenges (pp. 845–860). Murcia: Editum, Universidad de Murcia. 
Sauro, S. (2009). Computer-mediated corrective feedback and the development of L2 grammar. Language 
Learning & Technology, 13(1), 96–120. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num1/default.html. 
Schmidt, R. (2001). Attention. In P. Robinson (Ed.), Cognition and second language instruction (pp. 3–
32). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Schmidt, R. (1995). Consciousness and foreign language learning: A tutorial on the role of attention and 
awareness in learning. In R.W. Schmidt (Ed.), Attention and awareness in foreign language learning and 
teaching (pp. 1–63). Honolulu, HI: University of Hawaii.  
Schroeder, A., Minocha, S., & Schneider, C. (2010). The strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats 
of using social software in higher and further education teaching and learning. Journal of Computer 
Assisted Learning, 26(3), 159–174. 
Seow, A. (2002). The writing process and process writing. In J. Richards & W. A. Renandya (Eds.), 
Methodology in language teaching. An anthology of current practice (pp. 315–320). Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Smith, B. (2003). Computer-mediated negotiated interaction: An expanded model. The Modern Language 
Journal, 87(1), 38–57. 
Smith, B. (2004). Computer-mediated negotiated interaction and lexical acquisition. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition, 26(3), 365–398. 
Smith, B. (2005). The relationship between negotiated interaction, learner uptake, and lexical acquisition 
in task-based computer-mediated communication. TESOL Quarterly 39(1), 33–58. 
Stickler, U., & Lewis, T. (2008). Collaborative language learning strategies in an email tandem exchange. 
In S. Hurd & T. Lewis (Eds.), Language learning strategies in independent settings (pp. 237–261). 
Bristol: Multilingual Matters. 
María Belén Díez-Bedmar and Pascual Pérez-Paredes Types and Effects of Peer NSs’ Feedback 
 
Language Learning & Technology 90 
Sun, C., & Feng, G. (2009). Process approach to teaching writing applied in different teaching models. 
English Language Teaching, 2(1), 150–155. 
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (1998). Interaction and second language learning: Two adolescent French 
immersion students working together. Modern Language Journal, 82(3), 320–337. 
Thorne, S. L. (2003). Artifacts and cultures-of-use in intercultural communication. Language Learning & 
Technology, 7(2), 38–67. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/default.html. 
Trentin G. (2009). Using a wiki to evaluate individual contribution to a collaborative learning project. 
Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 25, 43–55. 
Truscott, J. (1996). The case against grammar correction in L2 writing classes. Language Learning, 46, 
327–369. 
Tudini, V. (2003). Using native speakers in chat. Language Learning & Technology, 7(3), 141–159. 
Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num3/default.html. 
Varonis, E., & Gass, S. (1985). Non-native / non-native conversations: A model for negotiation of 
meaning. Applied Linguistics, 6, 71–90. 
Ware, P. (2005). “Missed” communication in online communication: tensions in a German-American 
telecollaboration. Language Learning & Technology, 9(2), 64–89. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/ 
vol9num2/default.html. 
Ware, P., & O’Dowd, R. (2008). Peer feedback on language form in telecollaboration. Language 
Learning & Technology, 12(1), 43–63. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num1/default.html. 
Warschauer, M. (2000). On-line learning in second language classrooms: An ethnographic study. In M. 
Warschauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Network-Based Language Teaching: Concepts and Practice (pp. 41–58). 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Warschauer, M., & Kern, R. (Eds.). (2000). Network-Based Language Teaching: Concepts and Practice. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
White, L., Spada, S., Lightbown, P. M., & Ranta, L. (1991) Input enhancement and L2 question 
formation. Applied Linguistics 12(4), 416–432. 
Wu, D., & Hiltz, R. S. (2004). Predicting learning from asynchronous online discussions. Journal of 
Asynchronous Learning Networks, 8(2), 139–152. 
Yilmaz, Y., & Granena, G. (2010). The effects of task type in synchronous computer-mediated 
communication. ReCALL, 22(1), 20–23. 
