Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2012/commentary.pdf 
June 2012, Volume 16, Number 2 
pp. 1–3 
 
Copyright © 2012, ISSN 1094-3501 1 
SPECIAL ISSUE COMMENTARY 
HEGEMONIES IN CALL 
Marie-Noëlle Lamy, Open University 
Mark Pegrum, University of Western Australia 
An assumption that the technologies, pedagogies, and sociocultural norms associated with CALL are 
universal has implicitly permeated much of the discipline’s research over the past two decades. The 
current special issue draws together critical perspectives that problematize the workings of hegemonies, 
examining their complex effects on language students, teachers, and classrooms in a variety of linguistic 
and cultural settings, and considering what it means to resist them. This thought-provoking and 
provocative collection of articles from a multicultural, multilingual group of contributors contrasts voices 
from the Anglosphere with voices from less well-served territories, ensuring a fruitful dialogue between 
them. 
Hegemony refers to a situation where one culture or one form of praxis predominates and prevents the 
development or continued viability of alternative cultures and forms of praxis. In the field of CALL, 
hegemonies take varied and subtle shapes and forms. Technological hegemonies derive from the 
hegemonic implications of commonly used hardware, software and, of course, the Internet and the Web. 
Pedagogical hegemonies relate to the implications of social constructivism and associated interactive, 
collaborative, student-centred pedagogies, as well as curriculum and course design, while wider 
educational hegemonies derive from educational and institutional policies, expectations and norms. Going 
beyond strictly educational concerns, social hegemonies relate to the norms and practices of interaction 
and, specifically, online interaction. More broadly still, cultural and intercultural hegemonies might be 
seen to stem from Western cultural norms and approaches to cross-cultural contact, while sociopolitical 
hegemonies are tied to the hegemonic implications of larger social and political structures, as well as the 
implications of resistance to these and other hegemonies. In practice, as our authors reveal, hegemonic 
structures at one level are inseparable from hegemonic structures at other levels, while what is hegemonic 
in one context may become counterhegemonic in another. In short, this is a topic which requires 
reflective, carefully nuanced approaches, of the kind that the authors in this collection bring to the current 
discussion. 
In their paper, “Power within blended language learning programs in Japan,” Don Hinkelman and Paul 
Gruba examine the way that a shift towards a blended learning approach to CALL is about much more 
than technological change; it can be, they argue, an “interventionist strategy of iterative change in 
integrating face-to-face techniques with computer-based techniques” (p. 61). Reporting on longitudinal 
studies of EFL teaching at two Japanese universities, they show how, with an appropriately collaborative 
management culture, power can be redistributed as part of the move towards blended learning. Such a 
move can open up the potential for classrooms to transform from single-purpose CALL environments to 
spaces where a broader range of pedagogical approaches is possible; for locally produced multimedia 
materials to supplement or replace mass market materials; and for software to be configured to local 
needs. Such changes, they note, depend not only on shifting institutional hegemonies, but on wider shifts 
in “the political and economic ecosystems of language learning technology” (p. 61). 
Teacher resistance to pedagogical and educational hegemonies is the focus of Euline Cutrim Schmid and 
Shona Whyte’s paper, “Interactive whiteboards in state school settings: Teacher responses to socio-
constructivist hegemonies.” Reporting on a study of interactive whiteboard (IWB) use by non-native EFL 
teachers in French and German state schools, they argue that it is ineffective to try to hegemonically 
impose particular pedagogical approaches. Despite teachers’ socio-constructivist training, and despite the 
imposition of IWBs intended to support a socio-constructivist paradigm, the reality is that IWBs lend 
themselves to a wide range of educational practices and are not necessarily transformative in and of 
Marie-Noëlle Lamy and Mark Pegrum Special Issue Commentary 
 
Language Learning & Technology 2 
themselves. The study reveals that teachers used IWBs to support a variety of paradigms, from traditional 
grammar-translation and behaviourism to communicative and constructivist approaches. Teachers, then, 
find ways to resist educational and pedagogical hegemonies which do not sit easily with their own 
personal experiences, beliefs and contexts. In order to encourage teachers to engage more deeply with 
socio-constructivist CALL which, the authors observe, is currently our most effective model for language 
teaching with technology, there is a need for more teacher training and development, while social, 
cultural, and political settings must also be taken into account. 
In a paper entitled “Caught in the Web: Overcoming and reproducing hegemony in Azerbaijan,” Cara 
Preuss and Carolyn Morway explore the tension between the hegemonic and counterhegemonic potential 
of employing contemporary Western pedagogical approaches to teaching English in non-Western 
contexts. On the one hand, this practice may serve to impose Western pedagogical hegemonies, but on the 
other hand it may simultaneously disrupt “comfortable” local teaching practices and the local hegemonies 
they support. Reporting on a study of U.S. English teachers in Azerbaijan, the authors show how the 
teachers’ limited conception of CALL (the notion that it required fixed desktop technology in a lab) and 
misperception of students’ level of technology access (the notion that net access was limited) prevented 
them from exploring the pedagogical potential of the mobile technologies the students carried with them 
every day, and constrained their ability to act as critical educators whose work could lead to social 
change. After all, suggest the authors, CALL can help develop students’ technological skills, their ability 
to critically consume information, and their communicative options, all of which are tools they can use in 
the future to help them counter both local and global hegemonic practices.  
Francesca Helm, Sarah Guth, and Mohammed Farrah reflect on how telecollaboration projects can 
address cultural and intercultural hegemonies, in a paper entitled “Promoting dialogue or hegemonic 
practice? Power issues in telecollaboration.” They report on two cohorts of learners, from an Italian and a 
Palestinian university respectively, who interacted through the Soliya Connect Program; this is a program 
that fosters interaction between the Arab and Muslim world on the one hand, and the Western world on 
the other. Rather than being positioned as language learners, participants were positioned as 
representatives of their respective parts of the world, a polarization which increased the probability of 
intercultural conflict. However, the authors argue this is not necessarily a problem, with a dialogic 
approach to points of disagreement leading to opportunities for learning and a growth in intercultural 
awareness. In this way, telecollaboration projects can challenge technological, educational and especially 
cultural hegemonies by openly inviting learners to investigate and learn about differences and power 
dynamics in a safe, expertly facilitated environment. As the students reported, it can be a way of people 
coming “to know and understand each other as ‘human beings’ and ‘real people’” (p. 118). 
Before we leave the reader to meet our contributors, we would like to briefly reflect on our experience of 
putting together a special issue on this topic, specifically in relation to what we have called cultural and 
intercultural hegemonies. From its inception, the project harboured a potential contradiction: would our 
call for papers, launched in English on mainly English-medium networks, reach those scholars who might 
(a) be able to write from personal experience about the dominance of English in CALL, or (b) be willing 
to critique the “Anglospheric” academic culture in which they work? We soon found that many of those 
submitting were, if not from English-speaking countries, certainly from English-influenced cultures. 
Worse, as the editorial operations unfolded, several of those from other academic traditions fell foul of the 
genre conventions and the refereeing process. One startling incident involved a co-contributor publishing 
an immature version of one of the papers in an online journal without informing her co-authors, 
prompting the latter to wonder whether to blame a culturally determined misunderstanding of Western 
authoring ethics rather than an intent to plagiarize. 
Very similar inequalities to those mentioned in Lillis, Magyar and Robinson-Pant (2010) came to light in 
the process of our guest-editing of the special issue. They included (a) better performance by submitters 
with prior experience of publishing in “high status journals,” usually meaning U.S., Australian or 
Marie-Noëlle Lamy and Mark Pegrum Special Issue Commentary 
 
Language Learning & Technology 3 
European-based ones; (b) poorer performance by submitters with less easy “access to the necessary 
material resources for securing such publication…such as limited access to current journals” (Lillis et al., 
2010, p. 782); and (c) uneven performance by submitters from a “[d]iversity of linguistic-rhetorical 
practices” (ibid.). In an issue dedicated to critiquing sociocultural hegemonies, these inequalities cannot 
be glossed over. So to the broad question that our contributors addressed in their articles (i.e., “what kind 
of hegemonies are at work in CALL?”) we argue that two new questions should be added: “what kind of 
hegemonies condition the publication and dissemination of CALL research, and how can they be 
resisted?” Both this journal and Compare, the journal in which Lillis et al. (2010) were published, have 
taken deliberate steps in one possible direction1 by promoting training measures through publishing 
research guidelines or by setting up programmes of workshops and mentoring for intending submitters. 
Yet this is only one option, about which Lillis et al. comment: 
[e]ven if the programme is seen to have succeeded on its own terms (that is, that more non-
Anglophone writers are being published in Compare), there is the larger question about how far 
enabling writers from the ‘periphery’ greater voice and access to centre-based journals is 
strengthening the position of dominance of Anglophone centre and English language journals 
over all others (p. 796). 
As we explore the diverse and sometimes unexpected contexts and findings assembled in this issue, we 
should not lose track of that question. 
 
NOTE 
1. Another direction is to learn from the educational traditions of other world cultures. Nobody in the 
CALL community has attempted this. However, for a series of essays on pedagogy offline in non-
Western contexts, see Akkari and Dasen (2004), Pédagogies et pédagogues du Sud. Paris: L’Harmattan, 
http://www.editions-harmattan.fr/index.asp?navig=catalogue&obj=livre&no=18425 
 
REFERENCE 
Lillis, T., Magyar, A., & Robinson-Pant, A. (2010). An international journal’s attempts to address 
inequalities in academic publishing: Developing a writing for publication programme, Compare: A 
Journal of Comparative and International Education, 40 (6), 781–800. 
