Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2012/news.pdf 
October 2012, Volume 16, Number 3 
pp. 32–34 
 
Copyright © 2012, ISSN 1094-3501 32 
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS 
Sponsors 
University of Hawai„i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR) 
 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource 
Center (NFLRC)  
The University of Hawai„i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials 
development projects and conducts workshops and conferences for language professionals among its 
many activities. 
CALICO RETURNS TO HAWAI‘I FOR ITS 2013 CONFERENCE! 
The NFLRC and the Language Learning Center (LLC) at the University of Hawai„i at Mānoa are pleased 
to once again host the annual Computer Assisted Language Instruction Consortium (CALICO) 
Conference, to be held May 21–25, 2013, as it marks its 30th year.  The theme will be “Navigating the 
Complexities of Language Learning in the Digital Age.”  Conference highlights will include two days of 
pre-conference workshops, the Developers‟ Showcase, and three days of conference presentations.   
Interested in presenting at CALICO?  Submit your proposal today!  The deadline for the Call for 
Proposals is October 31, 2012.  For more information, visit https://www.calico.org/page.php?id=468. 
3RD INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON LANGUAGE DOCUMENTATION & 
CONSERVATION (ICLDC) 
Sponsored and organized by the NFLRC and the Department of Linguistics, the 3rd International 
Conference on Language Documentation and Conservation (ICLDC), “Sharing Worlds of Knowledge,” 
will be held February 28–March 3, 2013, at the Hawai„i Imin International Conference Center on the 
University of Hawai„i at Mānoa campus. 
By popular demand, the 3rd ICLDC will be a full day longer than the previous two conferences. The 
conference program will feature an integrated series of Master Class workshops.  An optional Hilo Field 
Study (on the Big Island of Hawai„i) to visit Hawaiian language revitalization programs in action will 
immediately follow the conference (March 4–5). 
This year‟s conference theme, “Sharing Worlds of Knowledge,” intends to highlight the interdisciplinary 
nature of language documentation and the need to share methods for documenting the many aspects of 
human knowledge that language encodes. We aim to build on the strong momentum created by the 1st 
and 2nd ICLDCs to discuss research and revitalization approaches yielding rich records that can benefit 
both the field of language documentation and speech communities. We hope you will join us. 
Website:  http://nflrc.hawaii.edu/icldc/2013/ 
 
  
 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 33 
STAY IN TOUCH WITH SOCIAL MEDIA 
Did you know that the NFLRC has its own Facebook page with over 1,000 fans? It‟s one of the best ways 
to hear about the latest news, publications, conferences, workshops, and resources we offer. Just click on 
the “Like” button to become a fan. For those who prefer getting up-to-the-minute “tweets,” you can 
follow us on our Twitter page. Finally, NFLRC has its own YouTube channel with a growing collection 
of free language learning and teaching videos for your perusal. Subscribe today! 
NEW NFLRC PUBLICATIONS 
Present communities of imagination (PCOIz) by Tim Murphey 
Using group dynamics as an umbrella term for overlapping literatures on community, cooperative, and 
collaborative practices, I introduce the concept of PCOIz which might help teachers to better 
conceptualize their classes and the time-frame influences on their students. I position PCOIz as 
complementary to but different from communities of practice and imagined communities, and in some 
ways overlapping, with an emphasis on imagining and re-imagining. We look at how teachers can 
systematically organize activities to look at students‟ pasts, presents, and futures. I also present several 
mixed method studies done in Japan which indicate that PCOIz, when well developed, can nurture the 
aspirations, resilience, learning strategies, beliefs, motivations, and possible selves of its members 
through critical dialogue and collaboration. View/download free. 
Check out our many other publications. 
Save the trees! Check out our other two online journals: 
  
Language Documentation & Conservation is a refereed, 
open-access journal sponsored by NFLRC and published 
by University of Hawai‘i Press. 
LD&C publishes papers on all topics related to language 
documentation and conservation, as well as book 
reviews, hardware and software reviews, and notes from 
the field. 
Reading in a Foreign Language is a refereed 
international journal of issues in foreign language reading 
and literacy, published twice yearly on the World Wide 
Web and sponsored by NFLRC and the University of 
Hawai`i College of Languages, Linguistics and Literature. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 34 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education 
and Research (CLEAR)  
CLEAR‟s mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States. 
Projects focus on materials development, professional development training, and foreign language 
research. 
CONFERENCES 
CLEAR exhibits at local and national conferences year-round. We hope to see you at ACTFL, CALICO, 
MIWLA, Central States, and other conferences. 
We will be presenting a session at ACTFL 2012. We hope to meet you in person! 
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
Our webinars continue to be a popular professional development option for educators who are not able to 
travel to MSU for our workshops. These low-cost, online, interactive workshops allow language teachers 
from around the country (and the world) to access CLEAR‟s professional development on demand. The 
currently available webinars focus on CLEAR‟s Rich Internet Applications and language assessment. We 
hope to add to the collection in the coming months. Webinar participants are able to apply for State Board 
Continuing Education Units. Detailed information on all webinars is posted on the webinars page of our 
Web site.  
MATERIALS DEVELOPMENT 
CLEAR is developing several new products during our fifth funding cycle. Check our Web site for 
updates on new products and services. Some of our upcoming projects include: 
 Professional development webinars on diverse topics (see above) 
 Online videos for language teaching techniques 
 Online listening and speaking tests for LCTLs 
NEWSLETTER 
CLEAR News is a free bi-yearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. 
Download PDFs of back issues and subscribe at http://clear.msu.edu/clear/newsletter/. 
 
