Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2012/review3.pdf 
October 2012, Volume 16, Number 3 
pp. 45–48 
 
Copyright © 2012, ISSN 1094-3501                                                                                                                                                 45 
REVIEW OF ROCKET LANGUAGES:  
INSPIRING LANGUAGE LEARNERS FOR LIFE 
Title Rocket languages: Inspiring language learners for life 
Program reviewed Rocket Chinese 
Levels Level 1: Rocket Chinese Premium 
Level 2: Rocket Chinese Premium Plus 
Computer system 
requirements 
Windows Users: 
(1) Microsoft Windows XP, Windows Vista, or Windows 7 
(2) Internet Explorer 8+, Chome or Firefox 4+ are recommended for the best 
experience 
(3) Adobe Flash 10.3+  
Mac Users: 
(1) OSX 10.4+  
(2) Chome, Firefox 4+ or Safari 3+ are recommended for the best experience 
(3) Adobe Flash 10.3+  
Publisher Libros Media Ltd. 
http://www.rocketlanguages.com 
(1) 8721 Santa Monica Blvd #1229, 
Los Angeles, CA 90069-4057, USA 
(2) 2-1008 Ferry Road, Woolston, 
Christchurch 8023, New Zealand 
Support offered (1) FAQ 
(2) Contact information 
(3) Tour video 
(4) Online community board 
Target language Chinese as a foreign/second language 
 
Review by Wan-Jeng Chang, Overseas Chinese University 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Rocket Chinese is a straightforward, and self-contained language learning website. Rocket Chinese has 
been developed specifically for English speakers who would like to learn Mandarin Chinese as a foreign 
or second language. Interactive content, intelligent dashboard displays, personalized customer support, 
and audio-based learning are all basic features of Rocket Chinese. With spot-on cultural information and 
insightful audio lessons, this program is ideal for beginning to low-intermediate adult learners. As an 
Internet-based language learning environment, Rocket Chinese combines up-to-date features of 
interactive tools, such as a voice comparison system and interactive audio files with the benefits of social 
utilities, such as Facebook, Twitter, and on-line forums. Users have lifetime access and get free upgrades 
when the program updates. 
NAVIGATION BAR 
Once users have used their account, the opening portal at each subsequent log-in will provide them with 
pie charts to orient them in their previous progress. Above these pie charts is the navigation bar which 
consists of five principal components: Interactive Audio Lessons, Language and Culture Lessons, 
Writing, Survival Kit, and Games. Each component has a drop-down list which shows different aspects of 
the program’s language learning resources and materials. Rocket Chinese presents an enhanced user 
Wan-Jeng Chang                                                                    Review of Rocket Languages 
 
Language Learning & Technology 46 
experience that combines listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills. 
PERSONALIZED DASHBOARD 
Below the navigation bar is a personalized dashboard which guides users on the recommended learning 
path by Rocket Chinese and allows users to see all the activities at a glance. This easy-to-manage 
interface contains several sections: Tour Video, My Overall Progress, Recent Activity, My Proficiency, 
Interactive Audio Lessons, Language and Culture Lessons, Writing, Survival Kit, and Games. 
Several of these sections are straightforward. An orientation “tour video” as well as additional strategy 
videos are offered. A self-rating system called "My Level" is introduced in the “My Overall Progress” area. 
This progress tracking system enables users to determine how well they know a lesson and whether they 
should restudy it or move on. Users can test their comprehension of words and phrases associated with 
each lesson and get an overall rating for future reference. Users may also simply click the “My Level” icon 
at the top right of every lesson to manually rate the lesson overall. Under “Recent Activity,” users can find 
a hyperlinked list of lessons they recently viewed and rated. The proficiency tests draw from the quizzes in 
each lesson. When a user has successfully completed each test, a certificate will be emailed for 
encouragement.   
There are, however, two comments about these sections. First, users need to notice that their progress does 
not automatically update when they finish a lesson, and they must rate a lesson before the pie charts reflect 
that change in progress. Also, the quizzes are shown in written form, which may confuse beginners who 
have no idea about Pinyin (Pinyin is a kind of phonetic alphabet that uses the Latin letters to standardize 
pronunciation of Chinese characters). It would be valuable if audio files could be provided at the same 
time so the learners have better idea about the quiz questions. 
The leading part of the program is the section “Interactive Audio Lessons,” which provides abundant 
material, including lesson content, conversation transcripts, audio files, practice record, notes, tour videos, 
lesson feedback, level rating system, and quizzes. The primary aim is to cultivate learners’ listening and 
speaking ability. Learners at level #1 can access thirty-one lessons, and level #2 learners can enjoy a more 
advanced selection of thirty-two courses in this section.  The interactive audio course is designed to get 
learners participating in a series of conversations between Mandarin Chinese speakers. It covers practical 
topics that one may encounter in a Chinese-speaking environment, from self-introductions to various 
points of discussion. The conversation page displays transcripts in Pinyin, Chinese script, and the English 
translation. Previous research has shown that the use of similar transcripts can facilitate second language 
comprehension (Chen, 2011). While the interactive audio course's primary aim is to cultivate learners’ 
listening and speaking ability, these trilingual transcripts may also enhance learners’ reading acquisition. 
Additionally, the English translation helps learners keep up with the lesson and get comfortable with 
written Chinese. The Pinyin transcripts provide users with useful pronunciation practice. 
The “Practice” page offers users a voice comparison feature, “Rocket Record.” This voice-mapping tool is 
designed to allow learners to record their voice and compare their pronunciation with that of a Chinese 
tutor. Users can record and repeat until their accent, tone, and rhythm match that of the native host. 
Strategies such as evaluating and monitoring can be important for language learners who do not have much 
exposure to the target language (Li, 2010), but users do not receive any feedback on their pronunciation 
from the program, which may raise questions about the adequacy of self-monitoring without recourse to 
any authority (Engwall & Bälter, 2007). 
The “Language and Culture Lessons” section attempts to address the need to integrate culture by 
describing cultural issues, facts, and social interactions; it offers resources, such as lesson content, 
transcripts, practice records, notes, tour videos, lesson feedback, a level rating system, and quizzes. The 
courses teach users the grammatical concepts behind the conversation as well as give them insights into 
different situations they are likely to encounter. Realistically portrayed impressions of Chinese society 
Wan-Jeng Chang                                                                    Review of Rocket Languages 
 
Language Learning & Technology 47 
(Chinese in this context meaning Chinese society as a linguistic group) help learners get the most out of 
their experience. Many of the topics in the language and culture section correspond to the ones in the 
interactive audio course. By linking these two sections, users have a chance to take a closer look at many 
of the words and phrases they learned earlier. Each lesson in this section provides audio sounds for 
individual sentences, but it would be even more helpful for learners if completed audio files for course 
content were offered, just like those in the “Interactive Audio Lessons” and “Survival Kit.” 
In the “Writing” section, there are easy-to-follow videos that teach learners how to write stroke by stroke. 
However, several problems surface here. There are two different kinds of Chinese (see above note) 
characters: simplified and traditional ones. Simplified Chinese is introduced throughout the program, but 
traditional Chinese characters are left out, which limits learners’ ability to understand different cultural 
dimensions of the target language. Moreover, the course content in this section does not relate to the 
“Interactive Audio Lessons” and “Language and Culture Lessons” and does not take a practical, usage-
oriented approach. Words and phrases that appear in other sections or that are used in daily conversation 
should be put in the writing section.   
Rocket Chinese also includes a series of learning games which makes learning fun. These games are self-
paced and can be repeated, which gives users an incentive to keep improving their scores and language 
skills. There are four kinds of learning games in this section: MegaVocab, MegaAudio, MegaCards 
Beginners, and MegaCards Advanced. MegaVocab and MegaAudio are word games that build users' 
Chinese vocabulary and test their audio recognition of Chinese words. These two games aim to increase 
users’ reading, listening, and comprehension skills. Both of them are presented in Pinyin and also come in 
a version with Chinese characters. Another feature of MegaVocab is the MegaVocab Creator, which 
allows users to add their own extra words and pictures. MegaCards Beginners and MegaCards Advanced 
are memory games that enable learners to test their knowledge of Chinese words and build familiarity with 
common Chinese phrases. Two of the concerns are the absence of audio to assist learners to recognize and 
speak those phrases, and the lack of alignment in the content of the four games with previous lessons. 
Users can get instant feedback from quizzes, tests, and games so they can see how much their Chinese has 
improved. Lesson content, mini games and audio tracks are downloadable. The on-average 28-minute 
audio files are compatible with computers and iPod/MP3, so learners can listen and practice easily through 
these portable and flexible files. The downloadable audio files are appealing, but additional files would 
also be useful, potentially with video as well as audio.  
ROCKET TOOLBOX 
 
On the left frame of the homepage is an area where users have access to additional features: My 
Community, My Motivation, My Notes, My Vocab, and Latest News. 
“My Community” is a virtual space for learners to interact with the Rocket Chinese teachers, native 
speakers, and fellow Chinese learners. Users can have the system email them automatically when 
someone replies to a community topic they have commented on. The personal support is with learners 
every step of the way, which adds a human touch to virtual learning. It would be useful if, possibly for an 
extra fee, users could schedule a live tutor so that users could practice Chinese in real time. In “My 
Motivation” users find guidance on how to advance their language learning with a range of techniques, 
tips, tools, and motivational ideas with twenty-three lessons. The “My Notes” page displays the notes that 
have been saved, and users can click on the lesson name to go straight back to the lesson.  
“My Vocab” is a learning tool that makes it easy for users to build their own vocabulary list, practice and 
remember important vocabulary, and rehearse pronunciation. Any word from the course materials can be 
added with its meanings and notes. Users are able to listen to the word or phrase to improve recognition 
and to practice their pronunciation as well. All the words in the “My Vocab” list are highlighted whenever 
Wan-Jeng Chang                                                                    Review of Rocket Languages 
 
Language Learning & Technology 48 
they appear in the course, and the meanings and notes will pop-up by clicking the words. Users need to 
add the English translation by themselves when they build their vocabulary list. It would therefore be 
beneficial to the learners to have a Chinese-English dictionary which can automatically translate the 
words for users. 
The “Latest News” announces new features of Rocket Chinese, such as introducing Rocket’s Facebook or 
Twitter account, changing the layout, and adding more materials. The dearth of posts shows that the news 
function is not frequently used. It would be desirable to have a moderator who could help to keep the site 
active by posting very important or fun news to all users in order to make fuller use of this announcement 
function. 
HELP AND SUPPORT 
On the Rocket Languages Help page, users can search for a topic by typing a question or key words into 
the Search box. They can check out the Top 5 frequently asked questions or browse for questions listed 
under the category headings as well. Through the help page or feedback icon at the top of each lesson, 
users who need technical support or want to provide feedback on the course can find contact information, 
such as phone numbers, mail, and e-mail addresses. Users can also send a copy to their own e-mail when 
they ask questions and receive answers on-line. 
CONCLUSION 
Rocket Chinese presents an Internet-based language learning environment which is extremely friendly, 
from the helpful words and phrases used in language instruction to the simple user interface. Rocket 
Chinese offers a favorable language learning environment in a self-contained website that integrates 
interactive features and inspires users with appropriate resources and materials to foster their learning. 
The strengths of this program lie in the continuity of native presenter, the voice-recognition technology, 
the variety of linguistic and cultural tips, the lifetime access, and the downloadable audio files. Rocket 
Chinese allows users to learn Chinese at their desired pace, place, and time. Beginning or low-
intermediate adult learners of Chinese will find this program insightful and achievable. Overall, Rocket 
Chinese makes learning Chinese a rewarding and interesting experience. 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Dr. Wan-Jeng Chang is currently an assistant professor in the Department of Applied English at Overseas 
Chinese University, Taiwan. She has a particular interest in examining how computer technology 
facilitates EFL teaching and learning.  E-mail: cwj@ocu.edu.tw 
 
REFERENCES 
Chen, H. J. (2011). Developing and evaluating SynctoLearn, a fully automatic video and transcript 
synchronization tool for EFL learners. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 24(2), 117–130. 
 
Engwall, O., & Bälter, O. (2007). Pronunciation feedback from real and virtual language teachers. 
Computer Assisted Language Learning, 20(3), 235–262. 
 
Li, F. F. (2010). Relationship between EFL learners' belief and learning strategy use by English majors 
in vocational colleges. Journal of Language Teaching & Research, 1(6), 858–866. 
