Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2012/tsaietal.pdf 
February 2012, Volume 16, Number 1 
pp. 110–130 
 
Copyright © 2012, ISSN 1094-3501 110 
EFFECTS ON LEARNING LOGOGRAPHIC CHARACTER FORMATION IN COMPUTER-
ASSISTED HANDWRITING INSTRUCTION 
Chen-hui Tsai, University of California, Berkeley, USA 
Chin-Hwa Kuo, Tamkang University, Taiwan 
Wen-Bing Horng, Tamkang University, Taiwan 
Chun-Wen Chen, Taipei National University of the Arts, Taiwan 
This paper reports on a study that investigates how different learning methods might affect 
the learning process of character handwriting among beginning college learners of 
Chinese, as measured by tests of recognition, approximate production, precise production, 
and awareness of conventional stroke sequence. Two methodologies were examined 
during character learning: a worksheet numbering system (the most prevailing workbook 
method used to learn characters) and a theoretically grounded handwriting system (a 
multimedia method). A repeated-measures MANOVA showed that under the multimedia 
treatment, novice learners with no prior character writing experience performed better on 
all four measures, and first-year learners with six months of character-writing experience 
only performed better in precise production and awareness of conventional sequence. 
Variations of character formation produced in both treatments, and learners’ perceptions 
were also analyzed to determine the effects of the two methods. Educational implications 
in the teaching and learning of character handwriting are provided based on the empirical 
results. 
Keywords: Computer-Assisted Language Learning, Language Teaching Methodology, 
Multimedia, Writing 
INTRODUCTION 
Logographic character handwriting, such as Hanzi in Chinese, Kanji in Japanese, or Hanja in Korean, is 
notoriously difficult for foreign language learners. Fortunately, computer-assisted learning systems for 
handwriting are being improved to meet the needs of teachers and learners in foreign language education. 
The use of this developing technology, however, has not been well explored. The aim of this paper is 
threefold. The first is to draw our readers’ attention briefly to first language (L1) handwriting tradition 
and a common problem in second language (L2) handwriting instruction. The second is to explore the 
effects of theory-informed multimedia handwriting system compared to the prevailing worksheet method, 
based on participants’ performances in learning handwriting and conventional stroke execution. The third 
is to provide pedagogical implications from a perspective concerning participants’ learning achievements 
and perceptions, as well as the strengths of the learning tools. 
The Role of Character Handwriting in L1 Learning 
A character is composed of subset components that are constructed by unique sets of strokes ranging from 
one to many. The formation and sequence of these components and strokes are not random; the 
components must fit together internally while the strokes are executed in a conventionally proper manner 
in L1 handwriting learning. Native beginners are taught to follow established character formation to 
develop their handwriting skill. The learning of character formation and standard sequencing is reinforced 
through class instruction and teaching materials throughout elementary education (Taylor & Taylor, 
1995), as seen in: China, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Singapore, Japan, and Korea. Unlike the alphabetic 
system, the logographic character writing system places a high value in the conventional formation for 
cultural and practical reasons. 
From a neuroscience perspective, the skill of logographic handwriting is associated with reading 
characters. Recent neuroimaging studies discovered that the premotor cortex, a region for handwriting in 
Chen-hui Tsai, Chin-Hwa Kuo, Wen-Bing Horng, and Chun-Wen Chen Learning Logographic Character Formation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 111 
the brain, is crucially relevant to logographic character reading, and that the execution of finger 
movements during stroke counting of ideographic characters can lighten the neural loads in recognition of 
characters (Matsuo, Kato, Okada, Moriya, Glover, & Nakai, 2003). Additionally, the establishment of 
motor programs is one of the mechanisms that serve and mediate the formation of long-term memory of 
Chinese characters (Tan, Spinks, Eden, Perfetti, & Siok, 2005). The role of character handwriting in L1 
acquisition involves both tactile learning and neural processes. 
A Common Problem in L2 Character Handwriting Instruction 
Character learning has been considered a challenging aspect for Chinese as a Foreign Language (CFL) 
students (Everson, 1998; Ke, Wen, & Kotenbeutel, 2001; Shen, 2004). The difficulty lies in the 
logographic writing system, which constitutes a barrier to memorization. For language learners, sheer rote 
learning is inevitable (Fan, Tong, & Song, 1987).  
Although handwriting is a part of instruction, effective methods to teach this skill have not been given the 
attention they need. In an L2 setting, instructors usually reinforce it in a much more flexible manner, 
allowing learners to “draw” a character as a picture to form a similar shape. This, at least partially, is for 
two practical reasons. The first is that teachers do not want to overwhelm beginning level learners with 
the obstacles of handwriting that might generally frustrate them. Learning character handwriting 
consumes a great amount of time for students. A self-evaluation survey study by Allen (2008) reported 
that, on average, the first-year participants spent a third of their study time on this one skill; however, the 
time spent usually did not yield productive results. The second reason is because of time constraints 
related to teaching loads. It is difficult for teachers to evaluate each character and correct the errors that 
beginners make, even if the stroke errors are discernable simply by judging the appearance of the 
produced characters. It is very common to see L2 beginners assemble characters together like a puzzle, 
using small parts to complete the whole.  
Learning of Stroke Sequencing Execution in Characters 
Some L2 beginners might believe that the sequence and combination of strokes are of little consequence, 
so long as the final product looks approximately the same. This requires a clarification of the value of 
conventional stroke sequence. The first rationale is culture-oriented. For centuries, the learning of the 
conventional character formation has been considered an essential element in handwriting instruction. It is 
commonly reinforced in early handwriting education in character-using societies and is generally 
accepted to bring proper proportion to a character. Traditionally, it is argued to be an aid for correct 
reproduction of the characters, to facilitate better penmanship as well as easy memorization, and to save 
energy in writing (Shimomura, 1980). Furthermore, because the conventional execution, to a large extent, 
originates from Chinese calligraphy, it is easier for learners if they would like to further pursue Chinese 
calligraphy in the future. 
The learning of conventional character formation also serves pedagogical needs. The formation of 
components in a character follows the general basic principle that a character is written: from left to right 
or from top to bottom. Each specific component is constructed by conventional strokes; that is, when the 
component appears in another character, its stroke execution remains the same. This knowledge of 
formation between and within components, once accumulated to a certain level, is transferrable to help 
beginners reduce their cognitive load when learning new characters, either from the motor aspect of 
handwriting or from the provision of clue-giving aids, in which a radical component can be utilized to 
give clues to the meaning or sound of another character that also shares the same component. For 
example, whenever the component 女 (meaning, woman) appears on any position of a character, it is 
always written with a uniform three-stroke sequence, whether it be in the character 妈 (meaning, mother) 
or in another one 妆 (meaning, makeup). In the long run, this helps students to reproduce characters in 
Chen-hui Tsai, Chin-Hwa Kuo, Wen-Bing Horng, and Chun-Wen Chen Learning Logographic Character Formation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 112 
proper sequence and proportion even if they have never seen the character before. 
For L2 learners, the most practical benefit is probably that the knowledge of conventional character 
formation enables beginners to effectively use a dictionary. When it comes to indexing and retrieving in a 
dictionary, the logographic script has been noted as being less convenient than a Western (alphabetic) 
system (Chen, 1999). There are three major ways for learners to look up a character. The fastest one is the 
indexing of pronunciation, which requires a user to know the exact sound and the corresponding tone of a 
character. Since a character’s sound is not immediately known from its shape for beginners, this method 
is actually not useful for them. The second one is based on the character’s bushou (or, radical). A 
character’s radical refers to the aforementioned distinguishing component of a character, and is arranged 
based on the number of strokes. A stroke is a complete movement of a handwriting action, beginning 
when a pen touches the paper until it is lifted. Although this sounds straightforward, it might not be as 
intuitive for beginning learners because of the architectural nature of characters. For example, the radical 
 (bow) is built with three strokes ( ,  and ), not one stroke ( ) as beginners might perceive. The 
third method is to search for the characters on a computer recognition program, but, in general, learners 
must know how to write the character correctly for effective recognition results to be obtained. 
Computer-assisted Language Learning (CALL) in Character Handwriting  
Over the past two decades, many advances have been made in computer-assisted character learning. With 
the developing technology of touch-screen devices, the design focus of educational software has shifted 
from simple visual aids to interactive interfaces. Some software has been designed to identify stroke 
production errors (Tonouchi & Kawamura, 1997; Tsay & Tsai, 1993) and some to analyze the global 
features of the handwriting (Kim, Kim, & Bang, 1997; Ozaki, Adachi, Ishii, & Koyazu, 1995); however, 
for the analysis to function well, the systems either required users to write a character in correct stroke 
sequence or required them to produce it in the correct shape. However, for beginners, these two skills are 
exactly the targeted abilities that need cultivation. This gap has been bridged by techniques that evaluate 
character qualities through stroke execution, and spatial relationships, check for multiple errors, and 
prompt learners with useful automatic feedback (See Tang & Leung, 2006a; Leung & Komura, 2006; Li, 
Leung, Lam, & Tsang, 2007; Hu, Leung, & Xu, 2008; Hu, Xu, Huang, & Leung, 2009; Kuo, Huang, 
Horng, Chen, Chen, & Wang, 2009 for more detailed reading on these techniques.) 
Although multimedia methods have become more available and accessible for the teaching and learning 
of orthographic character writing, empirical investigation on the effects of character learning methods is 
scant. In L1 learning, some studies (Fang, 2000; Wu, 2002; Lin L., 2004) suggest that the multimedia 
method with interactive exercises and immediate feedback increased accuracy of character writing in 
elementary-handwriting education. However, C. Lin (2003) examined the effectiveness of a 
demonstration-only non-interactive multimedia program on character writing and stroke sequence and 
found that, in spite of the participants’ positive perceptions of the demonstration tool, there were no 
observable statistically significant differences of the achievement test scores among the participants. 
Related research on L2 learning is even more limited. Tang, Li, and Leung (2006) reported that it required 
less time for the multimedia group to learn Chinese handwriting. In a second attempt, Tang and Leung 
(2006b) suggested that the learning time was shorter in the customized-feedback condition than in the 
general-feedback condition. There were several commonalities in these CALL studies. For example, 
learning was sometimes the secondary focus with the technology being the primary point of the studies. 
The multimedia effects were examined solely on final written production (i.e., the writing process was left 
out). While the studies were concerned with the learning time and final production, one might wonder 
how the multimedia method might affect L2 learners’ character learning in other areas. Moreover, most of 
the relevant studies initiated and developed upon practical teaching and learning need without the basis of 
a second language acquisition (SLA) theory. 
Chen-hui Tsai, Chin-Hwa Kuo, Wen-Bing Horng, and Chun-Wen Chen Learning Logographic Character Formation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 113 
Theoretical SLA and Practical Character Handwriting Instruction 
Pica (1997) categorized approaches to SLA research based on their interface with teaching. 
Complementarity is one interface type, in which SLA research complements L2 instruction through the 
examination of a theory-grounded learning method or of the materials. In the current study, a theoretically 
motivated handwriting learning system, selected and developed by the researchers, was employed to 
explore its possible effect on learning character handwriting for L2 learners. In addition to 
complementarity, we adopted and modified Chapelle’s (1998) interactionist model, which is a simplified 
version of the one outlined by Gass (1997). The multimedia system was designed to operationalize 
positive conditions for SLA from an interactionist perspective, and Figure 1 illustrates the basic 
components and corresponding design rationales of the multimedia program. 
 
 
Figure 1. Basic components and corresponding concepts in the design of the interactionist-based 
multimedia character handwriting program. 
 
In this section, we will address how we apply the constructs of the interactionist model to the learning of 
character writing. Input, located at the top of Figure 1, refers to the character formation a learner is 
exposed to. Target input is demonstrated to a learner by animations (of the whole character, or by its 
orthographic subcomponents), but only that which is perceived as having the potential to be acquired. An 
important aspect of apperception is one noticing certain aspects of the input. Learner controls are 
provided to help a learner to review the noticed aspect of writing. 
In learning character handwriting, comprehension represents the hypothesis that reproduction of a 
• animations
• orthographic componentsINPUT 
• learner controls for noticed aspectAPPERCEPTION
• stroke execution
• conventional character formationCOMPREHENSION
• a clear picture in mind combining the appearance and the internal structure of a characterINTAKE
• the processes for using the intake in short-term memory to affect  character reproduction INTEGRATION
• visualize the result of integration
• feedback to indicate formation errors OUTPUT
Chen-hui Tsai, Chin-Hwa Kuo, Wen-Bing Horng, and Chun-Wen Chen Learning Logographic Character Formation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 114 
character can be accomplished either with or without awareness of the conventional formation. However, 
when comprehension takes place through a combination of authentic stroke execution and conventional 
character formation, the processing can become intake. 
Integration is the process of using the intake to influence the development of the character handwriting 
skills, which in turn affect the character reproduction. The output is an observable result of the learning 
process. It also serves as an aid to develop a specific aspect of a learners’ character writing ability. 
Immediate feedback is provided to show indications of problems with the output and that will result in the 
learner’s noticing aspects of the formation, making new integration, and producing more output. 
Our particular interest lies in the possible ways in which the designed method assists participants in the 
learning of conventional formation and character reproduction with the prevailing workbook method 
serving as the control group. We hope to learn the following: What aspects of handwriting can be 
improved through either of the learning methods? In addition to that, what are the advantages and 
disadvantages of the two methods according to the perceptions of the participants? To what extent do 
novice learners (those with zero experience with orthographic handwriting) and first-year learners (those 
with prior experience in orthographic handwriting) perceive the two methods differently or similarly? 
These questions necessitate a research design to integrate quantitative and qualitative features. 
METHOD 
Operational Definition 
In the current study, handwriting refers to the skill of writing Chinese logographic characters by hand. 
When learning character handwriting, CFL learners need to follow conventional character formation in 
order to produce a character in its proper shape and proportion among and within sub-components. The 
conventional character formation indicates the rules about the order and direction in which the strokes 
and/or sub-components that make up characters should be written. The exercise of character handwriting 
is usually implemented as self-learning assignments at college level. Thus, self-learning is defined as a 
learning process done by students themselves outside class. The beginning learners are represented by 
two groups of students: novice learners with no prior experience and first-year students of Chinese with 
six-months of experience in character writing. Two methodologies were examined in the present study. 
The first is the interactionist-based computer-assisted character learning system (hereafter the multimedia 
method or multimedia task). The other is a popular pen-based workbook approach with aids of numbers 
marking the stroke sequence along with still images for each stroke (hereafter the prevailing method or 
prevailing task). The measures of Chinese character handwriting include character recognition, 
approximate production (judging by the appearance of a character), precise production (judging by 
conventional formation), and awareness of internal structures. Pronunciation is not emphasized in the 
measures due to three reasons: 1) this study targets character handwriting skills, 2) Chinese characters do 
not carry exact phonetic information in general, and 3) this study involves novice learners, whom we 
would like to focus fully on learning how to write during the assigned tasks. 
Research Design 
Creswell (2003, p. 215) proposed a mixed-methods sequential explanatory design that consists of two 
phases: quantitative followed by qualitative. The qualitative data are implemented to help analyze and 
explain the previous quantitative results. In the current study, we adopted the design strategy and posed a 
two-phase approach: Phase 1 was a quantitative study that looked at the immediate effects of the two 
learning methods on character handwriting and character variants. Phase 2 explored the learners’ attitudes 
by administering a survey, which contained Likert scales and corresponding open-ended questions to 
probe accounts for the learners’ perceptions, as well as to examine the Phase 1 results in more explanatory 
detail from the learners’ perspective. 
Chen-hui Tsai, Chin-Hwa Kuo, Wen-Bing Horng, and Chun-Wen Chen Learning Logographic Character Formation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 115 
 
In order to eliminate experimental errors caused by differences among individual participants, the study 
employs a within-group repeated-measure design (Keppel & Wickens, 1991) to ascertain the 
effectiveness of performance in the two learning conditions. The order of the two treatment conditions 
was counterbalanced to reduce possible practice effects. 
Research Questions 
Performance in Learning Chinese Character Writing 
Do statistically significant differences exist among novice and first-year learners of Chinese in terms of 
character recognition, production, and awareness of conventional formation in character learning between 
the prevailing learning method and the multimedia method? 
Performance in Variations of Character Formation 
Do statistically significant differences exist in variations of character formation between the prevailing 
and the multimedia method? 
Learners’ Perceptions 
1. Are the novice and first-year learners significantly different in their perceptions regarding the 
stroke demonstration formats of the two learning methods? 
2. Do the novice and first-year learners have different degrees of confidence in character 
reproduction following either of the two learning methods? 
3. Do the novice and first-year learners have different preference for either of the learning methods 
as a means of self-learning? 
Participants 
Thirty-four native English-speaking college students from a midwestern university in the US participated 
in the study. Sixteen of the thirty-four participants were recruited from a first-year Chinese class. The 
remaining eighteen participants were novice learners recruited from a short-term, beginners’ Chinese 
class. At the time of the data collection, the novice learners had some exercises on basic Chinese strokes 
but had not begun learning characters, while the first-year Chinese group had already studied Chinese 
characters for approximately six months. A preexperiment background survey showed that none of them 
had experience in learning an Asian language prior to their Chinese learning. They all considered 
themselves to have basic computer skills. The participants were compensated for their participation in this 
study. To avoid a possible Halo effect, participants were recruited from classes that were not taught by the 
researchers. 
Stimulus Characters 
Two groups of Chinese characters were selected to implement a with-group design, and were randomly 
assigned to the two experimental conditions in the study. The two groups were similar in graphic 
complexity, having similar total stroke counts and stroke turning points and belonging to similar character 
structure categories. The average number of strokes1 for each group is 6 and 6.1. Furthermore, the 
characters in each group represent four character structure categories: left-right structure, top-bottom 
structure, enclosure structure, and integral structure (see Appendix A for details). 
Task Procedure 
Participants were asked to learn the selected characters with the two learning conditions, a prevailing task 
and a multimedia task. A training section was given before each task to help participants familiarize 
themselves with the format of the tasks in the study. The two groups were randomly designated to the two 
Chen-hui Tsai, Chin-Hwa Kuo, Wen-Bing Horng, and Chun-Wen Chen Learning Logographic Character Formation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 116 
tasks, and the task order was counterbalanced as well. Each task has three steps. 
Step one was a pretest, which confirmed that the target characters were new to all the participants. 
Step two was a thirty-minute time-limited writing exercise in which a participant utilized an assigned 
method to learn how to write the characters.  
In a prevailing task, the participants learned character writing by using a worksheet that provided a 
number marking system and diagram to indicate order of strokes and components within a character (see 
Appendix B). For each character, the participants were asked to follow the system and reproduce the 
character five times right next to each provided character on the worksheet. The format of this exercise 
resembles a popular method that has been adopted by beginning Chinese textbooks.  
In the multimedia task, the participants used a computer-assisted program. For each character, participants 
saw animated demonstration to learn character writing. For each character reproduction, the program 
provided error-specific feedback for each character entry that a learner submitted. The system checked 
various error types, such as spatial relationship errors among internal components; stroke production 
errors including missing, additional, concatenated and/or broken strokes, and so forth. The participants 
utilized a digital writing tablet to practice writing in the multimedia task. For each character, they had to 
correctly reproduce five copies in order to move on to the next one. 
Step three was an immediate posttest, which consisted of three parts: recognition, production, and 
awareness of conventional character formation. For the recognition task, the participants were asked to 
provide a corresponding meaning in English for each character. For the production test, the participants 
were given English meanings and sounds of the characters and were asked to write the corresponding 
characters from memory on paper. In the awareness test, the participants were asked to copy each 
character printed on the awareness task sheet. That is, they handwrote characters one by one with the 
printed characters on sight. They were also asked to write all of the characters in a correct fashion that 
they learned during step two. The design of the awareness test is to find out the stroke sequence and 
execution that the participants learned in step two, and not their ability to remember characters. Fifteen 
minutes were assigned to the participants to complete step three. 
Each participant also took a survey (see Appendix C) at the end of the experiment. The whole experiment 
was conducted out of class. Each participant took one task per session with both tasks separated by three 
days. Production and awareness tests were close-up video recorded for further coding. 
Coding 
Tests in Character Handwriting 
The quantitative data were analyzed with SPSS (version 19). The following four aspects of character 
learning were examined in the posttest:  
Recognition. One point was assigned if the English meaning was correct for the stimulus character. 
Approximate production. A participant received one point in the production test for writing a character 
from memory with an approximate shape to the correct form. That is, if a character, judged by examining 
the character production sheet, was formed in a sense that the rater could recognize easily with or without 
correct stroke sequence, one point was given. 
Precise production. One point was assigned to precise production if a character written from memory in 
the production test was correctly formed following the standard stroke sequence adopted in this study. 
This was judged by viewing the corresponding video clips. 
Awareness of conventional character formation. One point was given if the on-sight copied character 
in the awareness test was written in a correct fashion, meaning the appearance was correct, and the 
Chen-hui Tsai, Chin-Hwa Kuo, Wen-Bing Horng, and Chun-Wen Chen Learning Logographic Character Formation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 117 
internal standard sequence was followed.  
Variations of Character Formation 
Variation in character formation indicates the incomplete learning of conventional formation in the 
current study. This was observed by screening the video data of the awareness test. For each character, the 
variations produced across participants, in either of the learning conditions, were counted.  
Qualitative Data Coding 
Inductive categorical coding techniques (Teddlie & Tashakkori, 2009) were implemented to analyze 
open-ended survey responses. In the unitizing process, initial data were reviewed line by line and divided 
into units of information (UOIs), which are the smallest pieces of meaningful information that are 
associated with specific themes. These UOIs were again reviewed and provisional categories were 
generated and attributed to cover similar UOIs, which share potentially meaningful aspects. This 
categorizing process involves merging and further differentiation of those categories in order to 
synthesize and conceptualize emerging patterns that surface from the participants’ response and to give an 
idea of the frequencies of each category. Two raters worked on the procedure of classification for three 
rounds until they reached unanimous consensus of categories.  
Performance in Learning Character Writing 
Since the two groups of participants are not equal and a within-subjects analysis of variance is very 
sensitive to violations of the sphericity assumption, we first checked to see if the sphericity assumption is 
met (Mauchly’s Test of Sphericity) before conducting a repeated-measures MANOVA analysis. Table 1a 
and 1b show that Epsilon is 1.000 (greater than 0.75) and thus indicates perfect Sphericity. The sphericity 
assumption is met. 
Table 1a. Mauchly’s Test of Sphericity 
Within Subjects 
Effect    
Measure Mauchly’s W Approx. 
Chi-Square 
df Sig. 
 
Condition Recognition 1.000 .000 0 .000 
 Approximate production  1.000 .000 0 .000 
 Precise production 1.000 .000 0 .000 
 Awareness 1.000 .000 0 .000 
Table 1b. Mauchly’s Test of Sphericity 
EPSILON 
Within Subjects 
Effect    
Measure Greenhouse-geisser Huynh-feldt Lower-bound 
Condition Recognition 1.000  1.000  1.000  
 Approximate 
production  
1.000  1.000  1.000  
 Precise production 1.000  1.000  1.000  
 Awareness 1.000  1.000  1.000  
The 2  2  4 (level  condition  performance) repeated-measures MANOVA  analysis, see Table 2, 
indicated a significant effect of condition (p < .001), and a significant interaction effect between condition 
and level (p = .043).  
Chen-hui Tsai, Chin-Hwa Kuo, Wen-Bing Horng, and Chun-Wen Chen Learning Logographic Character Formation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 118 
Table 2. Repeated-Measures MANOVA Analysis for Character Learning 
Effect   Wilks’ 
Lambda 
SS df MS Error df F p 
Between subjects  
Intercept .064 1849.432 4 462.358 29 105.668 .000 
Level .378 178.749 4 4.687 29 11.945 .000** 
Within subjects  
Condition .250 59.583 4 14.896 29 21.712 .000** 
Condition*Level  .720 9.005 4 2.251 29 2.823 .043* 
Note. * p < .05, ** p < .01. 
Since the two groups of learners have different proficiency in Chinese character writing, we do expect to 
see a main effect of level. Because the interaction effect was significant, the interpretation focuses on the 
interaction effect rather than on the main effect of condition (i.e., the learning methods). The Scheffé test 
was chosen to perform Post hoc tests because the two groups are different in size. Additionally, the test is 
more conservative and will reduce the risk of a Type I error. Post hoc tests with the Scheffé test, see Table 
3, showed pairwise comparisons of the two levels and conditions broken down by the four measures in 
character writing: recognition, approximate production, precise production and awareness of conventional 
character formation. The results suggest that novice participants performed significantly better with the 
aid of the multimedia program in all measures evaluated in the study, while first-year participants did 
better on two measures, the tests of precise production and awareness. 
Of the four Multivariate test results given, Wilks’ Lambda (Wilks’٨) is commonly used. For between 
subjects, Wilks’ Lambda is .378. Thus, the proportion of the variance in the outcomes that is not 
explained by an effect is .378. For within subjects, Wilks’ Lambda is .250. Thus, the proportion of the 
variance in the outcomes that is not explained by an effect is .250. 
Table 3. Pairwise Comparisons of the Level and Condition by the Four Measures (Performance) 
Measure Level MD 
(Multimedia-Prevailing) 
SD p 
Recognition Novice  1.333 .454 .005** 
First-year .938 .482 .059 
Approximate 
production  
Novice  1.778 .473 .001** 
First-year .125 .502 .795 
Precise production Novice  2.000 .505 .001** 
First-year 1.750 .536 .002** 
Awareness Novice  3.833 .540 .001** 
First-year 2.375 .573 .001** 
Note. The test is based on estimated marginal means, ** p < .01. 
Performance in Variations of Character Formation 
A homogeneity test is reported (see Table 4) before we move onto a paired t-test. The significance is .211 
Chen-hui Tsai, Chin-Hwa Kuo, Wen-Bing Horng, and Chun-Wen Chen Learning Logographic Character Formation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 119 
which is greater than .05. We can assume that the variances are approximately equal. We have met our 
assumption. A paired t-test was used to compare the mean number of variants for the targeted characters 
produced by the learners using the two learning methods. The results, see Table 5, indicated that 
participants produced more formation variants in the prevailing task (M = 6.35, SD = 3.45) than in the 
multimedia task (M = 2.80, SD = 1.81). In other words, the multimedia method helped the learners 
significantly reduce the variations of character formation (t[17] = 5.089, p = .000, two-tailed) during the 
learning process in the study. 
Table 4. Test of Homogeneity of Variances 
Levene Statistic df1 df2 sig. 
    
2.252 3 35 .211 
Table 5. Paired-Samples t-Test of Character Writing Variants for the Twenty Target Characters between 
the Two Learning Conditions  
Pair Paired Differences  t p 
 M SD SE    
Prevailing-Multimedia 3.55 3.12 .698  5.089 .000** 
Note. ** p < .01. 
Learners’ Perceptions  
Learners’ Perceptions of Stroke Demonstration Formats in the Two Learning Methods (Number-
Marking Worksheet and the Multimedia Method) 
The participants’ ratings on the survey items 1 and 2 were analyzed with a repeated measures MANOVA 
to test whether the learners’ perceived one stroke demonstration format to be more useful than the other, 
and whether this depended on the level of prior learning experience. Table 6 shows that the main effect of 
the stroke demonstration types was significant (p = .001); however, the main effect of learning experience 
was not significant (F = .44, p = .512) and the interaction between demonstration types and levels was not 
significant (F = .194, p = .663). The effect of stroke demonstration types was clear: The participants in 
this study perceived that using multimedia animation (M = 6.15) was slightly better than using prevailing 
numbering to demonstrate the stroke sequence (M = 4.65). 
Table 6. Tests of Within-Subjects Contrasts for Learners’ Perceptions of Demonstration Formats  
Source 
 
SS df MS  F p 
Demonstration type 37.590 1 37.590  13.713 .001** 
Demonstration * Level .531 1 .531  .194 .663 
Note. **p < .01. 
Learners’ Perceptions of their Confidence in Character Reproduction 
Items 3 and 4 on the survey explore the participants’ degree of confidence in learning character writing 
with the aid of the two learning tools. Table 7 indicated that the main effects of condition (learning 
Chen-hui Tsai, Chin-Hwa Kuo, Wen-Bing Horng, and Chun-Wen Chen Learning Logographic Character Formation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 120 
methods), as well as the interaction effects between condition and level, were observed in the repeated 
MANOVA test for the two statements. However, the main effect of level of experience was not 
significant (F = .009, p = .927). To take a closer look at the interaction effects, post hoc tests with the 
Scheffé test were conducted to reveal that the novice learners have more confidence in character 
reproduction after taking the multimedia task (F = 15.935, p = .001), while, for the first-year learners, 
there was no difference based on task type (F = .398, p = .503). 
Table 7. Tests of Within-Subjects Contrasts for Learners’ Perceptions of Confidence in Character 
Reproduction 
Source 
 
SS df MS  F p 
Condition 23.890 1 23.890  9.817 .004** 
Condition * Level 11.184 1 11.184  4.596 .040* 
Error (condition) 77.875 32 2.434    
Note. *p < .05, ** p < .01. 
Learners’ Preference for Either of the Learning Methods 
Statements 5 and 6 of the survey inquire about the participants’ preference for the learning tools. A 
repeated MANOVA test was carried out to see whether the learners liked one learning method more than 
the other and whether this depended on the level of prior learning experience. The result, see Table 8, tells 
us that there was a main effect of condition, the learning methods, (Wilk’s Lambda = 0.848, F = 5.735; p 
= .023), but not for level of prior experience (F = 0.554, p = .462). The interaction effect between task 
type and level (Wilk’s Lambda = 0.775, F = 9.278; p = .005) was also significant, suggesting that the 
interaction may explain the variability among the means of the participants’ responses. Since the 
interaction was significant, the interpretation focuses on this rather than on the main effect of condition. 
Table 8. Result of a Repeated MANOVA Test for Learners’ Preference to the Learning Methods 
Effect    SS df MS  F p 
Between subjects   
 Intercept  1759.441 1 1759.441  947.194 .000 
 Level  1.030  1 1.030  .554 .462 
 Error  59.441 32 1.858    
Within subjects   
 Condition  22.378 1 22.378  5.735 .023* 
 Condition * Level   36.201 1 36.201  9.278 .005** 
 Error  124.858 32 3.902    
Note. * p < .05, ** p < .01. 
Post hoc tests with the Scheffé test demonstrated that the first-year participants liked the prevailing (M = 
5.38) and multimedia tasks (M = 5.06) to about the same degree (F = 14.97, p = .598) while the novice 
participants liked the multimedia task (M =6.28) more than they liked the prevailing task (M =3.67, p = 
.000). That is, the first-year participants did not have a significant preference on either of the tools, 
whereas the novice participants preferred the multimedia program as a means of self-learning. Post hoc 
Chen-hui Tsai, Chin-Hwa Kuo, Wen-Bing Horng, and Chun-Wen Chen Learning Logographic Character Formation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 121 
tests with the Scheffé test showed additional pairwise comparisons of the two levels of experience broken 
down by task type that suggest the following: the first-year participants liked the prevailing task more 
than the novices did (p = .015), but liked the multimedia task less than the novices did (p = .013). 
INTERPRETATION AND DISCUSSION  
Multimedia Effects on Learning Character Handwriting  
The multimedia effects on the precise production and awareness of conventional formation were 
significant among the participants in this study. This begs the question: Why and how did the multimedia 
method affect the improvement of the invisible progress in the course of learning? In answering the 
question, we look to the differences in the “input enhancement” (Smith, 1993) of the two learning 
conditions. 
When an instructor assigns character homework, the exercise is usually devised to show the movement 
(visual exercises), and to direct learners to feel the movement (kinesthetic exercises). We will focus on 
the visual exercises for a moment. On a worksheet used in the prevailing method, a target character is 
presented with numbers referring to the sequence of the strokes and with a still diagram showing stroke 
position. The learners need to fulfill the writing trial with the final printed product in sight without a 
precise movement indicating the exact writing procedure. 
The other condition, the multimedia method, might provide more comprehensive input for the 
participants. From a cognitive point of view, learning a language involves working memory. Baddeley 
(2003) provides a review of working memory and language learning. He proposed that working memory 
could be divided into three subsystems: the central executive, the visuospatial sketchpad, and the 
phonological loop. The one that is concerned with visual information is the visuo-spatial sketchpad, 
which “serves the function of integrating spatial, visual, and possibly kinesthetic information into a 
unified representation which may be temporarily stored and manipulated” (p. 200). The multimedia-
learning program provides stroke animation that shows the movement required for each stroke of a 
character. This animated visual demonstration might help enable learners to incorporate information 
about a stroke’s directionality and component formation in a vividly successive manner. This could offer 
continuous and detailed input for the visuo-spatial sketchpad to better prepare learners for kinesthetic 
exercises, which immediately followed. 
With regard to the kinesthetic exercises, in the prevailing task, the participants did not have immediate 
feedback on their writing. They completed the writing task and moved on. In a regular class setting at 
college, character homework is graded and returned a few days later. When they receive the delayed 
feedback on their writing, the whole learning process has been done, and due to the pacing of college 
assignments, it is rare that students would review and fix the problems, as they have already moved to the 
next lesson. 
In the multimedia task, however, when the participants committed any writing errors, immediate feedback 
was prompted after submission to specify any problems. They watched the stroke animation again to 
review what the accurate form should be and, by the system’s workflow, were forced back to correct 
themselves. It seems that during this cognitive activity of handwriting, learners’ attention was directed to 
the visual details that distinguish the differences between what they thought it was and what it truly is. 
The process cycled until the character was completed in an authentic manner. Therefore, even though 
there might be factors unique to each participant that influence the likelihood of apprehension in 
conventional formation, the input enhancement combined with customized, error-specific feedback, 
helped the participants facilitate input assimilation, integrate new forms, modify their output, and improve 
the quality of handwriting. This in turn accentuated the learning of conventional character formation in 
the study.  
Chen-hui Tsai, Chin-Hwa Kuo, Wen-Bing Horng, and Chun-Wen Chen Learning Logographic Character Formation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 122 
Multimedia Effects on Variations of Character Formation 
The effects of the processes illustrated above are further evidenced by the variations of character 
formation produced by the participants in this study. In the multimedia task, these variations were 
significantly less than in the prevailing task. Take one of the targeted characters, 囚 (meaning, prisoner), 
as an example to depict modifications produced during the learning process; the outer surrounding box is 
authentically formed in a fixed manner, which consists of three strokes (see Figure 2 for an illustration of 
the standard formation). The authentic way to write this character is to construct the 冂 part first, then 
insert a two-stroke character for person 人 inside the cell, and finally close the bottom of the character 
with a finishing horizontal line. There were six types of variations of this character found in the prevailing 
task (#1 and #6 represent the same error type), while none was observed in the multimedia task, neither 
among novice nor among the first-year learners, for this example. Figure 2 shows all of the variations that 
emerged from the data in the prevailing task for this character. In order to highlight the deviant formation, 
only the parts that were incorrectly written were shown, and arrows were used to indicate directions or 
movements of strokes. 
 
Standard formation  
 
 
Levels Kinds of variants observed in the prevailing task 
 
Novice 
learners 
#1 
 
 
#2 
 
 
#3 
 
 
#4 
 
 
#5 
 
 
1st-year 
learners 
 
#6 
 
 
#7 
 
 
 
Figure 2. An example of variance in the prevailing worksheet task. 
Some participants compressed the three-stroke box into one (#1, #5, and #6) or two strokes (#2 and #3), 
and while others extended it into four strokes in the prevailing task (#4 and #7). Some of them changed 
the stroke number and/or sequence while others made the shape of a character improperly proportioned 
(#1, #3, and #6) or created inappropriate gaps of joints (#2, #3, #4, and #7). As described previously in 
this discussion, things could easily go wrong during the prevailing learning process since there is no 
visual demonstration with feedback. For the novice participants, the components and the character are 
brand new stimuli; therefore, they have not yet developed a precise perception of how the components are 
formed. Thus, they sequentially engendered more variations. Nevertheless, for the first-year participants, 
they have learned three characters with the same box component (i.e., 图, 国, and 回; meaning, map, 
country, and to return, respectively) in their prior experience of character learning; we did not expect to 
see variations in first-year participants’ characters productions. 
In order to further examine if these kinds of errors were inadvertent, we scrutinized those corresponding 
characters produced by the participants who made these modifications in their character production tests 
and in the writing exercises as well. We found that those variations were not random productions. Two 
patterns were observed: one is that the first-year participants wrote the character in the wrong way 
Chen-hui Tsai, Chin-Hwa Kuo, Wen-Bing Horng, and Chun-Wen Chen Learning Logographic Character Formation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 123 
throughout the study; the other is that they changed the way they wrote the character every time they 
produced it. That is, the variations were unpredictable for the character. In the former pattern, the wrong 
formation was reinforced in the writing exercise while the latter showed the fluctuations during the 
learning process. This phenomenon illustrates how different learning methods might have an impact on 
the dimension of interlanguage variation in character handwriting. More examples of the participants’ 
handwriting in the awareness tests can be seen at the following links:  
The target character: 官 (Meaning, officer) 
• Prevailing task: one of the 7 types of formation errors among novice participants (Link 1) 
• Prevailing task: one of the 4 types of formation errors among first-year participants (Link 2) 
• Multimedia task: one of the 2 types of formation errors among novice participants (Link 3) 
• Multimedia task: No error was made for this character among the first-year participants  
The problem of formation variation indeed exists but is usually neglected in handwriting instruction 
especially when students are expected to fulfill the motor-skill training through self-learning. As 
mentioned before, it is difficult for teachers to correct students’ errors in detail. They are usually tempted 
to allow students to reproduce a visual approximation of a character rather than to follow the authentic 
character formation paradigm. Sassoon (1995), in her research on handwriting acquisition, pointed out 
that this method of teaching a writing system, i.e., allowing students to reproduce a visual approximation 
of a character, may allow students “to express themselves more quickly in writing, but may also have a 
disastrous effect later on. As [hand]writing is a physical act, any aspect of it quickly becomes automated, 
and when practiced, becomes increasingly difficult to alter” (p.21). This is particularly true in learning 
logographic characters. In the following sections, we will turn to the second phase of the study and focus 
on the participants’ points of view. 
Learners’ Perception of the Two Learning Methods 
Degree of Confidence in Character Reproduction 
The novice participants had more confidence in character reproduction when they learned with the aid of 
the multimedia tool and that was echoed in their performances in all the measures in the current study. In 
their corresponding open-ended responses, 15 UOIs were obtained. The primary reason for their 
perceived confidence was that the multimedia method reinforced the correct character formation (67%) in 
learning process by giving immediate feedback that challenged their misconceptions. The following are a 
few comments given by the learners in this category: “It showed what I was doing wrong when I felt it 
right,” and, “I feel more immersed in the character … feedback on my characters helps correct errors 
early before they become a habit.”  
Another category explaining the degree of confidence was that the multimedia method enhanced their 
memorization (27%). Some of the learners noted that “… even if I wasn’t able to remember the character 
right away I could remember how to copy them correctly and I could recall more of them than I could 
with the paper task,” and another participant noted “Watching the animation and copying the movements 
greatly improved my memory.”  
For the first-year participants, the use of the learning methods did not bring a statistically significant 
difference in the degree of confidence in character reproduction. We looked at their responses that 
commented on their rating on survey item 3, which inquired about their degree of confidence in character 
reproduction in the prevailing task. Thirteen UOIs were obtained with 9 in the main category (regular 
practice). That is, among the first-year participants, 69% of the qualitative data indicated that their 
confidence resulted from the regularity of the practice form in the prevailing method. One example from 
these responses is “I already felt confident doing this due to Chinese class. ” However, along with these 
kinds of responses, a concern with the uncertainty of authentic formation also emerged. This problem is 
Chen-hui Tsai, Chin-Hwa Kuo, Wen-Bing Horng, and Chun-Wen Chen Learning Logographic Character Formation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 124 
stated by a first-year learner as “you can whip through without really absorbing what you are writing.”  
Although the first-year participants did significantly better in the precise production and awareness tests, 
their ratings did not reflect this result. It is very likely that their confidence in character reproduction 
results from whether they could recognize a character and whether they could produce the approximate 
shapes of characters, but not the precise production or better awareness of internal structures. That is, 
their confidence might come from the quantities, instead of the quality of their productions. 
Preference between the Two Methods 
The novice participants’ ratings and responses were clear: they liked the multimedia aid as a means of 
self-learning. Three advantages, among 24 UOIs, were specifically identified from the participants’ 
qualitative responses to survey item 6, (a) provide maximum correctness (54%), (b) provide animation 
(25%), and (c) provide motivation (21%). The first two were addressed previously, so we will elaborate 
more on the third. Some novice participants considered it more motivating to fulfill the multimedia task 
because the system would not let go until they completed a correct entry. Some of the comments were, “It 
was more fun and motivated me to try harder,” and “It felt like a game so I wanted to be perfect.”  
We also looked at their verbal responses to the prevailing method, survey item 5, in order to see why 
there was a significant difference in their preference. Among 16 UOIs, the first category that emerged to 
the top was the sense of uncertainty in accuracy regarding the paper worksheet (44%); the second 
category was expediency. Some of them noticed the possibility that one could go through the paper 
exercise in a quick manner (25%). The first-year participants, interestingly enough, perceived this 
disadvantage noted by the novice participants, as an advantage. 
The survey result revealed that the first-year participants liked the prevailing method more than the 
novices did. The first emerging reason, among 17 UOIs, was that they could complete writing exercises 
with the prevailing method in a faster and more flexible manner (41%), which seemed to be a major 
concern to them. Some participants wrote, “I have more control over ways of writing a character.” 
“Sometimes a different way (to write a character) feels more natural and I want to deviate.”  
Our quantitative analysis also depicted that the first-year learners liked the multimedia task less than the 
novices did. This is also reflected in their comments toward the multimedia method: “Completing the task 
on the computer forced me to slow down when practicing because the program was checking my 
accuracy. I couldn’t rush through it.” One participant who habitually began a stroke from bottom to top 
commented that he was irritated at having to change his stroke: “…many ways (of writing a character) are 
easier for my memory.” 
The first-year learners’ perception was, in all probability, influenced by their prior experience of learning 
characters in the contemporary conditions of character learning. With many new words in every lesson, 
they have a legitimate need to value their exercise time. It is also reasonable that they would prefer a more 
flexible way to achieve a high score on a vocabulary quiz. Since only the skills of recognition and 
approximate production are praised in tests, the accuracy and conventional formation of characters are 
consequently ignored during the learning process. Once a handwriting habit is established, learners find it 
awkward to change it. 
From this, we can also see how goal orientation of a learning task might color learners’ learning attitudes 
and affect learning processes. The prevailing task allows information to travel only one-way—the goal of 
the task becomes “completion” to the learners while the process becomes secondary. The multimedia 
program, however, requires a two-way information exchange between the learning tool and the learners. 
This puts an impetus on the learner to interact: they expected their output to be comprehended or 
acknowledged by the learning tool to see if their output was appropriately formed. This expectation 
pushed them to actively attempt to learn the character formation. The primary goal of the task was shifted 
to the learning of the target knowledge needed to complete the task. This goal orientation of the learning 
Chen-hui Tsai, Chin-Hwa Kuo, Wen-Bing Horng, and Chun-Wen Chen Learning Logographic Character Formation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 125 
tasks leads our attention to the likely problems and educational implications in character handwriting 
instruction. 
Educational Implications 
Do teachers want to emphasize the quantity or the quality of characters in teaching or learning 
handwriting? In addition to the participants’ perceptions, the phenomenon that our participants produced 
much more variations and less precise production with the prevailing method informs practitioners of a 
need to be more realistic in their curriculum objectives in character learning. We share a similar view with 
Ke (1998), who accurately pointed out that “although curriculum philosophies vary from program to 
program, it appears that at the initial stages of Chinese language learning, we need to control the amount 
of characters for our students to produce” (p. 98). If we overemphasize the quantity of characters, for 
instance, requesting beginners to write all the characters in the vocabulary list of a lesson by memory, 
quality and authenticity of character handwriting are most typically sacrificed. By controlling the amount, 
students could focus on character formation and the establishment of character writing skill. Because 
learners must find a way to be productive anyway, with limited time and cognitive constraints, the chance 
is greater that they would deviate to “draw” characters freestyle to compose approximate shapes instead 
of writing characters in a conventional and authentic manner. 
Instructors might underestimate the difficulties that confront adult learners. Our observation in the 
learners’ character variations indirectly showed that the participants’ errors were not random, and could 
be classified into several types. It is beyond the scope of this article to analyze the stroke error types of 
learners’ production that might result from their established cognitions, such as their L1 writing system. 
The fact that the multimedia effects improved the participants’ performance in conventional character 
formation and reduced their variations in the study presented the great possibility that this developing 
technology (i.e., multimedia with immediate error-specific feedback) appears to have positive effects on 
novice learners’ short-term achievements and benefit the motor aspect of the character learning. That, in 
turn, could lay a more thorough groundwork for teaching handwriting, especially at the initial learning 
stage. It may be worth mentioning that although the Chinese characters and CFL learners were chosen to 
serve the purpose of the study, the proposed technology could also accommodate different kinds of 
writing systems including minute differences among Chinese societies as well as Japanese and Korean 
characters, which are written differently (e.g., with different stroke orders), or characters created by the 
Japanese and Korean. 
Finally, while the conventional character formation has been the focus in this study, we are not arguing 
for the implementation of a rigorous stroke sequence per se. Rather, we would like to emphasize the 
feasibility and the desirability of developing culture-oriented automaticity in the beginning learners’ 
production of common strokes and subcharacter components, with an emphasis on quality rather than 
quantity of characters in learning logographic handwriting. 
LIMITATIONS AND FURTHER RESEARCH 
First of all, we remain aware that the small number of participants and stimuli sheds doubt on the validity 
of the observed significances found in the data analyses. Thus, the results cannot be generalized. 
However, the findings of this study could offer insights into the possible effects and perceptions that the 
learning methods might bring to the two sublevel beginning learners (novice beginners and first-year 
learners who had some prior experience in developing their handwriting skills).  Second, only short-term 
effects on writing performances were studied. Future research should be undertaken to determine if the 
multimedia effects are retained for a longer period of time at the initial stage of learning logographic 
character handwriting. Third, as mentioned earlier, a discussion of the writing error types is beyond the 
scope of this paper. It might be of interest for future studies to explore if the learning methods affect 
learners’ error types in learning conventional character formation. Fourth, since we are interested in the 
Chen-hui Tsai, Chin-Hwa Kuo, Wen-Bing Horng, and Chun-Wen Chen Learning Logographic Character Formation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 126 
multimedia effect on learning character handwriting, the criteria of character selection primarily focused 
on writing complexity and visual structure categories. Additionally, because the current study involved 
novice learners, we did not include high-density characters in the stimuli. Perhaps future research could 
cover more complex character or control other possible factors, for example, degree of stroke repetition, 
the parallel of internal structure, character frequency, etc. It is our hope to highlight the need for more 
research to investigate the effects of learning methods in logographic handwriting instruction. Studies of 
this kind could provide information for practitioners and L2 beginners to better overcome difficulties in 
learning logographic character handwriting, to exploit viability of the new technology in this process, and 
thus to offer dynamic options to enhance instruction. 
 
APPENDIX A. 
 
Note.  The enclosure structure includes visually partial enclosure and/or full enclosure. The numbers in 
the parentheses denote the average number of strokes among the characters in the structure categories. 
 
APPENDIX B. 
 
 
Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2012/tsaietal.pdf 
February 2012, Volume 16, Number 1 
pp. 110–130 
 
Copyright © 2012, ISSN 1094-3501 127 
APPENDIX C. 
 
 
NOTES 
1. Among the 3,500 Chinese characters for common use, the simplest characters have 1 stroke each, and 
the most complex character has 24 strokes. The majority of the characters have between 6 and 13 strokes 
(Taylor & Taylor, 1995). The average number of strokes for each group of characters in the current study 
is approximately 6 as our targeted participants are novice and beginning learners. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
“Xue-wen Easy Go!” program was adapted and modified to serve the present study. The computer-
assisted character-learning program was developed by the Center of Digital Language Research (CDLR) 
at Tamkang University in Taiwan. The experimental apparatus in the present study was supported in part 
by CDLR’s grant from National Science Council (NSC 100-2631-S-032-001) in Taiwan. The authors of 
the article are grateful to the anonymous reviewers for their inspiring comments and suggestions. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Chen-Hui Tsai is currently a lecturer at the Department of East Asian Languages & Cultures at the 
Chen-hui Tsai, Chin-Hwa Kuo, Wen-Bing Horng, and Chun-Wen Chen Learning Logographic Character Formation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 128 
University of California, Berkeley. Her research interests are logographic character acquisition, as well as 
educational technology and SLA. 
E-mail: chtsai@berkeley.edu 
Chin-Hwa Kuo is a professor and chairman at the Department of Computer Science and Information 
Science and the director of Digital Language Research Center, Tamkang University, Taiwan. His research 
interests include computer assisted language learning and multimedia processing. 
E-mail: chkuo@mail.tku.edu.tw 
Wen-Bing Horng is a professor in the Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, 
Tamkang University, Taiwan. His research interests include image processing, artificial intelligence, and 
information security. 
E-mail: horng@mail.tku.edu.tw 
Chun-Wen Chen received his Ph.D. in Computer Science and Information Engineering, Tamkang 
University, Taiwan in 2009. He is currently an assistant researcher in Center for Teaching and Learning, 
Taipei National University of the Arts, Taiwan. His research interests include image processing and 
artificial intelligence. 
E-mail: mavins.chen@gmail.com 
 
REFERENCES 
Allen, J. (2008). Why learning to write Chinese is a waste of time: A modest proposal. Foreign Language 
Annals, 41(2), 237–251. 
Baddeley, A. (2003). Working memory and language: An overview. Journal of Communication 
disorders, 36(3), 189–208. 
Chapelle, C. (1998). Multimedia CALL: Lessons to be learned from research on instructed SLA. 
Language Learning & Technology, 2(1), 22–36. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol2num1/ 
pdf/article1.pdf 
Chen, P. (1999). Modern Chinese: history and sociolinguistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  
Creswell, J. (2003). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods approaches (2nd Ed.). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc. 
Everson, M. (1998). Word recognition among learners of Chinese as a foreign language: Investigating the 
relationship between naming and knowing. Modern Language Journal, 82(2), 194–204. 
Fan, L., Tong, L., & Song, J. (1987). The characteristics of Chinese language and children’s learning to 
read and write. The Future of Literacy in a Changing World, 87–94. 
Fang, D. (2000). Web-based Chinese characters CAI system for primary school learners. Unpublished 
master’s thesis, Department of Information and Computer Education, College of Science, National 
University of Tainan, Taiwan.  
Gass, S. M. (1997). Input, interaction, and the second language learner. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates. 
Hu, Z., Leung, H., & Xu, Y. (2008). Automated Chinese Handwriting Error Detection Using Attributed 
Relational Graph Matching, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 5145, 344–355. 
Hu, Z., Xu, Y., Huang, L., & Leung, H. (2009). A Chinese Handwriting Education System with 
Chen-hui Tsai, Chin-Hwa Kuo, Wen-Bing Horng, and Chun-Wen Chen Learning Logographic Character Formation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 129 
Automatic Error Detection, Journal of Software, 4(2), 101–107. 
Ke, C. (1998). Effects of language background on the learning of Chinese characters among foreign 
language students. Foreign Language Annals, 31(1), 91–102. 
Ke, C., Wen, X., & Kotenbeutel, C. (2001). Report on the 2000 CLTA articulation project. Journal of the 
Chinese Language Teacher’s Association, 36(3), 25–60. 
Keppel, G., & Wickens, T. (1991). Design and analysis: A researcher’s handbook. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall. 
Kim, D., Kim, E., & Bang, S. (1997). A variation measure for handwritten character image data using 
entropy difference. Pattern Recognition, 30(1), 19–29. 
Kuo, C., Huang, Y., Horng, W., Chen, C., Chen, C., & Wang, Y. (2009). Design of a Chinese Character 
Learning System Based on Orthographic Decomposition Strategy. Paper presented at the International 
Workshop on Research and Practice of Advanced Learning (RePALT), Tokyo, Japan. 
Leung, H. & Komura, T. (2006). Web-Based Handwriting Education with Animated Virtual Teacher 
[Special issue]. International Journal of Distance Education Technologies, 4(1) 71–80. 
Li, K., Leung, H., Lam, S., & Tsang, C. (2007). An Assessment Tool for Judging the Overall Appearance 
of Chinese Handwriting based on Opinions from Occupational Therapists, Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science, 4823, 288–299. 
Lin, C. (2003). Effects of using language- Media teaching on learning Chinese character strokes and 
stoke orders- Exemplified with grade 2 primary school students in Hualien County. Unpublished master’s 
thesis, Department of Language and Literacy Education, College of Humanities, National Taichung 
University of Education, Taiwan.  
Lin, L. (2004). The Chinese characters assessment system for second grade elementary learners. 
Unpublished master’s thesis, Department of Educational Measurement and Statistics, College of  
Education, National Taichung University of Education, Taiwan.  
Matsuo, K., Kato, C., Okada, T., Moriya, T., Glover, G., & Nakai, T. (2003). Finger movements lighten 
neural loads in the recognition of ideographic characters. Cognitive Brain Research,17, 263–272. 
Ozaki, M., Adachi, Y., Ishii, N., & Koyazu, T. (1995). CAI System to Improve Hand Writing Skills by 
means of Fuzzy Theory. Paper presented at the Proceedings IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy 
Systems and the 2nd Internatoinal Fuzzy Engineering Symposium,Yokohama, Japan. 
Pica, T. (1997). Second language teaching and research relationships: A North American view. Language 
Teaching Research, 1(1), 48–72. 
Sassoon, R. (1995). The acquisition of a second writing system: Intellect Books. 
Shen, H. (2004). Level of cognitive processing: Effects on character learning among non-native learners 
of Chinese as a foreign language. Language and Education, 18(2), 167–182. 
Shimomura, T. (1980). Informatics: input and output: Science of the stroke sequence of Kanji. Paper 
presented at the Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, 
Stroudsburg, PA, USA. 
Smith, M. S. (1993). Input enhancement in instructed SLA. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 
15(2), 165–179. 
Tan, L., Spinks, J., Eden, G., Perfetti, C., & Siok, W. (2005). Reading depends on writing, in Chinese. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 102(24), 8781–8785. 
Chen-hui Tsai, Chin-Hwa Kuo, Wen-Bing Horng, and Chun-Wen Chen Learning Logographic Character Formation 
 
Language Learning & Technology 130 
Tang, K., Li, K., & Leung, H. (2006). A web-based Chinese handwriting education system with 
automatic feedback and analysis. Advances in Web Based Learning–ICWL 2006, 176–188. 
Tang, K., & Leung, H. (2006a). Reconstructing the Correct Writing Sequence from a Set of Chinese 
Character Strokes, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 4285, 333–344. 
Tang, K., & Leung, H., (2006b). Teaching Chinese handwriting by automatic feedback and analysis for 
incorrect stroke sequence and stroke production errors. Proceeding of the 2006 conference on Learning 
by Effective Utilization of Technologies: Facilitating Intercultural Understanding, 151, 107–114, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
Taylor, I., & Taylor, M. (1995). Writing and literacy in Chinese, Korean and Japanese (Vol. 3). 
Philadelphia, USA: John Benjamins Publishing Company. 
Teddlie, C., & Tashakkori, A. (2009). Foundations of mixed methods research. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage. 
Tonouchi, Y., & Kawamura, A. (1997). An on-line Japanese character recognition method using length-
based stroke correspondence algorithm. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the Fourth International 
Conference on Analysis and Recognition, Washington, DC, USA. 
Tsay, Y., & Tsai, W. (1993). Attributed string matching by split-and-merge for on-line Chinese character 
recognition. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 15(2), 180–185. 
Wu, L. (2002). Construction and effectiveness of online Chinese language learning systems. 
(Unpublished master’s thesis), Department of Information and Computer Education, College of Science, 
National University of Tainan, Taiwan. 
