Language Learning & Technology 
 http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2012/review4 
October 2012, Volume 16, Number 3 
pp. 49–52 
 
Copyright © 2012, ISSN 1094-3501 49 
REVIEW OF USING CORPORA IN THE LANGUAGE CLASSROOM 
Using Corpora in the Language Classroom 
 
Randi Reppen 
 
2010 
ISBN: 9780521146081 
US $35.00 
118 pp. 
 
Cambridge University Press  
New York, NY  
 
Review by Jacqueline Mull, Research Institute of English Language Education 
Corpus Linguistics has been shedding light on language for the last forty years. With the advent of the 
personal computer, researchers have been able to analyze and describe real language use and compare 
language use across genres.  Beyond its usefulness for research, corpus linguistics has been growing in 
popularity among language educators as an additional tool for the classroom. Not all language educators 
are aware of the benefits of corpus linguistics, however, and those that are may feel intimidated by the 
technology or may simply not know how to incorporate it into their classroom.  In her new book, Using 
Corpora in The Language Classroom, Randi Reppen invites language educators, whether they are 
familiar with corpus linguistics or not, to consider the value of this language tool and to learn about a 
variety of ways it may be useful in the language classroom.  
The first chapter introduces key terms of corpus linguistics in a simple and approachable way and is 
targeted at educators who may be unfamiliar with terms such as corpora, concordancers or ―Key Word in 
Context‖ (KWIC) searches. In addition to describing these terms and tools, Reppen uses the first chapter 
to argue for the importance of corpus linguistics and the value of using it in the classroom. She briefly 
describes how corpus linguistics is being used to inform commercial textbooks and suggests several 
classroom activities that can be easily incorporated into teaching. These classroom activities are addressed 
in an almost skeletal format, intended to generate interest in the technology and to show a place for it in 
the classroom without overwhelming a new user.  
Chapter Two continues the case for using corpus-informed materials and provides greater detail on a 
variety of readily available printed books and resources for investigating the target language. It highlights 
specific examples of general language features, lexical bundles and register comparisons from these 
resources that can be exploited by language educators when designing materials for their students. 
Reppen brings awareness to resources that are available as a result of previous corpus research and 
illustrates how to incorporate that information into teaching materials. Some brief examples of possible 
classroom lessons are shared in this chapter, though elaborate materials development is largely left as the 
responsibility of the educator.  Chapter Two ends with a reference list for further reading about corpus-
based research findings concerning English vocabulary, expressions, lexical bundles, and formulaic 
sequences.  
Jacqueline Mull                           Review of Using Corpora in the Language Classroom  
 
Language Learning & Technology 50 
Chapter Three makes the jump from providing general information about corpus linguistics and its 
classroom application, to detailing practical steps for exploring free online resources. The book outlines 
some resources that are designed for language educators and others that can be approachable for students 
as well. Reppen begins this chapter with a discussion of how to assess the quality of online resources so 
that educators may feel free to explore the Internet—and the wide variety of resources available to 
them—with a critical eye. From there, she introduces several approachable corpus-based online resources 
that educators and students can use to learn about English. Finally, she introduces three online corpora 
(Michigan Corpus of Contemporary American English; Corpus of Contemporary American English; and 
the Time Corpus) by describing their composition (spoken English, multiple register English, and 
academic English), as well as the resources that are available on their associated webpages. After 
providing a checklist of points to keep in mind when developing materials from corpus information, 
Reppen then highlights the strengths of each of the three corpora by leading readers through searches that 
highlight teachable points for classroom materials. 
By the fourth chapter, readers are aware of a number of both non-technical and technical methods for 
finding corpus-based materials. While Reppen briefly lists several types of lessons that can be created for 
students and offers some guidelines for making materials, she quickly turns the focus toward building a 
personal corpus. This chapter explains a number of decisions that need to be made when building a 
personal corpus and how to go about collecting and preparing texts. Language educators will also find 
information not only for corpora of written language, but advice and useful software for creating spoken 
corpora as well.  
While the first four chapters introduce educators to resources they can use to inform their lesson plans and 
activities, Chapter Five puts the corpora in the students’ hands. This chapter makes the case for student 
use of corpora in the classroom by presenting five specific classroom activities that target a variety of 
English proficiency levels and topics. The activities are laid out in step-by-step form, much like mini 
lesson plans, and are designed with the assumption that students have access to computers and are 
prepared to do their own simple searches. Reppen emphasizes the need to have a back-up plan whenever 
asking students to access anything online, so a lesson is not ruined by a faulty link or site crash. If 
educators are not in a teaching context that allows students to do their own searches in class, activities 
could be adapted into handout-based lessons by the instructor. Reppen finishes the chapter by describing 
several ways that corpora and corpus-based materials are being used in a variety of different teaching 
contexts and offers some additional food for thought on how these resources may be of use to both 
students and educators.  
Further information is available in the appendices and warrants reading. Appendix A includes a handful 
of photocopiable pages that were referenced in the first chapter and that can be used directly in a 
classroom. Additional activity ideas for using corpora in the classroom are tucked in here as well, 
including information about MonoConc Pro, a specific concordancer that can be used to search any 
corpus of text files. The tutorial for MonoConc Pro will only be of value for educators who own a copy of 
the software or are willing to acquire a copy. The book gives solid and easy-to-follow instructions for 
doing a variety of tasks using MonoConc Pro and is well worth the read for anyone starting out with the 
software. Appendix B includes a list of trusted online resources that language educators can explore. 
Resources range from highly educator-centered corpus-informed materials, to more research-centered 
materials that encourage independent corpus searches and evaluations. 
In addition to the materials in the book, Using Corpora in the Language Classroom offers a companion 
website that, while very slow, is worth a visit. Users will have to register on the Cambridge website with 
an email address before accessing any materials. The website offers a handful of additional lessons and 
worksheets. While the majority of them are geared toward high-level learners of academic English, they 
do offer some insight into how activities might be designed and how corpus-based information may be 
presented as a worksheet. The website also offers access to the KWIC results for three words in a readily 
Jacqueline Mull                           Review of Using Corpora in the Language Classroom  
 
Language Learning & Technology 51 
printable format, though it may be more valuable to look the same words up in one of the corpora 
described in the book as a way of familiarizing oneself with the resources.  
As with any book that relies on technology, and especially one that relies on online links, resources may 
not be reliable. For example, at the time of writing this review, one of the resources described in the book, 
the Birmingham Kibbitzers, was not available, though a subset of the Kibbitzers could be found hosted on 
another site after a brief Internet search.  Also, several screen shots in the book no longer match the most 
updated website. The ever-changing nature of the Internet demands that educators be prepared for 
hiccoughs when reading a book, such as this one, that relies so heavily on web-based links. Links may 
change or move, sites may crash, and information may be taken down. Reppen appears to be aware of this 
and does offer the list of links from the book on the book’s companion website.  At this time, the list is 
identical to the list in the book, but one might hope it will be updated periodically as sites inevitably 
change.  Many of the websites described in the book are hosted by universities. These sites have been 
available for some time and are still being maintained and expanded. These links, therefore, appear to be 
fairly stable and hopefully will continue to be available for some time to come.  
A troublesome point that Reppen fails to discuss in her book is the increasingly strict protections being 
placed on these bodies of language. Many of the hosting sites generously provide a concordancer to use 
with their corpus, but several restrict any copying and pasting of language from their sites. Educators may 
run up against this problem if they try to cut and paste lines from some of the online corpora into their 
handouts, as suggested in the book. This does not at all limit educators and students in terms of language 
exploration, and language samples can still be read and hand-typed into handouts, but these restrictions 
may make things a bit more time consuming when creating classroom materials.  
It is also important to note that Using Corpora in the Language Classroom is designed with an English 
language teaching context in mind, so the materials and corpora described in the book are all based only 
on English. The book does still give an accessible introduction to using concordancers in the classroom 
that may be of interest to educators of other languages as well, provided they have access to a corpus of 
their target language or are interested in spending time with Chapter 4 to create their own corpus. Activity 
ideas are also adaptable to other languages. 
In spite of these potential drawbacks, Using Corpora in the Language Classroom is an informative read 
for those who are willing to set the book down periodically to pick up their computer and explore the 
software being described. This is especially true in Chapter Three, in which many of the corpus searches 
described are much easier to understand while manipulating them directly. Reppen gives directions that 
are relatively easy to follow, and new users will almost certainly come away with a better sense of the 
tool and what can be done with it if they take the time to play with the software online. For educators who 
need visual reinforcement to make the jump from the text description to the actual online software, there 
is a PowerPoint presentation available on the companion website that provides visual steps for the 
educator of several corpus searches using the same corpora described in the book.  
The breadth and depth of information that can be gathered from corpora and other corpus-based resources 
is impressive and is becoming easier for educators to access. This book is designed as an introduction for 
language educators who are truly starting at the beginning, or who are familiar with corpus linguistics but 
are not sure how to make the transition to using it in their classrooms. For educators who are already 
familiar with corpora and/or concordancers and are already using it in their classrooms, the book may be 
too lightweight to be of much interest. However, the strength of Using Corpora in the Language 
Classroom is the highly approachable tone used to introduce corpora and their uses in classrooms. Above 
all, Using Corpora in the Language Classroom brings together a wealth of interesting websites for 
language educators and their students to explore further.   
 
Jacqueline Mull                           Review of Using Corpora in the Language Classroom  
 
Language Learning & Technology 52 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Jacqueline Mull is the Vice Dean of the Research Institute of English Language Education in Kobe, 
Japan, where she is also a full-time lecturer. Her interests include student use of concordancers, and 
materials development. 
 
Email: jmull@riele.org   
