Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2012/cutrimschmidwhyte.pdf 
June 2012, Volume 16, Number 2 
pp. 65–86 
 
Copyright © 2012, ISSN 1094-3501 65 
INTERACTIVE WHITEBOARDS IN STATE SCHOOL SETTINGS:  
TEACHER RESPONSES TO SOCIO-CONSTRUCTIVIST HEGEMONIES 
Euline Cutrim Schmid, University of Education Heidelberg 
Shona Whyte, University of Nice Sophia-Antipolis 
Recent CALL research suggests that the arrival of new technologies in the language 
classroom has led to an increased dominance of the socio-constructivist paradigm (Felix, 
2006). Borg (2006) suggests, however, that the hegemony of this paradigm may not 
extend beyond well-researched university and private ESL contexts. The present study 
tests this prediction by examining the integration of interactive whiteboard (IWB) 
technology by non-native speaking teachers of EFL in state schools in France and 
Germany. Teachers’ cognitions were investigated via longitudinal qualitative empirical 
data, involving classroom observations, video recordings of lessons, in-depth interviews 
and video-stimulated reflections. Findings suggest that in spite of communicatively 
oriented, socio-constructivist training, teachers used IWB technology to implement a 
variety of different approaches. The paper traces teachers’ use of different models, from 
traditional grammar-translation to more communicative and constructivist models of task 
and project-based learning. It shows how individual teachers’ approaches are shaped by a 
variety of factors, such as teachers’ teaching and learning experience, pedagogical beliefs 
and institutional demands. These findings illustrate the complexities of technology 
integration in CALL and show how teachers often adapt or ignore hegemonic pedagogies 
to construct their own representations of the technology which are more in line with their 
curricular and personal goals. 
Keywords: Computer-Assisted Language Learning, Language Teaching Methodology, 
Second Language Acquisition, Teacher Education 
INTRODUCTION  
While Kern is no doubt correct in his assertion that “technology-based language teaching is not a method 
but is integrated into various pedagogical approaches” (Kern, 2006, p. 200), CALL and CMC exist and 
evolve in the wider context of second language acquisition and teaching research, a context which has 
undergone radical, transforming changes over the past fifteen years. A general shift in learning theory 
“from behaviourist, to cognitive, to situated, social, and distributed views of human cognition” (Johnson, 
2006, p. 236) means changing practices for teachers and teacher educators: 
The challenge for L2 teacher education will be to position teachers as knowers and to position 
their ways of knowing that lead to praxis alongside the disciplinary knowledge that has 
dominated the traditional knowledge base of L2 teacher education. (Johnson, 2006, p. 243) 
In European state schools, the challenge is two-fold: teachers must adopt in their teaching the principles 
of a new pedagogical hegemony in the form of constructivist theories of language learning, and they must 
adopt this transformative approach in the context of a larger educational framework of assessment 
practices and school curricula which do not often easily lend themselves to such change. 
Current educational and pedagogical hegemonies in Europe centre on the Common European Reference 
framework (CEFR; Council of Europe, 2001), with its emphasis on a communicative, task-based 
approach and testable competences. France has adopted the CEFR wholesale: 
Level A1 is specified as the target for the end of primary school, level B1 for the end of 
Euline Cutrim Schmid and Shona Whyte Interactive Whiteboards in State School Settings 
 
Language Learning & Technology 66 
compulsory schooling, and level B2 for the end of upper secondary education […] national FL 
curricula have been rewritten (or are being rewritten) following the specifications of the CEFR 
[…and] the professional development of language teachers is naturally being focused on teaching 
and assessing according to the aims of the CEFR and its levels. (Bonnet, 2007, p. 670) 
German schools too, are committed to the CEFR, and pre-service teacher training programmes now focus 
on task and project-based approaches (Mueller-Hartmann & Schocker-Von Ditfurth, 2011). As a result, 
young teachers tend to be better familiarized with these new approaches in comparison to the more 
experienced teachers, who still struggle with the new policies, and consequently show resistance. The 
new top-down drive towards a communicative, task-based approach also creates tensions in French 
schools, where there is a tradition of teacher-fronted whole-class teaching, including recitation sessions 
favouring a product-oriented view of SLA. 
The arrival of new technologies in the language classroom is a complicating factor, creating a second, 
technological, hegemony where teachers are under pressure to use new equipment and software, and to do 
so within the new constructivist framework. Recent surveys have shown that in spite of the rapid increase 
in access to computers and internet connectivity over the last ten years and strong pressure to use these 
technologies, teacher uptake and technology training are low in France and Germany compared with other 
countries, such as the USA, UK, Australia and Mexico (Bauer, Hoffmann & Mayrberger, 2010; Guichon, 
2011; Mueller-Hartmann & Schocker-Von Ditfurth, 2008).  
The situation is not very different even in countries that show higher levels of ICT integration in schools. 
Since the widespread installation of IWBs in British schools, Gray (2010) has shown that FL teachers in 
the UK have resisted the discourse of “transformation towards constructivist practices” and appropriated 
the IWB to serve their own needs, including accommodation of national curricular constraints which 
emphasise “directive teaching with clear, shared objectives and the use of well-paced, lively and 
interactive whole-class work” as well as “public examination results and national test results” (p. 76). 
Teachers thus resist technological hegemonies for practical reasons, but may also need to maintain a 
critical stance: as one French teacher remarked, “I can’t just follow like a sheep, you know, I mean 
without asking questions” (F6, interview).1 
The importance of teachers’ beliefs and experience is underlined in recent work in teacher cognition 
research (Borg, 2006). Investigations of tensions between teacher beliefs and classroom practice highlight 
the importance of both teachers’ conceptual understanding of approaches to teaching, and the context in 
which these approaches are to be implemented. In the state school contexts discussed in the present paper, 
language teachers are under pressure to integrate both new technology and new pedagogy in their 
classrooms; teacher cognition research can shed light on how and why teachers react in particular ways to 
these technological and pedagogical hegemonies. 
The present paper investigates these issues by examining teaching methods based on different theories of 
language learning together with a variety of classroom resources and methods in a particular context of 
second language teaching with technology: the use of interactive whiteboards (IWB) in EFL classes in 
state school settings in France and Germany. The study traces teachers’ use of different models, from 
traditional grammar-translation through behaviourist drilling, to more communicative and constructivist 
models of task- and project-based learning, with classroom examples supported by teacher and trainer 
commentary for each. It also shows how individual teachers’ approaches are shaped not just by prevailing 
educational, pedagogical and technological hegemonies, but by a variety of factors, such as teachers’ 
cognitions and particular teaching contexts. It begins with a review of research in teacher cognition and 
on IWB pedagogy, then an outline of the research contexts and methodology. Data analysis is then 
presented, and the implications and conclusion form the final part of the paper. 
Euline Cutrim Schmid and Shona Whyte Interactive Whiteboards in State School Settings 
 
Language Learning & Technology 67 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Teacher Cognition Research 
Recent years have seen a growth in research on teacher cognition in second language teaching, referring 
to “the complex, practically-oriented, personalized and context-sensitive networks of knowledge, 
thoughts and beliefs” which inform teaching (Borg, 2006, p. 272). Phipps and Borg (2009) demonstrate 
the systematic nature of teacher cognitions, and distinguish core and peripheral beliefs, providing some 
explanation for the frequent failure of teacher development programmes to deliver anticipated outcomes, 
and for mismatches between teachers’ stated views and beliefs and their observed classroom practice 
(e.g., Feryok, 2010; Orafi & Borg, 2009). 
The field of teacher cognition dates to early work connecting teachers’ mental lives to their teaching 
behaviour by Freeman and Richards (1996) and Woods (1996), and with the recognition of the value of 
understanding what teachers think as well as what they do, research has since continued steadily (see 
Borg, 2003, 2006, for extensive reviews, as well recent dissertations by Feryok, 2005; Cross, 2006; and 
Wyatt, 2008). Despite an impressive volume of work in a variety of contexts, Borg (2006) notes that 
teacher cognition research is still vastly unrepresentative of language teaching worldwide, since the field 
is dominated by research into the teaching of English in English-speaking countries, and in private or 
higher education institutions, neglecting both secondary schools in the state sector and younger learners: 
“the surge in interest in teaching languages to young learners in recent years has not been matched by 
studies of cognitions and practices in this area” (Borg, 2006, p. 274). The integration of new technologies 
also remains largely unstudied from a teacher cognition perspective.  
To gain access to teachers’ cognitions, a variety of data collection methods have been used, including 
self-report instruments, verbal commentaries and reflective writing. Cross (2010) points out that while 
earlier teacher cognition research relied mainly on self-report data, there has been a recent methodological 
shift towards approaches that combine these data with observation records of what teachers actually do. 
The present study follows this trend by investigating cognition in connection with practice.  
Much teacher cognition research has investigated the relationship between teachers’ beliefs and practice, 
and the evolution of teacher cognitions over time. A number of studies have highlighted apparent 
mismatches or inconsistencies between stated cognitions drawn from interview or other commentaries, 
and inferred cognitions, based on observation of actual practice. In recent work in EFL contexts in a 
broad Middle Eastern area, researchers have examined attempts to introduce communicative language 
teaching in more traditional EFL classrooms and identified a number of factors which influence teacher 
take-up of new ideas. 
In her case study of an Armenian teacher’s adoption of communicative teaching methods, Feryok (2010) 
underlines “the ‘reality check’ of contextual factors, such as workload demands and institutional 
expectations” (Feryok, 2010, p. 273). Orafi and Borg’s (2009) study of three teachers’ implementation of 
a new communicative curriculum in Libyan secondary schools revealed that most pedagogical activities 
were not taught as recommended because of contextual factors. In their study of three experienced EFL 
teachers in a Turkish preparatory school, Phipps and Borg (2009) ascribe such discrepancies to conflicts 
between teacher’s core (deeply ingrained) and peripheral (less strongly held) beliefs about teaching and 
learning generally. Thus one teacher recognised the utility of group work to maximise opportunities for 
target language use, but actually conducted whole-class dialogue because of core beliefs about classroom 
management and feedback. Teachers may also lack the practical procedural knowledge to implement an 
approach to which they theoretically adhere (Feryok, 2010). 
Other work in second language teacher cognition has focused on change in teachers’ beliefs and practices 
over time. Borg (2006) distinguishes behavioural from cognitive change, showing that teachers may 
modify their teaching practice without altering their beliefs (e.g., during teaching assessment), or 
Euline Cutrim Schmid and Shona Whyte Interactive Whiteboards in State School Settings 
 
Language Learning & Technology 68 
conversely evolve in terms of their thinking without changing their practice (e.g., due to contextual 
constraints). Little longitudinal second language teacher cognition research has focused on the integration 
of new technologies, although some studies have looked at this factor in general education. Orlando 
(2009) emphasises the need for longitudinal studies which create space for examining the changes arising 
from the teachers’ perspectives rather than simply presenting “before and after snapshots.” She contends 
that constructivist approaches imposed institutionally tend to meet with teacher resistance, but that new 
technologies may enhance teaching and learning in unanticipated ways. Some comparable conclusions 
may be drawn from the review of the interactive whiteboard literature which follows. 
The IWB in school settings 
Much research on IWB use in school settings has been conducted in English-speaking primary school 
contexts, particularly in the UK, where the IWB has been actively promoted for interactive whole-class 
teaching in the context of a general push towards socio-constructivist pedagogies, emphasising active 
learners in an interactive classroom. A substantial body of IWB research has moved “beyond the ‘wow’ 
factor” (Beauchamp & Parkinson, 2005) to examine pitfalls and best practice. Haldane (2007) describes 
an initially somewhat limited conception of interactive learning among teachers, who referred “primarily 
to the way pupils came to the IWB to move text, pictures or diagrams or to control an aspect of the 
board’s functionality and saw this as pupils interacting both with the technology and the learning process” 
(Haldane, 2007, p. 262). 
Beauchamp and Kennewell (2010) distinguish between interactive technology and interactive pedagogy: 
while the former might require pupils simply to “press buttons and drag objects across the screen” 
(Beauchamp & Kennewell, 2008, p. 313), the latter is more challenging for both teacher and pupils. 
Beauchamp and Kennewell (2010) stress the role of the teacher in using the IWB to promote interactivity 
in its pedagogical sense, establishing a scale of interactivity ranging from none (the IWB is no more than 
a “suitable surface for a projected image” p. 763) to synergistic interactivity (the IWB is used to store, 
retrieve and amend ideas), involving a change in ownership (of the board, and thus of learning). The 
authors particularly value synergistic interactivity, which they concede requires high ICT skills, but they 
consider it more effective in producing learning. These researchers value the potential of the IWB in 
fostering communal work and learning from mistakes, two key aspects of current second language 
teaching. 
The secondary education literature extends these findings by showing how teachers generally start by 
developing technical mastery of IWB functionalities, often experiencing Fullan’s (2001) “implementation 
dip” in pedagogical effectiveness as they adjust to the new technology. In research into IWB use among 
mathematics and modern languages teachers, Glover, Miller, Averis, and Door (2007) find that only once 
technical competence is achieved do teachers look for pedagogical advantages. Cutrim Schmid (2010, p. 
169) documents a similar evolution in a German EFL teacher who first asked “what she could do with the 
technology,” but then “how the technology could support her teaching.” 
Hennessey, Ruthven, and Brindley (2005) found that teachers generally adopted the IWB tools and 
affordances which fit with the subject culture, rather than adapting practice to fit new tools. Similarly, 
Gray (2010) contests the claim that UK modern language teaching would necessarily benefit from 
transformation via technology. While acknowledging the value of the IWB for second language needs and 
practices such as multimodal input, noticing, and CMC, Gray contends that UK foreign language teachers 
are already expert in whole-class interactive teaching and rejects the assumption that “technology can 
transform any teaching, anytime, anywhere, and that transformation is always good.” For Gray, when 
these teachers use the IWB to increase rather than devolve control of the learning process, their response 
is both appropriate and effective in that particular context: 
It is no coincidence that the most popular technological application so far in schools has been one 
Euline Cutrim Schmid and Shona Whyte Interactive Whiteboards in State School Settings 
 
Language Learning & Technology 69 
which meets many teachers’ desire for control over content, learning and behaviour rather than 
those which promote independent learning. Learning may be improved, but perhaps not in the 
ways first envisaged by the technophiles (Gray, 2010, p. 80).  
We will return to this question in the conclusion to this paper, after analysis of our own data. 
Gray’s objections aside, most IWB studies in school settings highlight the potential of this tool for 
stimulating interaction among learners, a major element of modern communicative language teaching; 
IWB affordances for EFL teaching in schools are well documented (Cutrim Schmid & Stetter, 2008; 
Cutrim Schmid & van Hazebrouck, 2010; Gray, Pilkington, Hagger-Vaughan, & Tomkins, 2007; and 
Gray, 2010). However, this research also cautions against harnessing technology to effect a constructivist 
revolution (Gray, 2010; Orlando, 2009), and findings in the wider domain of teacher cognition underline 
the complexities of the relationship between teachers’ views and their actual classroom practices. 
RESEARCH CONTEXTS AND RESEARCH METHODOLOGIES 
The present research is situated at the intersection of the study of second language teacher cognition 
research and the investigation of interactivity in classrooms with IWBs. The projects described in this 
paper involved the use of the interactive whiteboard in primary, secondary and vocational EFL 
classrooms in France and Germany. In Germany, secondary EFL teachers were observed as they 
integrated the IWB into their regular English classes; in France, the IWB was used for videoconferencing 
between classes of French primary pupils learning English. As already pointed out, both research projects 
were implemented in macro-societal and institutional contexts in which hegemonic educational policies 
strongly encourage more widespread use of new technologies in accordance with the principles of current 
models of language teaching pedagogy, such as task-based and project-based language learning. 
Research Context 
German data were collected during a three-year project based on a professional development programme 
for EFL teachers in secondary and vocational schools in the south of Germany. IWB training was spread 
over 18 months, and teachers’ participation was voluntary, motivated by a personal interest in advancing 
their own teaching skills with respect to the IWB technology and in facilitating CALL research. The 
teachers received technical and pedagogical support for their own exploration of the technology via (a) 
IWB training workshops, (b) individual consultancy with an academic expert, (c) lessons designed and 
implemented by pre-service teachers, and (d) video-stimulated reflective sessions. A total of 10 IWB 
training workshops were designed and conducted by the first author.  
The French study concerns a longitudinal project on the introduction of videoconferencing (VC) for EFL 
in French primary schools. The local education authority decided to pair expert and novice EFL teachers 
and their classes as part of a FL teacher development programme for remote schools in the sparsely 
populated valleys of the Alpes-Maritimes. The classes were based on “the more traditional use [of 
videoconferencing] to broadcast a class” (Macedo-Rouet, 2009, p. 69), consonant with the prevailing 
pedagogical hegemony described previously. Teachers were followed over a six-month period from (a) an 
initial training session and materials development through (b) planning of class-to-class VC sessions to 
(c) implementation and (d) video-stimulated debriefing sessions (Whyte, 2011). 
Participants 
In Germany, seven longitudinal case studies were conducted from 2008 to 2011 with experienced EFL 
teachers in two secondary schools and one vocational school. 
The French project involved eight generalist primary teachers and two teacher trainers. Two pairs, F1-F2 
and F3-F4, were expert-novice EFL tandems, F5-F6 worked in English and Italian, while the remaining 
EFL pair, F7-F8, participated in training but were unable to conduct VC sessions due to technical 
Euline Cutrim Schmid and Shona Whyte Interactive Whiteboards in State School Settings 
 
Language Learning & Technology 70 
problems (see Table 1). The German teachers are referred to by the codes G1 through G5, while the 
French are F1 through F8, plus trainers FA and FB. 
Table 1. Participant Profiles 
Teacher Type of School School Subjects Years Teaching 
Level of 
Media 
Literacy 
Total 
Experience 
with an IWB 
G1 State/Vocational Business and Business English 11 basic 1 year 
G2 State/Vocational English and French 30 advanced 2 years 
G3 State/Secondary 
English, Social 
Sciences, and 
Geography 
4 basic 2 years 
G4 Private/Secondary English, German, and Religious Education 20 intermediate 4 years 
G5 State/Secondary English and German, 12 intermediate 3 years 
G6 State/Secondary  
English, Music, 
French, and 
Geography 
3 basic 2 years 
G7 State/Vocational Business and Business English 7 intermediate 2 years 
F1 State/Primary Generalist primary 6 basic 3 months 
F2  State/Primary Generalist primary  16 intermediate 3 years 
F3 State/Primary Generalist primary 15 basic 3 months 
F4 State/Primary Generalist primary 19 intermediate 1 year 
F5 State/Primary Generalist primary 6 basic 3 months 
F6 State/Primary Generalist primary 20 basic 3 months 
F7 State/Primary Generalist primary 10 advanced 4 years 
F8 State/Primary Generalist primary 2 basic 3 months 
FA State/Primary Teacher trainer 21 intermediate -- 
FB  State/Primary Teacher trainer 21 intermediate -- 
Euline Cutrim Schmid and Shona Whyte Interactive Whiteboards in State School Settings 
 
Language Learning & Technology 71 
Data Collection 
The German data were collected via a variety of qualitative research instruments, including classroom 
observations and field notes, video recordings of school lessons and workshops, in-depth interviews with 
the teachers and video-stimulated reflective sessions (VSRs). Data collection and analysis were facilitated 
by eight university students, who worked as teaching assistants to develop and evaluate collaborative 
mini-projects with the participating teachers and produce academic reports based on their findings. The 
design encouraged collaboration between in- and pre-service teachers (Meskill, Anthony, Hilliker, Tseng, 
& You, 2006). Figure 1 provides an overview of the research procedure in the German project. 
 
Figure 1. Research procedure - German project. 
In the French project, qualitative research data were also obtained through questionnaire and debriefing 
sessions during training, classroom observations by the researcher and trainers, video recordings of VC 
sessions, debriefing sessions with learners, and in-depth VSR sessions with teachers and trainers. Figure 2 
outlines the data collection procedure in the French initiative. 
 
Figure 2. Research Procedure - French project. 
Euline Cutrim Schmid and Shona Whyte Interactive Whiteboards in State School Settings 
 
Language Learning & Technology 72 
Research Questions 
The research goals in the two studies were similar. The German project aimed to: 
1. determine the extent to which teachers adopted socio-constructivist teaching practices 
recommended during training, and 
2. trace teachers’ developmental paths in the process of technology integration. 
The French project’s goals were to: 
1. examine the impact of technology on teachers’ efforts to create the communicative opportunities 
prescribed in the national CEFR-based curriculum, and 
2. compare teacher cognitions regarding language and technology with classroom practice, 
especially learner interaction. 
DATA ANALYSIS 
Analysis of the data from the two contexts revealed uses of the IWB which correspond to a variety of 
approaches to teaching and learning.  
Table 2. French Primary Video Conferencing Activities 
APPROACH ACTIVITIES 
Traditional  Stories and songs 
 teacher reads a picture book and shows illustrations; pupils listen 
 pupils sing a song 
 Vocabulary activities 
1. bingo 
2. hangman 
Behaviourist Opening routines  
1. introductions: individual learners give their names, likes/dislikes 
2. question/answer: speakers ask the date, weather, number of pupils absent in the other class 
 Vocabulary drills 
1. teacher or speakers show flashcards to other class; individuals name the picture 
2. physical response: teacher or speakers say which part of body to touch or where to place 
object; other pupils comply 
Communicative Guessing games 
1. teacher or speakers describe one of several pictures; other pupils select the correct one 
Task-based Video Conferencing project 
• class preparation/implementation/reflection for each VC session 
 Other potential projects 
• local class exchange (L1 writing, geography, field trips) 
• sustained VC interaction based on CER competences 
• international exchanges with native-speaker classes 
Our analysis will show that the participating teachers responded to hegemonic expectations regarding 
IWB use in different ways, depending on their own understandings of the potential of the technology, 
Euline Cutrim Schmid and Shona Whyte Interactive Whiteboards in State School Settings 
 
Language Learning & Technology 73 
their technological and pedagogical skills, their pedagogical and personal goals, and the specific features 
of their social and educational realities. In the following, we show examples of IWB use that are 
consistent with principles of “traditional” language teaching, a behaviourist approach, communicative 
methods, and finally project-based learning.2 An overview of lessons and activities corresponding to each 
of these four approaches from the French project is given in Table 2. Examples from the German project 
are given in each subsection. 
Traditional Approach 
The first approach to integrating the IWB into EFL teaching in our data might be termed a “traditional” 
approach, corresponding to a standard model of schooling predicated on the transmission of knowledge. 
In the EFL classroom, this approach tends to approximate the direct method for younger learners, and 
grammar-translation in secondary school and beyond. In what follows we present a description of a lesson 
that illustrates such approach to technology use. 
Table 3. Example Lesson - Traditional Approach  
 G1 - Traditional Approach (Field Notes, 15.04.2010) 
Aim of 
lesson  
Familiarize students with vocabulary and lexical phrases necessary for the understanding and 
production of texts related to the topic “deliveries and suppliers”. 
Activity 1 Reading Comprehension 
Introduction The students read a text, which contained descriptions of suppliers of a specific product. Their 
main assignment was to put themselves in the role of a real company and decide on the best 
supplier for that product, according to some criteria displayed on the IWB screen.  
IWB Use The students were then invited to come to the front to fill out a chart, which summarized the 
main information from the text. The completed chart (shown on the IWB) was then used as 
support and framework for a whole class discussion (in the target language) on which supplier 
should be chosen. 
Activity 2 Text Analysis  
IWB Use The teacher displayed an example of a “formal letter of enquiry” on the IWB. She then used 
different colours to annotate on the text and draw students’ attention to the various parts of 
this kind of letter, important lexical items and key phrases in the text. 
Activity 3 Translation Exercise 
Introduction In order to prepare the students to write a response to an enquiry letter, the teacher designed a 
worksheet that contained sentences in German (e.g. thank you very much for your enquiry) 
and the students were asked to translate them into English with the help of dictionaries or their 
textbooks. 
IWB Use This worksheet was later displayed on the IWB for checking the results. The teacher used the 
“white-out” effect to reveal the answers, after eliciting responses from the class. 
In this lesson G1 employed the technology mainly either as a substitute for the traditional blackboard, or 
as a presentation device to display textbook-based information (scanned documents or MS Word files). 
Most of the materials projected followed the same design principles as her previous print-based resources. 
The worksheets projected on the IWB screen were often cloze tests, completed as a whole-class activity 
directly on the board, or after individual work on the paper version. In her lessons the teacher also 
Euline Cutrim Schmid and Shona Whyte Interactive Whiteboards in State School Settings 
 
Language Learning & Technology 74 
employed a variety of interactive whiteboard tools (e.g., reveal tool, spotlight, highlighter, and different 
colours) to annotate these documents and draw attention to key lexical items or grammatical structures. 
Sometimes the IWB was also used for whole-class examination of texts produced by the students, which 
added an element of synergistic interactivity (Beauchamp & Kennewell, 2010). 
Thus G1 combined elements of a communicative approach (role plays and pair work), with more 
traditional grammar-translation activities (vocabulary lists and translation drills). However, the IWB was 
mainly used to support the implementation of the latter type of activities. The potential affordances of the 
IWB did not seem to have a transformative effect on G1’s practice: after one year in the professional 
development programme, the main change in practice was the digitization of the print-based materials she 
used before the installation of the technology. Asked whether the IWB had enhanced her teaching, the 
teacher commented: 
It makes things more interesting for the students, more appealing. It’s in colour, it’s colourful, it’s 
more interesting than the overhead projector or blackboard. (interview 1)3 
It’s nice and interesting. It’s colourful for the students. They are excited. So… and you don’t have 
all this hassle with: Do I have a CD player? Does the overhead projector work? Do I have enough 
transparencies? So all this hassle doesn’t exist anymore. (interview 2) 
At that stage of the study this teacher therefore showed a limited understanding of the potential of the 
technology, using it as a mere “high-tech chalkboard” or projection screen. She nevertheless perceived the 
IWB as having enhanced her teaching, since it allowed her to draw on a great variety of computer-based 
tools that added more “colour” and “excitement” to the pedagogical activities. She also mentioned its 
positive impact on student motivation and the fact that the technology allowed for seamless access to 
tools and resources. However, her failure to develop her patterns of technology use seemed to have had a 
negative impact on her learners’ reactions to the technology. After initial excitement, student 
questionnaires and interviews showed that they lost motivation and most of them did not see the 
technology as enhancing their learning. 
In the French primary context, a similar tendency to transfer traditional EFL teaching practices when 
using the IWB for VC sessions was observed. Typical face-to-face EFL sessions generally involved 
introductory routines including memorised question/answer pairs (name, age), the learning of vocabulary 
sets (animals, body parts), competitive games (bingo, hangman), and songs and stories. All these activity 
types were included in the VC sessions, as shown in Table 3. 
The data show a desire among teachers and trainers to maintain control over this new environment, and 
reveal tensions between core beliefs about the importance of structured sessions and peripheral beliefs 
regarding communicative language teaching. Concerns relating to teacher control over the learning 
environment surfaced in the organisation of the four-day training session, where a standard 30-45 minute 
VC lesson template was developed, including, in order, an introductory routine, vocabulary review, one 
or two whole-class activities, and a closing song. The teachers then developed learning resources to match 
this template for 10 theme-based VC sessions and conducted a trial session to test their approach. During 
the discussion of this trial session, the two teachers involved and the trainers identified a need to impose 
structure: “When we open the VC connection it has to be ready” (F2, training) and “to go further, couldn’t 
we for example draw up a list of all the games and for each game, say how this activity must be 
implemented?” (F4, training)4 The trainers decided to draw up an instruction document including “the 
indispensable points, or things to keep in mind, and conversely the things that must be implemented 
systematically in this kind of VC session” (FA, training). Such comments, expressed in emphatic terms, 
illustrate the core beliefs of the group regarding the need to maintain teacher control over the new 
learning environment. 
Euline Cutrim Schmid and Shona Whyte Interactive Whiteboards in State School Settings 
 
Language Learning & Technology 75 
With respect to traditional approaches based on grammar and lexis, then, teachers in both projects 
demonstrated core beliefs (Phipps & Borg, 2009) regarding classroom control based on structured lesson 
templates and whole-class activities which they transferred directly to the CALL environment. Peripheral 
beliefs concerning learner autonomy and communicative language use, though mentioned as appropriate 
goals, did not survive the transition to the new environment, partly due to lack of confidence/expertise 
and apprehensions about the technology.  
Behaviourist Approach 
A second approach to teaching with the IWB in our data shows evidence of behaviourist theories of 
learning, where the teacher takes a central role in defining learning objectives and the steps required to 
reach them, and then implements a carefully structured whole-class lesson, using, for example the PPP 
(presentation, practice, production) approach, as illustrated in the following lesson. 
Table 4. Example Lesson - Behaviourist Approach  
 G2 - Behaviourist Approach (Field Notes, 11/06/2010) 
Aim of Lesson Practice of the partitive article (article partitif) in French around the topic “shopping for 
groceries” 
Activity 1 Listening Comprehension  
IWB Use T2 used a flash file embedded into the electronic flipchart, which contained an interactive exercise 
for the practice of language phrases needed to buy food items in a grocery store. The students 
were asked to listen to the requests and come up to the IWB to click on the respective food items. 
Activity 2 Oral Drill and Practice Exercise 
IWB Use The teacher showed the students a flipchart page that contained a diagram of the grammatical 
rules involving the use of the article partitif - they had already been introduced to this 
grammatical topic in the previous lesson. This chart provided framework and support for an oral 
drill-and-practice exercise, which focused on the translation of German phrases (e.g. a lot of 
cheese) into French. 
Activity 3 Jumbled Sentences Exercise 
IWB Use The next flipchart page contained a drag and drop activity, in which the students had to match 
(partitif) articles, adjectives and nouns, according to the German phrases provided orally by the 
teacher. This was followed by the choral repetition of the correct phases. 
Activity 4 Online Shopping  
IWB Use In the final stage of the lesson the teacher showed the website of a French online supermarket and 
the students were invited to go shopping to buy ingredients for a specific recipe. One student came 
up to the IWB and the class made suggestions of which items to put into the shopping cart. 
G2 employed the PPP method in most of her lessons, and so generally used the IWB to facilitate the 
creation of a suitable context for the presentation and exploration of grammar topics and as a framework 
for controlled language practice. For the teaching of grammar, for instance, G2 used an inductive 
approach, in which she guided students into the discovery of grammar rules with electronic flipchart 
pages providing step-by-step scaffolding (e.g., through the use of drag and drop activities and hide-and-
reveal techniques). These activities had a strong focus on form, but students’ attention was not directed 
toward the meaning of the language. When asked about the impact of the technology on her teaching, she 
Euline Cutrim Schmid and Shona Whyte Interactive Whiteboards in State School Settings 
 
Language Learning & Technology 76 
stated: 
It’s definitely more learner-centred. A lot more learner-centred than the projector and the 
computer. With the projector….what can they do? What I noticed, really primitive simple things 
which we did before with the chalkboard, just “Come here” or “What is such and such? How 
would you say this and this? Okay, write it on the board”. With the chalk? No interest. And with 
this, they are fighting over it, who gets to write. (interview 2) 
G2 believed the introduction of the IWB caused her lessons to become more learner-centred, since the 
students had more opportunities to interact with the presentations, in contrast to a computer-projector 
setup where presentations are more static. She also pointed out that the technology had a positive impact 
on the students’ willingness to take part in board-based activities. Her understanding of learner-
centredness seemed to comprise only enhanced participation in a whole-class context. In fact, during the 
reflective sessions, G2 made several self-initiated comments related to the topic of teacher-centredness, 
no doubt noting tensions between her practice and the learner-centredness and learner self-discovery 
approach emphasised in the training programme. As she pointed out: 
That’s the thing, that grammar is very teacher-centred, especially the difficult chapters and if I 
just give them some worksheets: “well figure it out yourself”, then I have 25 rules and no rule is 
correct, that is kind of a really old-fashioned way […] at first I always let them figure it out, but 
then I can say immediately: “No, that’s not quite correct” and I can ask the others: “What do you 
think?” (VSR 2) 
In this excerpt, G2 justified the necessity to remain firmly in control of the teaching and learning process 
by referring to the special needs of her students, who were in a lower stream in the German secondary 
education system (Hauptschule) and thus required more support in language learning. In line 4, she 
emphasised the importance of a whole-class arrangement for the work with grammar because this way 
she could attend to any difficulties, or any grammar misconceptions, as soon as they arose.  
In this case, G2 justified her instructional choices with reference to her core views about teaching and 
learning (Phipps & Borg, 2009). In spite of G2’s belief in the importance of using the IWB to support and 
encourage learner-centredness, she still insisted on using a teacher-centred approach because of her core 
belief that these specific students needed more guidance and immediate feedback in their exploration of 
language. 
Similar classroom practices and underlying teacher beliefs were apparent in the French data. In five 
filmed VC sessions lasting from 35 to 45 minutes, the first 10 to 20 minutes (almost half the session in 
some cases) were taken up by routine dialogue and vocabulary drills in which both the language to be 
used and the pupils who were to speak were selected and rehearsed in advance. The speakers in each class 
introduced themselves and asked for the date and weather from the other class, and the question-answer 
pairs were written down and learned as homework: 
I had had them learn by heart and I had had the pupils copy [the questions into their English 
notebooks] so that it would trigger [them] when they looked, just in case (F4, interview). 
Discussion of the artificiality of such interactions occurred during training and in the trainers’ post-
initiative interview, and a number of reactions and justifications were given. 
The first explanation concerned some teachers’ conception of the purpose of the VC session; for F2, a 
teacher particularly concerned with the learners themselves, these sessions represented a performance 
opportunity, instead of creating opportunities for authentic communication. French classrooms feature an 
Euline Cutrim Schmid and Shona Whyte Interactive Whiteboards in State School Settings 
 
Language Learning & Technology 77 
event termed ‘coming up to the board,’ where one pupil is summoned to the teacher’s usual position at the 
front of the class to work through a problem or recite a lesson, and is then publicly evaluated by the 
teacher. For some teachers the VC offered a virtual extension of this practice, allowing pupils to ‘come to 
the board’ in front of the two classes: 
They want to show what they can do and I had told them, “So you revise for the VC, revise the 
names of the animals properly”. (F2, interview) 
I tried to put one pupil in my place. At one point, it was one of my pupils who led the game. I 
stepped aside. (F2, interview) 
This conception of discourse events in the VC as ones where the pupils take the teacher’s role led to 
exchanges where the speakers in one class ratified responses to their questions from the other class—“it’s 
correct”—when the date was given. F1 suggested during training that this type of exchange was 
inappropriate: “in the interaction I imagine between the classes I don’t think that ‘it’s correct’ is 
appropriate” (F1, training). Some participants agreed: “it’s artificial, we all know” (FB, training). But 
other teachers disagreed, with reactions which hinted at an expected implementation dip: 
F5 We are more or less obliged to do it. (training) 
F6 But it’s the first VC, so you’re not in full control […] at some level it’s reassuring for you 
as a teacher. (training) 
F7 I think at the beginning it’s reassuring, like with the IWB at the beginning we need to 
reassure ourselves. (training) 
Some French teachers used theatre metaphors: “we did a lot of theatre this year, so being observed by 
others, they’ve got past that, if you see what I mean, the eye of the camera or the eye of the observer” (F6 
interview). They justified behaviourist question-response pairs as a necessary preliminary to allow 
learners to control the stress of performance: “just as in stage presentations, we warm up” (F7, training).  
Another justification for behaviourist methods seemed to relate to the teachers’ perceptions of their 
learners’ abilities. When pushed on the topic of spontaneous production, F6 claimed her pupils were too 
inexperienced to go beyond prepared dialogue: “it’s their first year of English” (F6, interview). G2 also 
referred to her students’ low language (and cognitive) abilities to justify her use of such a behaviourist 
approach: “especially with this class, they come from the Hauptschule. If the teacher is not standing in 
front of the class you can forget about it” (G2, VSR 1). 
Communicative Approach 
Nonetheless, participating teachers from both projects expressed interest in more open-ended, 
communicative lesson phases, as the excerpts from the French training sessions indicate: 
We’re still working in classroom schemas, we need to manage to open it up. (F5, training) 
It would be interesting to leave space for the children so that they conduct the session. (F1, 
training) 
One trainer raised a question concerning the affordances of the IWB/VC with respect to EFL 
communication: 
What I think was lacking a little at the level of the VC itself was that we saw—it was good to see 
Euline Cutrim Schmid and Shona Whyte Interactive Whiteboards in State School Settings 
 
Language Learning & Technology 78 
the whole-class, but all the time—actually, when the pupils were talking we would like at some 
point to have a zoom on two or three pupils. (FB, training) 
This comment and F4’s immediate reaction—“I didn’t dare to upset the settings”—showed tensions 
between technical competence and pedagogical objectives, which reappeared throughout the six-month 
VC initiative. 
Table 5. Example Lesson - Communicative Approach 
 G3 - Communicative Approach (Field Notes, 18.01.10) 
Aim of Lesson Help students to develop students’ oral skills by preparing and presenting Power Point (PPT) 
presentations on the topic “Orkney Islands”. 
Activity 1 Construction of a Mind Map  
IWB Use The class brainstormed some facts and ideas about the topic onto a mind map on the IWB.  
Activity 2 Listening Comprehension  
IWB Use Students listened to an authentic interview of someone describing a trip to that place and 
completed a while listening task - Pictures and while-listening questions were presented on the 
IWB 
Activity 3  Pre-Reading Exercise 
 The students were then requested to work individually and write three questions about things 
they would like to learn about the Orkney Islands. The teacher then collected the questions and 
read some of them out to the whole class.  
Activity 4 Jigsaw Reading  
 The students were divided into 6 groups and worked with texts about different topics related to 
the Orkney Islands in order to find the answers to their questions. For the group work each 
student was provided with a short text and the teacher used a jigsaw reading approach so that 
the students could exchange information orally in their groups. 
Activity 5 Designing Power Point Presentations 
Computer Lab the students were brought to the computer lab where they prepared PPT presentations on their 
topics: three students in the group were responsible for summarizing and presenting the most 
important information and three others had to prepare a quiz, by using the ACTIVote software, 
to test the other class members on those specific topics. 
Activity 6 Presenting Results on the IWB 
IWB Use The students held their PPT presentations/quizzes and provided feedback to their peers. 
Our findings indicate that teachers in both projects implemented IWB-based activities which contained 
elements of a more flexible use of the technology. Table 5 presents a summary of a 7th grade lesson 
implemented by teacher in the second year of the German project, which illustrates a communicative use 
of the IWB. 
In early IWB practice, G3 used the IWB mainly to introduce and practice specific grammar structures. In 
contrast to G2, who thought that this approach would best serve the needs of her learners, G3 showed 
Euline Cutrim Schmid and Shona Whyte Interactive Whiteboards in State School Settings 
 
Language Learning & Technology 79 
some concern that the greater emphasis on whole-class teaching tended to make her lessons more teacher-
centred, thus taking her teaching a step backwards. In the following excerpt she expressed this 
disappointment regarding patterns of technology use in her lessons: 
I think when you use the whiteboard it’s very frontal, so I always stand there and the students 
must come to the front. But normally when you learn English, it should be communicative so that 
they learn how to speak. And so I think this sometimes gets lost when you work with the 
whiteboard. (interview 2) 
Classroom observations conducted prior to the introduction of the IWB technology showed that this 
teacher typically used a communicative approach in her lessons; accordingly, she wished to exploit the 
technology to support target language use. In the initial stage of the project, however, she was not able to 
fulfill this aim, since most of her IWB-based activities featured teacher-controlled practice of language 
forms. G3 thus seems to have experienced an implementation dip, creating tensions between her language 
teaching beliefs and her classroom practice. In attempting to exploit the technology in a learner-centred 
approach, G3 prepared flipcharts that encouraged pupils’ interaction with the IWB. However, most of the 
IWB-based activities she designed in the first year focused on the level of physical interactivity with the 
interface of the board (e.g. by clicking on an object to hear a sound, completing fill-in-the-gaps exercises), 
and there were only a few examples of “pedagogic interactivity” (Beauchamp & Kennewell, 2010). In 
later stages of the project, however, G3 was able to implement pedagogical activities that encouraged 
pupils’ use of the IWB at a different level. She commented: 
And like the things I said before with the teacher-centred lessons. First I realised that there is a 
problem that the whiteboard is in the centre of the lesson and not the students... and so we 
decided this time to make students talk and not use only the whiteboard as the most important 
tool. So I think that’s very important. Not to forget that the most important aim of the lesson is to 
make the students talk and not only use the whiteboard with the pen. (final interview) 
In this excerpt the teacher referred to the lessons described above, in which students used the IWB to 
share their knowledge by means of classroom presentations, or for designing and implementing content-
based quizzes using IWB-based voting software. As she pointed out, in order to use the technology 
purposefully in a communicative language classroom, it is important to go beyond a mere physical 
interaction with the IWB (“only use the whiteboard with the pen”). These findings indicate that, although 
the technology seemed to have a negative impact on G3’s practice in the first stages of the study, she 
appeared to gradually redirect her focus from IWB affordances which “increase teacher control over the 
learning process to those affordances that open up the classroom to the outside world and to more flexible 
approaches” (Gray, 2010, p. 74).  
The French project, being shorter and more exploratory in nature, offered less space for teacher 
development. In the French classes, four of the five filmed VC sessions included one genuinely 
communicative activity in the form of an information-gap guessing game, where learners had to identify a 
flashcard or picture on a worksheet on the basis of an oral description by another learner or the teacher. 
Such activities lasted only five to 10 minutes, a small proportion of the session. During VSR interviews, 
teachers had the opportunity to select video excerpts which they considered to show activities which had 
worked particularly well or poorly, or which puzzled them; the guessing activities were never nominated, 
suggesting that while there were no particular problems, the teachers did not especially value the learning 
opportunities such episodes afforded. Instead, they valued group greetings and singing as federating 
activities, and bingo and hangman as particularly engaging, with learner enjoyment and motivation 
clearly taking precedence. 
An examination of training and interview transcripts suggested three possible explanations for this failure 
Euline Cutrim Schmid and Shona Whyte Interactive Whiteboards in State School Settings 
 
Language Learning & Technology 80 
to maximise communicative opportunities on the part of the teachers. The first was a fear of noise and 
movement leading to disruptions which would prevent the two classes from collaborating effectively. F6 
explained: “we were so afraid that noise would interfere, that we were adamant about not rocking the 
chairs or dropping things” (F6, interview). 
Once again, there was tension between the participants’ declared goals and their actual practices. F3 for 
example praised interactivity in the trial VC session: 
F3 At one point you had a pupil who came up to the camera to say something. 
FA  I think we should do this systematically. 
F3 I thought it was really great. (Training, 11:14) 
However, she was reluctant to have her own pupils do this: 
We really just had our speakers and that was it, and all the others were behind and watched. Then 
we discussed with FB and FA that it would be better to give more children a turn so that they 
would feel more involved. The first time it put me off because there was a lot of moving around 
and I don’t like it, I mean, it wastes time, they make a noise, we make a noise and it prevents 
communication, so I didn’t like it. (F3, interview, 12:45) 
The second reason to disprefer communicative activities seemed to be an attachment to whole-class 
teaching (reminiscent of G3’s central focus on the board in the early stages of IWB integration in the 
German project). Midway through the 6-month initiative, after observing a number of VC sessions, the 
French trainers recommended organisational changes to improve communicative opportunities, such as 
allowing more groups of learners to take turns as speakers, or adopting a format based on rotating group 
activities so that only small groups of pupils were involved in VC communication at a given time. While 
all the teachers agreed to adopt the first change, none was prepared to abandon the whole-class format, as 
F3’s interview data show: 
What do you do with the others? I’m sure [it’s not possible] because you can’t help being drawn 
in […] The others have to be there or else you take them out of the class and put them somewhere 
else; that’s not very nice […] They are glued to the screen, even those who have nothing to do. 
(F3, interview) 
A final explanation might concern the teachers’ views of language learning itself. Each VC session was 
planned as a culminating event in a sequence of face-to-face EFL sessions on a particular topic. Since 
vocabulary sets and grammatical structures had been practiced with the VC in mind, the VC session itself 
represented an opportunity to display this acquired knowledge, rather than to develop language 
competence through use. Many teachers made comments concerning words and structures that had 
already been “seen” or “done” and thus posed no further problem, attesting to a product-oriented rather 
than a process-oriented view of acquisition. 
The data discussed in this section indicate that participating teachers in both projects expressed interest in 
using the IWB in a communicative fashion. However, the findings also highlight inconsistencies between 
teachers’ stated intentions drawn from interview or other commentaries, and what they actually did in 
practice. The discussion has shown that possible sources for these apparent mismatches are: (a) contextual 
factors (F6: fear of classroom noise, F3: attachment to whole-class teaching) and (b) teachers’ 
(mis)understandings of specific concepts (G3: interactivity; F4, F5, F6: acquisition). These explanations 
correspond closely to findings of previous teacher cognition studies (Orafi & Borg, 2009; Feryok, 2010). 
Euline Cutrim Schmid and Shona Whyte Interactive Whiteboards in State School Settings 
 
Language Learning & Technology 81 
Active Co-construction of Knowledge: The Project-Based Approach 
Our research findings have also shown that, as teachers gained more confidence in exploiting the 
affordances of the technology, they developed an understanding of the potential for broader technology 
use, in which multimedia, the web and other computer applications are part of a seamless learning 
environment. This change of perspective thus opened up new possibilities for harnessing the affordances 
of technology to support the implementation of project-based language learning.  
G4 was a good example of such development. Like other teachers (G3, G5) in the first stages of the 
German project, she used the IWB mainly to guide students into the exploration of grammar and practice 
of vocabulary, but as the research project progressed she started to use it to support the implementation of 
task- or project-based activities. In her first interview, G4 expressed fears that her technology use did not 
meet her students’ needs: 
He [example of a student] can’t save any information, nothing, nothing that he only sees… he has 
to write, he has to ... he needs all the skills.... What’s very very important for him is that he writes 
it, that he is talking, that he is doing something with his hands […] He needs a sheet of paper and 
he needs his pencil and he needs to look with his nose on the sheet of paper, watching everything 
and needs more time and when he is looking at this screen, he is looking like that and he is very 
impressed of the technology and [Interviewer: but gets distracted probably]. Yes, that’s it. And so 
I think this is what I think everybody should be very careful about. There are other learner types 
also here in this class so therefore I think it’s very important that you don’t put emphasis on only 
one way. (interview 1) 
G4 identified the possible negative consequences of excessive use of the IWB as a presentation tool, 
stressing instead the importance of providing learners with opportunities to access and work with 
information through different modes and methods. She also pointed out that students’ fascination for 
multimedia resources did not necessarily lead to enhanced learning, but could also distract or overwhelm. 
She wanted to participate in the project so as to exploit the IWB in task-based or project-based 
approaches. Her main goal was to find the “right place” for the IWB in her teaching in order to be able to 
attend to her students’ language learning needs.  
Table 6 is an example of a project-based teaching unit designed and implemented by the teacher in 
collaboration with a pre-service teacher. 
This example shows that G4 developed important competencies enabling her to provide students with 
stimulating and relevant input via the IWB, motivating them to engage with the various tasks and creating 
opportunities for co-construction of knowledge. Another essential feature in her teaching with the 
technology was her view of the students as active agents in their own learning, and not mere recipients of 
information. Some further examples of constructivist technology use by G4 have been published 
elsewhere (Cutrim Schmid, 2011) and other research reports are being prepared for future publication. 
Since the French VC initiative was a pilot initiative designed to test the feasibility and utility of the 
technology in primary EFL classes, there were no extended projects of this type in the French data. To the 
extent that each VC session was preceded by a number of preparatory face-to-face sessions, and followed 
by a class debriefing session, it featured the three-phase structure of task-based learning (Willis & Willis, 
2007), and a number of teachers saw future potential in this format for cross-curricular or international 
projects. F4, whose tandem conducted the most VC sessions, wanted to develop a competency-based 
approach for VC to match the official EFL programme. Her partner, F3, felt the EFL exchange could be 
extended to cover other curricular areas and culminate in a face-to-face meeting between the classes. 
Three of the four other teachers felt they had gained the confidence in their use of technology and 
language teaching to embark on international exchanges. 
Euline Cutrim Schmid and Shona Whyte Interactive Whiteboards in State School Settings 
 
Language Learning & Technology 82 
Table 6. Example Lessons - Project based Approach  
 Teaching Unit - Project based Approach (4 lessons) 
Field Notes (15-19/11/10) 
Aims of the 
Teaching Unit 
Expanding the students’ English language skills by offering them various language learning 
opportunities centred around the topic “The stolen generation of Australia”. By the end of the four 
lessons the students should be able to articulate their reactions towards Prime Minister Kevin 
Rudd’s apology speech, and prepare short statements that were then used as the basis for a class 
“documentary” on the topic, in which the students, as “members” of the stolen generation, 
responded to the apology speech in short interview sequences. 
IWB Use During these four lessons the students watched a short sequence of a film telling the true story of 
three stolen girls of mixed descent, searched for information on the Internet and created group 
Weblogs on different topics related to the issue (e.g., reasons for stealing the children), designed 
quizzes with the help of the ACTIVote software to test each other on the content of the Weblogs, 
worked on an authentic “The Guardian” article, and watched a four minute video sequence showing 
excerpts of Kevin Rudd’s speech. 
IWB Role The IWB served as a digital hub for the integration of a variety of multimedia materials (videos, 
websites, pictures, online texts), which added an element of authenticity to the lessons and provided 
support for the various tasks that the students needed to accomplish. For example, before showing 
the first film sequence, the teacher showed digital snapshots of four scenes on the IWB screen and 
students were asked to rearrange them, as they predicted the content of the story. 
In this section, we have discussed the significant steps already taken by one of the participant teachers in 
exploiting the potential affordances of IWB technology to support constructivist practice. Our data 
include a variety of factors that might have contributed to G4’s development: (a) more extended use of 
the IWB in comparison to the other teachers, (b) her private school environment, which gave her more 
freedom to try out different approaches and enabled more access to computer-based resources, and more 
importantly, (c) her strong commitment to the IWB professional development programme. These findings 
point to a crucial role played by technology training in preparing teachers to develop IWB-supported 
language pedagogy. 
IMPLICATIONS AND CONCLUSION 
This paper has discussed findings from two research projects which investigated the use of IWB 
technology for language teaching in primary, secondary and vocational schools in France and Germany. 
In spite of expectations from trainers and teachers themselves of transformation towards more 
constructivist practices, the participating teachers used the technology to implement a variety of different 
language teaching approaches, from traditional grammar-translation through behaviourist drilling, to more 
communicative and constructivist models of task- and project-based learning. We have discussed the 
language teaching methodologies that underlie their CALL practice and drawn on theories of teacher 
cognition to outline possible reasons for teachers’ pedagogical choices. 
As noted in our literature review, the IWB has been seized upon by educational authorities in many parts 
of the world (including the UK, Germany and France) as an ally in their mission to transform teaching 
and learning. However, as we also discussed, IWBs have been widely adopted in schools and 
hegemonically imposed on teachers without a “clear conception of what teachers would make of them 
and how their use could help good practice” (Mercer, 2010, p. xv). In other words, because the 
widespread introduction of IWBs was justified by the rhetoric of “positive transformation,” the 
technology was installed in schools before an appropriate investigation of its educational potential could 
be conducted to inform training and lead to effective exploitation. Indeed, critics of the IWB have pointed 
Euline Cutrim Schmid and Shona Whyte Interactive Whiteboards in State School Settings 
 
Language Learning & Technology 83 
out that one of its drawbacks is the fact that it can be easily assimilated into teachers’ traditional 
pedagogical practice, thus leading to patterns of technology use that simply replicate previous practice. As 
Moss et al. (2007, p. 96) point out, “the clear advantage IWBs seem to have in terms of uptake - that their 
use fits quite easily with existing patterns of whole-class pedagogy – may also be their weakness.” 
For Gray (2010, p. 72), the technological determinism implied in the hegemonic, transformative discourse 
of educational authorities means that teachers are “duty bound to ensure that the affordances of new 
technologies [are] put into operation, regardless of their own priorities or preferences or the existing 
dynamics of the sociocultural situation.” Although in Gray’s data increased teacher control of learner 
interaction via the IWB seemed to constitute an appropriate, pragmatic response to the particular 
conditions of secondary modern language teaching in the UK, the same is not true of our teaching 
contexts. Our study shows that although increased teacher control is also a concern for our teachers, 
episodes where teachers used the board for this purpose were not among the most effective in our data. 
Indeed, we observed successful learning episodes where the IWB was used to increase learner 
interactivity, which encourages us to believe that the tool can be used to both transform and improve 
classroom learning. 
Thus our findings have shown that teachers are able to resist educational and pedagogical hegemonies 
within their individual classrooms. Our data also reveal considerable variety, both in the ways in which 
the IWB was exploited pedagogically by the teachers, and in the degree to which they changed their 
classroom teaching practices. As this paper has shown, most of the participating teachers used the IWB in 
ways that did not reflect clear pedagogical transformation towards constructivist practices. In fact, even 
the French teachers who employed the IWB to support videoconferencing, whose pedagogical use is 
predominantly associated with constructivist practice, appropriated the IWB to suit their own needs in 
maintaining teacher control of learning processes and in managing pupil behaviour. However, as G4’s 
case study suggests, the use of IWB technology also has the potential to gradually afford more major 
pedagogical changes, provided that it is used over a sustained period and, crucially, in the context of a 
specifically targeted technology development programme. 
Our research suggests that with appropriate training, feedback and time for development, teachers can 
acquire the knowledge, skills and resources to respond positively to the socio-constructivist CALL 
approach which represents our current best model for language teaching with technology. But it is clear 
that such changes in pedagogical practice cannot be imposed hegemonically from above, via isolated 
training sessions and in the absence of ongoing support in the classroom. Teachers need to develop the 
knowledge to exploit technology in ways that effectively enhance pupil learning, but new pedagogical 
hegemonies will not effect change if social, cultural and political contexts are not taken into account. 
These findings can be used to inform the design of teacher education programs in CALL more generally 
and on the use of IWBs more specifically, not only in our own contexts, but also in other parts of the 
world. As noted earlier, the voices of non-native speaker language teachers in state schools too often go 
unheard. Research such as that presented here can help to assess the gap both in practices and beliefs 
between what is intended by the curriculum and teachers’ actual situations. In this way, it can also inform 
the support systems which are essential for the successful implementation of technology-based 
pedagogical innovations. 
 
NOTES 
1. Resistance to technological hegemonies by users of all kinds (customers, consumers, citizens) and, 
more broadly, patterns of appropriation of new technologies have long been the focus of French research 
in the sociology of uses of communication tools.  This empirical research looks beyond the technical 
affordances of tools to investigate cultural practices surrounding their use, and in so doing demonstrates 
Euline Cutrim Schmid and Shona Whyte Interactive Whiteboards in State School Settings 
 
Language Learning & Technology 84 
the influence of current technological practices on the uptake of new ones; for overviews see Chambat 
(1994) and Jouët (2000). We are grateful to one anonymous reviewer for bringing these references to our 
attention. 
2. This developmental approach bears comparison with the classification of technology use developed by 
Sandholtz, Ringstaff, and Dwyer (1997) in their work on an extensive early computer-based learning 
project in US state schools. Using data from classroom observations and teacher diaries, they identified 
five stages of technological exploitation on the part of the teachers, ranging from entry-level use through 
adoption, adaptation, appropriation and finally invention, the last stage, where teachers’ practice was 
transformed. 
3. German teacher and trainer quotes are reproduced exactly, without correction, and with changes only 
being made where there is a lack of clarity. 
4. The comments by French teachers were made in French and translated by the second author. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Dr. Euline Cutrim Schmid is assistant professor of Linguistics and TEFL at the University of Education 
Heidelberg, Germany. She has a PhD in Linguistics and an M.A. in Language Teaching from Lancaster 
University, UK. Her research interests include computer assisted language learning, teacher education and 
literacy in the new media age. 
E-mail: euline.cutrim.schmid@ph-heidelberg.de 
Dr. Shona Whyte is associate professor in the English Department at the University of Nice, France. She 
teaches EFL, SLA, and TEFL, for which she also develops web-based resources. Her research interests 
include young learners, English for Research Purposes, learning technologies, and teacher education. 
E-mail: whyte@unice.fr 
 
REFERENCES 
Bauer, P., Hoffmann, H., & Mayrberger, K. (Eds.) (2010). Fokus Medienpädagogik – Aktuelle 
Forschungs- und Handlungsfelder. Festschrift für Stefan Aufenanger [Focus on teaching with digital 
media – new domains of research and application.  Festschrift for Stefan Aufenanger]. München: 
Kopaed.de. 
Beauchamp, G., & Kennewell, S. (2008). The influence of ICT on the interactivity of teaching. Special 
Issue of Education and Information Technologies, 13(4), 305–315. 
Beauchamp, G., & Kennewell, S. (2010). Interactivity in the classroom and its impact on learning. 
Computers & Education, 54, 759–766. 
Beauchamp, G., & Parkinson, J. (2005). Beyond the ‘wow’ factor: Developing interactivity with the 
interactive whiteboard. School Science Review, 86(316), 97–103. 
Bonnet, G. (2007) The CEFR and education policies in Europe. Modern Language Journal, 91(4), 669–
672. 
Borg, S. (2003). Review article: Teacher cognition in language teaching: a review of research on what 
language teachers think, know, believe, do. Language Teaching, 36, 81–109. 
Borg, S. (2006). Teacher cognition and language education: Research and practice. London: Continuum. 
Euline Cutrim Schmid and Shona Whyte Interactive Whiteboards in State School Settings 
 
Language Learning & Technology 85 
Chambat, P. (1994). Usages des technologies de l’information et de la communication (TIC) : évolution 
des problématiques [Uses of ICT: Changes in research directions]. Technologies de l’information et 
société, 6(3), 249–270.  
Council of Europe. (2001). Common European Framework of Reference for Languages: Learning, 
teaching, assessment. Cambridge University Press: Council of Europe. 
Cross, R. (2006). Language teaching as activity: A sociocultural perspective on second language teacher 
practice. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia. 
Cross, R. (2010). Language teaching as sociocultural activity: Rethinking language teacher practice. 
Modern Language Journal, 94(3), 434–452. 
Cutrim Schmid, E. (2011) Video-stimulated reflection as a professional development tool in interactive 
whiteboard research. ReCALL, 23(3), 252–270.  
Cutrim Schmid, E. (2010). Developing competencies for using the interactive whiteboard to implement 
communicative language teaching in the English as a Foreign Language classroom. Technology, 
Pedagogy and Education, 19(2), 159–172. 
Cutrim Schmid, E., & Van Hazebrouck, S. (2010) The interactive whiteboard as a digital hub. Praxis 
Fremdsprachenunterricht, 2010 (4), 12–15. 
Cutrim Schmid, E., & Stetter, C. (2008) Houses of the future: Mit dem Whiteboard das Will-Future üben. 
Der Fremdsprachliche Unterricht Englisch (Heft Web 2.0), 96: 42–44. 
Felix, U. (2006). E-learning pedagogy in the third millennium: the need for combining social and 
cognitive constructivist approaches. ReCALL, 17(1), 85–100. 
Feryok, A. (2005). Personal Practical Theories: The Integration of Theory and Practice. Unpublished 
doctoral dissertation. University of Auckland, Auckland. 
Feryok, A. (2010). Language teacher cognitions: Complex dynamic systems? System, 38, 272–279. 
Freeman, D., & Richards, J. C. (Eds.) (1996). Teacher learning in language teaching. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Fullan, M. (2001). Leading in a Culture of Change. San Francisco, CA: Jossey Bass. 
Glover, D., Miller, D., Averis, D., & Door, V. (2007). The evolution of an effective pedagogy for teachers 
using the interactive whiteboard in mathematics and modern languages: an empirical analysis from the 
secondary sector. Learning, Media and Technology, 32(1), 5–20. 
Gray, C. (2010). Meeting Teachers’ Real Needs: New Tools in the Secondary Modern Foreign Languages 
Classroom. In Thomas, M. & Cutrim Schmid, E. (Eds.), Interactive Whiteboards for Education: Theory, 
Research and Practice. Information Science Reference, Hershey, NY, 69–85. 
Gray, C., Pilkington, R., Hagger-Vaughan, L., & Tomkins, S.A. (2007). Integrating ICT into Classroom 
Practice in Modern Foreign Language Teaching in England: Making Room for Teachers’ Voices. 
European Journal of Teacher Education, 30(4), 407–429. 
Guichon, N. (2011). How ready are French language teachers to integrate ICT in their professional 
practice? EuroCALL CMC & Teacher Education SIGs Annual Workshop, Barcelona, April. 
Haldane, M. (2007). Interactivity and the digital whiteboard: Weaving the fabric of learning. Learning, 
Media and Technology, 32(3), 257–270. 
Hennessy, S., Ruthven, K., & Brindley, S. (2005). Teacher perspectives on integrating ICT into subject 
teaching: commitment, constraints, caution, and change, Journal of Curriculum Studies, 37(2), 155–192. 
Euline Cutrim Schmid and Shona Whyte Interactive Whiteboards in State School Settings 
 
Language Learning & Technology 86 
Johnson, K. E. (2006). The sociocultural turn and its challenges for second language teacher education. 
TESOL Quarterly 40(1) 235–257. 
Jouët, J. (2000). Retour critique sur la sociologie des usages [A critical look at the sociology of uses]. 
Réseaux n°100, Paris, CNET/Hermès Science Publication, pp. 487–521. 
Kern, R. (2006). Perspectives on technology in learning and teaching languages. TESOL Quarterly 40(1), 
183–210. 
Macedo-Rouet, M. (2009). La visioconférence dans l’enseignement. Ses usages et effets sur la distance de 
transaction [Videoconferencing in teaching: Applications and effects on transactional distance.]. Distance 
et savoirs, 7(1), 65–91. 
Mercer, N. (2010). Foreword. In M. Thomas & E. Cutrim Schmid (Eds.), Interactive whiteboards: 
Theory, research and practice (pp. xv–xvi). Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
Meskill, C., Anthony, N., Hilliker, S., Tseng, C., & You, J. (2006). Expert-novice teacher mentoring in 
language learning technology. In Hubbard, P. & Levy, M. (Eds.), Research in CALL Teacher Education. 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 283–298.  
Moss, G., Carrey, J., Levaaic, R., Armstrong, V., Cardini, A., & Castle, F. (2007). The interactive 
whiteboards pedagogy and pupil performance evaluation: An evaluation of the schools whiteboard 
expansion (SWE) project: London challenge. Institute of Education, University of London, UK. 
Mueller-Hartmann, A., & Schocker-Von Ditfurth (2011). Teaching English: Task-Supported Language 
Learning. Paderborn: Schöningh. UTB für Wissenschaft, Standardwissen Lehramt. 
Mueller-Hartmann, A., & Schocker-Von Ditfurth. (2008). Aufgabenorientiertes Lernen und Lehren mit 
Medien: Ansätze, Erfahrungen, Perspektiven in der Fremdsprachendidaktik [Task-oriented learning and 
teaching with digital media: First steps, experiences and perspectives in foreign language pegagogy]. 
Frankfurt: Lang. 
Orafi, S., & Borg, S. (2009). Intentions and realities in implementing communicative curriculum reform. 
System, 37(2), 243–253. 
Orlando, J. (2009). Understanding changes in teachers’ ICT practices: A longitudinal perspective. 
Technology, Pedagogy and Education, 18(1), 33–44. 
Phipps, S., & Borg, S. (2009). Exploring tensions between teachers’ grammar teaching beliefs and 
practices. System, 37(3), 380–390. 
Sandholtz, J., Ringstaff, C., & Dwyer, D (1997), Teaching with Technology : Creating Student-Centered 
Classrooms. New York, NY: Teachers College Press. 
Thomas, M., & Cutrim Schmid, E. (Eds.). (2010). Interactive Whiteboards: Theory, Research and 
Practice. Hershey, PA: IGI Global. 
Whyte, S. (2011). Learning to teach with videoconferencing in primary foreign language classrooms. 
ReCALL 23(3), 271–293.  
Willis, D., & Willis, J. (2007). Doing task-based teaching. Oxford: OUP. 
Woods, D. (1996). Teacher cognition in language teaching. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Wyatt, M. (2008). Growth in Practical Knowledge and Teachers’ Self-Efficacy during an Inservice BA 
(TESOL) Programme. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. School of Education, University of Leeds, UK. 
 
