Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2012/hinkelmangruba.pdf 
June 2012, Volume 16, Number 2 
pp. 46–64 
 
Copyright © 2012, ISSN 1094-3501 46 
POWER WITHIN BLENDED LANGUAGE LEARNING  
PROGRAMS IN JAPAN 
Don Hinkelman, Sapporo Gakuin University 
Paul Gruba, University of Melbourne 
As blended language learning environments evolve within tertiary foreign language 
institutions, issues of power with regards to the privileging of electronic technologies 
come to the fore. Blended learning, or the principled mix of online and classroom-based 
activities, challenges the practices of traditional CALL and face-to-face teaching within 
newly emerging, hybrid learning environments. The aim of this study is to examine the 
role of power in relation to the design of these environments. To achieve this aim, a 
research team conducted a longitudinal study at two Japanese universities which employed 
blended learning practices in their EFL programs. We analyzed ethnographic and action 
research data using postmodern, critical, and ecological perspectives on technology, to 
explore hegemony in facility planning (online vs. face-to-face), control of materials 
development (publisher-based vs. teacher-based authorship), and development of software 
designs (proprietary ownership vs. distributed teacher initiatives). Results of the study 
reveal three significant changes in power: (a) the construction of classrooms shifted from 
single-purpose CALL laboratories to blended face-to-face/online spaces, (b) the 
production of teaching materials emphasized locally authored multimedia materials with a 
decreasing reliance on mass-market course books, and (c) the design of software modules 
was controlled by teaching teams for rapid customization. Overall, the process of 
innovation in institutional programs requires a collaborative management culture to be 
appropriate and sustainable in university contexts. 
Keywords: Computer-Assisted Language Learning, Blended Language Learning, Action 
Research, Institutional Ethnography, Actor-network Theory, Critical Theory, Ecological 
Perspectives 
INTRODUCTION 
Research in CALL has been criticized for a focus on narrow investigations of single-package solutions 
(Egbert, Huff, McNeil, Preuss, & Sellen, 2009) and analysis within de-contextualized settings (Cutrim 
Schmid, 2006). In response, researchers have called for more studies based on contextual inquiry across 
broad institutional programs (Kern & Warschauer, 2000; Levy & Stockwell, 2006). As universities gain 
pace in the adoption of blended language learning (Latchem & Jung, 2010; Neumeier, 2005), the 
processes involved provide a rich opportunity to research hegemonic relationships and power. In the 
context of blended learning, or the combination of online and face-to-face techniques in classroom 
teaching, we define power as action that influences outcomes. The action of blogging, for example, 
influences productive skills in writing and interaction with an audience. Its power, then, produces 
different outcomes than handwriting a journal. In the process of introducing blended language learning in 
institutions, the practices of face-to-face pedagogy and online pedagogy are often contentious and 
sometimes hegemonic. Hegemony, in our study, is demonstrated through a privileging of practices, 
concepts, spaces, and tools. A hegemonic policy, for example, might require all students to carry tablet 
computers to write their blogs, or similarly, require them to carry paper journals to write diaries. An 
educational environment that allows both online and paper-based options, is thus not hegemonic, allowing 
power to be exerted through multiple paths. 
The aim of this study is to investigate how power and hegemony are exercised in two examples of 
blended language learning programs in Japan. We frame and limit this aim by examining three aspects of 
Don Hinkelman and Paul Gruba Power within Blended Programs in Japan 
 
Language Learning & Technology 47 
institutional foreign language programs: (a) how the power to privilege certain spaces and types of 
technologies evolved in a blended environment, (b) how the power in production and ownership of 
teaching materials changed in a blended environment, and (c) how the power to design software shifted in 
a blended learning environment. 
To achieve this aim, we conducted a longitudinal study of two English language programs within tertiary 
Japanese institutions. In this paper, we first review postmodern, critical, and ecological perspectives on a 
conceptual approach to power. We utilize actor-network theory to view the blended approaches where 
social and technical elements are bound together in semiotic systems. Using this framework, we select 
data from two institutional blended learning programs that illustrate power relations and describe them as 
narratives. Finally, we analyze how power has been hegemonic and how it is shifting in the areas of 
learning spaces, teaching materials, and CALL software development. 
Understanding Power with Postmodern, Critical and Ecological Perspectives 
Approaches to understanding power in institutional contexts of technology design may include 
postmodernism, critical theory of technology, and ecological perspectives. Postmodernism seeks to 
question assumptions of knowledge and practice (Pennycook, 2006). In pre-modern and modern 
perspectives, power has been considered to be an essential state that an individual or position possesses 
(Hornborg, 2001). Postmodern theory, however, rejects essentialism and views power as the relation 
between actors who may mutually create, support or limit each other (Latour, 2005). Power is hegemonic 
when it denies alternative views and, in the case of education, hinders the development of alternative 
forms of learning. In line with Foucault’s notion of power to rather than power over (Fox, 2000; Law, 
1991), we view power in terms of action rather than domination or empowerment, terms which imply 
power is ‘possessed’ by an authority. Power can be seen as symbolic and enacted through semiotic 
materials or semiotic actions (van Lier, 2004). Through semiotic action, we can see how technologies and 
practices generate power through materials and objects as well as through human actions and meaning-
making. 
To better discern hegemonies of power, Feenberg (2002) developed a critical theory of technology. This 
theory asserts that technologies are not objective entities—which is how essentialists might describe 
them—but are socially constructed practices-in-action (Feenberg, 2008). The theory is critical as it takes 
issue with deterministic views that technology can dominate or control human action as well as utilitarian 
(instrumental) views that technology is neutral, merely aiding social actors. 
In their studies, Warschauer (1998) and Cutrim Schmid (2006) applied Feenberg’s critical theory of 
technology. Warschauer (1998) observed that research into CALL had essentially abandoned early 
deterministic views (the computer as ‘all-powerful’) and adopted instrumental views (the computer as 
neutral aid). He argued that instrumentalist research often ignored the powerful ways that technologies 
changed language education, in both creating new literacies and de-emphasizing orthodox literacies. One 
problem of deterministic (tool-centric) or instrumental (tool-minimized) approaches is that they 
decontextualize the technology in order to study its essential characteristics (Cutrim Schmid, 2006). Such 
views have assumed that the essential nature of technologies is fixed (an essentialist view) rather than 
dependent on their action in the local environment (a relational view).  
Actor-network theory provides a set of principles for understanding how humans and materials may co-
construct each other (Latour, 2005; Law, 2004). In this postmodern, critical perspective, human behavior 
cannot be divided from machine behavior as humans co-create and act in accordance with the tools they 
use. Learning materials, for example, construct pathways of human action. Teaching tools and equipment 
are physical objects that are designed by humans and contain software coding and hardware 
configurations set up by humans. These tools and materials are then re-designed or re-purposed in actual 
use, often with on-the-fly configurations by teachers and students. The physical tools also configure the 
humans by forcing or preventing certain behaviors. Reading a web page on a tablet computer, for 
Don Hinkelman and Paul Gruba Power within Blended Programs in Japan 
 
Language Learning & Technology 48 
example, forces a heads-down physical behavior in class while a projected web page on a large screen 
forces a heads-up behavior. Thus it is impossible to separate how humans construct the learning behavior 
from how the tools and materials construct the learning behavior. Researchers who adopt an actor-
network perspective do not seek to study tools or the essential features of any actor, but rather focus on 
action and effects within human-technical networks.  
In the field of education, Fenwick and Edwards (2010) explain how actor-network theory can connect the 
importance of ‘things’ with the actions of teachers and students. Importantly, an historical view of 
material things cannot simply highlight electronic substitutions (e.g., a slideshow lecture instead of a 
blackboard lecture), but needs also to consider variations in space, furniture, and modality (e.g., field 
trips, sitting on floors). Instead of focusing on an online blog, for example, as merely a substitution for a 
paper-based diary, an actor–network perspective would seek to open up the ‘black box’ (Latour, 1987) of 
blogging processes (e.g., timings, groupings, interfaces, interactions, workflow, and experiences) and 
account for the actions of other human and machine technologies in the classroom and beyond. Clearly, 
technology use is not deterministic, nor neutral, but is socially constructed (Feenberg, 2008) and 
materially constructed (Bennett, 2010). 
Ecological perspectives (Brown, 2000; Lafford, 2009; van Lier, 2004) may also provide insights into the 
power relationships of technologies in the classroom. Tools are embedded in a mix of synchronous and 
asynchronous activities inside and outside the classroom, and interconnected with spatial arrangements, 
multimodal texts, and learner groupings. From an ecological view, teaching tools are not at the center, nor 
mere aids, but rather a small part of complex classroom/online ecologies that are locally configured. 
Learning designs, then, are often created on-the-fly as bricolage (Berggren et al., 2005), driven by context 
(Kern & Warschauer, 2000), embedded in small cultures (Holliday, 1999) and enacted as local practice 
(Pennycook, 2010). In a study focused on interactive whiteboards, for example, Cutrim Schmid (2006) 
noticed that actual classroom uses were highly dependent on the local and individual teaching practices, 
or the ecologies of use, and not particularly on the intentions of the product designers.  
Conceptually, ecological perspectives situate the uses of tools within local pedagogic processes. Within 
local ecologies, van Lier (2007) describes power as “the creation of boundaries between categories (e.g. 
subject matter boundaries), and the discourses that establish, justify and maintain relations between 
categories, the conditions for specialization and legitimacy of disciplines” (p. 51). For Lafford (2009), 
such an ecological perspective for CALL is useful because it is “value-laden and potentially 
interventionist (i.e. change-oriented and critical)” (p. 675) and thus provides a way to understand, or even 
disrupt, hegemonic power.  
Blended Language Learning Environments 
Postmodern, critical and ecological perspectives are useful in examining blended language learning 
environments because the spatial and pedagogic boundaries are no longer clear and separated, as they 
have been between CALL laboratories and face-to-face teaching rooms. By combining both online and 
face-to-face technologies inside one classroom space, the concept of a learning environment requires re-
conceptualization for both CALL and second language learning theory. 
Our definition of a blended learning environment is specific to second language learning and localized to 
tertiary learning institutions. While blended learning has many wide-ranging and often conflicting 
definitions (Oliver & Trigwell, 2005), within university language learning programs, it can be defined 
more easily by focusing on the spaces and materials assigned to teachers. Some classes are assigned to 
CALL laboratories, where pedagogic activities are limited to online or software-based programs. Other 
classes are assigned to face-to-face classrooms, where pedagogic activities are limited to course books 
and interaction face-to-face between students and teachers. However, a blended room removes these 
limitations by providing both online/software-based learning with face-to-face learning in the same 
physical location (Hanson-Smith, 2007). Ideally, computers are so normalized that students can move 
Don Hinkelman and Paul Gruba Power within Blended Programs in Japan 
 
Language Learning & Technology 49 
freely to and from the internet within a single language learning session (Chambers & Bax, 2006). 
Therefore, for the purpose of this study, we define blended language learning as the combination of 
CALL classrooms and face-to-face classrooms within a single physical environment. 
RESEARCH APPROACH 
To examine power relations in these blended learning environments, we collected qualitative data 
consisting of interview transcripts, teaching journals and institutional documents in a study extending 
from 2005 to 2009. Teachers were the main participants, as their role is central in the selection, 
configuration, and use of technologies in the classroom (Egbert et al., 2009). In one site, we acted as 
ethnographers with an outsider positionality; in the other site, we acted as action researchers with an 
insider, interventionist approach (Herr & Anderson, 2005). For the purpose of this paper, we have 
emphasized the insider data from one institution as it provides richer detail and deeper insight into power 
relations. In the action research site, for example, we were allowed access to teacher-authored materials 
and all institutional documents for planning, personnel and budgeting. Furthermore, with one researcher 
employed on site, that site gave continuous access to the decision-making process during the five-year 
period of the study. 
Site Descriptions 
Each site consisted of an EFL program within a medium-sized, four-year university in Japan. Both sites 
were similar in that approximately 1,000-2,000 students were enrolled in EFL classes within a total full-
time enrollment of 3,000-5,000 full-time students. A steadily declining population within Japan has 
resulted in declining enrollments across Japanese universities, and has provoked a sense of urgency to 
present an attractive curriculum in university marketing brochures which often highlight digital 
technologies, innovation, and global perspectives. Both EFL programs had developed substantial blended 
language learning environments where movable furniture and computer access were readily available 
within a single classroom. We use pseudonyms for all participants and anonymized each institution, 
which we have called ‘Kita University’ and ‘Minami University’. 
As of 2009, the EFL program studied at Kita University included 1,300 students attending 240 classes 
taught by 50 teachers (30 Japanese teachers of English, and 22 native-speaking teachers of English) in a 
two-year required English curriculum. For the EFL program studied at Minami University, the institution 
had responded to a growing demand and built a dedicated language center with its own faculty and 
building. As of 2009, Minami University employed more than 55 full-time, non-Japanese instructors who 
taught approximately 370 classes for nearly 3,000 students. In both cases, the faculty in the EFL 
communication programs built their own organizational cultures, which emphasized collaboration among 
teachers and utilized blended learning rooms for 50-60% of the classes administered. 
In contrast, other English courses at these universities were often taught by tenured faculty who typically 
presented English through prominent literature and linguistic knowledge. Cook (2008) calls this 
approach, English as an academic subject, in contrast to teaching English as communicative skill. An 
academic’s identity in a English department in Japan is typically to be a scholar who specializes in a 
specific author (e.g., Whitman) or one part of speech (e.g., relative pronouns). Therefore, within many 
university foreign language programs in Japan, assessments tend to focus on prominent literary works and 
linguistic knowledge, rather than language proficiency, a persistent practice that has changed little since 
the introduction of communicative teaching principles in the 1970s (Seargeant, 2009). 
In order to counter narrowly focused academic approaches to language learning, the two institutions in 
this study set up semi-independent faculty for their EFL communication programs. At Kita University, 
there were two separate EFL curricula: (a) an ‘A’ curriculum of EFL taught by Japanese teachers that 
emphasized reading, translation, and listening, and (b) a ‘B’ curriculum of EFL taught by first language 
English teachers that emphasized oral communication. In the latter curriculum, which is the focus of this 
Don Hinkelman and Paul Gruba Power within Blended Programs in Japan 
 
Language Learning & Technology 50 
study, individual instructors designed their own assessments at their own discretion. Minami University 
also organized an independent EFL communication program, but operating on more collaborative 
management and employment conditions than for Kita University faculty, they designed a common 
institutional assessment system consistent with their curriculum.  
Both sites in this study employed blended learning rooms for a majority of the EFL communication 
classes taught at the institutions. Although each site used different furniture, equipment, and internet 
connections, the types of blending were similar. According to Neumeier’s (2005) framework of blended 
language learning, the sites in this study employed a ‘parallel’ version of blending, where online activities 
are directly connected to the face-to-face activities. This is also called a “face-to-face plus online” version 
of blending (Motteram & Sharma, 2009, p. 90), in which institutional learning management systems 
(LMSs) are a parallel classroom site that integrates on- and offline activities. In this pattern, activities are 
conducted synchronously in class and asynchronously out-of-class. The purpose of the LMS in both sites 
was to integrate online and classroom activities within the given cohort of learners of each course. 
Although the LMS was a dominant technology, inter-class and cross-institutional collaborative learning 
activities outside the LMS were being introduced in both sites, involving more complex networks of 
learners and audiences. 
Participants and Data Collection 
Participants at both university sites were teachers and administrators with postgraduate degrees in TESOL 
or related fields. At Kita University, the primary researcher served on the university-wide IT committee 
that was responsible for a major renovation of computing facilities. Accordingly, in the action research 
project, we interviewed twelve faculty members and had access to documents related to the CALL and 
blended learning facilities and curriculum. At Minami University, we interviewed fourteen faculty and 
observed blended classroom facilities in operation. Table 1 shows the number of staff in each EFL 
program according to their faculty role and the number of participants in this study (in brackets). 
Table 1. Participants from Two Blended Language Learning Programs in Japan 
Institution Part-time 
contract 
instructors 
(participants) 
Full-time contract 
instructors  
(participants) 
Tenured 
administrators 
/instructors 
(participants) 
Total EFL 
communication 
faculty 
(participants) 
Kita University 10 (1)   8 (8)   4 (3) 22 (12) 
Minami University   0 (0) 55 (10)   4 (4) 59 (14) 
Minami University employed almost no part-time (adjunct) faculty in their EFL communication program, 
instead relying on full-time, limited term contract staff. Later in this paper, we discuss how this policy 
affected power in the blended learning design process at Minami University. For this paper, we selected 
data from both sites that was relevant to the question of hegemony in three distinct areas: facility design, 
materials design, and software design. Participant names have been changed to preserve anonymity.  
BLENDED LANGUAGE LEARNING AT KITA UNIVERSITY 
Kita University established a large CALL laboratory in 1996 and began to develop blended learning 
environments in 2006. Approaches to blended language learning at Kita University were grounded in 
facility designs, materials authoring, and the development of custom software modules for its LMS.  
Facility Designs 
In 1995, Kita University garnered a national grant to build a 44-seat CALL laboratory at a cost of 
Don Hinkelman and Paul Gruba Power within Blended Programs in Japan 
 
Language Learning & Technology 51 
approximately one million U.S. dollars. The English department led campus resource allocation and 
images of technology were prominent in marketing campaigns. Teachers were encouraged to switch to 
computer-based approaches and the lab was filled each day. Computers, it was thought, truly had the 
power to transform passive forms of language teaching with interactive, drill-intensive pedagogic 
approaches. Yet some teachers quietly voiced concern: 
I think CALL is not suited for communication-based classes. Students need to do pair-work and 
face each other, not a computer screen. [George, 2005] 
It looks like teaching in a CALL lab is like running a factory. The teacher sits behind lots of 
screens and machinery, watching the students do their work. [Sarah, 2005] 
Teachers were raising concerns about how the physical layout affected student-to-student and student-to-
teacher interactions. The high-profile investment in the CALL lab, however, stifled debate. Significantly, 
the high cost of a CALL lab meant the school could afford to build only one room. As this lab was often 
fully scheduled for a relatively small group of students and teachers, the majority of teachers were able to 
continue their own pedagogic practices in the numerous face-to-face teaching rooms. Gradually, the 
CALL lab usage declined because both communication instructors and academic language teachers 
wished to avoid the rigid physical layout and packaged software, preferring settings fitted with a 
blackboard, movable desks and chairs, and paper-based materials. A teacher in an EFL composition class 
explained his preference for using paper: 
My students can write just as much in a paper journal than in a computer journal. Plus I can 
easily have them read and comment on each other’s journals in the beginning of class. 
Computers are clumsy for exchanging information student-to-student in the classroom. I want to 
control the pacing of activities and keep the class moving. [Steve, 2008] 
Additionally, an EFL communication teacher expressed concern about the difficulties with student 
interaction in the CALL lab: 
I don’t think my students are doing well at reading faces and exchanging feelings. A computer 
screen can’t help there. [Maria, 2009] 
In response to an institutional survey of foreign language instructors initiated by the lead teacher, Kita 
University remodeled existing computer laboratories into five blended learning rooms. In each of the 
remodeled rooms, computers were moved away from the center of class to line the walls, and movable 
desks and chairs were placed in the center of the room. The aim was to combine both face-to-face and 
online technologies in the same room, a strategy that proved to be both appealing to teachers and cost-
effective, through the use of standard (non-CALL) equipment for internet access. 
In 2009, at the end of the study, all five blended rooms were booked solid throughout the week, while the 
single CALL lab was half-filled. The teachers using the blended rooms reported doing face-to-face 
activities for about 80% of class time and using the remaining 20% of the period for online activities on 
an institutional LMS. Coursebooks, workbooks, and handouts were commonly used in class and often 
combined with a document camera to project the paper materials on a large screen. The mix of media and 
technologies was complex and determined by each teacher. Occasionally, teaching teams collaborated and 
built common materials and activities. Instead of packaged courseware, teachers were combining self-
developed quizzes, surveys, and forums on the LMS along with copied handouts or commercial 
coursebooks to build content-based materials to fit a particular major or level of students.  
The initial hegemony of computers configured with CALL software in a closed language laboratory 
Don Hinkelman and Paul Gruba Power within Blended Programs in Japan 
 
Language Learning & Technology 52 
allowed it to receive budgetary priority. The laboratory had been a showplace that enabled the school to 
compete against other schools in new student recruitment. However, later expansions avoided the CALL 
lab design, instead configuring multi-purpose blended rooms using standard, low-cost (non-CALL) 
equipment. IT committee planners recognized the value of flexible classroom layout to enable pair-work 
and group work, and increased support for in-house printed handouts and booklets. Based on a study of 
blended learning environments, Hinkelman (2009) claims that paper-based technologies are not 
necessarily being reduced in foreign language instruction, despite efforts to produce a ‘paperless 
classroom’ (Robb, 1997). Instead, paper materials have evolved, taking on new functions and multiple 
roles, such as: (a) recording information, (b) giving instructions, (c) publishing or pre-writing for projects, 
(d) prompting dialogue, (e) keeping records, and (f) assessing peers. With the greater use of pair-work, 
paper-based materials and other non-electronic technologies in the blended learning rooms, some teachers 
exhibited a growing excitement about students no longer facing a row of computer screens, as well as 
their own ability to encourage out-of-class, individual study: 
I love the new rooms. With the projector and the students facing forward, I can get their attention 
and hold it. They know what to do in the next task and the pace of the class moves along. I don’t 
like using computers so much because it is like a dull game for them. So I limit the Web work to 
the last 15 minutes of class and they can get a start on homework. Before I could never get them 
to do homework. [James, 2008] 
Administrators and head teachers ceased pushing electronic technologies on the program and instead 
responded to small changes proposed by the action research teaching team. The head teacher encouraged 
photocopying and printing of self-made materials and set up a pilot project to replace commercial 
textbooks with teacher-authored materials, as explained in the next section. 
Materials Authoring 
In the midst of a shift to increasing use of blended learning rooms, teachers began developing more 
locally authored multimedia materials. Until 2006, all teachers had used internationally published 
coursebooks for oral communication, based on a functional syllabus. One teacher expressed 
dissatisfaction: 
I have mixed feeling about these standard textbooks. The students complain they are expensive 
and they don’t always fit the wide range of levels and interests of our students. I have been 
teaching here for ten years, so I know what works and what doesn’t work. For example, this 
textbook has a lesson on restaurant English, something 5% of them might use if they take a trip 
abroad someday in the future. I prefer to make topics that students need to use now in their 
university life. [George, 2005] 
With an internet-based LMS being made available to each student in the blended classrooms, teachers 
wanted to move listening exercises onto the Web instead of doing whole-class activities with a CD player 
during class time. To build a large bank of quizzes for students, the four teachers in the action research 
team created these specialized EFL materials for oral communication courses. To divide up the labor-
intensive task of materials creation, they created a two-year curriculum that consisted of twelve projects. 
Each project had a small booklet of blended tasks. Teachers enjoyed the opportunity to be creative; 
nonetheless, weekly layout and printing chores grew tiresome. Some teachers built extensive booklets, 
and others did not. Some teachers felt the materials were unusable and others complained about the 
workload: 
We each have our own teaching styles and I can’t teach with [his] materials. It does not work for 
me. Also, I am working past six o’clock every night just trying to print up papers for the next day. 
Don Hinkelman and Paul Gruba Power within Blended Programs in Japan 
 
Language Learning & Technology 53 
I am not a graphic designer. Why are we reinventing the wheel? [Rebecca, 2008] 
The problem is that with 10 classes to handle [each week], I just don’t have the time to make 
good materials. [James, 2008] 
The team-authoring approach proved frustrating. After three months of effort, two members returned to 
commercial textbooks and two others continued to prepare original material for their own classes. The 
lead teacher expressed dismay:  
There is no way I can build good [online and print] multimedia activities by myself. Even if three 
or four get together it is not enough. Surely some kind of mass collaboration like Wikipedia could 
be organized to pull like-minded teachers together. [Steve, 2008] 
Due to a limited number of staff committed to collaborative authoring and insufficient incentives to 
author in-house materials, the grand plans of the action research team were abandoned. The lead teacher 
then persisted with several small-scale initiatives: (a) building a shared online question bank with 1000 
multimedia quiz items (multiple-choice, cloze, matching, and ordering types) that followed the syllabus of 
the most popular textbook chosen by the teachers, (b) monthly meetings to share lesson plans, and (c) a 
department-by-department content-based curriculum for just the top students in each department (law, 
economics, psychology, elementary education, etc.). The materials selection and creation was still 
undertaken independently by teachers. However, as the power of materials authoring shifted from mass-
market publishers to teacher-based, in-house curriculum design, incentives to save development time 
came from collaborative teamwork, and workload sharing gradually affected the overall institutional 
environment. 
Development of Custom Software Modules 
In parallel to the blended learning room renovation and locally authored materials, teachers began 
designing online software modules to accompany their face-to-face lesson plans. In 2003, one faculty 
member used open source software to build an inexpensive LMS server at Kita University. Because the 
LMS code was open source, two teachers, Akio and Steve, with the help of a programmer, were able to 
alter some existing LMS modules and build some totally new activity designs from scratch. Over the next 
eight years, three custom modules and ten other software modifications were initiated by the teachers. 
One case in particular highlights issues of power in the design process. In this case, Akio, a Japanese 
professor of linguistics who taught using an academic pedagogic approach, built a module based on his 
practice of a teaching method called “bidirectional lectures”, which he estimated ten to twenty percent of 
the university lecturers at Kita University had adopted. Bidirectional lectures use a response paper that 
students fill out at the end of lecture to summarize the key points of the lecture and to ask the lecturer 
questions (Tanaka, 1999). Typically, a lecture class will include from 50-150 students, which meant 
reading and summarizing the responses on paper was a very labor-intensive job. Akio took this process 
very seriously and collated the response papers and prepared a two-page summary of key student insights 
and questions, which he copied and returned to the students the following week. That handout became the 
basis of the first 20-30 minutes of his lecture. He was satisfied with the general operation of the system: 
My students usually explain the points of the class better than I do. The questions they ask are 
straightforward and force me to think about the value of what I was trying to teach. [Akio, 2006] 
When the open source LMS was installed at Kita University in 2004, he suggested designing an LMS-
based version of the response papers, which he called the “Lecture-feedback Module”. With this system, 
students entered their responses each week after class by going to the class Website in one of the 
Don Hinkelman and Paul Gruba Power within Blended Programs in Japan 
 
Language Learning & Technology 54 
computer labs on campus. This eliminated manually retyping the data, collating similar themes, and rating 
key phrases by the students. Akio was able to reduce his paperwork from eight hours to three hours per 
week. The resulting weekly summary was formatted as a pdf file and posted on the LMS for absent 
students to access. He then printed copies and handed these out to students in the following class. Paper 
copies were important because the students did not have computers in the lecture hall, but could easily 
focus on the summary on his two-page handout. He projected the handout onto a large screen with a 
document camera and marked up the key points with a red marker pen. Then he delivered a lecture on 
new material, writing key words with chalk on a blackboard. The LMS became a record of the course, 
allowing a collection of student-authored comments, access to the teacher’s summary papers, and tracking 
of individual student participation for assessment at the end of the term. Akio thus built a blended 
learning environment which consisted of an ecology of student input texts, LMS modules, pdf files, 
photocopiers, paper handouts, projectors, document cameras, marker pens, blackboards, and his own 
voice.  
The lecture feedback module that Akio created may have been more appropriate to the school culture and 
his classroom culture than other standard modules on the LMS (such as forum and chat modules). We 
speculated that it respected the teacher-student hierarchy, because it was a formal process that was 
systematically assessed. Yet it was transformational (compared to many non-interactive lectures in the 
university) in that some aspects of the content were co-created by teacher and students. However, one 
communication instructor, an American by birth, showed puzzlement and curiosity towards this module: 
I would have never tried to create such a kind of module, because I prefer to involve students with 
more peer-to-peer interaction. I also don’t have large lecture classes to deal with. I wonder, 
though, how he gets such high quality responses. Writing in their first language may explain it, 
but also I am impressed that his process was repeated in the same pattern, week-by-week over the 
fifteen-week semester. Students seem to take his approach more seriously than mine. [Steve, 
2008]  
Many American-born educators take an informal approach that assumes a more equal relationship 
between teacher and student, while Akio’s approach made no such pretense. These different approaches 
to innovation suggest that multiple teaching cultures in the language departments of universities may 
result in differing patterns of use of LMSs and other online tools. This possibility may be ignored by 
educators raised in Western cultures, who may assume ‘traditional’ teaching practices are not innovative. 
Waters (2009) concludes that a majority of innovation studies are: 
…written by native speakers of English, draw on literature from the English-speaking world for 
much of their academic background, and tend to be associated with native speaker-led innovation 
experiences. It therefore seems inevitable that the overall picture in this respect is a culturally-
biased one. (p. 451) 
At first we assumed this kind of cultural bias explained the varying paths of module development at Kita 
University, and that Japanese values of formality and hierarchy in the classroom led to this behavior. 
However, after taking this reasoning to Akio in a follow-up interview, he replied: 
Hmm. I don’t think about [hierarchy and roles] so much. I think it is more that my class is so 
large and yours is small. In small classes, I use oral activities a lot, too. [Akio, 2009] 
His response suggests the design of classroom environments in this case may have been less related to 
cultural values and more affected by the number of students and the differing pedagogic aims of the 
courses (academic knowledge about language vs. productive communication of language). At Kita 
Don Hinkelman and Paul Gruba Power within Blended Programs in Japan 
 
Language Learning & Technology 55 
University, lecture-based classes were typically five to ten times as large as seminars or language 
communication classes. Communication teachers could thus avoid such large classes and tended to 
develop LMS modules that accompanied activities fit for smaller, more intimate classroom settings. 
Akio’s classes, in contrast, ranged from 50-150 students. We also noticed that year by year, Akio 
continued to improve his module and make changes in his blended lecturing environment. In 2008, he 
redesigned the module to work on mobile phones, so students could complete the lecture responses 
immediately, during the final ten minutes of class time. In 2009, instead of lecturing with handwritten 
notes on a blackboard, Akio transferred his lecture points to slides projected on a large screen. Using a 
long computer laboratory with two parallel rows of students, he would walk up and down the rows as he 
lectured. A remote control for his slide show enabled him to be free from the front of class. He described 
how this changed his relationship with the students:  
By walking within the rows of students and using a remote control, I learned to see the lecture 
from the students’ point of view. When students were talking I was able to stop and enter their 
private discussions and either help them understand a point, or pull their attention back. Instead 
of standing up front on the podium, I could stand with the students. It feels like a kind of 
shoulder-to-shoulder communication. [Akio, 2009] 
This new teaching practice shows how the physical relationships of teacher, student, and texts were 
changing with the addition of new technologies. The physical layout of the classroom and the remote 
controlled slides exerted power and shifted the communication patterns in the sessions. In addition, the 
technology ecosystem in Akio’s class was based on a lecturing pedagogical approach, which could 
explain why technological change followed different paths within the same institution according to 
differing class sizes and differing pedagogical aims. In contrast, other instructors assigned to small classes 
with communicative aims chose to create LMS modules and courseware that emphasized student-to-
student communication rather than lecture comprehension. 
BLENDED LANGUAGE LEARNING AT MINAMI UNIVERSITY 
In 2002, Minami University also began developing blended learning environments in its EFL program. 
This institution did not have a history of language lab use; instead, a self-access learning center was 
established to promote individual efforts. 
Along with the purpose-built facilities, a personnel management system defined how the language 
curriculum and the blended learning practices were designed. For the majority of the positions, teachers 
were hired from abroad on limited-term full-time contracts, which ran counter to a common practice of 
hiring most faculty on casual, part-time contracts. The importance of the employment contract was 
explained by one of the administrators: 
Our teachers have a contract, which spells out their duties in three terms. One is a teaching 
obligation. And they have eight hours of teaching per week during the semester. The second one 
is a research component of the contract, and they are required to fully participate in one of the 
research institute’s institutional research projects. And the third component is a requirement for 
socializing with students, and is for work outside of the regular classroom. We call that a 
socializing function ... [Jack, 2005] 
Participation in institutional, curriculum research teams was required of all faculty through their contracts, 
which stipulated promotions according to productive research and curricular development that benefited 
the program. These teams also emphasized in-house materials development, to the point where the 
majority of paper materials and all online materials were developed by Minami University faculty. The 
director elaborated on this philosophy: 
Don Hinkelman and Paul Gruba Power within Blended Programs in Japan 
 
Language Learning & Technology 56 
As an educator, I’ve been very much concerned in many parts of the world with the design and 
development of instructional materials, which are seen as being at the heart of the educational 
process, and that if our discipline is to be taken seriously, these must be produced not by 
dilettantes like [famous textbook authors], but rather in a systematic way and so, when I came 
here, one condition was that I would be responsible for the development of proficiency with a 
system of instructional materials design, which was based upon the collaboration of all members 
who were going to be teaching. [Jack, 2005] 
The materials were collaboratively authored with annual iterations for more than a decade. Thus 
ownership of materials was localized in the institution. This philosophy meant commercialized CALL 
systems and textbooks never took hold in the foreign language program. Instead the curriculum materials 
were produced in-house by teacher teams. This collaborative culture was independent from the other 
academic departments, and solely institutionalized within the English Communication Institute that grew 
from four to 55 members. Although the entirety of this staff was non-Japanese, the management structure 
of the English Communication Institute differed from the English Department—in which both Japanese 
and non-Japanese faculty adhered to an academic approach to language learning. Therefore, the power in 
the design of the institutional environment was not related to the cultural background of the individual 
teachers but rather emergent from the organizational culture of the institute. 
The director’s vision became embedded in this program through common practices and formal contracts 
that guided the operation. The faculty was socialized to a set of values that were codified into the limited-
term contracts. The director explained the role of these requirements: 
This has always been the ethos of the [English Communication Institute]. We now have it 
formalized that this research component is an integral part, which will determine whether 
teachers get offered a new contract […] And we forced them to collaborate in the development of 
the curriculum. [Jack, 2005]. 
These rules of management, however, were not widely accepted by other academics: 
The idea that we would set up this collaborative research-based curriculum development project 
met with a great deal of resistance. You will know that Japanese professors have the right to 
teach whatever they like, and not be dragooned into teaching something that they don’t feel 
comfortable with. [Jack, 2005] 
Thus collaboration was forced as a requirement of employment of new staff. This vision was 
institutionalized into a policy that became a powerful actor in the working culture, but only within this 
one part of the institution—the main academic departments were not affected. Importantly, these research 
project teams took responsibility for not only designing curriculum and materials, but also controlling 
certain budgets and planning for school-wide services.  
One result of the distributed authority and budgeting was the creation of six blended learning rooms. Four 
teachers, including one tenured head teacher and three representatives from research teams, were assigned 
to build the architectural designs and equipment/furniture specifications of teaching spaces in a new 
building. These rooms—called ‘Blended Learning Spaces’—were the showcase of the Media Center 
building, which won a national award for architecture in education. Each blended room was equipped 
with movable desks and chairs along with a wireless system of notebook computers, and a 
projector/screen for whole class presentations. The notebook computers were housed in a cabinet and 
could be used anywhere in the room. These notebooks were used for both standalone word-processing 
and internet-based tasks. Many of these tasks were accessed on individual class sites within the open-
source LMS. This blended learning system was flexible enough to allow teachers to determine the degree 
Don Hinkelman and Paul Gruba Power within Blended Programs in Japan 
 
Language Learning & Technology 57 
of computer-based technology to include in their classes. Computer availability and flexible classroom 
facilities were important to teachers, and as teachers themselves, the design committee built a physical 
environment that reflected curricular values. As a result, the rooms were completely booked throughout 
each day of week. The popularity of the blended learning spaces led the university to build three more of 
these classrooms in another new building in 2009. 
POWER IN THE DESIGN OF BLENDED LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS 
This section discusses aspects of hegemony across the two institutions in this study. We focus first on 
facility design (power in technologies), then materials design (power in authorship), and finally software 
design (power in licensing). 
Hegemony in the Design of Facilities: Electronic Laboratories 
Initially, Kita University chose to emphasize a CALL laboratory as the core technology to publicize in its 
curriculum. Hegemony of technology is shown in this case as the power of electronic technology 
selection policies to ignore or discount face-to-face and print-based technologies. This power was 
enhanced by national-level political practices, which provided considerable funding that favored 
electronic over non-electronic tools. Hornborg (2001) argues that “asymmetries are systematically 
concealed from view by the hegemonic economic vocabulary” (p. 3) and recommends a defamiliarization 
of common concepts. By defamiliarizing and reconstructing concepts of technology to combine the non-
electronic into the structure of the design, and de-prioritizing the electronic and its commercialized, 
encapsulated formats, Kita University and Minami University were able to create ‘blended’ language 
learning rooms. These blended designs balanced online and face-to-face practices and thus avoided 
idealizing or fetishizing one aspect of technology (Hornborg, 2008). Beyond these two institutions, 
studies in Japan advocating blended learning practices (Miyachi, 2009) have neutralized the once-
common view that electronically based approaches to language learning (e.g. e-learning) should be given 
precedence over face-to-face techniques. 
The shift from CALL laboratory equipment to blended learning rooms was not only a conceptual power 
struggle among teachers and administrators, but also included commercial and technical factors. The 
design of the CALL lab at Kita University included highly packaged and inflexible courseware, thus it 
could not accommodate a wide variety of teaching practices. Rather than using standardized, off-the-shelf 
parts and open source software, the CALL setup was highly customized, requiring special hardware and 
software that cost more than 500% over the expenditure for one blended language learning room. This 
made replication of CALL labs unsustainable within the institution and thus the lab became a single-room 
showcase rather than a model for other spaces. Law (2004) describes technology packages as ‘black 
boxes’ that need to be opened and examined to see their network relations. Opening a CALL lab to 
understand its structure seems highly dependent upon a number of economic designs (e.g., licenses, 
copyrighted content), pedagogic designs (closed answer activities), and architectural designs (single-room 
wired LAN, fixed desks and screens) that may mitigate against wider adoption. Subsequent changes in 
these socio-technical designs have allowed a blended architecture to evolve (Web-based delivery, open 
source licenses, and locally authored content).  
In Minami University, emphasis on curriculum was the driving force in building design and equipment 
selection, as one teacher observed: 
So rather than building a building and then starting from scratch, we had the curriculum and the 
curriculum seemed to be working well with the research projects. And each project needed this 
equipment or this space. So the design of the building came from what we needed to develop our 
curriculum. [Alicia, 2005] 
Don Hinkelman and Paul Gruba Power within Blended Programs in Japan 
 
Language Learning & Technology 58 
Thus blended learning spaces were created to allow teachers to use new technologies bit by bit as needed, 
in line with Hornborg (2008), who remarked: “all technological systems are embedded in cultural—and 
political—webs of significance that tend to remain invisible (because self-evident) to the users of these 
technologies” (p. 4). Minami University’s strong collaborative teaching culture and in-house curriculum 
design meant there was little concern with idealized solutions such as CALL laboratories for teaching. 
Consequently, the task of designing the new building dedicated to language learning was given to a team 
of four teachers who chose designs based on the ongoing practices of the institution. The hegemony of 
packaged electronic solutions for language learning was neutralized by this focus on curriculum and 
decentralized budgetary decision-making.  
Although the director of the program appeared to be the nexus of power in the design of the blended 
environment, postmodern perspectives such as actor-network theory (Law, 2004) assert that people or 
tools do not possess power but act within a network of semiotic relationships. In this case, the primary 
actor-network was an employment contract, which directed teachers to work in mandatory research 
teams. This contract acts or exerts power within the network, which affects architectural planning, 
materials design, and testing policies and keeps faculty aligned and working together. The funding 
support of the owner of this privately funded institution was also an important part of the network, yet the 
majority of curriculum, facility and technology design decisions were actually made by collaborative 
groups of teachers. The director played a role of enforcing values and funding priorities based on a 
collaborative ethos embodied in a collective agreement symbolized by the contract. Separated from the 
prevailing culture of academic independence, teachers at Minami University had egalitarian access to 
curriculum-targeted research grants. A large body of committed staff was thus stabilized by 
comprehensive contracts and professional development assessments, which were the powerful ‘actor-
networks’ that drove innovation in this blended language learning program.  
Hegemony in the Design of Teaching Materials: Mass-marketed Coursebooks 
Minami University, with a powerful set of eight collaborative materials development teams, produced 
virtually all of its printed and online materials in-house. It overcame the hegemonies of mass-market 
coursebooks and individualistic teacher practices by enforcing a personnel contract that maintained 
institutional values. These policies gave priority to providing a more localized and learner-appropriate 
language program, in alignment with principles of teacher-based course development (Graves, 1996) and 
teacher-produced materials (Harwood, 2010). 
At Kita University, the situation was different as mass-marketed coursebooks dominated the university 
EFL program. Rather than a coordinated curriculum that determined course syllabuses, these textbooks 
forced syllabus selection and topic sequencing for each class. Teachers individually choose coursebooks, 
so there was little coordination in classes, a wide variety of syllabuses, and strong resistance to 
institutional standards or testing. Attempts to switch to program-wide assessments, team research 
collaboration, and teacher authoring of materials failed due to individualistic values and the high cost in 
the time required designing and printing the materials. Initially, in 2008, six full-time teachers intended to 
jointly prepare materials for classes but within a month this plan broke down because the action research 
team could not agree on common language learning principles, types of media, and lesson flows. The lead 
teacher recommended a shift to an integrated syllabus by adopting a single commercial textbook. This 
met with a fragmented reaction by the other five teachers. Two ignored the recommendation, one chose to 
use the printed textbook alone, and the other two joined the lead teacher in using the recommended 
textbook blended with online audio and video-based exercises. Even this effort to create multimedia 
activities languished because adding voice, images and video to LMS quizzes materials was so time-
consuming, and there were few incentives to individually develop custom materials.  
The struggles with blended learning materials at Kita University may be related to two issues of power. 
The first issue of power concerns shifts in roles of teachers. At Minami University, teachers were given 
Don Hinkelman and Paul Gruba Power within Blended Programs in Japan 
 
Language Learning & Technology 59 
roles as researchers and materials developers within a tightly integrated curriculum and an ethos of 
collaboration. At Kita University, teacher roles were limited to classroom instruction, and reinforced by 
an ethos of academic independence. Under these conditions, collaborative action research interventions 
became fragmented or were abandoned. In contrast, the employment contract at Minami University was 
an extremely powerful actor in an ecology that built an institutional effort to create evolving, locally 
designed teaching materials. 
The second issue of power concerns shifts in modalities. Somekh (2008) notes that electronic technology 
is problematic, not so much for the costs in funding or learning time, but rather because it “consistently 
destabilizes the established routines of classroom life including norms of time and space” (p. 452). The 
loss of routines and the instability of space may lead to skepticism among ‘conservative’ or reluctant 
teachers, who have legitimate unanswered questions about the appropriateness of new technologies. One 
of these concerns may be an unrecognized switch in modalities, such as the change from face-to-face 
communication in classrooms to text-based communication online. Lamy and Hampel (2007) 
acknowledge that online learning tools often provide reduced contexts and “disembodied environments, 
unable to replicate modes such as gestures or touch” (p. 38). While non-verbal modalities such as voice 
inflection, eye contact, kinesthetic and tactile interaction are removed and disregarded in many electronic 
environments, blended environments can retain these. In the same way, a blended environment can add 
extra digital modalities—such as audio, video, drawing, hyperlinking, commenting, and other online 
participation behaviors—to face-to-face and text-based environments. These ‘new’ modalities are often 
marginalized in a classic four-skills curriculum, leading to calls for multimodal approaches to education 
(Kress, 2009) that focus on a variety of digital literacies (Lankshear & Knobel, 2008). The rich variation 
of ‘old’ and ‘new’ modalities is the basis of variation theory, which Oliver and Trigwell (2005) claim is 
the strongest pedagogical justification for using a blended learning approach. This study reveals the 
emerging power of new modalities and newly required literacies exerting their influence by destabilizing 
established practices. 
Hegemony in the Design of Software: Proprietary Systems 
At Kita University, the initial CALL systems installed in the 1990s were proprietary systems that 
integrated content and activities in a single commercial package. This package, named the CALL Lab, was 
considered a standard language learning tool at this school until social-technical conditions changed over 
the next decade. As Hornborg (2001) argued, it exhibited a culturally constructed power that was 
“inevitable and natural” (p. 1). Gradually, Web-based systems proliferated and at Kita University, the 
teachers involved in designing new modules for the LMS could produce various types of modules (for 
lecture feedback and project-based learning) because of the low cost and public rights to build modules in 
an open source environment. The decommercialization of the LMS may have played a very large role in 
the development of multiple-approach online/hybrid activities designed for local teaching cultures. 
Commercial LMSs often allow selected commercial add-on components but uniformly forbid 
customization of code by teachers in local installations. In a proprietary system, it would be impossible 
for two teachers to create new modules as they did at Kita University. In contrast to large-scale, 
international publisher-driven CALL and coursebook designs, local initiatives at Kita University saw 
power exerted by teachers rather than expert designers. With low cost programming (under US $1,000 per 
module), tenured teachers could afford the design within their discretionary research funds, and they 
could thus produce strategically different pedagogic approaches. One design, by Akio, emphasized a 
systematic, repetitive and formal approach to learning. Steve, however, valued creative, spontaneous, and 
informal use of the LMS. These approaches required different forms of socialization of the student 
members of the class and established differing small cultures within the institution (Holliday, 1999). 
Furthermore, this approach to LMS design emphasized technology design as bricolage, a trial-and-error 
approach as opposed to intensive research and development initiatives (Garud & Karnoe, 2003). This 
aligns with those who advocate teacher-centered materials design (Harwood, 2010) and teacher-centered 
Don Hinkelman and Paul Gruba Power within Blended Programs in Japan 
 
Language Learning & Technology 60 
curriculum design (Graves, 1996). 
Examining the nature of power in LMS design, initially we interpreted the lecture feedback design by 
Akio on the basis of national culture (i.e., hierarchical values in Japanese culture). Later, in view of 
Pennycook’s criticism of a national culture perspective (2010), we identified other factors that might 
explain why his module designs were different from those of other teachers. Taking the small, local 
culture approach, we noticed that Akio was using his power as a teacher to make incremental and 
manageable changes in his classroom to save his own preparation time within a large class size 
environment. Akio maintained a lecture-based pedagogy and explained how he used to spend eight hours 
processing student response papers, but with the lecture-feedback module, processing time was reduced to 
three hours, and each student’s responses could be traced in a database. 
Yet efficiency alone as a cultural value does not explain why Akio could and did design new LMS 
modules. Broad economic and political re-structuring within computer-based learning, not possible in the 
1990s, allowed teachers to customize their LMSs. First, Web-based e-learning meant there was no need 
for specialized CALL hardware and software, thus allowing any computer room or computing device to 
act as a CALL laboratory. Then inexpensive servers with open source databases and operating systems 
lowered costs by a factor of ten in Japan (Hinkelman, 2005) allowing local customization and low-cost 
adoption by tinkering teachers. 
Finally, public licensing and distributed programming assistance meant that standard Web programming 
services could be sourced from low-cost countries. These factors changed the power structure from 
exclusive control by commercial firms and gave Akio, as an individual teacher, power to enact changes he 
had been thinking about for a long time but could not act on due to the expense of a server and access to 
programming. He then chose one aspect of his classes to improve (the response sheet management) and 
made that semi-automatized with a new module. In other words, this design change to make a blended 
environment was not attempted from a teacher belief that discussions were better than lectures, but from a 
pragmatic perspective on dealing with a large class of a hundred students. Then, as he applied the new 
module, he discovered more insights. He added mobile phone input to the response sheets to give more 
options to students. After shifting from handwriting on blackboards to projecting visual texts and images 
on slideshows, he found himself physically closer to the students and better able to perceive their 
perspectives on the lecture. Students learned the classroom routines and changed their note-taking and 
classroom behavior. 
These effects of technology change in blended environments are not predictable when iterative change is 
happening in individual teachers’ classrooms, and confirm that technical designs are constructed locally 
based on economic and political factors (Hornborg, 2001), such as the employment contracts at Minami 
University and the independent teaching culture at Kita University. Some of the technologies observed in 
the classrooms were combinations or hybrids (Latour, 2005) of online and face-to-face actions, such as 
the lecture-feedback module of Akio’s practice, or student-to-student surveys collected in face-to-face 
interviews and reported with online summaries. In blended classrooms, we found new ecologies of 
technology use emerging that no one had predicted and no commercial firms had been marketing, such as 
in the blended practice of using document cameras to project coursebooks and handouts during whole 
class activities. In line with critical and ecological views (van Lier, 2007; Warschauer, 1998), technology 
in the language classroom was not a neutral aid nor a triumphal savior but a complex, multi-dimensional 
set of processes that changed both how teachers and students learned and what they learned.  
LIMITATIONS AND IMPLICATIONS FOR DESIGN IN BLENDED LEARNING 
ENVIRONMENTS 
In summary, this study has identified and interpreted three issues of hegemonic relationships of power 
that initially influenced the design of blended language learning environments in two institutional EFL 
Don Hinkelman and Paul Gruba Power within Blended Programs in Japan 
 
Language Learning & Technology 61 
programs in Japan. In facility design, electronic laboratories were privileged over face-to-face classroom 
environments. Blended learning rooms allowed both environments to be used simultaneously in classes, 
according to teachers’ lesson planning. In materials design, mass-market coursebooks were favored over 
teacher-authored multimedia materials. Blended learning environments required multimodal materials and 
assessments to be developed locally to match the changes in classroom activities. In CALL laboratory 
design, commercial, proprietary systems prevented local software customization from developing. A 
switch to open-source, Web-based LMSs with access in all blended learning rooms allowed teachers to 
prepare custom modules. All of these situations showed evidence that power was redistributed to allow 
these three marginalized practices (face-to-face teaching, teacher-authored materials, and locally-designed 
software) greater prominence in the blended learning design. That redistribution happened not exclusively 
from interventionist strategies (e.g., action research), but also from larger-scale change in the political and 
economic ecosystems of language learning technology (e.g., open source proliferation) and smaller-scale 
change due to unintentional effects of new equipment and room arrangements. 
In ethnographic and action research studies of learning environments, there is no aim to propose 
generalizable claims (Burns, 2010; Nunan & Bailey, 2009). The intent in such qualitative studies and 
narrative inquiry is to describe the situation with relevant detail and reflexivity in order for practitioners to 
draw likely parallels to their local practice (Pavlenko & Lantolf, 2000). Thus the limitations in this study 
are primarily in understanding the breadth of applicability of these sites and the local designs they 
created. The participants in this study were limited primarily to teachers and thus their views were 
privileged. Selection criteria for interviews focused on active teachers involved in the development of 
blended learning environments. These tended to be non-Japanese, first language teachers of English oral 
communication. These teachers thus had smaller classes than did teachers of literature and linguistics, 
who had to deal with large class management issues.  
Even within the context of university education in Japan, the relevance of Minami University’s case is 
initially unclear. Starting a new university is a rare case, and even rarer is a single administrator given the 
resources to implement a vision of faculty management that runs counter to common university practice. 
As there are no other universities in Japan with a separate institute of 55 foreign faculty, it is easy to 
discount the relevance of Minami University to other institutions. Nonetheless, in the past two years, 
administrators of Minami University have reported that they have replicated their management structure 
in two other universities in Japan, which now hire new teachers recommended by Minami University and 
require a similar contract based on collaborative values. At the same time, by establishing a career path 
for its best teachers whose contracts are expiring, Minami University’s own problem of staff termination 
is addressed to a small degree. This suggests that a management system based on contracted, 
collaborative team research can be both replicable and sustainable. While this focus on a collaborative 
institutional culture has been the major theme of this study, we also acknowledge that the role of the lone 
innovator or visionary, as embodied by Jack, Akio, or Steve, may play a powerful role in the design of 
blended learning environments. 
Implications of the study suggest the concept of technology in blended environments needs to be 
expanded from a focus on integrating electronic tools to configuring hybrid face-to-face and online 
activities. Second, blended learning is not only a descriptive category of technology use in education, but 
also an interventionist strategy of iterative change in integrating face-to-face techniques with computer-
based techniques. In language learning programs, power relations can be established that enable 
democratizing of design in teacher-based work groups. This happens when job responsibilities are 
formally mandated to include collaborative research and materials development. This implies the 
management structure of teaching faculty may be a more important factor in the design of blended 
environments than techno-centric CALL studies might suggest. Finally, the low political and economic 
barriers to public, open source LMS design can facilitate a bricolage atmosphere for teachers to create the 
environments they intuitively desire to offer their students for learning. This study concludes that critical 
Don Hinkelman and Paul Gruba Power within Blended Programs in Japan 
 
Language Learning & Technology 62 
interventions in blended language learning environments are not simply injecting new electronic 
technologies into programs, but rather effecting change by the redistribution of power in ways that enable 
principled, appropriate, and sustainable design. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Don Hinkelman is an associate professor of foreign language education and intercultural communication 
at Sapporo Gakuin University, northern Japan. His research focuses on the design of blended language 
learning environments and particularly how face-to-face technologies and open source LMS modules 
evolve in the process of institutional innovation. 
E-mail: hinkel@sgu.ac.jp 
Paul Gruba is a Senior Lecturer in the School of Languages and Linguistics, University of Melbourne. In 
addition to blended language learning, his research interests include second language media literacy, 
multimodal studies, and new media and language assessment.  
E-mail: p.gruba@unimelb.edu.au 
 
REFERENCES 
Bennett, J. (2010). Vibrant matter: A political ecology of things. Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 
Berggren, A., Burgos, D., Fontana, J. M., Hinkelman, D., Hung, V., & Hursh, A. (2005). Practical and 
pedagogical issues for teacher adoption of IMS learning design standards in Moodle LMS. Journal of 
Interactive Media in Education, 2(02), 1–24. 
Brown, J. S. (2000). Growing up digital: How the web changes work, education, and the ways people 
learn. Change, 32(2), 11–20. 
Burns, A. (2010). Doing action research in English language teaching: A guide for practitioners. New 
York: Routledge. 
Chambers, A., & Bax, S. (2006). Making CALL work: Towards normalisation. System, 34(4), 465–479. 
Cook, V. J. (2008). Second language learning and language teaching (4th ed.). New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
Cutrim Schmid, E. (2006). Investigating the use of interactive whiteboard technology in the English 
language classroom through the lens of a critical theory of technology. Computer Assisted Language 
Learning, 19(1), 47–62. 
Egbert, J., Huff, L., McNeil, L., Preuss, C., & Sellen, J. (2009). Pedagogy, process, and classroom 
context: Integrating teacher voice and experience into research on technology-enhanced language 
learning. The Modern Language Journal, 93(Supplement s1), 754–768. 
Feenberg, A. (2002). Transforming technology: A critical theory revisited. New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
Feenberg, A. (2008). Critical theory of technology: An overview. In G. Leckie & J. Buschman (Eds.), 
Information technology in librarianship: New critical approaches (pp. 31–46). Westport, CT: Libraries 
Unlimited. 
Fenwick, T., & Edwards, R. (2010). Actor-network theory in education. London, Routledge. 
Don Hinkelman and Paul Gruba Power within Blended Programs in Japan 
 
Language Learning & Technology 63 
Fox, S. (2000). Communities of practice, Foucault and actor-network theory. Journal of Management 
Studies, 37(6), 853–868. 
Garud, R., & Karnoe, P. (2003). Bricolage versus breakthrough: Distributed and embedded agency in 
technology entrepreneurship. Research Policy, 32(2), 277–300. 
Graves, K. (1996). Teachers as course developers. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
Hanson-Smith, E. (2007). Critical issues: Places and spaces. In J. Egbert & E. Hanson-Smith (Eds.), 
CALL environments: Research, practice, and critical issues (Second ed.) (pp. 42–57). Alexandria, VA: 
TESOL. 
Harwood, N. (2010). Issues in materials development and design. In N. Harwood (Ed.), English language 
teaching materials: Theory and practice (pp. 3–32). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Herr, K., & Anderson, G. (2005). The action research dissertation: A guide for students and faculty. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Hinkelman, D. (2005). Blended learning: Issues driving an end to laboratory-based CALL. JALT 
Hokkaido Journal, 9, 17–31. 
Hinkelman, D. (2009). Revival of paper: Booklets and textbooks in blended language learning. In M. 
Thomas (Ed.), JALTCALL 2008 conference proceedings (pp. 35–40). Nagoya, Japan: JALTCALL. 
Holliday, A. (1999). Small cultures. Applied Linguistics, 20(2), 237–264. 
Hornborg, A. (2001). The power of the machine: Global inequalities of economy, technology, and 
environment. Lanham, MD: Altamira Press. 
Hornborg, A. (2008). Machine fetishism and the consumer’s burden. Anthropology Today, 24(5), 4–5. 
Kern, R., & Warschauer, M. (2000). Introduction: Theory and practice of network-based language 
teaching. In M. Warschauer & S. Kern (Eds.), Network-based language teaching: Concepts and practice 
(pp. 1–19). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Kress, G. R. (2009). Multimodality: A social semiotic approach to contemporary communication. 
London: Routledge. 
Lafford, B. (2009). Toward an ecological CALL: Update to Garrett (1991). Modern Language Journal, 
93 (Supplement s1), 673–696. 
Lamy, M. N., & Hampel, R. (2007). Online communication in language learning and teaching. New 
York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Lankshear, C., & Knobel, M. (Eds). (2008). Digital literacies: Concepts, policies and practices. New 
York: Peter Lang. 
Latour, B. (1987). Science in action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Latour, B. (2005). Reassembling the social: An introduction to actor-network-theory. New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
Latchem, C., & Jung, I. (2010). Distance and blended learning in Asia. New York, NY: Routledge. 
Law, J. (1991). Power, discretion and strategy. In J. Law (Ed.), A Sociology of monsters: Essays on 
power, technology and domination (pp. 165–181). London: Routledge. 
Law, J. (2004). After method: Mess in social science research. London: Routledge. 
Levy, M., & Stockwell, G. (2006). CALL dimensions: Options and issues in computer-assisted language 
learning. Mahwah, NJ: L. Erlbaum Associates. 
Don Hinkelman and Paul Gruba Power within Blended Programs in Japan 
 
Language Learning & Technology 64 
Miyachi, I. (Ed.). (2009). Iraningu kara burendedo raningu e [Toward blended learning from e-learning]. 
Tokyo: Kyoritsu Shuppansha. 
Motteram, G., & Sharma, P. (2009). Blending learning in a web 2.0 world. International Journal of 
Emerging Technologies and Society, 7(2), 83–96. 
Neumeier, P. (2005). A closer look at blended learning—parameters for designing a blended learning 
environment for language teaching and learning. ReCALL, 17(02), 163–178. 
Nunan, D., & Bailey, K. M. (2009). Exploring second language classroom research: A comprehensive 
guide. Boston, MA: Heinle. 
Oliver, M., & Trigwell, K. (2005). Can ‘blended learning’ be redeemed? E-Learning, 2(1), 17–26. 
Pennycook, A. (2006). Language policy and postmodernism. In T. Ricento (Ed.), An introduction to 
language policy: Theory and method (pp. 60–76). London: Blackwell. 
Pennycook, A. (2010). Language as a local practice. Abingdon, UK: Routledge. 
Pavlenko, A., & Lantolf, J. (2000). Second language learning as participation and the (re)construction of 
selves. In J. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 155–177). New York: 
Oxford University Press. 
Robb, T. (1997). The paperless classroom? TESL-EJ, 3(1). Retrieved from http://www.tesl-
ej.org/wordpress/issues/volume3/ej09/ej09int/ 
Seargeant, P. (2009). The idea of English in Japan: Ideology and the evolution of a global language. 
Bristol, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Somekh, B. (2008). Factors affecting teachers’ pedagogical adoption of ICT. In J. Voogt & G. Knezek 
(Eds.), International handbook of information technology in primary and secondary education (pp. 449–
460). New York: Springer. 
Tanaka, H. (1999). Sayonara furui kogi—shitsumon-sho hoshiki niyoru kaiwa-gata kyoiku e no shotai 
[Goodbye to old-style lectures: Invitation to bidirectional education using a reaction paper method]. 
Sapporo, Japan: Hokkaido University Press. 
van Lier, L. (2004). The ecology and semiotics of language learning: A sociocultural perspective. Boston: 
Kluwer. 
van Lier, L. (2007). Action-based teaching, autonomy and identity. Innovation in Language Learning and 
Teaching, 1(1), 46–65. 
Waters, A. (2009). Managing innovation in English language education. Language Teaching, 42(4), 421–
458. 
Warschauer, M. (1998). Researching technology in TESOL: Determinist, instrumental, and critical 
approaches. TESOL Quarterly, 32(4), 757–761. 
