Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2012/review2 
October 2012, Volume 16, Number 3 
pp. 40–44 
 
Copyright © 2012, ISSN 1094-3501 40 
REVIEW OF LANGUAGE TEACHING IN BLENDED CONTEXTS 
Language Teaching in Blended Contexts 
 
Margaret Nicolson, Linda Murphy, & Margaret Southgate 
(Eds.) 
 
2011 
ISBN: 190671620X 
US $37.00 
300 pp. 
 
Dunedin Academic Press 
Edinburgh, Scotland 
 
 
Review by Rebeca Fernandez, Davidson College  
Language Teaching in Blended Contexts is a welcome contribution to language educators seeking to 
deploy technology for the benefit of adult learners with their complex backgrounds and varying 
motivations for language study.  Written by educators at the Open University with first-hand experience 
in the topic, it provides research-supported, practical guidance on program design, instructional quality, 
student outcomes, and professional development in blended language contexts. The book is likely to be of 
special interest to adult educators in community college and continuing education programs seeking to 
create, expand, or improve the quality of their blended language learning offerings. It is also appropriate 
for those who might be well versed in online teaching, but are not specifically trained in language 
education. Particularly helpful for this broad audience is the inclusion of a glossary of frequently cited 
terms and concepts, as well as substantial information on language learning theory and pedagogy. The 
book consists of seventeen chapters grouped into five thematic sections.  
SECTION 1: THE LEARNING CONTEXT 
Chapter 1 offers a definition of blended learning and teaching as both encompassing ―a combination of 
forms of instructional technology, including traditional forms of learning used in conjunction with web-
based, online approaches‖ (p. 5). Strongly rooted in the distance education tradition, the authors are 
concerned with the non-traditional adult student approaching language learning with a diverse set of 
skills, performance levels, and instructional goals. They recognize that as the variety of blended options 
increases, so does the need for teachers and their professional developers to expand their skills as both 
educators and users of the many new technologies available.  
The second chapter begins with an overview of various instructional modes and technology tools along 
with the language skills they support and includes a much-valued feature of the book, sample materials 
and checklists. Two themes that persist throughout the book are introduced here. First, the teacher’s role 
is described across modes and tools, as are ways to combine both online and face-to-face components. 
Second is the focus on learner autonomy, which in this chapter is exemplified by the authors’ suggestion 
that low-technology options be made available to students across lessons and activities in order to 
Rebeca Fernandez                           Review of Language Teaching in Blended Contexts  
 
Language Learning & Technology 41 
mitigate potential resistance to online work.  
In chapter 3, the authors are concerned with student diversity, arguing that language learning among 
adults can be strongly influenced by individual, cultural, and psychological barriers. It is incumbent upon 
language teachers, therefore, to challenge their own understandings and assumptions about diversity and 
seek to create unique spaces for learning and teaching that will suit each student’s unique characteristics. 
The authors delve into typical markers of diversity (e.g., age, language background, gender), as well as 
those less often addressed in the literature (individual strategy preferences, task types, and learning 
modes).   
Chapter 4 focuses on learner autonomy, self-regulation, and motivation in blended contexts. It is anchored 
in theoretical and empirical work that connects autonomy and motivation in language learning. The 
authors are also candid here about the drawbacks of a learning environment that is designed to meet 
vastly diverse student needs. Through case studies, they illustrate some of the benefits and pitfalls of 
blended learning situations in which teacher support is needed to navigate a corresponding myriad of 
learning options.  The teacher, thus, serves primarily as a facilitator who advises students on their learning 
options, prepares them to use various tools, provides and models feedback, and leads them toward 
activities that suit their individual motivations.  
SECTION 2: ASSESSMENT 
Chapter 5 begins with an accessible description of assessment theory followed by the caveat that 
traditional classroom assessments should not be applied to the online setting without substantial 
modification. When developing an assessment strategy, they advise that teachers develop multiple forms 
of assessment that maximize on the affordances of the tools used. A course assessment strategy that 
provides students with enough opportunity to receive feedback and gauge progress is recommended. 
Teacher feedback, they explain, should feed ―forward‖ (p. 63) and give students advice that will shape 
future performance instead of simply giving grades or evaluative feedback. With respect to assessment 
design, they warn that the skills assessed need to match the affordances of the online tools selected. In 
such cases, the authors recommend that teachers generate student buy-in by creating authentic tasks and 
assessments that simulate real-world applications of web-based or written communication.  
Chapter 6 explores assessment in greater depth and presents it as a vehicle for language instruction. 
Following up on earlier comments, the authors stress the need to provide feedback that is useful to the 
student and can improve future performance. This chapter further discusses the nature of usable feedback, 
specifically addressing teacher’s tone, depth of comments, as well as feedback on productive language 
tasks specifically. Although cognizant of its time demands, they point to the value of individualizing 
instruction by combining computer-based assessments with spoken and written feedback. 
SECTION 3: SYNCHRONOUS AND ASYNCHRONOUS TOOLS IN BLENDED CONTEXTS  
In chapters 7–12, the authors focus on different aspects and modes of the blend. Chapter 7 focuses on 
planning, delivering, and assessing teaching sessions in face-to-face contexts and at a distance using a 
variety of tools. Time demands and skills supported across different modes are discussed. For example, 
synchronous sessions, which require significant preparation, are considered more conducive for speaking 
practice, whereas the less planning intensive asynchronous sessions lend themselves better to grammar 
and writing practice. The chapter also stresses the importance of integrating skills along a developmental 
progression by connecting instructional tasks. This is a particularly important point to make given that the 
temptation to use technology for its own sake, without a clearly articulated plan, may exist in the face of 
pressure to integrate tools with which one has limited experience.   
Chapter 8 is devoted to telephone teaching. While it may seem antiquated in the age of digital technology, 
distance learning programs—particularly those where online tools and training on such is limited—still 
Rebeca Fernandez                           Review of Language Teaching in Blended Contexts  
 
Language Learning & Technology 42 
rely heavily on the use of the telephone, particularly for one-on-one sessions and tutoring. In rural areas 
or where Internet access may be inconsistent, telephone land lines are often used. Many adult students 
who do not have home Internet have cell phones with data plans that allow them to communicate with 
teachers via email and enter course sites (The Parthenon Group, 2003). Challenges posed by the absence 
of visual cues in telephone teaching are discussed along with strategies for maximizing on this tool. A 
sample lesson plan of a telephone session is included to illustrate specific ways teachers can prepare 
students, build community, and guide a class through a variety of communicative activities in the 
telephone context. Consistent with the book’s practical focus, the stages of the telephone session and 
common pitfalls are subsequently presented in detail. 
Chapters 9 and 10 explore synchronous teaching. For the language educator striving to create an online 
environment in which language interaction and negotiation of meaning can take place, student 
participation is often a top concern. Chapter 9 focuses on planning to teach through several synchronous 
online conferencing tools with attention to pedagogy, task design, and teacher roles during the session. As 
in previous chapters, the authors emphasize the importance of a less dominant teacher role and provide 
advice on how to maintain this balance. The authors note that students who might otherwise fade into the 
background can become empowered by taking on leading roles with technology even when their language 
skills do not match those of their in-class peers.  
Chapter 10 takes a more practical approach to the delivery of synchronous teaching online. Guidelines 
and principles for effectively managing groups, interactions, technology, and time during synchronous 
sessions are offered. Noting the artificiality to which online interactions can become captive, the authors 
discuss options for communication flow and provide ideas and techniques for giving feedback and 
technical support with minimal intrusion. In their view, the teacher should be the architect of the learning 
space working behind the scenes to ensure that students are able to interact with one another with few 
interruptions or glitches. Other important topics covered here include the role of silence, peripherality, 
and learner identities in the online context.  
Chapter 11 presents the face-to-face component as a way to help overcome the shortcomings of 
technology-mediated distance learning modes. Whereas online and telephone sessions can require a great 
deal of planning and attention to detail, the face-to-face session is characterized by its fluidity. It can 
serve as an important medium for reducing student anxiety levels through direct social interaction and 
language games and can help establish a foundation for and lend authenticity to follow-up activities 
online.  Sample teaching plans are provided, and models that encourage the use of the physical space, 
movement, spontaneous groupings, and the use of props are emphasized.    
Chapter 12 focuses on asynchronous teaching, as many blended courses are taught using learning 
management systems in which students complete assignments and interact primarily through 
asynchronous discussion boards. Aiming to increase learner autonomy and expand opportunities for 
language use in this mode, the authors propose blogs and wikis, providing explanations of each of these 
tools and how to motivate students to take part in them. They also express concern for the social isolation 
that is common in the asynchronous mode and advise that teachers create online spaces for students to 
interact informally. The authors seem to understand the challenge that unstable student participation can 
pose to language teachers in adult and continuing education programs where traditional grades or credits 
may not be offered or used as an incentive and students’ motivations are often susceptible to shifts in 
personal or external circumstances.  
SECTION 4: COMMUNITY AND INDIGENOUS CELTIC LANGUAGES 
A cursory look at the title might tempt the non-Celtic language teacher to skip section 4, but chapters 13 
and 14 are among the most relevant to educators teaching a lingua franca, a heritage language or a 
community language to adults with various non-academic motivations for pursuing language study. As is 
Rebeca Fernandez                           Review of Language Teaching in Blended Contexts  
 
Language Learning & Technology 43 
typical in adult education programs, these classes are sometimes diverse not only in student language 
level, but also in native language and educational background.  
Chapter 13 includes a rich discussion on language varieties and ways of leveraging technology to access 
language resources and individualize input for diverse, multi-leveled learner populations. Even chapter 
14, in which the history and nature of Celtic languages in the UK are discussed in further detail, there is 
much that can be applied to a broader blended language teaching context, particularly with respect to 
learner motivations and instructional design. There is also a section suggesting ways to further enrich the 
blended language learning experience through community resources and volunteer participation.  
SECTION 5:TEACHER DEVELOPMENT AND FINAL REFLECTIONS 
In the last section, the authors once again assert that language teachers in blended contexts need to 
become ―facilitators of learning in a multiplicity of learning platforms‖ (p. 219). As is typical in other 
adult education learning contexts, unfortunately, the professional development needs of language teachers 
in blended contexts often go unmet (Smith & Gillespie, 2007). Placing the responsibility for professional 
growth squarely on teachers, this section discusses the skills and knowledge that are needed to work 
effectively in the online component of the blended course, with particular emphasis on reflection as the 
catalyst for growth. The authors encourage action research and recommend ―a dynamic approach to 
teaching methods and approaches that best responds to the individual context…rather than rigid 
adherence to a method‖ (p. 227). These chapters also offer specific direction for teacher developers with 
practical approaches and specific examples on mentoring and providing feedback. The final chapter 
distills much of the information, concepts and recommendations about blended teaching into an evolving 
set of principles: teacher responsiveness, creativity, openness, and pragmatism. It concludes with 
resources for further development in blended language learning and a useful bibliography and index. 
Language Teaching in Blended Contexts is quite comprehensive. Attention is given to an impressive array 
of language learning considerations and solutions for blended contexts. At times, it reads more like a 
handbook for blended language education, with one noteworthy omission. For all of its practical, detailed 
information, a clear discussion of different blended learning models is absent. A description of the various 
permutations that are possible between the online and face-to-face components of the blend would have 
been useful, for example, to language educators who are seeking to increase language learning options 
and promote greater autonomy in traditional language courses. Despite this minor limitation, the authors 
consistently offer workarounds and solutions to help make blended learning work for the adult student 
who might not be able to access language learning opportunities otherwise. This book is a must-have for 
teaching languages at a distance. It can be used by novices wishing to gradually incorporate more 
technology into their language instruction and by those who have been involved in online learning for 
some time but are seeking ways to improve support for language learning in these evolving contexts.  
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Rebeca Fernandez is an assistant professor and coordinator of non-native English writing at Davidson 
College in North Carolina. In her former position as adult ESL instructor at Central Piedmont Community 
College, she developed blended courses and online professional development. She received TESOL 
training at University of California, Los Angeles and specialized in language and literacy at the Harvard 
Graduate School of Education. 
Email: refernandez@davidson.edu 
 
Rebeca Fernandez                           Review of Language Teaching in Blended Contexts  
 
Language Learning & Technology 44 
REFERENCES  
The Parthenon Group. (2008). Innovation in ESL education: Mobile-learning technology. Melinda Gates 
Foundation. Retrieved from http://www.gatesfoundation.org/learning/Documents/innovation-esl-
education-mobile-learning-technology.pdf 
Smith, C., & Gillespie, M. (2007). Research on professional development and teacher change: 
Implications for adult basic education. Review of Adult Learning and Literacy, 7.   
 
