Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2012/preussmorway.pdf 
June 2012, Volume 16, Number 2 
pp. 87–102 
 
Copyright © 2012, ISSN 1094-3501 87 
CAUGHT IN THE WEB: OVERCOMING AND REPRODUCING 
HEGEMONY IN AZERBAIJAN 
Cara Preuss, Independent Scholar 
Carolyn Morway, Epic  
This paper explores university student access to and use of technology in Azerbaijan in the 
context of hegemony in computer-assisted language learning (CALL). Due to perceptions 
of a lack of technology access in the university context, the instructors in this study did not 
initially pursue a CALL agenda. Based on data sources that included a questionnaire, 
photographs, documents, journals, and interviews, the results of the study indicated that 
despite instructor perceptions, many students used and had access to various forms of 
technology on a regular basis. For example, students used computers and mobile devices 
to pursue different kinds of knowledge outside of the university. Implications include the 
importance of the deconstruction of instructor assumptions so that they can be critical 
educators and make choices that can lead to social change. 
Keywords: Computer-Assisted Language Learning, Culture, Language Teaching 
Methodology 
INTRODUCTION 
While citizens have fought oppressive government regimes in many countries around the world both in 
and out of cyberspace, numerous organizations have also played roles in working with activists, 
journalists, and others to resist oppression. These empowerment efforts include high profile groups like 
the internet community Anonymous which engaged in cyberwarfare (Reporters Without Borders, 2011, 
January 4). There are other groups involved in day-to-day development projects that do not garner 
historical headlines. For example, government organizations like the United States Agency for 
International Development (USAID) works to improve infrastructure and economic outcomes, and 
Fulbright English Language Fellows (ELFs), or the Peace Corps and the British Council, work to improve 
English language education around the globe. Non-government organizations1 also further development 
and include, but are not limited to: the International Research and Exchanges Board (IREX), the 
American Council for Collaboration in Education and Language Study (ACCELS), the Open Society 
Institute (OSI), and Project Harmony International (PH International). These organizations work to 
promote democracy, civic engagement, technology, and media development, for example. 
It is important to note that organizations often work in-country with the permission of, and sometimes at 
the express invitation of, host governments. All the organizations listed are of western origin and the 
participation of English speakers in language education reform may seem benign to some, but no 
educational enterprise is value-free and this needs to be recognized as a political endeavor (Apple, 2010), 
regardless of the country inviting or providing the development aid. Whatever the motives, interventionist 
educational projects can be viewed as colonialist (e.g., Saavedra, 2011). For example, it is easy to see 
how Peace Corps volunteers may be viewed as part of a larger agenda of the American Empire as they are 
sent out as “public relations people to portray [the United States] as the purveyor of freedom around the 
world” (Kincheloe & McLaren, 2005, p. 331). While those working in foreign contexts may be seen (by 
themselves or by others) as helpers or saviors, their role can also be viewed as part of a colonizing 
process. Likewise, those who engage in teaching/researching English through CALL are also legitimate 
objects for critical scrutiny. They both resist and impose forms of hegemony (Norton & Toohey, 2004). 
We take hegemony to refer to, “the maintenance of domination not by the sheer exercise of force but 
primarily through consensual social practices, social forms, and social structures produced in specific 
sites such as the church, the state, the school, the mass media, the political system, and the family” 
Cara Preuss and Carolyn Morway Caught in the Web 
 
Language Learning & Technology 88 
(McLaren, 1994, p. 182, italics in the original). Consequently, depending on the sociopolitical and 
technological context, it may be hegemonic practice to promote the use of CALL (see for example Cutrim 
Schmid & Whyte, this issue) or on the other hand to resist it, as in the role played by the Dean in the case 
presented below. Both scenarios can have a negative impact on education.  
In this paper we present descriptive data through a critical lens. First, the literature review describes 
hegemony within western teaching approaches and outlines what are often accepted as optimal CALL 
environments. The study challenges this notion of what is optimal by critically analyzing teacher 
perceptions about technology access and technology use as reported by students. Then, the methodology 
is described, including data sources (questionnaire, photographs, documents, journals, and interviews) and 
qualitative analysis techniques. Next, we present the results that characterize the students as having access 
to more technology than previously thought and as consumers of information. Results are followed by a 
discussion in which the authors conclude that there may be more pedagogical options that align to local 
CALL contexts than originally considered. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
In order to position the paper, this literature review addresses teaching approaches and the use of CALL. 
Critical theory is not addressed separately but rather is integrated. 
Hegemony of Teaching Approach 
As briefly described in the introduction, it is not uncommon for westerners, including teachers of English, 
to work on development or aid projects in developing countries. As described by McLaren (1994), each 
teaching context exists within overarching governmental and cultural practices that organize political, 
economic, and social life to maintain prevalent power structures. For example, Kumashiro (2009) shows 
how teaching in ways that feel familiar and common helps to maintain the status quo, which is often 
oppressive to those with the least power. Those involved in teaching English through CALL both resist 
and impose hegemony through their praxis of choice and dominant discourses which play out as “regimes 
of truth” (McLaren, 1994, p. 189).  
First, the increased use of and reliance/insistence on English can be both a way of maintaining hegemony 
and a way of struggling against it (e.g., Macedo, Dendrinos, & Gounari, 2003; Sonntag, 2003) as 
questions about language are questions of power (Chomsky & Ronat, 1979; Crawford, 2004). These 
struggles arise in perceptions of language prestige (Ager, 2005), language minority rights (May, 2005), 
and language extinction (Kramer, Miller, & Newberger, 2008). The increasing dominance of English, 
especially in academic publications (Ferguson, Pérez-Llantada, & Plo, 2011), raises questions about the 
legitimacy of some languages (Reagan & Osborn, 2002) and ‘non-standard’ forms of English, as 
documented in the journal World Englishes. One specific example includes a discussion about 
perceptions, features, and the validity of ‘China English’ (He & Li, 2009). Anzaldúa (1987) and hooks 
(1994) provide examples of how policy and cultural practices intersect with power and language on a 
personal level. Throughout her educational and teaching career, hooks, for example, felt that limiting the 
exchange of ideas in public forums to ‘standard English’ worked to silence those who were less 
comfortable expressing their ideas in English. So while learning English could be considered a means to 
open doors towards economic advancement or emancipation, it can also be viewed as an act of 
oppression, colonization, and cultural elitism (Anzaldúa, 1987; Hooks, 1994; Said, 1994).  
The classroom itself may become a source of embodied pedagogy, and hegemony (Grumet, 1988; 
McLaren, 1994; Pinar, 2000). Curriculum, in particular, is not only concerned with whether students have 
learned content and skills, but also reveals relationships of power about who declares what is considered 
knowledge worth learning and how that process is carried out (Apple, 2010; McLaren, 1994). 
Furthermore, theories of teaching and learning embedded in teaching approaches common in western 
educational contexts, like constructivism (Bruner, 1996), experiential learning (Rogers & Freiberg, 1994), 
Cara Preuss and Carolyn Morway Caught in the Web 
 
Language Learning & Technology 89 
multiple intelligences (Gardner, 1999), and social interaction and constructivism (Vygostky, 1978), can 
be oppressive to students who favor other means of learning. When applied to language learning contexts, 
these approaches often result in student-centered, communicative classrooms that privilege collaborative 
learning (e.g. Peregoy & Boyle, 2008). Of course, influences on the classroom and a teacher’s role in 
defining, reproducing, and constructing knowledge are much more complex than can be described in a 
single paragraph and they are not static. Teaching English through western educational approaches in 
foreign contexts that traditionally use other methods of teaching and learning can be colonizing and 
hegemonic. Yet using these same western approaches can also serve to disrupt the status quo of 
comfortable teaching that works to maintain existing power structures in such contexts.  
Optimal CALL Environments 
While any given teaching approach can be viewed as hegemonic, CALL introduces another layer for 
consideration through western ways of thinking about CALL and optimal environments, use of tools 
without even considering that a bias might be embedded within the tools, and available technology. Those 
trained in western pedagogy may privilege western ways of thinking about CALL. For example, Egbert 
suggests that for optimal CALL, instructors should use environments that foster engagement and, in turn, 
second language acquisition (Egbert, 2009, 2010; Egbert & Hanson-Smith, 2007). Some of the 
characteristics of optimal environments include interaction with the target language, negotiation of 
meaning, and authentic tasks and audiences. Learners for their part must consume and produce language, 
pay attention to feedback, and attend to their learning processes (Egbert & Hanson-Smith, 2007). While 
some of this might be accomplished in a traditional classroom that is not influenced by western pedagogy, 
arguably it is easier to achieve in classrooms where teachers and students value and include social 
interaction in their teaching and learning activities.  
The tools used in CALL introduce a fundamental bias, as the “very act of using technology reproduces 
what is supposed to be transformed” (Feenberg, 2002, p. 63). As humans are full of subjectivities, they 
are often blinded by their own ways of seeing the world (Scheurich & Young, 1997). Tools produced by 
humans, then, also reflect the biases of their producers, who often belong to dominant groups and who 
design tools to meet their own needs. To provide a simple example of how tools can incorporate bias, and 
as any left-hander can attest to, most tools are designed for a culture of right-handed people. If you put 
your right hand over a remote control, the power button is positioned to be turned on by the thumb on that 
hand. In the same way, many technologies are biased toward a culture of sighted people. According to 
Parry and Brainard (2010), problem areas for sight-impaired people include tablet readers that do not have 
voice-activated menus as well as inaccessible Web site content, as sites are not always compatible with 
programs that help sight-impaired people mitigate the accessibility problems. Popular learning 
management software has also been problematic. In response to pressure by sight-impaired students, 
Blackboard Learn, Release 9, alleviated many problems students encountered, by including “faster 
navigation and improved form interaction, allowing blind users to submit assignments, participate in 
discussion forums, send and receive e-mail, take tests and quizzes, and participate in polls” (Danielsen, 
2010, Mar 25, para. 4). In short, Web sites and software products often reflect the cultural orientations 
and abilities of those who produce them.  
While the bias embedded in tools in CALL environments is an area of hegemony, so, too, is a lack of 
tools. Tools have been the center of attention for those who have been concerned with issues arising from 
a lack of computers and connectivity, a situation that contributes to the digital divide. While a lack of 
hardware and software may or may not be the cause of increased educational inequities, even in very 
well-connected contexts, the use made of technology may limit the learning opportunities. Egbert (2010) 
defines an “optimal technology context” not as having sophisticated equipment per se, but as utilizing any 
tool that increases the effectiveness or efficiency of language learning (p. 2). While this could be 
interpreted as a practical move to use what tools are available, it could also be interpreted as complicity in 
the reproduction of hegemony in oppressive environments that critical researchers and teachers resist 
Cara Preuss and Carolyn Morway Caught in the Web 
 
Language Learning & Technology 90 
(Freire, 2000; Kincheloe & McLaren, 2005). In sum, there are many potential ways western-trained 
instructors who work with CALL in foreign contexts may contribute to hegemonic and oppressive 
teaching practices, only some of which have been addressed here.  
Difficulties arise, however, in determining what is hegemonic. For example, a western instructor in a non-
western context may feel unable or unwilling to work outside the pedagogical approaches within which 
they were trained, and this may be considered oppressive. On the other hand, such pedagogies could also 
be considered emancipatory if they contribute to the disruption of the status quo of local hegemonies 
currently in play. Therefore, educators interested in critical pedagogy may wish to work to disrupt the 
status quo, in order to, as they see it, advance social justice (Freire, 2000; Kincheloe & McLaren, 2002, 
2005). In doing so, however, they may both resist and impose forms of hegemony.  
The research questions addressed in this paper include: (a) What observations and assumptions do foreign 
teachers make about teaching/learning (especially with relation to technology) in their teaching contexts? 
(b) What technologies do university students have access to and use? and (c) What hegemonies are 
resisted/imposed as a result of foreign teachers working with students to teach both technology and 
English skills? The study was conducted in the Republic of Azerbaijan in two different university 
settings. Traditional methods of language teaching in Azerbaijan include reading and translation, rote 
memorization, and recitation. More details about the context and participants are provided in the 
following section. 
METHODS AND ANALYSIS 
In order to inform the research questions, data was collected from three sources: (a) environmental print 
photographs, (b) a survey about university students’ access to and use of technology and Wireless 
Application Protocol (WAP) sites (explained below), and (c) instructors’ reflective journals, notes from 
training sessions, conversations, and documents. Critical theory (Kincheloe & McLaren, 2002, 2005) was 
chosen to assist as a framework and to guide analysis. First, the context and sample is described, the 
methodology for each data source is then described, followed by details of the analysis procedures. 
Context and Sample 
As stated previously, the study occurred in Azerbaijan with groups of students from two public 
universities in the capital (henceforth University A and University B). Students’ ages ranged from 18-20 
and their participation in the study was voluntary. The students were preparing to enter English teaching 
or translating professions. Forty-eight students took part in the study while three students chose not to do 
so. The students were predominantly female; seven were male. The convenience sample of students was 
chosen for their proficiency in English. Less than 15% of the population in the country attends tertiary 
schooling (UNESCO Institute for Statistics, n.d.). Since these students had achieved high scores on their 
entrance exams, they were able to enter university. The breakdown of the five groups of students was as 
follows: (a) five first- and third-year students from the English Writing Center tutor training course, (b) 
thirteen third-year students enrolled in the Russian-speaking part of the institution (henceforth sector) 
attending an English course, (c) nine second-year students from the Russian language sector in an English 
academic writing course, (d) sixteen second-year students from the Azerbaijani language sector attending 
an English academic writing course, and (e) five third-year students from the Azerbaijani language sector 
in an English course.  
At both universities, students attended English language classes two days a week for ninety minutes per 
week. At University A the classes were voluntary (participation was not part of the grade) while 
attendance was mandatory at University B as part of graduation requirements. The academic writing 
classes used an academic reading and writing book created by a non-profit foreign organization. In other 
classes at University A, the same text was used, but only as a resource for lesson planning, while at 
University B the text was used in class. 
Cara Preuss and Carolyn Morway Caught in the Web 
 
Language Learning & Technology 91 
All classes were taught by one of two native English speakers, henceforth the instructors, living in the 
country for one year, funded by a grant from a U.S. government scholarship program. The universities 
applied for the English speakers to assist in their respective English Departments. Although each of the 
instructors had submitted a work proposal prior to commencing his or her duties, their roles within each 
university were constantly negotiated. One of the instructors had previously had training in CALL. 
Environmental Print 
Prior to the study, one of the authors of this paper had noticed graffiti spray-painted around town, with 
WAP addresses included (see photograph sample in the Results section). The WAP is a communications 
protocol that enables users of basic mobile phones to access and browse web-like text services. In the rest 
of this article, sites accessible on mobile phones through this protocol are referred to as WAP sites, and 
URLs directing users to those sites are referred to as WAP addresses. 
The authors wondered whether there was any link between the WAP addresses and the students. Did 
students view these sites? Did they create them? What kind of information was being promoted? In order 
to investigate these questions, a geographically-bounded sample of WAP address photos was created from 
a section of town close to one of the universities under study. Analysis of this data is discussed in the 
analysis section. 
Student Questionnaire 
In order to learn about student access to and use of technology, students were given a questionnaire. Due 
to the environmental print context of images of WAP addresses painted around town, the survey focused 
on WAPs. Students had the option of completing the questionnaire in English or the dominant native 
language, Azerbaijani, which was translated and checked by language and cultural informants to ensure 
linguistic, functional, and cultural equivalence (Lange, 2002; Lopez, Figueroa, Connor, & Maliski, 2008; 
Peña, 2007). The study and questionnaire received approval according to the procedures at the respective 
universities both in the United States (formal ethical review) and Azerbaijan (informal approval).2 The 
questionnaire included demographic information, nine yes/no questions, and eight open-ended questions 
(see Appendix). It was piloted successfully with three students and then given to the rest of the sample.  
Instructor Data 
Instructor data included reflective journals and notes from training sessions (taught by U.S. trainers) 
attended by the instructors prior to travelling to Azerbaijan as well as during the teaching year. They also 
included conversational interview notes, and documents such as slides from PowerPoint presentations as 
well as student essays. Most of the data collection occurred during the four-month fall term. Much of this 
documentation focused on what an instructor did in class, student reactions, and analyses of methods for 
improving teaching and meeting learning goals. 
Analysis 
The analysis was based on general procedures provided by Bogdan and Biklen (2003). Specifically, the 
questionnaire results were tallied, WAP sites explored, and notes taken on the content, and then all 
documents were coded according to emergent themes (technology/tools, media/information, teaching, 
student actions, and relationships). These themes were established by using ongoing reflective analysis 
throughout the study. 
RESULTS 
After describing what the instructors thought about the students’ technology ownership and access, we 
present the survey. 
Cara Preuss and Carolyn Morway Caught in the Web 
 
Language Learning & Technology 92 
Instructors’ Points of View 
According to the data, the instructors’ perceptions of technology ownership and student access were 
inconsistent on three levels. The instructors believed that: (a) many students did not have access to 
computers in the home; (b) the universities lacked available computers in the classrooms or in computer 
labs; and (c) the students did not or could not access computers in public internet cafés. We explore these 
three sets of beliefs in turn. 
First, while they joked that many students did not have just one cell phone, but multiple cell phones, the 
instructors did not consider mobile handheld devices as a viable pedagogical possibility. Both instructors 
were teaching in the capital that had a steady supply of electricity in comparison to some areas of the 
country, offering the opportunity to use such electronic devices, yet they characterized technology access 
as limited. 
Secondly, while there was a perception among university members that their university did not have 
computers in classrooms or any computer labs, this perception turned out to be questionable. Indeed, 
according to one instructor, the very bare minimum was provided (i.e., seats and tables, but sometimes 
not even a blackboard). Nevertheless, to that instructor’s surprise, technology did become available, as a 
few weeks into the term, the Dean at University A found a computer lab that he allowed the instructor to 
access with her students. These resources, however, were considered limited by both the Dean and the 
instructor, as relayed by the instructor: 
[The Dean] said the computers are not functioning because they ‘don’t have sound’ so no one 
uses [the lab] and the room gets locked up. It’s a very narrow room and when you walk in, there’s 
rows of desks…There is no blackboard…12 PCs….There was MS Word and later we 
downloaded Polyglot, a multiple language dictionary, onto them. The computers are not more 
than five years old but have zero online capability. 
The room had 12 relatively new computers that worked, but it was still viewed as a limited technology 
context by both the Dean and the instructor, albeit for different reasons. The Dean saw the lack of sound 
as the limitation; the instructor focused on the lack of internet connection which, consequently, did not 
allow the students to locate authentic materials or engage in authentic communication via computer. 
The third set of inconsistent instructor beliefs related to the availability of computers around town. 
Outside of the school context, the capital had many internet cafés, predominantly used by males, 
according to the instructors’ observations. However, since most of their students were female, one 
instructor stated her expectation that these women would not access computers in internet cafés. 
According to local tradition, public tea houses are a man’s domain and women are either not invited or 
not allowed to visit them, as well as possibly reluctant to do so.  
The data revealed some basic assumptions the instructors had about CALL. They believed, for example, 
that to engage in CALL required computers in labs or in the classroom, and did not consider mobile 
handheld devices. Their understanding that their universities did not have computers available or offer 
connectivity for their students, and that women did not use computers in internet cafés, did not turn out to 
be completely true, although these understandings affected the pedagogical choices they made in their 
teaching. The questionnaire results reveal another perspective on the situation, however. 
Questionnaire Results 
While the instructors and the Dean interpreted the educational technology context as limited, the 
questionnaire results describe the context from another perspective, namely that of the students.   
One hundred percent of respondents reported having a cell phone, and all but one utilized Short Message 
Service (SMS), that is, texting (see Table 1). The student who did not use SMS indicated that she used a 
Cara Preuss and Carolyn Morway Caught in the Web 
 
Language Learning & Technology 93 
cell phone plan. Cell phone plans are a more expensive option for communication, so we speculate that 
she could afford to communicate by the more expensive means of voice-based phone calls, rather than the 
cheaper medium of text messages. 
Table 1. Technology Access and Use (n = 48 students) 
Question Yes No No Response/ 
Do Not Know 
Own a cell phone 48 0 0 
Use a SIM card 47 1 0 
Use a calling plan 1 47 0 
Internet access at home 37 10 1 
Use Internet cafes 15 34 * 
Send text messages 45 1 2 
Use WAPs 36 11 1 
Create WAPs 6 42 1 
Follow Twitter feed(s) 4 39 5 
Send Twitter messages 4 39 5 
Note. *This student responded both yes and no. 
Thirty-seven students reported having internet access in their homes, 10 said they did not, and one did not 
respond. Fifteen students used internet cafés, while 34 did not. One student answered both yes and no, a 
response that remained unclarified after we analyzed the data, but which may suggest his or her situation 
had recently changed. Upon closer analysis of the data, it emerged that 11 of the students who used 
internet cafés were female, which was a surprise to the instructors. Only six students out of the sample 
said they did not access the internet at home or at internet cafés; of those six students, two said they used 
WAP sites. In other words, close to eight percent were not connected. 
Students were asked specifically about Twitter since this networking site was gaining popularity at the 
time of the survey. In addition, because observations had shown that students preferred SMS messaging 
to talking over the phone, we wondered whether they would use Twitter, which is similar to SMS in that 
users produce very short messages. However, our sample turned out not to be big users of Twitter. 
Students reported two main reasons for using technology: (a) staying in contact with their friends and 
“group mates” (i.e., classmates) both at home and abroad, and (b) obtaining what they called 
“information”. Out of the 42 who responded to a question on the news, 100% indicated that they followed 
the news. Two of the students, however, wrote “TV” for question number six, “Do you use technology to 
read the news?” TV news may be tightly controlled by the government (Committee to Protect Journalists, 
2001, February 15), depending on whether the students access external sources3 of news.  
According to the results of the questionnaire, students seemed to place a high value on the news, as 
indicated by their responses such as “of course” or similar expressions indicating that news-seeking 
behavior was to be expected. Eight students specifically mentioned accessing news or knowing what was 
happening on a global level. One student said, “Yes, I always use [technology]” and mentioned that two 
of her favorite sites were the BBC and CNN. In other words, there was a contrast between the 
predominantly female sample and instructor observations of young men in town. While the data included 
anecdotal observations of young men using computers in internet cafés for entertainment purposes 
mainly, many students in the sample sought and valued knowledge that kept them connected to what was 
happening in the world. 
Other popular sites among students varied, although they clearly favored three main sites. Those sites 
were: Facebook (14 responses), Google (12 responses), and the popular Russian e-mail service mail.ru 
(11 responses). Additionally, four students mentioned Wikipedia. The rest of the sites mentioned by 
Cara Preuss and Carolyn Morway Caught in the Web 
 
Language Learning & Technology 94 
students were only named once or twice, but covered news, education, sports, and pop culture. Some 
students indicated that they used technology to support their studies. Furthermore, students accessed 
information in multiple languages for reading and listening (see Figure 1). The languages in which 
students reported accessing information included: Azerbaijani, Chinese, English, French, German, Hindi, 
Russian, Spanish, Turkish, and Ukrainian. It was noted that three students did not access content for 
listening purposes in any language; these are indicated in Figure 1 by means of a zero score. 
 
Figure 1. Number of languages used to access content. 
Finally, in response to an open-ended prompt about other thoughts they wanted to share about technology 
use, students described technology as “easy”, “fast”, “simple”, and “comfortable”, and made comments 
such as: “we can’t live without [technologies]”, and “it is impossible to do anything without modern 
technologies.” One student even characterized technology as her “best friend”, while another expressed 
her appreciation: “I don’t know who invented technologies, but I thank him/she.” 
In sum, the students were connected and utilized social networking sites. They also accessed content in 
multiple languages. The question remains, were the students linked to the WAP sites spray-painted 
around town and what kind of content was available? 
WAPs 
The third source of data came from the WAP sites, spray-painted around town and displayed on walls like 
advertisements (see Figure 2 shown below). In the course of analyzing the data, we learned that many of 
the WAP sites, seven out of fifteen, were no longer accessible. 
Cara Preuss and Carolyn Morway Caught in the Web 
 
Language Learning & Technology 95 
 
Figure 2. Graffiti showing a WAP address. 
Of those WAP sites that were accessible, with the exception of links to namaz vaxti (prayer time), most 
appeared to serve entertainment purposes. Sites included links to a TV guide; three television stations; 
fitness instructions; and telephone dialing codes. Another example with quite a few menu choices 
(ciciwap.biz) showed a sexy girl in the corner with Cyrillic writing: ‘ПОРНО’ (porno, in both Russian 
and Azerbaijani). The site included links written in Azerbaijani (using the Latin alphabet) to: chat and 
meeting forums, mobile phone ringtones and sounds, different types of music like the national xalq music 
style, MP3s, comics, sites with live girls, wallpapers, pictures, and video and film clips.. One example of 
a film clip link included content relating to Kurtlar Vadisi, a popular Turkish television program. The last 
time this WAP address was checked, however, it was labeled “invisible”, with a notice explaining it was 
being “cleaned”. Another site had a link to the Eurovision Song Contest, an international singing 
competition.4 
Was there a connection between the WAP sites and the students? Not according to our survey. What we 
did discover, however, was that many WAP sites did not appear to be fully accessible to users, some 
appearing to be under construction while others had short life spans. Additionally, student technology use 
appeared to be seamless. In other words, most students did not seem to distinguish between connecting to 
the internet via cell phones and handheld devices or computers, as evidenced by their responses to the 
survey. For example, the survey specifically asked about WAP sites, but only two students included 
“wap” in the address provided for their favorite WAP sites, while the rest of the students provided general 
internet addresses. In other words, students wrote google.com instead of an address that indicated 
accessing Google via a mobile device like m.google.com, for example. It appears that students are not 
aware of or do not care about the technical differences between devices, and that instead, they view what 
they are doing as checking Google regardless of the equipment used. 
Cara Preuss and Carolyn Morway Caught in the Web 
 
Language Learning & Technology 96 
DISCUSSION 
Based on the data, two hegemonic processes came together to limit the use of CALL in the classroom. 
First, the instructors’ assumptions and their pedagogical choices reflected a western understanding of the 
local context, leading them to overemphasize the importance of certain kinds of technology, for example, 
computer labs, and to neglect the potential of the local students’ preferred technologies. As the instructors 
had specific beliefs about computers with internet connections being the way to engage in CALL, the 
context that we have discussed was deemed by them to be limited even though 100% of the students had 
cell phones with texting capabilities, and they knew how to use these devices. They were in fact 
connected to the internet and could access authentic content and engage in authentic communication. 
Second, the local practice of locking up resources such as computer labs, reflecting local power 
structures, appeared to confirm teachers’ assumption that no way was open to them for carrying out 
western-oriented CALL pedagogies. In this study, power relationships surrounded access to materials and 
information.  
In addition to a limited, computer-based definition of CALL, it is possible that societal structures and 
hegemonic processes were limiting women’s access to internet cafés outside the classroom as well. 
According to local tradition, public tea houses are a man’s domain and women are either not invited or 
not allowed to visit them, as well as possibly reluctant to do so. While internet cafés are different from tea 
houses, they can be viewed as serving similar purposes: as places where men gather for what appears to 
be mainly recreational purposes. Anecdotal data showed that the instructors observed women in public 
internet cafés although the women sat in certain sections of particular cafés. As explained by one 
instructor, women did not frequent cafés that were located in basements, for example, locations that she 
described as “dirty”, “poorly lit” and where males had been observed viewing pornographic material. In 
other words the hegemonic processes surrounding the use of internet cafés, and in our perspective, their 
potential for language education, are as yet unclear and could benefit from further research. 
Despite instructor perceptions as well as the realities of technology and access, the data revealed some 
contradictions. First, the instructors did resist hegemonic practices by bringing their personal laptops to 
class, showing PowerPoint presentations and previously downloaded You Tube videos, for example. 
Second, technology other than computers may have been available to instructors (e.g., CD players), 
although the instructors did not appear to know how to access this technology or, alternatively, did not try 
to overcome local hegemonic processes that distributed resources in possibly less than democratic ways. 
In other words, some forms of technology were available to some local instructors, but it took extra effort, 
insider knowledge of the way things worked, and a commitment to include them in classroom activities. 
Third, the Dean unlocked resources one instructor could previously not access. The Dean may or may not 
have had the money, power, or influence at his disposal to make the room a fully functioning, connected 
computer lab. Outside the general country context of pervasive corruption (as evidenced by the need for 
an anti-corruption government campaign, documented in Abassov, 2011, Feb 23) the data does not reveal 
the specific processes at play. However, the Dean did have the power to open and close the room and he 
had chosen, until that moment, to keep it locked. This choice maintained hegemonic practices in the 
school, so that students’ engagement with contemporary technology remained linked to their private lives 
and was not fostered as part of their school lives. The instructor, for her part, even after being granted 
access to the room, chose not to use the computers, either. She said, “I guess I haven’t seen much of a 
need for them yet.” as she did not want to artificially use technology just for the sake of it, given that it 
seemed limited for her purposes. 
In sum, power relationships surrounded access to materials and information, impacting pedagogical 
choices and, consequently, student learning. Instructors worked within assumptions that they derived 
from their prior educational contexts, and chose tools accordingly. What this study shows is that 
educators need to deconstruct their assumptions and try to better understand the conditions that lead them 
to choose certain technologies for certain educational purposes. In this way they can become critical 
Cara Preuss and Carolyn Morway Caught in the Web 
 
Language Learning & Technology 97 
educators and make choices that can lead to social change. 
LIMITATIONS 
The data, results, and interpretations here are limited in several ways. First, we used a convenience 
sample. While the students and the data may have similarities to other university students studying the 
same major in the capital, results cannot be generalized. Second, student volunteers filled in the 
questionnaire; volunteers may have certain characteristics that distinguish them from the rest of the 
students. Third, during the administration of the questionnaire, instructors observed that some students, in 
one group especially, were not fully completing the questionnaire; they said they were tired and left the 
open response prompts blank. Fourth, at the outset we had two host country nationals involved in the 
project to further illuminate some of our assumptions. Both of these individuals, however, became too 
busy to participate. 
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS 
In conclusion, the data reveal how hegemonic practices can hamper pedagogical choices and, in turn, 
student learning. While instructors may impose their own hegemonies, in this case, western-based ones, in 
the form of class-based roles, materials, and educational approaches, they are also well-positioned to 
interrupt local hegemonies. This study has revealed both the oppressive effects of hegemony and the 
possibility of resistance, and offers implications for practice and further research in CALL.  
The instructors in this study worked to engage students in authentic learning activities according to the 
instructors’ teaching and learning backgrounds and inherent assumptions, not the students’. For example, 
the instructors made assumptions about technology, namely, that not very many students had the kind of 
internet access they thought was required for CALL. However, upon closer investigation, the data 
revealed that students may be connected in ways that are different than we may anticipate; there may be 
pedagogical options that remain underutilized (Egbert, 2010).  In this light, educators have a 
responsibility to deconstruct hegemonic practices and work towards emancipatory educational practices 
(McLaren, 1994). This includes challenging their own conceptualizations as well as the larger societal 
contexts within which they operate.  
CALL teachers, whose primary responsibility is to teach language, recognize that CALL can open the 
world to students. While many students know how to use the available technology, they may not utilize it 
fully to both consume and produce language in authentic ways. Technological skills can transfer to 
multiple languages, providing students with the tools to counter hegemonic practices and work towards 
emancipation if they so choose. In this study based in Azerbaijan, students used technology to access 
various forms of information. In countries that have controlled media environments, technology may 
afford students access to external information. However, English-based media sources impose their own 
hegemonies and agendas. Therefore students must be taught to be critical consumers of information. 
Currently, teaching plans by the instructors at University A are moving towards a radio journalism project 
through which students and teachers will resist local hegemonic practices. Students will conduct 
interviews and write essays about their experiences as young women or men in Azerbaijan, with the goal 
of broadcasting them via radio throughout the country. They will challenge classroom-based 
instructor/learner relationships as the students will also be considered knowers, which means that they 
will use language to write, edit, and produce authentic materials based on their own experiences instead of 
being passive recipients of information. Depending on the content of their essays, they could challenge 
other hegemonies and forms of oppression publicly via radio. The administration at University A has 
given its support to the project although it will not provide any materials. To make the project a reality, 
the instructors have already garnered the support of other organizations who will contribute such tools as 
voice recorders. By seeking support for the project outside the university context, the instructors will 
Cara Preuss and Carolyn Morway Caught in the Web 
 
Language Learning & Technology 98 
disrupt power relationships and practices currently in place, especially those that relate to finances. 
However, in so doing, the instructors will simultaneously uphold the status quo by remaining complicit in 
practices that allow those in power at the universities to decline to fund educational activities or make 
materials available and/or accessible.  
The outcomes of the radio journalism project are unknown. Time will tell what the consequences will be, 
both positive and negative, of implementing alternative teaching approaches that challenge practices and 
the status quo of current power relationships. This is an area rich for future research. As we proceed, we 
remember Freire’s belief that transformative education must take place in true solidarity with oppressed 
peoples and through meaningful praxis (2000). 
 
APPENDIX. Student Questionnaire 
Sorğu #___________ (zəhmət olmasa, respondentin adını qeyd ETMƏYİN)  
 Birini qeyd edin: 
Kişi və ya qadınsınız? Kişi Qadın 
Sizin mobil telefonunuz (-larınız) 
varmı? 
Bəli Xeyr 
Siz hansı tariff paketindən istifadə 
edirsiniz: 
Sim Kart Aylıq abunəçi 
Evinizdə internet varmı? Bəli Xeyr 
İnternet klublardan istifadə edirsinizmi? Bəli Xeyr 
Siz WAP saytlardan istufadə edirsinizmi? Bəli Xeyr 
Siz WAP saytlar yaradırsınızmı? Bəli  Xeyr 
Siz Twitter yazısını (-larını) 
izləyirsinizmi? 
Bəli         Yazının 
adı? 
Xeyr                             Bilmirəm 
Siz Twitter-ə yazı(-lar) daxil edirsinizmi? Bəli Xeyr                             Bilmirəm 
Siz SMS göndərirsinizmi? Bəli Xeyr 
 1) Sizin ən sevimli WAP-larınız hansılardır?  
2) Hansı səbəbə görə siz məhs bu WAP-ları bəyənirsiniz?  
3) Hansı səbəbə görə siz WAP-ları istifadə və/və ya yaradırsınız?  4) Siz WAP-ları hansı dil(-lərdə) oxuyursunuz?  5) Siz WAP-ları hansı dil(-lərdə) dinləyirsiniz?  6) Siz xəbərləri oxumaq məqsədilə hər hansısa bir texnoloji vasitədən istifadə edirsinizmi?  7) Texnoloji vasitələrdən istifadə etməyinizin səbəbi nədir?  
8) İstifadə etdiyiniz texnoloji vasitələrdən və onların siz tərəfindən istifadə yolları barədə bizə 
daha nə deyə bilərsiniz? 
Cara Preuss and Carolyn Morway Caught in the Web 
 
Language Learning & Technology 99 
Survey #___________ (no names please)  
 Circle one: 
Are you male or female? Male Female 
Do you have a cell phone(s)? Yes No 
Do you use: Sim Card Calling Plan 
Do you have internet at home? Yes No 
Do you use internet cafes? Yes No 
Do you use WAP sites? Yes No 
Do you create a WAP site? Yes  No 
Do you follow a Twitter feed(s)? Yes         Name? No                             I do not know 
Do you send a Twitter feed(s)? Yes No                             I do not know 
Do you send SMS messages? Yes No 
 1) What are your favorite WAPs?  
2) Why do you like these WAPs?  3) Why do you use and/or make WAPs?  4) In what language(s) do you read WAPs?  5) In what language(s) do you listen to WAPs?  6) Do you use technology to read the news?  7) What are the reasons you use technology?  
8) What else can you tell us about the technologies that you use and the ways you use 
them? 
 
NOTES 
1. An organization may be considered a non-profit due to its legal business structure, but this does not 
preclude the possibility of government funding through contracts. For example, ACCELS administers the 
Future Leaders Exchange (FLEX), which is funded by the U.S. Department of State, Bureau of 
Educational and Cultural Affairs. See http://www.americancouncils.org/program/1j/FLEX/ for more 
details. 
2. Authors and research participants were affiliated with these universities. 
3. Accessing external content through satellite TV may not be an option for citizens in the future as 
government officials plan to forcefully remove the dishes and move to digital technologies which they 
can better control (Forrester, n.d.) 
4. The start of the 2011-2012 school year was pushed back by government officials (from September 15 
to September 1) so that the school year would end earlier than the previous year, in time for Azerbaijan to 
Cara Preuss and Carolyn Morway Caught in the Web 
 
Language Learning & Technology 100 
host the Eurovision Song Contest in Baku in 2012. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Cara Preuss earned her Ph.D. from Washington State University. She has studied six languages and has 
worked developing language and literacy among various groups in the United States and abroad for the 
last 15 years. She currently teaches and conducts fieldwork in a rural community. 
E-mail: cpreuss@wsu.edu 
Carolyn Morway is currently teaching in Azerbaijan on a U.S. government grant. She collaborates with 
professors on teaching methods and works with undergraduates on critical reading and writing skills. She 
has recently begun a radio journalism project. 
E-mail: cmorway@epic.com 
 
REFERENCES 
Abassov, S. (2011, February 23). Corruption in Azerbaijan: A mission with teeth? Retrieved from 
http://www.eurasianet.org/node/62947 
Ager, D. E. (2005). Prestige and image planning. In E. Hinkel (Ed.), Handbook of research in second 
language teaching and learning (pp. 1035–1054). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Anzaldúa, G. E. (1987). Borderlands/La frontera. San Francisco: Aunt Lute Books. 
Apple, M. (2010). Putting “critical” back into educational research. Educational Researcher, 39(2), 152–
155. 
Bogdan, R., & Biklen, S. K. (2003). Qualitative research in education: An introduction to theory and 
methods (4th ed.). Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon. 
Bruner, J. (1996). The culture of education. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Chomsky, N., & Ronat, M. (1979). Language and responsibility: Based on conversations with Mitsou 
Ronat (1st American ed.). New York: Pantheon Books. 
Committee to Protect Journalists. (2011, February 15). Attacks on the press 2010 – Azerbaijan. Retrieved 
from http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/4d5b95d8c.html 
Crawford, J. (2004). Educating English learners: Language diversity in the classroom. Los Angeles: 
Bilingual Educational Services. 
Danielsen, C. (2010, March 25). National Federation of the Blind and Blackboard to demonstrate new 
accessibility features at CSUN, retrieved from http://www.nfb.org/nfb/NewsBot.asp? 
MODE=VIEW&ID=566 
Egbert, J. (2009). Supporting learning with technology: Essentials of classroom practice. Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Pearson/Merrill/Prentice. 
Egbert, J. (2010). CALL in Limited Technology Contexts (Vol. 9). San Marcos, TX: CALICO. 
Egbert, J., & Hanson-Smith, E. (2007). CALL environments: Research, practice, and critical issues (2nd 
ed.). Alexandria, VA: TESOL. 
Feenberg, A. (2002). Transforming technology: A critical theory revisited. New York, NY: Oxford 
University. 
Cara Preuss and Carolyn Morway Caught in the Web 
 
Language Learning & Technology 101 
Ferguson, G., Pérez-Llantada, C., & Plo, R. (2011). English as an international language of scientific 
publication: A study of attitudes. World Englishes, 30(1), 41–59. 
Forrester, C. (n.d.). Azerbaijan banning sat-dishes. Retrieved from http://advanced-
television.com/index.php/2011/01/26/azerbaijan-banning-sat-dishes/ 
Freire, P. (2000). Pedagogy of the oppressed (30th anniversary ed.). New York: Continuum. 
Gardner, H. (1999). Intelligence reframed: Multiple intelligences in the 21st century. New York: Basic 
Books.  
Grumet, M. R. (1988). Bitter milk: Women and teaching. Amherst: University of Massachusetts. 
He, D., & Li, D. C. S. (2009). Language attitudes and linguistic features in the “China English” debate. 
World Englishes, 28(1), 70–89. 
hooks, b. (1994). Teaching to transgress: Education as the practice of freedom. New York: Routledge. 
Kincheloe, J. L., & McLaren, P. (2002). Rethinking critical theory and qualitative research. In Y. Zou & 
E. T. Trueba (Eds.), Ethnography and schools: Qualitative approaches to the study of education (pp. 87–
138). Boulder, CO: Rowman & Littlefield. 
Kincheloe, J. L., & McLaren, P. (2005). Rethinking critical theory and qualitative research. In N. K. 
Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.), The Sage Handbook of Qualitative Research (3rd ed., pp. 303–342). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Kramer, S. (Director), Miller, D. A. (Director), & Newberger, J. (Director) (2008). The Linguists. In S. 
Kramer, D. A. Miller & J. Newberger (Producers). USA: Ironbound Films. 
Kumashiro, K. K. (2009). Against common sense: Teaching and learning toward social justice. New 
York, NY: Routledge. 
Lange, J. W. (2002). Methodological concerns for non-Hispanic investigators conducting research with 
Hispanic Americans. Research in Nursing & Health, 25(5), 411–419. 
Lopez, G. I., Figueroa, M., Connor, S. E., & Maliski, S. L. (2008). Translation barriers in conducting 
qualitative research with Spanish speakers. Qualitative Health Research, 18(12), 1729–1737. 
Macedo, D., Dendrinos, M., & Gounari, P. (2003). The hegemony of English. Boulder, CO: Paradigm. 
May, S. (2005). Language policy and minority language rights. In E. Hinkel (Ed.), Handbook of research 
in second language teaching and learning (pp. 1055–1073). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
McLaren, P. (1994). Life in schools: An introduction to critical pedagogy in the foundations of education. 
New York, NY: Longman. 
Norton, B., & Toohey, K. (2004). Critical pedagogies and language learning. New York: Cambridge 
University. 
Parry, M., & Brainard, J. (2010). Colleges lock out blind students online. Chronicle of Higher Education, 
57(17), A1–A8. 
Peña, E. D. (2007). Lost in translation: Methodological considerations in cross-cultural research. Child 
Development, 78(4), 1255–1264. 
Peregoy, S. F., & Boyle, O. (2008). Reading, writing and learning in ESL: A resource book for K-12 
teachers (5th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson Education/Allyn & Bacon. 
Pinar, W. (2000). Curriculum studies: The reconceptualization. Troy, NY: Educator's International. 
Reagan, T. G., & Osborn, T. A. (2002). The foreign language educator in society: Toward a critical 
Cara Preuss and Carolyn Morway Caught in the Web 
 
Language Learning & Technology 102 
pedagogy. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Reporters Without Borders. (2011, January 4). Internet censors move into top gear in response to 
widespread unrest. Retrieved from http://en.rsf.org/tunisia-internet-censors-move-into-top-04-01-
2011,39213.html 
Rogers, C. & Freiberg, H. J. (1994). Freedom to learn (3rd ed.). New York: Merrill. 
Saavedra, C. M. (2011). De-academizing early childhood research: Wanderings from a Chicana feminist 
researcher. Journal of Latinos and Education, 10(4), 1–13. 
Said, E. (1994). From orientalism. In W. Chrisman (Ed.), Colonial discourse and post-colonial theory 
(pp. 132–149). New York: Columbia University. 
Scheurich, J. J., & Young, M. D. (1997). Coloring epistemologies: Are our research epistemologies 
racially biased? Educational Researcher, 26(4), 4–16. 
Sonntag, S. K. (2003). The local politics of global English: Case studies in linguistic globalization. 
Lanham, MD: Lexington Books. 
UNESCO Institute for Statistics. (n.d.). UIS Statistics in Brief. Retrieved from 
http://stats.uis.unesco.org/unesco/TableViewer/document.aspx?ReportId=121&IF_Language=eng&BR_C
ountry=380&BR_Region=40505 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press. 
