Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol16num1/emerging.pdf 
February 2012, Volume 16, Number 1 
pp. 1–9 
 
Copyright © 2012, ISSN 1094-3501 1 
EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES 
DIGITAL VIDEO REVISITED: STORYTELLING, CONFERENCING, 
REMIXING 
Robert Godwin-Jones 
Virginia Commonwealth University 
Five years ago in the February, 2007, issue of LLT, I wrote about developments in digital video of 
potential interest to language teachers. Since then, there have been major changes in options for video 
capture, editing, and delivery. One of the most significant has been the rise in popularity of video-based 
storytelling, enabled largely by innovations in video production and distribution. Another major shift has 
been the greater array of options for capturing video on inexpensive camcorders, built-in webcams, and, 
especially, mobile phones. This has in turn enabled new possibilities for video conferencing. Finally, the 
greater availability of video-capable devices and options for video sharing has led to an ever increasing 
presence of video alongside text and images in all manner of Internet-based publishing. 
NEW DEVICES, NEW USES 
In the 2007 column I wrote about the competing standards for high-definition optical discs, HD DVD and 
Blu-ray. Blu-ray won that battle soon after, but has been something less than a success in supplanting 
traditional DVDs. Video producers and packagers have largely ignored the capabilities that the network 
connection and much larger storage capacity of Blu-ray enables, including multiple camera angles, easy 
access to auxiliary materials, or client/server and peer-to-peer networking. The potential of Blu-ray Java 
Interactivity (BD-J) remains largely untapped. This past year saw the release of Easy3D BD-J, an 
authoring/editing system which allows standard Blu-ray discs to register and display 3-D graphics, when 
available. One of the other much-hyped arrivals five years ago were handheld HD (high-definition) 
cameras, which record either on miniDV tapes or on miniDVD and are capable of showing 1080i 
resolution video. These cameras at the time were prohibitively expensive; newer versions are available 
but still at prices starting at 300 to 400 USD. Today, sales of such high-end camcorders pale in 
comparison to the number of smaller devices capable of recording video. Particularly popular have been 
the Flip video cameras, which Cisco earlier this year announced would end production. The Flip Ultra, 
introduced in late 2007, has been consistently the best-selling camcorder on Amazon.com, selling for 
around 150 USD. The Flip camera has proven to be popular as well in education, with its simple controls 
and low-cost making it ideal for student video projects. 
Given its popularity, it seems possible that the Flip might have continued life after Cisco. But today it 
faces increased competition from the video capabilities on many mobile phones. The quality of video 
recording on phones varies greatly, from grainy, choppy video on basic models to smooth, high definition 
video on higher end smartphones. The iPhone 4S, for example, can capture video at 1080p resolution, and 
features image stabilization, excellent lowlight shooting, and sophisticated autofocusing. Android-based 
phones also feature excellent video capabilities. The maximum length of video depends on the phone’s 
memory capacity, but could be considerable on many newer phones. Phones still cannot match the quality 
and features of dedicated camcorders, but their small size and constant availability trumps such 
considerations for many people. Ease of transfer is another selling point, with the ability not only to 
transfer through USB or Wi-Fi to a computer, but also directly to upload the video to sites such as 
YouTube, or to send it by email or text messaging. 
The greatly expanded availability of video recording today points to a general trend in the use of video, 
away from professionally produced video using high-end equipment to more affordable and casual 
production and use. Anyone browsing YouTube sees immediate confirmation of that trend. It is evident as 
well in the use of video in language learning. I’m not aware of any language learning applications which 
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Digital Video Revisited 
 
Language Learning & Technology 2 
take advantage of the advanced capabilities of Blu-ray video. On the other hand, there are no end of 
examples of projects using basic video technology. In particular, student-created video projects abound. 
The American Hebrew Academy, for example, used Flip video cameras to improve Hebrew language 
instruction. The description of their experience is, I believe, largely typical. Initial reaction to the video 
projects was disappointment over the relatively poor quality of the video and audio. But the teachers who 
participated in the project gradually came to the awareness that professional-level quality was not 
necessary for the project to be successful and to reach its goal of improved language learning. They also 
discovered that shorter videos, limiting in their case student videos to a maximum length of two minutes, 
were more practical and efficient. They also discouraged extensive editing of student videos. The results 
showed improved vocabulary retention (their primary goal), as well as enhanced student engagement in 
learning Hebrew.  
A student video project for learning Russian points to some other important components of effective use 
of video in classroom settings (Nikitina, 2011). Students collaborated in small groups and were given 
clear outcomes for the projects in terms of language use (target language only, comprehensible to all 
students), content (topics and vocabulary from the course syllabus), and participation (all members of the 
groups to appear and speak). Most teachers are likely to echo this emphasis on giving clear instructions 
for such projects, which can otherwise become amorphous. Another prerequisite for successful student 
video projects is the preparatory work needed before the students start shooting any video. This may 
entail some instruction and training in the use of the equipment and software. Most likely it will also 
require linguistic preparation, introducing or reviewing vocabulary, phrases, or structures students may 
need for their projects. The pre-production work will probably center around writing a script to be used in 
the video, although, depending on the proficiency level of the students, the dialog or content might 
instead be prepared orally and rehearsed. To help generate ideas for dialogs and scripts, one author 
suggests a number of possible group games (Dal, 2010). In fact, the interactions within the working 
groups can be as valuable a part of the learning experience as actually creating the video. The same study 
lists a number of possible types of video-based projects, including a photo story (video built around 
images using a program such as Microsoft Photo Story 3), short presentations (students introducing 
themselves or discussing briefly a topic), interviews, sketches, mini documentaries, or dramatizations. No 
matter what the content, the process of preparing for, shooting, and then collectively viewing and 
discussing the video provides a nice opportunity for task-based, student-centered language learning.  
The kind of student videos used depends in part on student proficiency levels and on the language 
learning goals for the project. Video use in the classroom has traditionally targeted development of 
listening comprehension skills, but student-created videos may involve considerable writing and speaking 
as well. One study, in which ESL activities centered around a feature film, saw improved listening 
comprehension, but also improvement in working with targeted grammatical structures (Wilcox, 2009). 
One of the additional desired outcomes in that project was cross-cultural understanding, which the study 
reports, was communicated effectively through the film and the associated learning activities. This was 
also a goal in a study with intermediate level Japanese learners who created video projects (Goulah, 
2007). In this case, the goal was to create within the students a general awareness of cultural issues 
(global political conflicts, environmentalism) and more specifically of Japan’s role in international 
concerns. The student groups in this model were instructed to use the target language exclusively, both in 
video preparation and production. This came with the added benefit of students learning specific 
vocabulary associated with video production, something appropriate to higher-level language learners. 
The author also discusses the benefits of video in having students learn about gestures and body language 
in the target culture. This is an area in which there does not seem to have been recently much research 
activity, but gestures are important from both a cultural and communicative perspective. I remember 
fondly working with an excellent videodisc (now on DVD) on this topic, “In the German Body” by 
Carolyn Fidelman, which students found both enjoyable and informative. 
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Digital Video Revisited 
 
Language Learning & Technology 3 
Around the time videodiscs were being used, the first computer-connected cameras were becoming 
available. Particularly popular was the Connectix QuickCam, which was ball-shaped and connected 
through a serial port, later through USB. Today, webcams are often built into laptops or monitors. Video 
compression algorithms have come a long way since the days of CUSeeMe and its 15 frames a second. 
Better video codecs (a portmanteau of “compressor-decompressor”) and faster networks allow 
applications like Skype to have moved from audio-only conferencing to video, not only on desktops but 
on mobile devices as well. For language learning this has enabled video-enhanced tandem learning, a 
significant enhancement over the previous text or audio exchanges. Free videoconferencing programs like 
Skype, Oovoo, or MSN Live Messenger offer more than just video chat capability; they also feature some 
combination of whiteboards, file sharing, webcam recording, video-messaging, and desktop sharing. 
Increasingly, they also include links to social networking sites. Commercial conferencing products such 
as WebEX, Adobe Connect, or Wimba Live Classroom offer additional features and better video quality. 
There are also a number of web-meeting applications like Yugma or Vyew, which can also be used for 
video chat.  
DIGITAL STORYTELLING 
Another indicator of the trend towards personal videos created with lower-end desktop software is the 
emergence of digital storytelling. What is designated with this term is normally something more than a 
quickly slapped together YouTube video. Rather, what this entails is a more involved and thoughtful 
process, in which the creator narrates a deeply personal story with the help of video or a series of still 
images. The length of the video varies but tends to be fairly short, 3 to 5 minutes. The stories are usually 
drawn directly from personal experiences and come with considerable emotional investment. This is, in 
fact, one of the benefits of digital storytelling for language learning, namely that it is not just a class 
assignment but links into students’ real lives, an important element of effective task-based language 
learning. The rising popularity of digital storytelling in the last five years may be tied in part to the 
availability now of a technological infrastructure that makes these kinds of projects much more practical, 
from inexpensive video recording and widely available video editing (iMovie for the Mac, Movie Maker 
for Windows), to free storage and delivery through YouTube or one of the other video collector sites. The 
phenomenon might also reflect the need in our fractured real-life communities to find connections 
through online sharing, just as we do through Facebook or other sites of social gathering and exchange. 
There are many resources for digital storytelling on the Web; particularly useful for educational purposes 
is the digital storytelling Web site created at the University of Houston. Another important resource is the 
San Francisco bay area based Center for Digital Storytelling, which originated the concept. In the classic 
process outlined by the Center, the first step is to present a potential digital story to a small group (a 
“story circle”) as a kind of try out and opportunity to gather suggestions (or go back to the drawing 
board). Next is storyboarding, planning out the sequencing and narration of the story and gathering the 
resources to be used (audio, images, video). Resources for the story can come from online sources such as 
Flickr for images or YouTube for video, or may be drawn from self-created media. Once all the materials 
are collected, the author writes a script and works out the mechanics of telling the story including timing 
and transitions. Audio editing software (such as Audacity or GarageBand) is used to record the narrative. 
The story can be read from a script or narrated freely. As in presentations, the more natural the speech, the 
better, so using notes is preferred to reading. Normally the author will personally narrate the story, 
although other voices may be included. Usually a music soundtrack will be playing in the background. 
The narrative and music are mixed with the video, alongside any still images and titles using desktop 
video editing software. The saved digital file is then posted to the Web for sharing. Examples can be 
viewed from the University of Houston Web site, or from the Center for Digital Storytelling. Sample 
digital stories highlight global citizenship, the author’s Vietnamese roots, or a study abroad experience. 
The digitales site features stories grouped in a number of categories including docudramas, family history, 
and personal expression. Examples of stories created in Spanish by U.S. high school students are also 
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Digital Video Revisited 
 
Language Learning & Technology 4 
available online. Marco Torres has posted student videos in English and Spanish, such as one about a 
student’s Latino neighborhood. Rudolf Raward authored a digital story hosted on YouTube in the Panau 
language of Papua New Guinea. This is part of the Enduring Voices project from National Geographic, 
which uses digital stories and other strategies to help save endangered languages.  
Clearly such projects can be quite demanding in terms of technology (video/audio editing, titles creation, 
music synchronization) and require a significant investment of time and energy. If used in educational 
settings, production values are likely to be reduced significantly. Judith Rance-Rooney (2009) in her 
assessment of digital storytelling for language learning cautions against overemphasizing the technical 
side of the process, suggesting concentrating instead on the essence of the process—a compelling story 
engagingly narrated. Storytelling projects can be an effective means of documenting language 
proficiency. They can show both students’ ability in writing and in formal, rehearsed speaking. Rance-
Rooney has found that the process can be intensely engaging to learners and can be a way to empower 
normally shy students. Virtually all accounts of the use of digital storytelling in education emphasize how 
highly motivating it can be to students. It also takes advantage of students’ use of online social sharing 
and interest in video. It’s not surprising that a number of authors have pointed to the use of digital 
storytelling as a helpful step in the direction of autonomous language learning (Stanley & Dillingham, 
2011; Hafner & Miller, 2011).  
To be effective in this medium, students need to stretch the boundaries of their language ability. As one 
study points out, students have little trouble talking about everyday topics such as home, university life, 
or travel, but often have considerable difficulty expressing emotion or voicing opinions (Hayes & Itani-
Adams, 2011). Effective transitions between sentences or ideas tend to be problematic for language 
learners as well. The kind of language and structure needed in storytelling move students from textbook 
to real-life language. According to a study by Hafner and Miller, an important motivating factor for video 
projects is the awareness that students are writing for a real audience who will view the video, not just for 
their professor. Posting the videos on YouTube or making them available in an open personal portfolio 
can serve that purpose. Unfortunately, as Hafner and Miller point out, “it is not uncommon in educational 
settings for teachers to hide students’ work behind a protective firewall within an institutional intranet or 
learning management system. Such practices, understandable as they are, make it impossible for students 
to interact with a wider audience, and may therefore bring the meaningfulness of the coursework into 
question” (p. 81). This is the same issue that can arise when student portfolios are created within a closed 
system such as Blackboard. 
In addition to using desktop media editing software for authoring digital stories, there are an increasing 
number of Web sites which provide on-line story creation. Many of these such as Little Bird Tales, 
Storybird or Grabba Beast are designed for elementary or middle school students. Others have a special 
capability or a particular focus, such as the 3-D capability of Stage’D!, the historical orientation of 
Primary Access, or the art history emphasis of Picture A Story. Storyjumper features the option of 
producing a bound print copy of your story, Bitstrips enables creation of a personal comic strip. Other 
sites offer an array of tools or options. Creaza, for example, is a suite of tools that include mind-mapping, 
cartooning, as well as audio and video editing. There are a number of websites which have reviewed 
storytelling tools and software, including the AASL list of best educational tools, the iLearn annotated 
list, Digital Storytelling by Chris Smith, and a survey by Danny Maas of web-based tools. One of the 
more recent developments in this area has been the emergence of storytelling authoring apps for tablets, 
especially for the iPad. A site put together by Apple Distinguished Educators provides information and 
resources for the iPad. One teacher has written on his experiences with the Story Patch app with his 
students. Apple has released iPad versions of both GarageBand and iMovie and recently introduced 
iBooks Author (Mac only), and easy-to-use tool for creating interactive e-books for the iPad.  
VoiceThread is a collaborative audio authoring tool which allows users to start a story, which can then be 
continued by others through text, voice, or video. The ability to have online users participate in or 
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Digital Video Revisited 
 
Language Learning & Technology 5 
comment on a story is sometimes referred to as Web 2.0 Storytelling. This kind of process is familiar 
from YouTube, where comments in text or video formats are common. One of the better-known examples 
is the lonelygirl15 series of videos which purported to portray the life of an adolescent girl, but in fact 
were scripted and performed by an actress. The popularity of the videos resulted in a host of comments, 
blog posts, response videos, and parodies. Eventually, the lonelygirl15 videos became part of a complex 
story involving a secret evil organization. Subsequently, there were international spin-offs in Poland and 
Italy. A series of still images formed the starting point for “I found a digital camera in the woods,” which 
invited readers to add a comment, interpret the pictures, and continue the story. Video remixes fit into this 
category as well, such as movie trailer recuts, in which the creator offers a totally different take on a 
classic movie by re-arranging the scenes or adding a new audio track. Scary Mary, for example, features 
Mary Poppins as the major character in a horror movie. 
EMBEDDED VIDEO 
One of the capabilities of digital video being increasingly used is the ability to embed video clips on a 
Web page, which also may contain text, images, JavaScript-based interactivity, or audio clips. 
Commercial web-based language learning sites use this kind of multimodal approach (Yabla, for 
example), as do many language teachers engaged in distance learning. Some have used the Victory 
Author system from Penn State for this purpose. For language teachers, the most common rationale for 
embedding video is to offer learners help in comprehending video, through annotations, dictionary 
lookups, notes, or comprehension questions. YouTube pioneered the kind of easy copy and paste embed 
that is now ubiquitous on the Web for sharing and incorporating video clips. 
The flexibility of embedded video allows useful pedagogical adaptations of video clips, such as muting 
the audio, displaying or hiding the video, or calling up transcripts, or partial transcripts, on demand. With 
fairly basic JavaScript, it is possible today to create a Web page with such features, that in the past would 
have required considerable programming. One of the other useful functions is the ability to hide or show 
captions or subtitles. In fact, there are quite a few free and commercial tools for adding subtitles to videos, 
with annotated lists available online for Windows and for Macs. Tools are available to help in creating 
video transcripts, such as Transana and HyperTranscribe, available for both Mac and Windows platforms. 
Some transcription tools, such as Express Scribe, work with speech-to-text programs to generate 
transcripts automatically, although the results may vary considerably. This is true as well of the 
transcribing/captioning feature now in YouTube, which also allows the option of manually editing the 
generated text file. The captions can also be translated on-the-fly into over 50 languages, using Google 
Translate. 
A recent article in this journal on the use of captioning offers good insights into the issues surrounding 
captioning, or same language titles, which are similar to those involved in using first language titles for 
second language film (Winke, Gass, & Sydorenko, 2010). The study found that captioning can be useful 
for learners at all levels, but videos need to be carefully selected according to learners’ language 
proficiency. Another finding of the study was that the utility of captioning varies according to the target 
language. For some languages, displaying the captions the first time the video is shown proved to be most 
effective for helping comprehension, whereas for others, it was better to wait until a subsequent viewing. 
The study also showed that learners of languages using a different alphabet from their own particularly 
profited from the use of captioning. For speakers of European languages, for example, captioning video in 
Arabic and Chinese was particularly helpful. Deciphering word boundaries was greatly aided through 
captioning. As is the case with webcams, it would be useful to have more studies analyzing different uses 
of captioning and subtitling. Of particular usefulness are studies such as Winke, Gass, and Sydorenko’s 
which take into account different proficiency levels and a variety of languages.  
Video embedded in a Web page can be accessed through JavaScript and HTML. Until recently the video 
was most likely to be a Flash movie, which can be JavaScript-enabled if the Flash file was set up to 
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Digital Video Revisited 
 
Language Learning & Technology 6 
permit that kind of interactivity. In the 2007 column I highlighted the rise of Flash video, which had 
replaced QuickTime and Windows Media Video as the format of choice for Web delivery. This was 
evident in YouTube’s use of streaming Flash. Now, however, YouTube videos are also available in the 
HTML 5 friendly H.264 format, one of the codecs of MPEG-4. Flash has been losing favor in large part 
because it is not supported on any of Apple’s popular mobile devices. A December, 2011, study found 
that 80% of the video on the Web today is available for HTML 5 playback. Adobe has recently 
announced that it is discontinuing development of the mobile version of Flash. One benefit of HTML 5 
video is that it does not require a browser plug-in like Flash but is directly incorporated into the HTML of 
the Web page (using the new <video> tag), which makes targeting and manipulating it through JavaScript 
easier and more powerful. 
OUTLOOK: MORE REMIXING, MORE INTERACTIVITY 
The 2007 column discusses the then recent popularity of YouTube, for both general use and for educators. 
YouTube in language learning was the topic of an LLT column by Joseph Terantino in last year’s 
February issue. YouTube continues to be a rich resource for educators, particularly with the recent arrival 
of YouTube for educators. One aspect of YouTube, however, that usually generates scant attention among 
educators is the mashup or remix culture in which the site’s videos play a significant role. Users combine 
media, by, for example, adding alternate soundtracks to clips from feature films. Until it was removed for 
copyright reasons, a Hitler scene from the movie Downfall was a YouTube sensation, with multiple 
alternative soundtracks, using Hitler’s rant to comment on all kinds of issues. Conversely, users will 
create slideshows, image montages, or home videos to accompany commercially released songs. 
Sometimes what shows up on YouTube is a very personalized and customized mix of media from 
commercial sources and personal collections. Such videos drive copyright holders and their lawyers to 
distraction, but by and large the younger generation sees no problem with incorporating in this way 
copyright protected material, as long as it’s not for personal gain or advancement. This explains the rather 
bizarre comment often attached to uploaded videos on YouTube, that “no copyright infringement is 
intended.” Of course, such a statement in no way exonerates copyright violators, but it tends to highlight 
the very different perspective on copyright of the “digital natives.” While some educators are likely to 
bemoan this attitude, it may be, as one commentator noted, on its way to becoming the majority view 
once this generation reaches maturity. Either way, it is important for educators to take note of such 
developments, as we seek ways to tie the formal learning environment to students’ real lives. 
From a language learning perspective, one can envision creating similar kinds of “bridging” activities to 
those described by Thorne and Reinhart (2008) as a means of leveraging student investment in remix 
culture. Just as Thorne and Reinhart advocate analyzing student language used in another kind of modern 
hybrid, fanfiction, the same could be done for videos, inviting students to analyze language aspects of 
online videos, including language registers, vocabulary usage, unusual collocations, and so on. One of the 
intriguing aspects of digital storytelling is the combination it provides of traditional literacies (writing, 
narrating) with new literacies (online search, video editing). Having students engage in digital storytelling 
can make a considerable contribution to the multimodal literacy needed in today’s culture. 
For many in today’s youth culture, a compelling kind of online experience is what is known as interactive 
storytelling. Rather than having a set, predetermined, linear storyline, interactive storytelling incorporates 
game elements (3-D avatars, text-to-speech animation) to create an open ended narrative in which, as in 
computer games, the user controls the action and the narrative. In such stories, virtual, annotated 
characters interact with each other and with one or more real users, who type replies or directions. A 
recent study discusses different approaches to offering interactive digital stories for language learning, 
such as the graphic editing interface in Cyranus or Scenejo or the spreadsheet-like interface of Thespian 
(Müller, Iurgel, Otero, & Massler, 2010). In any case, this kind of media requires programming ability 
and a much more significant investment in time than linear storytelling. Interactive storytelling is not for 
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Digital Video Revisited 
 
Language Learning & Technology 7 
everyone, but it is certainly something that can be of great potential interest to an enthusiastic video game 
playing generation. 
 
REFERENCES 
Dal, M. (2010). Digital video production and task based language learning. Ráðstefnurit Netlu - 
Menntakvika 2010, 1–13. Retrieved from http://netla.khi.is/menntakvika2010/alm/021.pdf 
Goulah, J. (2007). Village voices, global visions: Digital video as a transformative foreign language 
learning too. Foreign Language Annals, 40(1), 62–78. 
Hafner, C. A., & Miller, L. (2011). Fostering learner autonomy in English for science: A collaborative 
digital video project in a technological learning environment. Language Learning & Technology, 15(3), 
68–86. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2011/hafnermiller.pdf 
Hayes, C., & Itani-Adams, Y. (2011). Digital storytelling and student-centered Japanese language 
learning [Abstract]. Canberra Langfest 2011. Retrieved from http://langfest.anu.edu.au/ 
index.php/als/alaa-alanz/paper/view/6121 
Müller, W., Iurgel, I., Otero, N., & Massler, U. (2010). Teaching English as a second language utilizing 
authoring tools for interactive digital storytelling. ICIDS’10 Proceedings of the third joint conference on 
Interactive digital storytelling, 222–227. 
Nikitina, L. (2011). Creating an authentic learning environment in the foreign language classroom. 
International Journal of Instruction, 4(1), 33–45. 
Rance-Rooney, J. (2009). Digital storytelling for language and culture learning. Essential Teacher, 5(1), 
29–31. Retrieved from http://connect.nwp.org/sites/default/files/file_file/Judith_Rance-
Roney_Digital_Storytelling.pdf 
Stanley, N., & Dillingham, B. (2011, February). Making learners click with digital storytelling. Language 
Magazine. Retrieved from http://languagemagazine.com/?page_id=1684 
Thorne, S., & Reinhart, J. (2008). “Bridging activities,” new media literacies, and advanced foreign 
language proficiency. CALICO Journal, 25(3), 558–572. 
Wilcox, K. (2009). The impact of student beliefs on the effectiveness of video in developing cross-
cultural competence. CALICO Journal, 27(1), 91–100. 
Winke, P., Gass, S., & Sydorenko, T. (2010). The effects of captioning videos used for foreign language 
listening activities. Language Learning & Technology, 14(1), 66–87. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol14num1/winkegasssydorenko.pdf 
 
RESOURCE LIST 
Digital Video and Language Learning 
•  Digital Video in the Language Classroom 
•  Improving Hebrew Language Learning through Video 
•  Digital Storytelling for Language and Culture Learning  
•  Flip Video - Wikipedia 
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Digital Video Revisited 
 
Language Learning & Technology 8 
•  Face-to-Face Project 
•  Yabla  
•  Victory Author  
Digital Storytelling  
•  Digital Storytelling 
•  Center for Digital Storytelling 
•  The Educational Uses of Digital Storytelling University of Houston 
•  VCU-CTE-Making-Learning-Visible - Digital Storytelling 
•  Flickr: Tell a story in 5 frames (Visual story telling) 
•  Digital Stories of Deep Learning 
•  Digital stories in the ESL classroom 
•  Historias Digitales MHS 
•  Web-based Digital Storytelling Tools & Online Interactive Resources: Danny Maas 
•  iLearn Technology: Digital storytelling 
•  iLearn Technology - 31 of My Favorite Digital Storytelling Sites 
•  Digital Storytelling: Free ESL Materials 
•  BBC - Wales - A Guide to Digital Storytelling 
•  Educational Uses of Digital Storytelling 
•  Digital Storytelling ESL 
•  Storyboard Template 
•  Digital Storytelling for Language and Culture Learning 
•  Videos from Marco Torres 
iPad Storytelling 
•  Authoring Content Directly on the iPad | UX Magazine 
•  ePortfolios for Learning: iPad Authoring Advances 
•  StoryKeepers - iPad StoryTelling APPS 
•  Digital Storytelling with the iPad 
•  Options for Recording Stories on the iPad: Story Patch 
Literacies and Remix Culture 
•  No Copyright Intended - Waxy.org 
•  The Generational Divide in Copyright Morality - NYTimes.com 
•  No copyright infringement intended 
•  Web 2.0 Storytelling: Emergence of a New Genre (EDUCAUSE Review) 
Robert Godwin-Jones Emerging Technologies: Digital Video Revisited 
 
Language Learning & Technology 9 
•  Digitally Speaking / Voicethread 
•  web2storytelling - home 
•  I found a digital camera in the woods 
•  lonelygirl15 - Wikipedia 
•  Scary Mary Mashup Movie Trailer 
•  HTML5 Based Video Availability 
Software: Storytelling 
•  Audacity, GarageBand, iMovie, Movie Maker 
•  PicLits.com - Create a PicLit 
•  ZooBurst 
•  Myths and Legends from E2BN 
•  Picture A Story 
•  Storybird - Collaborative storytelling 
•  VoiceThread - Group conversations around images, documents, and videos 
•  Stage’D! 
•  My StoryMaker: Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh 
•  Welcome to Fotobabble - Talking Photos 
•  Home - Creaza Education 
Software: Video Annotation  
•  InqScribe Transcription Software 
•  Mac Subtitling Software Round-up 
•  Best free software for making video subtitles 
•  Universal Subtitles: Add Subtitles to YouTube videos 
•  Download free Movie Subtitles Searcher by OpenSubtitles 
•  Transcription Tools 
•  Transana 
•  HyperTranscribe 
•  Express Scribe 
•  Adding and Editing captions / subtitles - YouTube Help 
•  EnhancED A Look at YouTube’s Automatic Captioning Features 
