Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2012/emerging.pdf 
October 2012, Volume 16, Number 3 
pp. 1–9 
 
Copyright © 2012, ISSN 1094-3501 1 
EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES 
ROBOT ASSISTED LANGUAGE LEARNING  
Jeonghye Han, Cheongju National University of Education 
Along with the rapid development of information and communication technologies, educators are trying 
to keep up with the dramatic changes in our electronic environment. These days mobile technology, with 
popular devices such as iPhones, Android phones, and iPads, is steering our learning environment 
towards increasingly focusing on mobile learning or m-Learning. Currently, most interfaces employ 
keyboards, mouse or touch technology, but some emerging input-interfaces use voice- or marker-based 
gesture recognition. In the future, one of the cutting-edge technologies likely to be used is robotics. 
Robots are already being used in some classrooms and are receiving an increasing level of attention. 
Robots today are developed for special purposes, quite similar to personal computers in their early days. 
However, in the future, when mass production lowers prices, robots will bring about big changes in our 
society. In this column, the author focuses on educational service robots. Educational service robots for 
language learning and robot-assisted language learning (RALL) will be introduced, and the hardware and 
software platforms for RALL will be explored, as well as implications for future research.  
ROBOTS: ANTHROPOMORPHISM OF THE MEDIA  
We have seen the evolution of various media, from the one-way mass media TV, to computers with 
enhanced interactivity and personalized services. With the proliferation of computers, computer-aided 
instruction (CAI) has been in the limelight in various instructional design theories since the 1970s. The 
advent of the World Wide Web and Internet has changed CAI into web-based instruction, and with the 
extensive use of mobile devices and tablet PCs, various language-learning applications based on m-
Learning are emerging in the market (Godwin-Jones, 2011).  
Since the mid-2000s, anthropomorphized robots in various forms have been developed, with faces, arms, 
and mobile devices or tablet interfaces attached to their chests, as shown in Figure 1. These robots are a 
type of anthropomorphized media, merging mobile information technology (IT) and robotics. 
 
Figure 1. IROBIQ, from http://www.irobibiz.com/. 
 
Jeonghye Han Emerging Technologies: RALL 
 
Language Learning & Technology 2 
These robots not only have a tablet interface but are also capable of autonomous movement, visual 
recognition through a camera, voice recognition through a microphone, and physical interaction based on 
various sensors, such as a touch sensor, infrared sensor, ultrasonic sensor, bumper sensor, or floor 
detection sensor. Computers or mobile devices also can be said to be capable of nonverbal 
communication employing cyber characters or videos. However, robots are notable in their capacity for 
nonverbal communication, such as facial expressions, gestures and actions, while coexisting with users in 
a real environment, such as the home or the classroom. Also, robots are different from computers and 
mobile devices in that they have a friendly appearance, a name, a birth story, a personality, and are 
capable of social relations. Moreover, robots with a computer display on their body can provide mobile 
services just the same as computer and mobile devices.  
EDUCATIONAL SERVICE ROBOTS  
There are mainly two types of educational robots: hands-on robots, such as LEGO MINDSTORM, and 
educational service robots, which are intelligent robots deployed into learning environments. The 
foremost purpose of hands-on robots is to promote interest and enhance creativity in STEM (science, 
technology, engineering and mathematics) education. It is argued that educational service robots, with 
their friendly appearance and physical movements, can establish interactive relationships with learners, 
particularly with children, making learning more pleasurable by increasing learners’ interest and lowering 
their affective filters (Han, 2010). The focus of this paper is educational service robots, which are 
primarily employed in the teaching of a second/foreign language at preschools, primary schools, and so 
on.  
Educational service robots as intelligent media in the teaching and learning environment are divided into 
three categories: the tele-operated type, autonomous type, and transformed type, according to the location 
of their intelligence. The tele-operated type provides the tele-presence of educational services through a 
remote control the instructor uses; the autonomous type has its own artificial intelligence; and, the 
transformed type has both tele-operation and autonomous control, and can switch between the two (Han, 
2010). Figure 2 shows a representative example for each category: VGO, ROBOVIE, and ROBOSEM, 
which are tele-operated, autonomous, and transformed, respectively. 
 
Figure 2. VGO (left), ROBOVIE (center) and ROBOSEM (right). 
Jeonghye Han Emerging Technologies: RALL 
 
Language Learning & Technology 3 
 
 
Educational service robots have started to appear in Canada, Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, and the United 
States. To take a closer look at the use of educational robots in each case, there are: Canada’s PEBBLES 
(Fels & Weiss, 2001); Japan’s ROBOVIE (Kanda, Hirano, Eaton, & Ishiguro, 2004) as a peer tutor for 
elementary English, PAPERO (NEC, 2004) for child-care, Keepon (Beatbots, 2007) as an interaction 
inducer for autistic children, and Saya (Shuster, 2010) for use in Japanese preschools; South Korea’s 
preschool teaching assistant, IROBI (Han, Jo, Kim, & Park, 2005), IROBIQ (Hyun, Kim, Jang, & Park, 
2008), primary school English teaching ROTI and ENGKEY (Yonhapnews, 2009), and primary school 
English teaching assistant, ROBOSEM (Park, Han, Kang, & Shin, 2011); Taiwan’s elementary English 
teaching assistant ROBOSAPIEN (You, Shen, Chang, Liu, & Chen, 2006); and, the United States’ 
preschool peer tutor, RUBI and QURIO (Movellan, Tanaka, Fortenberry, & Aisaka, 2005; Movellan, 
Eckhardt, Virnes, & Rodriguez, 2009), and VGO (Vgo communications, 2011) for young patients.   
Educational service robot hardware platforms 
Table 1 shows a brief description of the hardware platforms for the major education service robots.  
Table 1. Specifications of some educational service robots 
Type Name Country Role 
Height 
(cm) 
Facial 
emotion 
Moving 
parts 
Touch 
sensor 
Serving 
visual 
material 
Server 
Tele- 
presence 
ENKEY S. Korea 
native 
speaker 
100 operator none none √ N/A 
GIRAFFE USA student 
137-
176   
operator head none none N/A 
PEBBLES Canada student N/A operator hand N/A none  N/A 
ROBOSAPIEN USA 
native 
speaker 
38 none 
head, 
arms 
6 none none 
ROTI S. Korea 
native 
speaker 
122 operator head none √ none 
VGO USA student 122 operator none none none N/A 
Auto-
nomous 
KEEPON Japan peer 25 none body none none none 
PAPERO Japan 
peer 
tutor 
38 
robot’s 
own 
head 9 none √ 
ROBOVIE Japan 
peer 
tutor 
30-91 none 
head, 
arms 
11 none √ 
SAYA Japan teacher N/A 
robot’s 
own 
head, 
arms 
N/A none none 
Trans-
formed 
IROBIQ S. Korea 
teaching 
assistant 
45 
robot’s 
own 
head, 
arms 
6 √ √ 
ROBOSEM S. Korea 
native 
speaker, 
teaching 
assistant 
110 
robot’s 
own 
head, 
arms 
5 √ √ 
TIRO S. Korea 
teaching 
assistant 
110 
robot’s 
own 
head, 
arms 
none √ √ 
Note. N/A = no information from the website or papers. 
Most tele-presence robots in Table 1 feature a simple Wi-Fi video conferencing function and remote 
controlled movements. Also, to cater to the convenience of the remote controller, these robots are usually 
equipped with compulsory wheels for travel, but have no arm or head movement. They are mostly 
developed at a low-cost. Tele-presence robots are predominantly used by native speakers or English 
Jeonghye Han Emerging Technologies: RALL 
 
Language Learning & Technology 4 
teachers, and the interaction is comparatively limited since they only offer video conferencing and limited 
mobility. They can, however, sustain long-term interaction, but when there is a breakdown in the network, 
all interactions stop.  
The autonomous robots in Table 1 feature complex body and arm movement, but they are quite expensive 
for the general market and mostly used for research. Also, for the robots to interact autonomously, they 
need preprogrammed scenarios. With current artificial intelligence technology, however, seamless 
interaction is unattainable, thus the novelty effect can wear off quickly. Still, the advantage is that 
interaction is possible regardless of network problems. 
In the case of the transformed type of robots in Table 1, these robots have been developed to perform an 
assisting role rather than to interact autonomously. The teacher can control the robots by remote control 
or voice recognition, and when they are in tele-operated mode, a native speaker can control them. If 
network problems occur during the tele-operated mode, they can swiftly be switched to the autonomous 
mode. Hence interaction is always possible regardless of network stability, and continuous interaction is 
supported. 
Educational service robot software platforms 
Most operating systems for intelligent robots are based on MS Windows and Linux. Since the majority of 
robot companies own unique robot hardware and exclusive software platforms, developing robot 
applications is difficult. This has decelerated the popularization of robots and the opening up of robot 
markets. To address this predicament, the worldwide movement towards developing an integrated 
software platform started in earnest in 2000. Since then, many countries have developed their own robotic 
software platform with slightly different characteristics, such as Microsoft Robotics Developer Studio 
(Microsoft RDS), Willow Garage’s ROS (Robot Operating System), the EU’s RT CORBA-based 
standard platform OROCOS (The Open Robot Control Software), Japan’s National Institute of Advanced 
Industrial Science and Technology (AIST) driven RT middleware, and Korea’s OPRoS (Open Platform 
for Robotic Service), and so on.  
MS RDS is software oriented towards developers who are restricted to developing robot applications 
using preset robot hardware. In 2010, Willow Garage provided open source robotic software called ROS. 
ROS is engaged with a community of one hundred thousand robot developers worldwide, and from this 
foundation, various robot applications can be programmed, leading to the effective promotion and 
expansion of robot proliferation (http://www.ros.org). Recently, Willow Garage has received attention for 
having integrated their software with the Smartphone OS Android. 
These robot software platforms enable programmers to develop various applications so that robots can 
perform multiple functions. By integrating a robot’s modular features, such as voice- and sound-
recognition, face-detection and recognition, gesture- and object-recognition, synthetic speech, driving, 
space recognition, and position recognition, these software platforms enable the robot to provide various 
services. For example, in an instance of RALL service, the robot can easily look at a learner who is 
calling its name and move to a corresponding location. Most robots shown in Table 1 have their own 
robot software platforms. Efforts are being made, however, to integrate these robots to an open platform, 
such as ROS, and soon, when standardization is realized, the robot service market will rapidly expand.   
ROBOT ASSISTED LANGUAGE LEARNING (RALL) 
Currently, in most countries in Asia where English is taught as a foreign language, various instructional 
methods are being used. These include collaboration with native speakers, demonstrating and diagnosing 
pronunciation using computer- or mobile-based applications, video conferencing with native speakers, 
one-on-one native speaker tutoring, and so forth (see Figure 3). In language education, direct interaction 
with native speakers is considered the most effective way of instruction. However, when it is difficult to 
Jeonghye Han Emerging Technologies: RALL 
 
Language Learning & Technology 5 
employ native speakers, teachers can always utilize computer- or mobile-based applications. Yet, due to 
limitations in current image recognition technology, most applications based on computers or mobiles 
focus on voice-based verbal messages. 
As an alternative, video conferencing with native speakers can be considered. Video conferencing can be 
effective in demonstrating pronunciation. However, this is not popular because there are still limitations 
in pronunciation diagnosis since the native speaker needs to be close to individual pupils or the classroom 
as a whole. Recently, some after-schools programs in Korea have been conducting one-on-one native 
speaker tutoring. It is true that the educational benefits of individualized interaction are substantial, but 
there also are several drawbacks: it is costly for learners; when miscommunications occur there is no help 
available in the learner’s mother tongue; and, finally, different native speakers may be assigned to 
different classes according to their schedules and this would impede learners’ progress-tracking. 
 
Figure 3. A traditional collaborative class, a video conferencing class, and a one-on-one conference in 
Korea. 
Among the various instructional models in language learning, we should consider RALL, employing 
currently emerging robot technology. This anthropomorphized version of existing mobile devices is 
autonomous, with features such as image recognition through camera, voice recognition through 
microphone, and interaction based on various sensors. Robot-assisted learning (RAL) can be defined as 
learning assisted by robots with such features (Han, 2010). In the domain of RAL, RALL can be defined 
as targeting language learning in particular. Most robots in RALL are interlinked with instructional 
material, and can perform the role of the native speaker to interact with learners. The following scenes in 
Figure 4 show English classes being conducted with IROBIQ and ROBOSEM.  
 
Figure 4. RALL with IROBIQ (left) & RALL with ROBOSEM (right from Park, Han, Kang & Shin, 
2011). 
RALL shares the merits of the conventional collaboration model—the face-to-face, physical interaction 
with native speakers—but it is easier to recruit native speakers for tele-conferencing. Furthermore, RALL 
also has the advantage of an instruction model employing applications, by sharing instructional material 
over a TV or display device, such as a projector beam. Class activities, such as English chanting, can be 
recorded. Using radio frequency identification (RFID) tags, individual progress can be logged and 
Jeonghye Han Emerging Technologies: RALL 
 
Language Learning & Technology 6 
tracked. Figure 5 shows a sample of a RALL lesson plan. When compared to common computer-assisted 
language learning (CALL) classes, robots need to be programmed to interact with the teacher and pupils. 
Grade 3
th
 grade students on a Korean elementary school Period Formal learning 
Unit  4. Happy birthday! (3/3)  
Theme Celebrating birthday, expressing thanks  
The purpose of the lesson 
The students are able to express birthday greetings and thanks.   
The students are able to give and receive presents (cards) with birthday 
greetings. 
The students are able to make conversation, using expression of birthday 
greetings and thanks.  
 
Materials ROBOSEM, Gift-picture cards, Bracelet RFID tag  
Treatment time  40 minutes  
STEP PROCEDURE 
ROBOT 
CONTROL 
TEACHING & LEARNING ACTIVITIES 
TIME 
Intro-
duction 
Greeting 
Recognition of 
voice localization 
Teacher: Good morning everyone. 
3 mins 
Students: Good morning teacher, Kim. 
Teacher: Let's ask ROBOSEM together, ‘How are 
you?’ 
Students: How are you? 
Voice recognition 
ROBOSEM: I'm good. I'm excited today because 
today is my birthday. 
Recognition of 
voice localization 
Teacher: I've heard that today is your birthday, 
ROBOSEM. Boys and girls, let's say happy 
birthday to langbot. 
Voice recognition Students: Happy birthday ROBOSEM! 
Figure 5. A part of a RALL lesson plan using ROBOSEM. 
RELATED WORK ON RALL 
Research and development of RALL started around 2004, mainly in countries like Japan, Korea, and 
Taiwan, where English is taught as a foreign language. Japan’s ATR research international institute 
conducted research on student motivation during recess in elementary schools with ROBOVIE, a robot 
that remembers around 300 English sentences, simple everyday expressions, and recognizes 50 words 
(Kanda, Hirano, Eaton, & Ishiguro, 2004). In March 2004, Korean developer Yujin Robot announced a 
home robot IROBI, loaded with services such as reading English, photo books, and English chanting 
(Han, Jo, Park, & Kim, 2005). Han et al. (2005) studied learners’ achievements with IROBI—the 
precursor to IROBIQ—in English learning compared to computers, and the results showed IROBI to be 
more effective. In Han and Kim (2006), through a Delphi survey of elementary school teachers who have 
information technology literacy, it was found that RAL instruction is considered most appropriate for 
subjects such as English, Korean, and music, and was rated as excellent for language learning. In Taiwan, 
You, Shen, Chang, Liu, and Chen (2006) applied ROBOSAPIEN, an Infrared remote controllable toy-like 
robot manufactured by WowWee Toys, to an English classroom with five instruction models. In their 
study of preschoolers over a four-week period, Hyun, Kim, Jang, and Park (2008) showed a robot’s media 
effectiveness over computers in preschoolers’ story building, vocabulary, understanding, and word 
recognition in Korean reading activities. The RUBI/QRIO project (Movellan et al., 2005) suggested that 
English vocabulary learning efficiency was higher among preschoolers when they employed RUBI 
compared to computers (Movellan et al., 2009).   
Meanwhile, Han and Kim (2009) introduced various service types provided by the robot TIRO in 
elementary school classes, and ranked the favorites. The results suggested that among TIRO’s services, 
the ones that enhanced the relationship between children and the robot in English class were preferred. 
Jeonghye Han Emerging Technologies: RALL 
 
Language Learning & Technology 7 
The most popular service was TIRO’s praising and cheering, followed by face-to-face conversation and 
role-play with TIRO. Han (2010), based on previous studies, found that in Japan and the United States, 
robots are mostly given the role of a peer tutor, while in Korea, they are given the role of a teaching 
assistant and friend. Japanese robots provide service focusing on voice- and gesture-based interaction, 
while Korean and American robots base their service on visual instruction materials, such as Flash 
contents. It was also concluded that the subjects most suitable for RAL would be language learning, such 
as in English education, where robots are effective in inducing motivation and enhancing achievement, 
synchronizing visual contents with instruction, and playing the teaching assistant role necessary for long-
term interaction. Park, Han, Kang, and Shin (2011) designed class materials to evoke children’s 
motivation, to sustain their interaction with ROBOSEM, and to facilitate English learning. Their study 
showed meaningful results after four weeks of English classes conducted using ROBOSEM. 
CHALLENGES OF RALL 
As promising results of the educational effectiveness of RALL have appeared in numerous studies, many 
countries that teach English as a foreign language have begun to take the first step in RALL’s research 
and commercialization. Korea is one such country where RALL is in full swing, with already over 1,500 
robots employed in preschool play activities and attitude training, as well as over 30 English education 
robots currently in active use in elementary school afterschool programs. As RALL expands, there will be 
more emerging challenges for language educationalists to explore and address.  
First of all, research on the system framework of RALL is necessary. The system framework of RALL 
consists of elements such as robot hardware, robot applications and visual contents. Each element needs 
to be designed in consideration of the language learning goals. Also, not only language educationalists but 
also educational service robot developers need to conduct collaborative research on designing guidelines 
for each element and on integrating these elements to carry out RALL successfully. 
Secondly, more theoretical research on the current status of educational service robot technology, such as 
the RALL instruction model, is desirable. There needs to be consideration of how the teacher and robot 
would cooperate in the classroom and of what kind of teaching and learning model would be used in 
RALL. Both You et al. (2006) and Han and Kim (2009) have suggested several models, but a more 
specific teaching and learning model needs to be developed, reinforced with the language-learning 
experts’ perspective regarding the most suitable type of robot (tele-operated, autonomous, and 
transformed type).    
Third, more field experiments and studies on educational effectiveness are necessary to compare RALL to 
the conventional instruction methods of the multimedia program application model, native speaker 
collaboration model, and one-on-one videoconferencing model. Comparing educational effectiveness of 
such instruction models is very difficult to carry out, due to difficulties in conducting controlled 
experiments and its high cost. A Delphi survey with an expert group might be performed as an alternative. 
Fourth, research on teacher education is essential since teachers are the ones who will be installing RALL. 
We need to find out what teachers need as prior knowledge (for example, basic knowledge of robot 
hardware and software), and develop a teacher education program. Also, consideration needs to be given 
to areas of possible concern for teachers when conducting RALL, such as whether a child is becoming too 
dependent upon the robot.  
Fifth, research on various moral and technological issues arising through RALL applications are 
necessary. For example, RALL raises several problems, including: the exposure of the learning 
environment to outsiders through tele-conferencing; sharing data on class activities; students trusting a 
robot over the teacher; and the possibility of obsession with robots. Furthermore, solutions to class 
management problems, such as network breakdowns or robot hardware failure, are required.  
Jeonghye Han Emerging Technologies: RALL 
 
Language Learning & Technology 8 
 
Recently, with the emergence of an open robot software platform, robot applications enabling a variety of 
functions are being developed. Just as many people now have a personal computer, in the near future, 
personal robots (PR) may become the next paradigm-shifting tool for everyday life. Thus, as the computer 
sparked revolutionary changes in learning environments, studies needs to be conducted on how robots 
will bring about changes in education. Especially important will be the preparation of various approaches 
for RALL from the perspective of language learning and pedagogy, with a vision to evolve in tandem 
with already advanced developments in applications, programs, and services. 
REFERENCES 
Fels, D.I., & Weiss, P. (2001). Video-mediated communication in the classroom to support sick children: 
A case study. International Journal of Industrial Ergonomics, 28, 251–263. 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2011). Mobile apps for language learning. Language Learning & Technology, 15(2) 
2–11.  Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2011/emerging.pdf 
Han, J. (2010). Robot-aided learning and r-learning services.  In D. Chugo (Ed.), Human-Robot 
Interaction. Retrieved from: http://sciyo.com/articles/show/title/robot-aided-learning-and-r-learning-
services 
Han, J., Jo, M., Park, S., & Kim, S. (2005). The Educational Use of Home Robots for Children. In 
Proceedings of the 14th IEEE International Workshop on Robot and Human Interactive Communication 
(RO-MAN 2005), 378–383. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE. 
Han, J., & Kim, D. (2009). r-Learning services for elementary school students with a teaching assistant 
robot. In Proceedings of the 4
th
 ACM/IEEE Human Robot Interaction, 255–256. New York, NY: ACM 
Hyun, E., Kim, S., Jang, S., & Park, S. (2008). Comparative study of effects of language education 
program using intelligence robot and multimedia on linguistic ability of young children. Proceedings of 
the 14th IEEE International Workshop on Robot and Human Interactive Communication (RO-MAN 2008). 
Piscataway, NJ: IEEE. 
Kanda, T., Hirano, T., Eaton, D., & Ishiguro, H. (2004). Interactive robots as social partners and peer 
tutors for children: A field trial. Human-Computer Interaction, 19(1–2), 61–84. 
Movellan, J.R., Eckhardt, M., Virnes, M., & Rodriguez A. (2009). Sociable robot improves toddler 
vocabulary skills. In Proceedings of the 4
th
 ACM/IEEE Human Robot Interaction, 307–308. New York, 
NY: ACM.  
Movellan, J.R., Tanaka,F., Fortenberry, B., & Aisaka, K. (2005). The RUBI/QRIO Project: Origins, 
principles, and first steps. In Proceedings. The 4nd International Conference on Development and 
Learning, 80–86. Retrieved from http://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/DEVLRN.2005.1490948 
Park, S., Han, J., Kang, B., & Shin, K. (2011). Teaching assistant robot, ROBOSEM, in English class and 
practical issues for its diffusion. Proceedings of IEEE A Workshop on Advanced Robotics and its Social 
Impacts, http://www.arso2011.org/papers  
Shuster, R. (2012, April 1). English teaching robot comes with a cost. Korea IT Times. Retrieved from 
http://www.koreaittimes.com/story/8216/english-teaching-robot-comes-cost 
Sopher, J. (2011, February 2). Student uses telepresence robot to attend school. Retrieved from 
http://geekbeat.tv/student-uses-telepresence-robot-to-attend-school/ 
Yonhapnews. (2009, December 22). English tutoring Telepresence robot: Roti. Retrieved from 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-_wa_SZaqQU 
Jeonghye Han Emerging Technologies: RALL 
 
Language Learning & Technology 9 
You, Z., Shen, C., Chang, C., Liu, B., & Chen G. (2006). A robot as a teaching assistant in an English 
class. In Proceedings of the 6
th
 IEEE International Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies, 87–
91.  New York, NY: IEEE. 
 
RESOURCE LIST 
Robots and RALL 
IROBIQ. (2008). Yujin Robot. Retrieved from http://www.irobibiz.com/english/index.php 
KEEPON. (2007). Beatbots. Retrieved from http://beatbots.net/ 
Microsoft. (2008). Robotics Developer Studio 4.  Retrieved from http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-
us/robotics/aa731517 
NEC. (2012). Communication Robot PaPeRo. Retrieved from 
http://www.nec.co.jp/products/robot/en/index.html 
ROBOSEM. (2010). Yujin robot. Retrieved from http://www.robosem.net/ 
VGo. (2011). VGo communications. Retrieved from http://www.vgocom.com/ 
Willow Garage. (2009). Retrieved from http://www.ros.org/wiki/ 
 
