Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2012/review1.pdf 
October 2012, Volume 16, Number 3 
pp. 35–39 
 
Copyright ©   35 
REVIEW OF DECONSTRUCTING DIGITAL NATIVES 
Deconstructing Digital Natives: Young People, 
Technology, and the New Literacies 
 
Michael Thomas (Ed.) 
 
2011 
ISBN: 9780415889964 
US $ 39.95 (paperback) 
216 pp. 
 
Routledge  
New York, NY  
 
Review by Mark Evan Nelson, Deakin University, Australia 
Deconstructing Digital Natives is a volume much needed and a long time in coming: ten years, to be 
precise. This book, edited by Michael Thomas, is an unprecedented assemblage of critical scholarly 
perspectives on the digital native, a concept contraposed to the digital immigrant within Marc Prensky‘s 
bipartite formulation for ―describing the differences that many people observed, around the turn of the 
twenty-first century, between the attitudes of younger and older people regarding digital technology‖ (p. 
15) as Prensky explains in his own contributed article to this collection. In his first published discussion 
of these ideas ten years ago, a short two-part essay in 2001, Prensky identifies digital natives as ―‗native 
speakers‘ of the digital language of computers, video games, and the Internet‖ and digital immigrants as 
―[t]hose of us who were not born into the digital world but have, at some later point in our lives, become 
fascinated by or adopted many or most aspects of the new technology‖ (Prensky, pp. 1–2). Since its 
introduction a decade ago, this metaphoric distinction has penetrated seemingly every scholarly, 
professional, and even political conversation on digital technologies, youth, and education; virtually 
hundreds of thousands of pages of internet real estate are now dedicated to discussion of this particular 
―discontinuity‖ or ―singularity‖ (Prensky, 2001, p. 1). More, this and similar conceptions—a notable 
example being Tapscott‘s (1998, 2009) net generation—have incited widespread, heated debate: fervent 
support of its explanatory value in understanding the peculiarities, needs, and preferences of supposedly 
distinct younger cohorts of digitally networked cyber-citizens, as well as acerbic criticism of the 
purportedly reductive, if not also potentially harmful segregation of youth from their elders on opposing 
sides of a yawning digital generation gap, among other hotly contested positions. Deconstructing Digital 
Natives presents what is arguably the most comprehensive, nuanced treatment to date of these complex, 
impassioned debates. 
This edited volume features an insightful foreword by David Buckingham and twelve chapters, among 
whose authors are some of the most notable contributors thus far to the international scholarly 
conversation on digital natives and education. The chapters are divided into three sections, titled 
Reflecting on the Myth, Perspectives, and Beyond Digital Natives, respectively introducing and examining 
the varied interpretations and significance of Prensky‘s ideas; reporting on research that empirically 
grounds and tests the digital natives/digital immigrants formulation; and attempting to reconcile 
heretofore entrenched oppositions and move the conversation in productive new directions.  
Mark Evan Nelson                           Review of Deconstructing Digital Natives  
 
Language Learning & Technology 36 
Professor Buckingham‘s foreword is, honestly, the review I would like to have written myself. His 
concise remarks cut to the heart of the issues and problems at hand, rightly asserting for instance that 
―technologies have possibilities and limitations (or ‗affordances‘), but they do not produce social change 
in themselves‖ (p. x). Yet, he also admits the potential utility of thinking in generational terms about 
technological and social change, setting an appropriately even tone for the succeeding chapters. In 
Chapter One, Thomas examines the discourse of techno-evangelism, its implications—including the 
contagious appeal of the notions of the digital native and net generation and consequent calls for new 
pedagogical priorities—and the positions of notable ―dissenters‖ (p. 1). In so doing, he lays further 
necessary groundwork for the chapters that follow, which, Thomas explains, set out ―a number of 
research directions for future studies shown in the concerns of the contributors‖ (p. 7). 
Part One, Reflecting on the Myth, begins with Chapter Two, a version of a recent article by Marc Prensky 
himself, in which he addresses what, to his mind, have been misconceptions and exaggerations on the 
parts of his critics. Prensky then reframes his original formulation of the digital native/digital immigrant 
distinction so as to highlight the necessity of cultivating ―digital wisdom‖ (p. 20), the profit of enhancing 
natural human intellectual capacities through digital technology. Concluding Part One is Chapter Three, 
Jones‘s critical analysis of several conceptual underpinnings of the net generation and the digital 
native/digital immigrant divide (e.g., technological and generational determinism). Jones regards 
Prensky‘s updated formulation, focused on digital wisdom, as persistently deterministic: ―even though it 
moves beyond a straightforward divide between immigrants and natives, the argument retains a simple 
moral imperative: digital enhancement has to be accepted in order to succeed‖ (p. 38). Jones suggests that 
the changing ways that young people adopt and use technology are certainly worthy of attention from an 
educational perspective, but also asserts that assumptions that digital technologies might ―determine the 
outlook of an entire generation‖ (p. 43) are wrongheaded and unhelpful.  
Part Two (Perspectives) consists of Chapters Four through Ten, variously contributing empirical support 
to the process of deconstruction. Banaji‘s paper is centered on the European CivicWeb project, ―the 
largest existing cross-national study of young people, the Internet, and civic participation‖ (p. 52). 
Findings from this project suggest that any general presumption of young people being digitally 
networked, civically and politically active, and so also primed to develop digital wisdom, is misguided, 
especially in that it ―sidesteps issues of power, ideology, and privilege‖ (p. 62). In Chapter Five, 
Takahashi looks at mobile-internet use among youth in the Tokyo area and demonstrates in vivid 
ethnographic terms the inherent diversity of Japanese young people and the roles digital technologies play 
in the dynamic performance of varied individual and cultural identities, to both reproductive and 
innovative effects. Chapters Six (M. Levy and Michael) and Seven (Erstad), respectively referring to 
work in Australian and Nordic contexts, further develop what emerge as key themes in the volume: that 
young people‘s relationships to and uses of new media are both complex and diverse and that 
automatically competent—or fluent to apply Prensky‘s metaphor—use and production of digital texts 
cannot be assumed in young people, nor are such capacities well understood as yet. Kennedy and Judd, in 
Chapter Eight, review research on tertiary students‘ use of Google for information gathering, concluding 
that criticality and digital wisdom are often subordinated to expediency, ―somewhat counter-intuitively‖ 
(p. 132), the authors point out—referring to the expectation of masterful, conscious use of technologies 
that the digital native concept would evoke—putting ―more not less onus on faculty to support ‗Digital 
Native‘ students in the development of their information literacy skills‖ (ibid.). In Chapter Nine, 
recruiting Jenkins‘s participatory culture framework, Zimic and Dalin analyze the types and levels of 
participation of youth and younger adults on the Internet in relation to the participants‘ perceptions about 
their participation. The authors find that individual sense of involvement in the information society varied 
in degree according both to type of internet-enabled activity and age, suggesting that frequent use of the 
Internet does not imply a feeling of positive participation in the broader digital culture. With Chapter Ten, 
Rachael Levy brings an interesting close to Part Two inasmuch as her case studies of three primary-age 
Mark Evan Nelson                           Review of Deconstructing Digital Natives  
 
Language Learning & Technology 37 
school children both acknowledge the digital heterogeneity that other contributors have highlighted, and 
illustrate the homogenization of digital expression that may occur within educational institutions, 
frustrating the development of digital wisdom, which resonates with core arguments of Prensky, Tapscott, 
and likeminded others.  
Part Three (Beyond Digital Natives), paralleling Part One, comprises two chapters. Bennett and Maton are 
the authors of Chapter Eleven, in which they reassert and elaborate their earlier arguments (see Bennett, 
Maton, & Kervin, 2008) as to the lack of evidentiary support for Prensky‘s claims. Quite helpfully, I 
believe, these authors emphasize in this chapter the importance of ―sound and transparent research‖ (p. 
181) around these contentious issues and questions and recommend a shift in focus away from 
generational differences and effects of technologies, and toward ―studies of young people‘s experiences 
with technology‖ and ―how these are integrated into the array of contexts and practices in daily life‖ (p. 
180). In the concluding piece, Chapter Twelve, Palfrey and Gasser ask whether the term digital natives 
can, in fact, be productively reclaimed for use in moving the conversation forward. While supporting the 
critical perspectives in the preceding chapters (e.g., by roundly dismissing any technological and 
generational determinism), these authors also raise important questions about the dimensions of safety, 
privacy, and responsibility in communicating and creating with new media. ―Most important,‖ Palfrey 
and Gasser recommend to concerned readers, ―is that we share a common commitment to understanding 
of what is going on with new media practices and, in turn, that we work together to seize the opportunities 
and mitigate the challenges associated with media practices of youth and adults alike‖ (p. 201). The 
simplest advice is often the best, I believe. 
Still, one might ask if we couldn‘t have just begun with such a commonsense prescription. Why such ado 
over the digital native, which is, after all, only a metaphor? And doesn‘t the illustrative force of any 
metaphor naturally depend on its simplified comparative representation of only selected qualities of 
things and aspects of experience, as Prensky himself is quick to point out in Chapter Two?  
Reductive though such tropes may necessarily be, they may also be anything but simple, or innocuous, as 
scholars of metaphor George Lakoff, Mark Johnson, Mark Turner, and colleagues remind us. Lakoff and 
Johnson (1980) cogently demonstrate the fundamental organizing function of metaphor in human 
cognition, communication, and action, explaining in particular how so-called structural metaphors admit 
other extended meanings, or entailments, that give shape to our thoughts, language, and behavior (pp. 61–
68). The common metaphorical mapping of characteristics and functions of machines onto those of the 
human mind, for instance, has profoundly influenced educational theories and approaches, compelling 
teachers and students to think, speak, and act in terms of input and output, online processing, and the like. 
On the specific entailments of the digital immigrants metaphor, media scholar Henry Jenkins (2007) 
colorfully remarks, 
[It] tends to exaggerate the gaps between adults, seen as fumbling and hopelessly out of touch, 
and youth, seen as masterful. It invites us to see contemporary youth as feral, cut off from all 
adult influences, inhabiting a world where adults sound like the parents in the 
old Peanuts cartoons—whah, whah, whah, whah—rather than having anything meaningful to say 
to their offspring. In the process, it disempowers adults, encouraging them to feel helpless, and 
thus justifying their decision not to know and not to care what happens to young people as they 
move into the online world (n.p., italics in original). 
Jenkins‘s comments implicitly support Lakoff and Johnson‘s conclusions, that such metaphors are not 
mere illustrations or analogies. In concrete social realities, metaphors do matter. Notwithstanding 
Prensky‘s intent to usefully proffer only an intuitively persuasive ―broad generalization‖ (Chapter 2, p. 
16) and his admitted confusion over why ―so many supposedly well educated, thinking people ‗just can‘t 
take a metaphor‘‖ (p. 15), I hope that he and other so-called techno-evangelists come to see ardent 
Mark Evan Nelson                           Review of Deconstructing Digital Natives  
 
Language Learning & Technology 38 
skepticism and careful examination of that metaphor, which Deconstructing Digital Natives provides and 
invites, as healthy and necessary.  
My criticisms of this volume are few, but worth noting here. First, as persuasive as the included 
perspectives are, I think that a somewhat more balanced representation of voices might make the 
deconstructing seem a bit less like debunking, which I do not imagine was the intent. At a recent 
conference, I ran into Sue Bennett, a contributor here and co-author of one of the most widely cited 
critiques of Prensky‘s work (Bennett, Maton, & Kervin, 2008). When I expressed my admiration for that 
2008 paper, she explained how difficult it was to get the article published, having received a number of 
reviews that assessed their arguments as simply ―wrong‖ (personal communication). The problems 
associated with the digital native/digital immigrant formulation are quite evident, and the critics are 
legion; but there are other scholars who would make more supportive arguments, clearly, and they might 
also be heard. 
Two other criticisms I would are offer relate to the format of the volume itself. At certain points I felt that 
the absence of any images or figures was conspicuous, if not problematic. For instance, in Chapter Five, 
which reports on students‘ multimodal composing practices, the analysis would be much clearer and more 
cogent if the students‘ works were visible. Another issue is with the index, comprising only a sparse and 
rather random collection of terms and names, which I found particularly odd given the relatively narrow 
ranges of topics discussed and works referenced. In a volume such as this that aims to circumscribe the 
array of considerations, concepts, and contributors associated with a particular complex of issues, a more 
complete, better organized index would be helpful to the reader in making connections among the various 
positions within the conversation. 
Overall, however, Deconstructing Digital Natives does fulfill the promise of its title. It helpfully breaks 
down the assumptions, metaphors, mythology, and ―moral panic‖ (Bennett, Maton, & Kervin, 2008, pp. 
782–3) according to which relations between youth, digital technologies and education are commonly 
understood and renders sensible and comprehensible the particular value and shortcomings of the digital 
natives/digital immigrants distinction and the social and pedagogical exigencies that this and similar 
explanatory frameworks would convey. This book should be of significant interest and use to scholars, 
university students, teachers, and policy makers alike, in any area of education or communication. It 
would be most enlightening, I imagine, to all those who regard the metaphorical digital chasm between 
digital natives and digital immigrants—with tech-savvy children, teens and twenty-somethings on one 
side and their quaintly outmoded elders on the other—as somehow self-evident. 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Mark Evan Nelson is currently Lecturer in English Language and Literacy Education at Deakin 
University, Australia. He received his PhD in Language, Literacy, and Culture from the University of 
California, Berkeley, and his research investigates the semiotic, sociocultural, and pedagogical 
implications of multimodal communication, across geographic and cultural boundaries and via digital 
media technologies. 
Email: m.nelson@deakin.edu.au 
REFERENCES 
Bennett, S., Maton, K., & Kervin, L. (2008). The ―Digital Natives‖ debate: A critical review of the 
evidence. British Journal of Educational Technology, 39(5), 775–786. 
Jenkins, H. (2007). Reconsidering digital immigrants. Retrieved from http://henryjenkins.org/2007/12 
/reconsidering_digital_ immigran.html 
Mark Evan Nelson                           Review of Deconstructing Digital Natives  
 
Language Learning & Technology 39 
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Prensky, M. (2001). Digital natives, digital immigrants. On the Horizon, 9(5), 1–6. 
Tapscott, D. (1998). Growing up digital: The rise of the net generation. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Tapscott, D. (2009). Grown up digital: How the net generation is changing your world. New York: 
McGraw-Hill. 
 
