Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2012/kesslerbikowskiboggs.pdf 
February 2012, Volume 16, Number 1 
pp. 91–109 
 
Copyright © 2012, ISSN 1094-3501 91 
COLLABORATIVE WRITING AMONG SECOND LANGUAGE 
LEARNERS IN ACADEMIC WEB-BASED PROJECTS 
Greg Kessler, Dawn Bikowski, and Jordan Boggs 
Ohio University 
This study investigates Web-based, project oriented, many-to-many collaborative writing 
for academic purposes. Thirty-eight Fulbright scholars in an orientation program at a large 
Midwestern university used a Web-based word processing tool to collaboratively plan and 
report on a research project. The purpose of this study is to explore and understand the 
changing nature of collaborative writing, as it is influenced by Web-based writing 
contexts. Details of students’ writing processes and their perceptions of the collaborative 
Web-based word processing experience are explored. Findings suggest that students 
focused more on meaning than form, that their grammatical changes were overall more 
accurate than inaccurate, that they participated with varying frequency, and that they used 
the tool for simultaneous varied purposes. Student feedback about the Web-based 
collaborative activity and use of Google Docs offers additional insights. Observations 
about the evolving nature of Web-based collaborative writing and associated pedagogical 
practices including considerations about student autonomy are discussed. 
Keywords: Collaborative Learning, Computer-Assisted Language Learning, Discourse 
Analysis, Learner Autonomy 
INTRODUCTION 
Collaborative practices are being increasingly advocated in second language classrooms largely in 
response to the collaborative potential of Web 2.0 tools. The literature reveals a noticeable increase in 
interest in collaborative writing (e.g., Arnold, Ducate, & Kost, 2009; Elola & Oskoz, 2010; Kessler, 2009; 
Kessler & Bikowski, 2010; Storch, 2005). However, few collaborative writing projects, particularly 
involving more than two writers, are actually undertaken, and these types of projects have received little 
research (Storch, 2005). In particular, research on students’ perceptions of collaborative writing projects, 
“the nature of the [collaborative] writing process and of the written text produced” has received “scant 
attention” (Storch, 2005, p. 155). In fact, most of the research on collaborative writing is focused on texts 
produced for preparatory writing assignments and not on more extensive texts meant to stand on their 
own (Storch, 2005). As Storch (2005) notes, “To truly prepare students for collaborative writing may 
require a re-conceptualization of classroom teaching” (p. 169). Further, there is heretofore no research on 
collaborative writing with Web-based word processing in L2 contexts. The low number of collaborative 
writing projects and the restriction to pair work is likely due to logistical or environmental considerations 
such as face-to-face and online contexts where a single document is written by one student, then 
distributed to another student, and then returned to the original student for review. This sharing of a single 
original document requires students to work at the convenience of their partners. With newer technologies 
available, however, learners can more easily work in groups of three or more simultaneously. Newer 
technologies allow researchers insight into the L2 collaborative writing process and an increased 
understanding of how these technologies may affect the collaborative writing process. This study aims to 
fill the needs addressed above and understand the collaborative writing process involving more than two 
non-native English speaking writers working within a shared Web-based document. 
Collaborative Writing: Theoretical Bases, Benefits, and Concerns  
The literature has noted many benefits of collaborative writing. The theoretical basis for these projects 
largely rests on the work of Vygotsky (1978) with his emphasis on the role of social interaction in 
learning and on the concepts underlying the communicative approach in L2 learning. Hirvela (1999) 
Greg Kessler, Dawn Bikowski, and Jordan Boggs Collaborative Writing among Second Language Learners 
 
Language Learning & Technology 92 
expands on the importance of social interaction when he notes that collaborative writing provides 
opportunities for students to write as part of a community and use each other for support and guidance. 
Collaborative and/or pair writing in both L1 and L2 settings has been recognized as contributing to a 
higher quality of writing (Storch, 2005); a better sense of audience (Leki, 1993); increased pooling of 
knowledge (Donato, 1994) and ownership (Storch, 2005) in the writing process; increased student 
motivation (Kowal & Swain, 1994; Swain & Lapkin 1998); and attention to discourse structures as well 
as grammar and vocabulary usage (Swain & Lapkin, 1998). Storch (2005) also notes the importance of 
immediate feedback for optimal collaborative writing to occur.  
However, collaborative writing projects do not always succeed. This can be due to inexperience, 
interpersonal conflict, concerns of fairness (Chisholm, 1990), and concerns of inaccurate peer edits 
(Nelson & Murphy, 1993). Also, students may ultimately view the process of writing as a private act (Ede 
& Lunsford, 1990; Murray, 1992). Thus, the role of the individual writer in a collaborative writing project 
is not yet understood. Yet with technologies that allow many-to-many simultaneous or near simultaneous 
writing, greater accountability for participation in the writing process, and improved document sharing, it 
is likely that the number of projects involving collaborative writing with three or more writers will grow 
in the future. Of interest to researchers will be how these abilities that technologies afford may affect the 
process of collaborative writing itself. 
Collaborative Writing with Technology 
A search of the literature reveals that technology has influenced the writing process and practices in many 
ways. Discussion about technology and writing can be traced to the transition from pen to word 
processing (Pennington, 1991); then from word processing to the networked writing classroom (Ogata, 
Yano, & Wakita, 1998), online electronic portfolios (Kahtani, 1999) and writing in text-based virtual 
environments such as MOOs (Turbee, 1999); and to writing and email (Bloch, 2002; Liaw, 1998). Using 
technology for writing was seen as helping students see writing as fluid and dynamic and helping them 
focus more on the meaning in their papers early on as opposed to focusing excessively on form (Wresch, 
1984). With the newer technologies, collaborative writing often takes place within discussion boards, 
online chats, email communication, or wikis. These forms of communication offer students timely help in 
their writing when they most need it (Parks, 2000). With such a great amount of collaboration, issues of 
ownership and authorship have also been examined.  
Examining discussions in a wiki, Hunter (2011) found that the online collaborative environment is 
helping redefine contributors’ ideas of authorship. He finds that collaborative writing is more successful 
when the writers share “common ‘habits of mind’” and when contributors hold less “author-centric 
perspectives of textual ownership” (p. 40). Characteristics of wikis cited as leading to this redefinition of 
authorship and ownership include the ease with which collaborators can work together and the large 
number of people who can contribute, resulting in increased critical thinking in the collaborative writing 
process. In her analysis into collaborative writing and authorship, Spigelman (2000) concludes that 
successful collaborative writing groups view the collaborative writing process as a social activity 
involving knowledge construction with team mates who are willing to trust each other with co-ownership. 
This social constructionist perspective acknowledges the tension between the solitary act of writing and 
the need for notions of ownership that are both public and private. In all of these situations, the influence 
of the technology on the writing produced is discussed.  
These findings suggest that the process of collaborative writing will likely be affected by technology as 
well. Newer technologies may benefit collaborative writing by allowing more convenient feedback and 
revision and a faster response time, potentially increasing motivation and creativity (Lam & Pennington, 
1995). Newer technologies also allow students to work on the text simultaneously, and the text is always 
available to all users. In spite of the advantages, the role of the technology itself is seen as secondary to 
how it is used: “The degree of success of any application of word processing in an ESL setting will 
Greg Kessler, Dawn Bikowski, and Jordan Boggs Collaborative Writing among Second Language Learners 
 
Language Learning & Technology 93 
ultimately be determined by the nature of the users and the circumstances of use, rather than directly by 
the attributes of the medium” (Pennington, 1991, p. 267). Lam and Pennington (1995) also noted that 
teachers using new technology must be patient in order to give students and instructors sufficient time to 
adapt to the technology and “innovative teaching strateg[ies]” that will arise (p. 65). Many of the 
advances to be noted in technology currently are those in the realm of Web 2.0. 
Current research in writing using Web 2.0 tools has investigated how these technologies provide new 
opportunities for students “to engage in the writing process and display their finished products” 
(Hoopingarner, 2009, p. 228). Many have recognized that students tend to communicate online in 
unpredictable ways (Belz, 2007; Fischer, 2007), focus on meaning rather than form (Kessler, 2009), 
demonstrate improved fluency and accuracy (Elola & Oskoz, 2010), and value the opportunity to share 
feedback with peers (Ware & O’Dowd, 2008). Also, technologies that allow many-to-many 
communication influence collaborative writing in how writers may plan and engage in collaborative tasks 
(Kessler, 2009). These technologies can also contribute to students’ sense of ownership and to their sense 
of autonomy (Kessler, 2009). This area of individual autonomy within collaborative writing is one that is 
receiving more attention in research, due largely to the increasing ease of these assignments made 
possible by the technology of Web-based word processing and to the research opportunities this 
technology provides (Kessler & Bikowski, 2010). Kessler (2009) notes that the amount of teacher 
intervention and student autonomy in collaborative writing projects can influence the writing and as such 
should be considered carefully. 
Greene (2000) observed a decade ago that theories for using technology in the writing class were as of yet 
underdeveloped. Yet some theories and models are emerging. This study is informed by the cultures-of-
use analysis of Activity Theory (Thorne, 2003). Drawing from cultural-historical learning theory, this 
framework relies upon artifacts which, “embody historical processes that shape, and are shaped by, 
human activity” in an attempt “to render artifacts as they exist for users” (p. 40). This approach 
recognizes the influence of cultural practices and histories of use upon functionality of artifacts. Cultural 
practices comprise global and local characteristics as well as established and emergent qualities. This 
model allows us to reflect on the culture-of-use that emerges within a particular context such as online 
collaborative environments. To further explore how the environment affects writing, Kessler and 
Bikowski (2010) proposed a framework for promoting collaborative language learning abilities in 
computer mediated contexts. This framework can be used to address Storch’s (2005) call for more 
research into understanding the collaborative writing process. As the nature of Web-based many-to-many 
collaborative writing evolves, students will need to find their place in this writing process. Kessler and 
Bikowski’s model provides insight into helping students navigate these collaborative efforts that are often 
considered private acts, specifically focusing on how they negotiate the concept of autonomy in 
collaborative spaces. The framework assumes that, “Autonomy as a collaborative learner depends on (a) 
the ability to use language to independently contribute personal meanings as a collaborative member of a 
group; (b) the ability to use appropriate strategies for communicating as a collaborative member of a 
group; and (c) the willingness to demonstrate these abilities within the group” (p. 53). Thus, while 
individual contributions to the group project are important, noting how the contributions are made to the 
group (including the use of interactive technologies) is valued, as are group communication strategies and 
an interest in group performance. Crucial in this framework is how technology may influence the learner, 
the process, and the pedagogy.  
Thus, a review of the literature reveals that collaborative writing in the L2 writing classroom is advocated 
though underutilized, that there is a history of how technology has impacted the L2 collaborative writing 
process, and that technology provides many benefits to the L2 collaborative writing process. Yet, more 
research is needed on the nature and process of collaborative writing and learners’ perceptions of the 
collaborative writing process (Storch, 2005). Even less work has been published on collaborative writing 
in Web-based word processing (though, see Kessler, 2009, and Kessler & Bikowski, 2010) and how 
Greg Kessler, Dawn Bikowski, and Jordan Boggs Collaborative Writing among Second Language Learners 
 
Language Learning & Technology 94 
learners navigate writing in this context. This study aims to fill these needs by exploring the changing 
nature of Web-based collaborative writing within these environments.  
Specifically, the study focuses on the following research questions: 
1. How do L2 students engage in the collaborative writing process using Web-based word 
processing tools? 
2. What is the nature of group participation in Web-based collaborative writing? 
MATERIAL AND METHODS 
In order to understand students’ collaborative writing behavior within Web-based word processing, the 
researchers analyzed group collaborative texts produced in Google Docs. Google Docs includes 
functionality that is similar to a number of emerging Web-based word processing tools, including 
simultaneous editing ability and automated updating. Students’ activity within their team was initially 
analyzed in order to determine to what degree students participated in the collaborative writing process. 
Students’ writing and use of the Web space was then categorized according to their revision and 
participation activity. This analysis sheds light on how the students wrote collaboratively within this 
context. The researchers also conducted a survey at the end of the course to gather students’ perceptions 
of collaborative writing in this environment and their frequency of participation (see Appendix). 
Questions on the survey focused on their experience participating as a member of a group in these 
projects, how often they used the Web-based word processing tool, and feedback for using it for 
collaborative writing projects. 
Participants 
Thirty-eight Fulbright scholars in a pre-academic orientation program at a large Midwestern university 
participated in this study. This group included three sections of an English for Academic Purposes (EAP) 
class, the focus of which was to prepare students for the academic research, writing, and presentation 
skills of the US academic community. All of these students had scored above 550 on the paper-based 
TOEFL test and had been accepted into graduate programs through Fulbright scholarships. They were 
from a wide range of disciplines. This pre-academic program preceded entry into their academic 
programs. Instructors served as facilitators, helping students achieve course goals while allowing them 
flexibility in how they approached tasks. Students worked in small groups of three to four members for 
three weeks (12 class hours a week with additional outside work) to design, implement, write up, and 
present a primary research project. This study involved observing the writing process that student teams 
engaged in as they developed their projects. 
For the EAP course project, students grouped themselves according to academic interests. They were 
shown previous papers written by students in the courses and guidelines regarding topics were given, 
including encouraging the students to consider time restrictions, data availability, and research methods 
knowledge. Topics needed to be cleared by the instructors before the projects began. Students then 
planned their project and used faculty as advisors. No specific writing process model was given to the 
students to follow. The projects needed to involve both primary research (qualitative or quantitative) and 
secondary sources. Class time consisted of time for lecture/discussion on finding and narrowing a topic, 
research methods, data collection and analysis, organization, clarity in sentence structure, advanced 
grammar, using sources, citation styles, and presenting research orally. Teams gave in-progress 
presentations of their work during the course and received feedback from peers and the instructors. Other 
class time was reserved for teams to go to the library, collect data, discuss their project, or go to a 
computer lab. Teams re-convened at the end of class time to de-brief and plan for the next class meeting. 
Other courses were offered to the students during this three-week period as well, including ESL courses 
in grammar, listening, using sources without plagiarizing, and presenting. Since this program was 
Greg Kessler, Dawn Bikowski, and Jordan Boggs Collaborative Writing among Second Language Learners 
 
Language Learning & Technology 95 
voluntary for the students and not part of their graduate coursework, no grades were given in any part of 
the project or courses.  
For this research, participant groups were chosen for case study analysis. This decision to limit the data 
was made due to the abundance of data recorded throughout the revision process. Thus, three groups were 
randomly chosen for a more in-depth study of their collaborative writing, and a portion of each team’s 
writing was analyzed. A randomly-chosen 10% of the saved versions in each of the three team’s Google 
Docs texts was analyzed. Each iteration is an automatically saved and automatically numbered version 
(every 11 seconds) of the document; thus, an iteration could be a change to a word, sentence, paragraph, 
and so forth. The iterations to be used were identified using a random number generator 
(http://www.random.org/integers). This came to a total of 474 iterations that were analyzed. 
The three groups that were chosen for analysis of their collaborative writing included a total of nine 
students: one each from Cameroon, Germany, Guatemala, Nicaragua, and Russia, and two from Ukraine 
and Mexico. The topics the three groups chose for their projects were the “Integration of graduate 
Fulbright students into a university community,” “Changes in human behavior/thinking after becoming a 
parent: The influence of gender,” and “The use of digital library databases by graduate students.” Early in 
the program students were introduced to Google Docs as a potential context for them to do their projects. 
They were also given the option of using Microsoft Word; however, all groups chose to use Google Docs 
in order to collaboratively write up their research. No students had previously used Google Docs for 
collaborative projects. During the course any questions regarding the use of the software were answered. 
These students were trained on the features of Google Docs including how to create, name, and save 
documents; how to view and maneuver in the revision history; and how to change font formatting. Once 
the data was collected, it was analyzed. 
Data Collection and Analysis 
Contributions to the Web-based word processing document were categorized based on the revision 
activity observed. While these types of contributions have been defined in various ways previously (e.g., 
Brock & Pennington, 1999; Raimes, 1985) for the purposes of this study the coding protocol emerged 
during data analysis with the codes reflecting the observed action of the writer. The researchers observed 
that two types of contributions were occurring: those that affected the language itself and those that did 
not affect the language used. Six total codes were then identified, with three being related to language use 
and three being unrelated to language use. The quality of the papers themselves was not evaluated 
holistically, as it was not in the scope of this study. Two trained Linguistics graduate students then coded 
the 474 iterations using the coding scheme developed by the researchers. Inter-rater reliability was 
calculated at 0.95 using a paired samples t-test. 
These two types of contributions were identified as either language related contributions (LRCs) or non-
language related contributions (NLRCs). LRCs refer to the contributions that involved language use in 
some way, such as adding or moving text or making changes in form. Non-language related contributions 
refer to behavior such as student discussions or changes in formatting or style. Categorizing the students’ 
writing with these LRCs and NLRCs provided for a clean and clear analysis. The language-related 
contributions were identified as attending to form, meaning, or other. Each of these types is explained in 
Table 1. 
Greg Kessler, Dawn Bikowski, and Jordan Boggs Collaborative Writing among Second Language Learners 
 
Language Learning & Technology 96 
Table 1. Language Related Contribution Types, Descriptions, and Examples 
Contribution Type 
 
Description Examples 
Form 
 
Changes made in 
capitalization, part of speech, 
pluralization, pronouns, 
punctuation, spacing, 
spelling, or tense 
 
• Change from “literary” to “literature” 
• Change from “he” to “we” 
• Change from a period to a comma 
• Change from “theother” to “the other” 
• Change from present to past tense 
Meaning Text that contributes meaning 
to the paper added, deleted, 
or replaced 
Replacement: “This fact will help all of us to 
integrate successfully in the community at our host 
university and to improve ourselves and our points 
of view on many different topics.” 
Note: “many” was replaced by “different” 
Other  Text that does not contribute 
to meaning added, deleted, 
moved, or replaced 
• Deleting the stand-alone phrase “structure of our 
project.” from the end of the paper 
• Moving “The questionnaire was send to” from 
one location in the sentence in to another 
It can be seen in Table 1 that there were eight types of form LRCs: contributions in capitalization, part of 
speech, pluralization, pronouns, punctuation, spacing, spelling, and tense. Fewer types of language related 
contributions in meaning were found: adding, deleting, or replacing text. For a contribution to be 
categorized as a meaning LRC, the change to the collaborative text had to have affected the meaning of 
the paper. For example, adding new text or deleting novel text and not moving it elsewhere in the 
document were both categorized as meaning LRCs. Other LRCs, however, were contributions that 
students made that did not affect meaning or form. For example, when a student moved a phrase within a 
sentence and the change did not result in a different meaning or result in a change in form, it was 
identified as an other LRC. Other LRCs included four types: adding, deleting, moving, and replacing text. 
Other LRCs reflects changes students made to language as they revised and fine-tuned the document but 
without changing meaning. In addition to the three contribution types of LRCs discussed above, students 
also made non-language related contributions.  
Table 2 provides detail on non-language related contributions. The three types of NLRCs found were in 
formatting, planning, and non-project communication. 
In Table 2 we see that there are four types of formatting NLRCs: changes made in the formatting of the 
date, the text, and indentation. Given that none of these changes affected meaning, they were categorized 
as NLRCs. Four types of planning NLRCs were also found: planning text being added, deleted, moved, 
or replaced. In this type of NLRC, the writers’ contributions related to planning the organization of the 
document, the division of the workload, or meeting times. Finally, in contributions that were identified as 
non-project communication, two types of contributions were found: adding or deleting text that was not 
related to the project. Examples include discussions of social plans or messages for friends. The 
information in Tables 1 and 2 was used to analyze the 474 iterations from the three Web-based team 
collaborative writing projects. 
 
Greg Kessler, Dawn Bikowski, and Jordan Boggs Collaborative Writing among Second Language Learners 
 
Language Learning & Technology 97 
Table 2. Non-Language Related Contribution Types, Descriptions, and Examples 
Contribution Type Description Examples 
Format Changes made in date 
formatting, text formatting, 
or indentation 
• Change from “January 4, 2009” to “4 January 
2009” 
• Making the font size bigger 
• Change from a bulleted to a numbered list 
Plan Project planning text added, 
deleted, moved, or replaced 
Adding planning text: “next things we’ll discuss 
together, because all the rest seems very 
important and quite short for me, and about all 
the features we are going to discuss.” 
Non-Project  
communication 
Text that serves as 
communication for non 
project-related purposes 
added or deleted 
Adding a message about an event not related to 
the project 
 
An eight-question survey using both Likert-scale and open-ended questions was also conducted at the end 
of the course to gather students’ perceptions of collaborative writing in this environment, their feedback 
on using Google Docs, and their frequency of participation. All 38 students chose to complete the survey. 
The results of this survey can be found in the Appendix. 
RESULTS 
This study seeks to understand how L2 students engage in the collaborative writing process using web-
based tools. Results focus on the three case study teams’ individual member participation and 
construction of texts regarding their language and non-language related contributions. 
Participation within Teams 
The extent to which each member of a team contributed was observed. Table 3 shows that all students 
participated in the collaborative writing project and that each team had a member who assumed 45-50% 
of the activity workload, while a second teammate was responsible for 30-40%, and the third contributed 
15-25%.  
Table 3. Number and Percent of Language Related Contributions and Non-Language Related 
Contributions made by Team Members 
 Team One Team Two Team Three 
 
 
No. (% of Team) of  
LRCs and NLRCs 
No. (% of Team) of  
LRCs and NLRCs 
No. (% of Team) of  
LRCs and NLRCs 
Teammate 1  97 (46% of team) 90 (46% of team) 32 (48% of team) 
Teammate 2  79 (37% of team) 58 (30% of team) 23 (35% of team) 
Teammate 3  36 (17% of team) 48 (24% of team) 11 (17% of team) 
This table shows that regardless of the number of contributions made per team, the percent of 
participation by individual team members fell into three levels. While interpreting this data, it is important 
to note that Web-based word processing tools provide information about individual contributors and 
Greg Kessler, Dawn Bikowski, and Jordan Boggs Collaborative Writing among Second Language Learners 
 
Language Learning & Technology 98 
changes made. It is not possible to determine from this information if two or more students were sitting at 
the same computer making changes together.  
Language and Non-Language Related Contributions  
Next, the students’ language-related contributions and non-language related contributions to their projects 
were categorized according to the information provided in Tables 1 and 2. Frequency of use of these 
contributions was observed. The unit of analysis was each student contribution. Table 4 provides an 
overview of this use by team. 
Table 4. Language Related Contributions and Non-Language Related Contributions by Team 
 Team One Team Two Team 
Three 
Totals  
(Teams 1-3) 
Action  
(% of Total) 
Student Action       
Language Related 
Contributions 
      
Meaning  131 93 40 264 55.70% 
Other 25 35 4 64 13.50% 
Form 29 27 7 63 13.29% 
Non-Language Related 
Contributions 
     
Formatting  16 17 11 44 9.28% 
Plan  10 23 4 37 7.81% 
Non-project 
communication 
1 1 0 2 0.42% 
Totals of LRCs and NLRCs 212 196 66 474 100.00% 
As can be seen in Table 4, language related contributions occurred much more often than did non-
language related contributions (82% LRCs and 18% NLRCs). Meaning LRCs were the most common 
across all groups, representing over half of all the contributions made.  
Language Related Contributions 
Moving from all LRCs and NLRCs to a closer look at each contribution type provides information on the 
students’ writing behavior. Attention to meaning was the most common category found, including 57% of 
all contributions. 
We can see that while groups varied in frequency of contributions overall, each of the groups focused 
upon meaning LRCs. These include adding, deleting, and replacing text. Following are examples of each 
of these. 
Greg Kessler, Dawn Bikowski, and Jordan Boggs Collaborative Writing among Second Language Learners 
 
Language Learning & Technology 99 
Table 5. Attention to Meaning (Language Related Contribution) 
 Team One Team Two Team Three Totals  
(Teams 1-3) 
 
Action  
(% of Total) 
Student Action       
Text added 81 49 21 151 57.20% 
Text deleted 35 26 15 76 28.79% 
Text replaced 15 18 4 37 14.01% 
Total Meaning 131 93 40 264 100.00% 
This meaning LRC text added example involves the addition of a sentence that is a part of the main body 
of text and contributes to meaning. The added text is in bold: 
“This fact will help many people to integrate easier into the group, no matter which cultural 
background” [team 1, iteration 1230]. 
A meaning LRC text deleted involves a deletion that affected meaning. In the following example, when a 
student deleted a word the meaning was changed from being more general to more specific: 
“It is important to admit, that current research is determined by such fields of study as: general 
and family psychology and sociology” [team 2, iteration 568]. 
The second most frequent contribution was the LRC other. This refers to student revisions that did not 
focus upon form or meaning. An example of other would be a student moving a phrase within a sentence 
or deleting a redundant word. The results of this can be seen in Table 6. 
Table 6. Other (Language Related Contribution) 
 Team One Team Two Team Three Totals  
(Teams 1-3) 
 
Action  
(% of Total) 
Student Action       
Addition  12 20 3 35 54.69% 
Deletion  6 8 0 14 21.87% 
Move  4 6 1 11 17.19% 
Replacement 3 1 0 4 6.25% 
Total Other  25 35 4 64 100.00% 
Among students’ use of the LRC other, the category of addition was the most common across all teams, 
with replacement being the least common. Students moved text around nearly as often as they deleted it. 
Students demonstrated autonomous abilities by making contributions illustrating the preparation, 
planning, and recursive revision aspects associated with process-based writing.  
One aspect of the process of writing involves collective scaffolding, as described by Storch (2005). 
Instances of two or three students revising the same text simultaneously occurred within the teams. 
Greg Kessler, Dawn Bikowski, and Jordan Boggs Collaborative Writing among Second Language Learners 
 
Language Learning & Technology 100 
Exploring how students simultaneously build on each other as a resource allows for greater understanding 
of the types of changes they make as they write collaboratively. In one instance [team 1, revisions 46-48], 
a student wrote a four-sentence paragraph, another student removed the final sentence, and a third student 
re-inserted a portion of text using the review revision history interface. This all happened within 2 
minutes. After this re-insertion, no more changes were made. This example illustrates how the revision 
history feature of Google Docs allowed students to see previous text and choose to re-introduce it to the 
document.  
Figure 1 illustrates collective scaffolding [team 2, revisions 150-170]. One student’s changes are 
underlined and another’s changes are italicized. The students collectively produced grammatically correct 
phrasing for the question they desired. Within 14 iterations they were able to do so. 
 
Note: missing lines represent automatically saved iterations that include no data changes 
Figure 1. Example of collective scaffolding. 
This type of simultaneous editing is not possible in traditional desktop word processing programs, wikis, 
or other synchronous tools where the user must wait for interlocutors to complete their turns before they 
have access to each other’s text. In Google Docs users see their collaborators’ text appear as it is being 
written. Unlike the observations made by Storch (2005) where students orally pooled their collective 
linguistic knowledge to offer alternative suggestions in order to produce a written text, in this 
simultaneous word processing context students make written alternative suggestions within the text itself. 
This interaction results in an increase of textual production as opposed to oral production, an increase in 
opportunities for practice in writing, and experimentation with alternative phrasings within the full 
context of the text. 
Table 7 provides an overview of attention to form. It can be seen that the most common LRC in this was 
changing spelling (38.10% of the total), followed by changing punctuation (20.63% of the total). The 
least common contribution type in attention to form was changing verb tense (1.59% of the total).  
Greg Kessler, Dawn Bikowski, and Jordan Boggs Collaborative Writing among Second Language Learners 
 
Language Learning & Technology 101 
Table 7. Attention to Form (Language Related Contribution) 
 Team One Team Two Team Three Totals 
(Teams 1-3) 
Action 
(% of Total) 
Student Action       
Capitalization changed  3 3 0 6 9.52% 
Part of speech changed  1 0 2 3 4.76% 
Plural changed  2 1 2 5 7.94% 
Pronoun changed  2 0 0 2 3.17% 
Punctuation changed  3 9 1 13 20.63% 
Spacing changed  6 3 0 9 14.29% 
Spelling changed  11 11 2 24 38.10% 
Tense changed  1 0 0 1 1.59% 
Total Form 29 27 7 63 100.00% 
In addition to analyzing the types of contributions students made in attention to form, the accuracy of 
those contributions was also observed. The results are presented in Table 8. 
Table 8. Accuracy when Attending to Form 
Type of change Correct (Team 1/2/3) Incorrect (Team 1/2/3) 
Capitalization 1/1/0 2/2/0 
Part of Speech 1/0/2 0/0/0 
Plural 2/0/2 0/1/0 
Pronoun 2/0/0 0/0/0 
Punctuation 1/7/1 2/2/0 
Spacing 6/3/0 0/0/0 
Spelling 8/10/2 3/1/0 
Tense 1/0/0 0/0/0 
Total 50 (79%) 13 (21%) 
It can be seen that overall changes were correct. The contribution type with the most incorrect changes 
was capitalization, where out of a total of seven changes, five were done incorrectly. For some 
contribution types, however, changes were always correct (e.g., part of speech, pronouns, spacing, and 
tense). 
Examples of these changes follow. In the first, a part of speech is correctly changed from an adjective to a 
noun (“literary” to “literature”): 
 “The cultural background seemed to be not so important, like stated in the common 
litraryerature.” [team 1, iteration 1189] 
In the following example of an inaccurate contribution, the spelling of a heading is incorrectly changed 
when the final letter is removed:  
Greg Kessler, Dawn Bikowski, and Jordan Boggs Collaborative Writing among Second Language Learners 
 
Language Learning & Technology 102 
“A. Introduction” [team 2, iteration 603] 
These examples illustrate the type of changes that were made in attention to form. Students also made 
contributions within their texts that were not related to language. 
Non-language Related Contributions 
Information was also analyzed regarding non-language related contributions, such as how students used 
the Web-based processing tool to plan the creation and organization of their text. An example of a plan is 
offered below. In this exchange, students were using the environment to chat about administrative tasks 
and a list was constructed that served as a meta-discussion about the document as it neared completion. 
The students wrote it in the color red and in a larger font size for the beginning comments. This font 
change allowed the team members to separate their plan from their content so that they could 
simultaneously plan collaboratively in the same space as they actually created their final document [team 
1, begun in iteration 1235]. This can be observed in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2. Example of Planning Within Document. 
Figure 2 illustrates how students experimented with the tool as they established a shared understanding of 
ways they could collaborate within it. It also sheds light on some of the processes students used in their 
collaborative writing while in different locations—we can see that they felt that some topics warranted in-
person discussion, while others could be resolved online. Insight into L2 learners’ collaborative writing 
process can show us how they give feedback to each other, what they seek for help from each other, and 
how they share strategies in handling writing concerns (e.g., how to mark a missing citation).  
As students used this Web-based word processing tool, they engaged in a number of language related 
contributions (form, meaning, and other) and non-language related contributions (formatting, planning, 
and non-project communication). All members of all teams contributed, and yet each team had one 
student with higher participation rates. In addition, students simultaneously pooled their knowledge to 
Greg Kessler, Dawn Bikowski, and Jordan Boggs Collaborative Writing among Second Language Learners 
 
Language Learning & Technology 103 
create their texts and used the space in unexpected ways (e.g., simultaneous in-text planning and offers of 
help). 
DISCUSSION 
This study explored how students engage in collaborative writing using Google Docs. It builds upon 
research into how technology has affected the writing process in the past and responds to a need in the 
literature for more research into the nature of the collaborative writing process. The first research question 
asked how students engage in the collaborative writing process using a Web-based word processing tool. 
While more LRCs were made than NLRCs, both types of changes occurred fluidly throughout the writing 
process. Students did not wait until they completed the content of their writing project, for example, to 
make formatting changes (NLRCs) in the documents. Instead, they made planning and formatting 
changes or contributions throughout the writing process. Thus, this Web-based word processing tool can 
be seen as flexible and allowing for fluidity in the process of collaboration and writing. Within the LRCs 
attending to form, the most changes were made in spelling, followed by punctuation and then spacing 
changes. Changes in grammatical errors (such as plurals, pronouns, part of speech, and verb tense) 
occurred less frequently. It is unclear why students chose to correct seemingly more simple errors in form 
such as spelling and punctuation (as opposed to more complicated form errors such as verb tense). 
Changing spelling and spacing would appear to be easier for NNESs than would be changing verb tense 
or plurals. These findings are similar to those found by Kessler (2009) in his study with students working 
in collaborative wiki space. In that study, students were able to make the changes to form correctly when 
asked, but they often chose not to do so in their writing, explaining that they found those errors to be less 
important than meaning. In this study, students also paid primary attention to meaning in their 
contributions.  
While students made fewer contributions to form, the changes they did make were overall more accurate 
(79%) than inaccurate (21%). These findings are consistent with Elola and Oskoz (2010), in that students 
writing collaboratively in a wiki demonstrated improved accuracy. In addition to examining changes in 
form, students also demonstrated involvement in the writing process in this current study. The current 
participants’ attention to process shows that they valued the write and revise paradigm and were willing to 
do so within a group context. This is particularly encouraging, since Storch (2005) has noted that students 
involved in collaborative writing projects may focus on the product more than the process. Also 
illustrating their commitment to the actual process of collaborative writing was that students were willing 
to work together as they engaged in collective scaffolding (see Storch, 2005). At times this 
communication and collaboration resulted in lengthy back-and-forth and simultaneous changes. This 
simultaneous editing and collective scaffolding allowed students to pool their linguistic knowledge and 
analyze their language production. The ability to provide and receive timely feedback is important for 
optimal collaborative writing to occur (Storch, 2005). In addition to attention to process, students also 
demonstrated in-process planning as they wrote their texts. Their in-text communication sheds light on 
how they used the space to discuss the organization of the paper, plan logistics, seek help, and share 
strategies in handling writing concerns. Web-based word-processing tools also allow observations of 
student behavior, opportunities which are not available without these tools. 
The second research question involved students’ participation in each group. It was observed that there 
were three participation levels in all groups: a team member who made approximately half of the team’s 
changes, a second member who made approximately a third of the team’s changes, and another member 
who made from 15-25% of the team’s changes. Since social interaction in writing is valuable for support 
and guidance, it is encouraging that all students participated. It is unclear why participation varied among 
individual students, but this provides an opportunity for future research. Survey results (see Appendix) 
and the texts themselves provide some information regarding participation. All team members felt that 
members contributed equally, and the documents themselves showed no evidence of conflict when 
Greg Kessler, Dawn Bikowski, and Jordan Boggs Collaborative Writing among Second Language Learners 
 
Language Learning & Technology 104 
previous versions of the texts were analyzed. Thus, it is unlikely that team conflict contributed to the 
different online writing participation levels. The academic nature of the collaborative texts themselves 
may be a possible reason for the differences. Observation and analysis of the documents indicated that 
some students were more prepared for writing in the academic genre. Other factors contributing to the 
different levels might be the students’ comfort with the Web-based word processing program, their 
comfort and experience with collaborative writing tasks, roles the teammates took on explicitly or 
implicitly, or overall comfort and confidence with writing academically in English. It should be noted, 
though, that the differing rates of participation were not perceived to be problematic to the students. This 
is significant given Spigelman’s (2000) finding that trust and a willingness to share authorship are crucial 
for collaborative writing to succeed. Another possibility for differing participation rates could be students 
working together at the same computer. Future research could explore the extent to which this occurs and 
how it may affect perceptions of ownership. 
Thus, this study shows that students focus more on meaning than on form, but that when they do focus on 
form, they make correct more often than incorrect changes. They also demonstrate attention to process by 
assisting each other through collective scaffolding. The tool allowed the researchers to observe the 
students as they collaborated through the fluid process of planning, writing, revising/editing, and 
formatting. As they aid each other in edits and idea development, they demonstrate the willingness and 
ability to work together in the writing process. The teams’ contributions illustrate the preparation, 
planning, and recursive revision practices associated with process-based writing and demonstrate how 
students negotiate the space between simultaneously being a member of a group and an autonomous 
writer.  
Limitations and Pedagogical Implications 
This study examined students engaged in collaborative academic writing. Information was gathered in 
text form in an extant class. These realities may limit access to specific details related to individual 
student’s contributions. For example, a student’s location was not recorded nor was any attempt made to 
monitor student interaction with other individuals or resources (other than observing the production of 
text) while engaged in the task. Further, this study did not intend to evaluate the quality of the final 
product. All of these acknowledgements deserve reflection from the reader as well as researchers who 
will embark on similar studies. Yet, a number of pedagogical implications can be seen. 
Building on previous work of how technology has affected the writing process, we see that when students 
use Web-based tools for collaborative writing, they engage in the writing process in new and unexpected 
ways. Lam and Pennington (1995) comment on the likelihood that new technologies will give rise to 
innovative strategies in education, and Storch (2005) notes that a “re-conceptualization of classroom 
teaching” may be required in order for L2 students to be prepared for collaborative writing (p. 169). It 
seems clear that as technology evolves, teaching of L2 writing and of student use of these tools will 
evolve as well. This exploratory study has begun to document that evolution, but the language learning 
potential of these Web-based word processing tools may only be realized as a result of exploring and 
experimenting with varied collaborative writing tasks and pedagogical practices. We suggest that future 
language teaching and learning will be informed by the co-evolution of collaborative writing tools, 
student use of these tools, and pedagogy as influenced by these tools. Figure 3 illustrates this dynamic 
relationship. 
Greg Kessler, Dawn Bikowski, and Jordan Boggs Collaborative Writing among Second Language Learners 
 
Language Learning & Technology 105 
 
Figure 3. A framework for the co-evolution of collaborative autonomous pedagogy. 
This figure illustrates the unfamiliar and evolving nature of Web-based word processing and students’ use 
of this space and shows how the tools communicators use and the way they use them often co-evolve 
(Thorne, 2003). The pedagogical potential of this type of tool may influence an evolution of pedagogical 
practices and considerations. While collaborative writing has typically been limited to pair work in the 
past due to the restrictions of face-to-face or shared document conventions, these evolving tools allow 
many-to-many and simultaneous collaborative opportunities. As these opportunities arise, it will be 
increasingly important for students to be able to navigate these spaces, spaces which include new 
technologies, new pedagogies, and the existing tension involved in being one individual writing a 
collaborative paper. Helping students develop their autonomous language learning abilities as they 
collaborate will therefore become vital. This will be possible by providing collaborative writing projects 
that allow students to practice autonomy in these spaces, have input into expected outcomes, and maintain 
flexibility in how they use these tools and interact within them. The development of such abilities is 
inherently reliant upon the nature of collaborative tools that allow for writing practices in which 
collaboration can occur across many participants, within many different locations, and/or across varied 
periods of time. Such tools can support emerging pedagogical practices in the writing classroom as well 
as an increased variety of writing projects and tasks. By promoting the practice of larger group writing 
projects that capture these new potential benefits of synchronous collaboration, we will better recognize 
their role within the teaching of second language writers. 
The use of tools such as Google Docs also allows teachers to establish practices of monitoring student 
progress throughout the writing process without the need to formally collect drafts. By monitoring student 
contributions teachers will gain greater insight into how their individual students and groups use these 
tools as they continue to evolve. Since all contributors have access to editing the same document at the 
same time, everyone can participate without having to wait for a collaborator, leading to more 
engagement in the writing process. Related to synchronicity, there is only one saved version of the 
document with these tools, meaning that no one team member has exclusive access to the paper at any 
given time. The ability of all contributors to see all previous revisions also mitigates the individual versus 
team writing tension. Students know at all times that changes they make will be automatically saved and 
possibly viewed by teammates, and teammates know that they can see any previous versions of the shared 
document. Knowing that their writing will always be saved and accessible, students may be more willing 
to take risks in their idea development in order to work toward the group goal. These features of Web-
based word processing tools allow for more transparency and ease of use in the collaborative writing 
process. In turn, these features address concerns that teams must trust each other with co-ownership in 
order to succeed in their collaborative writing (Spigelman, 2000). As Web-based technologies continue to 
Greg Kessler, Dawn Bikowski, and Jordan Boggs Collaborative Writing among Second Language Learners 
 
Language Learning & Technology 106 
grow in use and in functionality, many opportunities arise for shared learning and language development 
to occur in L2 collaborative writing projects within these spaces. Writing instructors may want to engage 
students in discussions regarding how they will handle writing within collaborative projects, such as the 
degree to which they maybe want to/are able to write sections while sitting physically together, how much 
they may choose to write individually and then provide comments for each other in the online 
environment, how they will divide the sections and topics for writing, and so on. These discussions will 
likely assist students as they navigate collaborative projects with Web-based word processing tools. 
CONCLUSION 
This study has revealed that highly-proficient non-native English speaking students who were engaged in 
a collaborative writing project using Web-based word processing tools focused on meaning over form as 
they created their texts, though grammatical changes made were overall more accurate than inaccurate. 
Students also successfully collaborated in groups and developed their own process toward writing. Survey 
information indicated that students appreciated various aspects of the Web-based collaborative writing 
activity and felt that they worked together successfully and that each member played an important role. 
They also felt that their contributions were valued and they valued the contributions of their respective 
group members. Observing student participation through the framework of collaborative autonomous 
language learning allowed us to gain insight into the collaborative nature of how students interact with 
others in varied ways. Such practices have only recently become possible in the context of these emerging 
collaborative technologies. 
It is thus important to consider the co-evolution of Web-based word processing and emerging student 
abilities for using such tools. It is also important to reflect upon the relationship between the evolution of 
the use of these tools, the tools themselves, and the related pedagogy in order to identify approaches to 
encouraging flexible pedagogical practices. Such pedagogical reflection would promote guidance toward 
more extensive preparation to exploit the potential of these emerging technologies and to allow students 
the flexibility to define to some extent their own use of the environment. The co-evolution of technology, 
pedagogy, and the nexus of the two create opportunities for wholly new writing environments and 
experiences. Utilizing emerging collaborative writing technologies without adapting pedagogical writing 
practices inhibits the potential for this co-evolution. Developing collaborative autonomous language 
learning abilities within writing projects allows students to prepare for new and unanticipated writing 
opportunities. While we do not presume to know how these technologies or pedagogies will evolve, it is 
important to recognize that evolution is underway and that teachers and students can and should be active 
participants in the process. 
 
APPENDIX. Student survey feedback about their use of Google Documents for their Collaborative 
Writing Project 
1) Frequency of Use of Google Documents for Collaborative Writing Project  
How Often                Number of Students
5/Day                            1  
  
2/Day                            1  
1/Day                          24  
1-3/Week                      7  
No Answer                   5  
Greg Kessler, Dawn Bikowski, and Jordan Boggs Collaborative Writing among Second Language Learners 
 
Language Learning & Technology 107 
2) Type of use in Google Documents for Collaborative Writing Project 
Type of Use                     Yes         No         No Answer
Document Creation         22             9             7  
  
Document Revision         34             1             3  
Presentation Creation        4             26           8  
Sharing                             37            1             0  
View/Review History      16            18            4  
 
3) Positive and Negative aspects of Google Documents  
Positive  (number of comments)           Negative (number of comments)                          
Shareable (9)                             Tools too basic (9)  
Time saving/Efficient (2)         Too cumbersome (2)  
Useful (4)                                   Too many options (1)  
Easy to use (2)                           Revision feature complicated (1)  
Synchronous (1)                          Presentation feature inferior to PPT (2)  
Provides revision history (1 comment)  
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Greg Kessler is an assistant professor of Computer Assisted Language Learning (CALL) and director of 
the Language Resource Center at Ohio University. His research interests include CALL teacher 
preparation, CALL use in innovative pedagogical contexts, and the development of student and teacher 
autonomy within CALL use. 
E-mail: kessler@ohio.edu 
Dawn Bikowski is the Director of the English language improvement program at Ohio University. Her 
research has focused on technology and intercultural education and on writing at the graduate level.  
E-mail: bikowski@ohio.edu 
Jordan Boggs received his BA in Linguistics from Ohio University in 2011. He currently attends Iowa 
State University in the MA TESL/Applied Linguistics program. 
E-mail: jpboggs@iastate.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Arnold, N., Ducate, L., & Kost, C. (2009). Collaborative writing in wikis: Insights from culture projects 
in intermediate German classes. In L. Lomicka & G. Lord (Eds.), The next generation: Social networking 
and online collaboration in foreign language learning (pp. 115–144). CALICO Monograph Series 
Volume 5. San Marcos: Texas State University 
Greg Kessler, Dawn Bikowski, and Jordan Boggs Collaborative Writing among Second Language Learners 
 
Language Learning & Technology 108 
Belz, J. A. (2007). The development of intercultural communicative competence in telecollaborative 
partnerships. In R. O’Dowd (Ed.), Online intercultural exchange: An introduction for foreign language 
teachers (pp. 127–166). Clevedon, England: Multilingual Matters. 
Bloch, J. (2002). Student/teacher interaction via email: The social context of Internet discourse. Journal 
of Second Language Writing, 11, 117–34. Retrieved from http://www.jslw.org/ 
Brock, M. N., & Pennington, M. C. (1999). A comparative study of text analysis and peer tutoring as 
input to writing on computer in an ESL context. In M. C. Pennington (Ed.), Writing in an electronic 
medium: Research with language learners (pp. 61–94). Houston, TX: Athelstan. 
Chisholm, R. M. (1990). Coping with the problems of collaborative writing. The Writing Across the 
Curriculum Journal, 2, 90–108. Retrieved from http://wac.colostate.edu/journal/ 
Donato, R. (1994). Collective scaffolding in second language learning. In J. P. Lantolf & G. Appel (Eds.), 
Vygotskian approaches to second language research (pp. 33–56). Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
Ede, L., & Lunsford, A. (1990). Singular texts/plural authors. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University 
Press. 
Elola, I., & Oskoz, A. (2010). Collaborative writing: Fostering foreign language and writing conventions 
development. Language Learning & Technology, 14(3), 51–71. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2010/elolaoskoz.pdf 
Fischer, R. (2007). How do we know what learners are actually doing? Monitoring learners’ behavior in 
CALL. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 20, 409–442. doi:10.1080/09588220701746013  
Greene, D. (2000). A design model for beginner-level computer-mediated EFL writing. Computer 
Assisted Language Learning, 13, 239–252. doi:10.1076/0958-8221(200007)13:3;1–3;FT239 
Hirvela, A. (1999). Collaborative writing instruction and communities of readers and writers. TESOL 
Journal, 8(2), 7–12. 
Hoopingarner, D. (2009). Best practices in technology and language teaching. Language and Linguistics 
Compass, 3(1), 222–235. doi:10.1111/j.1749-818x.2008.00123.x  
Hunter, R. (2011). Erasing “property lines”: A collaborative notion of authorship and textual ownership 
on a fan wiki. Computers and Composition: An International Journal for Teachers of Writing, 28(1), 40–
56. doi :10.1016/j.compcom.2010.12.004 
Kahtani, S. A. (1999). Electronic portfolios in ESL writing: An alternative approach. Computer Assisted 
Language Learning, 12, 261–268. doi:10.1076/call.12.3.261.5711 
Kessler, G. (2009). Student initiated attention to form in autonomous wiki based collaborative writing. 
Language Learning & Technology, 13(1), 79–95. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num1 
/kessler.pdf 
Kessler, G., & Bikowski, D. (2010). Developing collaborative autonomous language learning abilities in 
computer mediated language learning: Attention to meaning among students in wiki space. Computer 
Assisted Language Learning, 23, 41-58. doi:10.1080/09588220903467335 
Kowal, M., & Swain, M. (1994). Using collaborative language production tasks to promote students’ 
language awareness. Language Awareness, 3(2), 73–93. Retrieved from http://www.tandf.co.uk/ 
journals/0965-8416 
Lam, F. S., & Pennington, M. (1995). The computer vs. the pen: A comparative study of word processing 
in a Hong Kong secondary classroom. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 8, 75–92. Retrieved from 
http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals/titles/09588221.asp 
Greg Kessler, Dawn Bikowski, and Jordan Boggs Collaborative Writing among Second Language Learners 
 
Language Learning & Technology 109 
Leki, I. (1993). Reciprocal themes in reading and writing. In J. Carson & I. Leki (Eds.), Reading in the 
composition classroom: Second language perspectives (pp. 9–33). Boston, MA: Heinle & Heinle. 
Liaw, M. L. (1998). Using electronic mail for English as a Foreign Language instruction. System, 26, 
335–351. Retrieved from http://www.elsevier.com/locate/system 
Murray, D. E. (1992). Collaborative learning as literacy event: Implications for ESL instruction. In D. 
Nunan (Ed.), Collaborative language learning and teaching (pp. 100–117). Cambridge, England: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Nelson, G. L., & Murphy, J. M. (1993). Peer response groups: Do L2 writers use peer comments in 
revising their drafts? TESOL Quarterly, 27(1), 135–141. 
Ogata, H., Yano, Y., & Wakita, R. (1998). CCML - Exchanging marked-up documents in a networked 
writing classroom. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 11, 201–214. doi:10.1076/call.11.2.201.5685 
Parks, S. (2000). Professional writing and the role of incidental collaboration: Evidence from a medical 
setting. Journal of Second Language Writing, 9(2), 101–122. Retrieved from http://www.jslw.org/ 
Pennington, M. C. (1991). Positive and negative potentials of word processing for ESL writers. System, 
19(3), 267–275. 
Raimes, A. (1985). What unskilled ESL students do as they write: A classroom study of composing. 
TESOL Quarterly, 19(2), 229–258. 
Spigelman, C. (2000). Across property lines: Textual ownership in writing groups. Carbondale: Southern 
Illinois University Press. 
Storch, N. (2005). Collaborative writing: Product, process, and students’ reflections. Journal of Second 
Language Writing, 14, 153–173. doi:10.1016/j.jslw.2005.05.002 
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (1998). Interaction and second language learning: Two adolescent French 
immersion students working together. The Modern Language Journal, 82, 320–337. Retrieved from 
http://www.wiley.com/bw/journal.asp?ref=0026-7902 
Thorne, S. L. (2003). Artifacts and cultures-of-use in intercultural communication. Language Learning & 
Technology, 7(2), 38–67. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/thorne/default.html 
Turbee, L. (1999). Classroom practice: MOO, WOO, and more-language learning in virtual 
environments. In J. Egbert & E. Hanson-Smith (Eds.), CALL environments (pp. 346–361). Alexandria, 
VA: TESOL Publications.  
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Ware, P. D., & O’Dowd, R. (2008). Peer feedback on language form in telecollaboration. Language 
Learning & Technology, 12(1), 43–63. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num1/wareodowd/ 
default.html 
Wresch, W. (1984). The computer in composition instruction: A writer’s tool. Urbana, IL: National 
Council of Teachers of English. 
