Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2012/action.pdf 
October 2012, Volume 16, Number 3 
pp. 10–20 
 
Copyright © 2012, ISSN 1094-3501 10 
PROMOTING EFL STUDENTS’ INFERENTIAL READING SKILLS 
THROUGH COMPUTERIZED DYNAMIC ASSESSMENT 
Adeline Teo, Fu Jen Catholic University 
Unlike static assessment, which relies on a student‘s assessment score as the primary 
indicator of an individual‘s abilities, dynamic assessment (DA) unifies instruction with 
assessment to provide learners with mediation to promote their hidden learning potential 
during assessment. Since many Freshman English classes in Taiwan are large in size, 
providing human-to-human mediation to each individual learner can be unrealistic. In this 
action research project, the Viewlet Quiz 3 software was used to develop a computerized 
dynamic assessment (C-DA) program that integrated mediation with assessment to support 
68 Taiwanese college EFL learners‘ inferential reading skills. The C-DA program and the 
mediation design are presented in detail in this article. The participants‘ written reflections 
in their working portfolio are presented to show the effects of C-DA on promoting 
Taiwanese EFL college students‘ metacognitive reading strategies in making inferences. 
In addition, the participants‘ pre- and post-test scores were compared to determine whether 
the participants showed any significant progress after receiving computerized mediation in 
the C-DA program.  
Keywords:  Computerized Dynamic Assessment, Mediation, Metacognition, Reading  
THE PRESENT STUDY 
Since 2001, reforms in the Taiwanese national English education policy have resulted in some significant 
changes in the English education in Taiwan. One of these is that English teachers are required to use not 
only a static test, but multiple assessments to evaluate what students have learned and to help teachers 
reflect on the students‘ actual learning situation (Chan, 2006). Most traditional assessments are called 
―static assessment‖ because they tend to measure learners‘ actual development or what the learners‘ have 
already learned (Feuerstein, Rand, & Hoffman, 1979). One of the main criticisms made by critics of static 
assessment is that we cannot continue to assume that learners‘ performance is static. For example, 
Feuerstein, Feuerstein, and Falik (2010) explained that individuals are not born with a certain intelligence 
that remains fixed throughout life. Individuals have the potential to change and are modifiable if provided 
with an appropriately-mediated learning environment. However, according to Feuerstein et al. (2010), 
static assessment is constructed in a way that no learning will take place. It measures a learner‘s 
―crystallized intelligence,‖ which does not allow the transfer of the learned principles to new situations, 
rather than treats one‘s intelligence as ―fluid,‖ which can be shaped (p. 90-91). Thus, in static assessment, 
the role of the assessor is to look for what is fixed, permanent, and unchanging in the learner. The solution 
to the problems in static assessment, based on L2 researchers such as Lantolf and Poehner (2004), is to 
adopt dynamic assessment (DA) where students are able to receive mediation that will help promote their 
potential learning.  
The primary characteristic of dynamic assessment (DA) that differentiates it from other forms of 
formative assessment is the component of mediation in the assessment. In DA, some learning has to take 
place within the assessment. This means that the learners should receive feedback from the mediator 
during assessment: responses to the questions tested and clues to where errors were made. The examiner 
plays a crucial role as a mediator. His responsibility is to bring about change in the learner‘s cognition 
through providing constructive mediation in the learners‘ learning process. Therefore, DA is constructed 
to create an opportunity for interaction between the learners and the mediator(s) so that the mediator(s) 
can evaluate the learners‘ learning process as well as the quality of the mediation.  
However, one major barrier many college-level EFL teachers face in Taiwan is the large number of 
Adeline Teo Promoting EFL Students’ Inferential Reading Skills through… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 11 
students. Providing one-on-one mediation to individual students has become a challenging and 
unmanageable task for many EFL teachers. The researcher in this action research project decided to take 
advantage of the technology available today and use it to design a computerized dynamic assessment (C-
DA) program to overcome the time-constraint challenge many teachers face in their classrooms. The goal 
of the project was to promote her Taiwanese college EFL students‘ inferential reading ability. The 
researcher focused on the inferential reading ability because it is an important skill that involves multi-
faceted reading skills. According to Harvey and Goudvis (2000), the inferential reading ability is a 
cognitively-demanding skill which requires learners to read between the lines and make educated guesses 
on certain outcomes, events, or actions based on their understanding of the reading materials. Therefore, 
an EFL student‘s ability in inferential reading not only reflects whether he understands the overall ideas 
of the reading materials, but also his own critical thinking skills.  
BACKGROUND LITERATURE 
Theoretical Concept 
The central concept of the computerized dynamic assessment (C-DA) is grounded in Vygotsky‘s 
theoretical framework (1978). To challenge the appropriateness of using a static IQ score to predict a 
child‘s capabilities in succeeding at school, Vygotsky and his colleagues developed a dynamic assessment 
by providing the test-takers with meditational prompts during the testing procedures (van der Veer & 
Valsiner, 1991). They concluded that the children‘s reactions to the mediation were not the same, and 
different types of mediation benefitted children in different ways. They also claimed that while a static IQ 
test helped indicate the children‘s present level of ability, providing mediation to the test-takers during the 
assessment allowed teachers to determine the learners‘ assisted performance, which indicated their 
potential future IQ.  
Vygotsky (1978) also introduced the concept of Zone of Proximal Development (ZPD), which 
emphasized that a learner should receive structured intervention from mediators that aimed at promoting 
his development. With the assistance of a mediator, a learner can move from his current level where he 
can‘t work independently to a level where he can accomplish the same task on his own. The focused 
intervention, which comes from a more mature counterpart, can be from a human, a cultural artifact, an 
object, or a tool. With the advancement of technology, Dixon-Krauss (1996) suggested the use of 
technology to realize Vygotsky‘s vision of designing lessons in a way that facilitates instruction that is 
slightly ahead of the learner‘s development. Crook (1991) also claimed that computers could act much 
like a human partner or classroom teacher within the ZPD, and technology makes the computerized tool 
pertinent to the mediation periods associated with internalization. Therefore, the C-DA program in the 
current project was designed based on the belief that when human mediators are not accessible, the social 
process necessary for development can be facilitated through computer assisted devices.  
Metacognition and Reading Comprehension 
Metacognition is defined as thinking about one‘s thoughts (Harris & Hodges, 1995). Perkins (1992) 
identified four types of readers based on four different levels of metacognitive knowledge the readers 
employ in their reading strategies. The four types of readers are: (1) tacit readers; (2) aware readers; (3) 
strategic readers; and (4) reflective readers. Tacit readers are not aware of how they think when they read; 
aware readers do not know how to fix their problems although they know that they do not comprehend the 
meaning from their reading materials. Strategic readers are those who are capable of using effective 
reading strategies and repairing meaning on their own when necessary. Reflective readers are able to 
reflect on the strategies they use in reading and can apply and revise the strategies flexibly in different 
contexts. Researchers such as Pressley and Afflerback (1995) found that high-skilled readers were able to 
use specific and appropriate metacognitive strategies before, during and after reading to help their 
comprehension of the texts they read. In Perkins‘ terms (1992), these types of readers would be 
Adeline Teo Promoting EFL Students’ Inferential Reading Skills through… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 12 
categorized as the strategic and reflective readers. Pressley and Afflerback as well as other researchers 
such as Block and Mangieri (2003) suggest that it is crucial for teachers to integrate metacognitive 
strategies in their literacy instruction to help the learners become independent and self-regulated readers. 
Therefore, the C-DA program consisted of mediation that was designed to improve the learners‘ 
metacognitive strategies, especially with the intention of training them to be strategic and reflective 
readers. One of the main purposes in the present study was exploring the effect of the C-DA program on 
the participants‘ metacognition.  
Research Questions 
The current action research was conducted to answer the following two research questions: 
 What are the effects of the C-DA program on promoting the participants‘ metacognition in their 
inferential reading skill?  
 Is there a difference in the participants‘ performance before and after the use of the C-DA 
program? 
METHODOLOGY 
Participants and Setting 
The action research project was carried out at a university in Taiwan. The participants were 68 EFL 
college freshmen who were enrolled in a required two-semester course titled ―Freshman English for Non-
English Major Students‖ (FENEMS) taught by the researcher. FENEMS was held two hours weekly for 
eighteen weeks each semester. At the beginning of the semester, the participants were assigned to the FENEMS 
course by the university‘s General Education Department based on their scores in the English subject of the 
Taiwanese national college entrance exam. Their scores ranged from 38 to 90 out of 100, which placed their 
English proficiency levels from intermediate low to advanced. There were 33 males and 35 females 
participants whose ages ranged from 18 to 19 in this research project. The participants were from five 
different departments at the university, namely the Statistics Department, the Information Management 
Department, the Public Health Department, the Occupational Therapy Department, and the Respiratory 
Treatment Department. None of the participants had experienced computerized dynamic assessment (C-DA) 
prior to the current project. The C-DA program was implemented as a part of the curriculum in the FENEMS 
course, which took place in a computer lab at the university where each participant had his own computer 
and could get access to the Internet to work on the C-DA program individually. 
Method Design and Procedure 
The research method design took the form of a ―sandwich‖ format (Sternberg and Grigorenko, 2002). 
This means that the participants took a traditional static test as a pre-test where no mediation was 
provided. Then, in the intervention phase, the computerized mediation was provided for the participants 
through the computerized dynamic assessment (C-DA) program. Afterward, each participant took a post-
test. This design allowed the researcher to compare the participants‘ performance before and after the 
mediation intervention. Also, during the intervention phase, each participant was given time to record 
their reading strategies and reflections in their working portfolio. 
The action research project lasted 10 weeks. In the first week, the participants took a pre-test created 
specifically for the current research project. The reading passages used for the pre-test were selected from 
previous years‘ TOEFL samples. Twelve reading passages were in the pre-test that consisted of 12 
multiple-choice inferential reading questions. In the pre-test, the participants worked independently 
without receiving any mediation. The pre-test helped the researcher get a sense of the participants‘ current 
level in their English inferential reading skills. Based on the mistakes the participants made in their pre-
test, the researcher designed a set of mediation for the C-DA program that would be used in the 
Adeline Teo Promoting EFL Students’ Inferential Reading Skills through… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 13 
mediational phase. The meditational phase lasted eight consecutive weeks, beginning from the second 
week. The mediation sessions were held once a week. During each weekly mediation session, the 
participants worked on three reading passages. Each reading passage involved an inferential question. In 
the tenth week, the participants took a post-test, in which 12 reading passages and inferential questions 
were designed in the same format as the pre-test. Since the passages used in the pre-test, mediation, and post-
test stages were adapted from the TOEFL exam samples, which were designed and tested in advance by a team 
of professional language test-designers, their validity and reliability were believed to be highly acceptable. 
There was no time limit for each C-DA session. The participants were allowed to work on the activities at 
their own pace during or after the class session. Although they were informed that they could continue 
working on the activities after class if they could not complete the task within the two-hour class time, all 
students were able to complete the C-DA sessions during class time throughout the current ten-week 
research project. Besides reading passages and answering questions posted on the C-DA program, for 
each mediated session, all participants were asked to write down their reflections on the mediation 
provided by the C-DA program, record their reading process and use of reading strategies, and supply 
concrete self-selected evidence of their growing/changing reading abilities. The participants were 
encouraged to do so during—not after—the mediated session when they were presented each slide. The 
reason was to allow actual documentation of one‘s reading process in the C-DA program to take place, 
rather than solely relying on introspective accounts of perceived strengths, weaknesses, and affective 
reactions to the C-DA program. Reflections anchored in concrete evidence of learning experiences 
recorded in the participants‘ working portfolio served as a benchmark for the participants to think about 
their metacognitive reading development and monitor their performance.  
At the beginning of each session before the participants started working on the C-DA program, the 
researcher modeled how to record reflections and comments in the working portfolio. However, 
participants were not given any specific guidelines concerning what to write; the evidence to be submitted 
was controlled and selected by the participants themselves. They were also asked to explain why they 
thought the evidence they provided helped them learn the reading strategies. Since there were no fixed 
guidelines for the recording of their working portfolio, the participants were provided with unlimited 
freedom for self-reflection, critical analysis, and the discovery of new strategic orientations towards their 
L2 reading processes and development. 
C-DA Mediation Designs 
The researcher developed the C-DA program by using the user-friendly Viewlet Quiz 3 software to 
integrate mediation with assessment. The software uses Adobe Flash technology and allows educators to 
create dynamic and interactive programs that can be saved as executable files and accessed through a web 
browser on the Internet. The C-DA program created by the researcher also stored the students‘ responses 
and recorded the number of incorrect responses as well as the mediation that were activated by each 
student.  
The C-DA program allowed the learners to interact with and respond to the preprogrammed computerized 
intervention. There were four levels of mediation in the C-DA procedure, and it progressed gradually 
from implicit to explicit. After a learner finished reading a passage, he would be asked an inferential 
question, followed by five multiple choices. He was asked to select one correct answer from the choices 
given. Each time a learner answered a question incorrectly, the computerized mediation would be 
presented to him in order of increasing explicitness. The computerized mediation ended automatically 
when the learners found the correct answer to the question. The maximum level of mediation each student 
received was four. Appendix A shows a flowchart of the arrangement of the mediation slides in the C-DA 
program. Also, the following website presents one of the C-DA activities the learners in the current 
project worked on: http://tinyurl.com/ch4ws8h. 
The following section details the types of assistance each level of mediation provided for the learners. 
Adeline Teo Promoting EFL Students’ Inferential Reading Skills through… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 14 
Mediation Level 1 
This level provides the most implicit mediation. The mediation focuses on explaining what inferential 
reading means. Then, the mediation involves asking a general question to guide the learners to find the 
main idea in the passage, which is an essential step prior to helping them to read between the lines. At this 
level, definitions of keywords in the passage as well as some common places where main ideas can be 
found are provided to help the learners identify the main idea.  
Example: To make inferences successfully, you need to read between the lines. This means that an 
inferential question cannot be answered by looking at the text itself. Instead, you will need to use the 
information stated in the passage to infer what is not stated. Your job is to make your best guess based on 
what you read. First, think about what the main idea of the passage is. The list below gives you the 
meanings of the keywords and places where you can possibly find the main ideas. Use the information to 
help you. 
Mediation Level 2 
This level provides more explicit mediation than the one in Level 1. Hints are narrowed down to guide the 
learners to focus on certain paragraphs, or sentences, while looking for the correct answer. This more 
specific information is followed by an explanation of the overall meaning of the specific context.  
Example: Read the third sentence through the last sentence of the passage very carefully. The author is 
trying to point out something serious about the society at that time. What is it? 
Mediation Level 3 
This level provides very explicit mediation. Therefore, the mediation focuses on ONE sentence, phrase, or 
word. The explanation given at this level is very context-specific, instead of emphasizing the overall 
meaning of the entire passage or specific paragraphs/sentences. The goal is to pinpoint for the learners 
how the specific information can lead to the correct answer.  
Example: Pay attention to the second sentence. The author said two things “bore little relation.” So, ask 
yourself: according to the author, what are the two things that were not related to each other? Since these 
two things were not related, it caused some serious societal problems. Think about it, and then answer the 
inferential question. 
Mediation Level 4 
At this level the correct answer is provided and then is followed by a step-by-step explanation. When a 
learner arrives at this stage, it usually shows that he is still far from fully mastering the reading strategy 
required to understand the concept tested. Thus, this stage focuses on explaining ―how‖ the answer is 
obtained so that the learner can follow the instructions to justify the correct answer. 
Example: The word “critical” in the 5th sentence gives out a sense of urgency. The author used this word 
to express how serious the air pollution problem is. Although she did not say it directly in the passage, 
she was implying that the problem needed to be solved urgently because of its critical condition. 
RESULTS 
Two types of data were collected: (1) the participants‘ written reflections in their working portfolio, and 
(2) the p value based on a paired samples t-test. The participants‘ working portfolio was collected to 
answer the first research question, investigating the effects of the C-DA program on promoting the 
participants‘ metacognition in their inferential reading ability. The p value was calculated to determine 
whether there was a statistically significant difference in the participants‘ performance before and after 
the use of the C-DA program.  
Baker and Brown (2002) stated that we should not exclusively rely on a reader‘s self-report techniques, 
Adeline Teo Promoting EFL Students’ Inferential Reading Skills through… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 15 
since research has found that sometimes one is less able to be introspective about one‘s cognitive 
knowledge than one would like. Thus, IBM SPSS Statistics 19 was used to run the paired samples t-test to 
determine whether the difference between the pre- and post-test scores was significant as a result of the 
computerized mediation. The result shown in Table 1 indicates that there was a significant difference 
between the pre-test and post-test scores, t (67) = -2.70, p = 0.009. This means that the participants scored 
significantly higher on the post-test (M = 7.28, SD = 3.00) than on the pre-test (M = 6.04, SD = 3.00) in 
their inferential reading skill after the computerized mediation.  
Table 1. Paired Samples T-Test 
 Mean SD 95% CI t df p** 
   Lower Upper    
Pretest  6.04 3.00      
Posttest  7.28 3.00      
Pretest-Posttest Comparison -1.24 3.78 -2.15 -.32 -2.70 67 .009 
Note. **p <0.05; CI = confidence interval. 
The qualitative data, which was based on the participant‘s self-reflection in their working portfolio, 
generated rich information showing their metacognition (the process of thinking about thinking) in their 
reading processes. The participants were encouraged to use their L1, Chinese, to write in their working 
portfolio so that they could easily express themselves clearly and in depth. Their writing was then 
translated into English and analyzed. According to Farris, Fuhler, and Walther (2004), one‘s awareness of 
one‘s own reading strategies is essential for reading success. Appendix B shows several essential 
characteristics of metacognition that emerged from the learners‘ responses in their working portfolio. 
These characteristics indicated that the computerized mediated assistance helped the participants become 
consciously aware of their metacognition and actively monitor and regulate their reading process.  
REFLECTION 
This action research enlightened the researcher/instructor in several essential ways. First, computerized 
dynamic assessment (C-DA) is a powerful tool to help her understand her students‘ potential in learning 
to read in English by examining their reaction to different types of mediation. The number of attempts the 
participants made and the corresponding answers they chose helped the researcher determine which types 
of mediation worked and which did not. The results generated in the C-DA program then helped her 
modify and fine-tune mediations to accommodate the learner‘s needs in one-on-one human interactions. 
For example, when one participant, while working on the C-DA program activities, repeatedly arrived at 
Mediation Level 3 (as described in the above section ―C-DA Mediation Designs‖) before being able to 
provide the correct answer, it indicated that he needed more elaborate mediation at this level than what 
was provided originally in the C-DA program. In this case, the learner would likely need extra help from 
the teacher on a one-on-one basis. When the teacher, who served as a mediator, worked with this 
particular learner, she would observe closely what was lacking in the Level 3 mediation for this learner, 
and then modify it by adding a more explicit, more powerful, and ultimately more understandable 
intervention based on every interaction between herself and the learner. As a result, the information 
generated from the C-DA program became a valuable resource for the teacher to create an effective one-
on-one mediated learning environment that meets individual learners‘ needs. Secondly, the C-DA 
program is not merely an assessment tool but also an effective tool to teach the learners useful reading 
strategies through the test. The participants were given an optimal amount of assistance based on their 
individual needs when the mediation was presented in a gradual progression from implicit to explicit 
design.  
Adeline Teo Promoting EFL Students’ Inferential Reading Skills through… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 16 
Furthermore, the participants benefitted greatly from the C-DA program where instruction and assessment 
were unified into a single activity. Based on the four types of readers identified by Perkins (1992), it is 
noteworthy that many of the participants in the present action research demonstrated rather high levels of 
metacognitive knowledge in their reading strategies. The C-DA program helped the participants move 
beyond merely answering the questions in the assessment and transcend into what Perkins called 
―strategic‖ and ―reflective‖ readers. As shown in the evidence listed in Appendix B, the participants were 
capable of using effective reading strategies and repairing meaning on their own when necessary. They 
also demonstrated profound awareness of their reading behaviors. In addition, their effective 
metacognitive strategies increased their meaning construction, their monitoring of text, and their ability to 
evaluate their own performance. During the C-DA process, the participants became strategic and 
reflective readers who are aware of knowledge, procedures, and controls of their reading processes. 
The C-DA program has also met the researcher‘s teaching needs very well. First, it does not have to be 
restricted to the classroom only. Instead, it can be used at home or outside the classroom. Since the 
procedures can be posted on the Internet, burned onto CDs, or stored on portable flash drives, they can be 
implemented anywhere and at the students‘ convenience as long as they can get access to a computer. The 
C-DA program thus places the classroom teacher in the role of a guide or facilitator, who intervenes only 
as necessary. Secondly, the C-DA program can also be simultaneously administered to large numbers of 
learners; individuals may be re-assessed as frequently as needed; and reports of learners‘ performances 
can be automatically generated. It allows the researcher to make good use of computer technology as a 
mediator to help support her students‘ learning process in and outside the classroom more efficiently.  
LIMITATIONS, RECOMMENDATIONS, AND CONCLUSION 
The main limitation of this action research is its within-group design. It focused on one targeted group of 
learners‘ pre- and post-test performance by providing the mediation in the treatment phase. The weakness 
of the within-group design is that it could not determine with absolute confidence whether the 
improvement was caused by frequent practices or indeed the result of the C-DA program. Thus, it is 
recommended that future studies take another perspective by designing a between-group design, which 
would compare a control group and an experimental group, to alleviate the potential factor of frequent 
practice that might influence the results. 
To conclude, the C-DA program is a breakthrough in the L2 language assessment field because it 
integrates instruction with assessment. It allowed the participants to interact with a human-like ―more 
competent other‖ in the C-DA program. When the mediation in the C-DA program became a tool that 
acted as a more competent peer, it allowed for the internalization of information, which in turn helped 
promote learners‘ potential development and assess the learners‘ reading levels in the process of learning. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Adeline Teo Promoting EFL Students’ Inferential Reading Skills through… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 17 
APPENDIX A. Flow chart for inferential questions 
 
Reading Passage and 
Inferential Question
If correct, then go to 
―End‖
If not correct, then 
go to Mediation 1 
(Main Idea)
If main idea is correct, then 
followed by Inferential 
Question
If main idea is not correct, then 
followed by Mediation 2 & 
Inferential Question
If Inferential Question 
answer is correct, then 
go to ―End‖
If Inferential Question 
answer is not correct, 
then go to Mediation 3
If Inferential Question 
answer is correct, then 
go to ―End‖
If Inferential Question 
answer is correct, then 
go to ―End‖
If Inferential Question 
answer is not correct, then go 
to Mediation 4
(provision of answer)
End
If Inferential Question 
answer is not correct, 
then go to Mediation 3
If Inferential Question 
answer is not correct, 
then go to Mediation 4
(provision of answer)
If Inferential Question 
answer is correct, then 
go to ―End‖
Flowchart for Inferential Questionsl rt f r I f r ti l sti s
Login
End
 
 
 
APPENDIX B. Metacognition Characteristics 
1. Activating prior knowledge and utilizing self-correction behaviors 
The participants responded that they used their prior knowledge to help comprehend the 
reading. Meanwhile, they also learned new knowledge from the instruction given in the 
computerized mediation and self-corrected their misconceptions. 
Examples:  
This activity is very helpful. I learned that I had mistaken ‗conclusion‘ for 
‗main idea‘ in the past until the hints pointed out what these terms are 
exactly. I made mistakes in the past couple of weeks because I couldn‘t tell 
the difference between the two terms. Now I understand the difference and it 
helps me comprehend the passage more easily.  
At first sight, I thought I got the overall message in the first (introduction) 
paragraph. But then I noticed there were a few points that kept popping up in 
the passage. So, I began to read these points closely. I then realized that the 
author discussed his main views in the second and third paragraphs, where 
the overall main points of the passage are. I learned that sometimes main 
ideas can be stated somewhere else, not just in the introductory paragraph. 
Adeline Teo Promoting EFL Students’ Inferential Reading Skills through… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 18 
2. Relating text-to-self and text-to-world strategies 
The participants reported that they related their personal experience, or what they knew 
about the world to what they were reading to help themselves comprehend meaning. 
Examples: 
(Text-to-Self): At the beginning I didn‘t know what the author inferred about 
college students‘ lives. But after reading the examples, I found that college 
students in the passage are like us, who always have much work to do. So, I 
chose the answer ―College students have many responsibilities.‖ I am right! 
(Text-to-World): The hint asks me to think about if women in the 19
th
 
century did the activities stated in the passage on their own, or if they were 
forced to do so. When I read this hint, I compared what happened back then 
and what is happening in the modern days. I then got a better idea about the 
differences between the lives of women in different generations. 
3. Selecting and executing appropriate strategies 
The participants were able to explain the necessary cognitive strategies to process texts, and 
why they executed these strategies. 
Examples: 
The question asks ‗how‘ the animals molt, so I need to find the information 
about the ‗methods‘ they use to molt. 
When the hint asked me what the author was comparing in the passage, I 
jotted down the notes ―visible‖ and ―invisible.‖ But my answer was wrong. I 
think my problem is that I tried to guess based on my personal views, not 
from the author‘s perspectives. Then, I knew that I probably should focus on 
all the keywords that tell the differences between the two types of arts. The 
example about Beethoven‘s music gave me a clearer idea. The author was 
actually showing the arts that can and can‘t be kept permanently. 
I recorded and underlined the keywords for each paragraph. E.g. The first 
paragraph is about what permanent magnets are. The second paragraph is 
about how to make permanent magnets. The third paragraph is about how to 
make temporary magnets. The fourth is about how to make ceramic 
magnets. The last paragraph is about how to make electromagnets. I looked 
at all the parts I underlined, and then I know the author is trying to show 
how magnets in general are made. His purpose is not to show us something 
about a particular type of magnet. 
4. Being aware of one’s own poor reading habits 
With the help of computerized mediation, the participants reflected on their poor reading 
habits that needed to be corrected. 
Examples: 
The first and second hints told me my answers were wrong. It helped me 
realize that I made mistakes in the first and second attempts because I read 
too fast and was too careless. 
Adeline Teo Promoting EFL Students’ Inferential Reading Skills through… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 19 
After reading the instructions given, I learned that very often I read too much 
into what I read. I could have answered the question correctly the first time. 
The computerized activities helped me change my bad habits in reading. I 
got caught up by trying to understand every sentence when I read. The 
instruction guided me to focus on the main points. I spent too much time 
reading sentences that are just examples or details. 
5. Evaluating one’s own changes in reading as a result of the C-DA program 
The participants self-evaluated the changes or progress in their reading processes brought 
on by the C-DA program. 
Examples: 
This activity really gives me more confidence and makes me feel that I can 
do better in reading. This way of learning English is really special and great. 
The tests we had in the past never gave us a second chance to check or think 
about our answers. With this type of activity, I can face my reading 
problems and am given opportunities to discover and analyze the problems. 
This is the first time I did a test not just for ―scores,‖ but for the sake of 
gaining ―real knowledge.‖ 
I find the inferential questions very challenging. More importantly, I now 
know that I can‘t use the strategies I usually used in the past to find the 
answer. The answer is not directly written in the passage. Now I have to 
understand the main idea, and then think ―critically‖. At the beginning it was 
very difficult because I was not used to it, but now I feel that it is quite fun 
sometimes because the answer is not straight-forward. It is like a guessing 
game. I think I am getting better now in reading the author‘s mind after I 
have practiced this activity so many times. 
At the beginning when I did this activity, I was confused because I thought it 
was just a typical test. But then it gave me one instruction after another to 
help me get the correct answer each time. I couldn‘t believe that a test could 
be designed this way. This approach is very innovative and helpful to me. I 
see myself improve a lot in my reading! 
 
 
REFERENCES 
Baker, L., & Brown, A. L. (2002). Metacognitive skills and reading. In P.D. Pearson (Ed.), Handbook of 
reading research (pp. 353–370). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc. 
Block, C. C., & Mangieri, J. N. (2003). Exemplary literacy teachers: Promoting success for all children 
in grades k-5. New York, NY: Guilford. 
Chan, Y. C. (2006). Elementary school EFL teachers' beliefs and practices of multiple assessment 
[Electronic version]. Retrieved November 1, 2010, from http://www.nus.edu.sg/celc/publications/ 
RELT71/37to62-chan.pdf 
Crook, C. (1991). Computers in the zone of proximal development: Implications for evaluation. 
Computers and Education 17(1), 81–91. 
Adeline Teo Promoting EFL Students’ Inferential Reading Skills through… 
 
Language Learning & Technology 20 
Dixon-Krauss, L. (1996). Vygotsky in the classroom: Mediated literacy instruction and assessment. New 
York, NY: Longman. 
Farris, P. J., Fuhler, C. J., & Walther, M. P. (2004). Teaching reading. A balanced approach for today’s 
classrooms. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. 
Feuerstein, R., Feuerstein, R. S., & Falik, L. H. (2010). Beyond smarter: Mediated learning and the 
brain’s capacity for change. New York, NY: Teachers College Press. 
Feuerstein, R., Rand, Y., & Hoffman, M. B. (1979). The dynamic assessment of retarded performers: The 
learning potential assessment device, theory, instruments, and techniques. Baltimore, MD: University 
Park Press. 
Harris, T.L., & Hodges, R.E. (1995). The literacy dictionary: The vocabulary of reading and writing. 
Newark, DE: International Reading Association. 
Harvey, S., & Goudvis, A. (2000). Strategies that work: Teaching comprehension to enhance 
understanding. Portland, ME: Stenhouse Publishers. 
Lantolf, J. P., & Poehner, M. T. (2004). Dynamic assessment: Bringing the past into the future. Journal of 
Applied Linguistics, 1, 49–74. 
Perkins, D. (1992). Smart Schools: Better thinking and learning for every child. New York, NY: Free 
Press. 
Pressley, M., & Afflerback, P. (1995). Verbal protocols of reading: The nature of constructively 
responsive reading. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Sternberg, R. J., & Grigorenko, E. L. (2002). Dynamic testing. The nature and measurement of learning 
potential. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
van der Veer, R., & Valsiner, J. (1991). Understanding Vygotsky: A quest for synthesis. Oxford, UK: 
Blackwell. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press. 
 
 
 
