Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2012/actionresearch.pdf 
February 2012, Volume 16, Number 1 
pp. 10–25 
 
Copyright © 2012, ISSN 1094-3501 10 
ACTION RESEARCH 
FOSTERING COMPUTER-MEDIATED L2 INTERACTION BEYOND 
THE CLASSROOM 
Keith Barrs 
Kanda University of International Studies, Chiba, Japan 
In language learning contexts a primary concern is how to maximise target language 
interaction both inside and outside of the classroom. With the development of digital 
technologies, the proliferation of language learning applications, and an increased 
awareness of how technology can assist in language education, educators are being 
presented with new opportunities to engage learners in innovative ways. This article 
reports on how technology was used to deal with the issue of an identified lack of English 
language interactional opportunities outside of the classroom at the author’s university in 
Japan. An Action Research (AR) project was initiated with a Computer-Mediated 
Communication (CMC) programme being implemented during an eight-week summer 
vacation period, in order to provide a platform for students to interact in the target 
language outside of class. The article reports on the action research methodology 
undertaken and the results of the CMC programme interactions. It shows that a CMC 
programme can offer students a convenient and useful platform on which to continue to 
communicate in the target language while outside of their classes, but that the construction 
of the platform needs input from both teachers and students. 
INTRODUCTION 
Fostering L2 interaction both in and out of the classroom, especially when this interaction is occurring in 
a wider L1 context, is considered fundamental for second-language development (see Dörnyei & 
Murphey, 2003; Nation, 1990; Van Lier, 1996; Warschauer, 1997). In this way, a primary pedagogical 
objective of a language course should be to maximise opportunities for students to interact in the target 
language in their classes (Van Lier, 1996), whilst also capitalising on the various available methods of 
extending learning beyond the walls of the classroom; particularly in L1 contexts where students have 
limited interaction with the L2 outside of their classrooms (Nation, 2003). 
This article reports on an action research project undertaken at the author’s language university in Japan, 
initiated by the issue of how to increase opportunities for continued English language interaction outside 
the classroom, specifically in the various holiday periods in the academic year. The principal area of 
investigation was whether or not students would participate and interact in a Computer-Mediated 
Communication (CMC) environment, designed to address the problem of a lack of opportunities to foster 
continued out-of-classroom English language practice over an extended holiday period.  
Investigating opportunities to encourage such out-of-class language practice, through the development of 
a platform for continued L2-directed peer interaction, was considered of high importance in the particular 
local social context due to the problem of an observed lack of L2 interactional opportunities in the L1 
environment outside of the students’ language classes. The lack of interactional opportunities was 
identified through the results of a needs analysis questionnaire administered as part of the course 
programme which showed that students had very minimal interaction in English outside of the class. The 
research was further motivated by the opportunity to contribute, in terms of research and pedagogical 
ideas, to the University’s campus-wide focus on developing independent learning abilities in the students.  
Consequently, an action-research methodology was selected for the research and a specific framework 
conceptualised for this investigation, synthesising the established frameworks outlined by Burns (1999) 
Keith Barrs Fostering Computer-Mediated L2 Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 11 
and Kemmis and McTaggart (1988). Within this framework, an online collaborative forum application 
was set up in Moodle, a Virtual Learning Environment (VLE), to offer the students an out-of-classroom 
platform for continued, and independent, L2 interaction. The practical nature of the issue, framed within 
the theoretical notion of the importance of interaction in language learning, as well as specifics of the 
local, contextualised environment in which the small-scale study was to be carried out, justified the 
selection of an action-research approach (see Burns, 1999; Van Lier, 1996 for discussions of the 
application of action research to such types of studies). 
MAXIMISING L2 INTERACTION WITH THE APPLICATION OF TECHNOLOGY 
The Importance of Encouraging and Maintaining Classroom Dynamics 
A fundamental problem of traditional modes of education is the disconnection between the inside and 
outside of the classroom (Kukulska-Hulme, 2009). The traditional method of classroom-based education, 
reliant upon face-to-face interactions between (a) teacher and students and (b) students and students, is 
necessarily restricted in the possible interactions that can occur beyond the classroom walls (Senior, 
2010). This disconnection is most evident not only day to day and week to week as students move 
between the inside and outside of the classroom, but also between and within each semester as 
instructional periods are interrupted by annual holidays and institutional events and festivities.  
In many contexts where English exists as a foreign language (EFL), such as China, Turkey and Japan, this 
problem of the disconnection between the inside and outside of the classroom is compounded by the fact 
that students are learning their L2 while living in their L1 environment. Specifically in Japan, English 
education generally occurs within the walls of schools, language centres and office buildings, all situated 
within a largely monolingual and homogenous society (Stanlaw, 1994). In such contexts, students have 
little opportunity to interact with the L2 outside the classroom. Nation, speaking generally, states that “it 
is very important that L2 use is maximised in the classroom” (2003, p. 2), and this logically implies the 
importance of maximising opportunities for L2 use outside of the classroom, where there are even fewer 
target-language interactional opportunities. 
Not only in relation to issues of consistency and continuity in the course programme, but also to issues of 
class dynamics, out-of-classroom periods in the academic year often represent a large obstruction to the 
flow of communication and learning between course participants. Dörnyei and Murphey write that “when 
positive group development processes are attended to, they can reward the group’s members and can 
provide the necessary driving force to pursue group learning goals beyond our expectations” (2003, p. 4). 
However, a problem arises in extended holiday periods in that it is difficult, without the use of digital 
technologies, to attend to these positive group development processes. Addressing this issue, various 
investigations have found that CMC environments can encourage time-and-space displaced synchronous 
and asynchronous interactions whilst simultaneously fostering relational communication (Finhoult & 
Sproull, 1990; Walther, 1995; Warschauer, 1997). Indeed Walther writes of CMC’s “potential usefulness 
in conveying organizational trust, warmth, attentiveness, concern and other interpersonal dimensions 
known to affect work relationships and organizational outcomes” (1995, p. 200). 
The Proliferation of Technological Devices Suitable for Language Learning 
In the current digital age, the disconnection of the inside and outside of the classroom and the importance 
of the promotion and development of group dynamics is increasingly being addressed with the 
proliferation of interactive, communicative and collaborative platforms, such as email, instant messaging, 
wikis, blogs, forums, social-networking sites and virtual-learning environments (Motteram & Sharma, 
2009). Furthermore, these platforms are no longer only tethered to the desk in the form of desktop 
computers and language learning labs in schools, but are increasingly going mobile, what Warschauer 
calls time-and-place independence (1997, p. 470), on the devices carried around by students such as 
laptops, standard mobile phones, smart-phones and tablet computers. 
Keith Barrs Fostering Computer-Mediated L2 Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 12 
With the proliferation of student-owned devices (see Barrs, 2011), the increase in language learning 
related apps (see: Godwin-Jones, 2011), and the increase in available access to Internet-enabled hardware 
in schools, libraries, Internet cafes and homes, there exists the possibility to be able to engage students in 
target language interactive communication inside and outside of the classroom (Motteram & Sharma, 
2009; Warschauer, 1997). In this way students can be encouraged to take more responsibility for their 
learning, both inside and outside of the educational institutions, which encourages the development of 
independent learning skills (Gross & Wolff, 2001), a characteristic which is increasingly being seen as of 
great importance to foster in learners (Benson, 2006). This is especially true in Asian contexts where 
deference to the teacher and adherence to traditional modes of classroom instruction can limit the 
opportunities for learning (Daulton, 2008; Reid, 1998). 
With specific reference to Japan, numerous surveys and research investigations have shown that a high 
level of access to Internet-enabled hardware is common (see Lockley, 2011), but that this is also a context 
where learning often follows traditional models of teacher-centred instruction and involves relative 
passivity on the part of students (Barrs, 2010; Daulton, 2008). In such contexts, the use of Computer 
Assisted Language Learning (CALL) can offer viable opportunities for the promotion of the concept of 
responsibility for one’s learning, by putting control of the learning in the hands of the students (Benson, 
2006). It is within this context that the research question of whether or not students would participate and 
interact in an out-of-classroom CMC environment was formulated. 
The Conceptual Framework of this Action Research Project 
Warschauer writes that it is the sociocultural perspective of looking at language learning which 
“illuminates the role of social interaction in creating an environment to learn language, learn about 
language, and learn ‘through’ language” (1997, p. 471). Further, Van Lier (1996) puts social interaction at 
the centre of language curriculums and promotes a “heuristic strategy of aiming for a balance between 
various participation formats” (p. 212). Within such a socio-cultural perspective, the concept of positive 
group dynamics is of fundamental importance because, as Dörnyei and Murphey (2003) write, “the class 
group can have a significant impact on the effectiveness of learning” (p. 3). Because of this importance, it 
is necessary for the teacher to try and foster connectivity and positivity between all the class members and 
this can be encouraged both in and out of the classroom.  
Not only in terms of creating the opportunity for continued input in the language learning process, but 
also in respect to fostering social interaction mediated by technology, this project’s initiation was the 
desire to create a platform, accessible from outside the class, whereby students could be encouraged to 
continue to interact with peers in the target language. 
METHODOLOGY 
Nunan (1992) writes that at its very core, Action Research (AR) consists of “a question/issue, data, and 
interpretive analysis” (p. 19). It becomes cyclical with the results feeding backing into and extending the 
initial inquiry (Kemmis & McTaggart, 1988), and can contribute to professional development on the part 
of the teacher who is investing time in researching their own practices (Wallace, 1998).  
The methodological framework for the research was an approach resulting from a synthesis of two 
established AR frameworks, and Figure 1 shows how approaches outlined by Burns (1999) and Kemmis 
and McTaggart (1988) were synthesised into two periods of AR. This conceptualisation of AR was 
deemed necessary in order to better recognise both the multiplicity of actions involved in AR, and the fact 
that AR is often characterised by cycles or spirals that inform on and feed into one another (such as with 
the pilot investigation period and main intervention period discussed in this article).Whilst the 11 phases 
suggested by Burns are comprehensive in regard to the coverage of the many different processes involved 
in AR, their presentation as a list makes them appear, even if that is not the intention, as individual steps 
in a linear research process. On the other hand, the moments of AR suggested by Kemmis and Taggart 
Keith Barrs Fostering Computer-Mediated L2 Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 13 
outline a methodology that emphasises various cycles feeding into one another as the research progresses, 
but imply a fairly simplistic and repetitive cyclical system with little account of the important variation in 
each cycle or phase. Therefore the framework presented here is not a new approach to AR but rather a 
new conceptualisation of established approaches. The 4 moments of AR put forward by Kemmis and 
Taggart have been applied to the 11 phases put forward by Burns, in order to create a clearer 
conceptualisation of 2 distinct but interactional periods. In this way, the approaches interact with each 
other in the new conceptualisation to allow for a richer description of the various phases of, and periods 
in, the AR process than would be possible through the adoption of only one of the frameworks. 
2 Periods of  
Action Research 
4 Moments of Action Research 
(Kemmis & Taggart, 1988) 
11 Phases of Action Research 
(Burns, 1999) 
 
AR Period 1 
 
 
Planning 
1. Exploring 
2. Identifying 
3. Planning 
Action 4. Collecting Data 
Observation  
5. Analysing/Reflecting Reflection 
 
 
AR Period 2 
 
Planning 6. Hypothesising/Speculating 
Action 7. Intervening 
Observation 8. Observing 
Reflection 
9. Reporting 
10. Writing 
11. Presenting 
Figure 1. A synthesised conceptualisation of the action research process. 
Data Collection and Analysis Methods 
Data for both period 1 (which centred around a pilot investigation) and period 2 (which centred around a 
main intervention) were collected through the use of two research instruments: (a) the Moodle forum 
which stored all the digital postings and (b) questionnaires which included open and closed-response 
items. Moodle allows the digital recording of each post, along with the date and time stamp, and the 
forum layout shows the interactional order of postings. For the 1st period the data was collected over a 4-
week period and for the main intervention the data was collected over 8 weeks. Immediately after the 1st 
period, questionnaires were distributed in order to collect quantitative and qualitative data on various 
aspects of the project which could inform the implementation of the main project.  
The forum data was analysed quantitatively by recording the total number of postings, the number of 
replies, and the patterns of replies. This data was then tabulated showing the respective totals and also the 
mean average of the number of postings and replies. The questionnaires were analysed quantitatively, 
with summary statistics, in respect to the closed-response questions and qualitatively, by categorisation, 
in respect to the open-response questions. The qualitative analysis involved categorising the responses, 
which were then independently checked and agreed upon by two colleagues. 
It is important to state here that the results and discussion of this research project are based only on the 
tangible postings made to the site. Because the project was conducted out-of-classroom and in an 
asynchronous environment, it is difficult to research the extent to which students interacted with the site 
Keith Barrs Fostering Computer-Mediated L2 Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 14 
in terms of consumption rather than production. Because a student did not post in the site does not 
automatically equal a lack of participation. They may have been a lurker in the online environment 
preferring to consume rather than produce. Therefore what follows necessarily focuses only on the 
production interactions with the site. 
Context 
The project was carried out at a private 4-year language university in Japan. All students, regardless of 
language major, are required to take content-based English courses in their freshman year. The primary 
objectives of the Freshman English programme are to encourage communication, collaboration and 
cooperation between all class participants, while working in an English-only learning environment. It is 
also an aim of the course to promote autonomy in language learning, which is supported by the on-
campus Self Access Learning Centre (SALC).The majority of students at the university are L1 Japanese 
users with some international students making up a small percentage of the student body, and on a yearly 
average around 60% of the students are female. The time targeted for the main intervention stage of the 
action-research project was the 8-week summer holiday period between semester 1 and 2, with the 
previous steps being carried out throughout the first semester. 
Participants 
The action-research project was administered for one class of English-major freshman (first-year) 
students, (N = 28: 22 female and 6 male), who were all taking both semester 1 and 2 of the compulsory 
Freshman English course at the author’s university. All students were Japanese L1 users and were 
studying English as an L2. All students on entry to the university are tested and placed in one of three 
tiers (top, middle and bottom) through a combination of results from a campus-wide proficiency exam, 
which assesses oral and written abilities, and a pre-TOEFL test, which assesses reading, listening and 
grammar. The students involved in this action-research project were placed in the middle tier meaning 
they were of an intermediate English proficiency level (roughly equivalent to IELTS test band 5). 
Participation in the main summer project was voluntary and not included in their semester grades. 
Materials 
When students entered the Freshman English course, a questionnaire was administered in order to 
investigate their access to Internet-enabled computers and mobile devices. This questionnaire formed part 
of the overall Freshman English course rather than being a specific research tool designed for this action-
research project. The results showed that as well as on-campus accessibility to institutional Internet-
enabled desktop computers, all students (N = 28) had off-campus Internet access in the form of desktop 
and/or laptop computers at home. This data proved important when later considering the feasibility of the 
selection of an Internet-based CMC programme for the action-research project, because it showed that all 
students would have the necessary access to technology required to participate. 
The project utilised the Moodle Virtual Learning Environment (VLE), chosen because of the institution-
wide integration of this particular VLE at the author’s university. It specifically focused on the use of the 
Moodle forum application, chosen because of the correlation between the functionality of the forum and 
the forms of student interaction in a CMC programme which were to be encouraged and investigated by 
this action-research project. These desired forms of interaction were: (a) all students could communicate 
in one online English-only space, (b) students could enter this space on or off-campus (i.e. virtual 
learning), (c) students could comment on other postings in the form of threaded discussions, (d) students 
could upload pictures and link to websites and videos, and (e) students could participate in a secure online 
environment. Although other online applications, such as blogs and social-networking sites, offer similar 
functionalities, it was felt that the institution-wide use of Moodle justified the selection of this particular 
online tool. 
Keith Barrs Fostering Computer-Mediated L2 Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 15 
RESULTS 
The 1st Period of Action Research 
Planning the Action Research (Exploring and Identifying) 
The initiation of the action-research project was the identification of the issue that the eight-week summer 
holiday could have a potentially negative impact on the amount and rate of students’ L2 interactions, as 
well as on the favourable classroom dynamics which had been developed over the first semester. This 
resulted in the following research question: would students participate in an eight-week summer holiday 
student-negotiated, computer-mediated communication programme designed to help them to continue 
interacting in English while outside of the classroom in their L1 environment? 
Taking Action (Planning and Collecting Data) 
In order to know how to best set-up and administer an eight-week summer vacation CMC project for my 
class, it was decided that a mini project should be conducted which would allow data to be gathered on 
interaction rates and any software/hardware related issues. A four-week project was set up during the 
2010 football World Cup, utilising a Moodle forum, whereby students were randomly assigned a 
country’s team to follow and had to post a message on the team’s tournament performance. Only the 
students were involved in the interactions which was felt a necessary step for research purposes, an issue 
discussed in the limitations section. Posting on the forum was made a compulsory activity of the course 
(although not a part of final grades) because at this stage the primary focus was on collecting data as to 
how students would interact on the platform, and what technology related issues they would come up 
against, rather than issues of participation. Students were also encouraged to comment on other people’s 
posts in the hope of generating extended interactions, rather than simple 2-part initiation-responses. The 
results are presented in Tables 1-3. 
Table 1. Total Number and Average of Postings 
 Number of 
students in 
class 
Number of students 
who posted
(Compulsory 
participation) 
 in the 
Moodle forum 
Total 
number of 
postings 
Average number of posts per 
student (mean average) 
4 Week 
Programme 
28 28 
(100% of the class) 
47 1.7 
Table 2. Total Number and Average of Replies 
 Number of 
students in 
class 
Number of students 
who replied
Total 
number of 
replies 
 in the 
Moodle forum 
Average number of replies per 
student (mean average) 
4 Week 
Programme 
28 6 
(21.4% of the class) 
16 2.7 
Keith Barrs Fostering Computer-Mediated L2 Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 16 
Table 3. Total Number and Type Distribution of Postings which Received Replies 
 Number of 
students in 
class 
Number of students 
who replied
Total 
number of 
postings 
which 
received 
replies 
 in the 
Moodle forum 
A-B 
 
 
(Single) 
A-B-A 
 
 
(3-part) 
A-B-A-
B… 
 
(Multiple) 
4 Week 
Programme 
28 
 
6 
(21.4% of the class) 
14 13 
93% 
0 
0% 
1 
7% 
Analysing and Reflecting on the Data (Observation and Reflection) 
As can be seen from the data in Tables 1-3, the number of postings in general as well as the number of 
interactions that went beyond a singular posting-reply pattern were low, especially considering this was a 
4-week project. Disappointingly, the majority of interactions (93%) involved a simple one or two 
sentence initiation followed by a single reply, at which point the communication ended: 
Spain won the final!!!! 
Miyuki [pseudonyms used throughout] 
Hello Miyuki, I watched the game on live and I’m very glad about the result!!! 
I enjoyed World Cup very much!!!!!!!!!! 
A post-project questionnaire was distributed in order to investigate the reasons for the low level of 
interaction. The first question (open-response) asked students to comment on why they thought the 
amount of interaction was low. The replies were categorised as shown in Table 5. 
Table 4. Categorised Reasons for the Low Number of Replies to Posts 
1. What do you think was the 
main reason for low level of 
interaction in the Moodle 
forum? 
No Time No Interest No Need (can 
talk face-to-face 
in class) 
No 
Answer 
 17 6 3 2 
The remaining questions (yes/no closed-response) were connected to hardware/software issues, to see if 
these were having an impact on students’ use of the forum platform. The results are shown in Table 5. 
Table 5. Responses to a Question about the Need for More Help with Using Moodle 
2. Do you need 
more help with 
how to use the 
Moodle forum? 
Log in Find our 
class 
page 
Post a 
comment 
Reply to 
a 
comment 
Attach a 
picture 
Link to a 
webpage 
Change 
font/ 
colour 
YES 10 8 9 9 19 21 18 
NO 18 20 19 19 9 7 10 
 
Keith Barrs Fostering Computer-Mediated L2 Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 17 
As can be seen in Table 4, the preliminary investigation revealed that the two distinct issues of (a) a lack 
of time, and (b) a lack of interest in the discussion topic, contributed to the low amount of interaction on 
the site. It can also be suggested that the variance in abilities with Moodle-specific technology skills, as 
seen in Table 5, added to general interactional problems with the forum platform, probably limiting the 
extent of the interaction with the site (see: Beatty, 2010 for a comprehensive discussion of technology-
related problems and how they affect CALL research). These then became three specific areas of focus 
which could inform upon the next action-research cycle. 
The 2nd Period of Action Research 
Hypothesising and Speculating Based on the Initial Investigation (Planning) 
Based on the findings from the initial investigation, a research hypothesis was generated: 
Given sufficient time, an interesting topic, and further training in how to use a Moodle forum, 
students would participate and interact in a voluntary out-of-classroom CMC programme aimed 
at encouraging and maximising target-language interaction. 
Intervening (Action) 
The main project was to be implemented over the 8-week summer vacation between semesters 1 and 2, 
which would address the issue of no time highlighted in the aforementioned survey. As with the 1st period 
of AR involving the pilot investigation, only the students were involved in the interactions (see the 
limitations section for a discussion of this). In order to get students more interested in posting and 
replying on the forum it was deemed necessary and favourable to have students generate the discussion 
topics. This was done through a class discussion activity whereby students thought of 10 possible forum 
discussion topics individually, then worked in pairs to streamline their lists into 8 topics, then the pairs 
combined into groups of 4 to make a list of 5 topics, and finally all the groups collaborated to reduce their 
choices into a final 4: (a) travel, (b) food, (c) music, (d) festivals. These 4 topics were introduced one by 
one over the 8 weeks to encourage a focus on one topic at a time. However it is important to state that 
each forum was left open as another was introduced, to allow students to add more content. This meant 
that research into the relative popularity of each forum topic was invalid because of the different times 
that each forum was open. Having only 4 topics allowed for wide coverage of different student interests 
while at the same time avoiding the possibility of having students’ posts and replies spread too thinly 
across many forum topic discussions. 
To address the issue of the need for further Moodle-specific technology training, a series of mini-projects 
and homework assignments were given to the students to complete between the end of the preliminary 
investigation and start of the main project. These were constructed to enable further familiarisation with 
Moodle, especially in relation to forums. 
The project was made voluntary, for the important reason that the fundamental question driving the 
initiation of the action-research project was whether or not students could be encouraged to participate in 
an extra-curricular language activity. 
Observing the Main Cycle of Action Research (Observation) 
Tables 6-8 show the total number of postings to the Summer Communication Programme, the total 
number of replies and a breakdown of the type of replies. 
Keith Barrs Fostering Computer-Mediated L2 Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 18 
Table 6. Total Number and Mean of Postings 
 Number of 
students in 
class 
Number of students 
who 
voluntarily posted 
Total 
number of 
postings in 
the Moodle forum 
Average number of posts per 
student (mean average) 
8 Week 
Programme 
28 25 
(89% of the class) 
347 14 
Table 7. Total Number and Mean of Replies 
 Number of 
students in 
class 
Number of students 
who replied
Total 
number of 
replies 
 in the 
Moodle forum 
Average number of replies per 
student (mean average) 
8 Week 
Programme 
28 25 
(89% of the class) 
314 13 
Table 8. Total Number and Type Distribution of Postings which Received Replies 
 Number of 
students in 
class 
Number of students 
who replied
Total 
number of 
postings 
which 
received 
replies 
 in the 
Moodle forum 
A-B 
 
 
(Single) 
A-B-A 
 
 
(3-part) 
A-B-A-B… 
 
 
(Multiple) 
8 Week 
Programme 
28 25 
(89% of the class) 
208 106 
51% 
99 
48% 
3 
1% 
As can be seen from Tables 6-8, there was a large amount of target-language interaction during the 8-
week summer vacation; 347 postings were made of which 314 were replies. Of these replies, 48% were of 
the three-part exchanges pattern which is a significant increase from the pilot project where the majority 
of postings only received single replies. A typical three-part exchange interaction on the site involved 
about a paragraph of writing for the initiation, followed by a short reply, and then another short reply 
from the initiator. A typical three-part exchange interaction is presented here: 
Hello, everyone! 
I went to Izu Teddy Bear Museum and Izu Cactus Park. 
Teddy Bear Museum has many cute teddy bear dolls. When I went there, 
suzy’s zoo exihibition was held. In Japan, Izu and Nasu are only places which 
Teddy Bear Museums are located in. So I recommend you to go there if you visit 
Izu or Nasu! Izu Cactus Park has not only cactuses but also many animals, for example, 
kangarooes, pelicans, orangutans, especially peacocks are walking freely in the park, so I was 
able to see them right in front of me! 
Keith Barrs Fostering Computer-Mediated L2 Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 19 
Bye for now, Keiko [pseudonym] 
Hi Keiko, I enjoyed that trip to Izu with you very much!! 
I’ d like to go there again!! Have a nice vacation. 
 
Hello Saori,  
I was happy to meet you on Friday. 
I’m sorry I am late Thank you for your comment! 
I really really enjoyed this trip with you 
I am looking forward to going to YAMANASHI!!! 
Let’s plan about our trip! See you tomorrow.  
Somewhat disappointingly, the majority of the replies (51%) were still of the single initiation-reply 
variety, such as: 
Hello, everyone! 
i will go to France with my family for 10days(13-22) so i want to eat Franch sweets, for example, 
makaron,crepe and madeleine and so on. They are French sweets! 
By the way, when i went to Switzerland and ate crepe, it’s shape was different from Japanese 
crepe.(↓Switzerland’s crepe) so i think French crepe is different from Japanese crepe. If i eat 
these, i will tell you difference and i will buy you souvenir, but i can’t meet you until 24 
September, so i worry about deadline of eating.. 
if it is OK, i will buy you it...! see you! 
Chihiro 
 
Hi Chihiro! 
Switzerland’s crepe looks very delicious!!but it is dificult to eat isn’t it? 
French sweet is may be wonderful! Please tell me about it later. Have a good trip! 
See you. 
and only 1% of the interactions involved a continued threaded discussion, such as: 
Today, I ate Ichigoni which is retort-packed food. This was cooked in good stock. I coulded eat 
not only sea urchin but also scallop. I love it but I prefer eating at local restaurant to eating retort 
Keith Barrs Fostering Computer-Mediated L2 Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 20 
pouch. 
By the way, I knew some people don’t like sea urchin, so I want to introduce next famous food in 
Aomori. It is apple. There are many kinds of apples. For example tugaru, hokuto, huji. 
Please try to eat them! 
Hide 
 
Hey Hide 
I am a one of persons who like sea urchins!  
that apple’s picuture looks nice! 
I know there are many kinds of apples in Japan like you said. 
but i cannot realize the differences of apple’s taste. 
if you know tell me about it! 
 
Hello Naoko, I can tell you about the difference of apple. 
Tugaru weighs 400 gramme, it looks sphere and this sarcocarp is little hard. We can eat it in 
September. 
Hokuto weighs 300 gramme, it looks ellipse and very juicy. We can eat it in October. 
Huji weighs 350 gramme and it looks sphere or ellipse. This sarcocarp is coarse. We can eat it in 
November. 
I sometime eat Huji which is sweet! 
 
Wow! Thank you for teaching! 
I really understand. 
I will try to eat them in each term. 
 
No problem! Today, I ate tugaru but it was little early! 
I would like to try to eat this kinds of apple next week. 
Keith Barrs Fostering Computer-Mediated L2 Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 21 
Good bye 
It was hoped that interactions on the forum would be a series of replies connected back to the original 
post; much like an extended face-to-face discussion. However, this issue of how to encourage longer 
threads of interaction based on one posting can form the initiation of a further extension to the project. 
Just as the initial investigation raised issues which were investigated and addressed in the main 
intervention, issues which themselves were raised in the 2nd period can become initiations of further 
extensions to the research. Indeed, action research is a methodology which has no real identifiable end, 
but rather is like a work in progress where issues that arise through the implementation of the first rounds 
of research can themselves become initiations of further research cycles (Kemmis & McTaggart, 1988; 
Nunan, 1992). 
Reporting, Writing and Presenting about the Research (Reflection) 
The statistical data in terms of number of postings/replies shows that the project fostered high levels of 
independent and target language-focused participation, but it is difficult to report on the effect of the 
project on classroom dynamics. Although it was hoped that the project would help to foster positive group 
development processes (Dörnyei & Murphey, 2003, p. 4), this was not a specific research question for this 
investigation. However, it was felt necessary to get students to reflect on why they thought there was a 
high level of participation and interaction in the programme, so that learners’ voices could be included in 
the research findings. This would help to illuminate the numbers by revealing what the learners felt about 
participating in the project. These learner reflections are presented and categorised in the Appendix. 
A presentation was given on the construction, implementation and evaluation of this action-research 
project at the CamTESOL 2011 conference in Phnom Phenh, Cambodia. During the presentation, I 
explained the rationale behind the initiation and construction of the programme and took questions from 
participants interested in implementing a similar project at their institutions. The research was then 
written up into an action research article in order to offer wider dissemination. 
LIMITATIONS 
As addressed earlier, one of the problems of researching asynchronous VLE communications is that it is 
difficult to gather data on all types of interactions with the programme, rather than just the tangible ones 
in the form of written postings. Initially, a lack of posting to the programme may appear as a lack of 
interaction, but students may well be consuming the site content without producing anything themselves. 
This is an important area to take into consideration when evaluating such a programme.  
A further identified issue is that it was felt necessary in this particular project for the teacher to be 
excluded from the interactions. This was to ensure that interactions were student initiated and controlled, 
and to see whether the communication platform would be sustained without teacher intervention. 
However, this does not mean that the teacher need always be excluded. In fact participation by the teacher 
may be an excellent addition to the communication, although due thought should be given to how often 
and it what ways the teacher participates.  
It is also recognised that the small number of participants in the study is a potential issue when 
considering the external validity of the results, but also one which is common in small, localised action 
research studies. Because of this, no particular statements are being made on the generalisability of the 
results to other contexts and participants. As an action-research project, the goal was to investigate one 
particular language learning issue, with the desire that the results could lead to further investigations 
within the same context as well as to encouraging other educators to implement similar projects in their 
contexts. 
CONCLUSION AND REFLECTIONS 
Keith Barrs Fostering Computer-Mediated L2 Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 22 
The high level of participation and the large number of postings/replies, all conducted in the target 
language and from outside of the classroom, show that such a CMC platform was a useful and viable way 
of increasing the opportunity to engage students in target-language focused interactions. 
Further, the categorised reflections presented in the Appendix show that students participated in the 
project because of the desire to stay in contact with classmates and to practice their English skills over the 
summer holiday, these being the initiations of the action-research project. This would suggest that CMC 
projects such as this one can be of value in increasing opportunities for L2 interaction and positively 
engaging students in target-language practice while out of the classroom. 
However, it was also shown through the difference in results between the 1st and 2nd periods of AR that 
such a CMC platform would need to be not only student-negotiated (in terms of topics) but well-planned 
and supported (in terms of training in use of the technology) if it were to encourage high levels of 
participation/interaction. 
Through this action research, opportunities unrestricted by time and place (Warschauer, 1997) were 
created online whereby students could communicate and interact in the L2. Such collaboration and 
interaction form not only essential underlying principles of the socio-cultural theory of learning 
(Vygotsky, 1962) but also act as the guiding principles of the institution where the action-research project 
was carried out. In this way, the project can be seen as beneficial both to the students in terms of their 
language learning, and to the institution and teachers in terms of being able to increase the ways in which 
students can be engaged in L2-focused practice. 
Although not investigated here, such CMC programmes could be of benefit to the students in possibly 
maintaining and even developing their L2 skills, despite the interruption of out-of-class periods. Indeed, 
this could be an area of further investigation in that a teacher may like to research whether or not there is 
a development in English ability through the use of such a programme, and possibly compare it to a 
control group of the same linguistic level who had no or very limited L2 interactions in the specified 
period. Further, the nature of the interactions themselves could become an area of value for extended 
investigation. Indeed, the planned extension of this project will focus on the types of replies, specifically 
targeting how to encourage multiple replies to a posting which better mirror typical face-to-face 
interactions. 
APPENDIX. Post-project questionnaire 
A post-project questionnaire was distributed at the start of Semester 2 which asked the following 
question:  
25 students in our class wrote a comment or reply in our Summer Moodle Forum and there were about 
350 posts in 8 weeks. Why do you think students used this Summer Moodle Forum over the 8-week 
summer holiday?  
 
(It was only possible to get 25 responses [from 28 students in the class] because of absences at the start of 
semester 2) 
 
Keith Barrs Fostering Computer-Mediated L2 Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 23 
Answer Category 
We could post to it whenever we wanted  
 
 
 
 
Convenience and 
usefulness of the 
Moodle platform 
It was really convenient and useful to communicate 
Because everyone have much time to use computer and make a comment on 
Moodle 
I think the Moodle was the only way to know about this summer vacation of 
classmates 
I think every students hard to connect with friends and have less time to use 
English, so Moodle is useful for positively students. It’s easy to connect with 
friends in English 
Maybe many people know classmates address but we didn’t contact with all 
people, so we couldn’t know what everyone did during summer vacation. But 
by using Moodle, we could contact and know it, so it was popular 
Because we could post and comment when we had time. we didn’t meet for a 
long time so we wanted to come in contact with classmates 
I think everyone wants to improve their English skill during summer vacation  
 
Opportunity to 
practice English 
skills 
We wanted to improve our English skill so we tried to use English during the 
summer. I could enjoy and improve my English skill 
I think many people want to improve English writing skill or reading skill. For 
me I want to improve typing skill. This is because to use Moodle was a chance 
to use PC. This was nice opportunity for me 
I think everyone wants to improve their English ability 
I think everyone in the class wanted to improve their skill 
Many people wanted to communicate with classmates  
 
Opportunity to 
stay in contact 
with friends 
during the 
summer holiday 
Because we wanted to communicate with classmate and know what did he/she 
do 
Because everyone wanted a chance to talk in English 
Because many people wanted to keep in contact with friends during summer 
vacation 
Many people joined in Moodle in order to talk about everyone’s summer 
vacation 
I think maybe someone my classmates enjoyed to communicate in the Moodle 
in English 
Because we couldn’t meet in the summer vacation, so I want to know what they 
are doing and communicate with them 
I think the writing became interesting, so it became popular  
 
Interesting topics 
I think the topics were easy to write and we enjoyed writing comments each 
other 
The communication on the Moodle was more interesting than we expected 
Everybody always have a positive attitude for English. Moreover articles were 
interesting 
Because many people were positive and active  Other 
I think it was good. I thought the comments would be around 100 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Keith Barrs is an English instructor at Kanda University of International Studies in Chiba, Japan. He is 
interested in the application of technology to classroom practices, particularly the opportunities for 
linking the inside and outside of the classroom through the time-and-space independence offered by 
digital technologies. 
Keith Barrs Fostering Computer-Mediated L2 Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 24 
E-mail: keithbarrs@hotmail.com 
 
REFERENCES 
Barrs, K. (2010). Thinking and teaching in circles. Peerspectives Online, 7, 14–19. Retrieved from 
http://peerspectivesonline.org/recent-issues/. 
Barrs, K. (2011). Mobility in learning: The feasibility of encouraging language learning on 
smartphones. Studies in Self-Access Learning Journal, 2(3), 228–233. Retrieved from http://sisaljournal 
.org/archives/sep11/barrs/
Beatty, K. (2010). Teaching & Researching: Computer-Assisted Language Learning (2nd ed.). Essex: 
Pearson Education Limited. 
. 
Benson, P. (2006). Autonomy in language teaching and learning. Language Teaching, 40, 21–40. 
Burns, A. (1999). Collaborative action research for language teachers. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Daulton, F. E. (2008). Japan’s built-in lexicon of English-based loanwords. Clevedon: Multilingual 
Matters. 
Dörnyei, Z., & Murphey, T. (2003). Group dynamics in the language classroom. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Finholt, T., & Sproull, L. (1990). Electronic groups at work. Organization Science, 1, 41–64. 
Godwin-Jones, R. (2011). Mobile apps for language learning. Language Learning & Technology, 15(2), 
2–11. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2011/emerging.pdf. 
Gross, A., & Wolff, D. (2001). A multimedia tool to develop learner autonomy. Computer Assisted 
Language Learning, 14(3-4), 233–249. 
Kemmis, S., & McTaggart, R. (Eds.) (1988). The action research planner (3rd ed.). Geelong: Deakin 
University Press. 
Kukulska-Hulme, A. (2009). Will mobile learning change language learning? ReCALL, 21(2), 157–165. 
Lockley, T. (2011). Japanese students’ experience of ICT and other technology prior to university: A 
survey. JALT CALL Journal, 7(1), 93–102. 
Motteram, G., & Sharma, P. (2009). Blended learning in a web 2.0 world. International Journal of 
Emerging Technologies and Society, 7(2), 83–96. 
Nation, I. S. P. (2003). The role of the first language in foreign language learning. Asian EFL Journal, 
5(2), 1–8. 
Nation, I. S. P. (1990). Teaching and learning vocabulary. Boston: Heinle & Heinle Publishers. 
Nunan, D. (1992). Research methods in language learning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Reid, J. M. (1998). Understanding learning styles in the second language classroom. London: Prentice 
Hall. 
Senior, R. (2010). Connectivity: A framework for understanding effective language teaching in face-to-
face and online learning communities. RELC Journal, 41(2), 137–147. 
Stanlaw, J. (2004). Japanese English language and culture contact. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University 
Press. 
Keith Barrs Fostering Computer-Mediated L2 Interaction 
 
Language Learning & Technology 25 
Van Lier, L. (1996). Interaction in the language classroom: Awareness, autonomy and authenticity. 
London: Longman. 
Vygotsky, L.S. (1962). Thought and Language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Wallace, M. J. (1998). Action research for language teachers. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Walther, J. B. (1995). Relational aspects of computer-mediated communication: Experimental 
observations over time. Organization Science, 6(2), 186–203. 
Warschauer, M. (1997). Computer-mediated collaborative learning: Theory and practice. The Modern 
Language Journal, 81(4), 470–481. 
