Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2012/sunchang.pdf 
February 2012, Volume 16, Number 1 
pp. 43–61 
 
Copyright © 2012, ISSN 1094-3501 43 
BLOGGING TO LEARN: BECOMING EFL ACADEMIC WRITERS 
THROUGH COLLABORATIVE DIALOGUES 
Yu-Chih Sun, National Chiao Tung University  
Yu-jung Chang, National Tsing Hua University 
This study examines how blogs and their interactive and collaborative features help 
academically-advanced graduate students process academic writing knowledge and make 
sense of their writer identity. Seven graduate students undertaking Master’s level study in 
TESOL and Linguistics participated. The research questions are: (a) What kinds of 
writing-related topics do students blog about? (b) How do students’ collaborative 
dialogues on blogs help them process and reconstruct knowledge about academic writing? 
(c) How do students’ collaborative dialogues on blogs facilitate their negotiation of 
academic identities and construction of authorship? Open-coding and content analysis 
were conducted to inductively identify salient themes and patterns regarding students’ 
learning and perception of their writer identities. The results suggest that the blog activity 
not only encourages students to actively and reflectively engage in knowledge sharing, 
knowledge generation, and the development of numerous strategies to cope with 
difficulties encountered in the learning process. Blogs also endow students with a sense of 
authorship as the writers of blog entries and, at the same time, provide a space for them to 
sort out what being an author entails, their purposes of writing, and their authority in 
writing. 
Keywords: Academic Writing, Blogs, Dialogic Interaction, Identity, Reflective Learning, 
Writing Strategies 
INTRODUCTION  
Blogs have become one of the best-received applications in the Web 2.0 era and have fundamentally 
changed the way we use the Internet, from mostly information consumers to information creators and 
contributors (Du & Wagner, 2007). Blogs differ from listservs, discussion boards, or Wikis in that blogs 
are controlled and owned by the bloggers and are primarily centered on and identified with their author or 
authors themselves, rather than organized around specific topics. Characterized by their strong personal 
editorship, hyperlinking potential, archival features and public access to content (Nardi, Schiano & 
Gumbrecht, 2004), blogs invite users to share, create, and interact in a virtual space—through writing and 
commenting on each other’s posts—to generate knowledge (Richardson, 2006; Warlick, 2005). Such 
ongoing textual and intellectual collaboration nurtures the interconnectivity of ideas, arguments, and 
theories between bloggers, and encourages reflection and meaning negotiation (Godwin-Jones, 2003; 
Instone, 2005; Oravec, 2002, 2003; Warlick, 2005).  
In pedagogical settings, the effective use of blogs enables knowledge sharing through connecting learners 
to contexts beyond the classroom. In turn, this facilitates the development of individual and critical voices 
and prompts individual accountability in learning (Du & Wagner, 2007).  
Several studies have highlighted the advantages of integrating blogs in foreign language classrooms to 
develop writing skills (e.g., Armstrong & Retterer, 2008; Bloch, 2007; Campbell, 2003; Lee, 2010; 
Noytim, 2010; Sun, 2009), facilitate the development of a L2 writing community (Sollars, 2007), develop 
a sense of voice (Bloch, 2007; Rezaee & Oladi, 2008), and foster critical and synthesizing skills (Lee, 
2010; Mynard, 2007; Noytim, 2010). Additionally, the archiving feature available at many blog hosts can 
also facilitate the recording of learners’ learning experiences (Noytim, 2010), and serves as voice blog 
portfolios to archive learning progress and provide alternative speaking assessment (Huang & Hung, 
2009).  
Yu-Chih Sun and Yu-jun Chang Bloggging to Learn: Becoming EFL Academic Writers 
 
Language Learning & Technology 44 
 
In Sun’s (2009) study examining speaking practice on blogs, EFL students went through a series of 
stages, including conceptualizing, brainstorming, articulation, monitoring, and evaluating in the blog 
project. They perceived blogging as more than a means of learning; it was also a means of self-
presentation, information exchange, and social networking. In addition, the sense of ownership in the 
blogging process encouraged students to write freely and promoted self-expression, self-reflection, and 
construction of knowledge collaboratively (Lee, 2010; Noytim, 2010). Noytim’s (2010) study also 
showed that meaning served as the prominent focus rather than form in the blogging environment and 
students seemed to focus more on the fluency rather than the accuracy of their blog project. Furthermore, 
Lee’s (2010) study further indicated that peer feedback on the blogs can prompt additional interaction and 
discussion of ideas.  
For graduate students in EFL contexts, English writing may be the most critical skill they have to 
communicate with others as recognized members within the international academic community. 
Researchers such as Casanave (2002) and Hyland (2002) have reported that non-native English-speaking 
students not only need to know the rules and conventions of writing games, but must also have a 
recognizable writer identity—endorsed by their linguistic and rhetorical competence—to participate in 
various academic writing practices. Additionally, studies have also shown that through their participation 
in blog writing, language learners can acquire a sense of voice in a community of writers in English 
(Bloch, 2007; Rezaee & Oladi, 2008; Sollars, 2007). 
According to Hyland (2002), “academic writing, like all forms of communication, is an act of identity: it 
not only conveys disciplinary ‘content’ but also carries a presentation of the writer” (p. 1,092). A writer’s 
authorial identity, or authorship, therefore, entails the manifestation of the writer’s stance, confidence, and 
commitment to ideas (Hyland, 2002), or “the writer’s ‘voice’ in the sense of the writer’s position, opinion 
and beliefs” (Ivanic, 1998, p. 26). Ideally, when learning to communicate knowledge in academic 
languages and genres, students also learn to take on an authorial identity, and its associated 
responsibilities. However, in his comparison of the use of first personal pronouns—a linguistic feature 
that represents visible affirmation of one’s role in their written discourse—between expert writers and L2 
Hong Kong undergraduate novice writers, Hyland (2002) found a clear avoidance of first personal 
pronouns among L2 writers when making arguments or claims. Although reasons behind such downplay 
of authorial identity among L2 writers may be cultural (unacceptable in traditions of Asian cultures), they 
could also be attributed to the unequal power relationship between novices and experts (thesis writers vs. 
examiners); for the students felt that the authorial marker in first person pronouns was “too powerful,” 
“okay for scholars, but not our project,” or they felt “embarrassed to do it” (Hyland, 2002).  
Though past literature has shed light on the ways blogs can be used to encourage language learning and 
learners’ participation in writing practices, little, if any, empirical research has been done to examine how 
interactions in blogs help EFL graduate students develop academic writing knowledge and writer 
identities. That is, if blogs are powerful tools in language learning, how do EFL students’ blog 
interactions demonstrate and facilitate how they process the knowledge they receive and make sense of 
who they are as emerging academic writers? In the current study, the students were required to keep blog 
entries on a regular basis and reflect upon self-selected issues of their development as academic writers 
throughout one semester. Unlike previous studies that mainly view blogs as a medium for language skill 
development, the current study expands the conceptual scope of blogs and views blogs as a social 
medium for knowledge and identity construction and aims to explore what kinds of writing-related topics 
the students blog about, and how the collaborative dialogues on blogs facilitate their process, their 
learning about academic writing, and even their academic identities and construction of authorship. 
Yu-Chih Sun and Yu-jun Chang Bloggging to Learn: Becoming EFL Academic Writers 
 
Language Learning & Technology 45 
STUDY FRAMEWORK: CONSTRUCTIVISM, COLLABORATION, AND COLLABORATIVE 
DIALOGUE 
The theory of constructivism first appeared in the 1980s and has since become one of the major 
conceptual frameworks to shape contemporary education reforms and practices (Brooks & Brooks, 1993; 
Wilson, 1996). Knowledge, in the constructivist perspective, is temporary, developmental, and socially 
and culturally mediated (Brooks & Brooks, 1993); learning, then, is an active development of knowledge 
through learners’ experiences, personal goals, curiosities, and beliefs (Cole, 1992; Yakimovicz & 
Murphy, 1995). The two main strands of the constructivist approach are cognitive constructivism and 
social constructivism (Cobb, 1994). While cognitive constructivism focuses on how individuals 
understand things and construct knowledge discovered through interactions with the environment, social 
constructivism views learning as emerging from social interaction, dialogues, and collaboration (Bonk & 
Cunningham, 1998). Murray and Hourigan (2008) further used expressivist and socio-cognitivist theories 
to describe two approaches that target and serve distinct aspects of learning in the blogosphere. 
Expressivism encourages fluency, personal writings, and development of writers’ voices whereas socio-
cognitivism promotes a more process-oriented, problem-solving approach and emphasizes the importance 
of higher-order thinking skills. The former approach can be quite effective in the establishment of 
individual blogs whereas the latter approach can be effective in collaborative group blogs. Vygotsky 
(1978) also stressed the central role of social interaction in learning and proposed that scaffolding, or the 
assistance one receives from a more capable person, can enhance one’s learning.  
Bonk and Cunningham (1998) pointed out that communication technologies can realize active and 
collaborative construction of knowledge and learning. Though they exist only virtually, blogs may be 
regarded as constructivist learning environments, for they provide their users with opportunities to reflect 
on their experiences, posing contradictions, addressing misconceptions, and negotiating ideas with their 
readers. To examine how such a constructivist learning environment can foster EFL students’ academic 
writing knowledge and writer identities, this study also draws on Swain’s (2000) conceptualization of 
collaborative dialogue—“a dialogue in which speakers are engaged in problem solving and knowledge 
building” (p. 102). According to Swain, collaboration refers to the collective behavior of the learner-
generated resources that “may serve them individually” (p. 104). Since, dialogues are exchanges of 
utterances—the “saying” and responses to “what is said” (Swain, 2000, p. 104). Swain pointed out that 
the language used mediates a process of joint constructive interaction that facilitates learning among 
interlocutors. That is, in a “dialogue,” through the verbalization of problems, one makes an object 
available for scrutiny and calls for peers’ attention, reflection, and feedback (Swain, 2000). 
In language learning contexts, this knowledge-constructing collaborative dialogue “occurs when learners 
work together to solve linguistic problems and/or co-construct language or knowledge about language” 
(Swain, Brooks, & Tocalli-Beller, 2002, p. 172). It scaffolds learners so that they are able to perform at a 
higher level than their individual competence (Swain, 2000). Such collaborative interaction has been 
found to aid L2 learners in writing, especially when they were asked to co-construct texts and peer-edit 
(Swain et al., 2002; Swain & Lapkin, 1998; Storch, 1999; Tang & Tithecott, 1999). Through the lens of 
collaborative dialogue, blogs can be regarded as learning sites that nurture such collaborative interaction 
and scaffold learning. Since the conversations on blogs allow not one-way reflection but two-way 
conversation among blog users, they record the collaborative interaction and scaffolding among multiple 
writers in co-constructing each blog entry. Thus, by taking blogging’s collaborative nature into 
consideration, we hope to trace learners’ paths of knowledge processing, construction, and identity 
negotiation by analyzing the texts, or the dialogues, presented on their blogs. 
RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
This study examines the way collaborative dialogues in the blogosphere help academically-advanced EFL 
students develop and process academic writing knowledge and negotiate their writer identities. The study 
Yu-Chih Sun and Yu-jun Chang Bloggging to Learn: Becoming EFL Academic Writers 
 
Language Learning & Technology 46 
is guided by the following research questions:  
1. What kinds of writing-related topics do students blog about? 
2. How do students’ collaborative dialogues on blogs help them process and reconstruct knowledge 
about academic writing? 
3. How do students’ collaborative dialogues on blogs facilitate their negotiation of academic 
identities and construction of authorship? 
METHOD 
The study employs a case study research method to explore EFL writers’ development as academic 
writers through collaborative dialogues in the blogosphere. Due to the small sample size, descriptive 
statistics serve to provide a layer of data triangulation to the qualitative evidence.  
Participants 
The participants of the study were seven graduate students in Taiwan, including six female Masters 
students studying Teaching English to Speakers of Other Languages (TESOL) and one male student 
studying in a graduate program in Linguistics. The participants, aged 23 to 25, all cited Mandarin Chinese 
as their mother tongue. The students’ English proficiency level was high-intermediate to advanced, These 
graduate students were required to complete a MA thesis to meet the criteria of their programs. For the 
TESOL students, the theses had to be written in English whereas the Linguistics student could use either 
English or Chinese to complete his thesis. At the time of the study, these students were taking a one-
semester course in academic writing that aimed to orient them in the basics of writing about academic 
research in English. The class met once a week for two hours. 
Procedures 
There were two main kinds of assignments for the course. One required students to find five journal 
articles in TESOL-related disciplines, and analyze the moves (Introduction, Method, Result, and 
Conclusion) and language samples used in each move. The assignment served to provide students with 
opportunities to connect what they learn from the textbook to authentic academic writing works. The 
other assignment type was the blog project. Students had freedom of choice in terms of topics they would 
like to blog about as long as the topics were related to issues of academic writing in general terms. The 
students could choose a blog service of their preference during the first week of the semester. Throughout 
the semester, they were required to post 13 entries on their own blogs as well as 13 comments on their 
classmates’ blogs. Even though the blogging task was a semester-long task, students were expected to 
post a blog entry and comment on other blog entries once a week. They were encouraged to reflect upon 
their process of developing academic writing skills. Since the quality of reflection is valued more than the 
length of the entries, there was no set word count. 
In order to create a free and non-judgmental blogging environment, the project was only evaluated in 
terms of the number of posts, rather than the content of the blog posts. Students could write in either 
English or Chinese. Freedom of language choice allowed students to use the language they felt the most 
comfortable with and the most able to express their meaning fluently. Table 1 illustrates the language 
used by the participants in their blogs. Most students switched between Chinese and English when they 
wrote on the blogs and Chinese accounts for 67% of the language used in both posts and replies. 
The course instructor served as a facilitator to guide students as they embarked on the blog project. The 
instructor’s tasks mainly included setting up a group blog, discussing with students the difficulties they 
encountered in the blogging process, and providing suggestions to solve the problems.  
 
Yu-Chih Sun and Yu-jun Chang Bloggging to Learn: Becoming EFL Academic Writers 
 
Language Learning & Technology 47 
Table 1. Language Used by the Participants in their Blogs 
Student Number of posts Number of replies 
 Chinese English Total Chinese English Total 
S1 11 2 13 9  7 16 
S2 8 0 8 12 2 14 
S3 7 6 13 6 7 13 
S4 9 4 13 11 1 12 
S5 7 6 13 8 2 10 
S6 9 4 13 6 3 9 
S7 7 6 13 3 5 8 
Total 58 28 86 55 27 82 
% 67 33 100 67 33 100 
 
Data Analysis 
The text (i.e., 168 posts) written by the seven students in their blogs is the main source of data. As there 
were two researchers, the data was first read and coded separately. Moreover, since a large part of the 
data analysis effort was qualitative; the data set was read multiple times before—and continued during 
and after—open-coding and content analysis. Then, the data was explored inductively: with the research 
goals and questions serving as analytical principles, the researchers identified salient themes, patterns, and 
relationships regarding students’ learning and perception of their identities as writers. There were times 
when the collected data was examined from beginning to end to allow the researchers a more holistic 
picture of what was happening in the students’ blogs; at other times, the researchers focused on specific 
parts of the data (e.g., those from a particular participant’s blog, those discussing the similar topics) in 
order to cross-reference, compare, or explore particular themes. To ensure consistency in the coding and 
code-sorting process, codes and memos from the two researchers were compared and discussed for 
similarities and necessary adjustments were made in the naming of codes and code-categories. 
To answer the research questions, the analysis focuses on (a) the kinds of topics the students blogged 
about, (b) signs of knowledge accumulation/development displayed in the texts, and (c) indications of 
issues and difficulties the students faced in seeing themselves as EFL academic writers in their 
disciplines.  
RESULTS 
Research Question 1: What Kinds Of Writing-Related Topics Do Students Blog About? 
The participating EFL graduate students in this study utilized their blogs to talk about a wide range of 
issues related to their academic writing experiences. Tables 2 and 3 offer some basic information about 
the blog interaction among the seven students. Table 2 shows the different topics the students wrote about 
and responded to on the blogs. The categorization was based on the researchers’ inductive analysis of the 
blog texts. The descriptive statistical data shows that the students most commonly used their blogs to 
judge and (often negatively) evaluate their writing competence (25%), share learning experiences (18%), 
Yu-Chih Sun and Yu-jun Chang Bloggging to Learn: Becoming EFL Academic Writers 
 
Language Learning & Technology 48 
echo concerns and problems mentioned by others (13%), and offer each other help or share writing 
resources (12%). The average word count for blog posts, responses posted and received by each student is 
illustrated in Table 3. On average, students wrote 356 words per post and 90 words per reply. A total of 
83 responses were received for the course blogs. The most responses a student received was 16 and the 
least was eight.  
Table 2. Topics the Seven Students Blogged About 
Topics of blogging  Number Percentage 
(%) 
Self-judgment (negative), self-blaming 
e.g. “My grammar is terrible”; “I just would not start writing and I could 
not do anything about it.” 
49 25.0 
Sharing learning experiences (what I did, how/what I have learned) 
e.g. “If an online dictionary could not provide adequate information, I 
would use Google.”  
36 18.3 
Echoing concerns/problems  
e.g. “Verb tenses are also my weaknesses.” 
26 13.2 
Offering help/sharing writing resources 
e.g. “When you encounter problems like this, the best way is to look for a 
model.” 
25 12.7 
Asking for help (do you have the same problem?) 
e.g. “I am trying to sort out the logic and make it understandable to the 
teacher; can anyone help me?”; “I have always had this question…” 
19 9.6 
Hopeful encouragement  
e.g. “I will try this strategy this weekend, wish me luck!” 
18 9.1 
Class/course content reflection 
e.g. “After reading chapter 6, I found that…” 
9 4.6 
Appreciation of help 
e.g. “Your database strategy really inspired me. I am going to start my own 
database.”  
8 4.0 
Showing disagreement 
e.g. “Rex does not have to think so negatively about research limitations.”  
3 1.5 
Anxiety, confusion, and challenges 
e.g. “Do we really have to give up a research idea if we cannot find much 
literature on the topic?” 
2 1.0 
Praising peers 
e.g. “I really appreciate all the questions you raised in class! I have learned 
a lot from them!” 
1 0.5 
Yu-Chih Sun and Yu-jun Chang Bloggging to Learn: Becoming EFL Academic Writers 
 
Language Learning & Technology 49 
Table 3. Number Words per Post, Responses Posted and Received 
Student Number of 
posts 
Average 
word count 
per post 
Number of 
responses 
posted 
Average 
word count 
per 
response 
Number of 
responses 
received 
Average 
word count 
for 
responses 
received 
S1 13 425 20  69 16 67  
S2 8 546 0  0  14 93 
S3 13 279 16  67 13 96  
S4 13 323 9  76  12 135  
S5 13 313 13  116  10 78  
S6 13 298 6  57  9 92  
S7 13 378 18  134  8 68  
The data shown in Tables 2 and 3 illustrate that blogs provide students with a forum to share and interact 
with each other on issues related to their academic writing endeavors. They share information not only on 
issues directly related to academic writing (e.g., sharing writing resources, class/course content 
reflection), but also monitor their progress (e.g., sharing learning experiences), post problems encountered 
(e.g., echo concerns and problems, ask for help, admit anxiety, confusion, and challenges), and offer 
support to each other (e.g., hopeful encouragement, praise peers, offer help/writing resources). Among the 
various types of topics, self-judgment, sharing experiences, and echoing concerns account for 57% of the 
students’ posts. Based on the types of topics the seven students blogged about, blogs could be regarded as 
a valuable space for students to continue exploring the meaning of being academic writers outside 
content-dominated in-classroom instruction. 
Research Question 2: How Do Students’ Collaborative Dialogues On Blogs Help Them Process And 
Reconstruct Knowledge About Academic Writing? 
The content analysis of the seven participants’ blog entries and responses indicates that through their 
engagement in writing and interacting on blogs, the students experienced and demonstrated one or more 
aspects of knowledge development in academic writing: (a) understanding knowledge, (b) reflecting on 
study skill development, and (c) learning through social support.  
Understanding Knowledge  
Many of the participating students blogged about their interpretation and accumulation of newly-acquired 
knowledge in academic writing. Table 4 summarizes brief examples of students’ understanding of 
academic knowledge in their blogs.  
Yu-Chih Sun and Yu-jun Chang Bloggging to Learn: Becoming EFL Academic Writers 
 
Language Learning & Technology 50 
Table 4. Examples of Students’ Understanding of Knowledge 
Understanding 
knowledge 
Examples 
Restating newly-
acquired knowledge  
 “I have a clearer idea about the structure of a thesis.” (S5) 
 “I learn some knowledge about some useful skeleton sentences available 
for use.” (S5) 
 realize different verb tense represent different meaning and tenses can 
even help researchers “position themselves in their paper.” (S5) 
 “I was stuck by what verb tenses to use when I write my literature review. 
I found that researchers have no consensus on the verb tense usage in their 
literature reviews; some use the past tense, some use simple present, some 
even are not consistent within a text.” (S5) 
Activating and 
expanding on prior 
knowledge  
 “I remember when I took advanced writing in college, our teacher kept 
reminding us not to write very complex sentences.” (S3) 
 “academic writing is very different from the ‘pleasure’ writing that I 
learned in the past.” (S5) 
Sharing resources and 
strategies  
 “I have no APA guide at hand, so I searched online and found much 
information about APA format.” (S3) 
 “I think the use of transition words can also help! You may also find some 
useful information in Swain’s book (Unit 5).” (S5) 
For example, S3 tried to summarize the key points she had learned about writing data commentary in one 
of her blog entries (Example 1):  
This week we talked about data commentary. Data commentary includes three parts: 
1. Location elements and summary statements; 
2. Highlighting statements; 
3. Discussions of implications, problems, exceptions, recommendations, etc. 
I think the most difficult part is the second element. In data commentary, we cannot simply repeat 
all the details in words and cover all the information. We have to get something from the data. 
We have to act as a detective to spot the differences in the data. (S3) 
The student further described how her new writing situation in graduate school activated her learning 
about the use of the simple sentence in the past:  
Regarding the issue of “simple sentence” . . . . I took the course of Advanced Writing when I was 
an undergraduate. The teacher kept stressing that we should avoid writing complicated English 
sentences. We were taught to keep the sentence structure as simple as possible and to avoid 
constructing lengthy sentences. He/she showed us some commonly-made mistakes by students . . 
. . Now, I often remind myself of these mistakes and try not to make similar ones when I write. 
(S3)  
Yu-Chih Sun and Yu-jun Chang Bloggging to Learn: Becoming EFL Academic Writers 
 
Language Learning & Technology 51 
Furthermore, the use of blogs allowed them to demonstrate their development of metacognitive 
knowledge by sharing how they planned and thought about the learning process and how they monitored 
and evaluated their production or comprehension. For instance, numerous blog entries were about 
exchanging useful Web site information they had come across (i.e., online APA guides), recommending 
books they had recently read, and sharing writing tips they had discovered. S5 used one blog post to 
explain the tips she had learned about writing literature reviews (Example 2): 
After I read the references that I found, I start brainstorming the viewpoints that should be 
included in the literature review. . . . I would jot down the ideas and research findings that I need 
or other relevant viewpoints from the literature. . . .[since] it is not an easy task to summarize 
such a large amount of information . . . . When I read articles, I pay special attention to how other 
authors systematically tell us all the information . . . . I would then incorporate what I learn from 
them into my next writing task. (S5) 
In short, the use of blogs provided a forum that enabled multiple constructions of knowledge development 
in academic writing for these EFL graduate students. Through restating newly-learned knowledge, 
building on their prior knowledge and experiences, and sharing resources and learning strategies, these 
students could reflect upon the material they had learned and enhance their cognitive and metacognitive 
performance as academic writers.  
Reflecting on Study Skill Development 
The participants also used their blogs as places to share and reflect upon numerous strategies to cope with 
difficulties encountered in their reading process, including metacognitive strategies, problem-solving 
strategies, language inquiry strategies, and different ways of applying knowledge learned in classes to 
academic writing situations. Table 5 summarizes examples of students’ reflection on their study skill 
development. 
While East Asian students have traditionally been considered to be more passive in classrooms (Cheng, 
2000; Tsui, 1996), these students looked forward to becoming more critical in their writing practices. In 
Taiwan, the importance of critical thinking skills is not impressed upon students until they enter 
university or, in most cases, graduate programs. Since developing critical thinking skills was a relative 
new challenge for these graduate students, they often shared their reflections on their changing 
perceptions about applying critical thinking skills to writing (Example 3):  
When we start being a graduate student, everyone surrounding us talks about critical thinking. I 
thought the way to present critical thinking was to find faults in other’s research. . . . However, 
after reading unit six, I have more understanding about writing critiques. I should position myself 
as a reader without any [presuppositions] such as fault-finding intention. I should include both 
complimentary elements and critical elements in critiques. (S3) 
Yu-Chih Sun and Yu-jun Chang Bloggging to Learn: Becoming EFL Academic Writers 
 
Language Learning & Technology 52 
Table 5. Examples of Students’ Reflection on Study Skill Development  
Metacognitive 
strategies  
Examples 
Problem-solving 
strategy 
 “I suddenly found that a brief summary after each subtitles in the literature 
review part played such an important role in connecting different kinds of 
information.” (S5) 
 “The best way is to find one published paper of different research topic 
from yours and use it as a template for your own writing.” (S4) 
 “I try to put away the articles and use my own words to express the 
meaning, to not let the paper that I read influence me. In this way, my flow 
of thought will not be interrupted.” (S3) 
Language inquiry 
strategy 
 “I search Google Scholar and found the following answers: 
24 items for ‘the learning process is triggered’ 
23 items for ‘the learning is triggered’  
219,000 items for ‘is triggered’ 
Based on the above statistics, the most likely interpretation of the findings 
is that ‘is triggered’ is not commonly used in TESOL field.” (S6) 
 “For me, it takes language intuition to correctly use preposition. Usually, I 
use a preposition when ‘it sounds right.’ Then, I will use Google to find 
evidence to prove or disapprove of one’s language intuition on collocation 
usage.” (S5) 
 “Now, I always jot down good sentences or expressions while reading 
journal articles and put them into different moves. Gradually, it becomes a 
personalized electronic academic language database.” (S5) 
Knowledge 
application  
 “It is important to find a few well-written journal articles as model papers, 
then analyze and imitate how the authors contemplate and present their 
arguments and ideas.” (S5) 
 “paying attention to how journal writers structure their literature review and 
applying it to one’s own writing.” (S5) 
The following excerpt is from the comments left in response to S7’s blog entry “My understanding of 
academic writing.” The students not only agreed upon the importance of critical thinking to academic 
writing through their exchanges on the blogs, but also questioned how they could become critical 
thinkers/writers (Example 4): 
S5: “Inspiring reading, critical thinking, and logical reasoning” really are very important skills 
that we need to be equipped with [as academic writers]. However, how to equip us with those 
skills remains a question. I’ve been told that it is so vital that graduate students need to know how 
to read and think critically, but I know clearly that I myself am very weak in this skill. I’d like to 
know if anyone can share with me some ways to improve my critical thinking skill. 
S3: In my opinion, critical thinking can’t be taught. If it is taught, it is [no longer] CRITICAL 
thinking. 
S1: I think being a “reflective” learner, reader, or teacher might be an easier way to start! After 
all, the concept of “critical thinking” itself is too abstract. 
Yu-Chih Sun and Yu-jun Chang Bloggging to Learn: Becoming EFL Academic Writers 
 
Language Learning & Technology 53 
S4: Critical thinking can’t be taught, like S3 said. But just like the concept of reflective reader, 
which S1 brought up, if we can think carefully and reflectively after we read something, our 
critical thinking skills can really improve.  
For these students, critical thinking was regarded as essential to becoming competent academic writers 
that brought innovative contributions to their academic fields. Blogs then offered a space wherein they 
could voice their concerns and anxiety about acquiring such skill and support each other via the exchange 
of ideas through discussion. Through these collaborative discussions, the students came to redefine 
“critical thinking” with a concept that seemed more approachable to them—“think carefully and 
reflectively.” They agreed that reflective thinking, or thinking carefully as suggested by S4, was an easier 
skill to grasp for relatively novice authors like themselves. 
Moreover, after a talk given about how to make effective use of dictionaries, one student reflected on the 
timing of looking up definitions (Example 5):  
During writing, I don’t like to put off those unresolved problems so I always resort to dictionary 
immediately . . .before I can move on to the next sentence . . . . The frequent interruption due to 
dictionary checking will cut off my flow of thoughts. . . . To solve the problem, I should read 
more and enlarge my vocabulary repertoire so that I don’t have to look words and expressions up 
in the dictionary during writing process (S3). 
In addition to the issue of interruption by the urge to use a dictionary, S3 also shared her insights about 
the limitations of online dictionaries. According to her, online dictionaries were usually not detailed 
enough in regards to the usage or collocation of a word. S3 said she would sometimes “go to Google” for 
a more comprehensive understanding of how a word/phrase was commonly used in authentic contexts. 
However, she cautioned that since the usually massive amount of search results presented by Google 
could include some non-standard English usage, “I will try out different search strings [of language 
patterns] and see which one is the most commonly used one” (S3).  
In response to S3’s post, S4 echoed her frustrations by commenting that “I also get frequently stuck 
during my writing process because I always have the feeling that my choice of word is incorrect. I also 
use Google to find out how other people use a particular language pattern.” However, S4 also pointed out 
that “I usually try not to look things up in the dictionary when I am reading, unless there are too many 
unknown words. I think if you meet the unknown words several times, you will learn them eventually. 
The best way to learn a word is to learn it with their ‘friends’ [collocation].” S3 responded to S4’s 
comment by acknowledging that “I feel that I have a kind of ‘obsessive compulsive behavior’ [when it 
comes to] looking words up whenever I encounter unknown vocabulary. . . . I am not sure if it is 
beneficial or harmful to my learning.” Such dialogic interactions indicate that blogs facilitate the sharing 
of student inquiry and their struggles with strategies used in academic writing that could foster both their 
awareness and self-evaluation of their learning process. Through sharing and interacting with each other 
on the blogs, their prior knowledge, experience, and capacity for reflection were activated. 
Learning through Social Support 
Blogs provide a medium for students to share their feelings and show mutual support. Table 6 presents 
examples of students’ learning from social support.  
Yu-Chih Sun and Yu-jun Chang Bloggging to Learn: Becoming EFL Academic Writers 
 
Language Learning & Technology 54 
Table 6. Examples of Students’ Learning from Social Support 
Strategies Examples 
Sharing 
feelings  
 “I have writing phobia.” (S1) 
 “The way I motivate myself to concentrate on writing is to think about what benefits I 
can get after I finish it.” (S5) 
Showing 
mutual 
support 
 “Since some of us have mentioned that we have to write in order to improve our writing, 
why don’t we write in English in this blog?” (S5) 
 “About writing critiques, I have the same feeling as S5’s.” (S3) 
 “Anyone who shares the same thought? Or any different view point? (S5) 
 “I also encounter the same problem.” (S3) 
 “I also encounter similar difficulty.” (S7) 
 “I wonder if others also make similar mistakes, or if it is only me.” (S3) 
The participants of this study consistently used phrases like “I also encounter the same problem” and 
shared their tips about how to cope with writing difficulties, such as procrastination. The following 
excerpt is from a student’s response to a post of her classmate, lamenting the fact she was forced to 
choose between her writing assignments and her personal life (Example 6): 
How I make myself concentrate on writing is to think solely on what benefits I can receive after 
completing the writing!! For example, if I want to take a good break next week, then, I will push 
myself to hang in there and write as much as I can. Maybe you can also think about it… complete 
the writing as soon as possible so that you can go back to your hometown and meet with him 
(your boyfriend) . . . Try it yourself (S5). 
Research Question 3: How Do Students’ Collaborative Dialogues On Blogs Facilitate Their 
Negotiation Of Academic Identities And Construction Of Authorship? 
According to Skeggs (2008), “identity is always underpinned by recognition; ‘I am’ is a recognition of a 
dialogic relationship in which the way one is being recognized occurs with how one recognizes oneself” 
(p. 12). The seven students’ interaction and reflection on their blogs shows that blogging helped them 
make sense of who they were within their academic community and facilitated their understanding and 
negotiation of authorship.  
Identities and Positions 
Being graduate students in Master’s programs, the phrasing and word choices used in the blogs showed 
that the EFL students were keenly aware of their relatively-novice status compared to native-English-
speaking academic writers or other established scholars in the discipline. In fact, the most salient 
identities the students took up when they blogged were “beginning academic writers” and 
“inexperienced/junior researchers” who were “still in the process of learning to read, think, and then write 
like a researcher or a good academic writer” (S7). However, these “inexperienced,” “novice,” and 
“learner” identities were not fixed. At times, they indicated the students’ self-belittlement; at others, they 
were taken on to ascertain their learning responsibilities and/or to project a hopeful learning trajectory.  
Based on the analysis of blog topics (as shown in Table 2), the students tended to devalue their EFL and 
learner identities by referring to the challenges they encountered. They raised questions like “What’s 
wrong with me?” or offered harsh self-criticism: “my poor grammar is giving me a hard time when I am 
working on [writing] tasks!” (S3); “I am still shy about what I wrote because my understanding [of the 
topic] is just superficial” (S4); “the lack of logical coherence in my writing is a result of my habit of 
Yu-Chih Sun and Yu-jun Chang Bloggging to Learn: Becoming EFL Academic Writers 
 
Language Learning & Technology 55 
jumping about from one topic to another in conversation” (S1). Moreover, the students’ interactions on 
the blogs also demonstrated their negative perceptions of themselves as unqualified members of the 
academic community. In a blog exchange S7 initiated about utilizing a Web concordancer to facilitate 
writing, she said (Example 7) she would “turn to concordancers for help next time when encountering 
writing problems.” Although S6 agreed that Web tools such as concordancers were helpful resources, she 
commented: 
Sometimes we know these tools are useful, but we don’t use it because of our natural laziness. I 
had already known how useful the concordancer was in the last semester, but I just used it for few 
times . . . so sad.  
S6’s comment was echoed by S1, “I agree with S6. I am just too lazy to use all those [reference] tools. 
The usefulness of any tools is not the point; it’s the ability to be diligent.”  
Their blog entries also revealed their anxiety about their lack of disciplinary knowledge—the inability to 
see the big picture within an ongoing scholarly conversation due to their relative novice status. S3, for 
instance (Example 8), suggested that the disorientation she suffered when writing proposals or 
introductions for course term papers was because she was not well-read. S1 responded with a sense of 
shared guilt and agreed that “We really need to read more, more, more, and more, and even more.” While 
aligning herself with her cohorts as an under-informed learner, another one of the classmates, S5, raised 
an objection: “Everyone is saying that we need to read more. But the real question is how much reading is 
enough?” S3, the initiator of this entry, proposed an answer: “Read till you can express yourself smoothly 
in writing.” 
Other than seeing themselves as inexperienced novices, the analysis of blog entries shows their alignment 
with non-native English-speaking (NNES) scholars who had had to overcome similar language struggles 
and established recognized memberships in the larger TESOL community. What follows is an excerpt 
from an entry posted by S6, pondering the difficulties her professors might have encountered in writing 
(Example 9):  
Today I read Dr. Sasaki’s article “A scholar on the periphery: Standing firm, walking slowly,” in 
which she said she had to struggle so much to be able to write in English. This sentence hit me 
hard because I had never thought that a competent professor in TESOL might also encounter the 
same difficulties. My curiosity was roused. What kind of difficulties do my professors face when 
writing? How do they solve their problems and improve their writing abilities?  
S1 echoed: 
I am also struggling with writing and searching for my academic voice. I guess the professors 
have been through the same challenges. They were once students; and we will one day be the 
teachers. I am really interested in knowing how they learned to write—or if they are still 
struggling? 
As they questioned their own competence in writing and sought an academic voice on the blogs, the 
exchange about established NNES scholars not only helped them realize that if they could just work hard 
enough, they would eventually make it in the English-speaking community—even as NNES speakers—
and would one day “see the pride of being non-native speaker” (S4).  
The Making of An Author 
Though this study is not focused on the use of certain linguistic features as a manifestation of authorial 
identity mentioned in Hyland’s (2002) study, the use of blogs seemed to complicate the idea of academic 
Yu-Chih Sun and Yu-jun Chang Bloggging to Learn: Becoming EFL Academic Writers 
 
Language Learning & Technology 56 
authorship among these academically advanced/EFL students. In fact, the act of blogging gave the 
students a sense of authorship as the writers of the blog entries and, at the same time, provided a space for 
them to begin to identify what accounts for being an author, their purposes of writing, and finally, their 
sometimes ambivalent authority in writing. They unanimously showed a keen awareness of their 
responsibility as academic writers—and especially of the need for them to produce clear, logical, and 
coherent texts for readers to follow. S1 wrote: “You have to be kind and always think about your 
readers.” S7 added: “I need to do more inspiring reading, critical thinking, and logical reasoning to train 
myself as a good researcher as well as writer with clear thought and innovative contribution in the 
academic field.” Moreover, in their blogs, some of the students commented that writers should be able to 
voice their own opinions rather than “clinging on to words written by other people” (S3); after all, “It’s 
true that no one owns the [English] language, but the writer owns his or her sentences” (S1). Furthermore, 
many also believed that writers should be able to voice their own thoughts through their own styles and 
tones. “Everyone has their own style and tone [in writing] . . . . We can’t lose our own selves and voices 
for the sake of confinement,” said S1.  
Nevertheless, the students’ authority over their own texts could be called into question when their writing 
was reviewed by peers or instructors. However, they did not always passively submit to other people’s 
comments. In an entry entitled “How [to decide whether] to use this word or that word,” S6 described a 
peer-editing activity in which she negotiated the use of the word “trigger” with her peer-editor, S3 
(Example 10): 
S6: I used “trigger,” a word I had learned from a journal article, in the context of “the learning 
process is triggered [by]…” in my final paper. I thought it fit nicely, but S3 suggested that I 
should take out the word “process” because a point can be triggered but not a process. . . . I then 
went online and searched the word “trigger” on Google Scholar and found 24 items for “the 
learning process is triggered” and 23 items for “the learning is triggered” and 219,000 items for 
“is triggered”. . . . I then read more carefully and found that “the process is triggered” has been 
used in publications in engineering disciplines and there was even a phrase “the learning process 
is triggered by a problem” by [John] Dewey! So I decided to keep my own sentence.” 
In this instance, S6 was able to defend the authority of her word choice in the text by drawing on a 
systematic analysis of authentic language usage from an online ‘corpus’. 
In another blog entry S2 pointed out that inexperienced academic writers like him often set a research 
topic for the thesis only to find there was not enough related literature on that topic (Example 11). Though 
others voiced similar concerns in their comments on his entry, S4 questioned the validity of regarding the 
lack of existing literature as problematic to conducting research: 
I have always wondered, can’t we still work on the topic even if we can’t really find much past 
literature on it? Didn’t much groundbreaking research also get started with limited information 
from the past? Those researchers did not surrender to “lack of literature,” did they? 
S4 tried to negotiate her positioning not only as a graduate student who shared S2’s concern, but as a 
researcher, who, though new to the field, may be able to see a critical gap among existing literature and 
initiate groundbreaking research.  
Regardless of whether the students were right in their beliefs about writing, the blog space gave them a 
chance to openly address concerns and created a buffer space that allowed the students to negotiate and 
practice taking on the authorial identity that might seem far-fetched for the students in Hyland’s (2002) 
study. In the end, these students’ collaborative dialogues on the blogs helped scaffold individuals to 
establish themselves as authors and researchers with an eye for good research topics and an active say in 
Yu-Chih Sun and Yu-jun Chang Bloggging to Learn: Becoming EFL Academic Writers 
 
Language Learning & Technology 57 
the end product rather than passive and problem-stricken learners of academic writing.  
DISCUSSION  
The mixed-method analysis of seven EFL graduate students’ collaborative dialogues on blogs 
demonstrates that blogs allow students to scaffold each other in navigating their writing tasks and 
processing academic writing knowledge, as well as negotiating and understanding their identities as 
academic writers. As the constructivist perspective proposes that effective learning involves the active 
process of linking learners’ existing knowledge with new ideas for them to make sense of a new situation 
(Naylor & Keogh, 1999), the range of different writing-related topics the students in this study discussed, 
shared, and explored on their blogs also helped them come to a newer understanding of their experiences, 
performances, and roles in writing. 
Social constructivist theory believes that the development of knowledge requires active engagement and 
social interaction on the part of the learners (Jenkins, 2000). The social process serves as a means of 
internalizing ideas encountered in the socio-cultural realm (Nyikos & Hashimoto, 1997). Blogs, in this 
study, provided a realm for students to process and re-construct knowledge through social interaction with 
each other online: To share ones’ eureka moments of academic writing (e.g., changing understanding of 
critical thinking), raise questions regarding writing (e.g., making effective use of dictionaries), and/or 
summarize what one had learned about a specific genre (e.g., data commentary) (As shown in examples 
1–5). When one verbalizes an issue or a problem via his/her blog, one not only reflects and responds to 
the issue/problem through the process of constructing the text (or a written utterance in a dialogue), but 
also invites others to engage in the problem-solving and/or knowledge-constructing dialogue by making 
the issue/problem available for others to ponder and respond to in an open blog forum.  
The social and emotional support revealed in the blog project indicates the potential of blogs in promoting 
the kind of mutually beneficial social interaction that is conducive to knowledge development. In this 
study, while the students supported and encouraged each other collectively to understand academic 
writing through their blogs, they were also critically re-examining their collective anxieties, positioning, 
and duties as relatively novice writers through the collaborative dialogues. The results show that they 
spent much time sharing their frustrations, confusions, and feelings of inexperience as they tried to write 
academically in a foreign language (Example 7). Nevertheless, through their discussion, they were able to 
come to a newer understanding of their learning experiences rather than feeling lost and belittling 
themselves as ignorant and under-qualified. They might be able to find a possible solution to their bad 
writing habits (Example 6) or find a cause to motivate themselves to work harder (Example 8). More 
importantly, as shown in Example 9, their collective re-construction of the possible learning challenges 
established NNES scholars might have faced—and might still be facing—in developing an academic 
voice might have served as an imagined social support that helped these EFL learners in academic writing 
and research put their own struggles in perspective, soothed their anxiety about their own learning 
struggles, and encouraged them to carry on.  
Additionally, blog entries did not offer a one-sided portrayal of the students as despaired and hopeless 
learners; rather, they showed their multifaceted experiences in learning to write. As language learners, 
they were resourceful in actively seeking answers and deftly making use of their acquired knowledge and 
various learning strategies. Furthermore, although they were relatively novice writers faced with 
uncertainties in newly-acquired knowledge, they were able to negotiate their identities as writers and 
claim the responsibility to defend their voice (Examples 10 and 11). As Casanave (1995) found, not all 
students felt that the top-down instruction was compatible with them and their beliefs about writing and 
learning. Here the students utilized the blog space individually or jointly to express tension, discomfort, 
frustration, and skepticism towards the knowledge, instruction, or comments encountered or received 
from their peers or authorities in the scholarly field (e.g., professors, other scholars in the field, textbooks 
or reference books). Hence, despite their nonnative-English-speaking and learner status, the issues of their 
Yu-Chih Sun and Yu-jun Chang Bloggging to Learn: Becoming EFL Academic Writers 
 
Language Learning & Technology 58 
concern were no longer whether they could—or could not—be authors when constructing academic texts 
in English, but the responsibilities they need to shoulder as authors of their texts.  
CONCLUSION 
As Web technology becomes an increasingly integral part of language education today, this study shows 
how blogs and their interactive and collaborative features can help academically-advanced graduate 
students process and reconstruct academic writing knowledge and negotiate their identity as EFL writers. 
The findings of the study also allowed for the rethinking of the roles that blogs can play in writing 
instruction, and how human−computer interaction, now an inevitable reality, can be judiciously 
incorporated into our pedagogic decisions.  
Despite the various advantages the addition of blogs (or any interactive Web program) can potentially 
bring to course instruction, it is important to note that technology itself does not guarantee better 
education (Yu, Sun, & Chang, 2010) and that an interactive Web discussion forum does not automatically 
make students learn. In the study, there were times when students simply echoed the problems someone 
else had encountered rather than offering a constructive solution; there were other times when students 
could not come up with a satisfactory answer even after several rounds of discussion; and there were still 
other times when cries for help were simply left unanswered on the open blogs. Therefore, if blogs are to 
be used as a platform to encourage and extend students’ learning, instructors need to monitor students’ 
interaction and provide timely intervention. That is, in addition to the attention paid to the process and 
products of learning, instructors should take part in students’ discussion and respond to queries online or 
in class to help keep the interactive dialogues on target and meaningful. After all, it is one thing to extend 
student-centered learning after class by allowing them to be owners and authors of blogs; it is another, 
however, to potentially leave these inexperienced academic writers fumbling in the dark, or misled into 
believing they would eventually find their way online.  
The present study confirms the conduciveness of collaborative interaction on blogs in facilitating 
learners’ meaning-making process. However, the results presented are not meant to serve as evidence of 
students’ success or failure in becoming academic writers in English. Unlike one’s acquisition of 
particular grammatical or pragmatic feature—a progress that can be ascertained by employing pre-tests, 
post-tests, or other forms of comparison mechanisms (i.e. drafts and revisions) (e.g., Swain & Lapkin, 
1998; Tang & Tithecott, 1999)—identity development and perception change are intricate and 
multifaceted processes that are not likely to happen within a single language-related episode (LRE) 
(Swain et al., 2002) or the exchange of a few blog comments. Building on what the study has found, 
longitudinal studies should be carried out in the future to further enrich our understanding of the long-
term effect of blogging; that is, whether students’ dialogues on blogs eventually change the way they 
write and understand writing academically.  
Moreover, it is important to note that the current study only examines a group of seven graduate students 
in TESOL and linguistics taking a graduate course in academic writing. Considering that these students 
might be more sensitive to issues surrounding academic writing and English learning than students in 
other disciplines, results of this study should not be casually generalized to represent the attitudes and 
perspectives of all learners of academic English. Instead, future investigation on how online interaction 
shapes learners’ understanding and development of knowledge should consider recruiting students from a 
wider range of disciplines, for “a thorough examination of peer−peer dialogue is instructive for teachers, 
researchers, and the learners themselves as a means of understanding how learning is happening, and 
what is going right or wrong with the process” (Swain et al., 2002, p. 181). 
Yu-Chih Sun and Yu-jun Chang Bloggging to Learn: Becoming EFL Academic Writers 
 
Language Learning & Technology 59 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Yu-Chih Sun is currently working as a professor at institute of Teaching English for Speakers of Other 
Languages at National Chiao Tung University in Taiwan. Her research interests include computer assisted 
language learning, academic writing, and teacher development. 
E-mail: sunyc@mail.nctu.edu.tw 
Yu-jung Chang is an assistant professor in the Department of Foreign Languages and Literature at 
National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan. She is interested in issues related to globalization, teaching and 
learning English for academic purposes, and EFL/ESL students’ language learning resources and 
identities.  
E-mail: yjchang@mx.nthu.edu.tw 
 
REFERENCES 
Armstrong, K., & Retterer, O. (2008). Blogging as L2 writing: A case study. AACE Journal, 16(3), 233–
251. 
Bloch, J. (2007). Abdullah’s Blogging: A generation 1.5 student enters the blogosphere. Language 
Learning & Technology, 11(2), 128–141. 
Bonk, C., & Cunningham, D. (1998). Searching for learner-centered, constructivist, and sociocultural 
components of collaborative educational learning tools. In C. Bonk & K. King (Eds.), Electronic 
collaborators (pp. 25−50). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Brooks, J. G. & Brooks, B. G. (1993). The case for constructivist classrooms. Alexandria, VA: 
Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. 
Campbell, A. P. (2003). Weblogs for use with ESL classes. The Internet TESL Journal, 9(2). Retrieved 
from http://iteslj.org/Techniques/Campbell-Weblogs.html. 
Casanave, C. P. (1995). Local interactions: Constructing contexts for composing in a graduate sociology 
program. In D. Belcher & G. Braine (Eds.), Academic writing in a second language: Essays on research 
and pedagogy (pp. 83–110). Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publication Corporation. 
Casanave, C. P. (2002). Writing games: Multicultural case studies of academic literacy practices in 
higher education. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Cheng, X. (2000). Asian students’ reticence revisited. System, 28(3), 435–446. 
Cobb, P. (1994). Where is the mind? Constructivist and socio-cultural perspective on mathematical 
development. Educational Researcher, 23(7), 13–20.  
Cole, P. (1992). Constructivism revisited: A search for common ground. Educational Technology, 33(2), 
27–34. 
Du, H. S., & Wagner, C. (2007). Learning with weblogs: Enhancing cognitive and social knowledge 
construction. IEEE Transactions of Professional Communication, 50(1), 1–16.  
Godwin-Jones, B. (2003). Blogs and Wikis: Environments for on-line collaboration. Language Learning 
& Technology, 7, 12–16. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/emerging/default.html/. 
Huang, H. T., & Hung, S. T. (2009). Implementing electronic speaking portfolios: Perceptions of EFL 
students. British Journal of Educational Technology. 41(5), 84–88. 
Hyland, K. (2002). Authority and invisibility: Authorial identity in academic writing. Journal of 
Yu-Chih Sun and Yu-jun Chang Bloggging to Learn: Becoming EFL Academic Writers 
 
Language Learning & Technology 60 
Pragmatics, 34(8), 1091–1112.  
Instone, L. (2005). Conversations beyond the classroom: Blogging in a professional development course. 
Paper presented at the ASCILITE conference, Brisbane, Australia. 
Ivanic, R. (1998). Writing & identity: The discoursal construction of identity in academic writing. 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Jenkins, E. W. (2000). Constructivism in school science education: Powerful model or the most 
dangerous intellectual tendency? Science & Education, 9, 599–610 
Lee, L. (2010). Fostering reflective writing and interactive exchange through blogging in an advanced 
language course. ReCALL, 22(2), 212–227. 
Murray, L., & Hourigan, T. (2008). Blogs for specific purposes: expressivist or socio-cognitivist 
approach? ReCALL, 20(1), 82–97. 
Mynard, J. (2007). A blog as a tool for reflection for English language learners. The Philippine ESL 
Journal, 1(1), 77–90.  
Nardi, B. A., Schiano, D. J., & Gumbrecht, M. (2004). Blogging as social activity, or would you let 900 
million people read your diary? Proceedings of the 2004 ACM conference on computer-supported 
cooperative work, New York, 222–228.  
Naylor, S., & Keogh, B. (1999). Constructivism in classroom: Theory into practice. Journal of Science 
Teacher Education, 10, 93–106. 
Noytim, U. (2010). Weblogs enhancing EFL students’ English language learning. Procedia Social & 
Behavioral Sciences, 2(1),127–1,132. 
Nyikos, M., & Hashimoto, R. (1997). Constructivist theory applied to collaboration: In search of ZPD. 
Modern Language Journal, 81, 506–517.  
Oravec. J. A. (2002). Bookmarking the world: Weblog applications in education. Journal of Adolescence 
& Adult Literacy, 45(7), 616–621. 
Oravec, J. A. (2003). Blending by blogging: Weblogs in blended learning initiatives. Journal of 
Educational Media, 28(2-3), 225–233. 
Rezaee, A. A., & Oladi, S. (2008). The effect of blogging on language learners’ improvement in social 
interactions and writing proficiency. Iranian Journal of Language Studies, 2(1), 73–88. 
Richardson, W. (2006). Blogs, Wikis, podcasts, and other powerful web tools for classrooms. California: 
Corwin Press. 
Skeggs, B. (2008). The problem with identity. In A. Lin (Ed.), Problematizing identity: Everyday 
struggles in language, culture and education (pp. 35–50). New York: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Sollars, V. (2007). Writing experiences in a second/foreign language classroom: From theory to practice. 
In M. Camilleri, P. Ford, H. Leja & V. Sollars (Eds.), Blogs: Web journal in language education (pp. 15–
24). Council of Europe, Strasbourg. 
Storch, N. (1999). Are two heads better than one? Pair work and grammatical accuracy. System, 27(3), 
363–374. 
Sun, Y. C. (2009). Voice blog: An exploratory study of language learning. Language Learning & 
Technology, 13(2), 88–103. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num2/sun.pdf. 
Swain, M. (2000). The output hypothesis and beyond: Mediating acquisition through collaborative 
dialogue. In J. P. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 97–114). Oxford: 
Yu-Chih Sun and Yu-jun Chang Bloggging to Learn: Becoming EFL Academic Writers 
 
Language Learning & Technology 61 
Oxford University Press. 
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (1998). Interaction and second language learning: Two adolescent French 
immersion students working together. Modern Language Journal, 82(3), 320–337.  
Swain, M., Brooks, L., & Tocalli-Beller, A. (2002). Peer-peer dialogue as a means of second language 
learning. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 22, 171–185. 
Tang, G.M., & Tithecott, J. (1999). Peer response in ESL writing. TESL Canada Journal, 16, 20–38. 
Tsui, A. (1996). Reticence and anxiety in second language learning. In K. Bailey & D. Nunan (Eds.), 
Voices from the language classroom (pp. 145–167). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press. 
Warlick, D. (2005). Classroom blogging: A teacher’s guide to the blogosphere. The Landmark Project, 
North Carolina. 
Wilson, B. (1996). Constructivist learning environments: Case studies in instructional design. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Educational Technology Publications. 
Yakimovicz, A. D., & Murphy, K. L. (1995). Constructivism and collaboration on the Internet: Case 
study of a graduate class experience. Computers & Education, 24(3), 203–209. 
Yu, W., Sun, Y., & Chang, Y. (2010). When technology speaks language: An evaluation of the use of 
course management systems in content-specific contexts. ReCALL, 22(3), 332–355. 
