Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2012/review3.pdf 
February 2012, Volume 16, Number 1 
pp. 39–42 
 
Copyright © 2012, ISSN 1094-3501 39 
REVIEW OF TEACHING AND RESEARCHING COMPUTER-ASSISTED 
LANGUAGE LEARNING 
Teaching and Researching Computer-Assisted 
Language Learning (2nd Edition) 
 
Ken Beatty 
 
2010 
ISBN 978-1-4082-0500-6 
Paperback: US $43.00  
284 pp. 
  
Pearson Education 
London, UK  
 
 
Review by Sarah E. Springer, Monterey Institute of International Studies 
The past decade has been one in which specialists in CALL have perceived much to be in flux, whether in 
refining categories (Bax, 2003), reframing long-standing dichotomies (Hubbard & Siskin, 2004), debating 
the nomenclature for the field as a whole (Levy & Hubbard, 2005), differentiating ‘CALL proper’ from 
general technology use in the daily work of language teachers (Garrett, 2009), or a combination of these 
themes (Kern, 2006). It is therefore hardly surprising that multiple authors (see also Chambers, 2010, and 
Petrie, 2005) have turned to the metaphor of the map when seeking to characterize the field of CALL. 
Ken Beatty’s Teaching and Researching Computer-Assisted Language Learning (2010) is one of several 
recently revised volumes from the Pearson series, Applied Linguistics in Action. It takes as its goal the 
mapping of a constantly changing field that “creates opportunities to revisit old findings, to conduct new 
research and to challenge established beliefs about the ways in which teaching and learning can be carried 
out both with and without a human teacher” (p. 1). 
The focus throughout this single-authored volume is squarely on the broader landscape rather than the ins 
and outs of specific technologies. Section One introduces terminology and key concepts that have shaped 
the field, Section Two shows how these ideas can be applied and identifies theories of learning and 
second language acquisition related to them, and Section Three both reviews current research studies and 
suggests new avenues of investigation. The volume ends with a brief collection of resources and a 
glossary of key terms. 
The first section of the book, comprised of four chapters, provides historical perspectives on early CALL 
developments as well as a rich array of further references related to the more general field of Computer 
Assisted Learning (as distinct from CALL and its focus on language). It also covers the development of 
and distinctions between hypertext, hypermedia and multimedia, and developments in general computing. 
(See also Wardrip-Fruin & Montfort, 2003 for an extended collection of essays related to Engelbart, 
Memex, and other related developments).  
This initial section closes with a chapter covering eight CALL applications including word processing 
(spelling and grammar functions), games (Nintendo Wii, hangman, and quiz software), literature 
(particularly with relation to hypertext), corpus linguistics (data driven learning), computer-mediated 
communication (email, netpals, chatlines, bulletin boards, and MOOs), WWW resources (Dave’s ESL 
Sarah E. Springer Review of Teaching and Researching CALL 
 
Language Learning & Technology 40 
Café, Club Penguin), adapting other materials for CALL (SimCity), as well as PDAs (Graffiti 
handwriting recognition) and mobile telephones. In the section on literature, an area of particular interest 
to Beatty that forms a common thread through several subsequent chapters in later sections of the book, 
he states his belief that “many of the best CALL programs offer learning in the same way as good 
literature, presenting a narrative in which the reader/learner draws a more general understanding of 
themes” (p. 65). 
Section Two, entitled The Place of CALL in Research and Teaching, introduces concepts from second 
language acquisition (including negotiation of meaning and comprehensible input and output) as well as 
collaboration and discourse analysis. The section closes with a final chapter in which Beatty proposes 
adaptations to a model of classroom instruction from general education for the more specific purposes of 
CALL software development. In this middle section of the book he carefully articulates the difference 
between programs that force a lock-step approach and those that offer or encourage the learner to make 
choices as they navigate through the available materials. It echoes an earlier Key Concept box from the 
first chapter that defines interactive as ranging from “a software program in which the learner has some 
degree of choice, perhaps only in selecting answers to multiple choice questions” to “more elaborate and 
interactive learning programs” (p. 13) such as a simulated world, a topic that is also revisited at several 
subsequent points in the book. 
There is also considerable emphasis on delineating the differences between behaviorist and constructivist 
models of instruction, and the applications of both to software interface design. He states early in Chapter 
5 that behaviorist methods of instruction are “so ingrained in standard classroom practice that many 
teachers may assume there is no alternative” (p. 93) and notes one paragraph later that “much of this 
approach is perceived as endemic to the nature of the computer.” The sub-sections on both programmed 
instruction and mastery learning exemplify in striking detail the ways in which the latter two methods 
have been implemented. After highlighting what he identifies as key differences between behaviorist and 
constructivist approaches, including the central importance of schema theory, the author emphasizes in 
this chapter’s conclusion that “the computer, with its binary logic, provides a natural environment for 
behaviorist models of learning” (p. 107). The role of collaboration and negotiation of meaning in 
language learning are picked up again as the topic of the following chapter, which focuses on students 
interacting together around a single computer and the use of discourse analysis to analyze those 
interactions. 
Throughout this section, and the volume as a whole, there is consistent discussion of the extent to which 
the computer might function in the absence of a teacher, including both the first and penultimate pages. In 
the model for CALL presented in Chapter 7, the roles of the classroom teacher in the original model 
(Dunkin & Biddle, 1974) are replaced by the collective experiences of the team of materials developers 
involved in any given CALL program (p. 148). The section titled ‘technology driving CALL,’ which 
includes a Key Concept box defining and highlighting the differences between artificial intelligence (AI), 
expert systems and natural language processing, provides useful background in this regard. However, 
approaches to the integration of technology into language learning and teaching that require increased 
involvement of and facilitation by a teacher receive, relatively speaking, less attention. 
Section Three shifts the emphasis more explicitly to research by first analyzing a set of 102 publications 
identified via an ERIC database search for the keywords “computer-assisted language learning” between 
2006 and 2008. These were in turn analyzed in terms of languages included (predominantly English), 
skills (including a short section on virtual worlds), processes, technologies (including Blackboard Vista), 
concerns, and subjects (primarily secondary school or university level). This chapter concludes with a 
brief discussion of action research. 
The final chapter of the book systematically explores eight different approaches to research and begins 
with reminders of the restrictions that authoring packages can impose, the threat of commercial 
Sarah E. Springer Review of Teaching and Researching CALL 
 
Language Learning & Technology 41 
expediency, potential concerns about the types of exposure to language that newer technologies may 
facilitate (expressed elsewhere as well), and the ambiguity surrounding the term innovation. There 
follows consistently formatted examples and explorations of the literature review, pilot study (automatic 
correction in word processing), corpus linguistics (online language use in Facebook), and error analysis 
(coding and contrastive analysis), as well as the experimental (the influence of two different models of 
instruction), case study (software evaluation), survey (software fatigue), and ethnographic approaches (the 
culture of Twitter).  
Overall Beatty emphasizes and explores in relatively less detail areas that involve communication or 
collaboration with others through the computer rather than interaction at or with the computer, but he 
offers references for further exploration (for example, Lomicka, Lord, et al, 2009; Warschauer, n.d.; and 
Lantolf, 2000). Almost every chapter in this second edition makes general reference to developments such 
as Web 2.0 applications and social media, and cites or highlights (via Further Reading boxes) articles in 
these areas from the past five years. As with the rich links to materials within and beyond CALL from the 
past sixty years in Section One, these updates are a useful resource, though at points readers may 
encounter studies based on theoretical positions that are beyond the scope of this well-integrated volume.  
In Sections One and Three the book maintains a broader scope (the history of CALL including influences 
from related fields, and an introduction to a range of research methods) while in Section Two it becomes 
relatively specialized, focusing on students engaging with computer-based learning materials while sitting 
together at the computer, and the use of behaviorist versus constructivist interfaces in the process of 
software development. It draws widely on journals and publications from beyond the teaching of 
languages (Journal of Interactive Learning Research, Internet and Higher Education, Computers and 
Education, Educause Quarterly, Chronicle of Higher Education), and analyzes a collection of recent 
articles drawn largely from a single CALL journal (Computer-Assisted Language Learning). The more 
general references invite readers to acknowledge that many questions and problems are not restricted to 
CALL but the reader is also encouraged to seek language learning-specific parameters for and solutions to 
those puzzles. 
A strength of this volume is the extent to which the various chapters, in an extended treatment, build 
towards a coherent whole. In addition, the extensive references to the literature—both historical and 
recent—as well as the choice to visually highlight key concepts and quotations within the chapters and 
supplement these with a glossary of terminology, will be helpful features for those seeking an orientation 
to the field. 
The map of CALL that this volume portrays is one that provides a grounding in the field’s history and an 
introduction to a wide range of potential CALL-related research projects, as well as comprehensive 
coverage of the areas of software development and the potential for student interaction when working 
together on materials developed by experts and professionals. In order to provide truly comprehensive 
coverage of the field of CALL in all of its current permutations (which, as defined by Beatty in the 
introduction, includes “any process in which a learner uses a computer and, as a result, improves his or 
her language” p. 7), it would likely need to be paired with materials that offer alternative perspectives in 
terms of their theoretical bases, those that consider the impact of technology on students in the role of 
producers, and those that explore in greater detail the implications of the ways in which technology has 
impacted our ability to interact with others both locally and globally. As the term research in the title 
suggests, the volume is not intended to be a hands-on manual for classroom practitioners; a volume that 
might be well suited as a practical complement in terms of emphasis and approach is Chapelle and 
Jamieson (2008). 
Hubbard (2011) has noted that it is possible for relative newcomers to define CALL almost exclusively in 
terms of more recent developments in the field, many of which are tied to the development of the Internet. 
For anyone seeking to add to their understanding of how the field has developed and the many 
Sarah E. Springer Review of Teaching and Researching CALL 
 
Language Learning & Technology 42 
perspectives, goals, and priorities currently being pursued, Teaching and Researching Computer-Assisted 
Language Learning fills a distinct niche in the ecosystem of CALL texts and is an important reference 
volume. 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
S.E. Springer has been teaching CALL courses in the Monterey Institute’s M.A. programs for Teaching 
Foreign Languages (TFL) and Teaching English as a Second Language (TESOL) since 2005 and has 
interests in language teacher education and the development of expertise in technology integration. 
 
E-mail: springer.miis@gmail.com 
 
REFERENCES 
Bax, S. (2003). CALL--past, present and future. System, 31(1), 13–28. 
Chambers, A. (2010). Computer-assisted language learning: Mapping the territory. Language Teaching, 
43(1), 113–122.  
Chapelle, C., & Jamieson, J. (2008). Tips for teaching with CALL. White Plains, NY: Pearson-Longman. 
Dunkin, M. J., & Biddle, B. J. (1974). The study of teaching. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston. 
Garrett, N. (2009). Computer-assisted language learning trends and issues revisited: Integrating 
innovation. Modern Language Journal 93(5) (Focus Issue), 719–740. 
Hubbard, P. (2011). An invitation to CALL: Foundations of computer-assisted language learning (Unit 1). 
Retrieved from http://www.stanford.edu/~efs/callcourse2/CALL1.htm. 
Hubbard, P., & Siskin, C. B. (2004). Another look at tutorial CALL. ReCALL: Journal of EUROCALL, 
16(2), 448–461. 
Kern, R. (2006). Perspectives on technology in learning and teaching languages. TESOL Quarterly, 40(1), 
183–210.  
Lantolf, J. P. (2000). Sociocultural theory and second language learning. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
Levy, M., & Hubbard, P. (2005). Why call CALL ‘CALL’? Computer Assisted Language Learning, 
18(3), 143–149. 
Lomicka, L., Lord, G., et al. (2009). Web 2.0 and beyond: An annotated bibliography. In L. Lomicka, G. 
Lord (Eds.), The next generation: Social networking and online collaboration in foreign language 
learning (pp. 235–255). San Marcos, TX: CALICO.  
Petrie, G. M. (2005). Toward a cartography of CALL. In J. L. Egbert and G.M. Petrie (Eds.), CALL 
research perspectives (pp. 193–196). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Wardrip-Fruin, N., & Montfort, N. (2003). The New Media Reader. Cambridge: MIT Press. 
Warschauer, M. (n.d.). Retrieved from http://www.gse.uci.edu/person/warschauer_m/ 
warschauer_m_papers.php 
