Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2012/review2.pdf 
June 2012, Volume 16, Number 2 
pp. 31–34 
 
Copyright © 2012, ISSN 1094-3501   31 
REVIEW OF TESOL TECHNOLOGY STANDARDS: DESCRIPTION, 
IMPLEMENTATION, INTEGRATION 
TESOL Technology Standards: Description, 
implementation, integration 
Deborah Healey, Elizabeth Hanson-Smith, 
Philip Hubbard, Sophie Iannou-Georgiou, Greg 
Kessler, and Paige Ware 
2011 
ISBN-10: 1931185727  
ISBN-13: 978-1931185721  
TESOL Members US $35.00; Nonmembers US 
$50.00 (Paperback) 
250 pp.  
TESOL 
Alexandria, VA 
 
 
Review by Dafne Gonzalez, Universidad Simon Bolivar 
Standards are bases for comparison, reference points against which other things can be evaluated. In the 
field of education, they should provide a clear understanding of what teachers are expected to teach and 
students to learn. In spite of the growing use of technology in the field of language teaching and learning, 
there have not been clear guidelines on how to successfully implement technology to promote language 
learning. 
The TESOL Technology Standards (TTS) volume attempts to fill this void. It is intended, according to its 
authors, for teachers, students, administrators, teacher educators, and researchers, and I would also greatly 
recommend it to curriculum designers and materials developers as well. This volume is an extension of 
the TESOL Technology Standards Framework Document (2008) that adds practical examples (in the 
form of extended vignettes) of the use of the standards and the pertinent research that supports them. The 
sections aimed at teacher educators, administrators and online teachers are also new additions.  
The objective of the book is to give this target audience a clear idea of what the technology standards are, 
their importance in CALL, and how they can be put into practice in different contexts (second and foreign 
language; blended and fully online programs; k-12 to higher education, adult and vocational education; 
general language learning and language for specific purposes; and settings with low, medium or high 
technological resources). 
DESCRIPTION 
TESOL Technology Standards is divided into four parts, and each part is composed of chapters. 
Part 1: Description 
Chapter 1 (Introduction) includes the introduction of the standards. It also provides a brief summary of 
what the different sections of the book offer. Chapter 2 (Theoretical and Research Bases for the 
Technology Standards) contains the research on CALL that informs the standards. It addresses major 
Dafne Gonzalez Review of TESOL Technology Standards 
 
Language Learning & Technology 32 
studies that illustrate the following: a) technology is beneficial for language learning, b) technology 
should be incorporated in education for students to learn a second language and electronic literacy skills, 
and c) the lack of teacher and student training are some of the principal reasons why technology is still 
not used to its full potential in language learning. At the end of the chapter, there is a table that 
summarizes a comprehensive list of studies in CALL and their implications in different areas (writing, 
reading, speaking, listening, form, synchronous and asynchronous communication, hybrid and online 
learning and language labs). 
Part 2: Implementation 
This part of the book offers all the information needed to start putting the standards into practice. Chapter 
3 (Technology Standards for Language Learners) contains the three goals and their corresponding 
standards and performance indicators for the use of technology with language learners. It also provides 
vignettes for each standard on how actual teachers from different settings and language levels have used 
these standards. Each of these vignettes gives information about the profile of the learner, the setting in 
which the vignette was implemented, and the focus of the lesson (language skill, methodological 
approach, and the CALL applications used). These vignettes start with background information about the 
lesson, and move on to show how the given goal can be reached in low, medium and high technological 
settings. Chapter 4 (Technology Standards for Language Teachers) introduces the goals, standards and 
performance indicators aimed at language teachers. The chapter follows the same organization of the 
previous one. Chapter 5 (The Relationship of the TESOL Technology Standards to Other Standards) 
compares the TTS to the International Society for Technology in Education’s National Technology 
Standards (ISTE-NETS) and the United Nations Education, Scientific and Cultural Organization’s 
Information and Communication Technologies Competency Standards for Teachers (UNESCO ICT-
CST). Apart from explaining the differences among the three documents, the chapter offers detailed tables 
relating the TTS to those contained in the other two documents. 
Part 3: Integration 
This section of the book offers guidance for teacher educators, administrators and fully online teachers. 
Furthermore, there are checklists to be used as self and program assessment. These checklists are based 
on the performance indicators provided for each of the standards. Chapter 6 (Implications and 
Recommendations for Teacher Educators) addresses the importance of the standards for teacher training 
and teacher education. Concepts such as situated, reflective, and project based learning are discussed in 
the realm of technology. Different approaches to implementing CALL are also examined (Breadth first, 
Depth first, Using technology to teach technology, Collaborative learning, Communities of Practice, self-
directed learning). The chapter ends with a list of resources about technology and language teacher 
education. Chapter 7 (Administrators and the Technology Standards) provides decision-making support to 
language program administrators about important issues regarding the integration of technology in their 
language programs, as well as the support they need to offer their teachers and learners in a variety of 
contexts. There is also a vignette about adding technology resources. The vignette follows the format 
encountered in the ones described in previous chapters. At the end of the chapter, there is a list of 
resources about background information, tools and learning communities. Chapter 8 (Online Teaching 
and Learning with the Technology Standards) concentrates in the integration of the TTS in fully online or 
blended environments. It examines some aspects that are crucial for teachers and administrators to be 
aware of when working in these settings: technology infrastructure (tools, learning management systems, 
Internet access, and availability of technical support, among others); the learning environment (e.g., 
interaction, collaboration, and appropriate use of resources); time (timelines, time zones, and synchronous 
activities); and finally, the implication of teachers and learners to create a community of inquiry with a 
social presence, a teaching presence and a cognitive presence. The chapter contains tables relating the 
implications for online learning with the standards for language learning and for language teachers. This 
chapter also ends with a short list of resources about teaching online. Chapter 9 (Checklists for Self-
Dafne Gonzalez Review of TESOL Technology Standards 
 
Language Learning & Technology 33 
Assessment and Program Assessment) offers a rubric for teachers to evaluate their own performance in 
the use of the TTS, and also a rubric aimed at teachers’ self-assessment of how they are helping their 
students’ use of technology. There is a rubric for each of the goals and their standards with the 
corresponding performance indicators and the criteria for assessment (Very well, Adequately, Not so 
well, Not at all, N/A). There is also a rubric for program administrators that comprises both the 
technology standards for language learners and the technology standards for language teachers. The 
authors claim that these rubrics should be taken as aids to meet the standards and not as prescriptions due 
to the broad variety of technology available and the different pedagogical needs in educational contexts. 
Part 4: Supporting Matter 
This section contains resources and supporting information: references; a glossary of terms about 
technology and pedagogy used throughout the book; three appendices with the TTS for language learners 
and language teachers; the proficiency descriptors; and a table with all the vignettes. The proficiency 
descriptors include the three sets of descriptors used in the vignettes: The TESOL’s Standards for Adult 
Education ESL Programs (used for adult education in the USA), the TESOL’s PreK-12 English Language 
Proficiency Standards (used in k-12 contexts in the USA), and the Common European Framework of 
Reference (used in Europe). 
EVALUATION 
Focus 
This book focuses on very relevant and up-to-date content. It is developed in a very praxis-oriented way 
that will allow teachers, administrators, and teacher educators to implement the standards with the 
guidelines provided. The book offers easy-to-follow guidelines for those starting to use technology, and at 
the same time, those with certain experience will find ideas to improve their praxis while following the 
standards. 
Clarity and Style 
The book is very easy to read, in spite of using technological jargon. However, some of the main concepts 
used are not clearly defined throughout the book and they are not even mentioned in the glossary. 
Performance indicators, standards and goals are three examples of this. The use of tables in some of the 
chapters is a great way to summarize the content in a visual way. In general, the book is very well 
organized, making it easy to find specific topics when needed. The section at the beginning of the book, 
“Technology Standards at-a-Glance,” and the appendixes are good examples of the authors’ attempt to 
offer a user-friendly book. 
Content 
Some of the aspects that called my attention regarding the content of the book are as follows: 
1. The chapter about the research on CALL is a great asset for teachers and administrators who are 
not up-to-date in the studies that support the use of technology. It is also a good source of ideas 
for researchers in the field.  
2. A comprehensive approach is followed in the development of the standards, goals and 
performance indicators.  
3. Chapter 4 is of special importance, not only for language teachers, but also for course designers 
due to the range of topics and settings covered in the vignettes.  
4. The vignettes with real-life examples that illustrate the use of the standards, and the ideas to use 
them in low, medium and rich technology resource contexts will undoubtedly motivate teachers 
to try the standards in their own settings.  
Dafne Gonzalez Review of TESOL Technology Standards 
 
Language Learning & Technology 34 
5. The reference in each vignette to the Common European Framework of Reference (CEFR) 
expands the geographical use of the standards.  
6. The detailed rubrics provided to assess the use of the standards seem very helpful to complete the 
implementation process.  
CONCLUSION 
The book is very comprehensive and practical. As a teacher who has been involved in blended and fully 
online courses since 2002, I find this book of great help as both a teacher and a course designer. The 
performance indicators, which would correspond to what we usually call performance objectives, make 
this book a real guide to implementing successful CALL courses. 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Dafne Gonzalez is a Full Professor in the Language Department of the Universidad Simon Bolivar in 
Caracas, Venezuela. She teaches ESP courses at the undergraduate level and technology-related courses 
at the graduate level. She has been teaching and designing blended and online courses since 2002. She is a 
member of the TESOL Electronic Village Online coordination team and co-teaches the “Teaching 
Vocabulary and Grammar Online” course of the TESOL’s “Principles and Practices of Online Teaching” 
Program. 
E-mail: dafnegon@gmail.com 
 
 
REFERENCES 
TESOL. (2008). Technology standards framework document. Alexandria, VA: TESOL. 
