Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2012/news.pdf 
February 2012, Volume 16, Number 1 
pp. 26–29 
 
Language Learning & Technology 26 
NEWS FROM SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS 
Sponsors 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education and Research (CLEAR) 
 
University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource 
Center (NFLRC)  
The University of Hawai‘i National Foreign Language Resource Center engages in research and materials 
development projects and conducts workshops and conferences for language professionals among its 
many activities. 
ALOHA, DICK & DAVID...WELCOME, JD & MARTA! 
After many dedicated years of service at the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa (UHM), Dr. Richard 
Schmidt (NFLRC Director and Professor of Second Language Studies) and Dr. David Hiple (NFLRC 
Associate Director and Language Learning Center Director) retired on December 31, 2011. We 
wholeheartedly thank them for their excellent vision, leadership, and immense contributions to the field 
of language learning and teaching (see bio statements below), and though they will be sorely missed, we 
wish them the best as they embark on the next exciting, leisurely chapters of their lives. 
We also wish to warmly welcome Dr. James Dean “JD” Brown (Professor of Second Language Studies 
and international expert in language testing, curriculum design, research methods, and program 
evaluation), who will become the new NFLRC Director as well as Dr. Marta Gonzalez-Lloret (Assistant 
Professor of Spanish, with interests in technology, task-based language teaching, and L2 pragmatics), 
who will become interim NFLRC Associate Director / LLC Director. We look forward to working with 
them and the innovations and new directions they are sure to bring. 
Professional bios: 
Richard Schmidt was a professor in the Department of Second Language Studies (formerly known as the 
Department of ESL) from 1976–2011 and served as NFLRC Director from 1995–2011. Following 
completion of his doctorate in linguistics (originally specializing in Arabic sociolinguistics) and a stint 
teaching at the American University in Cairo, he has spent his whole academic career engaged in 
research, teaching, and service at UHM. His primary research areas concern cognitive and affective 
factors in adult second and foreign language learning—including the role of attention and awareness and 
the importance of motivation in learning—as well as the problems of learning and teaching difficult, less 
commonly taught languages (LCTLs). He has written many pivotal research articles, many of them 
related to his well-known Noticing Hypothesis. He is one of the most cited scholars in the field of SLA, 
with over 7,000 citations according to Google Scholar. An experienced grant writer, he brought over $6M 
in grant funds to UH. He was also a Fulbright Senior Lecturer and Research Scholar in Brazil in 1983, 
was named an honorary member of the Japan Association of College English Teachers in 1986, received 
a Special Service Award from the Center for Asia-Pacific Exchange (CAPE) in 1990 and 2010, served as 
President of the American Association for Applied Linguistics (AAAL) in 2003–04, and was the 2009 
recipient of the AAAL Distinguished Service and Scholarship Award. 
David Hiple served as NFLRC Associate Director from 1992 and LLC Director from 1997. He has over 
35 years of experience in language teaching, testing, and teacher training. He has secured and managed 
many federal and private foundation grants and contracts to conduct materials development and teacher-
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 27 
training projects in a variety of LCTLs, including Chinese, Filipino, Indonesian, Korean, and Vietnamese. 
He has been an external evaluator for SEASSI, as well as the COTIM summer study abroad program in 
Sulawesi, Indonesia, and the Advanced Khmer Program (ASK) in Phnom Penh, Cambodia. He is also a 
tester trainer for the Peace Corps and has trained oral interviewers in the field in such diverse countries as 
Kyrgyzstan, Turkmenistan, Russia, Samoa, Lesotho, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, and Thailand. His recent 
work has focused on innovative avenues for distance education and distributed learning, including the 
development of online cafés (learning communities) based on the Cultura model. 
2012 NFLRC SUMMER INSTITUTE: ASSESSMENTS FOR JAPANESE LANGUAGE 
INSTRUCTION 
This four-day NFLRC summer institute (July 10-13, 2012) is intended for postsecondary Japanese 
language educators who wish to promote good assessment practices in their home institutions. It consists 
of lecture as well as hands-on sessions designed to help improve their theoretical knowledge and practical 
skills about assessments (including testing). To this end, the workshop will provide ample authentic 
assessment examples in various formats and procedures to assess learning outcomes in Japanese in 
classroom and program-level settings. The workshop will also cover portfolio assessments for Japanese 
language teacher training programs. After attending the workshop, participants will be better prepared to 
engage in effective formative and summative assessments for Japanese language instruction and teacher 
training in their home institutions. Selected classroom assessment modules developed by participants as 
part of the workshop will be published by the NFLRC as a Network (available online for teachers of 
Japanese around the world). 
For more information, visit our summer institute website: http://nflrc.hawaii.edu/prodev/si12j/  
7TH TECHNOLOGY & CHINESE LANGUAGE TEACHING CONFERENCE (TCLT7) 
Co-sponsored with Hamilton College, the National Foreign Language Resource Center (NFLRC) and the 
National Resource Center East Asia (NRCEA) at the University of Hawai‘i at Manoa are pleased to host 
the 7th International Conference and Workshops on Technology and Chinese Language Teaching 
in the 21st Century (TCLT7) from May 25 through 27, 2012 at the Hawai‘i Imin International 
Conference Center at the University of Hawai‘i at Manoa in Honolulu, Hawai‘i. Initiated by Hamilton 
College in 2000, this biennial conference aims to bridge the gap between technology and teaching 
methodology and curriculum as well as to enhance the exchange on technology-based Chinese language 
learning and instruction. The combination of in-depth panel discussions and hands-on workshops on 
technology-enhanced Chinese language teaching is a hallmark of TCLT conferences, which have 
contributed a great deal to the field of Teaching Chinese as a Second Language. Over the past 11 years, 
about 200 institutions from 17 countries and regions have sent hundreds of professionals to join TCLT. 
TCLT7 will place emphases on frontier research topics such as mobile learning, cloud technology, the 
digital classroom, and computational linguistics, as well as on general topics on the integration of 
technology in day-to-day usage. The program will include keynote speeches, paper presentations and 
panel discussions, hands-on workshops, computer program demonstration, and a technology-based 
educational product exhibition. Supported by more than 200 institutions worldwide, TCLT7 will bring 
together about 250 academics for discussion. For more information, please visit the conference website: 
http://nflrc.hawaii.edu/TCLT7/  
STAY IN TOUCH WITH SOCIAL MEDIA 
Did you know that the NFLRC has its own Facebook page? It’s one of the best ways to hear about the 
latest news, publications, conferences, workshops, and resources we offer. Just click on the “Like” button 
to become a fan. For those who prefer getting up-to-the-minute “tweets,” you can follow us on our 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 28 
Twitter page. Finally, NFLRC has its own YouTube channel with a growing collection of free language 
learning and teaching videos for your perusal. Subscribe today! 
NEW NFLRC PUBLICATIONS 
Have you visited our YouTube channel lately? We are 100+ videos strong and growing. See a sample 
here: 
 
 
Developing, using, and analyzing rubrics in language assessment with case studies 
in Asian and Pacific language 
by James Dean Brown (Ed.) (2012) 212pp., ISBN: 978–0–9835816–1–1 
Rubrics are essential tools for all language teachers in this age of communicative and 
task-based teaching and assessment—tools that allow us to efficiently communicate to 
our students what we are looking for in the productive language abilities of speaking 
and writing and then effectively assess those abilities when the time comes for grading 
students, giving them feedback, placing them into new courses, and so forth. This book 
provides a wide array of ideas, suggestions, and examples (mostly from Maori, 
Hawaiian, and Japanese language assessment projects) to help language educators 
effectively develop, use, revise, analyze, and report on rubric-based assessments. View table of contents. 
Check out our many other publications. 
Michigan State University Center for Language Education 
and Research (CLEAR)  
CLEAR’s mission is to promote the teaching and learning of foreign languages in the United States. 
Projects focus on materials development, professional development training, and foreign language 
research. 
CONFERENCES 
CLEAR exhibits at local and national conferences year-round. We hope to see you at ACTFL, CALICO, 
MIWLA, Central States, and other conferences. 
We will be presenting sessions at at Central States 2012 and CALICO 2012. We hope to meet you in 
person! 
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
We debuted a series of webinars this in Fall 2011. These low-cost, online, interactive workshops allow 
language teachers from around the country (and the world) to access CLEAR’s professional development 
 News from Our Sponsoring Organizations 
 
Language Learning & Technology 29 
on demand. The initially available webinars focus on CLEAR’s Rich Internet Applications, and future 
planned webinars include content on language assessment, culture in the classroom, and other topics of 
interest to language educators. Webinar participants are able to apply for State Board Continuing 
Education Units. Detailed information on all webinars is posted on the webinars page of our Web site.  
MATERIALS DEVELOPMENT 
CLEAR is developing several new products during our fifth funding cycle. Check our Web site for 
updates on new products and services. Some of our upcoming projects include: 
• Expansion of our Rich Internet Applications for language learning on mobile devices 
• Professional development webinars on diverse topics (see above) 
• Online videos for language teaching techniques 
• Online listening and speaking tests for LCTLs 
NEWSLETTER 
CLEAR News is a free bi-yearly publication covering FL teaching techniques, research, and materials. 
Download PDFs of back issues and subscribe at http://clear.msu.edu/clear/newsletter/. 
