Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2012/review3.pdf 
June 2012, Volume 16, Number 2 
pp. 35–37 
 
Copyright © 2012, ISSN 1094-3501  35 
REVIEW OF EVALUATING COMPUTER-ASSISTED LANGUAGE 
LEARNING: AN INTEGRATED APPROACH TO EFFECTIVENESS 
RESEARCH IN CALL 
Evaluating Computer-Assisted Language Learning: An 
Integrated Approach to Effectiveness Research in CALL 
 
Jonathan Leakey 
 
2011 
ISBN: 978-3-0343-0145-9 
Paperback: US $70.95 
308 pp. 
 
Peter Lang 
Bern, Switzerland 
 
 
 
Review by Deborah Crusan, Wright State University 
Since its inception, the field of Computer-Assisted Language Learning (CALL) has suffered from 
skeptics questioning whether technology and multimedia have anything to add to language learning. 
These uncertainties clearly illustrate a need for a comprehensive evaluative model of CALL. In 
Evaluating Computer-Assisted Language Learning: An Integrated Approach to Effectiveness Research in 
CALL, Jonathan Leakey asks readers to consider important matters about the field of computer-assisted 
language learning (CALL). His purpose for the book centers on gathering evidence for the computer’s 
impact on language learning. He argues for an integrated approach to the evaluation of CALL and 
constructs a prototype for evaluating what he refers to as the three Ps:  platform, programs, and pedagogy. 
Leakey espouses a philosophy that data collection should be for improvement of the three Ps rather than 
valuing data and technology for their own sakes—“as an end in themselves” (p. 7). He asks the question: 
Can CALL make a difference in language learning? 
The first five chapters of the book are highly theoretical, justifying the need for such a study, providing an 
in-depth review of the literature as well as an identification of the gaps in CALL effectiveness research, 
and offering a “prototype for evaluation CALL” (p. 132). Chapter 1 remains true to its title—The need for 
systematic quality control in CALL. In it, the author begins by building a case for systematicity. He then 
provides an overview of studies and sets down seven foundational research questions. These questions are 
followed by an overview of data collection methods, the experimental design models used in the study, 
and a breakdown of the remaining eight chapters of the book. 
Chapter 2 establishes Leakey’s familiarity with the field and his awareness of the key issues. In Swings, 
spirals, and reincarnations: Lessons from the past, the author defines CALL, summarizes CALL 
acronyms, and provides a thorough analysis of past studies and approaches. He then provides a brief 
history of CALL pedagogy followed by a discussion of Blended CALL, or blended learning, weighing 
both the advantages and disadvantages of such a methodology. He then introduces platforms and 
programs and lays out questions to be answered including “whether software that incorporates a blend of 
technologies and is driven by a hotchpotch of language learning or none can be equally as effective as, or 
even more effective than, software that is rigidly subservient to the dictates of one particular theory” (p. 
Deborah Crusan Review of Evaluating Computer-Assisted Language Learning  
 
Language Learning & Technology 36 
56). 
Chapter 3 presents evidence of CALL’s effectiveness and discusses the four debates in CALL: the 
improvement debate, the comparison debate, the configuration debate, and the outcome vs. processes 
debate. Each of these debates concerns the effectiveness of CALL. Leakey points out that these debates 
have been and are still important to CALL and will determine future directions in CALL. 
Chapters 4 and 5 are the most daunting. In them, Leakey offers his model for evaluating CALL. Chapter 4 
offers CALL enhancement criteria and includes an evaluation flow-chart; the chart lists the twelve criteria 
for evaluation of CALL enhancement, which he explains as an addition to Chapelle’s (2001) six criteria 
for evaluating the effectiveness of CALL. The chapter also compares and contrasts the work of scholars 
such as Chapelle and Dunkel.  Chapter 5 outlines both qualitative and quantitative measures for 
evaluation and explores the concept of validity. Once again, data collection methods are outlined and 
methods for reporting the data are summarized. 
The next three chapters, 6, 7, & 8, offer evaluative models for the three Ps of platforms, programs, and 
pedagogy through case studies whose “overarching goal is to see how one ‘P’ relates to and interacts with 
the others and see if there is a synergy at work” (p. 133). In Chapter 6, Leakey examines courses that used 
digital platforms at The University of Ulster and University of Portsmouth. Leakey concludes that while it 
is difficult to compare the Robotel and Melissi systems because the “degree and manner of integration” 
(p. 164) vary, the project was instructive in that it aided in elucidating criteria by which to evaluate the 
platforms. Chapter 7 discusses two generations of the TellMeMore language learning software package, 
comparing features and carefully delineating the steps of the investigation. Chapter 8 outlines the 
application of Leakey’s Model for Evaluation (MFE) to two projects, Technology and Oral Language 
Development (TOLD) and BILINGUA, and to various other approaches: behaviorist, communicative, 
constructivist, and blended pedagogies. 
The final chapter (Chapter 9) presents MFE2, a new framework for evaluating CALL. Leakey refers to 
this as an end-product in the form of evaluative frameworks represented in this chapter as 12 different 
tables listing criteria such as learner fit, authenticity, practicality, learner control, and error correction and 
feedback. The author states that these tables “should provide the evaluator with a clear idea of the quality 
of CALL provision, resources, and adherence to principles of pedagogy” (p. 278). Finally, the author sets 
up a proposed timeline for a CALL evaluation as well as tables cataloguing research design criteria, data 
collection methods, and a validity checklist. In the end, Leakey concludes, “This study has been less 
about justifying CALL…than about how best to evaluate CALL in a range of contexts, using a variety of 
resources, and delivered via a number of different teaching approaches” (p. 289). His ultimate goal is “to 
add credibility to the body of evidence for CALL’s effectiveness” (p. 289). 
Flaws in the manuscript are few and relatively minor. For one, the prose is dense and, at times, difficult to 
read, especially with the number of tables included. Deciphering the immense amount of information 
included takes careful reading and a great deal of time to interpret results. Regardless of these fairly 
insignificant shortcomings, the book offers a comprehensive model for CALL evaluation and the tools to 
perform those evaluations and on the whole, signals CALL’s coming of age. 
Many can benefit from reading this book. Certainly anyone who is interested in research in CALL will 
find the topic meticulously researched; further, those who are considering investing in expensive digital 
equipment to expedite computer-assisted language learning would do well to carefully study Leakey’s 
framework for evaluation of CALL. Lastly, software developers will find Leakey’s book informative to 
aid in improvement and further development of CALL software. The research embodied in Evaluating 
Computer-Assisted Language Learning: An Integrated Approach to Effectiveness Research in CALL is 
important in that, besides meticulously researching the field and offering insight into the many questions 
about CALL’s importance, it raises new questions about the future of CALL research and opens the door 
for new studies. 
Deborah Crusan Review of Evaluating Computer-Assisted Language Learning  
 
Language Learning & Technology 37 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Deborah Crusan is Professor of TESOL/Applied Linguistics at Wright State University, Dayton, Ohio, 
USA. Her research interests include assessment for placement of second language writers, the machine 
scoring of essays, and the politics of assessment. Her book, Assessment in the Second Language Writing 
Classroom, was published in 2010 by the University of Michigan Press. 
E-mail:  deborah.crusan@wright.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Chapelle, C. A. (2001). Computer applications in second language acquisition: Foundations for teaching, 
testing and research. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 
