Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2013/jin.pdf 
June 2013, Volume 17, Number 2 
pp. 193–219 
 
Copyright © 2013, ISSN 1094-3501 193 
LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT AND SCAFFOLDING  
IN A SINO-AMERICAN TELECOLLABORATIVE PROJECT 
Li Jin, DePaul University 
Previous research (e.g., Belz & Thorne, 2006; Ware & O’Dowd, 2008) has discovered that 
language learning can be afforded through intercultural telecollaboration. From a 
sociocultural theoretical perspective, the current study investigated the language 
development outcomes and process in a 10-week Sino-American telecollaborative project 
involving 10 college-level American learners of Mandarin Chinese and their respective 
native Chinese partners from China. The findings show that the American learners’ 
production quantity in Mandarin Chinese increased steadily throughout the project 
whereas the quality of their production didn’t improve as rapidly. These learners also self-
reported gains in age-appropriate cultural information, reading ability, and expanded 
vocabulary. The analysis shows the gains can be attributed to the scaffolding conditions 
(van Lier, 1996, 2004) that focused on friendship building and idea sharing in Mandarin 
Chinese and were specifically manifested in the operation of intersubjectivity, contingent 
help, and handover by both American learners and their Chinese partners throughout the 
project. Possible underlying reasons for the unbalanced focus on form versus on meaning 
in the project are discussed. Based on the findings, pedagogical suggestions are provided 
to enhance the learning conduciveness of email-based intercultural telecollaborative 
projects, particularly those involving participants from oriental cultures. 
Keywords: Sino-American Telecollaboration, Language Development, Sociocultural 
Theory (SCT), Scaffolding, Intersubjectivity, Contingency, Handover  
APA Citation: Jin, L. (2013). Language development and scaffolding in a Sino-American 
telecollaborative project. Language Learning & Technology, 17(2), 193–219. Retrieved 
from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2013/jin.pdf 
Received: May 31, 2012; Accepted: February 6, 2013; Published: June 1, 2013 
Copyright: © Li Jin 
INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, we have witnessed the exponential development of computer technologies, particularly 
the Internet and social networking. The Internet has revolutionized human interaction and made 
intercultural communication unprecedentedly convenient. Telecollaboration has been increasingly 
adopted within language learning contexts, aiming to develop students’ language proficiency and 
intercultural communicative competence through authentic intercultural communication (Guth & Helm, 
2010; O’Dowd, 2007). For over a decade, an incredible number of telecollaborative projects have been 
conducted. Research in this vein investigates whether and how intercultural communication through 
telecollaboration helps students on both sides develop linguistic and pragmatic skills as well as 
intercultural awareness (e.g., Belz, 2003; Belz & Thorne, 2006; Darhower, 2006, 2007; Dooly, 2011; 
Furstenberg, Levet, English, & Maillet, 2001; Kern, Ware, & Warschauer, 2004; Lee, 2011; Spinelli & 
Dolci, 2007; Vinagre, 2005; Vinagre & Lera, 2008; Vinagre & Muñoz, 2011; Ware & Kramsch, 2005; 
Ware & O’Dowd, 2008).   
Language learning through telecollaboration has been widely investigated from various theoretical 
perspectives. From an interactionist view (e.g., Long, 1996; Long, Ignaki, & Ortega, 1998; Long & 
Robinson, 1998), a myriad of empirical studies have been conducted to investigate individual linguistic 
development through negotiation of meaning and corrective feedback between learners (e.g., Sauro, 2009; 
Li Jin Language Development and Scaffolding in a Sino-American Telecollaborative Project 
 
Language Learning & Technology 194 
Vinagre, 2005; Vinagre & Lera, 2008; Vinagre & Muñoz, 2011; Ware & O’Dowd, 2008). Another line of 
research has adopted a sociocultural theoretical (SCT) lens (Lantolf & Thorne, 2006; Vygotsky, 1978) to 
explore how language development occurs through telecollaboration. Specifically, this strand of research 
has investigated how social cultural contexts and learners as active agents intersect to shape learners’ 
language development during telecollaboration (e.g., Basharina, 2007; Belz, 2002, 2003; Dooly, 2011; 
Kinginger & Belz, 2005; Kramsch & Thorne, 2002; Lee, 2002, 2008). Both the interactionist approach 
and the SCT approach have their respective strengths and weaknesses. However, the complexity of 
intercultural telecollaboration contexts warrants a need for more research from a SCT perspective to 
uncover how both learners and social cultural contexts collectively shape the language learning via 
intercultural telecollaboration.    
Chinese has been gaining popularity among foreign language learners in the United States in recent years 
(Asia Society, 2009). Many educators and learners of Mandarin Chinese are interested in connecting with 
native speakers of Mandarin Chinese in China. However, research on intercultural telecollaboration 
between English-speaking learners of Mandarin Chinese and native speakers is still an uncharted territory. 
The nature and effectiveness of intercultural telecollaboration between the two groups merit systematic 
investigation. This paper reports on an empirical study investigating from a SCT perspective whether 
language development occurs and how it unfolds during a 10-week telecollaborative project between 10 
college-level American learners of Mandarin Chinese and their respective native Chinese partners.        
LITERATURE REVIEW  
Interaction and Language Development in Second Language Acquisition (SLA)  
Interaction has been the focus of attention in various theories of SLA. From an interactionist view that is 
rooted in cognitivism (e.g., Long, 1996; Long et al.,1998; Long & Robinson, 1998; Mackey & Philip, 
1998), negotiation of meaning can initiate interactional modifications and corrective feedback. This can in 
turn stimulate learners’ noticing a gap (Schmidt, 2001) in their interlanguage system and consequently 
lead to language development. Corrective feedback has also been described as a focus-on-form procedure, 
which is defined by Long (1991) as “…overtly draw[ing] students’ attention to linguistic elements as they 
arise incidentally in lessons whose overriding focus is on meaning or communication” (p. 46). The 
interactionist view is generally understood in terms of the conduit metaphor in which prescriptive norms 
of form and style are transferred from the expert to the novice. This view has been criticized for focusing 
on language form and accuracy with little consideration of language as a process and a communicative 
means for use in socially and culturally situated activities. Research from an interactionist view focuses 
on the relationship between error types, feedback types, and feedback’s effectiveness on learners’ L2 
development. The results from this research vantage point are inconclusive.  
In recent years, an ever-increasing number of SLA researchers (e.g., Lantolf & Thorne, 2006; van Lier, 
2004) have started to understand interaction from a SCT perspective, a theory of developmental 
psychology initially developed by Vygotsky (1978). From a SCT view, learning does not exclusively take 
place inside a learner’s brain. Instead, it resides in particular social and cultural contexts, which constantly 
mediate a learner’s development. Input and interaction are not sufficient for language development. 
Scaffolding from an expert or a more advanced learner of the language within a learner’s zone of 
proximal development (ZPD) is also indispensable to the learner’s development. In particular, scaffolding 
from an expert can help a learner gradually move from conducting other-regulated performances to 
engaging in self-regulated ones (DiCamilla & Antón, 2004; Lantolf & Thorne, 2006). The help provided 
by the expert is contingent and dynamic, depending upon the learner’s proficiency throughout the 
learning process. Thus, the process is always fluid and dynamic as the learner’s ZPD is always 
developing. In addition, from a SCT perspective, the learner is an active rather than passive agent, who 
actively co-constructs the learning process and product (Lantolf & Pavlenko, 2001; Lantolf & Thorne, 
2006). Despite the metaphor’s inherent static connotation, the scaffolding process in the current paper 
Li Jin Language Development and Scaffolding in a Sino-American Telecollaborative Project 
 
Language Learning & Technology 195 
refers to “a dialogically produced interpsychological process through which learners internalize 
knowledge they co-construct with more capable peers” (Lantolf & Thorne, 2006, p. 282).  
To understand the multifaceted nature of scaffolding, van Lier (2004) delineated three related levels or 
layers of scaffolding: the macro level, in which task sequences and projects are planned; the meso level, 
in which sequences of actions in each task are structured; and the micro level, in which moment-to-
moment interaction operates. The first two levels are geared towards the planning and structuring phase of 
scaffolding whereas the third level focuses on the interactional phase of scaffolding. Van Lier (1996) 
proposed six general conditions for scaffolding in language project design and operation: continuity, 
contextual support, intersubjectivity, contingency, handover, and flow. To achieve continuity, the tasks 
need to occur repeatedly over time with a series of actions to keep a balance between routine and 
variation. Contextual support is achieved by providing a safe but challenging environment with access to 
various learning resources. Intersubjectivity (Rommetveit, 1974) refers to mutual engagement and support 
within dyads. Contingency means assistance is tailored according to learners’ reactions. In other words, 
based on learners’ current language needs, assistance can be added, changed, deleted, and repeated. 
Handover means that the expert ceases the provision of assistance when the learner is ready to undertake 
similar tasks independently. Flow refers to the situation in which the challenges of a task and the learners’ 
skills are in balance and participants are focused on the task. In general, consistency and contextual 
support are usually achieved in the planning phase of a project whereas intersubjectivity, contingency, 
handover, and flow are manifested during interaction.  
To unpack how scaffolding effectively operates at a micro level, Aljaafreh and Lantolf (1994) carefully 
sketched five levels of collaborative scaffolding tailored to different L2 learners’ levels, descending from 
offering the most explicit assistance (more other-regulation) to offering the least assistance (more self-
regulation). A successful expert is expected to offer appropriate help within the learner’s ZPD, which is 
constantly evolving and never static. This process can occur through consistent feedback negotiation in 
which the learner is actively engaged. This model provides a useful set of constructs to analyze moment-
to-moment scaffolding in dyadic collaboration (Lantolf & Thorne, 2006). It illustrates in detail how 
contingency and handover operate. Many SLA studies (e.g., de Guerrero & Villamil, 2000; Donato, 1994; 
Foster & Ohta, 2005) have been conducted to analyze contingency at the micro-level scaffolding in 
dyadic interaction within tasks. Very few studies have explicitly investigated other aspects of scaffolding 
such as intersubjectivity and handover across tasks in a long-term project as delineated by van Lier (1996, 
2004).  
Telecollaboration  
An increasing number of foreign language educators and researchers have realized that the ultimate goal 
of foreign language education should be expanded to include intercultural communicative competence 
(Byram, 1997). Intercultural communication naturally provides more resources than classroom-based 
learning environments for foreign language learners (Byram & Feng, 2004). In the past two decades,  a 
plethora of projects have been conducted to digitally connect learners of foreign languages with native 
speakers in the target culture. Reported findings from the telecollaboration projects have shown that 
participation in task-based intercultural telecollaborative projects can foster the development of language 
learners’ linguistic, pragmatic, and intercultural communicative competence (e.g., Belz, 2003; Belz & 
Thorne, 2006; Furstenberg et al., 2001; Levy & Kennedy, 2004; Jin & Erben, 2007; O’Dowd, 2003; 
Schenker, 2012; Spinelli & Dolci, 2007; Thorne, 2003; Ware & Kramsch, 2005).  
A great number of empirical studies have focused on illuminating various factors contributing to the 
success of telecollaboration. Research from an interactionist view showed that both asynchronous and 
synchronous text-based computer-mediated communication can create learning conditions to support both 
meaning-oriented negotiations and focus-on-form negotiations (e.g., Edasawa & Kabata, 2007; Kabata & 
Edasawa, 2011; Lee, 2002, 2011; Meskill & Anthony, 2005; O’Rourke, 2005; Pellettieri, 2000; Sauro, 
Li Jin Language Development and Scaffolding in a Sino-American Telecollaborative Project 
 
Language Learning & Technology 196 
2009; Sotillo, 2000; Vinagre, 2005; Vinagre & Muñoz, 2011; Ware, 2005; Ware & O’Dowd, 2008). The 
findings of this line of research have also revealed that learners usually reformulate peers’ lexical errors 
but provide more detailed metalinguistic explanations to peers’ morphosyntactic errors. Feedback with 
explanations leads to higher percentage of error recycling. In addition, participants in telecollaboration 
need to be trained how to provide effective feedback and to use feedback. Research in this vein further 
uncovered that task types and technologies adopted in telecollaboration may influence the types of 
feedback and the effect of feedback on error correction (e.g., Díez-Bedmar & Pérez-Paredes, 2012; 
O’Dowd & Ware, 2009; Vinagre, 2005).    
Research has also been conducted to analyze language and intercultural learning in telecollaboration from 
a SCT perspective (e.g., Basharina, 2007; Belz, 2002, 2003, 2007; Belz & Kinginger, 2002, 2003; Belz & 
Vyatkina, 2005; Darhower, 2002, 2007, 2008; Dooly, 2011; Kinginger & Belz, 2005; Kramch & Thorne, 
2002; Lee, 2008; Thorne, 2003). This line of research has focused on how learners function as active 
agents to develop linguistic and intercultural communicative competence while building interpersonal 
relationships with their telecollaboration partners. Based upon their findings from a study on French and 
American students’ online exchanges, Kramsch and Thorne (2002) warned that cultural preference of 
genres of communication might trigger communication breakdown during intercultural telecollaboration. 
Thorne (2003) further argued that technologies are culturally mediated artifacts, which in turn mediate 
how online communication is conducted. In other words, an online intercultural communication 
environment is not a value-free setting. Instead, it is mediated by the adopted technology and the 
communicators’ personal and cultural communicative patterns. Basharina’s (2007) study confirmed that 
different online communication genres and expectations of appropriate online communication behaviors 
could create severe intercultural communication clashes. With a focus on pragmatic development, Belz 
and her colleagues (Belz, 2002, 2003, 2007; Belz & Kinginger, 2002, 2003; Belz & Vyatkina, 2005; 
Kinginger & Belz, 2005) uncovered how learners developed awareness of and competence in 
appropriately using linguistic forms during particular social interactions through building interpersonal 
relationships with their partners from the target culture. In his studies on text chat-based telecollaboration, 
Darhower (2002, 2007, 2008) discovered that learners took the initiative to construct a dynamic learner-
centered discourse community by establishing intersubjectivity and experimenting with new identities. 
Dooly’s (2011) study further illuminated that learners as active social and cultural participants 
reconstructed their participation and their use of the target language according to the contexts in which 
they were involved. In addition, the reconstruction was guided by their own rather than their teacher’s 
intentions.  
Scaffolding in peer interaction has been the focus of investigation mostly within formal classroom 
settings (e.g., Aljaafreh & Lantolf, 1994; Antón & DiCamilla, 1999; de Guerrero & Villamil, 2000; 
Donato, 1994; Foster & Ohta, 2005). These studies discovered that learners can scaffold each other’s 
learning by co-constructing meaning and supporting each other to produce accurate linguistic forms. In 
particular, language development largely depends upon how well scaffolding is manifested in peer 
interaction. Despite the large number of SCT-guided studies on telecollaboration, very few of them (e.g., 
Darhower, 2002; Lee, 2008) have used the construct of scaffolding to analyze peer interaction in 
telecollaboration. Darhower’s (2002) study revealed that L2 learners made efforts to establish and 
maintain intersubjectivity as well as to repair lost intersubjectivity in bilingual text chat. He concluded 
that the existence of intersubjectivity is consequential to maintaining a collaborative discourse for 
learners’ linguistic development. By using Aljaafreh and Lantolf’s (1994) five-level model of scaffolding, 
Lee (2008) discovered that native speakers in text chat-based telecollaboration provided step-by-step and 
multi-level scaffolding to attend to non-native speakers’ non-target-like linguistic forms within each non-
native speaker’s ZPD. Her study illustrated in detail that peer scaffolding helped L2 learners develop 
certain linguistic competence whereas some forms remained unchanged due to the lack of scaffolding that 
was caused by the lack of intersubjectivity. The study findings also showed that the open-ended question 
Li Jin Language Development and Scaffolding in a Sino-American Telecollaborative Project 
 
Language Learning & Technology 197 
task stimulated more L2 use and the native speaker-non-native speaker dyads used both L1 and L2 to 
facilitate feedback negotiation process and to maintain intersubjectivity.   
The rich research on telecollaboration illustrates that telecollaboration can support language development 
by engaging learners in authentic communications situated in particular social and cultural contexts. 
However, the process is complex, dynamic, and shaped by participants’ active agency. In particular, 
scaffolding is an important SCT construct that can help decipher why certain aspects of language 
development occurs whereas others do not when assistance and interactions are provided. To uncover the 
complexity and dynamics of telecollaboration, more research from a SCT perspective needs to be 
conducted. In particular, it is worth investigating whether and how scaffolding is manifested to influence 
the process and outcomes of language development. 
Very few empirical studies in telecollaboration have been conducted with American learners of Mandarin 
Chinese. Jin and Erben’s (2007) study reported that college-level American learners had successful 
intercultural learning through text chat with native speakers of Mandarin Chinese. Research on whether 
and how language development occurs through Sino-American telecollaboration is still an uncharted area. 
Significantly different cultural and social norms exist between China and the United States. For example, 
according to Chinese politeness norms, offering corrective, even constructive, feedback is generally 
considered as a face-threatening act (Brown & Levinson, 1987) as it may make the listener lose face (Pan, 
2000). Thus, because of various politeness concerns, Chinese students may decide not to offer any direct 
or indirect negative feedback on their American counterpart’s linguistic mistakes during intercultural 
communication. There is an urgent need for a better understanding of particular issues involved in Sino-
American telecollaboration as well as for clearer guidance to Mandarin Chinese language teachers in the 
United States.  
To provide a preliminary empirical understanding of interaction and language learning in Sino-American 
telecollaboration, the present study was conducted to unpack the language developmental process in a 
telecollaborative project between college-level American students of Mandarin Chinese and their native 
Chinese partners from mainland China. In particular, the researcher investigated from a SCT perspective 
whether and how American learners’ Mandarin Chinese language development is scaffolded by their 
native Chinese partners in a Sino-American telecollaborative project. The analysis was centered on 
identifying three salient scaffolding conditions: intersubjectivity, contingency, and handover. Two 
research questions guided the present study:  
1. Does Sino-American intercultural telecollaboration assist American learners’ 
Mandarin Chinese development, in particular, their L2 production quantity and 
quality? 
2. If so, how is language development scaffolded from a sociocultural theoretical 
perspective in Sino-American telecollaboration? 
METHODOLOGY 
Background and Participants 
The current study was conducted during the 10 weeks of the 2010 winter quarter (January–March) at a 
private university in the Midwestern United States. The Chinese language program at the university offers 
four years of language courses. It also has a summer intensive language study abroad program hosted by 
its partner, the Department of Chinese Language and Literature, at a major university in Shanghai, China. 
The primary goal of the current research project was to provide a unique opportunity for beginning-level 
American learners of Mandarin Chinese to have direct interaction with native speakers of Mandarin 
Chinese. It was hoped that direct intercultural communication could complement the formal classroom 
instruction in the first-year classes, which primarily focused on developing learners’ basic conversational 
Li Jin Language Development and Scaffolding in a Sino-American Telecollaborative Project 
 
Language Learning & Technology 198 
skills. In particular, it was expected to enable the American learners to expand their vocabulary and 
engage in discourse-level reading and writing practice through authentic communication with native 
Chinese peers. Learning about culture was an integral part of the language classes as well as of the current 
project. However, the focus of this study was on whether the quantity and quality of the American student 
participants’ Mandarin Chinese writing could be improved through text-based direct intercultural 
communication with native speakers of Mandarin Chinese. In addition, whether and how language 
development was scaffolded throughout this telecollaboration process also interested the researcher, the 
instructor of the class. The participants of the study included both American students of Mandarin 
Chinese enrolled in the 2nd-year Chinese language class at the American university and their respective 
native Chinese-speaking partners who were junior or senior students from the partner program in 
Shanghai. 
Out of the 18 American participants who initially volunteered to participate in the study, only 10 
completed all the tasks required in this study.1 Among them were six males and four females. Only one 
participant was a heritage learner of Chinese whose family language was Cantonese Chinese. One female 
American participant had lived in China for one and a half years as a teenager, and one male participant 
had toured China for two weeks. But neither of them had native Chinese friends from China. The age 
range of the American participants was 19–21 during the period of the project. All participants had started 
their Chinese learning during the first year of the current Chinese program. Thus, the vast majority of the 
American participants had no prior experience with direct communication with native speakers of 
Mandarin Chinese. Before the project was conducted, the American participants had only finished ten 
months of formal Chinese language instruction. Their language proficiency was at the novice level 
according to ACTFL proficiency guidelines (ACTFL, 2012). Before voluntarily participating in the 
current study, all participants were informed that each of them could obtain cultural information and 
linguistic help from one native speaker of Mandarin Chinese. They were aware that their Chinese partners 
participated in this study to gain language-tutoring experience.  
Regarding the Chinese participants, there were eight females and two males. Their age range was between 
21 and 23 during the project. All of them volunteered for this project to gain experience so that they could 
work as language tutors to American learners in an upcoming summer intensive study abroad program. 
None of them had had prior experience with providing language or cultural help via telecollaboration to 
American college students. All of them were familiar with communicative technologies such as email and 
instant messaging. They all possessed at least low intermediate-level English proficiency, which was 
evidenced by their TEM-4 certificates.2 At the beginning of the project, all Chinese participants were 
instructed that they were expected to provide linguistic help and cultural information to their respective 
American language partners. To assist the Chinese participants in offering effective scaffolding to their 
American partners, a colleague from the partner university gave a one-hour workshop at the beginning of 
the project on how to provide contingent help with Mandarin Chinese learners’ L2 production, 
particularly linguistic errors (see Appendix A for the handout distributed at the workshop).      
Procedures 
Telecollaboration researchers (e.g., Lee, 2008; O’Dowd & Ware, 2009) argue that the types of tasks may 
affect how learners interact and negotiate feedback in telecollaboration. Drawing on van Lier’s (1996, 
2004) proposed conditions for scaffolding in project and task design as well as Lee’s (2008) finding that 
open-ended questions tasks stimulate more L2 use and negotiation, the researcher designed a total of four 
intercultural communication tasks (see Appendix B). Each of them contained a list of open-ended 
questions for the participants to discuss.  
To achieve continuity, the requirements for all four tasks in the project were kept consistent. The only 
difference lay in the topics provided in each task. In each task, the American participants needed to ask 
their Chinese questions based on a list that had been provided by the instructor. The first task was an 
Li Jin Language Development and Scaffolding in a Sino-American Telecollaborative Project 
 
Language Learning & Technology 199 
introduction session during the first week of the winter quarter. Each American participant was randomly 
paired with a native Chinese language partner from Shanghai. The researcher emailed the relevant 
information including name, gender, grade level, and email address to each American participant and his 
or her respective Chinese language partner. As soon as the contact information was distributed, each 
American participant was asked to contact his or her language partner via email to introduce themselves 
and to get to know their respective language partner. This first task served as a warm-up task for the 
American participants to start using Mandarin Chinese for authentic communicative purposes. In each of 
the following three tasks, the American participants were required to research one distinct cultural topic 
by consulting their respective Chinese partner for their experiences and views. They were informed that 
they could use their preferred communication tools (e.g., email, MSN messenger, SKYPE) during the 
project. All American participants were encouraged to use Chinese throughout the project to maximize 
language development. They were also informed that English was not prohibited in case of technical, 
linguistic, or cultural miscommunication. 
To ensure the provision of contextual support, all discussion questions in each task were related to the 
content of the lessons that the American participants were learning during the project period. They were 
also provided with a list of online Mandarin Chinese dictionaries for consultation. Additionally, the 
American participants were allowed to seek help from the instructor or the language tutor provided by the 
home department if they thought the online dictionaries were unhelpful. 
Data were collected from two major data sources: each participant’s online communication records (email 
and text chat) throughout the project and a post-study online questionnaire in Mandarin Chinese for the 
Chinese participants (see Appendix B for the detailed data collection schedule). Each participant was 
required to submit to the researcher an electronic copy of all their communication records after finishing 
each task. The online questionnaire was administered in the last week of the winter quarter. It was devised 
for two purposes: (a) to help the Chinese participants reflect on why they used certain strategies, such as 
code-switching, in email communication with their respective American partners; and (b) to collect their 
perceptions about intercultural telecollaboration. Research question 1 was answered primarily with the 
data collected from the online communication records. Research question 2 was answered based on the 
online communication records, which were triangulated with the information collected from the 
questionnaire. 
Data Analysis 
During the data analysis process, both descriptive statistical analysis and qualitative data analysis were 
conducted to understand both the outcomes and the process of the telecollaborative project. The analysis 
for research question 1 focused on identifying evidence of the development of the quantity and quality of 
the American participants’ L2 production throughout the project. Three phases of data analysis were 
undertaken. In the first phase, all American participants’ online communication records were grouped 
based on the task number. Their use of Mandarin Chinese, in both their email and text chat exchanges, 
was considered L2 production. However, any copied sentences from the list of questions provided by the 
instructor were excluded. The second phase was the analysis of the quantity of the American participants’ 
L2 production throughout the project. The number of Mandarin Chinese characters in all T-units (Polio, 
1997) that were independent Chinese clauses with or without a dependent clause was calculated. Clauses 
embedded with one or more English words that were not names of certain products or tools, such as 
MSN, SKYPE, and so forth, were not considered as L2 production. The third phase focused on the 
analysis of the American participants’ L2 linguistic accuracy. This was measured by counting the ratio of 
error-free T-units to the word count of all L2 productions. An error-free T-unit in this study refers to an 
independent Chinese clause with or without a dependent clause that doesn’t contain lexical or syntactic 
errors. For example, the sentence “我最喜欢的国家是北京和印度” [“my favorite countries are Beijing 
and India”] was considered an error-free T-unit although its content is erroneous, since the writer referred 
Li Jin Language Development and Scaffolding in a Sino-American Telecollaborative Project 
 
Language Learning & Technology 200 
to Beijing as a country. After counting all error-free T-units in all L2 productions, the ratio of error-free 
T-units to the total number of L2 characters in each task was calculated by dividing the number of error-
free T-units by the total word count of L2 productions. 
To answer research question 2, the constant comparison method (Glaser & Strauss, 1967) and matrix 
display (Miles & Huberman, 1994) were employed to organize, categorize, and then display data. The 
analysis for research question 2 focused on understanding the scaffolding conditions (van Lier, 1996, 
2004) in terms of intersubjectivity, contingency, and handover throughout the project. The researcher first 
scanned through all of the participants’ online communication records (text chat and email exchanges) to 
obtain a general view of how the American and Chinese participants interacted in each task. The data 
evidencing the scaffolding conditions throughout the project were grouped and categorized separately. 
Then the constant comparison method was used to identify salient patterns within each category, (e.g., the 
intersubjectivity strategies). To show the trend of each pattern’s appearance, the frequency of their 
appearance in each task was also tallied. When analyzing the intersubjectivity and contingency 
conditions, an additional unit of analysis, Language Related Episode (LRE) (Swain & Lapkin, 1998), was 
used to provide more in-depth analysis of the negotiation between each pair within each task. Two steps 
were conducted in the LRE analysis. The researcher first identified the LREs in the communication 
records. Then, Aljaafreh and Lantolf’s (1994) multi-level scaffolding model was used to analyze whether 
and how multi-level scaffolding was provided in moment-to-moment interaction. After the online 
communication data were analyzed, the data from the questionnaire for the Chinese participants were 
further reviewed to provide triangulating information for the identified patterns. All findings were 
organized and displayed in matrices. The researcher and a colleague then conducted the analysis 
separately and compared results. Any contradictory findings were reviewed and reanalyzed to reach 
agreement. 
FINDINGS  
The data analyzed in the study included those from both text chat sessions and email exchanges. Before 
reporting the findings, it is worth noting that among the 10 pairs of participants who submitted complete 
sets of data for all four tasks, only two pairs used the text chat function of two synchronous tools (MSN 
messenger and SKYPE); the vast majority of the communication records data were from email 
exchanges. One pair used text chat once in Task 1. The other pair used text chat twice in Task 1 and once 
in Task 2. All other pairs chose email communication throughout the project due to the scheduling 
difficulty inherent in synchronous communication.   
Language Development in Sino-American Telecollaboration  
The data analysis yields a clear trend of ascending quantity of the American participants’ production in 
Mandarin Chinese. By contrast, the quality of their L2 production did not improve as consistently and 
considerably throughout the project.  
Table 1.  American Participants’ L2 Production in Sino-American Telecollaboration 
  Task 1 Task 2 Task 3 Task 4 
L2 word count 423 765 1494 1560 
Ratio of error-free T-units  
to total production 2.40% 6.30% 3.70% 6.70% 
  
As shown in Table 1, the total number of Chinese characters that the American participants produced in 
their exchanged messages increased steadily from Task 1 to Task 4. The American participants produced 
a total of 423 characters in Task 1, 765 in Task 2, 1494 in Task 3, and 1560 in Task 4. For example, in 
Li Jin Language Development and Scaffolding in a Sino-American Telecollaborative Project 
 
Language Learning & Technology 201 
Task 1, Michael3 wrote only one Chinese sentence in his entire introductory message, “我不知道很多中
文可是我觉得我学会很多。” [“I don’t know much Chinese but I think I will learn a lot.”] in contrast to 
five complete English sentences in the message to his partner. In Task 2, he started to write more in 
Chinese while using English occasionally,  
新年快乐！！ 我用 ‘ichat’可是我觉得 msn和 ichat不兼容。(I think they are [not] 
compatible/work with each other）要是 ichat和 msn不兼容，我们只利用 email怎么样
？我有些问题。 
[Happy New Year! I use ‘ichat’. But I think msn and ichat are not compatible. If ichat and 
msn are not compatible, we only use email. How does it sound? I have some questions to 
ask.]  
In Task 4, Michael wrote one entire email message in Chinese with 126 Chinese characters.  
The American participants had awareness of and were very excited about their progress in using Chinese 
to communicate with their native Chinese partners. For example, in Task 2, Cecile showed her excitement 
when she realized she could compose her email message entirely in Chinese,  
oh wow. 听起来你一定很忙了。我今天很糟糕。:[我在我的工作地放过新年。xD.为
什么你们不打电话给他们？探访每一个家人不是很麻烦吗？ \(^__^)/ yay! I wrote in 
chinese :D!  
[oh wow. It sounds like you must be very busy. I was terrible today. I spent the New Year 
at my workplace. Why didn’t you call them? Isn’t visiting each one family member very 
tiresome? Yay! I wrote in Chinese!]   
On the other hand, it seems that the quality of the American participants’ L2 production didn’t benefit 
extraordinarily from the telecollaboration. As shown in Table 1, in contrast to the steady increase of L2 
production quantity, the ratio of error-free T-units to the total number of Chinese characters produced in 
each task did not consistently increase. The ratio was 2.4% in Task 1, 6.3% in Task 2, 3.7% in Task 3, 
and 6.7% in Task 4. However, a more careful look into the findings shows an interesting picture. 
Although the ratio of the error-free T-units to the total L2 productions decreased in Task 3, it occurred 
under the condition that the American participants’ L2 production quantity almost doubled in this task. It 
is predictable that L2 learners’ accuracy may suffer when they produce more. The ratio in Task 4 
ascended despite their continuously higher production quantity. This indicates that the American 
participants’ production quality did improve through the telecollaborative project, although not as much 
as the increase in quantity. 
In sum, the findings illustrate that the American participants’ L2 production quantity improved steadily 
whereas their L2 production quality improved moderately and less steadily throughout the project. The 
following section will further illustrate how the native speaker-non-native speaker interaction throughout 
the project might have led to the unbalanced language development. 
Intersubjectivity 
According to van Lier (1996, 2004), intersubjectivity is the mutual support and engagement in dyadic 
interaction. Lee (2008) emphasizes that scaffolding cannot be reached if intersubjectivity does not exist 
between the expert and the learner. Thus, the existence of intersubjectivity is crucial for scaffolding to 
occur. Furthermore, the focus of intersubjectivity may also shape the scaffolding process (Lee, 2008). The 
data from the communication records and the questionnaire show that both the Chinese participants and 
the American participants consistently employed a variety of strategies throughout the project to engage 
each other throughout the project. Starting from Task 1, there emerged six strategies (as categorized and 
illustrated in Appendix C) employed by the participants from both sides: (a) informal discourse styles, (b) 
explicated desire for friendship, (c) sharing of personal feelings and pictures, (d) expressed interest in 
Li Jin Language Development and Scaffolding in a Sino-American Telecollaborative Project 
 
Language Learning & Technology 202 
each other’s life and culture, (e) language engagement, and (f) compliments. As shown in Figure 1, both 
the Chinese participants and the American participants employed these intersubjectivity strategies 
consistently throughout the project, which is demonstrated in the frequency of these strategies in each 
task.  
 
12
11
9 99 9 9
7
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Task 1 Task 2 Task 3 Task 4
Frequency of Chinese
Participants'
Intersubjectivity Strategy
Use
Frequency of American
Participants'
Intersubjectivity Strategy
Use
 
Figure 1.  Chinese and American participants’ use of intersubjectivity strategies.  
Strategies 1–4 focus on friendship building. Participants from both sides frequently employed very 
colloquial phrases and emoticons such as “呵呵” (the Chinese characters for smiling sound), “haha,” 
“:D,” “^_^” to show positive emotions in both email and text chat exchanges. They constantly expressed 
explicitly their desire to build friendship with their respective partners in both L1 and L2. For example, “I 
enjoy talking to you very much. And I think we will be good friends through e-mails,” “I’m so happy you 
are my pen pal,” “我会尽力为你的中文学习提供帮助。希望我们能成为朋友” [“I will try my best to 
help you with your Chinese learning. Hope we can become friends.”] Besides verbally expressing their 
desire to be friends, the majority of them also shared family or personal pictures throughout the project. In 
addition, some participants shared increasing personal feelings and gradually showed emotional support 
for each other, an important sign of friendly trust. For example, one Chinese participant confessed her 
worry about her bad grades: “This term I got very bad marks. That’s really frustrating.” Then the 
American participant shared similar stress: “I also did very bad this term and I think that I need to get my 
priorities in order so that I can have better grades in the next quarter.”  
Despite the fact that the American participants were given some pre-planned questions, they showed great 
interest in learning about their Chinese partners’ lives and Chinese culture. For example, one American 
participant commented on the questions he was required to ask his Chinese partner: “I was asked to ask 
you these questions… but to be honest I would really like to know the answers.” After their questions, 
some American participants also invited their Chinese partners to ask any questions that were of interest 
to them. For example, after he asked a few questions about his partner’s student life, Jake extended the 
invitation: “我问了你很多问题。我也喜欢你问我很多问题。” [“I asked you a lot of questions. I also 
want you to ask me many questions.”] On the other hand, some Chinese participants often initiated some 
questions as well. One Chinese participant requested some information from her American partner after 
she shared information about the dating culture in China: “It is your turn now haha~ I wonder when do 
Americans begin your first love? Do your parents care about that? What’s your attitude about sex?” The 
participants also tried to encourage each other to use more Chinese in the communication through using 
Li Jin Language Development and Scaffolding in a Sino-American Telecollaborative Project 
 
Language Learning & Technology 203 
strategies 5 and 6. Without knowing their American partners’ Mandarin Chinese proficiency, especially in 
Task 1, the Chinese participants encouraged them to express their need for language help, such as “以后
的邮件需要我用中文和英文双语写么？” [“Do you want me to write in both Chinese and English in 
future emails?”] They also frequently checked whether their American partners were lost in their L2 
communication. For example, after her first long email completely in Chinese, Yangzi wrote a postscript:  
“If you have any difficulty in understanding those Chinese words, let me know in the next 
email~it’s really a good way to improve~^^.” They complimented their partners’ language 
skills, such as “what you said in the email ‘我觉得我会学会更多’is really perfect, and I 
believe you can speak good Chinese in the new future.”  
Rather than waiting for their Chinese partners to control which language to use, many American 
participants often actively negotiated their need for L2 input. For example, at the beginning of the project 
when Chloe felt unconfident and incompetent in typing Chinese characters, she told her Chinese partner, 
“我觉的我们应该说英文，因为我的电脑没有好的中文” [“I feel we should speak English because my 
computer doesn’t have a good input system for Chinese characters”]. It is much easier to write Chinese by 
hand than to do so on the computer—it takes so long! lol.” In the second round of email exchanges in 
Task 1, she changed her mind, “I’d really like it if you wrote to me in zhongwen characters so I can learn. 
Xiexie.” Then in Task 2, she informed her partner of her independence in reading and writing in Chinese, 
“我觉得我懂你写的字因为我有一个很好用的 website (nciku.com)” [“I think I understand what you 
wrote because I have a very helpful website.”]  
Compared to the intersubjectivity on friendship building and encouragement of more target language use, 
the American participants and the Chinese participants rarely focused on negotiation of linguistic forms. 
This was further reflected on the relatively small number of LREs and scarcity of multiple-level 
scaffolding of linguistic forms throughout the project. Despite the low ratio of error-free T-units to L2 
production in each task, only a total of eight language related episodes (LREs) (two in Task 1, four in 
Task 2, one in Task 3, and one in Task 4) in which feedback negotiation occurred were identified 
throughout the project.  
When asked why they were reluctant to provide explicit feedback on their American partners’ linguistic 
errors, one Chinese participant confessed:  
我也想了解一下美国的文化，所以我想跟我的语伴交朋友。我不想让她觉得她的中
文不好。再说，总是指出她的错误，她可能就不敢用中文写信了。  
[I also want to understand American culture. So I want to make friends with my partner. I 
don’t want her to feel her Chinese is bad. Moreover, constantly pointing out her errors 
may intimidate her from using Chinese.] 
When they had to correct their partners’ language errors, they used either recast or other less critical-
sounding phrases to soften the tone. For example, in LRE 1, the American participant (A) omitted the 
character “会” in front of the verb phrase “学会,” which turned the sentence into past tense although he 
tried to express his hope for a future situation. The Chinese participant (C) carefully reformulated the 
sentence in a compliment.  
LRE 1 (Task 1):  
A: 我不知道很多中文可是觉得我学会很多。 [I don’t know much Chinese but feel I 
learned much] 
C: what you said in the email “我觉得我会学会很多” [“I feel I will learn much”] is really 
perfect.  
In LRE 2, the American participant used the wrong homophone “回” when she tried to describe her 
Li Jin Language Development and Scaffolding in a Sino-American Telecollaborative Project 
 
Language Learning & Technology 204 
summer plan in Shanghai. This made it sound like she had been to Shanghai before and was planning to 
return there in the summer, even though she had never been there before. Understanding her real intention 
from their earlier communication, the Chinese participant corrected her by using “哈哈” [“haha”], “请勿
见怪” [“please take it easy”], and “也许是你打错字了” [“maybe it was just a typo”], which were three 
phrases to mitigate the tone of criticism and make his message sound friendlier. 
LRE 2 (Task 1):  
A: 这个夏天我回去上海的 FUDAN大学. [This summer I will go back to Fudan 
University in Shanghai] 
C: 哈哈，先指出你来信里的一个中文错误，请勿见怪！应该是今年夏天我“会”去
上海的，而不是“回”，也许是你打错字了。[haha, first let me point out a Chinese 
error in your email. Please take it easy. It should be “this summer I will go to Shanghai, 
not “go back to”. Maybe it was just a typo. ] 
In all LREs, the American participants either didn’t acknowledge the correction from their Chinese 
partners or simply said “Ok,” “haha, yeah, I mean that.” For example, in LRE 3, the Chinese participant 
directly corrected the American participant’s pragmatic mistake by using “汉语里，问候可以用” [“In 
Chinese, we greet this way”.] However, it didn’t catch the attention of the American participant, who 
seemed to have been distracted by the unknown vocabulary in the previous message sent by the Chinese 
participant.   
LRE 3 (Task 4):  
A: 你好吗？[Are you okay?] 
C: 不错，回到学校了，你呢？忙完了吗？[Not bad. I got back to school. What about 
you? Are you done with your work?] 
C: 汉语里，问候可以用：最近过得怎么样? :) [In Chinese, we greet in this way: how 
are you lately?] 
A: I don’t understand some of these characters 
A: sorry my Chinese isn’t that great! 
C: 不错=I’m fine 
C: 回到学校了=I have come back to FDU 
A: oooo 
A: 我懂了！[I understood] 
In sum, the findings shown above indicate that both the Chinese participants and the American 
participants shared intersubjectivity with regard to building friendships and encouraging more L2 use. 
However, developing the American participants’ linguistic and pragmatic accuracy was not the focus of 
the intersubjectivity.   
Li Jin Language Development and Scaffolding in a Sino-American Telecollaborative Project 
 
Language Learning & Technology 205 
Contingency & Handover 
Contingency and handover are another two important features in the manifestation of scaffolding. Further 
data analysis of the interaction patterns illustrates that the Chinese participants provided consistent and 
contingent target language assistance that was consciously tailored to their American partners’ L2 reading 
and writing abilities. Gradually, certain types of assistance were withdrawn and the communication was 
carried out primarily in the learners’ L24, which is called handover by van Lier (2004). The contingency 
and handover were discernibly shown in three aspects of language use as illustrated in Figure 2 and Figure 3.  
423
765
1494 1560
512
1570
1855
2343
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
    
  
   
 
Figure 2.  Participants’ contingency in L2 (Mandarin Chinese) use. 
Throughout the four tasks, the Chinese participants contingently increased the use of Mandarin Chinese in 
their messages. At the outset of the project, the Chinese participants were more conservative in terms of 
their Chinese use due to their uncertainty about their American partners’ need for language assistance. It 
was evidenced with only 512 Chinese characters used in Task 1. Aligning with the American participants’ 
language development, the Chinese participants gradually increased their use of Mandarin Chinese in the 
following tasks (1570 characters in Task 2, 1855 in Task 3, and 2343 in Task 4).  
The data from the communication records and the questionnaire results confirmed that the Chinese 
participants took the action consciously to accommodate their respective American participants’ language 
proficiency. For example, in her introductory email to Chloe, Yangzi explicitly asked Chloe’s preference 
of language choice: “Please let me know how’s your Chinese degree now, and we can decide which 
language will be the chief one in our communication~.” As shown earlier, upon Chloe’s request for more 
L2 use, Yangzi wrote in Chinese throughout most of the following email and reminded Chloe at the end 
of the message to let her know whether the amount of L2 was appropriate for Chloe’s level. After Chloe 
confirmed her readiness, Yangzi started to write her messages primarily in Chinese. The Chinese 
participants also reflected in the questionnaire on their conscious language choice. For instance, one 
Chinese participant reflected:  
我的语伴用什么语言，我就用什么语言。我想这样他能看懂我的信。有时候他要求
我用更多中文，我就用更多中文。 [I used whatever language my American partner 
used in his email. I think this helps him understand me better. Sometimes he asked me to 
use more Chinese, I then used more Chinese.]  
Thus, the contingency of L2 use in communication was negotiated within the dyads and dynamically 
shifted to fit the learner’s ZPD in terms of their reading ability.  
Besides consistently increasing their Chinese use in communication according to the American 
participants’ needs and proficiency, the Chinese participants also used code-switching as well as bilingual 
Li Jin Language Development and Scaffolding in a Sino-American Telecollaborative Project 
 
Language Learning & Technology 206 
translation or explanation to assist their American partners’ L2 reading. As shown in Figure 3, the 
Chinese participants used code-switching throughout the project. When the American participants’ L2 
reading ability noticeably improved, they also gradually reduced the frequency of adopting this strategy: 
15 times in Task 1, eight in Task 2, 10 in Task 3, and seven in Task 4. The code-switching occurred both 
from the learners’ L1 to L2 and from their L2 to L1. For example, at the end of his first email to his 
American partner, Ben switched from English to Chinese: “The spring festival is coming, and wish you ‘
春节快乐，年年有余’， 提前给你拜年啦~” [“Happy New Year, wish you a surplus. Here are my New 
Year greetings to you in advance.”] Sometimes the Chinese participants also switched from the learners’  
15
8 10 7
52
41
1320
30
40
50
60
    
F   
F     
Figure 3.  Chinese participants’ contingency and handover in code-switching and translation/ L1 
explanation. L1 refers to the Chinese learners’ L1 (English). 
L2 to their L1. For example, Yuanmeng wrote in an email message, “他对我很好，但是他是个现实主
义者（realist?）。Anyway, boys always can’t be as romantic as the girls want.” [“He treats me well. But 
he is a realist”.] In the questionnaire, the Chinese participants reflected that they code-switched from 
English to Chinese in an attempt to expose their American partners to some authentic Chinese 
expressions. When they switched from Chinese to English, they were mainly concerned that their 
American partners might have difficulty understanding the email if they continued writing in the learnersʼ 
L2.  
Another strategy the Chinese participants adopted to assist the American participants’ L2 reading was 
providing additional translation and/or explicit explanation of certain cultural concepts in English. For 
example, when explaining what Chinese people do during the Spring Festival, one Chinese participant 
wrote:  
过年的时候，中国北方会吃饺子(dumpling)，南方的话，我们吃面食，比如糕点，
糯米团子(sth like glutinous cakes, sweep dumplings), 我们过春节会贴春联 (put on 
spring festival couplets), 贴福字(福 which means good luck). [During the New Year, the 
northerners eat dumplings. In the south, we eat wheat flour food such as steamed cakes, 
sweet rice cakes. We will hang Spring Festival couplets and fortune posters.]  
All Chinese participants only used translation or explanation into the learnersʼ L1 three times in Task 1 
when the participants mainly tried to get to know each other. After Task 2, which focused on the Chinese 
Spring Festival traditions, the Chinese participants gradually reduced the frequency of adopting this 
strategy (52 times in Task 2, 41 in Task 3, and 13 in Task 4). In the questionnaire, one Chinese participant 
explained that: 
Li Jin Language Development and Scaffolding in a Sino-American Telecollaborative Project 
 
Language Learning & Technology 207 
我觉得有些跟中国文化有关的概念，他可能理解不了。所以我想双语解释应该更方
便。后来他用的中文越来越多，我想他理解中文应该没有很大问题，我也就不用那
么多英文解释了。” [“I feel that he probably can’t understand some specific Chinese 
culture-related concepts. So, I think an explanation in English will make it more 
convenient to communicate. Later on, he used more Chinese. I think he should not have 
big issues with Chinese. I decided not to use so many English explanations.”]   
On the other hand, a microgenetic analysis of the LREs revealed that contingency and handover did not 
operate substantively and effectively in moment-to-moment interaction. Among the eight identified 
LREs, seven LRES contained over-intervention (Lee, 2008), in which the correct linguistic form was 
provided once an error was spotted. For example, in LRE 1, LRE 2, and LRE 3 discussed earlier, all 
Chinese participants immediately provided the correct expressions rather than assisting their respective 
American partner according to their respective ZPD. From a SCT perspective, over or early intervention 
prevents the learner from reaching self-regulation and eventually independently producing error-free 
language forms. Thus, it is unknown whether the American participants consequently understood how to 
avoid similar errors in their future writing.   
Multi-level scaffolding (Aljaafreh & Lantolf, 1994) was observed in only one LRE during this project. As 
shown in LRE 4, the Chinese participant first provided an indirect hint by asking whether the American 
participant learned a similar phrase, “有事.” She then followed up with more hints by giving the social 
context in which the new phrase “没事” is used. After two rounds of confirmation check, the American 
participant finally understood the phrase. During the entire process of intervention, the Chinese 
participant didn’t provide the answer directly. Instead, she carefully provided scaffolding such that the 
American participant could independently find out the correct meaning of “没事.”  
LRE 4 (Task 2):  
C: 呵呵，没事 [smiling characters in Chinese, it is nothing] 
A: 没什么？[no what?]        (noticing unfamiliar phrase) 
A: I don’t remember that character 
C: Did you learn “有事” before?     (gave indirect hint) 
A: yeah. I remember. It means “I am busy.”   
A: o its means thing        (self-regulated answer) 
A: so the phrase means “not busy”?    (confirmation check) 
C: Usually we use this word after sorry    (gave more hint) 
A: yes, I understand now. It means “its nothing”?  (confirmation check) 
C: hehe 
The data above indicate that contingency and handover were provided to assist the American participants 
to read in Mandarin Chinese and produce more Mandarin Chinese more effectively than to assist their 
linguistic accuracy. This is consistent with the patterns of intersubjectivity that were identified earlier.  
DISCUSSION 
Scaffolding of L2 Production Quantity 
Telecollaboration is perceived as one of the most complex contexts for L2 development (Guth & Helm, 
2010; O’Dowd, 2007; O’Dowd & Ware, 2009). It has been investigated from various theoretical 
perspectives (e.g., Belz, 2002, 2003, 2007; Belz & Thorne, 2008; Dolly, 2011; Lee, 2004, 2008, 2011; 
Li Jin Language Development and Scaffolding in a Sino-American Telecollaborative Project 
 
Language Learning & Technology 208 
Ware, 2005; Ware & O’Dowd, 2008). From a SCT perspective, specifically drawing on the concept of 
multifaceted scaffolding (Aljaafreh & Lantolf, 1994; van Lier, 1996, 2004), this study uncovered that 
beginning-level American learners of Mandarin Chinese had discernible and steady gains in their L2 
production quantity during a Sino-American telecollaborative project. More importantly, the study results 
showed that the L2 production quantity gains could be largely attributed to the scaffolding conditions 
afforded by the telecollaborative project. They were particularly manifested in the consistent 
intersubjectivity within each dyad as well as the contingent assistance and handover which were provided 
by the native Chinese partners and actively negotiated by the American participants throughout the project.  
Certainly, it is very possible that the distinct topic in each task might have stimulated different interests 
among the American participants. This might have exerted influence on their various quantities of L2 
production in each task. For example, the topic on the Chinese Spring Festival traditions in Task 2 was 
new to all American participants and might have stimulated more exchanges than the simple introduction 
topic in Task 1. And the spike of learner L2 use in Task 3 might have been attributed to a more engaging 
topic: dating culture in China. However, the in-depth analysis of the telecollaboration process revealed 
that the Chinese participants consciously and consistently tailored their language use throughout the 
project to assist their respective American partner to read and write more in their L2. This process was 
actively negotiated by the American participants as shown in findings. Therefore, it is reasonable to claim 
that the scaffolding conditions manifested in the project shaped the American participants’ L2 
development in terms of their L2 writing quantity.  
Lack of Scaffolding for L2 Production Quality  
By contrast, the findings of the current study suggested that the lack of relevant scaffolding led to the 
American participants’ relatively small and inconsistent gains in their L2 linguistic accuracy. First and 
foremost, this stemmed from the lack of intersubjectivity about focus-on-form. Unlike previous studies, 
which reported a substantive amount of focus-on-form negotiation in email-based telecollaboration (e.g., 
Vinagre, 2005; Vinagre & Muñoz, 2011; Ware & O’Dowd, 2008), the current study identified only a 
limited number of focus-on-form LREs. The first reason might be that the primary focus of the project 
was information sharing rather than linguistic correction. During the project, the Chinese participants 
were instructed, but not mandated, to provide comments on their American partners’ linguistic forms. 
This corroborated previous studies’ findings that learners may not focus on formal aspects of utterances 
unless they are specifically instructed to do so (e.g., Edasawa & Kabata, 2007; Kabata & Edasawa, 2011; 
O’Rourke, 2005; Lee, 2002; 2009; Sotillo, 2000; Ware, 2005; Ware & O’Dowd, 2008).  
Another underlying reason that the Chinese participants were reluctant to offer corrective feedback may 
be Chinese politeness norms (Pan, 2000). According to Chinese politeness norms, being critical of a 
peer’s errors can make the peer lose face. As shown in the findings, the Chinese participants expressed 
strong interest in building a friendship with their respective American partners. This might have 
prevented them from being critical. As a result, they opted to provide assistance with reading and writing 
more in L2 or to mitigate negativity in their linguistic feedback. In addition, some Chinese participants 
also held their own concerns that constant critical comments on linguistic forms might discourage their 
American partners from using L2. This view might also have deterred them from offering corrective 
feedback to their American partners.  
On the other hand, there was minimal evidence in the communication records that the American 
participants actively engaged in negotiation of forms. This is similar to what was discovered in previous 
text chat-based studies (e.g., Darhower, 2002, 2007, 2008). L2 learners’ lack of agency in focus-on-form 
may be attributed to the cognitive challenge of paying attention to both meaning and form in intercultural 
collaboration (e.g., Darhower, 2008; Kötter, 2002; Sotillo, 2000). This is very possible since the 
American participants in this project were only beginning-level learners of Mandarin Chinese. Their lack 
of agency was exacerbated by the Chinese participants’ reluctance to provide linguistic feedback. 
Li Jin Language Development and Scaffolding in a Sino-American Telecollaborative Project 
 
Language Learning & Technology 209 
Besides the lack of intersubjectivity, the Chinese participants’ lack of skills to offer successful linguistic 
scaffolding might also have given rise to the lack of scaffolding for the learners’ L2 linguistic accuracy. 
The Chinese participants only received one hour of training on offering scaffolding assistance. Their early 
or over intervention lent no assistance within their American partner’s ZPD, as discovered in Lee’s (2008) 
study. This might have limited engaging the American participants in focus-on-form negotiation.  
Pedagogical Implications 
The success of intercultural telecollaboration is shaped by both task design and participating learners. As 
discussed earlier, telecollaborative projects can be beneficial for learners, even beginning-level learners, 
to develop confidence and certain abilities to communicate in an L2 with native speakers of that L2. To 
guarantee the learning conduciveness of a telecollaborative project, both macro- and micro-level 
scaffolding throughout the project needs to be in place. In the first half of the project, the instructor may 
assign culture discussion-related tasks to meet the learners’ need for building intercultural friendships, 
obtaining authentic target cultural information, and freely expressing ideas in the target language. If 
focus-on-form is expected as well, the second half of the project could shift to linguistic accuracy-focused 
tasks such as keeping blogs and requiring peer revision. This should be implemented under the condition 
that participants from both sides are well trained with micro-level scaffolding strategies. Moreover, native 
speakers of Mandarin Chinese may receive specific training on how to skillfully offer linguistic feedback 
without being overly concerned with intercultural impoliteness.      
LIMITATIONS OF THE STUDY 
As with any research study, this study is not exempt from limitations. First, as this study only analyzed 10 
pairs of participants, the nature of qualitative research limits the generalizability of the research findings. 
Second, the project only lasted for 10 weeks. The relatively short duration of this telecollaboration may 
not reveal the full-fledged language development that could have occurred in a longer-term 
telecollaborative project. American learners’ linguistic gains may appear in other forms such as the 
accuracy and complexity of vocabulary and the complexity of sentence structures, which were not 
investigated in the current study. Third, the researcher didn’t analyze the eight pairs of dyads who 
dropped out of the project. Their failure to complete the project may offer more insights into the 
complexity of Sino-American telecollaboration. Lastly, intersubjectivity, contingency, and handover have 
not been widely adopted as analytical constructs in SLA. While the researcher’s analysis may offer new 
insights, there may exist limitations for these concepts when employed as analytical constructs.  
CONCLUSION 
The current study documented the language development of 10 tertiary-level American learners of 
Mandarin Chinese engaged in a 10-week Sino-American telecollaborative project. It analyzed the native 
speaker-non-native speaker interaction throughout the project from a SCT perspective. The research 
findings demonstrated that the beginning-level American learners’ production quantity in Mandarin 
Chinese steadily increased throughout the project. This benefited greatly from the scaffolding conditions 
that were specifically manifested in the maintenance of intersubjectivity, contingent assistance and 
handover throughout the project. Their linguistic accuracy in terms of the ratio of error-free T-units to the 
total L2 production, however, did not improve as rapidly. The findings of the current study contribute to 
the field of intercultural telecollaboration by revealing from a SCT perspective the complexity of 
telecollaboration-based language development. The current study complements the previous studies by 
shedding light on how scaffolding conditions can be planned and maintained to assist L2 learners to 
increase L2 production quantity in a telecollaborative project over a period of 10 weeks. The findings 
about the multitude of intersubjectivity and contingency strategies throughout the project also offer 
additional views of the underlying reasons for the imbalanced language development in intercultural 
telecollaboration. This enriches the understanding of both the possible linguistic affordances in 
Li Jin Language Development and Scaffolding in a Sino-American Telecollaborative Project 
 
Language Learning & Technology 210 
telecollaboration and the complexity of intercultural telecollaboration.    
As there is much interest in launching telecollaboration projects between English-speaking learners of 
Mandarin Chinese and native speakers of Mandarin Chinese, the current study provides a preliminary 
understanding of whether and how beginning-level American learners’ language development can benefit 
from a culture discussion-focused telecollaborative project with native speakers of Chinese. More 
research should be conducted to investigate whether and how scaffolding help could be planned and 
operated to balance focus-on-form and focus-on-meaning negotiations with learners of various 
proficiency levels. More attention should also be paid to what specific aspects of language development 
and how language development can be optimally scaffolded in various task types over a longer period of 
time. In addition, future studies can investigate how intercultural learning is scaffolded in a 
telecollaborative project. Studies could also focus on how scaffolding could be manifested in different 
modalities of communication (e.g., text chat versus voice chat) in telecollaboration, particularly for 
advanced-level learners.  
 
APPENDIX A. Handout on Scaffolding American Students’ L2 Use  
一：中文语伴工作的基本原则： 
了解你的美国语伴的中文水平：在交流时观察并分析你的语伴在词汇，或句法各方面的强势和弱
势。在发现他/她在弱势方面有所进步时，及时表扬进步（任何时候都用中文表扬）； 
不断鼓励你的语伴用简单的语言表达自己的想法； 
使用渐进式辅导技巧：根据语伴的水平及交流话题，提供必要的辅导来帮助你的语伴使用更多更
正确的中文来交流。比如，在语伴完全不知道怎么表达自己时，提供一些词汇提示，或者给一个
类似的范例，然后鼓励语伴用简单的方式表达他/她想表达的意思。如果语伴能够表达自己但重复
出现某种句法错误，帮助他/她解释并纠正错误。 
二：对词汇及语法错误的辅导技巧：你的语伴跟你用中文交流时会犯各种词汇或者语法错误。当
他们出现错误时，根据他们的水平，你可以提供不同的帮助以帮助他们能自主正确地使用中文表
达自己。注意：你的语伴的写作水平在这两个月内可能会有明显的进步。如果你观察他/她的水平
进入到下一阶段，请适宜逐步改动你的交流方式。 
 
 美国学生的情况 渐进式辅导方式 
阶段一 出现词汇或者语法错误时，学生不能辨
识出自己的错误。当你指出他/她的错误
时，不知道如何修改。 
直接指出他/她的错误，提供解释和正确的
用法。 
阶段二 出现词汇或者语法错误时，学生能辨识
出自己的错误，可是完全不知道如何修
改。 
帮助详细的解释，并提供正确的用法 
阶段三 出现词汇或者语法错误时，学生能辨识
错误，但不能确信如何改正自己的错误
。 
提供相关的提示，帮助学生找到正确的用
法。 
阶段四 出现词汇或者语法错误时，学生能辨识
自己的错误，并能自己改正，但不能完
如果注意到学生的用法有时正确，有时不
正确，肯定学生正确的用法。 
Li Jin Language Development and Scaffolding in a Sino-American Telecollaborative Project 
 
Language Learning & Technology 211 
全确信。 
阶段五 学生基本没有明显的词汇使用不当或语
法错误。 
正常与学生交流。 
 
English Translation  
I. General guidelines you can follow to help your American partner’s L2 use:  
1. Understand your American partner’s Chinese language level: observe and analyze 
your partner’s competence when using Chinese to express him/herself, e.g., 
vocabulary, grammar structure. When he or she makes progress, offer compliments to 
recognize their progress;  
2. Encourage your American partner’s Chinese use: frequently encourage your American 
partner to express him/herself in Chinese even if they have to make mistakes;  
3. Scaffold your American partner’s Chinese use: based on your American partner’s 
proficiency, provide appropriate assistance to help improve the quantity and quality of 
his or her Chinese use. For example, when he or she can only use simple phrases 
rather than sentences in the communication, provide more vocabulary and simple 
sentence structures and encourage your partner to make similar sentences to express 
him or herself. If your partner can use complete sentences to express him or herself 
but constantly uses certain vocabulary or grammatical structures erroneously, point 
out the error(s) and scaffold him/her to correct it/them.     
II. Scaffolding strategies you can use to help your partner gradually reduce linguistic errors in their 
writing. Your American partner will inevitably make various vocabulary or structural mistakes during the 
communication with you. Based on how they react to their mistakes, use different levels of scaffolding 
strategies that are provided below to help him or her develop the competence to use Chinese accurately.  
 
 Your American Partner’s Situation Scaffolding Strategy 
Level 1 
Scaffolding 
Your partner cannot notice his or her error. 
When you point it out, he or she does not 
know how to correct it.  
point out the errors, provide detailed 
explanation and the correct usage.  
Level 2 
Scaffolding 
Your partner notices own error, but has no 
clue how to correct it.  
Provide detailed explanation and demonstrate 
the correct usage 
Level 3 
Scaffolding 
Your partner notices own error, but can 
only correct it with some of your help.  
Provide implicit hint rather than explicit 
correction to induce your partner to discover 
the correct usage.   
Level 4 
Scaffolding 
Your partner notices own error and is able 
to correct it, but your confirmation is 
needed.  
Provide confirmation  
Level 5 
Scaffolding 
Your partner can use Chinese to 
appropriately express his or her ideas. No 
extra help is needed.   
Maintain the communication  
Li Jin Language Development and Scaffolding in a Sino-American Telecollaborative Project 
 
Language Learning & Technology 212 
 
APPENDIX B. Intercultural Telecollaboration Tasks & Data Collection Timeline 
Time Task Task Instructions 
Week 1 Task 1 Introduction:  
As you have your Chinese partner’s email address now, please contact 
your partner to introduce yourself （介绍你自己）and get to know 
your partner（了解你的语伴）. You can ask for the information you 
would like to know. If you two decide to chat synchronously, try to set 
up a time to meet with him or her online to prepare your Task 2（约定
你们讨论第二个话题的网上见面时间）. You may use as much 
Chinese as you can.  
End of Week 
1 
Data 
Collection 1 
Both the AS participants and the CP participants submitted the Task 1 
communication records (email and/or text chat).  
Week 2-4 Task 2 Please discuss with your Chinese partner on the topic: 过春节 (Chinese 
Spring Festival celebration).  You can use the following questions to 
jumpstart your discussion.   
1. 过春节的时候，中国人一般吃什么？During the Spring Festival, 
what do Chinese people usually eat? 
2. 过春节的时候，中国人家里一般一起做什么？During the Spring 
Festival, what do Chinese people usually do as a family?  
3. 今年你过情人节吗？如果过，你怎么过？Will you celebrate 
Valentine’s Day this year since it is overlapping with the Spring 
Festival? If yes, what will you do?  
End of Week 
4 
Data 
Collection 2 
Both the AS participants and the CP participants submitted the Task 2 
communication records (email and/or text chat). 
Week 5-7 Task 3 Please research on the topic: 约会(dating) and conduct an online 
interview with your Chinese partner. You can use the following topics 
to structure your interview.   
1. 如果你能跟一个美国的明星约会，你想跟谁约会？为什么？If 
you could date an American celebrity, who would you like to date? 
Why? 
2. 如果你在大学里谈男/女朋友，你的爸爸妈妈会生气吗？在中国
，跟你的男/女朋友出去玩，会很花钱吗？你们常常玩什么？Will 
your parents be mad if you have a boy/girlfriend in college? In China, is 
it expensive if you hang out with your boyfriend/girlfriend? What do 
you usually do for fun? 
End of Week 
7 
Data 
Collection 3 
Both the AS participants and the CP participants submitted the Task 3 
communication records (email and/or text chat). 
Week 8-10 Task 4  Please research on the topic: 中国的大学生活(being a college student 
in China) and conduct an online interview with your Chinese partner. 
Li Jin Language Development and Scaffolding in a Sino-American Telecollaborative Project 
 
Language Learning & Technology 213 
You can use the following topics to structure your interview.   
1. 你常常有很多作业吗？你有什么作业？Do you usually have a lot 
of homework? What kind of homework do you have? 
2. 你在上英文课吗？你的英文课难吗？有意思吗？你怎么学英文？
Are you taking an English class? Is it difficult? Is it interesting? How do 
you learn English? 
3.  在中国，你们的考试怎么样？特别难吗？你是怎么准备考试的
？How are the tests in China? Are they extremely difficult? How do 
you prepare for tests? 
 
Week 10 
Data 
Collection 4: 
Post-program 
Questionnaire 
The CP participants were surveyed on their collaboration with their 
American partners.  
End of Week 
10 
Data 
Collection 5 
Both the AS participants and the CP participants submitted the Task 4 
communication records (email and/or text chat). 
 
Li Jin Language Development and Scaffolding in a Sino-American Telecollaborative Project 
 
Language Learning & Technology 214 
APPENDIX C. Specific Intersubjectivity Strategies  
Strategies Examples  
Informal Discourse Style  “The class must be interesting! Tell me something, :D”  
“哈哈，所以欢迎你来喔～lol” [haha, so we welcome you to 
visit~lol]; 
“嗯，好的，你中文讲的真不错啊，呵呵” [okay, you speak really 
well, hehe[ 
Expressing desire to build 
friendship 
I enjoy talking to you very much. And I think we will be good friends 
through emails.” 
 “等你夏天来中国，我会带你去有特色的中国菜馆吃饺子”[When 
you come to China, I will take you to have dumplings at those special 
Chinese restaurants[; 
Sharing personal feelings & 
Exchange pictures 
“This term, I got very bad marks, that’s really frustrating. I think next 
term I should pay more attention to my courses”; 
“I attached a picture of me, so you know who you’re talking to” 
Asking questions to show 
interest   
“It is your turn now hah~I wonder when do Americans begin your 
first love? Do your parents care about that? What’s your attitude 
about sex?” 
“我问了你很多问题。我也喜欢你问我很多问题。”[I asked you a 
lot of questions. I also want you to ask me many questions[       
Language engagement   “If you have any difficulty in understanding these Chinese words, let 
me know in the next email~it’s really a good way to improve~^^”;  
“以后的邮件需要我用中文和英文双语写么？”[Do you want me to 
write in both Chinese and English in future emails?[ 
Compliment on language skills  “呵呵，你的中文很棒啊！”[hehe, your Chinese is awesome!];  
“You are really a great partner. I learned so much from you”.  
NOTES  
1. According to the post-study questionnaire, the other eight dyads were unable to complete all tasks or 
submit complete data due to their busy schedule rather than any intercultural communicative clashes.    
2. TEM-4 is a standardized national exam for English majors in mainland China. All college-level 
students in mainland China are required to pass TEM-4 to fulfill the mandatory intermediate-level English 
language requirement.  
3. All names in this study were pseudonyms in order to protect the participants’ confidentiality.   
4. L2 in this paper refers to the American participants’ target language: Mandarin Chinese. 
Li Jin Language Development and Scaffolding in a Sino-American Telecollaborative Project 
 
Language Learning & Technology 215 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
 
The author appreciates the journal editor’s and three anonymous reviewers’ thoughtful and helpful 
feedback during the review process. The author also would like to thank her assistant David W. Magee 
for his meticulous and excellent assistance in data analysis and manuscript editing. Many thanks also go 
to the author’s colleagues Shengrong Cai, Wesley Curtis, and Elizabeth Deifell for reviewing the earlier 
version of the paper and providing very thoughtful feedback. All errors remain the author’s.    
 
REFERENCES 
Aljaafreh, A., & Lantolf, J. P. (1994). Negative feedback as regulation and second language learning in 
the Zone of Proximal Development. The Modern Language Journal, 78(4), 465–483. 
ACTFL. (2012). ACTFL Proficiency Guidelines 2012. Retrieved from http://actflproficiency 
guidelines2012.org/ 
Anton, M. & DiCamilla, F.J.(1999). Socio-cognitive functions of L1 collaborative interaction in the L2 
classroom. The Modern Language Journal, 83(ii), 233–247.  
Asia Society. (2009). Language learning in the United States: How we’re doing? Retrieved from 
http://asiasociety.org/education-learning/world-languages/in-american-schools/language-learning-united-
states-how-were-doin  
Basharina, O. K. (2007). An activity theory perspective on student-reported contradictions in international 
telecollaboration. Language Learning & Technology, 11(2), 36–58. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/ 
vol11num2/basharina/default.html   
Belz, J. A. (2002). Social dimensions of telecollaborative foreign language study. Language Learning & 
Technology, 6(1), 60–81. Retrieved from http://www.llt.msu.edu/vol6num1/belz/default.html  
Belz, J. A. (2003). Linguistic perspectives on the development of intercultural competence in 
telecollaboration.  Language Learning & Technology, 7(2), 68–117. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/belz/default.html  
Belz, J. A. (2007). The development of intercultural communicative competence in telecollaborative 
partnerships. In R. O’Dowd (Ed.), Online intercultural exchange: An introduction for foreign language 
teachers (pp. 127–166). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.  
Belz, J. A., & Kinginger, C. (2002). The cross-linguistics development of address form use in 
telecollaborative language learning: Two case studies.  The Canadian Modern Language Review/ La 
revue canadienne des langues vivantes, 59(2), 189–214. 
Belz, J. A., & Kinginger, C. (2003). Discourse options and the development of pragmatic competence by 
classroom learners of German: The case of address forms. Language Learning, 53(4), 591–647. 
Belz, J. A., & Thorne, S. L. (Eds.). (2006). Introduction: Internet-mediated intercultural foreign language 
education and the intercultural speaker. In J. Belz & S. L. Thorne (Eds.), Internet-mediated intercultural 
foreign language education (p. ix–xxv). Boston, MA: Thomson Heinle Publishers.  
Belz, J. A. & Vyatkina, N. (2005). Learner corpus analysis and the development of L2 pragmatic 
competence in networked intercultural language study: The case of German modal particles. The 
Canadian Modern Language Review/La revue canadienne des langues vivantes, 62(1), 17–48. 
Brown, P., & Levinson, S. (1987). Politeness: Some universals in language usage. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press.  
Li Jin Language Development and Scaffolding in a Sino-American Telecollaborative Project 
 
Language Learning & Technology 216 
Byram, M. (1997). Teaching and assessing intercultural communicative competence. Clevedon, UK: 
Multilingual Matters.   
Byram, M., & Feng, A. (2004). Culture and language learning: Teaching, research and scholarship. 
Language Teaching, 37(3), 149–168.  
Darhower, M. (2002). Interactional features of synchronous computer-mediated communication in the 
intermediate L2 class: A sociocultural case study. CALICO Journal, 19(2), 249–277. 
Darhower, M. (2007). A tale of two communities: Group dynamics and community building in a Spanish- 
English telecollaboration. CALICO Journal, 24(3), 561–590 
Darhower, M. (2008). The linguistic affordances in telecollaborative chat. CALICO Journal, 26(1), 48–
69.  
de Guerrero, M., & Villamil, O. (2000). Activating the ZPD: Mutual scaffolding in L2 peer revision. The 
Modern Language Journal, 84, 51–68.  
DiCamilla, F. J., & Antón, M. (2004). Private speech: A study of language for thought in the 
collaborative interaction of language learners. International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 14(1), 36–69. 
Díez-Bedmar, M. B., & Pérez-Paredes, P. (2012). The types and effects of peer native speakers’ feedback 
on CMC. Language Learning & Technology, 16(1), 62–90. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/ 
issues/february2012/diezbedmarperezparedes.pdf  
Donato, R. (1994). Collective scafffolding in second language learning. In J. P. Lantolf & G. Appel 
(Eds.), Vygotskian Approach to Second Language Research (pp. 33–56). Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing 
Corporation. 
Dooly, M. (2011). Divergent perceptions of telecollaborative language learning tasks: Task-as-work plan 
versus Task-as-process. Language Learning & Technology, 15(2), 69–91. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2011/dooly.pdf  
Edasawa, Y., & Kabata, K. (2007). An ethnographic study of a key-pal project: Learning a foreign 
language through bilingual communication. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 20(3), 189–207. 
Foster, P., & Ohta, A. (2005). Negotiation of meaning and peer assistance in second language classrooms. 
Applied Linguistics, 26(3), 402–430.  
Furstenberg, G., Levet, S., English, K., & Maillet, K. (2001). Giving a virtual voice to the silence 
language of culture: The CULTURA project. Language Learning & Technology, 5(1), 55–102.   
Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for qualitative 
research. New York, NY: Aldine Publishing Company. 
Guth, S., & Helm, F. (Eds.) (2010). Telecollaboration 2.0: Language, literacies and intercultural 
learning in the 21st century. Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang. 
Jin, L., & Erben, T. (2007). Intercultural learning via instant messenger interaction. CALICO Journal, 
24(2), 291–311.   
Kabata, K., & Edasawa, Y. (2011). Tandem language learning through a cross-cultural keypal project. 
Language Learning & Technology, 15(1), 104–121. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/ 
february2011/kabataedasawa.pdf   
Kern, R., Ware, P., & Warschauer, M. (2004). Crossing frontiers: New directions in online pedagogy and 
research. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 24(1), 243–260. 
Li Jin Language Development and Scaffolding in a Sino-American Telecollaborative Project 
 
Language Learning & Technology 217 
Kinginger, C., & Belz, J. A. (2005). Sociocultural perspectives on pragmatic development in foreign 
language learning: Case studies from telecollaboration and study abroad. Intercultural Pragmatics, 2, 
369–421.  
Kötter, M. (2002). Tandem learning on the internet: Learner interactions in virtual online environments 
(MOOs). New York, NY: Peter Lang. 
Kramsch, C., & Thorne, S. L. (2002). Foreign language learning as global communicative practice. In D. 
Block & D. Cameron (Eds.), Globalization and language teaching (pp. 83–100). London, UK: Routledge. 
Lantolf, J. P., & Pavlenko, A. (2001). (S)econd (L)anguage (A)ctivity theory: Understanding second 
language learners as people. In M. Breen (Ed.), Learner contributions to language learning: New 
directions in research (pp. 141–158). London, UK: Longman.  
Lantolf, J. P., & Thorne, S. L. (2006). Sociocultural theory and the genesis of second language 
development. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Lee, L. (2002). Synchronous online exchanges: A study of modification devices on nonnative discourse 
interaction. System, 30(3), 275–288. 
Lee, L. (2008). Focus-on-form through collaborative scaffolding in expert-to-novice online interaction. 
Language Learning & Technology, 12(3), 53–72.   
Lee, L. (2009). Promoting intercultural exchanges with blogs and podcasting: A study of 
Spanish–American telecollaboration. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 22, 425–443. 
Lee, L. (2011). Focus on form through peer feedback in a Spanish-English telecollaborative exchange. 
Language Awareness, 20(4), 343–357. Retrieved from http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/ 
10.1080/09658416.2011.592589 
Levy, M., & Kennedy, C. (2004). A task-cycling pedagogy using stimulated reflection and audio-
conferencing in foreign language learning. Language Learning & Technology, 8(2), 50–68. Retrieved 
from http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num2/levy/default.html   
Long, M. H. (1991). Focus on form: A design feature in language teaching methodology. In D. C. K. de 
Bot, C. Kramsch, & R. Ginsburg (Eds.), Foreign language research in a cross-cultural perspective (pp. 
39–52). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Long, M. H. (1996). The role of the linguistic environment in second language acquisition. In W. C. 
Ritchie & T. K. Bahtia (Eds.), Handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 413–68). New York, NY: 
Academic Press. 
Long, M. H., Ignaki, S., & Ortega L, (1998). The role of implicit negative feedback on Japanese and 
Spanish. The Modern Language Journal, 82, 357–371. 
Long, M. H., & Robinson, P. (1998). Focus on form: Theory, research and practice. In C. J. Doughty & J. 
Williams (Eds.), Focus on form in second language acquisition (pp. 15–41). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Mackey, A., & Philip, J. (1998). Conversational Interaction and Second Language Development: Recasts, 
Responses, and Red Herrings? The Modern Language Journal, 82(iii), 338–356. 
Meskill, C., & Anthony, N. (2005). Foreign language learning with CMC: Forms of online instructional 
discourse in a hybrid Russian class. System, 33(1), 89–105. 
Miles, M. B. & Huberman, A. M. (1994). Qualitative data analysis (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.  
O’Dowd, R. (2003). Understanding “the other side”: Intercultural learning in a Spanish-English email 
exchange. Language Learning & Technology, 7(2), 118–144. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/ 
Li Jin Language Development and Scaffolding in a Sino-American Telecollaborative Project 
 
Language Learning & Technology 218 
vol7num2/odowd/default.html  
O’Dowd, R. (Ed.). (2007). Online intercultural exchange: An introduction for foreign language teachers. 
Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.  
O’Dowd, R., & Ware, P. (2009). Critical issues in telecollaborative task design. Computer Assisted 
Language Learning, 22(2), 173–188.  
O’Rourke, B. (2005). Form-focused interaction in online tandem learning. CALICO Journal, 22(3), 433–
466. 
Pan, Y. (2000). Politeness in Chinese face-to-face interaction. Stamford, CT: Ablex Publishing 
Corporation.  
Polio, C. G. (1997). Measures of linguistic accuracy in second language writing research. Language 
Learning, 47(1), 101–143.  
Pellettieri, J. (2000). Negotiation in cyberspace: The role of chatting in the development of grammatical 
competence. In M. Warschauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Network-based language teaching: Concepts and 
practice (pp. 59–86). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Rommetveit, R. (1974). On message structure. New York, NY: Wiley.  
Sauro, S. (2009). Computer-mediated corrective feedback and the development of L2 grammar. Language 
Learning & Technology, 13(1), 96–120. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num1/sauro.pdf 
Schenker, T. (2012). Intercultural competence and cultural learning through telecollaboration. CALICO 
Journal, 29(3), 449–470.  
Schmidt, R. (2001). Attention. In P. Robinson (Ed.), Cognition and second language acquisition 
(pp. 3–32). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Sotillo, M. (2000). Discourse functions and syntactic complexity in synchronous and asynchronous 
communication. Language Learning & Technology, 4 (1), 82–119. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/ 
vol4num1/sotillo/default.html 
Spinelli, B., & Dolci, R. (2007). Developing a multilevel language learning in a powerful environment: A 
case study. Mosaic, 9(2), 11–20.  
Swain, M., & Lapkin, S. (1998). Interaction and second language learning: Two adolescent French 
immersion students working together. The Modern Language Journal, 82(3), 320–337. 
Thorne, S. L. (2003). Artifacts and cultures-of-use in intercultural communication. Language Learning & 
Technology, 7(2), 38–67.  
Thorne, S. L. (2008). Mediating Technologies and Second Language Learning. In D. Leu, J. Coiro, C. 
Lankshear & M. Knobel (Eds.), Handbook of Research on New Literacies (pp. 417–449). Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum 
van Lier, L. (1996). Interaction in the language curriculum: Awareness, autonomy, and authenticity. 
London, UK: Longman. 
van Lier, L. (2004). The ecology and semiotics of language learning: A sociocultural perspective. New 
York, NY: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
Vinagre, M. (2005). Fostering language learning via email: An English-Spanish exchange. Computer 
Assisted Language Learning, 18(5), 369–388. 
Vinagre, M., & Lera, M. (2008). The role of error correction in online exchanges. In F. Zhang & B. 
Barber (Eds.), Handbook of Research on Computer-enhanced Language Acquisition and Learning (pp. 
Li Jin Language Development and Scaffolding in a Sino-American Telecollaborative Project 
 
Language Learning & Technology 219 
326–341). Hershey: IGI Publishing. 
Vinagre, M., & Muñoz, B. (2011). Computer-mediated corrective feedback and language accuracy in 
telecollaborative exchanges. Language Learning & Technology, 15(1), 72–103. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2011/vinagremunoz.pdf  
Ware, P. (2005). “Missed” communication in online communication: Tensions in a German-American 
telecollaboration. Language Learning & Technology, 9(2), 64–89. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num1/wareodowd/default.html  
Ware, P., & Cañado, M. L. P. (2007). Grammar and feedback: Turning to language form in 
telecollaboration. In R. O’Dowd (Ed.), Online intercultural exchange: An introduction for foreign 
language teachers (pp.107–126). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Ware, P., & Kramsch, C. (2005). Toward an intercultural stance: Teaching German and English through 
telecollaboration. Modern Language Journal, 89(2), 190–205.  
Ware, P., & O’Dowd, R. (2008). Peer feedback on language form in telecollaboration. Language 
Learning & Technology, 12(1), 43–63. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num1/wareodowd/ 
default.html  
