Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2013/polatetal.pdf 
June 2013, Volume 17, Number 2 
pp. 57–74 
 
Copyright © 2013, ISSN 1094-3501 57 
ANONYMITY AND MOTIVATION IN ASYNCHRONOUS DISCUSSIONS 
AND L2 VOCABULARY LEARNING 
Nihat Polat, Duquesne University 
Rae Mancilla, Duquesne University 
Laura Mahalingappa, Duquesne University 
This study investigates L2 attainment in asynchronous online environments, specifically 
possible relationships among anonymity, L2 motivation, participation in discussions, 
quality of L2 production, and success in L2 vocabulary learning. It examines, in 
asynchronous discussions, (a) if participation and (b) motivation contribute to L2 
vocabulary learning, (c) if motivation is related to level of participation in anonymous 
versus nonanonymous discussions, and (d) if a student’s quality of L2 use varies in 
anonymous vs. nonanonymous discussions. Data from 87 high school students enrolled in 
a cyber-charter school Spanish II course in the Eastern United States included a pre- and 
post-cloze, a vocabulary recognition test, e-documents retrieved from the asynchronous 
discussions, and demographic information and motivation surveys. Results revealed that 
students who participated in the asynchronous discussions received significantly higher 
scores on the post-test than those who did not. In terms of level of participation, 
nonanonymous forums may have a comparative advantage over anonymous ones for 
learners with high levels of introjected regulation, whereas for learners with high levels of 
identified regulation, both forums are advantageous. Introjected regulation was the only 
significant predictor of success in learning L2 vocabulary. Finally, nonanonymous forums 
seem to generate higher quality L2 production than anonymous ones.  
Keywords: CALL, Anonymity Effect, Motivation, Vocabulary Learning, Asynchronous 
Discussions, Quality of L2 use  
APA Citation: Polat, N., Mancilla, R., & Mahalingappa, L. (2013). Anonymity and 
motivation in asynchronous discussions and L2 vocabulary learning. Language Learning 
& Technology, 17(2), 57–74. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2013/polatetal.pdf 
Received: February 9, 2012; Accepted: September 22, 2012; Published: June 1, 2013 
Copyright: © Nihat Polat, Rae Mancilla, & Laura Mahalingappa 
INTRODUCTION 
The evolution of internet and computer-mediated communication (CMC) has transformed the face of 
learning, making web-based environments a common choice in education. With rapidly increasing 
computer accessibility and internet popularity, K–12 educational settings are evolving to include public 
cyber schools as a common alternative to the classic brick-and-mortar classroom environment across the 
United States. According to the National Alliance for Public Charter Schools (2010), almost all states 
offer significant online learning opportunities for K–12 populations, with the number of public cyber 
charter schools having grown by more than 50% since 2001. Previous research on online learning has 
traditionally focused on college-level and adult learners since those have traditionally been the 
participants in online classes (Volle, 2005); however, as the cyber charter movement grows on a national 
scale and presents cyber classrooms as a viable educational alternative for the K–12 population, a new 
and rising sense of urgency demands more research regarding the instructional potential of cyber 
schooling.  
Since cyber schooling is a stand-alone educational platform, students must take all of their courses online, 
Nihat Polat, Rae Mancilla, Laura Mahalingappa Anonymity and Motivation in Asynchronous Discussions  
 
Language Learning & Technology 58 
including foreign language (L2) classes. In L2 online classroom environments, asynchronous discussions 
have been reported to be one of the most common cyber forums through which learners engage in 
multiple interactive collaborations and audio-visual scaffolding activities to acquire an L2 (Abrams, 
2003). Asynchronous discussions may be associated with general learning gains both in L2 production 
and self-expression as compared to face-to-face interactions, since such forums are not subject to time and 
autonomy limitations or disruptions embedded in traditional classrooms; asynchronous discussions allow 
students the opportunity to process the linguistic input at their own pace, negotiate meaning with their 
peers, and re-formulate responses (Hurd, 2006; Poza, 2005). Participation in asynchronous discussions 
has also been linked to increased motivation and reduced anxiety—a lowered affective filter, which 
results in greater gains in L2 acquisition (Arnold, 2007; Beauvois, 1992; Kelm, 1992). 
Such asynchronous communication tools also provide students with scaffolding and multiple sources of 
interaction with peers and instructors in order to practice and improve an L2. L2 educators have 
particularly capitalized on the use of glosses and multimedia annotations in asynchronous exchanges to 
enhance lexical development (Bowles, 2004; Yanguas, 2009), which plays a principal role in overall L2 
development (McLaughlin, 1980; Segler, Pain, & Sorace, 2002). However, although several studies have 
sought to address whether participation in asynchronous discussions results in improved quality of L2 
production (Beauvois, 1998; Salaberry, 2001), questions remain concerning the possible relationships 
among anonymity or disclosure of identity, L2 motivation, participation in discussion, quality of L2 
production, and success in L2 vocabulary learning. If online forums indeed offer unique participatory 
roles and technological and other affordances (Abrams, 2001; van Lier, 2002), exploring the nature and 
degree of L2 learners’ motivation and level of participation—as these factors may relate to L2 
attainment—is warranted.  
This quantitative study attempts to redress this gap in research by exploring possible relationships 
between L2 production, anonymity, motivation, participation in asynchronous discussions, and the 
acquisition of targeted Spanish vocabulary. More specifically, it examines if (a) participation and (b) 
motivation contribute to L2 vocabulary learning in asynchronous discussions, and if (c) motivation is 
related to level of participation in anonymous versus nonanonymous asynchronous discussions. It also 
explores if (d) a student’s quality of L2 use varies in asynchronous discussions in which they are 
identified by name versus being anonymous.  
Second Language Acquisition (SLA) and Online Interactions 
Much SLA research has presented L2 learning as an inherently complex social process that occurs when 
learners negotiate meaning with capable interlocutors in socioculturally meaningful interactions (Johnson, 
2004; Lantolf & Pavlenko, 2000; Larsen-Freeman, 2007). However, twenty-first century language 
learning is becoming increasingly pluralistic as interlocutors work to negotiate meaning in the face of 
expanding social and cultural contexts and diversified modes of expression and interaction provided by 
technology. In such times of rapid change, theoretical models that incorporate multiple perspectives are 
particularly important (Egbert, 2005).  
One such model, the ecological theory of language learning, contextualizes language into other semiotic 
systems in the world so that language learning is viewed as a relationship negotiated between learners and 
their environment (Van Lier, 2000, 2002, 2004). In ecological theory, language learners are active agents 
who work within their environments to engage in meaning-making activities with others more or less 
linguistically competent by seeking out symbolic affordances. Affordances, defined as relationships of 
possibility that potentially arise from topics or subjects of collaborative activity, can effectively replace 
the traditional notion of language input as an analytical tool in online language learning environments, 
where effective forums can support meaningful and interactive collaborations among diverse learners 
without imposing geographic sanctions (Satar & Ozdener, 2008).  
Considering the increased popularity and the many advantages of engaging in online language learning 
Nihat Polat, Rae Mancilla, Laura Mahalingappa Anonymity and Motivation in Asynchronous Discussions  
 
Language Learning & Technology 59 
environments, the question remains as to whether the gains in L2 attainment seen in face-to-face 
interactions (Ellis, Tanaka, & Yamazaki, 1994; Gass & Selinker, 2001; Long, 1996; Mackey, 1999; Pica, 
1994) can be equally documented in online interactions (Salaberry, 2001). In online L2 classrooms, 
synchronous discussions as well as asynchronous discussion formats, such as dialogue journals and 
electronic discussion boards and conferences, have been the most traditional methods that give access to 
peer-to-peer and teacher-student interactions in an L2 (Aitsiselmi, 1999; Barson, Frommer, & Schwartz, 
1993; Beauvois, 1998).  
Some contributions of asynchronous discussions to L2 acquisition have been documented in previous 
research. A few studies have suggested that such discussions are more student-centered by shifting the 
authority from teacher to students (Cooper & Selfe, 1990) and increasing student control of content, 
leading to more student autonomy (Tella, 1992). In addition, while some researchers have explored the 
benefits of such forums regarding L2 learners’ control over their time, participation, and progress 
(Arnold, 2007), others have underscored the use and practice opportunities that asynchronous discussion 
offer to L2 learners (Fitze, 2006). For example, Absalom and Rizzi (2008) argue that in asynchronous 
discussions, learners can compose and revise responses with the assistance and collaboration of other 
resources and peers, producing higher quality linguistic output.  
In addressing the quality and quantity of L2 production, some studies have compared online discussions 
with paper-pencil exchanges while others have evaluated synchronous versus asynchronous discussions. 
In comparing paper-pencil exchanges with e-mail dialog journals regarding L2 production, Wang (1994) 
found that English as a Second Language (ESL) students in the e-mail dialog journals produced more 
writing per session, used more language functions, and adopted a more conversational tone than their 
paper-pencil counterparts. Likewise, González-Bueno (1998) found that Spanish learners who used 
electronic dialog journals produced more quantity of output (number of words per journal entry) with 
higher grammatical accuracy than their paper-pencil peers. Nevertheless, while Van Handle & Corl 
(1998) also found in their study with intermediate German students that online exchanges may yield more 
language production, these exchanges did not increase the quality of linguistic production.  
In addition, other studies have explored the quantity and quality of L2 production in synchronous and 
asynchronous discussion forums (Perez, 2003). For example, Abrams (2003) compared the production of 
written asynchronous, written synchronous, and control groups and found no significant differences 
among the groups in the quality of output in the terms of lexical richness, diversity, and syntactic 
complexity. Beauvois (1998) used synchronous rather than asynchronous student-to-student French 
discussions to examine the quantity of student-to-student communication within the discussion forum and 
the quality of target language use through an analysis of sentence structure. Beauvois (1998) defined two 
qualities of target language: formal quality, including compound/complex sentences, and content quality, 
including phrases going beyond a superficial treatment of the topic and referencing personal experiences. 
She discovered that participants in the synchronous, local-area-network (LAN) discourse generated more 
personal messages of multiple complex/compound sentence structures in comparison to their face-to-face 
peers, suggesting that electronic discussions can enhance the quality of L2 learning by bridging the gap 
between oral and written communication.  
Online Vocabulary Learning 
Previous research confirms that lexical development plays a principal role in different aspects of L2 
acquisition (Bresnan, 1982; Cook, 1996; DeBot, Paribakht, & Bingham Wesche, 1997; Gadzar, Klein, 
Pullum, & Sag, 1985; Levelt, 1989; McLaughlin, 1980; Nation, 2001; Salaberry, 2001; Segler et al., 
2002). Therefore, most current studies on L2 vocabulary acquisition focus on determining the most 
effective ways of interfacing computer-mediated resources with traditional best practices for vocabulary 
instruction (Fuente, 2003). Some of this research has studied glosses and multimedia annotations, 
suggesting a positive effect on the comprehension of written texts and incidental vocabulary acquisition 
Nihat Polat, Rae Mancilla, Laura Mahalingappa Anonymity and Motivation in Asynchronous Discussions  
 
Language Learning & Technology 60 
(Bowles, 2004; Lomicka, 1998; Yanguas, 2009). Other studies have examined a variety of computerized 
glossing formats and their effect on L2 vocabulary learning, reporting that the most effective glossing 
format is a combination of graphic representations and written annotations of target vocabulary words 
(Gettys, Imhof, & Kautz, 2001; Jones, 2004; Kim & Gillman, 2008), possibly because in such formats 
learning is integrated with immediate access to annotated information and enhanced with multi-sensory 
linguistic contexts (Al-Seghayer, 2001; Horst, Cobb, & Nicolae, 2005; Sun & Dong, 2004).  
Most of the research cited here has focused on vocabulary acquisition through learner interaction with 
commercial materials or software rather than on the active engagement of students in online discussion 
forums with peers. This study focuses on this intersection because despite the fact that some previous 
research has suggested that modified student interactions enhance L2 development (Gass & Varonis, 
1994; Long, 1996), current research addressing the effect of participation in asynchronous discussions on 
L2 lexical development is markedly limited. Indeed, due to the nature of its technological affordances 
(van Lier, 2002), asynchronous discussions may maximize interaction opportunities (Abrams, 2001) for 
L2 learners to produce more language of richer lexical quality than face-to-face conversations (Beauvois, 
1997). 
Motivation and Participation in Asynchronous Discussions 
Some research has documented differences between online and face-to-face interactional patterns (Blake, 
2000; Smith, 2003). This suggests that online discussions elicit more participation while providing better 
communication functions and a more comfortable environment with less communication apprehension, in 
turn promoting the production of higher quality and complex language (Arnold, 2007; Beauvois, 1992; 
Chun, 1994; Kelm, 1992; Kern, 1995; Smith, 2003). For example, in a recent study, Simpson (2006) 
documented that L2 learners participated in asynchronous discussions more than native-speakers due to 
reasons related to more autonomy, convenience, and absence of distractions that are common in face-to-
face classes. Relatedly, several other studies have reported that L2 learners participate in online 
discussions more than face-to-face ones because they provide more comfortable and equal opportunities 
to diverse groups who are typically made invisible in classroom discussions (Baron, 1984; Kern, 1993; 
Pratt & Sullivan, 1994; Warschauer, Turbee, & Roberts, 1996).  
Previous research also has underscored the role of motivation in online learning because distance learners 
are responsible for directing their own pace and interaction with peers and instructional materials, 
independent of teacher guidance. For example, results of Hurd’s (2006) study on 500 French students in 
the United Kingdom suggested that motivation might be the most important factor in distance language 
learning. Skinner and Austin (1999) also reported that learners showed an increased use of L2 through 
computer conferencing because of the enhancement of personal confidence and motivational factors. 
Furthermore, previous research has associated online learning environments, in which participants’ 
identities are anonymous, with a decrease in anxiety (Poza, 2005) and an increase in motivation to 
participate. Online discussions may protect English Language Learners (ELLs) from intimidation (Roed, 
2003), lower the affective filter (Beauvois, 1997), and foster a level of comfort that may enhance L2 
production because in such anonymous environments, the computer serves “as a shield from being on 
stage” (Bradley & Lomicka, 2000, p. 362) for L2 learners. This may partially be due to the reduction of 
paralinguistic cues such as frowning, hesitating, and raised eyebrows that serve to intimidate people and 
tout a power dynamic (Arnold, 2007; Warschauer et al., 1996).  
While previous research has deemed online learning as a shield to protect learners from the negative 
aspects of traditional classrooms, some online forums, like asynchronous discussions, may take non-
anonymous forms of interaction. As such, we could expect that online learners may experience a reaction 
as their identities are unveiled and their disclosures and contributions are directly linked to them as 
individuals. We seek to explore these potential effects of anonymity on participation in asynchronous 
discussion as it intersects with L2 vocabulary acquisition. Among other motivation theories, Deci and 
Nihat Polat, Rae Mancilla, Laura Mahalingappa Anonymity and Motivation in Asynchronous Discussions  
 
Language Learning & Technology 61 
Ryan’s (1985, 1987) self-determination theory, particularly the extrinsic forms, are well-suited to the 
goals of this study because our participants are learning Spanish as a foreign language in the United 
States, where acculturation or assimilative elements of motivation may not be very strong. In addition, 
this model has been validated, calibrated, and widely applied to various SLA contexts (Grolnick & Ryan, 
1989; Ryan & Connell, 1989). Therefore, adopting a multidimensional view of extrinsic motivation is 
more comprehensive because such orientations vary from external regulation (doing a task due to 
externally imposed rewards or punishments) to introjection (engaging in a task due to the attainment of 
self-esteem or ego enhancement, or avoidance of guilt or anxiety) and to identification (identifying with 
the personal importance of the task) and integration (doing a task because it emanates from the self).  
METHODOLOGY 
Participants and Setting 
Students from two Spanish II courses which met five times weekly self-selected to participate in this 
experimental study by responding to a call for participation. This call was sent out to during two 
consecutive semesters. From a possible pool of 122 students, 115 students (age range: 14–17) expressed 
willingness to participate in this study; however, data from 28 students were not included in this study 
due to reasons related to incomplete pre- and post-tests and questionnaires and/or lack of full participation 
in all experimental activities. Therefore, participants included 87 students (response rate = 76%) (49 girls, 
38 boys) who were enrolled in high school Spanish II courses at a tuition-free public cyber charter school 
in an Eastern U.S. state. The overwhelming majority of participants self-identified as white non-Hispanic 
(84%), followed by black non-Hispanic (11%), Hispanic (3%), and other (2%). The setting and courses 
were selected because of accessibility.  
All participants were native speakers of English and had at least one year of previous experience with 
cyber learning including extensive Moodle training. Analysis of school records suggested that participants 
had either successfully completed a Spanish I course at this or another high school or were placed into 
this level based on their performance on a placement test. Participants’ overall Spanish proficiency levels 
were determined as low-intermediate. All participants in the study used the same syllabus, were taught by 
the same teacher (the second author), and were familiar with the online textbook components of the 
commercial text, Exprésate 2 (McMinn, 2008).  
The students, who receive their education exclusively through the Internet, are all distance learners pooled 
from across this eastern state. As such, all students receive a complete desktop computer system, 
including a printer, a scanner, a copier, and a microphone headset that they use to connect to the Internet. 
Students log into the school website daily to access their courses. Courses are taught by highly qualified, 
state-certified teachers, who personally deliver curriculum used in the course via the Moodle course 
management system. Students receive both commercial textbooks and online materials to support their 
instruction. They interact daily with their teachers through telephone, email, and instant messaging and 
receive personalized feedback and support for all schoolwork. 
Research Questions 
1. What is the relationship between participation in asynchronous discussions and success 
in L2 vocabulary learning? 
2. How does motivation relate to level of participation in anonymous versus 
nonanonymous asynchronous discussions? 
3. What is the relationship between motivation and success in L2 vocabulary learning in 
asynchronous discussions? 
4. Does quality of L2 language use differ in anonymous versus nonanonymous 
asynchronous discussions? 
Nihat Polat, Rae Mancilla, Laura Mahalingappa Anonymity and Motivation in Asynchronous Discussions  
 
Language Learning & Technology 62 
The Lesson and Experiment Procedures 
Prior to the implementation of the experiment, all 87 participants were given a background and 
motivation questionnaire and completed the three following procedures that involved their typical online 
Spanish learning instruction. First, following the school’s regular curriculum sequence, 24 target words 
were selected from the students’ textbook to be taught in the lesson. Second, all participants were exposed 
to the 24 targeted words using Moodle’s online course module through several warm-up, reading 
comprehension, and vocabulary learning activities. This typical online Spanish learning instruction 
involved the use of open-source software available through Moodle, a tool that provides lesson modules 
that can be tailored to meet the individual needs of students (Brandle, 2005). The lesson comprised of 
Pre, During, and Post reading parts. The Pre activities involved building background knowledge through 
reading texts accompanied by audio prompts and examination of titles and illustrations, brainstorming 
pertinent vocabulary, completing illustrated vocabulary guides with sentence-level translations (Jones, 
2004; Kim & Gilman, 2008) and highlighting the target words in the text (El ratón del pueblo y el ratón 
de la ciudad). The During activities involved (re-) reading the text, which was accompanied by a 
prerecorded audio file, summarizing content, identifying the main idea, and verifying their responses 
through a self-check clickable link. The Post activities that encompassed the practice and application 
portion of the lesson were twofold. To facilitate learning via L1 support (Jimenez, 2003; Lucas & Katz, 
1994), students also answered some reading questions in English before they completed several 
comprehension questions in a Spanish quiz. To ensure participation in the lesson, students’ records were 
retrieved from Moodle. Third, students were given a vocabulary recognition test and a cloze (pre/post-
test) that involved the meaningful use of the selected words in context (Hughes, 2003). Both the cloze and 
the recognition tests were timed to minimize possible use of online resources such as translators or 
dictionaries. An average score was computed for each student’s performance on these two tests as their 
pre-test scores. Out of the 24 words, students’ correct responses ranged between 8 and 19 (mean = 13.9).  
Upon the completion of these instructional steps, the students were randomly assigned to experimental 
(n = 46) and control groups (n = 41). Both of these groups continued to follow their regular Spanish II 
curricula. While the control group did not receive further structured activities that targeted the 24 specific 
vocabulary words, two weeks later, the participants in the experimental group joined in two asynchronous 
discussions—neither being strictly structured—responding to certain instructor-led prompts that involved 
the use of the targeted words in a Moodle forum. During each discussion, students were asked to use as 
many target words as they could while discussing the prompts with their classmates. The prompts 
included “Tell your classmates what your city or town is like; I think living in a town/city is better than 
living in a town/city because…; I enjoy traveling very much because…; and I don’t like traveling very 
much because….” They were asked to post as many threads as they wanted throughout the week, either 
directly responding to the prompts or to their classmates’ comments; however, a minimum of at least 
three posts was mandated to establish a baseline. To respond to potential time constraints in students’ 
schedules, each discussion was made available for two weeks. To control for possible confounding effects 
(e.g., teacher’s moderation skills) on students’ participation, and language use and learning, the teacher’s 
involvement was limited to only setting up the discussion forums and providing the participation 
guidelines. To avoid the use of known nicknames as pseudonyms and inaccurate gender-identification and 
thereby ensure full anonymity, participants were randomly assigned pseudonyms by the researchers. At 
the end of the discussions, each student’s posts were saved in separate folders.  
Finally, all participants were given a post-test to determine if any significant differences between the 
experimental and control groups occurred as a result of participation in the anonymous versus non-
anonymous discussions. The post-test was administered three weeks after the completion of the 
discussions to minimize short-term recall possibilities.  
 
Nihat Polat, Rae Mancilla, Laura Mahalingappa Anonymity and Motivation in Asynchronous Discussions  
 
Language Learning & Technology 63 
Data Collection and Instrumentation 
Data sources included questionnaires, vocabulary tests, and e-documents retrieved from the asynchronous 
discussions. Each participant spent around 125 minutes providing the data, including a pre/post-test that 
was comprised of a vocabulary recognition test (35 minutes), a cloze test (65 minutes), background and 
motivation questionnaires (25 minutes), as well as the discussions (experimental group). The background 
questionnaire included information about participants’ gender, grade level, age, and years in cyber 
schooling as well as comfort level with technology use, degree of Spanish use outside the class and at 
home (on a 5-point Likert scale), and reasons for learning Spanish. The motivation questionnaire, which 
is based on Deci and Ryan’s (1985, 1987) self-determination theory, had five sections asking about why 
they did their Spanish homework, why they worked on their Spanish class work, why they tried to answer 
hard questions in their Spanish classes, why they were learning Spanish, and why they should be 
concerned about attaining the highest proficiency level possible. Using an e-survey format within 
Moodle, participants reported their responses on a 7-point Likert-scale, with 1 = “Not at all true” and 
7 = “Very true.” They reported the degree to which the items in each section measured external, 
introjected, identified, and integrated regulation. A mean score was calculated for each of the four self-
determined orientations. To determine the reliability of this questionnaire—the internal consistency of the 
survey items and their answers—we calculated Cronbach's alpha (1951). The questionnaire yielded higher 
alpha levels (α = .86) than what is considered minimum (α = .70) for scales used in educational research 
(Nunnally & Bernstein, 1994; Stemler, 2004).  
The recognition tests asked the participants to match synonyms, antonyms, and related words in the two 
columns while the cloze test measured students’ knowledge of eight nouns (e.g., blocks, countryside), 
eight verbs (e.g., turn, hug), and eight adjectives (e.g., narrow, simple) in Spanish. By using these two 
instruments, we aimed to capture a more accurate estimation of students’ knowledge of the target words. 
Since these words were taught in a meaningful unit (Towns and Cities) of the course textbook (Holt et al., 
2008), they shared some inherent lexical value that made it easy for participants to use them in 
meaningful contexts in the asynchronous discussions.  
Data Analysis 
A series of repeated-measure analysis of variance (ANOVA), multiple regression, and paired t-tests, were 
performed, comparing and contrasting scores of participants both within (repeated measure) and across 
the experimental and control groups (Warner, 2008). An experiment-wise α level of .05 was set for all 
statistical calculations. While the first research question involves a series of comparisons both within the 
experimental group and between the experimental and the control group, the other analyses only include 
variance in the scores of the experimental group participants in anonymous versus nonanonymous 
asynchronous discussion forums. To examine success in L2 vocabulary learning after participation in the 
two asynchronous discussion forums, a one-way repeated measure ANOVA with one within and one 
between factors was performed. To address students’ motivation as it relates to success in L2 vocabulary 
learning and participation in anonymous versus nonanonymous asynchronous discussions, multiple 
regression analyses were run. In these models, the motivation variables were used as predictors of the 
level of participation and success in attaining the targeted vocabulary. To determine differences in the 
quality of language use in the anonymous versus nonanonymous forums, several paired t-tests were 
performed using the number of correct simple and complex sentences, and capitalization, punctuation, 
and grammar mistakes. Among two possible analytic techniques appropriate for these data, we chose t-
test analyses with Bonferroni adjustments (to control for possible problems related to multiple 
comparisons) instead of MANOVA to adhere to APA guidelines that suggest the use of the simplest 
analysis method available for a set of data (APA Manual, 2010; Warner, 2008). These language quality 
categories had been identified based on previous studies, in particular, Abrams (2003) and Beauvois 
(1998). Data were also dummy-coded to look for possible gender effects; however, the sample size would 
not allow such analyses.  
Nihat Polat, Rae Mancilla, Laura Mahalingappa Anonymity and Motivation in Asynchronous Discussions  
 
Language Learning & Technology 64 
RESULTS 
Question 1. What is the relationship between participation in asynchronous discussions and success 
in L2 vocabulary learning? 
Results revealed that the pretest scores of participants in the experimental (M = 14.02, SD = 3.87) and 
control groups (M = 13.85, SD = 3.55) were not significantly different from each other (F (1, 86) = .408, 
p = .948), which is to be expected. Hence, to determine the effect of participation in asynchronous 
discussions on vocabulary learning, a one-way repeated measure ANOVA with one within and one 
between factor was performed. In this model, pre- and post-test scores were entered as the within-subject 
variables and the group assignments (experimental/control) as the between-subjects factor. Results 
suggested a significant difference between the post-test scores of the experimental and control groups 
(F (1, 86) = 7.97, p <.01, partial η2 = .08), indicating that students who participated in the asynchronous 
discussions obtained higher scores (M = 18.46, SD = 3.32) than those who did not (M  = 12.93, SD = 3.91).  
Question 2. How does motivation relate to level of participation in anonymous versus 
nonanonymous asynchronous discussions? 
The number of threads a participant posted in each discussion forum was used as basis to determine his or 
her level of participation. Note that a minimum of three posts was required to establish the baseline; 
however, participants were encouraged to post as many threads as they liked. Analyses revealed that, in 
response to the discussion prompts, the number of threads the participants posted in the nonanonymous 
forum (M = 4.70, SD = 1.70) was significantly higher than those they produced in the anonymous one 
(M = 3.98, SD = 1.20, t (45) = 3.92, p < .001). Thus, in a multiple regression model, we inserted 
motivation (external, introjected, identified, and integrated regulation) scores as predictors of level of 
participation in anonymous discussion, obtaining an R2 of .22 (p < .01). Table 1 shows that of the four 
motivation variables, only identified regulation was a significant predictor of level of participation in the 
anonymous asynchronous discussion (.39).  
Table 1. Standardized beta coefficients from two regression models predicting level of participation from 
four motivation variables in anonymous versus nonanonymous asynchronous discussion forum 
Predictors: Level of participation Beta  R2  R2 adjusted 
Model 1—Anonymous forum  .22* .15* 
        External regulation .24   
        Introjected regulation .23   
        Identified regulation .39**   
        Integrated regulation  .03   
    
Model 2—Nonanonymous forum  .32** .25** 
        External regulation .12   
        Introjected regulation .33*   
        Identified regulation .42**   
        Integrated regulation  .17   
Note. *p < .05; **p < .01 
Next, we constructed another multiple regression model for the nonanonymous forum, for which we 
found an R2 of .32 (p < .01). Taken together these results suggest that these variables together account for 
some of the variance in participants’ level of participation in the two discussion forums. Table 1 
demonstrates that two of the four motivational orientations were low but significant predictors of level of 
participation in the nonanonymous asynchronous discussion: introjected (.33) and identified regulations 
(.42). They also indicate that as the level of identified regulation increased, the level of participation also 
Nihat Polat, Rae Mancilla, Laura Mahalingappa Anonymity and Motivation in Asynchronous Discussions  
 
Language Learning & Technology 65 
increased regardless of the kind of discussion forum, while the introjected orientation was correlated with 
level of participation only for the nonanonymous forum.  
Question 3. What is the relationship between motivation and success in L2 vocabulary learning in 
asynchronous discussions? 
Having found that students with higher levels of some forms of motivation (introjected and identified 
forms) participated in the discussions more, we then needed to examine if these motivation forms 
predicted higher gains on the vocabulary post-test. Hence, we constructed a multiple regression model 
with the four motivation forms acting as predictors of success in L2 vocabulary attainment (R2 = .34, 
p < .01). Data suggested that of the four motivation orientations, introjected regulation was the only 
significant predictor of success in learning the 24 selected words (.37). This result implies that avoidance 
of guilt or anxiety or the attainment of self-esteem or ego enhancement were among the forces that moved 
these students to acquire more Spanish vocabulary (Table 2).  
Table 2. Standardized beta coefficients from a regression model predicting gains on the vocabulary test 
from four motivation variables in asynchronous discussion forums 
Predictors: Gains on Vocabulary 
Test 
Beta R2 R2 adjusted 
Model 3—Anonymous Forum  .34** .27** 
        External Regulation -.22   
        Introjected Regulation -.04   
        Identified Regulation        .25   
        Integrated Regulation       .37**   
Note. *p < .05; **p < .01 
In addition, multivariate regression analyses yielded no statistically significant relationships between the 
post-test scores and level of participation (number of posts) either in the anonymous or the 
nonanonymous forum.  
Question 4. Does quality of L2 language use differ in anonymous versus nonanonymous 
asynchronous discussions? 
The categories used to measure the quality of L2 use were borrowed from Abrams (2003) and Beauvois 
(1998). To examine if the quality of L2 use the participants produced in nonanonymous discussion 
significantly differed from the anonymous one, we performed five dependent t-tests on the experimental 
group data. In these tests, we compared the quality of L2 production in the two discussion forums on the 
basis of five variables (correct simple and complex sentences; capitalization, punctuation, and grammar 
mistakes). Namely, we counted the numbers of correct simple and complex sentences as well as the 
capitalization, punctuation, and grammar mistakes in the discussion forums. Thus, we used the Bonferroni 
adjustment to avoid the probability of obtaining spurious significance as a result of multiple comparisons 
(Type 1 error). Thus, we divided the experiment-wise .05 significance level by the number of tests we 
performed (5), establishing a significance level of .01 for each t-test.  
Descriptive statistics (see Table 3) show that participants produced more correct simple and complex 
sentence structures in the nonanonymous forum than in the anonymous one. In contrast, the numbers of 
capitalization, punctuation, and grammar mistakes they produced were higher in the anonymous forum 
than in the nonanonymous one.  
Next, we ran t-tests to determine if these mean differences were indeed statistically significant. Results 
revealed that participants’ scores between the anonymous and nonanonymous forums varied significantly 
Nihat Polat, Rae Mancilla, Laura Mahalingappa Anonymity and Motivation in Asynchronous Discussions  
 
Language Learning & Technology 66 
on four of the five comparisons. Results indicate that in the nonanonymous discussion participants 
produced more correct simple sentences (t (45) = 3.82, p < .001) than the anonymous one; however, the 
number of correct complex sentences did not vary significantly by the kind of discussion forum. Table 3 
also demonstrates that participants made fewer capitalization (t (45) = 2.69, p < .01), punctuation 
(t (45) =  3.09, p < .01), and grammar mistakes (t (45) = 2.61, p < .01) in the nonanonymous discussion  
Table 3. Descriptive statistics for the quality of language variables in anonymous versus nonanonymous 
discussion forums (n = 46) 
Language Quality Measures   M  SD 
correct simple sentences—nonanonymous forum 9.80 4.66 
                                       —anonymous forum 8.65 4.14 
correct complex sentences—nonanonymous forum 3.76 2.08 
                                          —anonymous forum 3.56 1.82 
capitalization mistakes—nonanonymous forum 4.50 3.48 
                                    —anonymous forum 5.63 4.39 
punctuation mistakes—nonanonymous forum 6.06 3.97 
                                  —anonymous forum 6.95 4.66 
grammar mistakes—nonanonymous forum  9.21 5.41 
                             —anonymous forum 10.15 5.28 
forum than the anonymous one, suggesting that they produced higher quality of language when their 
identities were revealed to each other. (See the Appendix for examples of student posts in anonymous and 
nonanonymous forums.)  
DISCUSSION 
Findings from the first question reveal that students who participated in the asynchronous discussions 
received significantly higher scores on the post-test than those who did not. In response to the discussion 
prompts, the participants posted more threads in the nonanonymous forum than the anonymous one. In 
addition, results indicated that as the level of identified regulation increased, the level of participation is 
predicted to increase regardless of the kind of discussion forum. However, introjected orientation was 
correlated with level of participation only for the nonanonymous forum. Indeed, data suggested that 
introjected regulation was also a significant predictor of success in learning vocabulary in asynchronous 
discussions. Note that the significance levels of these correlations ranged from low to moderate. Finally, 
data revealed that, compared to the anonymous forum, participants produced higher quality of language in 
the forum where their identities were revealed to each other, producing more correct simple sentences and 
fewer capitalization, punctuation, and grammar mistakes.  
Although previous research has documented the role of vocabulary in L2 development (Bresnan, 1982; 
Cook, 1996; DeBot et al., 1997; Gadzar et al., 1985; Levelt, 1989; McLaughlin, 1980; Nation, 2001; 
Salaberry, 2001; Segler et al., 2002), research on the interaction of individual and contextual variables in 
L2 vocabulary attainment in cyber ecologies is rather limited. Furthermore, it is important to examine the 
role of anonymity, participation, and motivation in L2 vocabulary learning in cyber contexts because, 
unlike in brick-and-mortar classrooms, students who receive education in such environments do not 
engage in face-to-face-like interactions. In other words, due to the particularity of online ecological 
affordances (Abrams, 2001; van Lier, 2002), the indexicality norms of self and identity may take different 
forms, positions, and interaction patterns. It is, then, plausible that learners engage in different linguistic 
(Milroy & Gordon, 2003) and L2 learning behavior (Lantolf & Thorne, 2006). In light of research on 
social networks in L2 attainment, it is possible to assume that there will be differences in ways students in 
Nihat Polat, Rae Mancilla, Laura Mahalingappa Anonymity and Motivation in Asynchronous Discussions  
 
Language Learning & Technology 67 
these environments rely on emotional and material support from each other because the nature, frequency, 
and closeness of their interactions are different (Milroy, 1992; Polat, 2011). Hence, one might assume that 
students in such ecologies may not be concerned about the quality of language they produce when their 
identities are revealed or vice versa, and some extrinsic motivational forms that originate from fear of 
negative evaluations by peers, avoidance of guilt, anxiety, ego enhancement, or self-esteem may need 
special attention.  
Participation and L2 Vocabulary Learning  
Our data revealed that students who participated in the asynchronous discussions (experimental group) 
obtained significantly higher scores on the Spanish vocabulary test than those who did not (control). The 
.08 effect size (partial η2), the practical significance of this result, is considered medium in educational 
research (Cohen, 1988). This finding is in line with previous research on the contributions of 
asynchronous discussions to L2 learning. In light of previous research, we can argue that such cyber 
ecologies are imbued with affordances related to increased student autonomy (Cooper & Selfe, 1990) and 
control over the content (Tella, 1992), thereby leading to high learning gains. One could further speculate 
on learner autonomy-related affordances because the online discussion forums have been found to benefit 
L2 learning by giving learners control over their time, participation, practice, and progress (Arnold, 2007; 
Fitze, 2006). Other advantages of asynchronous discussion forums may be related to technological 
affordances, including glosses and multimedia annotations (Bowles, 2004; Lomicka, 1998; Yanguas, 
2009), graphic representations (Gettys, Imhof, & Kautz, 2001; Jones, 2004; Kim & Gillman, 2008), and 
integrated immediate access to enhanced multi-sensory linguistic contexts (Al-Seghayer, 2001; Horst, 
Cobb, & Nicolae, 2005; Sun & Dong, 2004). However, since the control group did not receive a further 
structured set of alternative tasks that involved the use of the targeted words in an off-line format, only 
practicing the targeted vocabulary words in the course of their regular class activities, the significant 
difference obtained here could be due to the amount of further practice rather than this particular 
discussion format. Overall, though, results do indicate that asynchronous forums are an effective format 
to develop L2 vocabulary.  
Motivation, Participation, Anonymity in L2 Learning 
We used the number of posts in each forum to determine a participant’s level of participation. Our results 
indicated that, in responding to the discussion prompts, participants produced significantly higher 
(p < .001) numbers of posts in the nonanonymous forum than they did in the anonymous one. In fact, a 
simple calculation also revealed a higher number of word-count in the nonanonymous forum. Thus, in 
terms of student participation in learning tasks and the lowering of the affective filter (Beauvois, 1997; 
Krashen, 1985), we can argue that nonanonymous forums may have a comparative advantage over the 
anonymous ones. This is an interesting finding because, on the one hand, students may be expected to 
participate in anonymous forums more than the nonanonymous ones because such ecologies have been 
found to be less threating or anxiety-provoking (Poza, 2005) or protect the learners from possible verbal 
attacks or intimidation (Roed, 2003), with anonymity acting “as a shield from being on stage” (Bradley & 
Lomicka, 2000, p. 362). We could also argue for the benefits of anonymous forums to increase the 
amount of student participation due to possible reasons related to learner styles, personality, and so forth 
(Kern, 1995; Waschauer et al., 1996).  
On the other hand, as evidenced by our data, learners may participate in nonanonymous forums more than 
anonymous ones due to certain motivational forms that we have examined in this study. In fact, the 
regression model we constructed based on self-determination theory accounted for some variance in 
participants’ levels of motivation in both forums (anonymous: R2 = .22, p < .01; nonanonymous: R2 = .31, 
p < .01). More interestingly, however, is that one of these four extrinsic forms of motivation seemed to be 
a significant predictor of level of participation in both of these forums, whereas students’ level of 
participation increased as their level of introjected orientation also increased only in the nonanonymous 
Nihat Polat, Rae Mancilla, Laura Mahalingappa Anonymity and Motivation in Asynchronous Discussions  
 
Language Learning & Technology 68 
forum. These results may imply that for students who identify strongly with the importance of learning an 
L2 (identified regulation), whether a discussion forum is anonymous or nonanonymous may not matter. 
Nonetheless, for students who are more concerned about issues of ego enhancement, avoidance of guilt or 
anxiety, or the attainment of self-esteem, nonanonymous forums may provide higher levels of 
participation (Arnold, 2007). Relatedly, analyses corresponding to our third research question revealed 
that the higher the level of some forms of motivation (introjected and identified forms), the more 
frequently the students participated in the discussions. Thus, we needed to determine if, indeed, these 
motivation forms and different levels of participation predicted higher gains on the vocabulary post-test. 
Interestingly, once again, introjected orientation was the only significant predictor of high gains in L2 
vocabulary learning.  
Another vital question at this point is whether high levels of participation in anonymous versus 
nonanonymous forums were related to success in L2 vocabulary attainment. Despite the fact that the 
participants posted more threads in the nonanonymous forum, level of participation (number of posts) did 
not seem to be related to success in L2 vocabulary learning, neither in the anonymous nor in the 
nonanonymous forum. Based on SLA research, one could speculate a possible significant relationship had 
the sample size been bigger, at least between the level of participation in nonanonymous forums and gains 
in L2 vocabulary. Note that this study does not examine the complex processes of social interactions of 
L2 learners in online discussions of different nature; however, our findings suggest that such 
environments seem to offer facilitating interactions and learning opportunities that may present ecological 
affordances of different nature depending on an anonymity effect. Thus, in light of L2 attainment theories, 
particularly input and interaction hypotheses, and ecological theory (Ellis, Tanaka, & Yamazaki, 1994; 
Gass & Selinker, 2001; Krashen, 1985; Long, 1996; Mackey, 1999; Pica, 1994, van Lier, 2002), these 
results underscore the potential of cyber ecological affordances not only in terms of higher exposure 
opportunities to comprehensible input but also higher learning gains.  
In sum, while our results corroborate the findings of some previous research that participation may be 
linked to increased motivation in online asynchronous discussions due to its interactions with anxiety, 
autonomy, peer scrutiny and intimidation, and so forth (Arnold, 2007; Beauvois, 1992; Hurd, 2006; Poza, 
2005; Kelm, 1992), we argue that anonymity is also somewhat linked to different forms of motivation and 
students’ level of participation in L2 learning tasks. Finally, in terms of motivation theory, these results 
are also interesting, because according to Deci and Ryan (1987), introjected orientation is a less 
autonomous form of self-determined motivation and has been frequently found to be negatively correlated 
with L2 attainment. In other words, the amount of time learners would invest in tasks would depend on 
their perceptions about their control over the tasks. Interestingly, learners in this study seemed to perceive 
higher levels of autonomy in the nonanonymous forum than they do in the anonymous one, and their 
introjected motivation seemed to be positively related to success in L2 learning.  
Anonymity and Quality of L2 Use 
The possibility that the quality of L2 use may vary in different asynchronous forums also deserves 
exploration because anonymous and nonanonymous discussions offer potentially different ecological 
affordances. One could then speculate that learner variables such as anxiety, motivation, perceptions 
about self and identity, agency, socialization patterns, and so forth (Polat, 2011; Polat & Mahalingappa, 
2010; Block, 2007; Cziser & Dörnyei, 2005; Dörnyei & Ushioda, 2010; Milroy & Gordon, 2003; Lantolf 
& Thorne, 2006) may interact differently in anonymous versus nonanonymous forums, thereby generating 
L2 production of different qualities. Thus, in examining whether the quality of L2 use the participants 
produced in the nonanonymous discussion significantly differed from the anonymous one, we compared 
the number of correct simple and complex sentences, and capitalization, punctuation, and grammar 
mistakes each participant produced in each forum. We do, however, acknowledge that quality of language 
entails more than what we have examined in this study. Despite the conservative nature of the Bonferroni 
adjustment, results suggested that the participants did, indeed, produce significantly higher numbers of 
Nihat Polat, Rae Mancilla, Laura Mahalingappa Anonymity and Motivation in Asynchronous Discussions  
 
Language Learning & Technology 69 
correct simple sentences and fewer capitalization, punctuation, and grammar mistakes in the 
nonanonymous forum than the anonymous one.  
It seems rather obvious that differences in the nature of ecological affordances may have an impact on the 
quality of L2 use in these forums. Indeed, participants had access to the same resources (González-Bueno, 
1998) and/or counter-tasks (Lantolf & Thorne, 2006, p. 238) in both of these forums, and it is hard to 
speculate as to why these differences might have occurred other than the nature of the environment. 
Finally, unfortunately it is hard to interpret our findings in light of previous research because most of 
these studies either compared online discussions to paper-pencil exchanges (Beauvois, 1998; González-
Bueno, 1998; Cooper & Selfe, 1990; Van Handle & Corl, 1998; Wang, 1994) or examined differences 
between synchronous and asynchronous discussions regarding different language skills (Abrams, 2003; 
Perez, 2003).  
CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS 
Similar to several previous studies, this study also demonstrates that (a) asynchronous discussion forums 
are effective in producing learning outcomes in L2 attainment, (b) in terms of level of participation, 
nonanonymous asynchronous forums may have a comparative advantage over anonymous ones for 
learners with high levels of introjected regulation whereas for learners with high levels of identified 
regulation both forums are advantageous, (c) of the four self-determined motivational forms, introjected 
regulation was the only significant predictor of success in learning L2 vocabulary in asynchronous 
discussions, and (d) regarding offering ecological opportunities, nonanonymous forums seem to generate 
higher quality of L2 production than anonymous ones.  
We believe these findings have several implications for L2 learning and teaching in cyber settings. Our 
findings confirm the vitality of the growing cyber movements in K-12 education, particularly the 
effectiveness of L2 learning opportunities that the cyber ecologies have to offer. Thus, the over 50% 
growth in the number of cyber charter schools in the last decade in the United States is not surprising, and 
the trend is likely to continue. Nonetheless, our findings come with a caveat: the effectiveness of 
asynchronous discussion forums may be mitigated by the kind of motivation L2 learners have. Thus, 
educators involved in cyber schooling need to conduct needs analysis and identify L2 learners’ affective, 
cognitive, and metacognitive differences before deciding on whether to adopt anonymous versus 
nonanonymous forums. 
Current research on some affective and metacognitive factors, extrinsic pressures, autonomy, anxiety, and 
control over positioning one’s self seems to beg for special attention to maximize the effectiveness of 
online L2 learning forums. Hence, future research that employs a multivariate exploration of the 
interaction of these variables is much needed. Indeed, future research also needs to examine more closely 
the nature of ecological affordances and how learner variables vary and interact in anonymous versus 
nonanonymous forums because as evidenced in our findings participants may produce higher quality L2 
in nonanonymous forums than they do in anonymous ones. Finally, our findings indicated that higher 
levels of participation in the L2 did not seem to significantly contribute to success in L2 vocabulary 
learning. This could possibly be due to participation in online forums not always implying active 
attendance on the assigned tasks (Lantolf & Thorne, 2006). It could also be that the length of participation 
was inadequate or the sample size in this study was not big enough to obtain statistical significance. 
Either way, we believe that future studies that involve participation in discussion forums of longer periods 
on bigger sample sizes could shed light on this finding.  
 
 
Nihat Polat, Rae Mancilla, Laura Mahalingappa Anonymity and Motivation in Asynchronous Discussions  
 
Language Learning & Technology 70 
APPENDIX. Sample student posts in anonymous versus nonanonymous asynchronous discussions 
 
Participant Non-anonymous Anonymous 
1 Mi pueblo no es muy grande. Mi ciudad es 
tranquila. Me gusta vivir en mi ciudad 
porque me puedo relajar aquí. Cuando 
miro afuera de la ventana a veces puedo 
ver venados u otros animals. 
Mi pueblo es pequeño, limpio y tranquilo. 
Me gusta mi ciudad porque no está ocupado 
como el de la ciudad. 
   
2 Me gusta viajar mucho, porque veo 
muchos bonitos lugares alrededor del 
mundo. 
Me gusta viajar mucho porque me gusta sé 
nuevo ciudades. Me gusta conocer lugares 
gran. 
   
3 Me gusta viajar mucho porque me gusta 
conocer nuevos lugares y conocer a gente 
nueva. Me gusta ver cómo vive otra gente. 
También me gusta ver los lugares 
históricos adonde viajo. 
Me gusta viajar mucho, porque veo como las 
personas vive. Me gusta conocer a nuevos 
lugares y gente nueva. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
Abrams, Z. I. (2001). Computer-mediated communication and group journals: Expanding the repertoire of 
participant roles. System, 29, 489–503. 
Abrams, Z. I. (2003). The effect of synchronous and asynchronous CMC on oral performance in German. 
The Modern Language Journal, 87, 157–167. 
Absalom, M., & Rizzi, A. (2008). Comparing the outcomes of online listening versus online text-based 
tasks in university level Italian L2 study. ReCALL, 20, 55–66. 
Aitsiselmi, F. (1999). Second language acquisition through email interaction. ReCALL, 11, 4–11. 
Al-Seghayer, K. (2001). The effects of multimedia annotation modes on L2 vocabulary acquisition: A 
comparative study. Language Learning & Technology, 5(1), 202–232. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol5num1/alseghayer/default.html  
American Psychological Association, (2010). Publication manual of the American Psychological 
Association (6th ed.). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
Arnold, N. (2007). Reducing foreign language communication apprehension with computer-mediated 
communication: A preliminary study. System, 35, 469–486.  
Baron, N. S. (1984). Computer mediated communication as a force in language change. Visible 
Language, 18, 118–141. 
Barson, J., Frommer, J., & Schwartz, M. (1993). Foreign language learning using e-mail in a task-
oriented perspective: Interuniversity experiments in communication and collaboration. Journal of Science 
Education and Technology, 2, 565–584. 
Beauvois, M. (1992). Computer-assisted classroom discussion in the foreign language classroom: 
Conversations in slow motion. Foreign Language Annals, 25, 455–464.  
 
Nihat Polat, Rae Mancilla, Laura Mahalingappa Anonymity and Motivation in Asynchronous Discussions  
 
Language Learning & Technology 71 
Beauvois, M. (1997). Write to speak: The effects of electronic communication on the oral achievement of 
fourth semester French students. In J. Muyskens (Ed.), New ways of learning and teaching: Issues in 
language program direction (pp. 93–116). Boston, MA: Heinle. 
Beauvois, M. (1998). Conversations in slow motion: Computer-mediated communication in the foreign 
language classroom. The Canadian Modern Language Review, 54, 198–217. 
Blake, R. (2000). Computer mediated communication: A window on L2 Spanish interlanguage. Language 
Learning & Technology, 4(1), 120–136. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/blake/default.html 
Block, D. (2007). The rise of identity post Firth and Wagner. The Modern Language Journal, 91, 863–
876.Bowles, M. (2004). L2 glossing: To CALL or not to CALL. Hispania, 87, 541–552. 
Bradley, T., & Lomicka, L. (2000). A case study of learner interaction in technology-enhanced language 
learning environments. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 22, 347–368. 
Brandle, K. (2005). Are you ready to ‘Moodle’? Language Learning & Technology, 9, 16–23. Retrieved 
from http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num2/review1/default.html 
Bresnan, J. (Ed.). (1982). The mental representation of grammatical relations. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press. 
Chun, D. M. (1994). Using computer networking to facilitate the acquisition of interactive competence. 
System, 22, 17–31. 
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Cook, V.J. (1996).  Second language learning and language teaching (2nd ed.). London, UK: Edward Arnold.  
Cooper, M., & Selfe, C. (1990). Computer conferences and learning: Authority, resistance, and internally 
persuasive discourse. College English, 52, 847–869. 
Cronbach, L. J. (1951). Coefficient alpha and the internal structure of tests. Psychometrika, 16, 297–334. 
Cziser, K. & Dörnyei, Z. (2005) The internal structure of language learning motivation: Results of 
structural equation modeling. Modern Language Journal, 89, 19–36. 
De Bot, K., Paribakht, S., & Bingham Wesche, M. (1997). Toward a lexical processing model for the 
study of second language vocabulary acquisition. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 19, 309–329. 
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1985). Intrinsic motivation and self-determination in human behavior. New 
York: Plenum.  
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1987). The support of autonomy and the control of behavior. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 53, 1024–1037. 
Dörnyei, Z., & Ushioda, E. (2010). Teaching and researching motivation (2nd ed.). Harlow, UK: Longman. 
Egbert, J. L. (2005). Conducting research on CALL. In J. L. Egbert & G. M Petrie (Eds.), CALL research 
perspectives (pp. 3–8). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Ellis, R., Tanaka, Y., & Yamazaki, A. (1994). Classroom interaction, comprehension, and the acquisition 
of L2 word meanings. Language Learning, 44, 449–491. 
Fitze, M. (2006). Discourse and participation in ESL face-to-face and written electronic conferences. 
Language Learning & Technology, 10(1), 67–86. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num1/ 
fitze/default.html 
Fuente, M. J. (2003). Is SLA interactionist theory relevant to CALL? A study on the effects of computer-
mediated interaction in L2 vocabulary acquisition. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 16, 47–81. 
Nihat Polat, Rae Mancilla, Laura Mahalingappa Anonymity and Motivation in Asynchronous Discussions  
 
Language Learning & Technology 72 
Gadzar, G., Klein, E., Pullum, G. K., & Sag, I. A. (1985). Generalized phrase structure grammar. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
 Gass, S. M., & Selinker, L. (2001). Second language acquisition: an introductory course (2nd ed.). 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Gass, S.M., & Varonis, E.M. (1994). Input, interaction, and second language production. Studies in 
Second Language Acquisition, 16(3), 283-302. 
Gettys, S., Imhof, L., & Kautz, J. (2001). Computer-assisted reading: The effect of glossing format on 
comprehension and vocabulary retention. Foreign Language Annals, 34, 91–100. 
González-Bueno, M. (1998). The effects of electronic mail on Spanish L2 discourse. Language Learning 
& Technology, 1(2), 55–70. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num2/article3 
Grolnick, W. S., & Ryan, R. M. (1989). Parent styles associated with children’s self-regulation and 
competence in schools. Journal of Educational Psychology, 81, 143–154. 
Horst, M., Cobb, T., & Nicolae, I. (2005). Expanding academic vocabulary with an interactive on-line 
database. Language Learning and Technology, 9(2), 90–110. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/ 
vol9num2/horst/default.html 
Hughes, A. (2003). Testing for language teachers. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press. 
Hurd, S. (2006). Towards a better understanding of the dynamic role of the distance language learners: 
Learner perceptions of personality, motivation, roles, and approaches. Distance Education, 27, 303–329. 
Jiménez, R. (2003). Literacy and Latino students in the United States: Some considerations, questions, 
and new directions. Reading Research Quarterly, 38, 122–128. 
Johnson, M. (2004). A philosophy of second language acquisition. New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press. 
Jones, L. (2004). Testing L2 vocabulary recognition and recall using pictorial and written test items. 
Language Learning & Technology, 8(3), 122–143. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num3/ 
jones/default.html 
Kelm, O. (1992). The use of synchronous computer networks in second language instruction: A 
preliminary report. Foreign Language Annals, 25, 441–454. 
Kern, R. (1993). Restructuring classroom interaction with networked computers: Effects on quality and 
characteristics of language production. Paper presented at ACTFL, San Antonio, TX. 
Kern, R. (1995). Restructuring classroom interaction with networked computers: Effects on quantity and 
characteristics of language production. The Modern Language Journal, 79, 457–476. 
Kim, D., & Gilman, D. (2008). Effects of text, audio, and graphic aids in multimedia instruction for 
vocabulary learning. Educational Technology and Society, 11, 114–126. 
Krashen, S. (1985). The input hypothesis. Torrence, CA: Laredo. 
Lantolf, J., & Pavlenko, A. (2002). Second language learning as participation and the re-construction of 
selves. In J. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and language learning (pp. 155–218). Oxford, UK: 
Oxford University Press. 
Lantolf, J., & Thorne, S. (2006). Sociocultural theory and the genesis of second language development. 
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2007). Reflecting on the cognitive–social debate in Second Language Acquisition. 
The Modern Language Journal, 91, 773–787. 
Nihat Polat, Rae Mancilla, Laura Mahalingappa Anonymity and Motivation in Asynchronous Discussions  
 
Language Learning & Technology 73 
Levelt, W. (1989). Speaking: From intention to articulation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Lomicka, L. (1998). ‘To gloss or not to gloss’: An investigation of reading comprehension online. 
Language Learning & Technology, 1(2), 41–50. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num2/ 
article2/default.html 
Long, M. H. (1996). The role of the linguistic environ-ment in second language acquisition. In W. Ritchie 
& T. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 413-468). San Diego, CA: Academic. 
Lucas, T., & Katz, A. (1994). Reframing the debate: The roles of native languages in English-only 
programs for language minority students. TESOL Quarterly, 28, 537–561. 
Mackey, A. (1999). Input, interaction, and second language development. Studies in Second Language 
Learning, 21, 557–587. 
McLaughlin, B. (1980). Theory and research in second-language learning: An emerging paradigm. 
Language Learning, 30, 331–50. 
McMinn, J. (2008). Holt Spanish 2 Exprésate! Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin and Harcourt. 
Milroy, J. (1992). Linguistic variation and change. On the historical sociolinguistics of English. Oxford, 
UK: Blackwell. 
Milroy, L., & Gordon, M. (2003). Sociolinguistics: Method and interpretation. Malden, MA: Blackwell 
Publishing, Inc. 
Nation, I. S. P. (2001). Learning vocabulary in another language. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press. 
National Alliance for Public Charter Schools. (2012). [PA Leadership Charter Metrics Table]. The Public 
Charter Schools Dashboard. Retrieved from http://www.publiccharters.org/dashboard/ 
select/school/pa_leadership 
Nunnally, J. C., & Bernstein, I. H. (1994). Psychometric theory. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. 
Perez, 2003. Foreign language productivity in synchronous versus asynchronous computer-mediated 
communication. CALICO Journal, 21, 89–104.  
Pica, T. (1994). Research on negotiation: What does it reveal about second-language learning conditions, 
processes, and outcomes? Language Learning, 43, 493–527. 
Polat, N. (2011). Nature and content of L2 socialization patterns and attainment of a Turkish accent by 
Kurds. Critical Inquiry in Language Studies, 8(3), 261–288. 
Polat, N., & Mahalingappa, L. J. (2010). Gender differences in identity and acculturation patterns and L2 
accent attainment. Journal of Language, Identity, and Education, 9, 17–35  
Poza, M. (2005). The effects of asynchronous computer voice conferencing on learners’ anxiety when 
speaking a foreign language. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). West Virginia University. 
Pratt, E., & Sullivan, N. (1994). Comparison of ESL writers in networked and regular classrooms. Paper 
presented at TESOL '94, Baltimore, MD. 
Roed, J. (2003). Language learner behaviour in a virtual environment. Computer Assisted Language 
Learning, 16, 155–172. 
Ryan, R. M., & Connell, J. P. (1989). Perceived locus of causality and internalization: Examining reasons 
for acting in two domains. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57, 749–761.  
 
Nihat Polat, Rae Mancilla, Laura Mahalingappa Anonymity and Motivation in Asynchronous Discussions  
 
Language Learning & Technology 74 
Salaberry, M. R. (2001). The use of technology for second language learning and teaching: A 
retrospective. The Modern Language Journal, 85, 39–56. 
Satar, H., & Ozdener, N. (2008). The effects of synchronous CMC on speaking proficiency and anxiety: 
Text versus voice chat. The Modern Language Journal, 92, 595–613. 
Segler, T., Pain, H., & Sorace, A. (2002). Second language vocabulary acquisition and learning strategies 
in ICALL environments. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 15, 409–422. 
Simpson, N. (2006). Asynchronous access to conventional course delivery: a pilot project. British Journal 
of Educational Technology, 37, 527–537. 
Skinner, B., & Austin, R. (1999). Computer conferencing: Does it motivate EFL students? ELT Journal, 
53/4, 270–279. 
Smith, B. (2003). Computer-mediated negotiated interaction: An expanded model. The Modern Language 
Journal, 87, 38–57. 
Stemler, S. E. (2004). A comparison of consensus, consistency, and measurement approaches to 
estimating interrater reliability. Practical Assessment Research & Evaluation, 9 (4). Retrieved from 
http://pareonline.net/getvn.asp?v=9&n=4 
Sun, Y., & Dong, Q. (2004). An experiment on supporting children's English vocabulary learning in 
multimedia context. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 17, 131–147. 
Tella, S. (1992). The adoption of international communications networks and electronic mail into foreign 
language education. Scandinavian Journal of Educational Research, 36, 303–312. 
Van Handle, D., & Corl, K. (1998). Extending the dialogue: Using electronic mail and the internet to 
promote conversation and writing in intermediate German language courses. CALICO Journal, 15, 129–143. 
Van Lier, L. (2000). From input to affordance: Social interactive learning from an ecological perspective. 
In J. P. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning: Recent advances (pp. 245–
259). Oxford, UK: OUP. 
Van Lier, L, (2002). An ecological-semiotic perspective on language and linguistics. In C. Kramsch (Ed.), 
Language acquisition and language socialization: Ecological perspectives (pp.140–164). London, UK: 
Continuum International. 
Van Lier, L. (2004). The ecology and semiotics of language learning: A sociocultural perspective. 
Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic. 
Volle, L. (2005). Analyzing oral skills in voice email and online interviews. Language Learning 
&Technology, 9, 146–163. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol9num3/volle/default.html 
Wang, Y. M. (1994). Email dialogue journaling in an ESL reading and writing classroom. (Unpublished 
doctoral dissertation). University of Oregon. 
Warner, R. M. (2008). Applied statistics: From bivariate to multivariate techniques. Los Angeles, CA: 
Sage Publications. 
Warschauer, M., Turbee, L., & Roberts, B. (1996). Computer learning networks and student 
empowerment. System, 24, 1–14. 
Yanguas, I. (2009). Multimedia glosses and their effect on L2 text comprehension and vocabulary 
learning. Language Learning & Technology, 13(2), 48–67. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/ 
vol13num2/yanguas.pdf 
