Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2013/linetal.pdf 
June 2013, Volume 17, Number 2 
pp. 123–142 
 
Copyright © 2013, ISSN 1094-3501 123 
THE EFFECTS OF TEXT-BASED SCMC ON SLA: A META ANALYSIS 
Wei-Chen Lin, National Tsing Hua University 
Hung-Tzu Huang, National Tsing Hua University 
Hsien-Chin Liou, Feng Chia University 
As various means of computer mediated communication (CMC) have been incorporated 
within language classrooms over the past two decades, it has become important to 
critically understand whether, to which extent, and under what contextual factors, a 
particular type of CMC is more effective than other modes of communication. This study 
examined the magnitude of the effect of text-based synchronous computer-mediated 
communication (SCMC) on second language acquisition (SLA). By searching the studies 
published between 1990 and 2012, this meta-analysis explored 10 experimental and quasi-
experimental journal articles and doctoral dissertations and reports their overall effect on 
SLA, and the contextual factors that influence the between-study variation. A small but 
positive overall effect (m = .33) indicates that text-based SCMC could make a larger 
difference on SLA than other means of communication. Findings further suggested that 
intermediate learners may benefit more from SCMC tasks if they are grouped into pairs or 
small groups and participate in SCMC interactions on a weekly basis. In terms of 
suggestions for future research, authors should provide more description about the SCMC 
task in order to confirm or disconfirm the factors that are associated with effectiveness of 
second language (L2) learning in technology-mediated language learning contexts. 
Key Words: Text-Based Synchronous Computer-Mediated Communication (SCMC); 
Second Language Acquisition (SLA); Quantitative Meta-Analysis 
APA Citation: Lin, W.-C., Huang, H.-T., & Liou, H.-C. (2013). The effects of text-based 
SCMC on SLA: A meta analysis. Language Learning & Technology, 17(2), 123–142. 
Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2013/linetal.pdf 
Received: June 4, 2012; Accepted: November 30, 2012; Published: June 1, 2013 
Copyright: © Wei-Chen Lin, Hung-Tzu Huang, & Hsien-Chin Liou 
INTRODUCTION 
Over the past two decades, synchronous computer-mediated communication (SCMC), defined in this 
article as synchronous written chat (excluding audio and voice chats), has been commonly applied to 
enhance various aspects of foreign or second language learning. As a technology and communication tool, 
SCMC has been said to have a strong potential for encouraging the negotiation of meaning in interaction. 
This is because of SCMC’s resemblance to spoken communication and the textual features of discourse, 
which allow learners with more time to attend to language output (Blake, 2009; Kern, 1995; Satar & 
Ozdener, 2008; Smith, 2005; Sykes, 2005). Benefits of applying SCMC to second language (L2) 
classrooms have been reported including more equitable student participation (e.g., Kern, 1995), more 
learner language output (e.g., Sequeira, 2009; Sullivan & Pratt, 1996), better quality of linguistic 
production (e.g., Chun, 1994; Warschauer, 1996a), more student motivation and interest (Warschauer, 
1996b), and reduced communication anxiety (Satar & Ozdener, 2008). SCMC provides students with an 
authentic way to learn the target language through communicative use, reduces students’ anxiety of 
talking face-to-face, and gives students more opportunities to express their ideas than oral communication 
does. As a result of these qualities, it has attracted much attention from researchers in the field of 
computer assisted language learning (CALL).  
Chapelle (2009), in a recent review article concerning general CALL studies and SLA theories, indicated 
Wei-Chin Lin, Hung-Tzu Huang, and Hsien-Chin Liou The Effects of Text-based SCMC on SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 124 
that SCMC is effective for second language learning in several language domains: grammatical 
development (e.g., Pellettieri, 2000), oral proficiency (e.g., Payne & Whitney, 2002), lexical development 
(e.g., de la Fuente, 2003; Smith, 2004), and negotiation of meaning in communication (e.g., Blake, 2000). 
However, there are limitations of SCMC which may lead to L2 learning outcomes that are not as positive 
as the previously described ones. For instance, Liu and Sadler (2003), in a study on peer reviews for 
English as a Second Language (ESL) writing, found the SCMC mode in their electronic environment—
with more than two student members chatting at a time—yielded chaotic flows of online messages with 
frequent problematic turn-taking or chaotic multiple comments which impeded comprehension or 
revision. Hirotani, in his 2009 study of Japanese learners, found that the quality of learners’ language 
output was not easy to improve through text-based SCMC. He hypothesized that this was because 
learners’ pace of typing and reading messages might be inhibited by unfamiliar words during chatting, 
due to their limited linguistic knowledge. 
The effects of SCMC on L2 development have been often examined from an SLA interactionist 
perspective. Compared to face-to-face interaction, the written nature of text-based chat programs have 
been argued to facilitate more form-focused linguistic modifications during interaction, as learners have 
more time to plan and reflect upon what is typed. This has the result of conveying error-free and precise 
messages (Pelletieri, 2000). Such noted potential has motivated research efforts in operationalizing central 
constructs in the interactionist framework such as noticing, focus on form, repair, uptake, and pushed 
output in SCMC contexts. Recent findings, however, seem to reveal that the negotiation of meaning in 
SCMC environments is qualitatively different from the negotiation of meaning in face-to-face interaction. 
Smith (2008), for example, found that learners produced more linguistically complex output when repairs 
were self-initiated. Fernández-García and Martínez-Arbelaiz (2003) and Lee (2002) both reported that 
negotiation of meaning took place in SCMC interaction, even if there were no communication 
breakdowns.  
Findings from some interactionist SCMC studies suggest that key notions of the SLA interactionist 
framework need to be expanded when applied to SCMC interaction. This is because data collection 
methods in traditional classrooms and SCMC contexts are fundamentally different. For example, self 
repair has been investigated by Smith and Sauro (2009) using learner deletion and the editing of text-
chats. Similarly, Yilmaz and Yuksel (2011) used nonverbal behaviors such as cursor and keyboard 
movements as indicators of noticing and awareness. Within the SCMC context, L2 learning processes 
have been recorded through data collection tools and methods such as screen-capture software—recording 
chatscripts, learner on-screen behaviors (Smith, 2008), or interlocutor images (Yamada & Akahori, 2009). 
However, as Smith and Sauro (2009) have noted, how productive learning outcomes can be documented 
through these tools is still unexplored. Interoperating chat interaction with varied SCMC data collection 
methods can help us understand familiar constructs of SLA such as self-repair or learner uptake with a 
new light (Smith, 2005, 2008).  
In addition to the difference of data collection methods, recognizing the unique nature of SCMC 
interaction also means interpreting SCMC interaction in terms of its task characteristics, conditions, 
processes, and contextual variables when examining its effects on L2 development. Ortega (1997) has 
noted the importance of carefully describing task features when analyzing computer-assisted interactions, 
so that task conditions and contextual variables conductive to language development in computer 
mediated interactions can be meaningfully compared to face-to-face tasks.  
Because a growing body of SCMC studies has been conducted over the past two decades under different 
contexts yielding mixed findings, a synthesis of the research is needed to help our field examine the 
impact of SCMC use on L2 learning. One such type of research synthesis is meta-analysis. Glass (1976), 
has defined meta-analysis as a statistical analysis of a collection of primary research data, calling it “the 
analysis of analyses” (p. 3). Typical meta-analyses begin with a literature search of primary sources, 
empirical studies that meet selection criteria. This sample pool is then coded, analyzed, and interpreted 
Wei-Chin Lin, Hung-Tzu Huang, and Hsien-Chin Liou The Effects of Text-based SCMC on SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 125 
based upon a set of pre-defined features. Then, researchers estimate an effect size, this being defined as 
the magnitude of the effect of one variable on the other variable (Cooper & Hedges, 1994). Through the 
calculation of the effect sizes, the findings from different primary empirical studies can be converted into 
comparable values. Meta-analysis has developed into a science providing SLA researchers replicable 
methods that summarize cumulative knowledge within a domain (Norris & Ortega, 2000, 2006; Plonsky, 
2011). In one of the first meta-analyses concerning SLA, Norris and Ortega (2000) examined 49 studies 
published between 1980 and 1998 and verified that focused L2 instruction was indeed effective (effect 
size d = .96).  
Meta-Analyses and CALL Research 
In CALL areas, several meta-analyses have recently been published, addressing various aspects of using 
technologies to enhance language learning and teaching. One of the earliest efforts to consider CALL 
effectiveness is Zhao’s analysis (2003) of nine studies from a sample of 389 journal articles published 
between 1997 and 2001 in English. He found a large effect size (d = 1.12) for CALL and claimed that the 
use of technology was generally a more effective teaching method than traditional ones. More recently, 
Taylor (2006) analyzed 18 studies that compared the efficiency of traditional first language (L1) glosses 
with that of electronic L1 glosses in L2 reading, finding that providing learners with electronic glosses (e-
glosses) had a large effect on understanding more text (d = 1.09) than those learners with paper-based 
glossing aids. Abraham (2008) surveyed 11 experimental studies in order to compare the effects of L2 
learners’ access to computer-mediated glosses (L1; or, L1 and L2 together) to those without such access. 
The results showed that computer-mediated glosses had an overall medium effect (m = .73) on their 
reading comprehension and a large positive effect (m = 1.40) on incidental vocabulary learning. To 
connect the results from Taylor (2006) and Abraham (2008), Taylor’s 2009 meta-analysis research with 
32 studies revealed that the overall effect sizes of e-glossing studies (d = .51) were larger than those of 
traditional glossing studies. Recently, Yun (2011) considered 10 primary studies with 35 weighted mean 
effect sizes (overall, d = .37), examining specific variables such as modes of glosses, test type, and 
language proficiency. Yun found that multiple hypertext glosses were more likely to yield an influence on 
beginning learners’ L2 vocabulary acquisition. 
In a recent review article, Sauro (2011) conducted a qualitative synthesis that examined the overall 
research trends, methods, and findings of 97 SCMC journal articles over the past 20 years (1990–2010). 
Following Canale and Swain’s (1980) conceptual framework for communicative competence, Sauro 
classified the primary research studies under four types of competences: grammatical, sociolinguistic, 
discourse, and strategic. Of the 97 studies, grammatical competence was most investigated, with 48 out of 
the 97 studies exploring this competence though SCMC. However, only half of the 48 grammatical 
competence articles directly addressed the issue of how SCMC use could effectively impact linguistic 
development. Most of the other SCMC studies touched upon L2 learners or learning processes through 
linguistic or technological strategies for negotiating communication, the changes of discourse functions, 
and the use of speech acts plus participant roles, or language socialization, among others. Sauro suggests 
that “SCMC is a productive context for examining L2 processes and outcomes in a manner that 
incorporates and builds upon research in face-to-face contexts while also beginning to explore the 
technologically influenced tools and strategies unique to computer-mediated contexts” (2011, p. 383). 
While these different issues in the reviewed SCMC research for SLA were discussed, the effectiveness of 
SCMC in different skill areas of communicative competence was not addressed in a quantitative way with 
the calculation of effect sizes.  
To our knowledge, none of the meta-analyses that have been conducted specifically address the use of 
SCMC on L2 learning outcomes. To fill this gap, we conducted a meta-analytic review of the 
effectiveness of SCMC on SLA by collecting experimental and quasi-experimental SCMC studies and 
calculating and comparing effect sizes across studies. In this meta-analysis, we extended the scope of 
previous analyses to include doctoral dissertations database searches from the years 1990 to 2012. Five 
Wei-Chin Lin, Hung-Tzu Huang, and Hsien-Chin Liou The Effects of Text-based SCMC on SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 126 
contextual factors were examined that were quantifiable and hypothesized to have an impact on the 
overall effectiveness. This was done in order to show the between-study variation in terms of participants’ 
L2 proficiency level, target language, the language learning conditions (ESL or EFL), the duration of 
SCMC treatment, and grouping methods as designed in the SCMC activities. It is hoped that with a close 
quantitative examination, future research directions for applying SCMC for L2 learning can be more 
precisely indicated.  
Accordingly, the two research questions we ask are: 
1. What is the overall effect of text-based SCMC on SLA?  
2. What are the contextual factors that influence the between-study variation on effects of text-
based SCMC on SLA? 
METHODS 
The present meta-analysis was conducted in four steps: (a) literature search; (b) selection of eligible 
studies; (c) coding of study reports; and (d) calculation of effect size. 
Literature Search 
Following the recommendation made by In’nami and Koizumi (2010) from their study examining the 
quality of databases that had been used for meta-analyses in applied linguistics, this current literature 
search was conducted using five databases: Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC), Linguistic 
and Language Behavior Abstracts (LLBA), Social Science Citation Index (SSCI), PsycINFO, and 
ProQuest Digital Dissertation Full Text (PQDT). We believe that these databases provide an adequate 
coverage of representative journals in applied linguistics and are frequently used by meta-analysts. During 
the search process, two main search terms—computer-mediated communication (CMC) and synchronous 
computer-mediated communication (SCMC)—were combined with the following keywords: second 
language acquisition (SLA), second language learning, chat, grammatical, lexical, oral, reading, writing, 
speaking, vocabulary, speech act, interaction hypothesis, negotiation, focus on form, sociocultural theory, 
and task.  
Besides searching in these databases, 10 journals that have published SCMC studies were also manually 
checked, including CALICO Journal, Canadian Modern Language Review, Computer Assisted Language 
Learning, Language Learning, Language Learning & Technology, The Modern Language Journal, 
ReCALL, Studies in Second Language Acquisition, System, and TESOL Quarterly. Moreover, all the 
reference sections of review articles and the retrieved primary studies were also examined, and the full-
text doctoral dissertations searched from PQDT were included in the present meta-analysis as well.  
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria of Eligible Studies 
In order to select eligible studies for this quantitative meta-analysis, inclusion criteria were built and each 
selected primary study had to meet the following six screening criteria: 
1. The study had a quasi-experimental or experimental design. Only the studies that examined the 
effect of second language learning interventions via text-based SCMC through a quasi-
experimental or an experimental design could provide the needed data for the present 
quantitative meta-analysis. 
2. The study included at least one experimental group and one control/ comparison group.1 The 
effect sizes in the present study were calculated based on the group difference. The 
experimental groups were involved in text-based SCMC interventions in which learners were 
doing activities through text-chat.2 The control/comparison groups were involved in the 
traditional instruction or computer-mediated activities other than text-based SCMC. 
Wei-Chin Lin, Hung-Tzu Huang, and Hsien-Chin Liou The Effects of Text-based SCMC on SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 127 
3. The dependent variable was a measurement of certain target language features (e.g., 
grammatical judgment tests, oral proficiency measures). Only the studies that provided 
quantifiable data of the measures were included. 
4. The study was published between 1990 and 2012, because most discussions of using text-based 
SCMC on second language acquisition have occurred after 1990, and the current literature 
search was conducted in 2012. 
5. The study should be reported in English, as translation and linguistic homogeneity were 
considered difficulties that would interfere with the analysis. 
6. The publication type of the study should be a journal article or a doctoral dissertation. Since 
other types of unpublished manuscripts were not easy to retrieve, only the articles and doctoral 
dissertations searched from the five databases were included. 
Coding Study Reports 
As a result of the first search for relevant literature, 145 articles were found. In the second stage, these 
articles were filtered through the six screening criteria described above, leaving 17 studies. In the third 
stage, six studies lacked the necessary statistical information such as mean and standard deviation to 
calculate the effect size (e.g., Fiori, 2005; Sykes, 2005), and thus were excluded. Finally, of this pool of 
11 studies, Sauro (2009), though studying three groups using online-chat, did not have a control group, 
and was therefore excluded as well. In the end, 10 studies remained as the body of the meta-analysis (as 
identified with an asterisk in the reference section).  
The 10 studies we include here were independently read and coded by one of the researchers and by an 
MA-TEFL graduate student, using a list of 24 study features from a coding manual (see Appendix A). For 
the feature of research design, the control groups of the studies were categorized into comparison groups 
and true control groups. The comparison group refers to the group that was involved in any types of CMC 
activities other than text-chat or face-to-face communication activities during treatments. One example of 
a comparison group is an asynchronous computer-mediated communication (ACMC) group who sent 
email or gave responses on forums. In contrast, the true control group refers to the group that received 
traditional face-to-face instructions without any interaction or communication activities. For instance, 
some true control groups only took pre-tests and post-tests for comparison, and some only received 
traditional grammar instructions. Because some studies had more than one experimental group, these 
groups were regarded as different samples for the calculation of effect size.  
The training session for coding involved coding two journal articles randomly chosen out of the 10 and 
discussing the codings with a faculty member in applied linguistics. The final coding had an agreement 
ratio of .89 (the number of mutually coded items divided by the total items of the 10 articles on the coding 
scheme). Disagreements were discussed and resolved by the two coders after finishing all the coding (see 
the summary of coding results in Appendix B).  
Effect Size Calculation 
To demonstrate the effectiveness of text-based SCMC on second language acquisition, effect sizes were 
calculated by estimating Cohen’s d (1977). To compute Cohen’s d, means and standard deviations, 
commonly provided by researchers in experimental reports, were obtained to complete the quantitative 
meta-analysis. By contrasting the immediate post-test data of each experimental group and each 
control/comparison group, d was computed. For studies using more than one learning outcome measure, 
the effect size was calculated by averaging the d values across several dependent variables that targeted at 
the same language feature (Norris & Ortega, 2000). Then, Cohen’s d was used to calculate unbiased 
standardized mean difference effect sizes (Hedges’ g), or weighted mean effect sizes based on the sample 
size of each primary study (Lipsey & Wilson, 2001; Yun, 2011).  
Wei-Chin Lin, Hung-Tzu Huang, and Hsien-Chin Liou The Effects of Text-based SCMC on SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 128 
The confidence interval is the range in which the effect size might be located. Following Cohen’s (1977) 
explanation of effect size d values, the effect size around .8 or above is considered a large effect, around 
.5 a medium effect, and around .2 a small effect. In order to determine the statistical significance of the 
mean effect sizes, 95% confidence intervals were calculated for each weighted mean effect size (Lipsey & 
Wilson, 2001; Norris & Ortega, 2000, pp. 449–450). Confidence intervals that contain the value zero 
indicate that the mean effect sizes are not statistically significant (Norris & Ortega, 2000); values not 
containing the value zero are interpreted as statistically significant. The narrower the confidence interval 
is, the more trustworthy the obtained effect is. Cochran’s homogeneity of variance tests (the Q-test, cited 
in Lipsey & Wilson, 2001) were conducted to determine whether the distribution of the effect sizes was 
due to the sampling error alone. If the Q value exceeds the critical value for a chi-square with k-1 degrees 
of freedom (where k represents the group members for comparison), the hypothesis that the variance is 
caused by only sampling error is rejected (Lipsey & Wilson, 2001), and the variation is thought to be 
caused by the variables observed from the primary studies. In the present study, the Q values were 
calculated by using the Comprehensive Meta-Analysis software.  
RESULTS 
We first present a brief review of the 10 chosen studies. Then we provide the results that help us answer 
the initial research question, which considers the overall effectiveness of text-based SCMC on second 
language acquisition. Finally, we address five contextual factors which may influence the between-study 
variation on effects of text-based SCMC on SLA. 
As described, based on the identified 24 study features, we coded 10 articles (their detailed results are 
shown in Appendix B). With the publication dates ranging from 2002 to 2011, the 10 studies included 
two unpublished dissertations and eight journal articles. Sample sizes ranged from 24 to 96, with the 
majority being adult learners (a total of 562). Five studies were conducted with English L1 learners, and 
five were conducted with mixed L1 learners. Four target language outcomes were examined: oral 
performance (Abrams, 2003; Blake, 2000; Hirotani, 2009; Kost, 2004; Payne & Whitney, 2002; Satar & 
Ozdener, 2008; Sequeira, 2009), grammatical competence (Abrams, 2003; Hirotani, 2009; Loewen & 
Erlam, 2006; Sequeira, 2009), lexical development (Abrams, 2003; de la Fuente, 2003; Hirotani, 2009; 
Yilmaz & Yuksel, 2011), and writing performance (Kost, 2004). Seven studies examined learners’ oral 
skill, followed by four on grammatical competence, and four others on lexical development (see Table 1). 
A summary of the major study characteristics of the 10 reports is presented in Table 1. The target 
languages identified in the 10 primary studies were English, German, Japanese, Spanish, and Turkish. 
Different from Sauro’s review article (2011), oral performance was examined in seven studies as a target 
language feature, ranked as the most important, followed by lexical and grammatical aspects. Because 
four of the 10 studies examined more than one target language feature, comparing effect sizes concerning 
particular target language outcomes across the 10 studies would be an unfair calculation. As to L2 
learning contexts, seven studies were conducted in an FL setting, two studies were conducted in ESL 
contexts, and one, in an EFL context.  
Since learners’ target language proficiency levels were not reported consistently in the primary studies, 
following Norris and Ortega (2000) we used the amount of target language instruction that the learners 
received before the investigation as a proxy for L2 proficiency levels. Accordingly, low-level refers to 
learners with 0–2 semesters of L2 instruction, while mid-level refers to learners with 3–4 semesters of 
instruction. Mix-level refers to a group including both low- and mid-level learners. Among the 10 primary 
studies, four studies involved mid-level learners; four studies, low-level learners; and two studies, mixed 
level learners. No study involved advanced learners.  
In terms of the treatment duration, four studies administered the instructional activities for more than 10 
weeks (defined as long), two studies involved treatments between one and ten weeks in length (mid) , and  
Wei-Chin Lin, Hung-Tzu Huang, and Hsien-Chin Liou The Effects of Text-based SCMC on SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 129 
Table 1. Summary of Major Characteristics of the 10 Studies 
Study N Language 
features 
Target 
language 
Learning 
Context 
L2 
proficiency  
Treatment 
duration 
Group 
division 
Abrams 
(2003) 
 
96 Speaking 
Grammar  
Vocabulary 
German FL Mid Not reported Pair/ 
group 
Blake 
(2009) 
 
34 Speaking English SL Mid Mid Class 
de la Fuente  
(2003) 
24 Vocabulary Spanish FL Low Short Pair 
Hirotani  
(2009) 
 
55 Speaking 
Grammar  
Vocabulary 
Japanese FL Mid Long Group 
Kost  
(2004) 
94 Speaking 
Writing 
German FL Low Long Pair/ 
group 
Loewen & Erlam  
(2006) 
31 Grammar English SL Mixed Not reported Class 
Payne & Whitney  
(2002) 
58 Speaking Spanish FL Mid Long Group 
Satar & Ozdener  
(2008) 
90 Speaking English FL Mixed Mid Not  
reported 
Sequeira  
(2009) 
56 Speaking 
Grammar 
Spanish FL Low Long Pair 
Yilmaz & Yuksel 
(2011) 
24 Vocabulary Turkish FL Low Short Pair 
Note. Oral performance = speaking; grammatical competence = grammar; lexical development = vocabulary; writing 
performance = writing. 
two studies’ interventions lasted for less than one week (short). The two remaining studies did not report 
the duration of the treatments.  
To further investigate the features of SCMC activities used in the treatments, how learners were grouped 
within the different studies was also classified. Five studies asked learners to do pair work, and four 
studies divided learners into groups of three to six people. Two studies administered activities and 
instruction with the whole class online. One study did not report its grouping arrangement.  
Different from Sauro’s recent review on SCMC on SLA (2011), where the predominance of the past 
research considers the development of grammatical competence, seven of the 10 studies we reviewed 
addressed how SCMC could contribute to learning effects of L2 oral skills. Some investigated measures 
of lexical and grammatical knowledge being transferred to speech production in terms of the spoken 
languages’ lexical richness, lexical density, and syntactic complexity (Abrams, 2003; Hirotani, 2009), 
accuracy of word choice (Hirotani, 2009), and accuracy of vocabulary and grammar use (Payne & 
Whitney, 2002; Satar & Ozdenar, 2008). Predominantly focusing on oral fluency, Blake (2009) compared 
the development of oral fluency development by 34 ESL students under face-to-face, SCMC, and control 
contexts, and found that students who engaged in text-chat achieved significantly greater gains in multiple 
Wei-Chin Lin, Hung-Tzu Huang, and Hsien-Chin Liou The Effects of Text-based SCMC on SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 130 
measures of fluency than did the control group or the face-to-face group. Sequeira (2009) examined how 
56 ninth- or tenth-grade Spanish learners used either SCMC or face-to-face communication in order to 
promote oral fluency, and found that the SCMC group performed better than the other group in terms of 
increased means of language production. Two studies concerned lexical performance. Yilmaz and Yuksel 
(2011) examined whether an SCMC group or face-to-face group of English speakers would more 
effectively learn new Turkish words. This was evaluated through recasts on oral tasks, and these 
researchers found that the SCMC context was superior. Kost (2004), recruiting four sections of beginning 
German learners, examined their interlanguage development considering accuracy, performance, and 
communication strategies. She compared how SCMC and oral role-plays over one semester helped the 
groups acquire overall German performance. Kost found no significant difference across the four sections 
of low level German learners; however, participants’ self-reported data indicated the noticing of their 
peers’ grammatical mistakes, which was perceived to help them turn input into intake. The last two 
studies used form-specific tests to measure the development of lexical or grammatical knowledge as a 
result of SCMC interaction or interventions conducted via SCMC: de la Fuente (2003) analyzed the 
development of receptive and productive knowledge of food-related Spanish nouns. Loewen and Erlam 
(2006) investigated the effect of computer-mediated corrective feedback.  
The Overall Effectiveness of Text-Based SCMC 
To answer the first research question about the overall effectiveness of text-based SCMC on second 
language acquisition, we calculated the effect size values (Cohenʼs d) and unbiased standardized mean 
difference effect sizes (Hedgesʼ g) on immediate post-tests for each study sample contrast g (based on the 
sample size of the 10 primary studies), as shown in Table 2. Since some primary studies have more than 
one experimental group or control/comparison groups, these studies yielded more than one effect size 
measure because of the calculations resulting from the different contrasts between the different groups (as 
marked with 1 to 4, see Appendix A for details). Altogether, there were 19 comparison groups which 
allowed the calculation of effect sizes across the 10 studies. In Table 2, the unbiased effect sizes (g) 
rangefrom -1.23 to 1.55, with 14 positive (four large, three medium, six small) and five negative effect 
sizes; this demonstrates that the effect sizes obtained in these studies tend to be small. Among the 10 
primary studies, only two studies (de la Fuente, 2003; Loewen & Erlam, 2006) administered delayed post-
tests, so the effect sizes based on delayed post-tests could not be calculated across all studies. The 
weighted mean effect size across the 10 single SCMC studies was m = .33 (small); however, the 
confidence interval of .18 to .49 indicates that the result is statistically significant as the confidence 
interval does not include zero (Norris & Ortega, 2009). Thus, text-based SCMC had a statistically 
significant but small-sized overall effect on the participants’ language acquisition, compared with face-to-
face communication, ACMC, or voice-chat. Moreover, the Q value of the 19 effect sizes (Q = 47.686, 
p < .05) shows that the variation between the effect sizes might be caused by variables other than 
sampling error.  
Contextual Factors Influencing the Between-Study Variation of the Effects of Text-Based SCMC on 
SLA 
Following Plonsky’s meta-analysis (2011) on the effectiveness of L2 strategy instruction, the following 
variables are hypothesized to be relevant to the overall effects of SCMC for L2 learning: L2 proficiency 
levels, second vs. foreign language environments (SL and FL, respectively), target languages, and length 
of treatment (also in Norris & Ortega, 2000). In designing SCMC treatment tasks, group size has been a 
pedagogical concern (e.g., Liu & Sadler, 2003); thus, ways of group division (pair, small group, or whole 
class) is considered a possible factor for variation. The weighted mean effect sizes (g) and 95% 
confidence intervals for all studies and subgroups which represented the different contextual factors 
(levels of language proficiency, treatment duration, learning contexts, target languages, and ways of 
group division) were calculated and are shown in Table 3. The findings help us see which contextual 
factors of text-based SCMC influenced L2 learning in these studies.  
Wei-Chin Lin, Hung-Tzu Huang, and Hsien-Chin Liou The Effects of Text-based SCMC on SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 131 
Table 2. Individual Biased and Unbiased Effect Sizes on Immediate Post-Tests  
Study Label Biased effect 
size (Cohenʼs d) 
 Unbiased effect 
size (Hedgesʼ g) 
Satar & Ozdener (2008)  2 1.57  1.55 
Sequeira (2009) – .87  .86 
Yilmaz & Yuksel (2011)  1 .87  .84 
Payne & Whitney (2002)  3 .77  .75 
Payne & Whitney (2002)  1 .66  .64 
Payne & Whitney (2002)  4 .62  .60 
Payne & Whitney (2002)  2 .52  .51 
Yilmaz & Yuksel (2011) 2 .41  .40 
Blake (2009)  1 .39  .38 
Abrams (2003)  1 .36  .36 
Blake (2009)  2 .24  .23 
Kost (2004)  2 .09  .09 
Loewen & Erlam (2006)  2 .07  .07 
Abrams (2003)  2 .02  .02 
Kost (2004)  1 -.08  -.08 
Hirotani (2009) – -.10  -.10 
Satar & Ozdener (2008)  1 -.14  -.14 
Loewen & Erlam (2006)  1 -.46  -.44 
de la Fuente (2003) – -1.28  -1.23 
Note. These studies have been listed in decreasing order of effect sizes. 
L2 Proficiency Levels 
We first calculated the weighted mean effect sizes of each L2 proficiency level. It was found that SCMC 
had small weighted mean effect sizes for learners at mid-levels (m = .33) and mixed-levels (m = .39). 
These results are statistically significant as the 95% confidence intervals (CI) of the two effect sizes did 
not include zero. As for the low-level learners, the effect size (m = .21) of SCMC was small and 
statistically not significant, as the 95% confidence interval (CI) included zero. 
Treatment Duration 
To investigate whether the amount of treatment as given in the SCMC communicative activities influenced 
the effectiveness of language learning, the effect sizes were calculated across the three pre-defined 
categories of treatment periods: long, mid, or short duration of the SCMC treatment. It was found that the 
SCMC studies had a medium positive effect when the treatment period was defined as mid (m = .51) and 
a small positive effect when the treatment duration was long (m = .35); both of these findings were 
statistically significant. As for the short treatment period, there was a small effect size (m = .12) that was 
not significant. Among the 10 primary studies, two did not report the duration of treatments. Thus, four 
effect sizes obtained from the two single studies were categorized into the subgroup of NA (i.e., not 
applicable) in Table 3, and the mean effect size (m = .10) was not statistically significant. 
Wei-Chin Lin, Hung-Tzu Huang, and Hsien-Chin Liou The Effects of Text-based SCMC on SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 132 
Table 3. Weighted Mean Effect Sizes for Immediate Post-Tests 
   95% CI  
 N g Lower Upper Q value 
All studies 19 .33 .18 .49 47.686* (p < .05, df = 18) 
L2 proficiency level     
       Low-level 6 .21 -.04 .46 
       Mid-level 9 .33 .10 .56  
       Mixed-level 4 .39 .06 .72 
Treatment duration     
       Long  8 .35 .12 .57 
       Mid  4 .51 .19 .84 
       Short  3 .12 -.38 .61 
       NA 4 .10 -.20 .41 
Learning context      
       ESL 4 .08 -.36 .52  
       EFL 2 .60 .22 .98  
       FL 13 .28 .10 .45  
Target languages      
       English 6 .39 .09 .66  
       Spanish 6 .51 .22 .81  
       German 4 .09 -.16 .34  
       Japanese 1 -.10 -.87 .67  
       Turkish 2 .61 .03 1.19  
Group division      
       Pair/Group 13 .28 .10 .45  
       Class 4 .08 -.36 .52  
       NA 2 .60 .22 .98  
Notes. Confidence intervals that do not include zero are statistically significant; those that do span a zero value are not 
statistically significant. g = mean weighted effect size; CI = confidence intervals; Q = heterogeneity of single studies. 
Learning Condition 
To account for the effect of SCMC in different language learning conditions, the weighted mean effect 
sizes for ESL, EFL, and FL conditions were calculated. The results show that SCMC had a medium 
impact when the participants were learning in an EFL context (m = .60) and small impacts on the other 
two conditions (m = .08 for ESL, m = .28 for FL). Among the three 95% CIs of the three mean effect 
sizes, only the one for ESL was not statistically significant. 
Target Languages 
In order to see the difference of SCMC in learning different target languages, the weighted mean effect 
sizes for English, German, Japanese, Spanish, and Turkish were calculated. It was found that SCMC had 
medium effects on the subgroup of Turkish (m = .61) and Spanish (m = .51), but small effects on the 
subgroup of English (m = .37) and German (m = .09), and a negative effect on the Japanese group 
(m = -10). Based on the 95% CIs, the mean effect sizes for the English, Spanish, and Turkish studies were 
shown to be statistically significant, but the 95% CIs for German and Japanese groups were not. It should 
Wei-Chin Lin, Hung-Tzu Huang, and Hsien-Chin Liou The Effects of Text-based SCMC on SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 133 
be noted that there was only one effect size contributing to the weighted mean effect size calculation for 
the subgroup of Japanese, so this particular result should be interpreted with caution. 
Group Division 
To address the variation of learners working either in small groups or as part of a whole class, the weighted 
mean effect sizes for the subgroups were calculated. One study (Satar & Ozdener, 2008) did not report how 
learners were grouped; three types of group divisions in the present study were found:  pair/group, class, 
and NA (i.e., not applicable or not reported). The calculation results show that SCMC had small, positive 
effects on the subgroups of pair/group and class (m = .28 and m = .08 respectively), but a medium effect 
on the NA subgroup (m = .60). The mean effect size for doing SCMC activities with the whole class was 
not statistically significant (95% CIs: -.36, .52) , a finding that deserves further investigation. 
DISCUSSION 
The primary goal of the present quantitative meta-analysis was to investigate the magnitude of the effect 
of text-based SCMC on SLA. Given the 10 quasi-experimental or experimental studies chosen, it was 
found that the text-based SCMC had a small-sized but positive overall effect (m = .33) on SLA. Although 
the overall positive effect was small, there was a significant difference (p < .05) among the 10 studies. 
Compared with the known five meta-analyses in the CALL area with effect sizes ranging from .37 to 1.12 
(Abraham, 2008; Taylor, 2006, 2009; Yun, 2011; Zhao, 2003), the effect size obtained from the present 
study was the smallest. In his meta-analytic assessment of the effects of technology use on language 
learning, Zhao (2003) found a large effective size of 1.12 from the nine studies included in his report. 
Yun’s (2011) study of the effects of hypertext gloss on vocabulary acquisition obtained a relatively small 
effect size (d = .37) from 10 studies, very close to our statistic (d = .33). In instructed SLA meta-analyses, 
Norris and Ortega (2000) examined the overall instructional effect of L2 and found a large effect size of 
.96. Plonsky (2011) found a small size (d = .49) in a meta-analysis of L2 strategy instruction and Lee and 
Huang (2008) found an even smaller effect size (d = .22) when they examined the effects of input 
enhancement on SLA. Given all the meta-analytic reports cited here, our sample size was larger only than 
that of Zhao (2003). The small sample size may contribute to the small effect obtained from the present 
study: across the time span between 1990 and 2012, only 10 studies which used an (quasi-) experimental 
design to address the effectiveness issues of applying SCMC to L2 learning were found. The number of 
studies analyzed is indeed small and indicates an urgent need for more research along this line if 
researchers serious hope to understand further the effects of SCMC for language learning. 
Nevertheless, we suspect that the complex nature of SCMC interaction and the many contextual variables 
involved in the implementation of SCMC tasks may be the main reason contributing to the small overall 
effect. As our analysis of the five contextual variables shows that variations in L2 language proficiency, 
target language, learning conditions, treatment duration, and grouping dynamics are likely to influence 
learners’ language learning through SCMC interaction. It was found that SCMC had small positive effects 
on most subgroups of the five contextual factors. However, because of the small sample sizes of certain 
subgroups of the factors, it was hard to conclude which contextual variation was essential for SCMC to 
cause effects. Nevertheless, based on the results, we were able to illustrate a picture of SCMC effects on 
each contextual factor. For learners’ L2 proficiency levels, the results indicated that SCMC had more 
impact when participants were in a mid- or mixed-level class setting. It is assumed that beginners might 
not have enough L2 proficiency to negotiate with interlocutors very successfully. As Loewen and Erlam 
(2006) discussed, some target items or language skills required for the SCMC tasks may be beyond the 
learners’ development stages. Therefore, compared with beginners, learners with an intermediate level of 
target language benefit more, given certain SCMC task designs with specific target language features. None 
of the 10 studies included advanced learners; further investigation studying this type of learner is needed.  
As to the treatment duration, the results showed that text-based SCMC had statistically significant 
Wei-Chin Lin, Hung-Tzu Huang, and Hsien-Chin Liou The Effects of Text-based SCMC on SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 134 
positive effects for mid- and long-term periods. It seems to suggest that at least one-week duration of 
SCMC treatment is essential for there to be any effect. Further examination of treatment design in the 
primary studies suggests that whether participants received SCMC treatments regularly during the 
treatment period may be a factor that influenced the effect of SCMC. Most of the primary studies with a 
mid-period (one to 10 weeks) or a long-period (more than 10 weeks) treatment duration involved 
participants in the SCMC treatments regularly. That is, students were required to complete SCMC tasks 
or to participate in SCMC sessions every few days or every week. Payne and Whitney (2002), for 
example, designed two online classes for students every week during a 15-week semester. Satar and 
Ozdener (2008) involved participants in one outside-class chat session every week during their four-week 
treatment. Even though the treatment duration of the two studies was different, both asked participants to 
use SCMC tools periodically. It seems that at least one-week regular practice is needed for SCMC 
treatments to have some effect. 
As for learning conditions and target languages, it was found that SCMC had a medium impact for the 
subgroup of EFL context, and also medium effect sizes for the language subgroups of Spanish and 
Turkish. It should be noted, however, that the sample size of each subgroup was quite small and the 
results tended to be determined by certain studies. Further examination based on a larger number of 
samples of the two contextual factors (learning conditions and target languages) is needed to gain a better 
scope of how language learning context and target language affect the effect of SCMC.  
When it comes to the group division, it was not surprising that SCMC had a better effect when participantd 
were divided into pairs or groups than doing activities as part of a whole class. Instead of being passive 
learners in a whole-class discussion, participants had more opportunities for interactions and negotiations 
when they did online tasks with group members and interlocutors (Payne & Whitney, 2002). Pair work in 
either CALL or non-CALL contexts has been recommended as better learning conditions than groups 
with a larger size as the former arrangement allows more intensive discussion and easier group 
management (Hu, 2002; Liu & Sadler, 2003; Miao, Badger, & Zhen, 2006; Villamil & De Guerrero, 
1998). In reporting a SCMC study on peer review, Liu and Sadler (2003) found that too many members, 
instead of the synchronous mode itself, in their arrangement caused chaotic flows of online messages.  
SCMC research so far has discussed the benefits of SCMC in terms of learner participation (e.g., Kern, 
1995), quantity of output (Sequeira, 2009; Sullivan & Pratt, 1996), quality of discourse (e.g., Chun, 1994; 
Warschauer, 1996a), increased motivation (Warschauer, 1996b), and reduced communication anxiety 
(Satar & Ozdener, 2008). This meta-analysis provides evidence that SCMC has positive effect on various 
aspects of L2 learning. Pedagogically, the initial analysis of contextual variations suggests that intermediate 
learners may benefit more from SCMC tasks if they are grouped into pairs or small groups and participate 
in the SCMC interaction on a weekly basis. In seeking to understand whether communication opportunities 
in SCMC lead to L2 acquisition, complications arise as we try to align results from SCMC primary 
studies to the SLA interactionist research mainly because most SCMC studies provide little description of 
the tasks implemented. Descriptions of SCMC tasks relative to the interactionist approach such as 
planning time, types of task prompts designed to generate discussion, and rationale of task sequence were 
generally very sparse. Carefully documenting how the SCMC tasks are structured is crucially important in 
future studies because descriptions of SCMC conditions and processes allow us to further analyze the 
kinds of interactions fostered in different SCMC tasks. Recent attempts such as Baralt (2010) and 
Collentine (2010) have demonstrated such a direction on task complexity and sequence as related to 
language learning outcome variables such as linguistic complexity. Unfortunately, their research designs 
did not provide essential statistical information for us to include them and compare them with the 10 
studies in the current meta-analysis. With a more transparent characterization of SCMC conditions in 
future effectiveness studies, we can then ascertain which features may or may not trigger the processes 
involved in SLA and truly capitalize on the communication opportunities afforded in SCMC environments. 
In his meta-analytic review of the effectiveness of technology use in language learning, Zhou (2003) 
Wei-Chin Lin, Hung-Tzu Huang, and Hsien-Chin Liou The Effects of Text-based SCMC on SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 135 
reported that there is an “overall emphasis on the process rather than result of using technology in 
language learning” (p. 23). The lack of effectiveness research, and in particular the large-scale 
implementations of school-level efforts was evident in the small number of SCMC studies surveyed in 
our meta-analysis. While we recognize the value of process oriented research, which offers rich 
description of how language learning occurred through SCMC interaction, more efforts oriented towards 
empirical evaluation assessing the effectiveness of implementing SCMC for language acquisition can 
yield fruitful insights in how much L2 learning and progress we can expect from SCMC interaction.  
CONCLUSION 
The study aims to find the magnitude of effectiveness of using synchronous computer-mediated 
communication for L2 learning. After a careful literature survey, we chose 10 experimental or quasi-
experimental studies which were published between 1990 and 2012 in either a journal article or a 
dissertation format, and calculated their weighted effect sizes. The results yielded a small but statistically 
significant, positive mean effect (m = .33) through the calculation of 19 weighted effect sizes. This 
indicates that the SCMC groups in the 10 studies, on average, performed better than their counterparts 
who used either ACMC, face-to-face interactions, or voice-chats. The analyses of the contextual factors 
suggest that intermediate learners may benefit more from SCMC tasks if they are grouped into pairs or 
small groups and participate in the interaction on a weekly basis.  
Pedagogical Implications 
As shown in the study, SCMC can serve as an effective tool for enhanced L2 learning in traditional 
classroom instruction. Teachers should consider designing pair or small-group communication tasks for 
students to practice what they have learned in class (Abrams, 2003; Payne & Whitney, 2002). In online 
communication settings, learners cannot obtain clues of gestures or facial expressions via text chats in 
order to assume the interlocutors’ intentions; they are pushed to use language itself to communicate with 
others. In this way, SCMC could serve as a “conversation simulator” in language learning to develop 
learners’ speaking skills (Payne & Whitney, 2002, p. 25). Moreover, the chat logs could be saved in 
computers, so students could read their messages and check their language use after the tasks. However, 
because text-chat is a written form, it could not completely substitute for face-to-face communication or 
voice-chat.  
Limitations and Suggestion for Future Research 
The present meta-analysis has several limitations. First, because of the very limited number of the 
unpublished doctoral dissertations, and exclusion of unpublished reports and non-English reports, a 
certain level of publication bias existed in this study. More primary studies should be conducted to 
examine the text-based SCMC effects on L2 grammatical competence, pragmatic development, writing 
performance, and vocabulary acquisition. The present study also did not include qualitative primary 
studies that examined the sociocultural, discourse, and strategic aspects of language learning and use.  
We have several suggestions for future research. First, more detailed description of tasks including 
implementation procedures (e.g., planning time) and designs of tasks (e.g., prompts) used to facilitate 
discussion would help CALL scholars identify more precisely the variables that have a definitive or major 
influence on L2 learning effectiveness in SCMC contexts. Second, as the effectiveness of text-based 
SCMC on learners’ learning process and affective aspects is not easily observed through quantifiable 
measures, a qualitative research synthesis (e.g., including case studies, as suggested by Storch and 
Wigglesworth, 2010) that not only reviews the obtained results but also addresses the effects of SCMC on 
second language learning process and the reasons to both the effective and ineffective SCMC instruction 
could be conducted to obtain a better picture of its impact on SLA. Third, since there were few primary 
studies involving advanced learners in using text-based SCMC, more primary studies could target at 
advanced learners to see whether the learners with the L2 proficiency level higher than intermediate level 
Wei-Chin Lin, Hung-Tzu Huang, and Hsien-Chin Liou The Effects of Text-based SCMC on SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 136 
could benefit from SCMC more. Last, few studies (only two of 10 in our study) have involved a delayed 
posttest; thus, the retention effect of SCMC on language learning is unable to be determined. Future 
research should have a design which incorporates an assessment beyond an immediate post-treatment 
observation. 
 
APPENDIX A. Coding Manual 
Feature 
 
Name of features Definition of the features 
1 Study ID Assign an identification number to each study 
2 Author First name + last name 
3 Publication year The publication year 
4 Publication type 1. journal article 2.doctoral dissertation 
5 Participants’ L2 proficiency 
level 
The participants’ second language proficiency level, e.g., low, mid, 
and high levels 
6 Participants’ education level The participants’ education background. e.g., college level 
7 Learning context The participants’ learning environment, e.g., ESL, EFL, FL 
8 First language (L1) The participants’ mother tongue 
9 Target language (TL) The L2 that was examined in the study 
10 Independent variable (IV) 
(intervention) 
The intervention given to the participants in the study, e.g., using 
SCMC tools to complete the tasks 
11 SCMC tool The SCMC software used in the study 
12 SCMC activity The activities in the study. e.g., jigsaw, information-gap, discussion 
13 Treatment length The time spent on doing each SCMC task 
14 Treatment duration The duration of undergoing the treatment for the participants 
15 Dependent variable (DV) 
(TL measures) 
The variable to measure or assess the effects of independent 
variable, e.g., test scores and ratings 
16 Target language features The language aspect that was examined. e.g., lexical development, 
oral performance, grammatical competence 
17 Pretest The type of the pretest and the measurement 
18 Posttest The type of the posttest and the measurement 
19 Delayed posttest The type of the delayed posttest and the measurement 
20 Sample size Total sample size of this study 
21 Research design 1. Between subjects (with a comparison group) 2. Between subjects 
(with a true control group) 3. Between subjects (with more than one 
text-based SCMC groups) 4. Within subject 
A. pretest  B. posttest  C. delayed posttest 
22 Experimental group (EG) Which group it was in the study, e.g., SCMC group;  
the group sample size was__________ 
23 Comparison group (CG)/ True 
control group (TG) 
Which group it was in the study, e.g., ACMC group, face-to-face 
group, true control group (no intervention);  
the group sample size was__________  
24 Data collected for analysis The data collected for the analysis in the study, e.g., test scores, 
questionnaires, chat log transcripts 
Wei-Chin Lin, Hung-Tzu Huang, and Hsien-Chin Liou The Effects of Text-based SCMC on SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 137 
APPENDIX B. Summary of Coding of the 10 Primary Studies 
Study 
ID 
Author 
(Year) 
Article 
type 
L1 Context  TL Proficiency Intervention SCMC 
activity 
01 Abrams 
(2003) 
1 English FL German Mid SCMC & 
ACMC 
activities 
Discussion 
02 Blake 
(2009) 
1 Arabic 
Chinese 
German 
Japanese 
Korean 
Polish 
Spanish 
Turkish 
ESL English Mid  SCMC & 
F2F 
interaction  
Free chat, 
discussion 
03 de la Fuente 
(2003) 
1 English FL Spanish Low SCMC & 
F2F 
activities 
Information 
gap 
04 Hirotani 
(2009) 
1 Chinese 
English 
Korean 
FL Japanese Mid SCMC 
ACMC 
F2F 
activities 
Discussion 
05 Kost  
(2004) 
2 English 
Filipino 
Japanese 
Lithuanian 
Russian 
Spanish 
Swedish 
Tagalog  
FL German Low SCMC & 
F2F 
activities 
Role play, 
discussion, 
communi-
cation tasks 
06 Loewen &  
Erlam (2006) 
1 Arabic 
Chinese 
French 
German 
Japanese 
Korean 
Portuguese 
Spanish 
Thai  
ESL English Mixed SCMC 
corrective 
feedback 
Retell the 
story 
07 Payne & 
Whitney 
(2002) 
1 English FL Spanish Mid SCMC & 
F2F 
activities 
Role play, 
discussion, 
communi-
cation 
activities 
08 Satar & 
Ozdener 
(2008) 
1 Turkish EFL English Mixed Text & 
voice chat 
activities 
Information 
gap, problem 
solving, 
jigsaw, 
decision 
making 
09 Sequeira 
(2009) 
2 English FL Spanish Low SCMC 
written 
exchanges 
Inclass 
interaction 
10 Yilmaz & 
Yuksel (2011) 
1 English FL Turkish Low SCMC 
activities 
Vocabulary 
learning tasks 
Notes. Article type: 1 = journal article; 2= doctoral dissertation. TL = target language. 
 
Wei-Chin Lin, Hung-Tzu Huang, and Hsien-Chin Liou The Effects of Text-based SCMC on SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 138 
APPENDIX B. Summary of Coding of the 10 Primary Studies, continued. 
Study 
ID 
Duration Group 
division 
SCMC 
inter-
locutor  
Examined  
TL features 
Measures N Research 
Design 
EG CG/TG 
01 n.r. Pair/ 
group 
NNS Oral 
grammatical 
lexical 
Oral performance 
measures 
96 1, 2 
A, B 
SCMC CG: 
ACMC 
TG 
02 6 weeks Class  NNS Oral Oral fluency 
measures 
34 1, 2 
A, B 
SCMC CG: F2F 
TG 
03 2 days Pair  NNS Lexical L2 word meaning 
tasks 
24 1 
A, B, C 
SCMC CG: F2F 
04 1 
semester 
Group  
(3-4 
people) 
NNS Oral, 
grammatical 
lexical 
Oral performance 
measures 
55 1 
A, B 
SCMC CG: 
ACMC 
05 1 
semester 
Group 
(2-3 
people) 
NNS Oral 
Writing 
Oral and written 
measures 
94 1, 2 
A, B 
SCMC CG: F2F 
TG 
06 n.r. Class  NNS & 
instructor 
Grammatical Grammar 
judgement test 
31 2, 3  
A, B, C 
SCMC 
(Implicit 
& explicit 
feedback) 
TG 
07 15 weeks Group  
(4-6 
people) 
NNS Oral Oral proficiency 
measures 
58 1  
A, B 
SCMC CG: F2F 
08 4 weeks n.r. NNS Oral Speaking 
proficiency 
measures 
90 1, 2 
A, B 
Text-
based 
SCMC 
CG:  
voice-
chat 
TG 
09 1 
semester 
Pair  NNS Oral, 
grammatical 
Oral proficiency 
interview (OPI) 
 
56 2 
A, B 
SCMC TG 
10 1 day Pair Researcher  Lexical Oral production 24 1, 
B 
SCMC CG: F2F 
Notes. n.r. = not reported; N = sample size; EG = experimental group; CG = comparison group; TG = true control group; 
F2F=face-to-face. 
In the research design column (also refer to Appendix A for detail), 1 = between subjects (with CGs); 2 = between subjects (with 
a TG); 3 = between subjects (with more than one EG); 4 = within subject. A = with pre-tests; B = with post-tests; C = with 
delayed post-test 
 
 
NOTES 
1. A comparison group in an SCMC study is the group of subjects that used ACMC or face-to-face 
communication, whereas a true control group is one that does not receive any intervention. 
2. Even though some experimental groups undertook other kinds of activities (e.g., face-to-face 
activities), as long as the independent variable of the study was SCMC intervention, the experimental 
group was still regarded as an SCMC group in the present meta-analysis. In Payne and Whitney (2002), 
the experimental group did have both SCMC and face-to-face classes during the experiment period. 
Wei-Chin Lin, Hung-Tzu Huang, and Hsien-Chin Liou The Effects of Text-based SCMC on SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 139 
However, the same face-to-face class was taken by both the experimental and the control groups. The 
only difference between the two groups was the way of doing certain activities. As Payne and Whitney 
(2002) stated, “the students in the experimental groups meeting online in the chatroom engaged in the 
same activities on the same days as those in the control groups did face to face” (p. 18). Therefore, we 
still regard the experimental group as a SCMC group since the difference between them and the control 
group was the use of SCMC. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The paper is partially funded by a research project of National Science Council (under the grant number 
NSC NSC99-2411-H-007-052-MY3). Feedback from Dr. Hui-Fen Lin is appreciated. We would also like 
to thank Juliette Yueh-Chih Lin for searching the databases in order to locate articles published after 
2010. Comments from three anonymous reviewers of this manuscript and editors of Language Learning 
and Technology are also acknowledged. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Wei-Chen Lin obtained an MA degree in TEFL from the Department of Foreign Languages and Literature 
at National Tsing Hua University (Hsinchu, Taiwan). 
Hung-Tzu Huang, assistant professor at Department of Foreign Languages and Literature of National 
Tsing Hua University (Hsinchu, Taiwan), specializes in L2 vocabulary and writing research. She is the 
corresponding author for this article. 
Professor Hsien-Chin Liou, Department of Foreign languages and Literature of Feng Chia University 
(Taichung, Taiwan), has done research and published journal articles in CALL and EAP.  
 
REFERENCES  
Note: Studies that were included in the present meta-analysis are marked with an asterisk (*). 
Abraham, L. B. (2008). Computer-mediated glosses in second language reading comprehension and 
vocabulary learning: A meta-analysis. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 21(3), 199–226.  
*Abrams, Z. I. (2003). The effect of synchronous and asynchronous CMC on oral performance in 
German. The Modern Language Journal, 87(2), 157–167. 
Baralt, M. L. (2010). Task complexity, the cognition hypothesis, and interaction in CMC and FTF 
environments. (unpublished doctoral dissertation). Georgetown University, Washington, D.C, USA. 
Blake, R. (2000). Computer-mediated communication: A window on L2 Spanish interlanguage. 
Language Learning & Technology, 4(1), 120–136. Retrieved from: 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num1/blake/default.html  
*Blake, C. (2009). Potential of text-based internet chats for improving oral fluency in a second language. 
The Modern Language Journal, 93(2), 227–240. 
Canale, M., & Swain, M. (1980). Theoretical bases of communicative approaches to second language 
teaching and testing. Applied Linguistics, 1, 1–47. 
 
Wei-Chin Lin, Hung-Tzu Huang, and Hsien-Chin Liou The Effects of Text-based SCMC on SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 140 
Chapelle, C. A. (2009). The relationship between second language acquisition theory and computer-
assisted language learning. The Modern Language Journal, 93, 741–753. 
Chun, D. M. (1994). Using computer networking to facilitate the acquisition of interactive competence. 
System, 22(1), 17–31. 
Cohen, J. (1977). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences. New York, NY: Academic Press. 
Collentine, K. (2010). Measuring complexity in task-based synchronous computer- mediated 
communication. In M. Thomas, & H. Reinders, (Eds.). Task-based language learning with technology 
(pp. 105–128). New York, NY: Continuum. 
Cooper, H., & Hedges, L. V. (Eds.). (1994). The handbook of research synthesis. New York, NY: Russell 
Sage Foundation. 
*de la Fuente, M. (2003). Is SLA interactionist theory relevant to CALL? A study on the effect of 
computer-mediated interaction in L2 vocabulary acquisition. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 
16(1), 47–81. 
Fernández-García, M. F., &  Martínez-Arbelaiz, A. (2003). Learners' interactions: A comparison of oral 
and computer-assisted written conversations. ReCALL, 15, 113–136. 
Fiori, M. (2005). The development of grammatical competence through synchronous computer-mediated 
communication. CALICO Journal, 22(3), 567–602. 
Glass, G. V. (1976). Primary, secondary, & meta-analysis of research. Educational Researcher, 5, 3–8. 
*Hirotani (2009). Synchronous versus asynchronous CMC and transfer to Japanese oral performance. 
CALICO Journal, 26(2), 413–438 
Hu, G. (2002). Potential cultural resistance to pedagogical imports: The case of communicative language 
teaching in China. Language, Culture and Curriculum, 15(2), 93–105. 
In'nami, Y., & Koizumi, R. (2010). Database selection guidelines for meta-analysis in applied linguistics. 
TESOL Quarterly, 44, 169–184. 
Kern, R. G. (1995). Restructuring classroom interaction with network computers: Effects on quantity and 
characteristics of language production. The Modern Language Journal, 79, 457–476. 
*Kost, C. R. (2004). An investigation of the effects of synchronous computer-mediated communication 
(CMC) on interlanguage development in beginning learners of German: Accuracy, proficiency, and 
communication strategies. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). The University of Arizona, USA. 
Lee, L. (2002). Synchronous online exchanges: A study of modification devices on non-native discourse. 
System, 30, 275–288. 
Lee, S. K., & Huang, H. T. (2008). Visual input enhancement and grammar learning: A meta-analytic 
review. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 30, 307–331.  
Liu, J., & Sadler, R. W. (2003). The effect and affect of peer review in electronic versus traditional modes 
on L2 writing. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 2, 193–227. 
*Loewen, S., & Erlam, R. (2006). Corrective feedback in the chatroom: An experimental study. 
Computer Assisted Language Learning, 19(1), 1–14. 
Lipsey, M. W., & Wilson, D. B. (2001). Practical meta-analysis. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Miao, Y., Badger, R., & Zhen, Y. (2006). A comparative study of peer and teacher feedback in a Chinese 
EFL writing class. Journal of Second Language Writing, 15, 179–200. 
Wei-Chin Lin, Hung-Tzu Huang, and Hsien-Chin Liou The Effects of Text-based SCMC on SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 141 
Norris, J., & Ortega, L. (2000). Effectiveness of L2 instruction: A research synthesis and quantitative 
meta-analysis. Language Learning, 50, 417–528. 
Norris, J., & Ortega, L. (2006). The value and practice of research synthesis for language learning and 
teaching. In J. M. Norris, & L. Ortega (Eds.), Synthesizing research on language learning and teaching 
(pp. 3–50). Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.  
Ortega, L. (1997). Processes and outcomes in networked classroom interaction: Defining the research 
agenda for L2 computer-assisted classroom discussion. Language Learning and Technology, 1(1), 82–93. 
Retrieved from: http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/ortega/default.html 
*Payne, J. S., & Whitney, P. J. (2002). Developing L2 oral proficiency through synchronous CMC: 
output, working memory, and interlanguage development. CALICO Journal, 20(1), 7–32. 
Pellettieri, J. (2000). Negotiation in cyberspace: The role of chatting in the development of grammatical 
competence in the virtual foreign language classroom. In M. Warschauer & R. Kern (Eds.), Network-
based language teaching: Concepts and practice (pp. 59–86). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Plonsky, L. (2011). The effectiveness of second language strategy instruction: A meta-analysis. Language 
Learning, 61(4), 993–1038. 
*Satar, H., Ozdener, N. (2008). The effect of synchronous CMC on speaking proficiency and anxiety: 
Text versus voice-chat. The Modern Language Journal, 92(4), 595–613. 
Sauro, S. (2009). Computer-mediated corrective feedback and the development of L2 grammar. Language 
Learning & Technology, 13(1), 96–120. Retrieved from: http://llt.msu.edu/vol13num1/sauro.pdf 
Sauro, S. (2011). SCMC for SLA: A research synthesis. CALICO Journal, 28(2), 369–391. 
*Sequeira, C. A. (2009). Synchronous computer mediated communication and second language 
proficiency. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of Oregon, USA. 
Smith, B. (2004). Computer-mediated negotiated interaction and lexical acquisition. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition, 26, 365–398. 
Smith, B. (2005). The relationship between negotiated interaction, learner uptake, and lexical acquisition 
in task-based computer-mediated communication. TESOL Quarterly, 39, 33–58. 
Smith, B. (2008). Methodological hurdles in capturing CMC data: The case of the missing self-repair. 
Language Learning & Technology, 12, 85–103. Retrieved from: http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num1/ 
smith/default.html 
Smith, B., & Sauro, S. (2009). Interruptions in chat. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 22, 229–247. 
Storch, N., & Wigglesworth, G. (2010). Learners’ processing, uptake, and retention of corrective 
feedback on writing: Case studies. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 32, 303–334. 
Sullivan, N., & Pratt, E. (1996). A comparative study of two ESL writing environments: A computer-
assisted classroom and a traditional oral classroom. System, 29, 491–501. 
Sykes, J. M. (2005). Synchronous CMC and pragmatic development: Effects of oral and written chat. 
CALICO Journal, 22(3), 399–341. 
Taylor, A. M. (2006). The effects of CALL versus traditional L1 glosses on L2 reading comprehension. 
CALICO Journal, 23(2), 309–318.  
Taylor, A. M. (2009). CALL-based versus paper-based glosses: Is there a difference in reading 
comprehension? CALICO Journal, 27(1), 147–160. 
Wei-Chin Lin, Hung-Tzu Huang, and Hsien-Chin Liou The Effects of Text-based SCMC on SLA: A Meta-Analysis 
 
Language Learning & Technology 142 
Villamil, O. S., & De Guerrero, M. (1998). Assessing the impact of peer revision on L2 writing. Applied 
Linguistics, 19(4), 491–514. 
Warschauer, M. (1996a). Comparing face-to-face and electronic discussion in the second language 
classroom. CALICO Journal, 13, 7–25. 
Warschauer, M. (1996b). Motivation aspects of using computers for writing and communication. In 
Warschauer, M. (Ed.), Telecollaboration in foreign language learning (pp. 29–46). Honolulu, HI: 
University of Hawai‘i Press. 
Yamada, M., & Akahori, K. (2009). Awareness and performance through self- and partner’s image in 
videoconferencing. CALICO Journal, 27, 1–25. 
*Yilmaz, Y., & Yuksel, D. (2011). Effects of communication mode and salience on recasts: A first 
exposure study. Language Teaching Research, 15, 457–477. 
Yun, J. (2011). The effects of hypertext glosses on L2 vocabulary acquisition: A meta-analysis. Computer 
Assisted Language Learning, 24(1), 39–58.  
Zhao, Y. (2003). Recent development in technology and language learning: A literature review and meta-
analysis. CALICO Journal, 21(1), 7–27. 
