Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2013/lai.pdf 
June 2013, Volume 17, Number 2 
pp. 100–122 
 
Copyright © 2013, ISSN 1094-3501 100 
A FRAMEWORK FOR DEVELOPING SELF-DIRECTED TECHNOLOGY 
USE FOR LANGUAGE LEARNING 
Chun Lai, The University of Hong Kong 
Critical to maximizing the potential of technology for learning is enhancing language 
learners’ self-directed use of technology for learning purposes. This study aimed to 
enhance our understanding of the determinants of self-directed technology use through the 
construction of a structural equation modelling (SEM) framework of factors and 
interactions that determine students’ self-directed use of technology for language learning. 
A survey was conducted among second language learners at one university in Hong Kong 
to provide the basis for a model that describes how various psychological and 
sociocultural factors interact to influence language learners’ use of technology for learning 
outside school. Attitudinal factors—such as language learning motivation, perceived 
usefulness of technology for learning, and perceived compatibility between technology use 
and learning expectancies—played a dominant role in shaping technology use. Perceived 
support from teachers and peers, self-regulation skills, and confidence in the selection and 
use of technology effectively impacted technology use mainly through strengthening 
perceived compatibility and usefulness. The findings suggest that attitudinal factors 
deserve much greater attention than currently given in promoting language learners’ self-
directed use of technology. 
Keywords: Student Use of Technology, Out-of-Class Technology Use, Structural 
Equation Modelling 
APA Citation: Lai, C. (2013). A framework for developing self-directed technology use 
for language learning. Language Learning & Technology, 17(2), 100–122. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2013/lai.pdf 
Received: July 27, 2012; Accepted: November 16, 2012; Published: June 1, 2013 
Copyright: © Chun Lai 
INTRODUCTION 
In the ecology of learning, technology constitutes an important space (Benson, 2006; Greenhow, Robelia, 
& Hughes, 2009). Technology is expected both to enhance language instruction inside the classroom and 
to extend language education beyond the classroom (Chapelle, 2010; Zhao & Lai, 2007). Thus, 
encouraging and supporting the self-directed use of technology outside language classrooms is essential 
to maximizing the potential of technology for language learning. Self-directed learning has been defined 
as the “process in which individuals take the initiative, with or without the help from others, in diagnosing 
their learning needs, formulating goals, identifying human and material resources, choosing and 
implementing appropriate learning strategies, and evaluating learning outcomes” (Knowles, 1975, p. 18). 
So, are language learners engaging in self-directed learning with technologies outside their language 
classes? More specifically, do language learners engage in self-initiated use of technologies to regulate 
various cognitive, metacognitive, socio-affective, and behavioral processes and conditions that affect 
language learning and how? Understanding the nature of language learners’ self-directed use of 
technology outside language classrooms is the first and foremost step towards supporting and enhancing 
self-directed use of technology for language learning.  
Research has found that language learners do incorporate technology into their out-of-class learning 
repertoire (Inozu, Sahinkarakas, & Yumru, 2010; Murray, 2008). However, the types of technologies they 
use for language learning are limited and rather conventional (Winke & Goetler, 2008; Zhang, 2010). 
Chun Lai A Framework for Developing Self-Directed Technology Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 101 
More importantly, there are great variations in the frequency and type of technologies used and in the 
nature of technology use for self-regulated language learning (Lai & Gu, 2011). Because of these 
uncertainties, an essential question emerges as to which factors influence whether and how university 
students use technologies for learning outside language classrooms. The answer to this question may help 
identify possible areas of support that language educators can provide to enhance students’ technology 
use for language learning.  
The current literature lists factors that affect students’ adoption of technology for learning in general. This 
includes awareness of the educational potentials of technological resources, perceived alignment between 
the use of technology and the demands of the study situations, and perceived availability of resources in 
the environment (Goodyear & Ellis, 2008; Lai, Lei, & Wang, 2012; McLoughlin & Lee, 2010). The 
literature on students’ use of technology for language learning also identifies some domain-specific 
factors, such as learners’ language learning beliefs and motivation, language profiles of the immediate 
living environments, and requirements of the language study situation (Hyland, 2004; Lai & Gu, 2011; 
Zhang, 2010). What is missing is a conceptualization of different motivating factors and potential 
interactions of these factors when predicting language learners’ self-directed use of technology for 
learning. This study aimed to construct a framework to unravel the intricate relationships of predictive 
factors that impact university students’ self-directed use of technology for language learning.  
In this study, a theoretical model was constructed to capture the various factors and their relationships that 
might influence students’ technology use for language learning. A survey was administered to university 
undergraduate language learners to collect information on their self-directed use of technology and related 
factors. The theoretical model then was evaluated and modified against the research data using structural 
equation modeling (SEM) so as to unravel how the various factors interact with each other to influence 
students’ technology use.   
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 
To better understand which factors affect students’ self-directed use of technology for language learning 
and how these various factors interact with each other to shape their decisions on technology use, this 
study referred to the Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB; Ajzen, 1985), a theory acclaimed for explaining 
individual behavioral intentions. This study used the TPB as a theoretical structure and referred to the 
literature concerned with the adoption of technology and to self-regulated learning models to identify key 
constructs and interactions in determining self-directed technology use for language learning. These key 
theoretical constructs and the hypothesized inter-relationships between these constructs were placed into a 
preliminary theoretical framework—technically known as a conceptual model—to explain students’ self-
directed use of technology for language learning. This conceptual model was the basis for the Structural 
Equation Modeling (SEM). As is common in SEM studies, based on the findings from the preliminary 
conceptual model, a refined model was then suggested and analyzed.  
The Theory of Planned Behavior 
The TPB posits that human behavioral intentions are predicted by three key constructs: (a) an attitudinal 
component; (b) a perceived behavior control component; and (c) a social influence component. This 
theory has been widely used when studying the adoption of technology to explain variations in individual 
acceptance and use of technology (Davis, 1989; Venkatesh, Morris, Davis, & Davis, 2003). Lai et al. 
(2012) used the TPB to examine factors that affect undergraduate students’ use of technology for learning 
across different disciplines and found that it is a useful framework to help identify key determinants of 
students’ adoption of technology and the interactions thereof.   
While the TPB provides useful constructs to explain an individual’s acceptance of technology, the 
underlying structures of and psychological antecedents to the key constructs are nevertheless context and 
domain specific (Straub, 2009; Venkatesh, Davis, & Morris, 2007). Thus, I also referred to the domain of 
Chun Lai A Framework for Developing Self-Directed Technology Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 102 
self-regulated language learning to further identify factors that are critical to self-directed learning and the 
relationships thereof. Mercer (2011) points out that self-directed language learning behavior is contingent 
on “a learner’s sense of agency involving their belief systems, and the control parameters of motivation, 
affect, metacognitive/self-regulatory skills, as well as actual abilities and the affordances, actual and 
perceived in specific settings” (p. 9). This conceptualization of self-directed behavior as a product of the 
interaction between individual psychological factors (such as learner beliefs, dispositions and styles, 
motivation, knowledge of study tactics and learning strategies, skills) and contextual characteristics (such 
as the context for learning, resources, time, and influences from teachers) is common to several models of 
self-regulated behaviors (Weinstein, Woodruff, & Awalt, 2007; Winnie & Hadwin, 1998). I referred to 
this body of literature to identify additional factors and relationships that may influence language 
learners’ use of technology.  
Below are the key constructs and hypothesized inter-relationships, as suggested by the relevant literature, 
which may influence language learners’ self-directed technology use. These factors are the ones that have 
been placed into the SEM model. 
Attitudinal Factors 
Attitudinal factors are beliefs about the value of and affective feelings towards technology use for 
performance. Three attitudinal factors were included in the conceptual model as predictors of 
undergraduate students’ self-regulated use of technology for language learning: perceived usefulness, 
attitude to technology use, and educational compatibility. Perceived usefulness (belief in enhanced 
performance through the technological behavior) and attitude to technology use (affective appraisal of the 
technological behavior) have been shown to be robust predictors of individuals’ intention to use 
technology (Lee, Kozar, & Larsen, 2003; Yousafzai, Foxall, & Pallister, 2007). They have also been 
shown to have a significant impact on students’ intentions to adopt technological resources for learning 
(Clark, Logan, Lucklin, Mee, & Oliver, 2009; Lai, Lei, & Wang, 2012; Šumak, Polancic, & Hericko, 
2010). Educational compatibility—the perceived compatibility between the technological behavior and 
learning preferences and values—is another belief variable that has significant direct and indirect effects 
on students’ adoption of technology for learning (Chen, 2011; Lai et al., 2012). When interviewing 
foreign language learners on their selective use of technology for learning outside language classrooms, 
Lai and Gu (2011) found that perceived usefulness of technology for language learning and perceived 
compatibility of technology use with one’s language learning beliefs and approaches predicted whether 
learners would use technology to self-regulate their language learning experience. Barrs (2010) also found 
that perceived compatibility affected student participation in self-directed language learning in self-access 
centers. Therefore, the following hypotheses were proposed for this current study:  
Hypothesis 1: Perceived usefulness (PU) influences students’ technology use directly and 
indirectly via attitude to technology use. 
Hypothesis 2: Attitude to technology use (ATU) directly influences students’ technology 
use. 
Hypothesis 3: Educational compatibility (EC) influences students’ technology use directly 
and indirectly via perceived usefulness and attitude to technology use. 
Attitudinal Factor Antecedents 
The literature on self-regulated learning suggests a few antecedents of these attitudinal factors. One 
significant antecedent might be language learning motivation. Interest and task value beliefs (i.e., interest 
in and beliefs about the importance of learning) are precursors to self-initiated efforts to learn (Weinstein, 
Woodruff, & Awalt, 2007; Winnie & Hadwin, 1998; Zimmerman, 2011) and have been found to affect 
foreign language learners’ autonomous learning behaviors and their self-regulated use of technology for 
learning (Ferede, 2010; Hyland, 2004; Lai & Gu, 2011). Therefore, learners’ interest and task value 
Chun Lai A Framework for Developing Self-Directed Technology Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 103 
beliefs in learning a language may influence whether learners are willing to exert agency in managing 
their language learning experience and thus whether they are likely to perceive the use of technology as a 
worthwhile and value-added after-school endeavor to pursue. Based on the literature above, the following 
hypothesis was proposed: 
Hypothesis 4: Language learning motivation (LLM) influences students’ technology use 
directly, and indirectly via perceived usefulness, attitude to technology use, and self-
regulated learning. 
Two other possible antecedents to the attitudinal factor are language learning approaches and situated 
interpretation of the learning context. These two variables may affect perceived educational compatibility 
between technology use and language learning. Language learners who believe in seeking language use 
opportunities beyond the classroom have been found to be more likely to take responsibilities for self-
directing and self-managing their language learning and use technologies to regulate their language 
learning experience (Lai & Gu, 2011; Mercer, 2011). Such language learning approaches may also 
correlate positively with language learning motivation: on the one hand, belief in expanding language use 
and learning opportunities enhances learners’ interest in the language; on the other, interest in learning the 
language and understanding the culture strengthens the belief in the importance of expanding language 
learning opportunities outside the classroom. Learners’ situated interpretation of the learning context 
might be another antecedent of educational compatibility. What students set out to do in their studies is a 
situated interpretation of the study situation (Goodyear & Ellis, 2008), and teacher expectancies, the 
curriculum, course requirements, and assessment regimes have been found to be correlated with the 
frequency and nature of students’ technology use (Selwyn, 2008). Thus, students’ perceptions of the 
course expectations and approaches to achieving good assessment results may determine whether they 
perceive the use of technology as compatible with their learning needs and expectancies. The above 
reasoning led to the following hypotheses: 
Hypothesis 5: Language learning approaches (LLA) indirectly influence students’ 
technology use via educational compatibility; language learning approaches positively 
correlate with language learning motivation.  
Hypothesis 6: Situated interpretation of technology use (SI) indirectly influences students’ 
technology use via educational compatibility.  
Perceived Behavioral Control 
Perceived behavioral control refers to people’s perceptions of their ability and the availability of the 
support necessary to achieve an expected behavior. This study used computer self-efficacy, self-
regulation, and facilitating conditions to capture perceived behavioral control (Mercer, 2011; Weinstein 
et al., 2007).  
Computer self-efficacy refers to users’ perceptions of their capability to use computers to execute actions 
to achieve an intended outcome (Compeau & Higgins, 1995). It has been found to have a significant, 
positive influence on students’ intention to use technology (Chang & Tung, 2008; Hsu, Wang, & Chiu, 
2009), since efficacy beliefs are the foundation of human agency (Bandura, 2001). Rahimi and Katal 
(2012) found that English language learners’ experience and familiarity with podcasts predicted whether 
they would use podcasting for English learning on their own. In the context of self-directed use of 
technology for learning, computer self-efficacy refers to confidence in one’s ability to select appropriate 
technological solutions and utilize the chosen technologies effectively to meet learning needs (Ertmer & 
Ottenbreit-Leftwich, 2010; Lai et al., 2012). Lai and Gu (2011) found in their own interviews with foreign 
language learners that one major obstacle to self-regulated technology use for language learning was the 
lack of the knowledge and skills in selecting and using technologies appropriately and effectively for 
learning. Levy (2009) highlighted the importance of helping learners make informed choices on 
Chun Lai A Framework for Developing Self-Directed Technology Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 104 
technology use so as not to be overwhelmed by the diversity of technologies available for learning. 
Closely related to computer self-efficacy are learners’ self-regulation skills. Self-regulation skills have 
been found to be closely related to learner-initiated use of technology for learning in general (Bernacki, 
Aguilar, & Byrenes, 2011) and for self-initiated use of technology for language learning in particular (Lai 
& Gu, 2011). Thus, I hypothesize that self-regulation skills might not only affect student technology use 
for learning directly, but also indirectly through computer self-efficacy. 
Facilitating conditions refer to the perceived availability of support in the environment that encourages 
and facilitates the adoption of technology. In the educational context, sources of support mainly come 
from teachers and peers. Research has found that teachers and peers play important roles in shaping 
students’ technology use (Lai et al., 2012; Margaryan & Littlejohn, 2008). Instructors’ feedback and 
guidance on possible technology-enhanced materials for learning have been found to be critical to 
enhance learners’ self-directed use of technology for language learning (Castellano, Mynard, & Rubesch, 
2011; Lai & Gu, 2011; Deepwell & Malik, 2008). Resources available in the peer networks that learners 
were in close contact with were also found to affect language learners’ frequency of technology use for 
learning (Zhang, 2010). Facilitating conditions are found to be a robust predictor of technology adoption 
(Lee et al., 2003; Yousafzai et al., 2007), and they also moderate the influences of computer self-efficacy 
and perceived usefulness (Hsu et al., 2009; Lai et al., 2012). This suggests that there might also be a 
positive correlation between facilitating conditions and situated interpretation: perceived institutional 
expectations with respect to using technology for language learning may help attune students to the 
support available from peers and teachers, and support from peers and teachers may in turn reinforce 
perceptions of institutional expectations regarding technology use. Therefore, the following hypotheses 
were proposed: 
Hypothesis 7: Computer self-efficacy (CSE) directly influences students’ technology use. 
Hypothesis 8: Self-regulation (SR) influences students’ technology use directly, and 
indirectly via computer self-efficacy. 
Hypothesis 9: Facilitating conditions (FC) influence students’ technology use directly, and 
indirectly via computer self-efficacy and perceived usefulness, and are positively 
correlated with situated interpretation.  
Subjective Norm 
Subjective norm refers to one’s perception of whether or not significant others think a certain behavior 
should be performed. Research studies have found that significant others, such as teachers and peers, 
shape university students’ use of technology (Margaryan & Littlejohn, 2008) and affect their decision to 
use technology and the frequency of their use of technology to support their language learning (Lai & Gu, 
2011; Zhang, 2010). Subjective norm is hypothesized to have both a direct impact and an indirect impact 
on technology adoption (Venkatesh & Davis, 2000). Its direct predictive power may not be salient in 
voluntary settings (Chen, 2011; Venkatesh & Davis, 2000), but its indirect effect via perceived usefulness 
has been found (a) to stand regardless of whether the setting for the adoption of technology is voluntary or 
mandatory, and (b) to hold true in educational contexts (van Raaij & Schepers, 2008; Teo, 2010). This 
suggests that there might be a positive correlation between subjective norm and situated interpretation 
since peers and teachers are the major sources of social influence on university students’ learning 
behavior; students’ perceptions of peers’ and teachers’ expectations concerning the use of technology for 
language learning go hand in hand with their perceptions of the institutional expectations regarding this 
aspect. Thus, the following hypothesis was proposed:   
Hypothesis 10: Subjective norm (SN) indirectly influences students’ technology use via 
perceived usefulness and is positively correlated with situated interpretation.   
Thus, using the TPB as a frame of reference, I have synthesized the literature on the adoption of 
Chun Lai A Framework for Developing Self-Directed Technology Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 105 
technology and the literature on self-regulated language learning and propose a conceptual model (see 
Figure 1) that depicts the interactive relationships that predict language learners’ self-directed use of 
technology for learning. This preliminary conceptual model with hypothesized key predictors and inter-
relationships was then tested against the research data to examine whether this conceptualized structure 
was reflected in the research data. Using the results from this preliminary model, a second corrected 
model was developed and analyzed. 
 
Figure 1. The conceptual model. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
Participants 
The participants in this study were second language learners recruited from one university in Hong Kong. 
The study was announced through course coordinators of foreign language departments and through on-
campus flyers posted in libraries and in instructional buildings for modern language courses. Participants 
could either complete an online or paper survey. 373 language learners completed the online survey and 
six participants filled out the paper survey. After discarding 40 incomplete questionnaires, a data set of 
339 usable questionnaires remained, an adequate sample size for structural equation modeling since the 
general rule of thumb is that number of participants should be no less than 200, or 5–20 times the number 
of parameters (i.e., variables and hypothesized relationships) to be estimated (Kline, 2005).  
Participants ranged from 18 to 31 years of age, with the average age being 21. Most participants were 
female (75%), and most were in the first two years of their studies (1st year: 41%; 2nd year: 30%; 3rd year 
and above: 29%). The participants were from diverse disciplinary backgrounds, though around 40% were 
studying in fields related to language or culture-studies. At the time of the study, the participants were 
studying a variety of languages, with 24% studying resource-rich languages that are abundant in their 
immediate environment (Chinese or English), and 76% studying resource-poor languages to which 
students had limited exposure in the immediate environment (e.g., French, German, Japanese, Korean, 
Chun Lai A Framework for Developing Self-Directed Technology Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 106 
Spanish, etc.). A large proportion of the participants (62%) rated themselves at the beginner level, and 
only a small number (7%) rated themselves at the advanced proficiency level. The participants rated 
themselves as having relatively high levels of motivation: when asked whether they were highly 
motivated to understand the language and culture, 68% of the participants partly agreed or agreed, 16% 
strongly agreed, and only 16% disagreed; when asked whether they spent a lot of spare time learning the 
language, 62% of the participants partly agreed or agreed, 8% strongly agreed, and 30% disagreed.  
Materials 
A survey collected data on students’ self-reported frequency of the use of technology for language learning 
outside language class and several predictor variables (See Appendix A for information on each construct 
and its indicating items). The dependent variable, technology use, assessed the frequency of technology use 
to support various needs in language learning. A 6-point Likert scale was used, with 1 indicating never, 2 
indicating less than 1 hour a week, 3 indicating 1–3 hours, 4 indicating 4–7 hours, 5 indicating 7–14 hours, 
and 6 indicating more than 14 hours. To ensure this construct reflected self-directed use of technology for 
learning, we included at the beginning of this section an item that measured the frequency of technology 
use, required by a teacher, to finish language class assignments, and excluded this item when analyzing 
self-directed technology use. All the independent constructs were rated on a 6-point Likert-type scale, 
with 1 being strongly disagree and 6 being strongly agree. In addition, some demographic characteristics 
of the students (gender, age, major, years of language study, proficiency in the language being studied) 
were collected. The survey items were constructed referring to previous works on language learners’ self-
regulated use of technology for learning and were adapted from existent instruments in technology 
adoption literature to fit the specific context of language learning (Lai & Gu, 2011; Lai et al., 2012, Chen, 
2011; Teo, 2010; Venkatesh et al., 2003) (Appendix A). The survey items were pilot tested and revised in 
several iterations with language learners at the university where the study was conducted.  
Modeling and Analysis 
The survey response data were analyzed using structural equation modeling (SEM) to evaluate and 
modify the hypothesized theoretical model (i.e., the preliminary conceptual model) so as to capture the 
complex relationships between various constructs that affect students’ self-regulated use of technology for 
language learning. SEM was used as the analytical approach because it allows the modeling and testing of 
complex patterns of relationships as a whole. SEM also helps to capture the relationships more accurately 
through taking into account the measurement errors of observed indictor variables (i.e., the variables that 
can be directly observed) and controlling for correlations between dimensions of latent constructs (i.e., 
the variables that cannot be directly observed but assessed indirectly through a number of indicator 
variables). SEM captures the relationships of indicating items to the measured latent constructs in the 
measurement model, namely how well the items relate to the specific construct they intend to measure 
(Appendix A). For example, the dependent variable (technology use for language learning, henceforth 
abbreviated as technology use) was measured by five indicating items. SEM also examines the 
relationships between the latent constructs (the independent and dependent variables) in the structural 
model, namely how the constructs relate to each other (Figure 2). It allows us to understand the total 
effect, direct effect, and indirect effect of the 10 independent variables (language learning approach, 
situated interpretation, educational compatibility, perceived usefulness, subjective norm, facilitating 
conditions, computer self-efficacy, self-regulation, language learning motivation, and attitude to 
technology use) on the dependent variable (technology use). The total effect refers to the magnitude of 
one variable’s influence on another. The total effect of a variable on another can be decomposed into 
direct effects and indirect effects. Direct effects refer to the part of the influence that is not transmitted by 
intervening variables. For example, perceived usefulness’s effect on technology use was hypothesized to 
consist of two parts: a direct effect (perceived usefulness  technology use) and an indirect effect mediated 
by attitude to technology use (perceived usefulness  attitude to technology use  technology use). 
Chun Lai A Framework for Developing Self-Directed Technology Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 107 
The model was estimated using Amos 20.0. Maximum Likelihood Estimation was used to fit the models 
and estimate parameters. The absolute fit indices, the χ2 statistic, the parsimonious indices, root mean 
square of approximation (RMSEA), and the incremental fit indices, the comparative fit index (CFI) and 
Tucker-Lewis index (TLI), were used to assess the model fit. The absolute fit indices measures whether 
the variables are orthogonal (i.e., independent). Ideally, a non-significant χ2 value would indicate good fit 
of the research data to the model; however, because the χ2 statistic is very sensitive to the effect of sample 
size, normed χ2 statistics—adjusted by their degrees of freedom—are used often used to assess model fit. 
The recommended threshold for χ2/df is less than 2.0. The parsimonious index, RMSEA, indicates the 
badness-of-fit of the model (larger values signal worse fit), and these indices favor models with fewer 
parameters. The cut-off point for RMSEA is .06. The incremental fit indices—the Comparative Fit Index 
(CFI) and Tucker-Lewis Index (TLI)—measure the goodness-of-fit of the model; values close to .95 
indicate good-fit (Hu & Bentler, 1999; Tabachnick & Fidell, 2007).  
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Conceptual Model 
Table 1. Comparison of Conceptual and Final Structural Models (Standardized Regression Coefficients, 
Two-Way Correlations of the Constructs, and Goodness-Fit Indices)  
IV 
Conceptual Model  Final Model 
DV Mediator  DV Mediator 
 
TU AT PU SR CSE EC  TU PU SR CSE EC 
β β β β β β  β β β β β 
AT  -.06            
PU .15* .01      .26**     
CSE -.10           .42*** 
FC .02  .19**  .20***    .35*** .37*** .15*  
EC .11 .89*** .18**      .17**    
SN   .11^         .16** 
SR .07    .49***      .47***  
LLM  .43*** .05 .40*** .70***    .40*** .26*** .64***   
LLA      .23***      .15* 
SI      .47***      .26*** 
Two-Way 
Correlation SN SI EP  SN SI EP 
FC  .13***   .58*** .35***  
SN  .47***    .48***  
LLM   .35***    .31*** 
Model fit index  
χ2 (N, df) χ2 (339, 644) = 1463.97  χ2 (339, 544) = 1122.86 
χ2/df 2.27  1.87 
CFI .89  .93 
TLI .88  .92 
RMSEA [95% CI] .061 [.057, .065]  .051 [.046, .055] 
Note. *** = p < .001; ** = p <.01; * = p < .05. CFI = comparative fit index; TLI =Tucker–Lewis index; RMSEA = root-mean-
square error of approximation; CI =confidence interval. N = 339. 
Chun Lai A Framework for Developing Self-Directed Technology Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 108 
The conceptual model had poor model fit indices (χ2/df = 2.27, CFI = .89, TLI = .88, RMSEA = .06) and 
high correlation between educational compatibility and attitude to technology use (r = .82, p < .001). This 
resulted in a negative regression coefficient of attitude on technology use (β = -.07, p = .71), and 
thehypothesized mediating effects of attitude on technology use were not working properly either (see 
Table 1). Therefore, we removed attitude to technology use from the model and its associated direct and 
indirect effects, a typical solution for problems with multicollinearity (Tabachnick & Fidell, 2007). 
Final Model  
The final model had a χ2/df value was 1.87 and a RMSEA value of .05, suggesting a good fit of the model 
for the data. The CFI value was .93 and the TLI value was .92, which were close to .95. All indicators 
significantly loaded on their specified latent construct, and the means were all above the neutral point of 
the Likert scale (3.5) (Appendix A). The results of the analysis of the final structural model are listed in 
Table 1 and illustrated in Figure 2.  
 
Figure 2. The structural model. All the effects and relationships were significant at p < .05. 
Determinants of the Five Endogenous Variables 
As hypothesized, perceived usefulness and language learning motivation directly and significantly 
predicted language learners’ self-directed use of technology for language learning, resulting in an R2 
of .29. The other hypothesized independent variables affected technology use indirectly through intricate 
interactions with these two direct determinants and between themselves. The final model also illustrated 
the determinants of four additional endogenous variables: perceived usefulness, educational compatibility, 
computer self-efficacy, and self-regulation. These four endogenous variables were explained by their 
Chun Lai A Framework for Developing Self-Directed Technology Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 109 
determinants in the amounts of 30%, 40%, 30%, and 54%, which is to say that the determinants could 
account for 30%, 40%, 30%, and 54% of the variations within perceived usefulness, educational 
compatibility, computer self-efficacy, and self-regulation. 
Technology Use: The Direct Product of Personal Will and Buy-in and the Indirect Product of Social 
Support 
Within this model, language learning motivation and perceived usefulness were the two dominant 
predictors of technology use. Language learning motivation, operationalized as interest and task value 
beliefs, was found to be a major attitudinal construct that drives self-initiated technology use for language 
learning with a total effect size of .50 (p < .001). It not only influenced technology use directly (β = .43, 
p < .001), but also exerted an indirect effect of .07 (p < .01) via perceived usefulness and self-regulation. 
This finding confirms the importance of students’ motivational beliefs, including task value beliefs, as the 
imperative precursor of self-regulated behavior (Weinstein et al., 2007; Winnie & Hadwin, 1998; 
Zimmerman, 2011). The more motivated students are towards learning the target language, the more 
likely they will exert their agency in using technology to support their learning experience outside their 
language classes (Lai & Gu, 2011; Mercer, 2011).  
Table 2. Standardized Direct-, Indirect-, and Total-Effects of the Research Model 
Outcome Determinant Mediator  Standardized Estimates 
Direct 
Effect 
Indirect 
Effect 
Total 
Effect 
Technology 
Use (R2 = .29) 
Language Learning 
Motivation (LLM) 
 .43 (.07)***  .50*** 
Perceived Usefulness 
(PU) 
 .07 (.03)** 
Self-Regulation (SR)  .01 (.00)** 
Perceived Usefulness 
(PU) 
 .20 (.09)**  .20** 
Educational 
Compatibility (EC) 
Perceived Usefulness 
(PU) 
 .04 (.02)** .04** 
Computer Self-
Efficacy (CSE) 
Educational 
Compatibility (EC) 
 .02 (.01)** .02** 
Self-Regulation (SR) Computer Self-
Efficacy (CSE) 
 .01 (.01)** .01** 
Facilitating conditions 
(FC) 
Perceived Usefulness 
(PU) 
 .09 (.04)** .10** 
Self-Regulation (SR)  .01 (.00)** 
Computer Self-
Efficacy (CSE) 
 .004 (.00)** 
Language Learning 
Approaches (LLA) 
Educational 
Compatibility (EC) 
 .01 (.01)* .01* 
Situated Interpretation 
(SI) 
Educational 
Compatibility (EC) 
 .01 (.01)** .01** 
Subjective Norm (SN) Educational 
Compatibility (EC) 
 .01 (.00)** .01** 
Note: ***p < .001; **p < .01; *p < .05. The first number reports the effect size; the number in the parentheses is the standard error.  
Consistent with previous literature, perceived usefulness was found to be a significant predictor of 
students’ technology acceptance for language learning, with a significant direct effect of .20 (p < .01) 
(Clark et al., 2009; Lee et al., 2003; Šumak et al., 2010). Perceived usefulness, an important attitudinal 
construct, also functioned as the only venue through which the other predictors exerted their influences on 
Chun Lai A Framework for Developing Self-Directed Technology Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 110 
technology use. When facing various potential resources and venues that they can potentially utilize to 
construct their personalized language learning ecologies, language learners’ buy-in of the usefulness of 
technologies for various learning purposes is particularly crucial in influencing their decisions on whether 
or not to use technologies to support language learning (Lai & Gu, 2011).  
The other seven independent variables, with the exception of facilitating conditions, all had significant yet 
minimal indirect effects on technology use mainly through perceived usefulness or educational 
compatibility (see Table 2). Facilitating conditions had a small significant indirect effect on technology 
use through perceived usefulness, self-regulation, and computer self-efficacy (β = .10, p < .01). Thus, 
these findings are in line with previous studies showing that technological resources shared by teachers 
and peers and the tips and technical support from peers help students to realize the potentials of 
technology for language learning, encourage them to take up control in learning, and boost their 
confidence in their ability to capitalize on the potentials. This increased confidence ultimately increases 
the frequency of their use of technology to support language learning (Hartshorne & Ajjan, 2009; 
Lai et al., 2012). 
Thus, technology use appears to be reliant upon students’ interest and task value beliefs in learning the 
language, their perceptions of the usefulness of such an activity for language learning, and the perceived 
availability of support, both pedagogical and technical, from their language instructors and peers. Since 
perceived usefulness is a strong direct predictor and the major mediator for technology use, and is an 
attitudinal component that is subjective to intervention (Venkatesh et al., 2007), it is crucial to understand 
its antecedents. 
Table 3. Determinants of Perceived Usefulness 
Outcome Determinant Mediator  Standardized Estimates 
Direct Indirect Total 
Perceived 
Usefulness  
(R2 = .30) 
 
Educational 
Compatibility (EC) 
 .20 (.05)**  .20** 
Computer Self 
Efficacy (CSE) 
Educational 
Compatibility 
 .06 (.02)** .06** 
Self-Regulation (SR) Computer Self-
Efficacy (CSE) 
 .04 (.01)** .04** 
Facilitating conditions 
(FC) 
 .27 (.09)***  .30*** 
Self-Regulation (SR)  .02 (.01)** 
Computer Self-
Efficacy (CSE) 
 .02 (.01)** 
Language Learning 
Approaches (LLA) 
Educational 
Compatibility (EC) 
 .04 (.02)* .04* 
Situated Interpretation 
(SI) 
Educational 
Compatibility (EC) 
 .05 (.02)** .05** 
Subjective Norm (SN) Educational 
Compatibility (EC) 
 .02 (.01)** .02** 
Language Learning 
Motivation (LLM) 
 .37 (.05)***  .39*** 
 Self-Regulation (SR)  .02 (.01)* 
Note: ***p < .001; **p < .01; *p < .05. The main number reports the effect size; the number in the parentheses is the standard error.  
Perceived Usefulness: The Combined Effect of Personal Will, Social Support, and Perceived Fit 
Three factors influenced perceived usefulness: language learning motivation (β = .39, p < .001), 
facilitating conditions (β = 0.29, p < .001), and educational compatibility (β = .20, p < .01). These three 
determinants accounted for 30% of the variance in perceived usefulness (see Table 3). The stronger the 
Chun Lai A Framework for Developing Self-Directed Technology Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 111 
interest and task value beliefs students have for learning a particular language, the greater the teacher and 
peer support for technology-enhanced language learning, and the closer the connection the students feel 
between technology use and their language learning expectations, the more likely they will perceive the 
usefulness of technology use for language learning (Lai et al., 2012; Pynoo et al., 2011). In particular, 
educational compatibility served not only as a significant direct predictor of but also as the major 
mediator of other variables’ effects on perceived usefulness. 
Educational Compatibility: The Interactive Outcome of Personal Psychological Traits and Contextual 
Expectations 
Educational compatibility was found to be determined by a combination of psychological and contextual 
factors. The influential personal psychological traits included computer self-efficacy (direct effect: 
β = .42, p < .001), self-regulation (indirect effect: β = .23, p < .01), epistemological belief (direct effect: 
β = .15, p < .05) and language learning motivation. The affecting contextual expectations included 
situated interpretation (direct effect: β = .26, p < .001), facilitation conditions (indirect effect: β = .23, 
p < .001), and subjective norm (direct effect: β = .16, p < .01). These variables explained 40% of the 
variance in educational compatibility (see Table 4). The psychological variables had a greater impact on 
educational compatibility than contextual factors. For students to perceive the compatibility of technology 
use with their language learning expectations, they need to (a) believe in autonomous out-of-class 
language use and in constructing learning experience themselves (Tsai & Chuang, 2005), (b) have faith in 
their abilities to do so and to capitalize on the potentials of technologies (Chow, Herold, Choo, & Chan, 
2012), and at the same time (c) perceive the expectations concerning and the supports available for 
technology use from their educational contexts (Goodyear & Ellis, 2008). 
Table 4. Determinants of Educational Compatibility 
Outcome Determinant Mediator  Standardized Estimates 
Direct Indirect Total 
Educational 
Compatibility 
(R2 = .40) 
Computer Self-
Efficacy (CSE) 
 .42 (.05)***  .42*** 
Self-Regulation (SR) Computer Self-
Efficacy 
 .24 (.05)** .24** 
Facilitating conditions 
(FC) 
Self-Regulation  .12 (.03)** .23** 
Computer Self 
Efficacy 
 .10 (.05)** 
Language Learning 
Approaches (LLA) 
 .15 (.09)*  .15* 
Situated Interpretation 
(SI) 
 .26 (.07)***  .26*** 
Subjective Norm (SN)  .16 (.05)**  .16** 
Language Learning 
Motivation (LLM) 
Self-Regulation  .11(.02)** .11** 
Note: ***p < .001; **p < .01; *p < .05. The main number reports the effect size; the number in the parentheses is the standard error.  
Computer Self-Efficacy: The Product of Social Support and Individual Skill 
Computer self-efficacy was found to be largely determined by self-regulation (β = .47, p < .001), and the 
effect was completely direct. As is shown in Table 5, facilitating conditions also exerted a direct effect on 
computer self-efficacy (β = .15, p < .05) as well as an indirect effect via self-regulation (β = .30, p < .05). 
Language learning motivation’s effect was mediated through self-regulation (β = .28, p < .01). These 
three variables accounted for 30% of the variance in computer self-efficacy. This is in line with research 
showing that the greater the skills learners have in managing their learning process and the more support 
Chun Lai A Framework for Developing Self-Directed Technology Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 112 
they have to facilitate their effective use of technology, the greater confidence they have in their ability to 
use technology effectively for learning (Lai et al., 2012; Moos & Azevedo, 2009). 
Table 5. Determinants of Computer Self-Efficacy 
Outcome Determinant Mediator Standardized Estimates 
Direct Indirect Total 
Computer 
Self-Efficacy 
(R2 = .30) 
Facilitating conditions 
(FC) 
 .15 (.10)*  .45* 
Self-Regulation (SR)  .30 (.07)* 
Language Learning 
Motivation (LLM) 
Self-Regulation (SR)  .28 (.05)** .28** 
Self-Regulation (SR)  .47 (.09)***  .47*** 
Note: ***p < .001; **p < .01; *p < .05. The first number reports the effect size; the number in the parentheses is the standard error.  
Self-Regulation: The Influence of Personal Will and Social Support 
Facilitating conditions and language learning motivation significantly and directly affected self-
regulation. Language learning motivation had a large effect size on self-regulation (β = .64, p < .001), 
and facilitating conditions also showed a moderate effect (β = .37, p < .001). These two factors accounted 
for 54% of the variance in self-regulation (See Table 6). These findings indicate that self-regulated 
language learning is influenced both by individual, cognitive variables and by social factors: strong 
interest and task-value beliefs in learning the language drive learners to exert agency over themselves to 
control their language learning experience (Artino & Stephens, 2009); and ideas and support from 
teachers and peers in using technology to support learning also orient learners to play a more active role 
in their learning process (Hadwin, Oshige, Gress, & Winne, 2009).  
Table 6. Determinants of Self-Regulation 
Outcome Determinant Mediator  Standardized Estimates 
Direct Indirect Total 
Self-regulation 
(R2 = .54) 
Facilitating conditions (FC)  .37 (.09)***  .37*** 
Language Learning 
Motivation (LLM) 
 .64 (.05)***  .64*** 
Note: ***p < .001; **p < .01; *p < .05. The first number reports the effect size; the number in the parentheses is the standard error.  
All in all, findings from this study revealed that language learning motivation, perceived usefulness, and 
facilitating conditions were the major predictive factors for language learners’ self-regulated use of 
technology for learning. Perceived usefulness and educational compatibility were the two major factors 
that mediated most of the relationships that affected technology use. Language learning motivation and 
facilitating conditions had the most influence on the majority of the psychological and sociocultural 
factors that affected technology use through either serving as precursors of or holding interactive 
relationships with them.  
Interactions of Attitudinal, Perceived Control, and Social Influence Components in the Model 
Ajzen’s (1985) Theory of Planned Behavior identified three major determinant components that influence 
individuals’ behavior decision making: an attitudinal component, a perceived control of behavior 
component, and a social influence component. In this study, the three constructs of the attitudinal 
component appeared to play major roles in technology use: language learning motivation functioned as 
the dominant predictor, and perceived usefulness and educational compatibility served as two levels of 
mediating venues through which the rest of the factors exerted an influence on technology use. This 
Chun Lai A Framework for Developing Self-Directed Technology Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 113 
finding suggests that in the context of self-directed technology use for language learning, the attitudinal 
component is most critical in shaping learners’ digital choices.  
More importantly, the attitudinal component mediated the effects of the other two components on the 
adoption of technology. The perceived control of behavior component, consisting of facilitating 
conditions, computer self-efficacy, and self-regulation, exerted its influence on technology use through the 
attitudinal component: facilitating conditions exerted its influence through perceived usefulness and 
computer self-efficacy via educational compatibility. The social influence component interacted with the 
attitudinal component through the direct effect of subjective norm on educational compatibility: the 
positive opinions and expectations of significant others helped language learners become more attuned to 
the compatibility of technology use with language learning and consequently raised their awareness of its 
potentials for language learning. The social influence component also interacted with the perceived 
control of behavior component through a significant positive correlation between subjective norm and 
facilitating conditions: on the one hand, the more teachers and peers expected and encouraged students to 
use technology, the more likely they were to share resources and strategies to help students make 
effective use of technology for language learning; on the other, the resources and strategies from teachers 
and peers reinforced students’ perceptions of their positive opinions of technology use.    
Discrepancies between the Conceptual Model and the Structural Model 
Table 7 shows the results of the hypothesis tests and the discrepancies between the conceptual model and 
the final model. Overall, the ten selected variables were mostly found to affect language learners’ self-
directed use of technology for language learning as hypothesized except attitude to technology use.  
Table 7. Hypothesis Testing and Discrepancies between Conceptual Model and Final Model 
Hypotheses Direct Paths           Result Indirect Paths           Result 
H1 (effect of perceived usefulness, PU) PU  TU √   
H2 (effect of attitude to technology use, ATU) ATU  TU ⊗   
H3 (effects of educational compatibility, EC) EC  TU ⊗ EC  PU √ 
EC  ATU ⊗ 
H4 (effects of language learning motivation, LLM) LLM  TU √ LLM  PU √ 
LLM  SR √ 
LLM  ATU ⊗ 
H5 (effect of language learning approach, LLA)   LLA  EC √ 
LLA * LLM  √ 
H6 (effect of situated interpretation, SI)   SI  EC √ 
H7 (effect of computer self-efficacy, CSE) CSE  TU ⊗   
H8 (effects of self-regulation, SR) SR  TU ⊗ SR  CSE √ 
H9 (effects of facilitating conditions, FC) FC  TU ⊗ FC  PU √ 
FC  CSE √ 
FC * SI √ 
H10 (indirect effect of subjective norm, SN)   SN  PU ⊗ 
SN * SI √ 
Added Path & Relationships 
SN  EC FC  SR CSE  EC SN * FC 
Chun Lai A Framework for Developing Self-Directed Technology Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 114 
Note. √ indicates that the result was supported; ⊗ indicates that the result was not supported. 
Attitude to technology use was found to be highly correlated with educational compatibility and interacted 
abnormally with other variables due to this high correlation, and was thus subsequently dropped from 
analysis. The hypothesized effects and relationships of perceived usefulness, language learning 
motivation, and facilitating conditions were largely supported. The hypotheses of language learning 
approaches and situated interpretation serving as antecedents of educational compatibility were also 
supported. However, the hypothesized effects of attitude to technology use, computer self-efficacy, 
subjective norm and educational compatibility on self-directed technology use were largely unsupported. 
Instead, they impacted technology use mainly through educational compatibility. Thus, the major 
discrepancies between the conceptual model and the structure model were that attitude to technology use 
did not play the hypothesized significant role, but rather educational compatibility replaced it as a more 
determinant player. Attitude to technology use, namely, whether students perceived technology use 
making learning fun and as something to look forward to, failed to exert the hypothesized effect on Hong 
Kong undergraduate students’ self-directed use technology for learning. A plausible explanation is that 
people’s appraisal of the importance and relevance of an attitude object affects its potential impact on 
behavior (Ajzen & Fishbein, 2005). Hong Kong students tend to regard learning as a serious undertaking 
(Rao, 1996) and valued diligence and perseverance in English learning (Shi, 2006). Thus, whether 
technology use fits their learning expectancies might have mattered more than whether it makes learning 
fun in shaping their decisions on technology use for learning. Thus, this study joins a few emerging 
studies to advocate giving greater attention to the importance of the perceived fit between technology use 
and learning preferences and values in shaping students’ technology adoption behavior (Chen, 2011; 
Slyke, Dick, Case, & Ilie, 2010).   
The final model highlighted the effects of perceived usefulness, language learning motivation, and 
educational compatibility and suggested that the attitudinal factors play the dominant role in shaping self-
directed use of technology for language learning. The attitudinal component, although repeatedly shown 
to be significant, has often been found to work parallel with the perceived control component and social 
influence component to influence technology adoption. However, in this study we found it played a 
dominant role and mediated the effects of perceived control and social influence. This finding makes 
sense in the context of self-directed technology use for language learning: most of the technology-
enhanced language learning opportunities exist in the common information communication technological 
platforms and venues that learners frequently use in their daily life, and thus the roles of perceived control 
and social influences might be relatively less critical to technology adoption in this context than other 
subject matters. The findings suggest that in cases where technological resources for learning are 
abundant and are incorporated into daily life, what matters more might be the attitudinal factors that drive 
learners’ willingness to actively incorporate these technological resources into their language learning 
ecology. 
IMPLICATIONS ON EDUCATIONAL INTERVENTION FRAMEWORK 
This study set out to understand factors that determine language learners’ self-directed use of technology 
for learning. The findings concurred with current literature that educational interventions that aim to 
enhance self-directed use of technology for language learning should adopt multi-faceted models that 
focus on fostering both learners’ willingness and relevant skills (Holec, 2009; Weinstein et al., 2011). 
More importantly, this study found that among the various components that affect technology use, 
attitudinal factors—the driving forces behind learners’ willingness to use technology—played the most 
critical role, and factors in perceived control and social influence impacted technology adoption mainly 
through influencing these attitudinal factors. This finding suggests that developing a willingness to use 
technology should be at the core of educational interventions. This warrants attention given that most of 
the current literature on enhancing language learners’ use of technology has highlighted the importance of 
Chun Lai A Framework for Developing Self-Directed Technology Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 115 
enhancing relevant skills for technology-enhanced language learning, namely learners’ technological, 
pedagogical, and content knowledge and skills (Hubbard, 2004; Levy, 2009). As an example, consider the 
newly released TESOL Technology Standards (Healey et al., 2011). These standards focus heavily on 
developing students’ digital competencies in selecting appropriately technologies and using them in 
socioculturally and pedagogically appropriate manners. In contrast, learners’ attitudinal factors, the most 
significant determinants of self-directed technology use for language learning, are not given enough 
attention. Thus, to enhance students’ active use of technology outside classrooms for language learning, 
enhancing learners’ willingness for technology use needs to be stressed more consistently.  
This study further identified the underlying structures of and psychological antecedents to the key 
components, and suggested specific aspects that educators can work on to enhance self-directed use of 
technology for language learning.   
First of all, this study identified that language learning motivation, perceived usefulness, and educational 
compatibility are three major attitudinal factors that drive language learners’ willingness to use 
technology, and thus educational interventions need to work on strengthening these attitudinal factors so 
as to enhance learners’ willingness. It also revealed that self-regulation and efficacy in mapping 
appropriate technologies with learning purposes and using them in effective manners form the essential 
skills that language learners need in order to engage in self-regulated technology use, and should be the 
major targets of the skill enhancement component in educational interventions. 
Second, the study identified that perceived usefulness and educational compatibility were shaped by a 
variety of psychological and sociocultural factors, including (a) students’ constructive views of language 
learning that value experiential learning and out-of-class language use opportunities; (b) students’ 
perceived expectations and support from language course instructors and peers in using technology for 
learning; and (c) students’ abilities to regulate their language learning experience and their confidence in 
selecting and using technologies effectively for language learning. Thus, to foster these two sets of 
positive attitudinal beliefs, language instructors and peers have an important role to play. First of all, 
language instructors need to help students adopt a more experiential and autonomous view of language 
learning, which could be achieved explicitly through class discussions and explicit strategy training 
(Macaro, 2006) and implicitly through utilizing more constructivist-oriented language pedagogies, such 
as task-based language teaching (Lai & Lin, 2012) since learner beliefs are dynamic, socially constructed, 
and subject to the influence of the instructional context and the instructors’ teaching styles (Christison, 
2003; Haerle & Bendixen, 2008). Second, language instructors may need to convey explicitly their 
expectations concerning the use of technology to support language learning. These expectations could be 
expressed through teachers actively using technologies themselves in language teaching, involving some 
technology-enhanced language learning activities such as formative or summative assessment 
components, or through teachers introducing technology-enhanced language learning resources or 
materials during class instruction or as learning assignments. Third, measures need to be taken to develop 
students’ confidence in using technologies effectively for language learning since such confidence 
reinforces positive attitudinal beliefs and drives action. Language instructors may develop learners’ 
confidence through helping them to gain successful experience of using technologies for language 
learning both in and outside class and through forming a positive social environment in the classroom that 
strengthens students’ perceptions of the availability of social support for technology use (Clark et al., 
2009; Lai et al., 2012; Moos & Azevedo, 2009).  
Third, the study found that self-regulation seems to determine computer self-efficacy, which suggests that 
developing self-regulation should form the basis of boosting efficacy in selecting and using technologies 
effectively for language learning. Educational interventions need to increase learners’ knowledge and 
skills of using technologies effectively for various language learning purposes and develop their self-
regulation skills simultaneously. Hubbard’s (2004) cyclical approach that engages language learners in 
pedagogical training, personal experimentation with technological applications and collaborative 
Chun Lai A Framework for Developing Self-Directed Technology Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 116 
debriefing, and self-reflection is one such good model that incorporate both components to enhance 
learners’ skills in technology use. But at the same time, we need also to attend to the impacts of 
facilitating conditions on skill development. Thus, in addition to directly training students on relevant 
skills, we need also to make sure instructional moves are in place that expand and strengthen resources 
and strategies that learners can access. For instance, language instructors may construct learning activities 
that engage students in discussing their experience of technology use so as to orient each other towards 
the potential of technology for language learning or form peer support networks to facilitate and 
encourage classmates to share resources, tips, and technical support with each other (Lai et al., 2012; 
McLoughlin & Lee, 2010).  
CONCLUSIONS 
This study set out to identify key predictors of self-directed use of technology for language learning and 
their determinants in order to identify potential interventions to boost language learners’ self-regulated 
use of technology. It identified attitudinal factors as the most critical and suggests that they should be the 
focus of interventions. Through revealing the predictive relationships of various factors, the study further 
suggests areas and directions for intervention. Future studies may empirically test whether or not and how 
the manipulation of different variables affect language learners’ self-regulated use of technology for 
learning and explore various intervention models to foster such behaviors.  
This study has several limitations. First, the study was based on student self-reported data in one 
questionnaire, which made it susceptible to common method variance. However, since the study targeted 
students’ opinions on impersonal objects—technology—rather than socially sensitive topics, the elicited 
data were more likely to represent true opinions and to be less subject to the threat of common method 
variance (Malhotra, Kim, & Patil, 2006). Second, this study measured a small cohort of learners at a 
university in Hong Kong and thus, the applicability of its findings may be limited. It would be interesting 
to examine the predictive relationships in other cultures where students differ in their use of technologies 
and approaches to learning (Gray, Chang, & Kennedy, 2010). Furthermore, the particular characteristics 
of the participants in this study might have biased some research findings and cautions need to be taken in 
interpreting the findings. For one thing, since the majority of the participants self-selected to take the 
online version of the survey, it is quite likely that the data stood for a cohort of learners who were 
relatively more comfortable with technology. This potential participant bias might have caused the non-
significant direct effect of computer self-efficacy on self-directed technology use. For another, the 
participants were of relatively high motivation and their learning motivation profiles might have caused 
the high impact of perceived usefulness and low impact of computer self-efficacy (Huang, Huang, Huang, 
& Lin, 2012). Third, the research model explained 29% of the variance in language learners’ frequency of 
technology use for learning, and a large portion of the variation remains uncaptured in the current model. 
Future research should explore potential variables that are not included in the current model, such as 
affective factors (e.g., students’ enjoyment of various technology-enhanced activities; Straub, 2009), and 
examine various contingency variables that moderate the effects of key constructs on technology 
adoption, such as gender, espoused cultural values and so on (Venkatesh et al., 2007). Future research 
could also use more fine-grained measures of some variables to test the effects of these variables, such as 
assessing the strength of the learners’ immediate social network to measure facilitating conditions (Zhang, 
2010), or including other dimensions of motivation that are critical to self-regulated behaviors (e.g., goal 
orientations, learning efficacy, motivational engagement; Artino & Stephens, 2009; Zimmerman, 2011). 
Finally, using a quantitative lens this study added to our understanding of language learners’ self-directed 
use of technology for learning through constructing a framework that teases apart factors and their 
interactions in shaping self-directed technology use. However, to understand the nuances of this 
phenomenon, qualitative studies are very much needed to provide further insights into the nature of the 
self-directed technology use for language learning and how these and various other factors motivate or 
inhibit learners’ selective use of various technologies for learning.  
Chun Lai A Framework for Developing Self-Directed Technology Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 117 
 
APPENDIX A.  Measurement Model (n = 339) 
Latent Construct Mean SD Unstandardized 
Loading 
Standardized 
Loading 
SE 
Technology Use for Language Learning (TU) (α = .89) (adapted from Lai & Gu, 2011) 
Use technology to learn more about the language 
and culture  
2.88 1.11 1.00 .77*** .07 
Use technology to persist in achieving language 
learning goals 
2.71 1.02 .86 .71*** .07 
Use technology to expand opportunities to use 
the language 
2.81 1.13 1.05 .79*** .07 
Use technology to sustain/enhance motivation 
and interest 
2.97 1.15 1.17 .87*** .07 
Use technology to seek engaging learning 
activity or experience 
2.74 1.13 1.02 .77*** .07 
Perceived Usefulness (PU) (α = .82) (adapted from Lai & Gu, 2011) 
Useful for improving learning experience and 
environment 
4.40 .97 1.00 .67*** .11 
Useful for monitor learning progress 3.76 .98 .90 .60*** .10 
Useful for enhancing motivation and interest 4.50 1.02 1.20 .77*** .11 
Useful for expanding venues of emotional and 
learning support 
4.21 1.09 1.16 .69*** .11 
Useful for expanding language use 
opportunities 
4.47 1.07 1.06 .65*** .11 
Educational Compatibility (EC) (α = .91) (adapted from Chen, 2011) 
Compatible with beliefs about language 
learning 
4.18 .88 1.00 .88*** .05 
Compatible with goals for language learning 4.11 .86 1.00 .90*** .04 
Compatible with current learning situation 4.21 .87 .89 .79*** .05 
Fit into learning style 4.16 .97 .97 .77*** .06 
Computer Self-Efficacy (CSE) (α = .90) (adapted from Lai et al., 2012) 
Confident with abilities in using technologies 
effectively for language learning 
4.12 .92 1.00 .92*** .04 
Confident with abilities in selecting appropriate 
technologies for learning needs 
4.02 .93 .97 .88*** .04 
Confident with abilities in using technologies to 
create enjoyable learning experience 
4.18 .90 .84 .78*** .05 
Facilitating Conditions (FC) (α = .82) (adapted from Lai et al., 2012) 
Often get ideas from teachers on potential 
technologies to use 
3.80 1.09 1.00 .45*** .23 
Have friends/classmates who share strategies of 
using technologies effectively for learning 
3.77 1.02 1.76 .85*** .21 
Have friends/classmates from whom to seek 
advice on technology use for learning 
3.71 1.02 1.83 .88*** .22 
Have friends/classmates from whom to seek 
technical help  
3.69 1.00 1.68 .82*** .20 
Subjective Norm (SI) (α = .86) (adapted from Venktesh et al., 2003) 
People who influence learning behaviors think I 
should use technologies to support language 
learning 
3.75 1.04 1.00 .86*** .05 
People important to me think I should use 
technologies to support language learning 
3.63 1.02 1.07 .94*** .05 
Chun Lai A Framework for Developing Self-Directed Technology Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 118 
Members in learning community support the 
use of technologies for language learning 
4.03 .97 .76 .70*** .05 
Language Learning Motivation (LLM) (α = .80) (based on Zimmerman, 2011)  
Highly motivated to grasp the language and 
understand the target culture 
4.45 1.06 1.00 .85*** .08 
Invest a lot of spare time in learning the 
language 
4.05 1.08 .94 .78*** .07 
Language Learning Approaches (LLA) (α = .63) (adapted from Lai & Gu, 2011)    
Learning well depends on learning and using 
the language outside the class 
5.03 .83 1.00 .59*** .17 
Study time best spent in seeking opportunities 
to use the language in real life 
4.93 .80 1.00 .62*** .16 
Time spent on learning and using the language 
outside the class is crucial to ultimate 
achievement 
4.75 .88 1.05 .59*** .17 
Situated Interpretation of the Context (SIC) (α = .76) (based on Goodyear & Ellis, 2008) 
Using technologies is part of the language 
course requirement 
3.88 1.05 1.00 .68*** .15 
Are expected to use technologies to enhance 
language learning at this university  
3.94 1.05 1.33 .91*** .16 
Self-Regulation Skill (SRS) (α = .81) (adapted from Lai & Gu, 2011) 
Constantly monitor learning progress 3.76 1.06 1.00 .61*** .10 
Have ways to make learning the language more 
attractive 
4.02 .93 .92 .64*** .10 
When learning environment becomes less 
favorable, try to sort out and address the 
problem 
4.12 .87 1.05 .79*** .10 
Know how to arrange time and environment to 
make learning more efficient and effective 
3.99 .97 1.17 .80*** .11 
Note. Attitude to technology use was dropped from the measurement model. Attitude to technology use was conceptualized by 
three items on interest and enjoyment in using technology to support language learning (adapted from Teo, 2010), such as “I 
enjoy learning language with technologies” or “I look forward to the language learning experience that involves the use of 
technology.” This construct had an alpha value of .89.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This article is based on a project (GRF7461/10H) funded by the Research Grants Council of the 
Government of the Hong Kong SAR. Thanks are expressed to the participating students and the 
anonymous reviewers of the journal Language Learning & Technology.  
 
REFERENCES 
Ajzen, I., & Fishbein, M. (2005). The influence of attitudes on behavior. In D. Albarracin, B. T. Johnson 
& M. P. Zanna (Eds.). The handbook of attitudes (pp. 173–221). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Ajzen, I. (1985). From intentions to actions: A theory of planned behavior. In J. Kuhl, & J. Beckmann 
(Eds), Springer Series in Social Psychology (pp. 11–39). Berlin, Germany: Springer. 
Artino, A. R., & Stephens, J. M. (2009). Academic motivation and self-regulation: A comparative analysis 
of undergraduate and graduate students learning online. Internet and Higher Education, 12, 146–151.  
Chun Lai A Framework for Developing Self-Directed Technology Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 119 
Bandura, A. (2001). Social cognitive theory: An agentic perspective. Annual Review of Psychology, 52, 
1–26.  
Barrs, K. (2010). What factors encourage high levels of student participation in a self-access centre? 
Studies in Self-Access Learning Journal, 1,10–16.  
Benson, P. (2006). Autonomy in language teaching and learning. Language Teaching, 40, 21–40. 
Bernacki, M. L., Aguilar, A. C., & Byrenes, J. P. (2011). Self-regulated learning and technology-
enhanced learning environments: An opportunity-propensity analysis. In G. Dettori & D. Persico (Eds.), 
Fostering Self-regulated Learning through ICT (pp. 1–26). doi:10.4018/978-1-61692-901-5 
Castellano, J., Mynard, J., & Rubesch, T. (2011). Student technology use in a self-access center. 
Language Learning & Technology, 15(3), 12–27. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues 
/october2011/actionresearch.pdf 
Chang, S., & Tung, F. (2008). An empirical investigation of students’ behavioral intentions to use the 
online learning course wLLAsites. British Journal of Educational Technology, 39(1), 71–83.  
Chapelle, C. (2010). Evaluating computer technology for language learning. TESL-Ontario, 36, 2, 56–67.  
Chen, J. L. (2011). The effects of education compatibility and technological expectancy on e-learning 
acceptance. Computers & Education, 57, 1501–1511.  
Chow, M., Herold, D. K., Choo, T. M., & Chan, K. (2012). Extending the technology acceptance model 
to explore the intention to use Second Life for enhancing healthcare education. Computers & Education, 
DOI: 10.1016/j.compedu.2012.05.011.  
Christison, M. A. (2003). Learning styles and strategies. In D. Nunan (Ed.), Practical English language 
teaching. New York, NY: McGraw Hill.  
Clark, W., Logan, K., Luckin, R., Mee, A., & Oliver, M. (2009). Beyond WLLA 2.0: Mapping the 
technology landscapes of young learners. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 25, 56–69. 
Compeau, D. R., & Higgins, C. A. (1995). Computer self-efficacy: Development of a measure and initial 
test. MIS Quarterly, 19(2), 189–211.  
Davis, F. D. (1989). Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user acceptance of information 
technology. MIS Quarterly, 13(3), 319–340.  
Deepwell, F., & Malik, S. (2008). On campus, but out of class: an investigation into students’ experiences 
of learning technologies in their self-directed study. ALT-J, Research in Learning Technology, 16(1), 5–14.  
Ertmer, P. A., & Ottenbreit-Leftwich, A. T. (2010). Teacher technology change. How knowledge, beliefs 
and culture intersect. Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 42, 221–251.  
Ferede, T. (2010). Major hindrances to the development of autonomy among Grade Nine students in 
learning English: Baso General secondary school in DLLArLLAerhan in focus. Ethiopian Journal of 
Education & Society, 6(2), 1–28.  
Gray, K., Chang, S., & Kennedy, G. (2010). Use of social wLLA technologies by international and 
domestic undergraduate students: implications for internationalising learning and teaching in Australian 
universities. Technology, Pedagogy and Education, 19(1), 31–46. 
Goodyear, P., & Ellis, R. A. (2008). University students’ approaches to learning: Rethinking the place of 
technology. Distance Education, 29(2), 141–152. 
Greenhow, C., Robelia, E., & Hughes, J. (2009). WLLA 2.0 and classroom research: What path should 
we take now? Educational Researchers, 38(4), 246-259.  
Chun Lai A Framework for Developing Self-Directed Technology Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 120 
Hadwin, A. F., Oshige, M., Gress, C. L. Z., & Winne, P. H. (2010). Measurement and assessment in 
computer supported collaborative learning. Computers in Human Behavior, 26, 806–814.  
Haerle, F. C., & Bendixen, L. D. (2008). Personal epistemology in elementary classrooms: A conceptual 
comparison of Germany and the United States in a guide for future cross-cultural research. In M. S. 
Khine (Ed.), Knowing, knowledge and beliefs: Epistemological studies across diverse cultures (pp.151–
176). New York, NY: Springer. 
Hartshorne, R., & Ajjan, H. (2009). Examining student decisions to adopt Web 2.0 technologies: theory 
and empirical tests. Journal of Computers in Higher Education, 21, 183–198.  
Healey, D., Hanson-Smith, E., Hubbard, P., Ioannou-Georgious, S., Kessler, G., & Ware, P. (2011). 
TESOL technology standards: Description, implementation, integration. Alexandria, VA: TESOL. 
Holec, H. (2009). Autonomy in language learning: A single pedagogical paradigm or two? In F. Kjisik, P. 
Voller, N. Aoki & Y. Nakata (Eds.), Mapping the terrain of learner autonomy: Learning environments, 
learning communities and identities (pp. 21–47). Tampere, Finland: Tampere University Press.  
Hsu, M. K., Wang, S. W., & Chiu, K. K. (2009). Computer attitude, statistics anxiety and self-efficacy on 
statistical software adoption behavior: An empirical study of online MBA learners. Computers in Human 
Behavior, 25, 412–420.  
Hu, L.T., & Bentler, P.M. (1999). Cutoff criteria for fit indices in covariance structure analysis: 
Conventional criteria versus new alternatives. Structural Equation Modeling, 6, 1–55. 
Huang, Y. M., Huang, Y. M., Huang, S. H., & Lin, Y. T. (2012). A ubiquitous English vocabulary 
learning system: Evidence of active/passive attitudes vs. usefulness/ease-of-use. Computers & Education, 
58, 273–282. 
Hubbard, P.  (2004). Learner training as effective use of CALL. In S. Fotos & C. Browne (Eds.), New 
perspectives on CALL for second language classrooms. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Hyland, F. (2004). Learning autonomously: Contextualizing out-of-class English language learning. 
Language Awareness, 13(3), 180–202.  
Inozu, J., Sahinkarakas, S., & Yumru, H. (2010). The nature of language learning experiences beyond the 
classroom and its learning outcomes. US-China Foreign Language, 8, 14–21.  
Kline, R. B. (2005). Principles and practice of structural equation modeling: Methodology in the social 
sciences (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Guilford Press. 
Knowles, M. (1975). Self-directed learning: A guide for learners and teachers. New York, NY: 
Association Press.  
Lai, C., & Gu, M. Y. (2011). Self-regulated out-of-class language learning with technology. Computer 
Assisted Language Learning, 24, 317–335. 
Lai, C., Wang, Q., & Lei, J. (2012). What factors predict undergraduate students’ use of technology for 
learning? A case from Hong Kong. Computers & Education, 59, 569–579. 
Lai, C., & Lin, X. L. (2012). Strategy training in a task-based language classroom. Language Learning 
Journal, 40, 1–21. 
Lee, Y. H., Kozar, K. A., & Larsen, K. R. T. (2003). The technology acceptance model: Past, present and 
future. Communications of the Association for Information Systems, Vol. 12, Article 50.  
Levy, M. (2009). Technologies in use for second language learning. Modern Language Journal, 93, 769–
782.  
Chun Lai A Framework for Developing Self-Directed Technology Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 121 
Macaro, E.  (2006). Strategies for language learning and for language use: Revising the theoretical 
framework. Modern Language Journal, 90, 320–337.  
Malhotra, N. K., Kim, S. S., & Patil, A. (2006). Common method variance in IS research: A comparison 
of alternative approach and a reanalysis of past research. Management Science, 52(12), 1865–1883.  
Margaryan, A., & Littlejohn, A. (2008). Repositories and communities at cross-purposes: Issues in 
sharing and reuse of digital learning resources. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 24(4), 333–347.  
McLoughlin, C., & Lee, M. L. (2010). Personalized and self-regulated learning in the WLLA 2.0 era: 
International exemplars of innovative pedagogy using social software. Australian Journal of Educational 
Technology, 26(1), 28–43. 
Mercer, S. (2011). Understanding learner agency as a complex dynamic system. System, 39(4), 427–436. 
Moos, D. C., & Azevedo, R. (2009). Learning with computer-based learning environments: A literature 
review of computer self-efficacy. Review of Educational Research, 79, 576–600. 
Murray, G. (2008). Pop culture and language learning: Learners’ stories informing EFL. Innovation in 
Language Learning and Teaching, 2, 1–16.  
Pynoo, B., Devolder, P., Tondeur, J., van Braak, J., Duyck, W., & Duyck, P. (2011). Predicting secondary 
school teachers’ acceptance and use of a digital learning environment: A cross-sectional study. Computers 
in Human Behavior, 27, 568–575. 
Rao, Z. H. (1996). Reconciling communicative approaches to the teaching of English with traditional 
Chinese methods. Research in the Teaching of English, 30, 458–-471. 
Rahimi, M., & Katal, M. (2012). The role of metacognitive listening strategies awareness and podcast-use 
readiness in using podcasting for learning English as a foreign language. Computers in Human Behavior, 
28(4), 1153–1161. 
Shi, L. J. (2006). The successors of Confucianism or a new generation? A questionnaire study on Chinese 
students’ culture of learning English. Language, Culture and Curriculum, 19, 122–147. 
Slyke, C. V., Dick, G., Case, T., & Ilie, V. (2010). The importance of compatibility and pressure on 
intentions to engage in distance learning. Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 27, 
395–414. 
Straub, E. T. (2009). Understanding technology adoption: Theory and future directions for informal 
learning. Review of Educational Research, 79, 625–649.  
Šumak, B., Polancic, G., & Hericko, M. (2010). An empirical study of virtual learning environment 
adoption using UTAUT. Second International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid and Online Learning 
Conference Proceeding, pp. 17–22. 
Tabachnick, B. G., & Fidell, L. S. (2013). Using multivariate statistics, 6th ed. Boston, MA: Allyn and 
Bacon. 
Teo, T. (2010). A path analysis of pre-service teachers’ attitudes to computer use: Applying and 
extending the technology acceptance model in an educational context. Interactive Learning 
Environments, 18(1), 65–79.  
Tsai, C. C., & Chuang, S. C. (2005). The correlation between epistemological beliefs and preferences 
toward Internet-based learning environments. British Journal of Educational Technology, 36(1), 97–100. 
Van Raaij, E. M., & Schepers, J. J. L. (2008). The acceptance and use of a virtual learning environment in 
China. Computers & Education, 50(3), 838–852.  
Chun Lai A Framework for Developing Self-Directed Technology Use 
 
Language Learning & Technology 122 
Venkatesh, V., Davis, G. B., & Morris, M. G. (2007). Dead or alive? The development, trajectory and 
future of technology adoption research. Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 8(4), 267–
286. 
Venkatesh, V., Morris, M. G., Davis, G. B., & Davis, F. D. (2003). User acceptance of information 
technology: Toward a unified view. MIS Quarterly, 27, 425–478.  
Venkatesh, V., & Davis, F. (2000). A theoretical extension of the technology acceptance model: Four 
longitudinal field studies. Management Science, 46(2), 186–204. 
Weinstein, C. E., Woodruff, T., & Awalt, C. (2007). Becoming a strategic learner: LASSI instructional 
modules. Clearwater, FL: H & H Publishing.  
Winke, P. & Goertler, S. (2008). Did we forget someone? Students’ computer access and literacy for 
CALL. CALICO Journal, 25(3), 482–509. 
Winnie, P., & Hadwin, A. (1998). Studying as self-regulated learning. In D. Hacker, J. Dunlosky, & A. 
Graesser (Eds.), Metacognition in educational theory and practice (pp. 227–304). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Yousafzai, S. Y., Foxall, G. R., & Pallister, J. G. (2007). Technology acceptance: A meta-analysis of the 
TAM: Part 1. Journal of Modeling in Management, 2(3), 251–280. 
Zhang, G. M. (2010). Technology uses in creating second language learning environments: When 
learners are creators. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Michigan State University.  
Zhao, Y., & Lai, C. (2007). Technology and second language learning: Promises and problems. In L. L. 
Parker (Ed.), Technology-mediated learning environments for young English learners: Connections in 
and out of school (pp. 167–205). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Zimmerman, B. J. (2011). Motivational sources and outcomes of self-regulated learning and performance. 
In B. J. Zimmerma & D. H. Schunk (eds.) Handbook of self-regulation of learning and performance 
(pp. 49–64). New York, NY: Routledge. 
