Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2013/action.pdf 
October 2013, Volume 17, Number 3 
pp. 23–38 
 
Copyright © 2013, ISSN 1094-3501 23 
FROM PARTICULAR TO POPULAR: FACILITATING EFL MOBILE-
SUPPORTED COOPERATIVE READING 
Yu-Ju Lan, National Taiwan Normal University 
Yao-Ting Sung, National Taiwan Normal University 
Kuo-En Chang, National Taiwan Normal University 
This paper reports the results of an action research-based study that adapted a mobile-
supported cooperative reading system into regular English as a foreign language (EFL) 
classes at one Taiwanese elementary school. The current study was comprised of two 
stages: adaptation and evaluation. During the adaptation stage, a mobile-supported 
cooperative EFL reading (MCER) system—chosen because of a report about its effects on 
enhancing the development of young EFL learners’ reading abilities (Lan, Sung, & Chang, 
2009)—was tailored to be integrated into a regular elementary EFL curriculum based on 
the suggestions of experienced elementary EFL teachers. During the evaluation stage, an 
EFL class learned reading via the support given by the MCER system; quantitative and 
qualitative data were collected and analyzed to evaluate the effects of the adapted reading 
system on young EFL learners’ reading abilities. The results revealed that the adaptation 
and use of the MCER system was successful and that it might facilitate the acquisition of 
reading abilities by young learners if used within EFL classes around the entire school. 
Key words: English as a Foreign Language (EFL), Mobile-Supported Cooperative 
learning (MSCL), Early Reading, Mobile Assisted Language Learning (MALL) 
APA Citation: Lan, Y.-J., Sung, Y.-T., & Chang, K.-E. From particular to popular: 
Facilitating EFL reading through mobile-supported cooperation. Language Learning & 
Technology 17(3), 23–38. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2013/action.pdf 
Received: December 14, 2012; Accepted: March 7, 2013; Published: October 1, 2013 
Copyright: © Yu-Ju Lan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang 
BACKGROUND 
In 2000, the Ministry of Education of Taiwan initiated curricular and instructional reforms (Ministry of 
Education, 2001), cultivating in its citizens the global perspectives and core competences necessary for 
modern life. The teaching of English as a foreign language (EFL) is one of the major foci of this reform, 
as learning English from an early age is expected to help students easily master grammatical rules and 
acquire near-native pronunciation (Flege, Yeni-Komshian, & Liu, 1999; Wu, Sung, Huang, Yang, & 
Yang, 2011). A report about a mobile-supported cooperative EFL reading (MCER) system (Lan, Sung, & 
Chang, 2009) caught the imagination of one principal of a Taipei elementary school, who was eager to 
help the students in her school improve their English abilities. The idea was to evaluate the feasibility of 
integrating the MCER system into regular EFL classes in Taiwanese elementary schools. 
After consulting with the developer of the MCER system, a two-stage action research project was 
conducted, focusing on the adaptation and evaluation of the MCER system into this particular Taipei 
elementary school. During the first stage, several experienced elementary EFL teachers were invited to 
use and give suggestions for revising the MCER system to meet the requirements of EFL teaching in 
Taiwanese elementary schools. Then after completing the modifications, a class of elementary EFL 
students used the MCER system, so researchers could evaluate the effects of the modified system on 
students’ EFL reading abilities. Researchers were also able to measure student attitudes confirming the 
appropriateness of the adaptation. 
Yu-Ju Lan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang Facilitating EFL Reading through Mobile-Supported Cooperation  
 
Language Learning & Technology 24 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
The Reality of Taiwanese EFL Education at the Elementary Level 
The Ministry of Education of Taiwan is greatly concerned with its students’ English abilities, especially 
students in elementary and high school, and many efforts have been made to improve Taiwanese students’ 
English abilities. Since 2000, the Ministry of Education in Taiwan has implemented curricular and 
instructional reforms, in which English education has been designated to start from the third grade of 
elementary school, four years earlier than the previous requirement. In certain locations, English is 
required from an even younger age; indeed, in the city of Taipei, English is now a required subject from 
the first grade (Taipei City Government Department of Education, 2000). Despite these mandates, based 
on the official report of the International English Language Testing System, the English abilities of 
Taiwanese students were far beneath proficiencies of students in many other Asian countries (Central 
News Agency, 2011; Chen, 2007). 
Several issues might be causing these test results: diversity of student English abilities, high student-
teacher ratio, parental social and economic differences, class sizes, and limited learning time available in 
classrooms (Lan, Chang, & Sung, 2004). A high student-teacher ratio (typically 30-to-1) not only 
constrains teachers from catering to individuals’ needs but also influences instruction. With large EFL 
class sizes, teacher-centered approaches are frequently used, and EFL students often lack opportunities to 
use the target language during instructional time (Hwang & Chen, 2011), lowering student motivation and 
interest in English language learning. In spite of the fact that EFL teachers wish to increase student 
interest in learning English through the use of language activities like classroom games, such activities are 
mainly designed for large groups. This privileges language output by higher proficiency students rather 
than by lower proficiency students. In one example, though lower-level students actively participated in a 
game activity, they only shouted the word “go” to cheer for their team members, whereas the higher-level 
ones used the lesson’s target words (Lan, in press). Inefficient teaching methodologies and low learning 
achievements have been shown to decrease students’ motivation to learn (Central News Agency, 2011; 
Chen, 2007). Not surprisingly, English is typically one of the most disliked subjects in Taiwanese 
schools. 
Though we are unaware of studies that address the larger problem of why Taiwanese students dislike 
English, we have anecdotally observed that the specific problem of varied proficiency levels in a single 
class mostly results from social and economic inequalities among parents. Typically, students from 
wealthy families learn English during early childhood and have plenty of opportunities to practice the 
language outside the classroom; in contrast, students from lower-income families have only 80 minutes in 
the classroom per week to learn English, and rarely do they have opportunities to use or learn the 
language outside of school. Consequently, varying levels of student exposure to English challenges 
teachers when preparing their teaching materials (Lan, Sung, & Chang, 2007). These adverse conditions 
have been shown to frustrate numerous EFL teachers when assisting low-proficiency students (Chang, 
2006). This also increases the frustration of students at beginning levels when they are forced to learn 
alongside their more advanced classmates. Unfortunately, many students have negative attitudes towards 
English from early learning experiences and avoid learning English after leaving school at the end of high 
school (Chang, 2007; Wu, 2004). 
One strategy used to face the above problems is to promote learner autonomy and to increase their 
opportunities for exposure to English. According to Day and Bamford (1998) and Wu et al. (2011), 
reading ability is important for student academic achievement, particularly for EFL learners with limited 
exposure to the target language. Students with adequate English reading ability are capable of expanding 
their vocabulary through independent reading. Therefore, early EFL reading has been attracting 
increasing attention from EFL teachers, practitioners, and researchers (National Reading Panel, 2000; 
Taipei City Government Department of Education, 2000, 2012).  
Yu-Ju Lan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang Facilitating EFL Reading through Mobile-Supported Cooperation  
 
Language Learning & Technology 25 
Based on descriptions of successful reading programs, socio-constructivist learning approaches are 
potential strategies for alleviating difficulties with reading and for improving reading skills. These 
approaches include working in small groups (Foorman & Torgesen, 2001; National Reading Panel, 2000), 
scaffolding (George & Patrick, 2002; Mathes, Torgesen, & Allor, 2001), and cooperative learning 
(Ghaith, 2003; Ushioda, 1996). Although numerous studies have supported the effect of these learning 
strategies on the progress of young children learning to read, most prior study informants have been 
native speakers of English. The degree to which these strategies can be successfully applied to young EFL 
learners in Asia—especially in Taiwan, where the EFL teaching environment differs markedly from a 
first language (L1) reading class—is uncertain. The pedagogical challenges described above, including 
class size, time constraints, and available resources, hinder most EFL teachers in Asia from applying 
socio-constructivist learning approaches to reading instruction in traditional EFL classes, though the 
effectiveness of these strategies in EFL reading have been clearly demonstrated (Lan et al., 2004; Reed, 
2002). Also, simply grouping students into small reading groups does not guarantee the effectiveness of 
the cooperative process (Lan et al., 2007), as some students with lower-level abilities might feel left out 
the group and may lack of confidence. Hence, more teacher intervention is needed to help small reading 
groups to proceed with cooperation (Lan, Sung, & Chang, 2006). Without a doubt, both students and 
teachers need additional support during the cooperative reading process for the successful implementation 
of socio-constructivist learning in EFL reading. These pedagogical interventions informed the authors 
throughout the research process of this current study. 
Mobile-Supported EFL Reading Studies 
Mobile technology potentially offers a feasible approach to removing numerous existing barriers in the 
implementation of the socio-constructivist approaches in traditional EFL settings (Lan et al., 2007; Lan, 
Sung, & Chang, 2009). Mobile assisted language learning (MALL) not only provides second language 
(L2) learners with ubiquitous learning support, immediate feedback, and independent and targeted reading 
practice, it also helps them achieve advances in social interactivity, context awareness, connectivity, 
individuality, and immediacy (Attewell & Webster, 2004; Chinnery, 2006; Klopfer, Squire, & Jenkins, 
2002; Soloway, Norris, Blumenfeld, Fishman, Krajcik, & Marx, 2001). Moreover, as Kukulska-Hulme 
and Shield (2008) noted, MALL inspires new ways of learning, as it emphasizes continuity or spontaneity 
of access and interaction across different contexts of use. MALL also provides a ubiquitous learning that 
can closely fit learners’ learning habits. 
Numerous advocates have recommended MALL as a method of providing L2 learners with rich, real 
time, cooperative, and conversational experiences both inside and outside the classroom. However, 
research on MALL has mostly focused on speaking (Kukulska-Hulme, 2005), listening (Liu & Chu, 
2010), vocabulary (e.g. Huang, Huang, Huang, & Lin, 2012; Sandberg, Maris, & de Geus, 2011; 
Thornton & Houser, 2005), phrases (e.g. Morita, 2003; Thornton & Houser, 2005), and grammar (Sung, 
Huang, & Chang, 2006), rather than early EFL reading skills. Furthermore, recent studies of MALL have 
focused on college students or adults (e.g., Chang & Hsu, 2011; Cui & Wang, 2008), and few have 
examined how mobile technology benefits the early EFL reading skills of elementary students. Studies 
that have connected mobile technology and early EFL reading skills includes those of Lan and her 
colleagues (Lan et al., 2007, 2009), who applied mobile technology to cooperative EFL reading in order 
to overcome the problems existing in traditional cooperative EFL reading activities. Their research 
obtained fruitful results and echoed the advances of MALL reported by other researchers (e.g., Attewell 
& Webster, 2004; Chinnery, 2006) that MALL consistently benefits young EFL learners’ reading 
development, improves EFL learning attitude, and enhances students’ cooperative learning skills.  
However, even though academic research on MALL has provided cheerful results in relation to the 
improvement of young EFL learners’ performance and motivation, expanding the research agenda to 
consider elementary EFL curricula has yet to be investigated. As a second gap, the learning materials and 
activities used in much previous research have been created especially for purposes related to 
Yu-Ju Lan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang Facilitating EFL Reading through Mobile-Supported Cooperation  
 
Language Learning & Technology 26 
experimental design; whether these materials and activities were relevant to the regular elementary EFL 
curricula is not known. In addition, most previous research has used additional lesson time to conduct 
experimental procedures. Using a specific research procedure integrated within the regular EFL syllabus 
and time constraints also has not been a priority in previous research. 
To successfully integrate the concepts from previous research and the practical limitations of the EFL 
syllabus in Taiwanese elementary schools, this study asks the following questions: 
1. What adaptations should be made to strengthen the MCER system so it better 
integrates with the existing EFL curriculum, so as to best meet EFL teachers’ needs? 
2. How does the adapted system benefit reading abilities and attitudes of young 
Taiwanese EFL learners? 
INTEGRATING PREVIOUS ACADEMIC RESEARCH INTO THE REGULAR EFL SYLLABUS 
The previously documented success using the MCER system in supporting elementary learners’ EFL 
reading (Lan et al., 2009) inspired this action research project, especially in face of the pedagogical 
challenges found in most Taiwanese elementary schools by EFL teachers. Nevertheless, this system had 
to be modified to be more relevant to regular elementary EFL classes and to overcome several identified 
problems. 
To adapt the MCER system, two experienced elementary EFL teachers met with the MCER system 
developer to describe the advantages and challenges associated with using this system in Taiwanese EFL 
settings. Both teachers had used the MCER system in a two-week trial; both thought highly of the 
system’s functions, expressing that the system helped learners read cooperatively and that it had a great 
potential to resolve numerous pedagogical problems they faced. However, because of strict course syllabi 
stipulated by school administrators, it was difficult for teachers to include this supplementary 
methodology with their students. Thus, the MCER system needed to be more flexible to allow for the 
inclusion of teacher-selected reading materials. Moreover, as EFL teachers at Taiwanese elementary 
schools do not have extended periods of time to prepare extra online materials, it was recommended that 
the system include a sharing function between all teachers, to encourage more teachers to use the system 
in their classes. Aligned with the two teachers’ feedback mentioned above, a platform for sharing 
cooperative English reading materials—MCER+—was developed and connected to the original student 
learning platform—MCER. Accordingly, the teaching materials developing mobile-supported cooperative 
reading activities in daily EFL classes that were uploaded to MCER+ were automatically transferred to the 
pool of learning materials on MCER. In order to document the effects of the MCER+ system, a two-stage 
evaluation was conducted, which is briefly described below. 
Stage One: Adaptation 
In the adaptation stage, two versions of MCER+—I and II—were adapted based on the experienced EFL 
teachers’ suggestions and comments. The MCER+ I was based on two teachers’ feedback as described 
above. In order to make sure the MCER+ I system met the general EFL teachers’ expectations, another 
eight experienced EFL teachers from different elementary schools in Taipei City were invited to provide 
feedback about the MCER+ I system. The first iteration of evaluation considered user interfaces and the 
functions of MCER+ I, and these comments were used to create MCER+ II. The MCER+ II system was 
again evaluated on its user interfaces and functions. The two iterations of adaption on user interfaces and 
functions of MCER+ system are briefly described below. 
The First Version of MCER+ System (MCER+ I) 
Built upon the existing MCER system, which was an original learning platform for elementary EFL 
learners, the MCER+ I system incorporates three new modules to directly support EFL teachers in their 
Yu-Ju Lan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang Facilitating EFL Reading through Mobile-Supported Cooperation  
 
Language Learning & Technology 27 
development of mobile-supported cooperative reading materials. These modules include a material 
management module, a class management module, and a material sharing management module. The 
material management module aims at providing EFL teachers with an easy approach to developing online 
reading materials. Three categories of materials, which together form a learning unit, can be uploaded in 
this module: sight words, phonetic words, and an article. The second module—the class management 
module—focuses on helping EFL teachers effectively manage the information of each teaching course, 
such as the class information (e.g., grades and class sizes), student bio-data, teaching records, assigned 
learning materials, and teaching schedules, and so forth. The EFL teacher can also use the class 
management module interface to add or delete a class, assign students and group leaders to different small 
cooperative learning groups, and set assigned learning activities. Within this module, the teachers can 
check individual learning records, and also establish assessment criteria to see whether students passed 
tests. The last module, the material sharing management module, keeps specific information regarding the 
author, theme, or target users of a learning unit designated via the material management module. The 
material sharing information can be used as keys for searching in the material sharing management 
module. Through the material sharing module, EFL teachers can search for suitable articles for their 
students and can print out materials to be used in conventional EFL settings. 
Evaluation of User Interfaces and Functions of MCER+ I 
As stated above, eight experienced elementary EFL teachers were invited to assess the MCER+ I platform. 
Teachers completed two questionnaires, one for the interface appearance of web pages of MCER+ I 
(Appendix A, Questionnaire 1), and the other for usability which was based on Lund’s questionnaire 
(2001) (Appendix A, Questionnaire 2). The evaluation focused on five dimensions: appearance (color, 
font size, button name and location, web style, etc.), usefulness, ease of use, ease of learning (while using 
the system), and satisfaction. During the evaluation, the teachers were first trained to use the MCER+ I 
system, then they completed the interface evaluation questionnaire considering the individual web pages 
of all three modules and an overall system evaluation questionnaire. Afterwards the participating teachers 
had to develop a complete teaching unit and to use the newly developed materials in their EFL classes via 
MCER+ I. After the usage, they completed the questionnaire of usability. All the questionnaire items used 
a five-point Likert scale where “1” means strongly disagree and “5” means strongly agree. Table 1 lists 
the evaluation results. 
Table 1. MCER+ I Survey Results (n = 8) 
Dimensions Mean SD 
Appearance 3.90 .26 
Usefulness 3.62 .23 
Ease of use 4.04 .31 
Ease of learning 3.97 .32 
Satisfaction 3.96 .37 
All the teachers were broadly satisfied with most of the functions of the MCER+ I; however, some 
refinements were suggested. According to the participating teachers, the interface required too many steps 
to upload their teaching materials: a simple upload process was suggested so teachers could integrate the 
proposed system into their daily EFL classes. Additionally, almost all teachers recommended using larger 
font sizes for texts. Appearance was also a main concern for these teachers. Some teachers even suggested 
replacing the original webpage background with a more interesting layout that would attract the attention 
of elementary EFL learners. 
To summarize, MCER+ I offered a potential approach for improving current elementary EFL education in 
Yu-Ju Lan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang Facilitating EFL Reading through Mobile-Supported Cooperation  
 
Language Learning & Technology 28 
Taiwan, but still required some modifications. The biggest concern in terms of improving the MCER+ 
system was to simplify the system’s operational procedures to increase these EFL teachers’ interest in 
using it. 
The Second Version of the MCER+ System (MCER+ II) 
The MCER+ II system incorporated several improvements based on teacher suggestions. First, structured 
teacher interfaces, including both tree- and map-structures (as shown in Figure 1, left) were provided to 
facilitate user navigation within the system. Second, several new functions were developed for adding 
new learning materials to simplify material creation and the uploading process, such as the new interface 
for editing teaching materials related to sight words (as shown in Figure 1, right). Third, the process of 
searching for and managing teaching materials was simplified. Figure 2 shows a material management 
module for a sample unit of learning. 
 
 
Figure 1. Improvements included within MCER+ II. These include a teacher interface map structure (left), 
and new functions, such as editing teaching materials related to sight words (right). 
Evaluation of User Interfaces and Functions of MCER+ II 
All eight EFL teachers who provided suggestions for the creation of MCER+ II were invited to participate 
in this second evaluation. The evaluation focused on the MCER+ II system interface and functions, and 
specifically on whether the problems identified earlier were resolved. The same questionnaires were used 
for this evaluation. Except for two instructors who gave only oral feedback, all other teachers sent back 
their evaluation results. All teachers expressed their high satisfaction with MCER+ II. Table 2 lists the 
evaluation results obtained from the six EFL teachers who provided written feedback. 
The results obtained in this second survey showed that instructors rated more highly the different 
dimensions of MCER+ II, particularly the dimension of usefulness. As shown in the third column of Table 
2, the means of the different ratings increased across all the dimensions. These results indicated that the 
system interfaces and functions were aligned with the teachers’ specifications and did not require any 
immediate modification, even though there is room for future improvement in the dimensions “ease of 
use” and “ease of learning.” These results indicated to the researchers that the MCER+ II system could be 
used with confidence to study the effects of this system on young EFL learners learning to read. 
Yu-Ju Lan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang Facilitating EFL Reading through Mobile-Supported Cooperation  
 
Language Learning & Technology 29 
Figure 2. A sample unit of learning material management modules. 
Second Stage: Evaluation 
Participants 
A third grade class of 20 students at one Taiwanese elementary school participated in this study of effects 
MCER+ II on young EFL learners’ reading abilities and English learning attitudes. At the beginning of 
this study—according to the Taipei Municipal Education Department’s standards for the elementary 
school English curriculum (Taipei Municipal Dept. of Education, 2000)—the participants knew the letters 
of the English alphabet, 30 words, and 20 sentences of basic daily conversation and classroom English. 
The students in this class were divided into small reading groups, based on their level of English 
achievement in the previous semester. Each group was comprised of one student with higher-level  
Table 2. MCER+ II Survey Results (n = 6) 
Dimensions Mean SD Increase over MCER+ I 
Appearance 4.50 .30 .60 
Usefulness 4.60 .38 .98 
Ease of use 4.40 .25 .36 
Ease of learning 4.30 .27 .33 
Satisfaction 4.50 .36 .54 
Unit title 
Author information 
Development date 
Target users 
Target skills 
Unit theme 
Needed teaching 
time 
Reading article 
Reading 
comprehension 
questions 
Group size 
Yu-Ju Lan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang Facilitating EFL Reading through Mobile-Supported Cooperation  
 
Language Learning & Technology 30 
reading abilities and two or three with lower-level reading abilities. Only data from the 18 students who 
completed the entire semester were analyzed in this study. 
Instruments and Procedure 
The participating EFL teachers adapted two units from an EFL textbook used in the elementary school 
into learning activities and materials for the MCER+ II system. Every student was provided with an Asus 
EeePad, within which the MCER+ II system was embedded. Additionally, an attitude questionnaire of 
EFL learning (see Appendix B) and two subtests from the dynamic indicators of basic early literacy skills 
(DIBELS) (Good & Kaminski, 2002) (phoneme segmentation and nonsense word reading) were 
administered before the study. For Taiwanese elementary EFL learners, those two early reading skills are 
crucial for both their spelling and oral reading (Lan, in press). Additionally, both the two subtests were 
individual tests. While administering the phoneme segmentation test, participants would hear an English 
word, such as “book,” then they were asked to produce all the phonemes included in the word: /b/, /ʊ/, 
and /k/. Each correctly said phoneme scored one point. In terms of the nonsense word test, participants 
were shown a paper filled with pseudo English words, such as “cik.” Participants were then asked to 
produce the pseudo words as quickly and correctly as possible. Again, for each correctly produced 
phoneme, students scored one point. After the pretest, the participants received training on the use of the 
equipment. Then the two units were taught. Each unit was taught in four 40-minute periods over two 
weeks. In each 40-minute period, the MCER+ first randomly assigned part of the reading materials to each 
member of a small group, such as one fourth of target vocabulary or one paragraph of a story. Then 
everyone learned the assigned materials with the support of MCER+ II. After participants finished their 
reading tasks, they shared what they had read with other group members. Finally, the whole group 
cooperatively carried out group projects, such as unscrambling out-of-order paragraphs into a complete 
story. One week after finishing the four-week experiment, the same questionnaire and reading tests were 
administered as a post-test. 
RESULTS 
The young EFL learners showed significant differences in their pre and post test scores on the same early 
reading ability tests (phoneme segmentation: t(17) = -3.79, p < .05, effect size = .30; and nonsense word 
reading: t(17) = -2.34, p < .05, effect size = .14). Table 3 lists the means and standard deviations for early 
EFL reading ability scores on the two tests. It was found that the young EFL learners made a greater 
improvement in phoneme segmentation than nonsense word reading after having had the support of 
MCER+ II. This phenomenon potentially indicates that there was an absence of the instruction of first skill 
in Taiwanese elementary EFL settings which has been partially filled by the MCER+ II system. The 
young EFL learners are able to acquire this skill if they have the appropriate learning opportunities and 
support. 
Table 3. Pre- and Post-Test Scores for Reading Tests and Learning Attitude Questionnaire 
 Phoneme Segmentation Test Nonsense Word Reading 
Test 
Early FL Learning Attitude 
Questionnaire 
 Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD 
Pretest 11.94 19.47 22.17 30.17 3.11 .58 
Posttest 23.61 26.78 59.39 38.38 3.57 .43 
Note. n = 18. 
In addition, the students’ attitudes towards learning English were measured during this stage (see Table 
3). The participants showed significant differences in attitude towards learning English before and after 
Yu-Ju Lan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang Facilitating EFL Reading through Mobile-Supported Cooperation  
 
Language Learning & Technology 31 
this study: t(10) = -3.75, p < .05, effect size = .29. Additionally, the young EFL learners’ more positive 
attitudes towards English learning after using MCER+ II system are similar to the positive evaluation 
results obtained from the eight participating EFL teachers during the adaptation stage. 
In sum, by participating in this study, teachers developed a more favorable opinion of the MCER+ II 
system as a method of developing and sharing teaching materials. The efforts made to simplify the 
operational processes and provide a map of the material development processes in the MCER+ II system 
were seen by teachers as being improvements, and the MCER+ II was seen as being an easy and useful 
platform for EFL teachers to develop curricular-based teaching materials. Results obtained in this study 
also showed that the curricular-based materials and learning activities transformed via the MCER+ II 
system into mobile supported cooperative learning, cultivating early EFL learners’ reading abilities and 
improving their enthusiasm for English learning. Based on the results obtained from this two-stage action 
research project, the MCER+ II system was found to be an appropriate platform to be popularized in all 
the EFL classes at the participating school. 
REFLECTIONS AND CONCLUSIONS 
A primary goal of Taiwan’s National Science Council (NSC, 2005, 2010) has been to enhance the 
practical value of academic research. In Taiwan there have been numerous investigations relevant to e-
learning striving for excellence in teaching and learning (Shih, Feng, & Tsai, 2008), but few successful 
practical applications designed for regular teaching contexts. This study can be seen as a first step of 
bridging academic research and practical pedagogical settings. 
The current research was inspired by two urgent needs in practical EFL teaching and learning: aiding EFL 
teachers and enhancing EFL learners’ reading abilities. The findings obtained from this study added to the 
knowledge of both MALL and CALL research. It highlighted the importance of assisting EFL teachers to 
first prepare young learners for executing individual learning tasks and then put them in small groups to 
facilitate them to learn by doing and sharing. Furthermore, based on the lessons learned from the two 
stages of this study, directly introducing technological products (learning systems or advanced devices) to 
real educational practice will face severe obstacles if project managers do not take into account different 
educational realities. Thus, end users, including teachers and students, should be invited to be involved 
from the very beginning stage of a learning system. This shows the increasing impact of design research 
on educational research, in which the teachers, students, and the researchers work together to develop and 
evaluate a technological product via an iterative process (Collins, Joseph, & Bielaczyc, 2004).  
Based on the system MCER, the present action research project improved the original system’s 
functionality, to create the new system MCER+ II. As described above, purely academic research might 
be limiting in terms of how much it can actually help improve real-world educational environments. 
Careful research involving the researchers, teachers, the real users (learners), and multi-stage 
confirmation is necessary as a first step towards improving education. However, this study is only the 
beginning. Only eight experienced EFL teachers from Taipei were invited to provide comments and 
suggestions for adapting the original MCER system to become MCER+ II; there was only one elementary 
school from Taipei city that participated in evaluating the effect of MCER+. Students in many other 
regions in Taiwan possess different EFL abilities, and their concerns should be represented in future 
studies. Furthermore, EFL teachers teaching in different area of Taiwan may need different instructional 
support. Thus, there is still a need to expand the popularization of MCER+ II to all the EFL classes in 
Taiwan beyond this single elementary school in Taipei.  
 
 
Yu-Ju Lan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang Facilitating EFL Reading through Mobile-Supported Cooperation  
 
Language Learning & Technology 32 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors would like to thank the National Science Council of the Republic of China, Taiwan, for 
financially supporting this research under Contract Nos. NSC 101-2511-S-003-031-MY3 and 
101WFA0300229. The authors also want to thank the Ministry of Education of the Republic of China, 
Taiwan, for financially supporting this research under Aim for the Top University Plan. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Yu-Ju Lan is currently an Associate Professor of Department of Applied Chinese Language and Culture 
at National Taiwan Normal University. Her research interests include technology enhanced foreign 
language learning, online synchronous teacher training, language learning in virtual worlds, and mobile 
learning. 
Yao-Ting Sung is a professor of Department of Education and Psychology and Counseling at National 
Taiwan Normal University. His research interests include the psychology of learning and computer-
assisted instruction. 
Kuo-En Chang is currently president and a professor in the Department of Information and Computer 
Education at National Taiwan Normal University. His research interests include intelligent tutoring 
systems, web-based learning, and learning technology. His main research work is the design of web-based 
systems with applications to education. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Yu-Ju Lan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang Facilitating EFL Reading through Mobile-Supported Cooperation  
 
Language Learning & Technology 33 
APPENDIX A.  Questionnaires for User Interface and Overall Functions of MCER+ System 
Questionnaire 1. Interface Evaluation Questionnaire of MCER+ System 
System pages Items 1 2 3 4 5 
Suggestions 
for refining 
system 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The interface design is clear 
for users to understand.       
 
The font size and color make 
reading comfortable.      
 
The webpage is easy to 
navigate.        
 
The webpage shows a suitable 
amount of information.       
 
The way of presenting the 
information is easy to read and 
to understand.  
     
 
It properly presents the reading 
comprehension questions.      
 
The screen background 
provides a good fit with the 
information without disturbing 
the users’ main task.  
     
 
Each link is properly labeled.        
General suggestions for interface 
improvement  
Note. Each of the system pages is accompanied by this questionnaire.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
an example page 
Yu-Ju Lan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang Facilitating EFL Reading through Mobile-Supported Cooperation  
 
Language Learning & Technology 34 
Questionnaire 2. Usability Questionnaire of MCER+ System 
Dimensions Items 1 2 3 4 5 
Suggestions 
for refining 
system 
Usefulness It helps me manage the students’ personal learning 
activities in the system.      
 
It helps me manage the whole-class learning activities in 
the system.      
 
It helps me understand students’ learning process in the 
system.      
 
The data of student’s learning process shown in the 
system help me better understand the student learning 
outcomes. 
     
 
The system clearly shows student peer assessment in the 
teacher module and helps me understand the results of 
the activity. 
     
 
Ease of Use It is easy to add both phonetic words and sight words to 
the system.      
 
It is easy to post the reading comprehension questions.       
It is easy to enter and organize student data.       
It is easy to set up and manipulate student learning 
activities in the system.      
 
Ease of 
Learning 
It is easy to learn to add both sight words and phonetic 
words to the system.      
 
It is easy to learn to post the reading comprehension 
questions.      
 
It is easy to learn to enter and organize student data.       
It is easy to learn to set up and manipulate student 
learning activities in the system.      
 
Satisfaction The system provides appropriate sight words.       
The system provides appropriate phonetic words.        
The context of the articles are appropriate.         
The system provides a proper way to set up standards to 
help students reach goals.       
 
General 
suggestions for 
improvement 
  
 
Yu-Ju Lan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang Facilitating EFL Reading through Mobile-Supported Cooperation  
 
Language Learning & Technology 35 
APPENDIX B.  Attitude Questionnaire of EFL Learning 
Num. Items 
Strongly 
agree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
disagree 
4 3 2 1 
1 I like reading English stories.      
2 I like listening to English songs.     
3 I like watching English cartoons or movies.      
4 
I like participating in English-related activities, 
such as English oral reading contests, English 
drama contests, etc.  
    
5 I like attending English classes.     
6 I learn very useful knowledge in English classes.      
7 I can understand the sentences I have learned.      
8 I can make a self-introduction in English.      
9 I can use an English dictionary to help me learn English.      
10 I can read English stories; when I encounter new words, I look them up in the dictionary.      
11 I can write out my thoughts in English.      
Note. This is a translation of the questionnaire written in Chinese that was originally administered to this study’s young students. 
 
REFERENCES 
Attewell, J., & Webster, T. (2004). Engaging and supporting mobile learners. In J. Attewell & C. Savill-
Smith (Eds.), Mobile learning anytime everywhere: A book of papers from MLEARN 2004 (pp. 15–20). 
London, UK: Learning and Skills Development Agency. 
Central News Agency (2011). Taiwan ranked 25th in the global English proficiency ranking of 44 
countries which was far behind Japan and Korea. Retrieved from 
http://www.cna.com.tw/postwrite/P5/80405.aspx 
Chang, H. Y. (2007). The influence of Readers Theater on the fifth graders’ English reading 
comprehension and learning attitudes (Master’s thesis). Retrieved from http://ndltd.ncl.edu.tw/cgi-
bin/gs32/gsweb.cgi?o=dnclcdr&s=id=%22095NHLTC576005%22.&searchmode=basic 
Yu-Ju Lan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang Facilitating EFL Reading through Mobile-Supported Cooperation  
 
Language Learning & Technology 36 
Chang, V. W. (2006). English language education in Taiwan: A comprehensive survey. Journal of 
Education Resources and Research, 69, 129–144. Retrieved from 
http://search.nioerar.edu.tw/edu_paper/data_image/g0000219/0n69/20060400/p0000129.pdf 
Chang, C. K, & Hsu, C. K. (2011). A mobile-assisted synchronously collaborative translation-annotation 
system for English as a foreign language (EFL) reading comprehension. Computer Assisted Language 
Learning, 24(2), 155−180.  
Chinnery, G. (2006). Going to the MALL: Mobile assisted language learning. Language Learning & 
Technology, 10(1), 9−16. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol10num1/emerging/default.html. 
Chen, Y. Z. (2007, August 22). In the English skills ranking, Taiwan was ranked fourth to last and was 
only better than China, Bangladesh, and Saudi Arabia. Dajiyuan. Retrieved from 
http://tw.epochtimes.com/b5/7/8/22/n1809674.htm 
Collins, A., Joseph, D., & Bielaczyc, K. (2004). Design research: Theoretical and methodological issues. 
The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 13(1), 15−42. 
Cui, G, & Wang, S. (2008). Adopting cell phones in EFL teaching and learning. Journal of Educational 
Technology Development and Exchange, 1(1), 69−80. 
Day, R.R., & Bamford, J. (1998). Extensive reading in the second language classroom. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Flege, J.E., Yeni-Komshian, G.H., & Liu, S. (1999). Age constraints on second-language acquisition. 
Journal of Memory and Language 41, 78–104. Retrieved from 
http://www.jimflege.com/files/Flege_Yeni-Komshian_age_constraints_JML_1999.pdf 
Foorman, B.R., & Torgesen, J. (2001). Critical elements of classroom and small-group instruction 
promote reading success in all children. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 16(4), 203−212. 
George, J., & Patrick, G. (2002). Reading alone together: Enhancing extensive reading via student-student 
cooperation. Reading Online, 5(6), 16−25. 
Ghaith, G. (2003). Effects of the learning together model of cooperative learning on English as a foreign 
language reading achievement, academic self-esteem, and feelings of school alienation. Bilingual 
Research Journal, 27(3), 451−474. 
Good, R.H., & Kaminski, R.A. (Eds.). (2002). Dynamic indicators of basic early literacy skills (6th ed.). 
Eugene, OR: Institute for the development of educational achievement. Retrieved from 
http://dibels.uoregon.edu/ 
Huang, Y.M., Huang, Y.M., Huang, S.H., & Lin, Y.T. (2012). A ubiquitous English vocabulary learning 
system: Evidence of active/passive attitudes vs. usefulness/ease-of-use. Computers & Education, 58, 273–
282. 
Hwang, W.Y., & Chen, H.S.L. (2013). Users’ familiar situational contexts facilitate the practice of EFL in 
elementary schools with mobile devices. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 26(2), 101−125.  
Klopfer, E., Squire, K., & Jenkins, H. (2002). Environment detectives: PDAs as a window into a virtual 
simulated world. In M. Milrad, U. Hoppe, & Kinshuk (Eds.). Proceedings of IEEE International 
Workshop on Wireless and Mobile Technologies in Education. Växjö, Sweden: IEEE Computer Society, 
95−98. 
Kukulska-Hulme, A. & Shield, L. (2008) An overview of mobile assisted language learning: From 
content delivery to supported collaboration and interaction. ReCALL, 20(3). 249−252. 
 
Yu-Ju Lan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang Facilitating EFL Reading through Mobile-Supported Cooperation  
 
Language Learning & Technology 37 
Lan, Y. J. (in press). The research on computer assisted cooperative learning for early EFL reading. In H. 
W. Ko (Ed.), Technology and Language Learning. Taipei, Taiwan: Higher Education Process. 
Lan, Y.J., Chang, K.E., & Sung, Y.T. (2004). DIAMOND hunt: A reading teaching approach for EFL 
beginners’ reading skills development. In F. Malpica, F. Welsch, & A. Tremante (Eds.), Proceedings of 
International Conference on Education and Information Systems: Technologies and Applications, 3, 
92−96. 
Lan, Y.J., Sung, Y.T., & Chang, K.E. (2006). Collaborative early EFL reading among distributed 
learners: A simulation pilot study. The Journal of JALT CALL, 2(2), 53−65. 
Lan, Y.J., Sung, Y.T., & Chang, K.E. (2007). A mobile-devices-supported peer-assisted learning system 
for collaborative early EFL reading. Language Learning & Technology, 11(3), 130−151. Retrieved from: 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol11num3/pdf/lansungchang.pdf 
Lan, Y.J., Sung, Y.T., & Chang, K.E. (2009). Let us read together: Development and evaluation of a 
computer assisted reciprocal early English reading system. Computers & Education, 53(4), 1188−1198. 
Liu, T.Y., & Chu, Y.L. (2010). Using ubiquitous games in an English listening and speaking course: 
Impact on learning outcomes and motivation. Computers & Education, 55(2), 630−643. 
Lund, A.M. (2001 October). Measuring usability with the USE Questionnaire. Usability Interface: The 
usability SIG newsletter of the Society for Technical Communications, 8(2). Retrieved from 
http://www.stcsig.org/usability/newsletter/0110_measuring_with_use.html 
Mathes, P.G., Torgesen, J.K., & Allor, J.H. (2001). The effects of peer-assisted literacy strategies for 
first-grade readers with and without additional computer assisted instruction in phonological awareness, 
American Educational Research Journal, 38, 371−410. 
Ministry of Education. (2001) General guidelines of grades 1-9 curriculum for elementary and junior 
high school education. Retrieved from http://www.fhjh.tp.edu.tw/eng_www/G1-9%20curriculum.doc 
Morita, M. (2003). The Mobile-based learning (MBL) in Japan. In Y. Kambayashi, S. Konomi, & K. 
Rose (Eds.), Proceedings of the First Conference on Creating, Connecting and Collaborating through 
Computing. Retrieved from http://csdl2.computer.org/comp/proceedings/c5/2003/1975/00/19750128.pdf 
National Reading Panel. (2000). Teaching children to read: An evidence-based assessment of the 
scientific research literature on reading and its implications for reading instruction. Retrieved from 
http://www.pbs.org/teacherline/courses/rdla155/pdfs/c2s5_11teachingchildren.pdf 
National Science Council. (2005). Key points of implementation for NSC subsidized application and 
promotion plans of science education research results. Retrieved from 
http://law.nsc.gov.tw/LawContentDetails.aspx?id=FL035276&KeyWordHL=&StyleType=1 
National Science Council. (2010). Yearly survey of promotion and application of research projects results 
funded by NSC’s department of science education. Retrieved from 
http://www.nsc.gov.tw/sci/public/Attachment/0102910521571.doc 
Reed, J. (2002). The pedagogical challenges for western ESL teachers in Asia. Contact, 28(4), 1−8. 
Sandberg, J., Maris, M., & de Geus, K. (2011). Mobile English learning: An evidence-based study with 
fifth graders. Computers & Education, 57(1), 1334−1347. 
Shih, M., Feng, J., & Tsai, C.-C. (2008) Research and trends in the field of e-learning from 2001 to 2005: 
A content analysis of cognitive studies in selected journals. Computers & Education, 51, 955−967. 
Soloway, E., Norris, C., Blumenfeld, P., Fishman, B., Krajcik, J., & Marx, R. (2001 June). Log on 
education: Handheld devices are ready-at-hand. Communications of the ACM, 44(6), 15−20. 
Yu-Ju Lan, Yao-Ting Sung, and Kuo-En Chang Facilitating EFL Reading through Mobile-Supported Cooperation  
 
Language Learning & Technology 38 
Sung, Y.T., Huang, C.C., & Chang, K.E. (2006 July). The design and application of a mobile devices-
based real time formative assessment system. Paper presented at the meeting of the IADIS International 
Conference Mobile Learning, Dublin, Ireland. 
Taipei City Government’s Department of Education. (2000). Curriculum guidelines of elementary 
English language teaching and learning. Retrieved from Curriculum Guidelines Download  
Taipei City Government’s Department of Education. (2012). “English Easy Go VI” － The best English 
reading material is published! Retrieved from 
http://www.edunet.taipei.gov.tw/ct.asp?xItem=14380130&ctNode=22621&mp=104021 
Thornton, P., & Houser, C. (2005). Using mobile phones in English education in Japan. Journal of 
Computer Assisted Learning, 21(3), 217−228. 
Ushioda, E. (1996). Learner autonomy 5: The role of motivation. Dublin, Ireland: Authentik. 
Wu, Y.M. (2004). Implementing the theory of multiple intelligences in English teaching to improve 
students’ learning attitude: An action research study (Mater’s thesis). Retrieved from 
http://ndltd.ncl.edu.tw/cgi-
bin/gs32/gsweb.cgi?o=dnclcdr&s=id=%22092NTPTC694022%22.&searchmode=basic  
Wu, T.T., Sung, T.W., Huang, Y.M., Yang, C.S., & Yang, J.T. (2011). Ubiquitous English learning 
system with dynamic personalized guidance of learning portfolio. Educational Technology & Society, 14 
(4), 164–180. 
