Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2013/chen.pdf 
June 2013, Volume 17, Number 2 
pp. 143–170 
 
Copyright © 2013, ISSN 1094-3501 143 
IDENTITY PRACTICES OF MULTILINGUAL WRITERS IN SOCIAL 
NETWORKING SPACES 
Hsin-I Chen, Tunghai University 
This study examines the literacy practices of two multilingual writers in social networking 
communities. The findings show that the multilingual writers explored and reappropriated 
symbolic resources afforded by the social networking site as they aligned themselves with 
particular collective and personal identities at local and global levels. Through the designs 
available to them in these online environments, multilingual writers constructed multiple 
identities that were dynamic and developmental over time. The writers demonstrated that 
they adopted different strategies and subject positions when participating in online-
networked discourses. Analysis and understanding of these digitally mediated multiliterate 
practices—by researchers, teachers, and learners alike—may provide insight into 
pedagogies that recognize and even affirm these practices. 
Keywords: Technology-Mediated Communication, Social Networking, Identity, ICT 
Literacies 
APA Citation: Chen, H. I. (2013). Identity practices of multilingual writers in social 
networking spaces. Language Learning & Technology, 17(2), 143–170. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2013/chen.pdf 
Received: December 1, 2011; Accepted: January 12, 2013; Published: June 1, 2013 
Copyright: © Hsin-I Chen 
INTRODUCTION 
Over the past few decades, there has been a move in Second Language Acquisition (SLA) from a concern 
with the linguistic and cognitive consequences of literacy acquisition towards a broader consideration of 
literacy as a social practice (Street, 1993). In the latter view, literacy learning, regardless whether it 
pertains to a first language (L1) or second language (L2), is understood as a social process in which 
language learners/users actively participate, enacting particular social roles and negotiating their situated 
identities (Lam, 2000). As such, identity should not be seen as a fixed, singular possession but as 
developmental, plural matters that are shaped and reshaped through learners’ ongoing interactions and 
negotiations with others in specific communities of practice (Buckingham, 2008; Lave & Wegner, 1991; 
Pavlenko & Blackledge, 2004). The identity of the language learner indicates the ways in which language 
learners understand their relationship to the target language and to the social world. Examinations of how 
learners socially construct and transform identities across time and space thus help teachers discover the 
learners’ language learning journey (Norton, 2000).  
While much attention has been focused on learner identity and the L2 enculturation process in face-to-
face communities, Internet-mediated communities such as social networking sites (SNSs) have not been 
extensively explored for their potential in shaping the interdependency of learner identity and literacy 
learning (Pavlenko & Norton, 2007). With the growth of the Internet and computer-mediated 
communication (CMC) tools, new technologies such as Web 2.0 tools (e.g., blog, wiki, video games) and 
other CMC technologies have altered human communication, information media, and most importantly, 
the ways in which language is used and how information is presented (Williams, 2009). The Internet and 
digital tools have challenged traditional views of literacy and literacy learning as acquiring linguistic 
elements that are fixed, rule-governed, monomodal, and static; they have redefined literacies as social 
practices that are fluid, sociocultural, multimodal, and dynamic. In addressing the relationships between 
literacy/-ies and the rising demands of technology and increasing lingual and cultural diversity, a 
Hsin-I Chen Identity Practices of Multilingual Writers in Social Networking Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology 144 
multiliteracies perspective emphasizes the multiplicity and multimodality of literacy as social practices in 
human communication and how such features of literacy affect language learning and teaching (New 
London Group, 1996). Recent literature in SLA has shown the potential of emerging technologies for 
their educational value, as well as their promise for L2 literacy development, social engagement, 
authorship and readership, agency promotion, intercultural understanding, and community construction 
(e.g., see Belz, 2003; Black, 2008, 2009; Gee, 2007; Kramsch, A’Ness, & Lam, 2000; Lam, 2000, 2004, 
2009; Thorne, Black, & Sykes, 2009; Warschauer & Grimes, 2007). 
Despite the many advantages of CMC tools identified by SLA scholars, the dynamics of multilingual 
writers’ literacy practices and identity constructions in social networking communities are still unclear. 
Yet, as multilingual writers often enjoy simultaneous membership in a number of diverse cultural 
communities, complexity is added to their literacy learning, identity formation, socialization, and 
engagement in online communities (Canagarajah, 2002, 2006, 2010). Questions arise that remain 
unexplored: How do multilingual writers participate in literacy practices and construct identities in the 
online social networking space? How do these identities change and develop over time? Empirical studies 
that address these questions could shed light on SLA and identity studies in relation to CMC.    
In order to explore these research questions, this study adopts a case study approach and examines two 
multilingual writers literacy practices and their construction of online identities in one social networking 
site, Facebook, over a two-year period. I use the term multilingual writer in this paper to refer to people 
who use more than one language in everyday life, specifically, those who write in more than one language. 
As such, with digital tools afforded by SNSs, multilingual users engage in varying writing activities and 
write themselves into SNSs (boyd, 2007). A longitudinal study of L2 users’ social networking activity 
with a particular focus on literacy development and identity representation yields valuable insights into 
L2 and multilingual learners’ meaning-making process (Choi, Kim, Sohn, & Sung, 2011; Duff, 2008; 
Jackson, 2008). Drawing on poststructuralist perspectives on identity, I conceptualize identity as socially 
contingent relations between the learner and others, in that it is multiple, complex, and a site of struggle 
(Norton, 2000; Pavlenko, 2002). Such a view challenges the monolingual and monocultural bias in SLA 
research and argues for a dynamic perspective that views multilingual individuals as members of multiple 
ethnic, social, and cultural communities with multidimensional identities.  
Through mixed quantitative and qualitative methodology, this study explores how the multimodal choices 
afforded by Facebook allowed the two multilingual writers to develop and negotiate multiple identities 
and affiliations within/across diverse networks. An analysis of status updates, information sharings, and 
other SNS-mediated activities provide valuable insights into the diverse, complex, and dynamic choices 
multilingual writers make when entering and socializing in new discourse communities. The aim is to 
further understand how social networking sites and other Internet-mediated online communities provide 
opportunities for language learners/users to participate and navigate across multiple identities in various 
social and cultural networks. From a pedagogical perspective, the exploration of multilingual writers’ use 
and appropriation of various symbolic resources in online communities can not only contribute to our 
knowledge of the interdependency between literacy, identity, and Internet-based communication but also 
serve as a window to examine learners’ meaning-making and socialization process over time. An 
understanding of the ways learners construct and transform identities from a longitudinal perspective 
helps language teachers uncover learners’ learning trajectories, further allowing language teachers to 
assist learners in developing symbolic competence and critical awareness of the affordances of digitally 
mediated meaning-making resources for identity formation.  
Social Networking Sites and Second Language Learning 
Social networking sites (SNSs) such as MySpace, Facebook, and Twitter, have grown in popularity 
worldwide, attracting millions of users in the past few years. As of October 2012, Facebook, the leading 
SNS, had one billion active users around the world, with approximately 81% of Facebook users being 
Hsin-I Chen Identity Practices of Multilingual Writers in Social Networking Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology 145 
located outside of the United States and Canada. Facebook is available in 70 languages and embraces 
multilingual and multicultural users (Facebook, 2012). This evidence shows that Facebook has become a 
medium for communication across the globe, providing a cosmopolitan and plurilingual linguistic 
landscape for its multilingual users.  
With their various technological and networking affordances (i.e., profiles, status updates, shared links, 
synchronous chats, asynchronous messages, photo sharings), SNSs like Facebook allow users to maintain 
and develop social ties, both online and offline, through participation in a multifaceted and multisensory 
environment (Jones & Bronack, 2008). While Facebook allows various writing activities, each writing 
practice affords and constrains certain texts and requires that users possess specific digital literacy skills. 
For example, status updates, a popular feature of Facebook, allow users to post text-based messages, 
photos, and videos for all their designated friends to read. Facebook users can also share information such 
as hyperlinks, videos, images, and news articles through the share function. Furthermore, what makes 
SNSs unique is that they enable users to articulate and make visible their social networks through public 
displays of friend lists and wall-to-wall postings (boyd & Ellison, 2007) to “networked publics,” groups 
of audiences that are bound together through technological networks (boyd, 2007, p. 8). The interactions 
and affiliations between members of the networked publics are mediated through various literacy 
activities such as status updates and information sharings and also symbolic actions including Friend, 
Like, Tag, Poke, ReTweet, and Share that are afforded by Web 2.0 tools (Knobel & Lankshear, 2008). 
Such social networking communities appear to have significant affordances for language acquisition and 
potential as pedagogical tools in support of L2 learning (Godwin-Jones, 2008). Vie (2007) states that 
SNSs afford language learners various writing activities and provide a naturalized space for socialization 
by situating literacy practices and human activities in particular online contexts where learners are 
exposed to authentic language use for particular social purposes. Mills (2011), examining SNSs in a 
French-as-a-foreign-language classroom, discovered that by using Facebook as an authentic environment 
for enhancing communication, interaction, and discussions in French, her students were able to meet the 
grammatical, functional, and linguistic objectives of her French language course. She found that the 
incorporation of SNSs like Facebook in L2 classrooms creates authentic opportunities for learning, fosters 
multimodal literacy, and promotes learners’ meaningful social interactions, development of community 
memberships, and shared cultural understanding. Similarly, Blattner and Fiori (2011) observed 15 L2 
learners in an intermediate Spanish course and found that over the course of a semester, learners, through 
the Facebook-mediated awareness-raising tasks, developed linguistic repertoire and socio-pragmatic 
competence such as greetings and leave-takings. Hence, SNSs provide opportunities for L2 learners to 
develop socio-pragmatic competence (e.g., Blattner & Fiori, 2009, 2011; McBride, 2009), a sense of 
community (e.g., Mills, 2011), authentic language interaction and discussion (e.g., Godwin-Jones, 2008), 
cultural understanding (e.g., Mitchell, 2012), and learner motivation and engagement (e.g., Haverback, 
2009) while learners are observing and engaging in multifaceted SNS literacy practices. 
In SNSs, identity is constructed through impression management, network structure management, and 
bridging of online and offline social networks (boyd & Ellison, 2007). To explore the sense of “who we 
are and the relationship to the world” (Kanno, 2003, p. 3), SNS users create virtual “subject positions” 
(Kramsch, 2009, p. 20) for themselves through the discursive choices and selective appropriation of 
symbolic resources in words, photos, videos, and other modalities. Due to the public exposure of SNS 
participants, users’ posted literacy practices reflect how they project themselves in relation to others in the 
SNS space, and more importantly, how they want others to perceive them in particular social networks. 
SNS users exercise their agency and relate to the question of “who am I” through deliberate choices and 
appropriations of language, discourse, social role, and projection of cultural values and beliefs. SNS posts 
therefore reflect the dynamic development of an individual’s identity/-ies. 
 
Hsin-I Chen Identity Practices of Multilingual Writers in Social Networking Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology 146 
Identity Construction of L2 Users/Learners in Social Networking Spaces 
To understand how language users/learners construct identities in online communities like SNSs, it is 
important to investigate the extent to which network-mediated literacy practices promote new forms of 
identities through hybrid textual practices in online environments. Lam (2004) studied the language used 
by two adolescent Chinese immigrants to the United States in a bilingual Chinese and English chatroom. 
She found that the Chinese youth, Yu Qing and Tsu Ying, used a hybrid form of English and Romanized 
Chinese to represent their dual linguistic identities available in “neither the social categories of English-
speaking Americans nor those of Cantonese-speaking Chinese” (Lam, 2004, p. 45). Through this mixed-
code variety of English and Chinese, the Chinese youth adopted and negotiated new forms of use and 
developed textual identities that indicate group affiliation. In another case study, Lam (2009) investigated 
the instant messaging practices of a Chinese adolescent immigrant in the United States and found that the 
student negotiated multiple identities and created affiliations with a local Chinese immigrant community, 
the translocal network of an Asian American youth group, and transnational relationships with her peers 
in China through varying digitally-mediated textual practices such as vernacular English use and 
multidialectal use of Cantonese, Mandarin, and Shanghaiese. Communication technologies like instant 
messaging provided a space for the youth migrant, Kaiyee, to engage in an ongoing dialogue, and in the 
process design her multilayered identities and affiliations with various social groups, both translocally, 
and transnationally.  
In a study of learner identity and L2 use in SNSs, Pasfield-Neofitou (2011) examined the informal use of 
SNS by native speakers of English and Japanese across two SNSs, Facebook (English-medium SNS) and 
Mixi (Japanese-medium SNS). The learners were shown to align themselves with a reference group and 
positioned themselves with various identities through conscious selections of different languages in the 
Japanese and English domains. The L2 learners’ language choices reflected their sense of ownership of a 
particular language and indexed their online identity as foreigners. For instance, Kaylene, the Australian 
learner of Japanese in the study, highlighted her foreignness with an opening statement in her Mixi Profile 
“I’m sorry, this blog will probably end up being very badly written and the Japanese is that of a foreigner, 
or even Kaylese,” which foregrounds her non-native identity (Pasfield-Neofitou, 2011, p. 102). The 
studies conducted by Lam (2004, 2009) and Pasfield-Neofitou (2011) provide evidence that the hybridity 
and diversity of language practices and linguistic repertoires of language learners become mediating tools 
for meaning-making and participating in the digitally mediated activity (Gutiérrez, Baquedano-López, & 
Tejeda, 1999).  
Extending Lam’s (2000) notion of textual identity, which privileges the role of language in identity 
formation in online discourse, the term multimodal identity has emerged with the multimodalities 
available in SNSs. Analyzing an SNS page as a dynamic, multimodal hypertext reflecting the user’s 
identity, Knobel and Lankshear (2008) examined the socially recognized ways, meaningful content, 
encoded texts, and participation in discourses evident in the Facebook profiles of two individuals. They 
found that the users’ different qualitative use of wall posts, status updates, and collocations with other 
technologies reflect their socially identifiable ways of engaging in the SNS space. Thus, SNSs are ideal 
places for the virtual construction of self since the users can design their profiles with multimodal 
resources such as texts, photos, videos, and hyperlinks. Zhao, Grasmuck, and Martin (2008) looked at 
how Facebook users present their “hoped for possible selves” by “showing rather than telling” (p. 1816). 
They showed that identity construction on an SNS profile tends to be rather implicit (through affiliations 
with certain activities) than explicit, since SNS like Facebook gives users resources but also constraints, 
and users are forced to adhere to the SNS’s layout. 
While more studies on identity formation and SNSs have been done in L1 contexts, several studies have 
examined identity representations among multilingual learners on SNSs. Depew and Miller-Cochran 
(2010) examined the choices of languages, registers, and technological tools of three L2 advanced 
students—an undergraduate senior, a master’s student, and a doctoral student—in social networking 
Hsin-I Chen Identity Practices of Multilingual Writers in Social Networking Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology 147 
spaces. They concluded that engagement in text-based practices relied on the technological features of 
SNSs and that the students’ hybrid literacy practices were driven by their anticipated audience. Depew 
and Miller-Cochran’s study indicates that the L2 writers wrote themselves visually, textually, and aurally 
into online spaces and represented themselves with different identity constructs in relation to global and 
local discourses. Continuing this line of inquiry through an in-depth case study, Depew (2011) examined 
the writing strategies that three L2 students adopted in designing their visual self on SNSs and concluded 
that the students, with different writing strategies, shuttled between the linguistic and cultural repertoires. 
While Bakul, a student from India speaking Gujarati as her L1 and Hindi and English as L2s, shifted 
between formal and informal registers in her linguistic production on Facebook profile pages; Dhanesh, a 
generation 1.5 student speaking Gujarati as his L1 and English, Hindi, and Polish as L2s, negotiated his 
Indian heritage identity and American identity through his deliberate choice of account name with the 
term “desi” and shared links to the university organizations he was engaged in with comments like  “I am 
Hindu and I am proud to be one!” to signal his Indian heritage (Depew, 2011, p. 66).  
To summarize, these studies highlight the multiplicity and complexity of multilingual learners’ subject 
positions and identities and recognize the ways in which language, identity, agency, and cultural beliefs 
are inextricably intertwined in digitally mediated literacy practices. The research shows that online 
communities such as chat rooms, instant messaging, and SNSs, afford multilingual learners—like Yu 
Qing and Tsu Ying (Lam, 2004), Kaiyee (Lam, 2009), and Bakul and Dhanesh (Depew, 2011)—a hybrid, 
dynamic “third space” (Bhatia, 1994) that enables new and alternative identity options and allows 
multilingual learners, with their semiotic repertoires and cultural values, to navigate across multiple 
languages, identities, and cultures. With the affordances of digital tools, SNSs provide learners an 
additional space in which they construct and reconstruct identities while engaging in multimodal SNS-
mediated activities. 
Building upon previous research, this study explores how two multilingual writers use the semiotic 
resources available to them through Facebook to construct and develop their identities over a two-year 
period during their graduate studies in the United States. Sojourned students present an interesting group 
because they are second language learners/users “who have both physically and symbolically crossed the 
border” (Pavlenko & Lantolf, 2001, p. 174). With pre-established connections with their home countries 
and cultures, these students come to the host country and engage in situated literacy practices in the new 
community, both online and offline, with their multilingual and multicultural repertoires; these students 
may encounter challenges in terms of facing language barriers, achieving academic goals, and 
experiencing social/cultural adjustment in the host country (Trice, 2003). As SNSs allow unique 
affordances for the process of designing self, and moreover a recorded history of acts of self-presentation 
and interaction, an analysis of identity construction in Facebook status updates and posts can help in 
discovering the different ways in which multilingual users can participate in online discourse and, in so 
doing, take up space in different social worlds.  
METHODOLOGY 
Participants 
Two multilingual writers, Jane and Cindy (pseudonyms), participated in this study. Jane and Cindy were 
international graduate students at a university in the southwestern United States. Both writers were in 
their mid 20s and began their graduate studies in fall 2009. Both speak Mandarin Chinese as their L1 and 
started learning English at the age of 13 at middle schools in China. 
Jane was a doctoral student in the field of Applied Linguistics. She arrived to the United States in August 
2009 from China. Jane was born and raised in a city in the Henan province in Central China and moved to 
Shanghai, a cosmopolitan city, for undergraduate and graduate studies. Before coming to the United 
States, Jane had received a bachelor’s and master’s degree in English Literature in China. Based on my 
Hsin-I Chen Identity Practices of Multilingual Writers in Social Networking Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology 148 
participant observation in offline settings, Jane mostly socialized with American peers in her program 
and/or international friends she met at social events or at church. Jane lived with her husband who is also 
Chinese. Jane was very aware that she had little exposure to English at home, speaking only Chinese with 
her husband, and she wanted to practice more English with her school friends in both online and offline 
contexts. When asked about her experience with social networking sites, Jane acknowledged that she had 
joined Facebook in January 2009 but had minimally interacted. While still in China, Jane had actively 
participated in RenRen, a leading Chinese-medium SNS. RenRen, founded in December 2005, is a 
Chinese social networking service that exists as the Chinese remake of Facebook. With similar functions 
as Facebook, RenRen allows users to develop social networks and connect with one another through 
synchronous chats, asynchronous messages, photo postings, information sharings, and other SNS-
mediated features. As of October, 2012, RenRen had over 70 million users in total, with 31 million active 
monthly users (RenRen, 2012). Jane, like many other Chinese students, was an active RenRen user prior 
to her departure to the United States. However, she commented that after arriving to her PhD studies, she 
used Facebook with increasing frequency as a means to build local friendships, participating in RenRen 
much less.  
Cindy was a master’s student at the same institution but in a different discipline—Chinese Linguistics. 
She began her master’s degree in August 2009, the same year that Jane entered her doctoral program. 
Cindy also came from China and was born and raised in a major city in the Sicuan province in 
southwestern China. After her secondary education, she moved to Nanjing, China for undergraduate and 
graduate studies, both in Chinese Literature. She was admitted to an MA program in the US institution 
during the final year of her master’s degree program at a Chinese institution. She earned her first MA 
degree from the Chinese institution after two semesters in the United States while continuing with studies 
for a second master’s degree in the US institution. Cindy joined Facebook in January 2009 and actively 
participated in RenRen even after her arrival. Based on her own assessment, Cindy mainly used RenRen 
to maintain friendships in China and Facebook to communicate with new friends in the United States. In 
offline contexts, Cindy often socialized with her Chinese peers who were enrolled in the same program 
and/or Chinese friends she met at social events held by the Chinese student association at the university. 
Cindy commented “I felt awkward when I speak English because my English is not good” (Interview with 
Cindy, November 4, 2011). Even if Cindy expressed that she made attempts or wished to improve her 
English, she had few opportunities to interact with native English speakers due to the scarcity of native 
English speakers in her program. Her discomfort in speaking English also prompted her to live in an 
apartment with another Chinese girl from her program. 
Overall, Jane and Cindy demonstrated similar profiles in many ways, but varied in their ways of 
interacting in and through Facebook throughout their studies in the United States. Their profiles also 
show how a group of sojourned students, with multilingual and multicultural repertories, take diverse 
pathways in entering the host country (Jackson, 2007). It is thus of interest to examine the ways these 
learners participate in the literacy practices and construct identities while socializing into the new 
community over time, and more importantly, in an online networked discourse. 
Data Collection and Analysis  
A case study approach was adopted in this study1 in order to contextualize the analysis of the participants’ 
online practices and tracking changes over time (Dyson & Genishi, 2005). To understand more 
holistically how the multilingual writers participated in the social networking site Facebook, I built the 
study using multiple data sources including: (a) participants’ Facebook pages and SNS use, (b) semi-
structured interviews (Seidman, 1998), and (c) field notes from participant observation, both online and 
offline. Facebook was chosen for the study due to its popularity in the United States. Background surveys 
were conducted prior to the project to gain insight into the writers’ language learning histories and 
experiences with social media. The writers’ SNS use over two years was collected for frequency and 
content analysis (Jones et al., 2008). Semi-structured interviews were conducted after the initial content 
Hsin-I Chen Identity Practices of Multilingual Writers in Social Networking Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology 149 
analysis to assist in the interpretation of their experience with Facebook. As Androutsopoulos (2008) 
points out, such case studies that take into account the participants’ awareness and interpretation of their 
own practices can prove invaluable in arriving at more integrated conclusions. 
As an international graduate student who has pursued a doctoral degree in the United States, I have been 
involved in the international student community and share the experience of studying abroad. My 
proficiency in Mandarin and familiarity with the local student community helped me develop a degree of 
rapport with the participants. I socialized with them both in person and on Facebook, which allowed me 
to observe their participation and interactions with others in both online and offline contexts. Field notes 
were taken during my participant observations. 
While qualitative approaches are advocated by many scholars to be the best approach to investigating 
online communities such as SNSs (Thomsen, Straubhaar, & Bolyard, 1998), a quantitative approach 
allows a more holistic view of language practices in educational contexts, particularly in a longitudinal 
study (Johnson, 1992). With the permission of the participants2, I collected their SNS postings from 
January 2009 to May 2011 and adapted Jones et al.’s (2008) content analysis to analyze their Facebook 
pages. The frequency analysis documented patterns and changes in the writers’ use of literacy practices 
(e.g., status updates, wall-to-wall posts, information sharings). The number of status updates (SUs) and 
information sharings (ISs) were recorded as was the language used and the identities reflected in each 
post. It should be noted that SUs and ISs were chosen on the basis of their salience in the participants’ 
SNS use compared with other practices (e.g., chats, messages). Although SUs and ISs share many 
similarities, I distinguish ISs from SUs based on one significant difference: the availability of links to 
outside information. While both ISs and SUs allow users to post print words and multimodal texts such as 
photos and videos, Facebook users can only post photos or/and videos that are stored in their own 
computers when composing SUs. ISs, in contrast, enable users to share hyperlinks to external sources that 
they encounter in other webpages. While SUs contain messages that users want to share with their friends, 
ISs, such as videos, hyperlinks, and other multimodal contents, also signal personal interests and 
investments and thus present aspects of a user’s identity (Knobel & Lankshear, 2008). For example, in 
one of the SUs, Jane posted, “So we don’t have stats class this week, right?” (see Figure 1, on the left). 
This text-based SU about a graduate-level statistic class indicates Jane’s student identity that seeks class 
information. In an IS activity, Jane shared multimodal contents from the PHD (Piled Higher and Deeper) 
Comic, a web comic strip that deals with issues of life in graduate school, with external hyperlinks (see 
Figure 1, on the right). In these two examples, although the SU is more text-based and the IS involves 
multimodal contents from external sources, both activities index Jane’s identity as a graduate student. 
 
 
Figure 1. Jane’s status update about a graduate-level statistic class (left), and information sharing of the 
PHD Comic (right). 
In addition to the frequency analysis, I conducted a qualitative content analysis of the SNS posts, 
specifically focusing on identity representations. Viewing identity as indexical and constructed through 
symbolic practices, a colleague and I first read and tagged each post with specific identities and discussed 
the posts where we did not agree. Through a process of grouping and re-grouping, we identified 12 
categories: five indexed traditional roles (human, friend, girlfriend, student, and teacher), and seven 
indexed cultural and community participation (general, Chinese, local, American, global, university, 
professional). Coded categories, definitions, and examples are presented in the Appendix. My colleague 
Hsin-I Chen Identity Practices of Multilingual Writers in Social Networking Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology 150 
and I then went through the same sets of posts again to tag them using the 12 categories, allowing for 
double or triple categorization when necessary. We reached an inter-rater reliability of 98%. The intention 
here was not to advocate absolute categories, but to uncover the multiplicity of identities performed in 
SNS-mediated activities. Based on the primary categorizations, the data was organized into three periods: 
pre-arrival (March 2009 to July 2009), the first academic year (August 2009 to July 2010), and the second 
academic year (October 2010 to May 2011). The aggregated and distribution frequency and percentages 
of identity categories across years (pre-arrival, year 1, and year 2) and totals are presented in the findings. 
Finally, the participants were interviewed as to their authorial intent, their perceptions of SNSs, and their 
experiences in SNS-mediated activities. I then transcribed and analyzed the interviews with their SNS 
posts, corresponding to the research questions. The semi-structured interviews helped uncover 
participants’ actual practice and their own voices and beliefs (Pavlenko & Blackledge, 2004), which 
allowed for a more complete analysis.  
FINDINGS 
This section reports findings in terms of (a) numbers and patterns of the two multilingual writers’ status 
updates and information sharings, (b) language choices of their postings, and (c) identity representations 
in their postings. The interview data and observation field notes are presented here to triangulate with the 
quantitative data.   
SNS Literacy Practices Over Time 
Overall, the two multilingual writers displayed increasing participation on Facebook over time, as evident 
in their SUs and ISs, two of the most common SNS practices on their Facebook pages. As an example, 
Cindy first joined Facebook in January 2009 when she was in China, but as Figure 2 shows, she did not 
actively participate in Facebook posts between January 2009 and August 2009, the period when she was 
in China. Cindy, however, did begin to participate in Facebook use from September 2009 shortly after 
arrived to the United States, and her activity increased throughout her US graduate studies. Jane also 
demonstrated an overall increase in involvement in SUs and ISs. Similar to Cindy, Jane did not actively 
engage in SNS practices until she came to the United States in August 2009, with her SNS use increasing 
over time (see Figure 2). 
 
Figure 2. Cindy’s and Jane’s total SNS practices (status updates and information sharings). 
The SNS activities of both were minimal between June 2010 and August 2010, when both were in China 
for summer vacation. This minimal participation on Facebook is attributed to the fact that Facebook was 
prohibited in China from July 2009 after riots broke out between police and protestors in the Xinjiang 
province. In the interview, Jane confirmed the observation and commented “I didn’t use Facebook when I 
went back to China because it was blocked in China, and I didn’t have access to Facebook” (Interview 
with Jane, November 15, 2011). This Facebook activity decrease supports Villarreal Ballesteros’s (2010) 
0 5 
10 15 
20 25 
Jan 2009 Mar May Jul Sep Nov Jan 2010 Mar May Jul Sep Nov Jan 2011 Mar May n
um
be
r 
pe
r 
m
on
th
 
Cindy Jane 
Hsin-I Chen Identity Practices of Multilingual Writers in Social Networking Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology 151 
claim that SNS use and reflective online identity work could be promoted or constrained by social and 
cultural contexts, ideologies, and power structures. 
Types of Literacy Practices  
These two SNS practices, SUs and ISs, require users to interact with other members on Facebook by 
exploiting different sets of skills and socially developed ways of using technology and knowledge 
(Scribner & Cole, 1981). An examination of the multilingual writers’ participation in the SNS in terms of 
SUs and ISs thus can help to uncover the ways the writers generate, communicate, and negotiate 
meaningful content through “the medium of digitally encoded texts of various kinds in contexts where 
they interact as members of Discourses” (Knobel & Lankshear, 2008, p. 259). The literacy choices 
individuals make in participating in the SNS thus reflect how they want to present themselves and be 
perceived by others in the online space. 
A close investigation of the percentages of their SUs and ISs shows that both Cindy and Jane started with 
SUs as the dominant literacy practice in their early SNS use. As indicated in Figure 3, Cindy began 
information sharing in September 2009, while Jane began in November 2009. This practice emerged only 
after they began their US graduate studies. 
 
Figure 3. Percentage of Cindy’s and Jane’s status updates and information sharings. 
Although Jane and Cindy were engaged in both literacy practices on Facebook over time, Cindy engaged 
less frequently in ISs. SUs dominated Cindy’s SNS activity. When interviewed, Cindy commented on her 
preference for SUs over ISs: 
Sometimes you want others to know more about you…yourself. You want to share your 
current status and what happens to you. You want your friends to follow you too. Sharing 
information is good too, but it is not really about yourself. (Interview with Cindy, 
November 4, 2011; italics are the researcher’s emphasis)  
Cindy’s remarks indicated that she viewed SUs and ISs as two distinct literacy practices with different 
socially recognized goals. For Cindy, while SUs seem to focus more on self-sharing, ISs involved more 
concern with others. In pursuing a specific goal of sharing with others about her life, Cindy perceived and 
exploited the affordance of the SUs as self-reflection/self-sharing to help her achieve that goal.  
Jane, however, displayed increasing exploitation of ISs over time, indicating that she gradually shifted 
from a more self-centered writing practice like the SU to a more other-involved writing practice like IS, 
as evident in her response to her increasing use of ISs over time (see Figure 3). In the interview, she 
commented that she first observed her American friends sharing information and links on Facebook when 
she started engaging in SNS activities. Jane remarked,  
0% 10% 
20% 30% 
40% 50% 
60% 70% 
80% 90% 
100% 
Jan 2009 Mar May Jul Sep Nov Jan 2010 Mar May Jul Sep Nov Jan 2011 Mar May 
Cindy-SU (%) Cindy-IS (%) Jane-SU (%) Jane-IS (%) SUs
 a
nd
 IS
s 
(%
) 
Hsin-I Chen Identity Practices of Multilingual Writers in Social Networking Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology 152 
I wasn’t used to share information. But I noticed that there are more and more people 
sharing information on Facebook now. Sharing is more fun than status update I think…. 
Well, I like to know about others’ lives, but sometimes I doubt if they are interested in 
knowing what’s happening in my life. I like to see the postings others share…. I got to see 
some interesting videos and issues around the world. It’s a good way to bring people with 
similar interests together. And it sometimes can generate good discussion! When I share 
information, I think about my audiences a lot. I only share information what may be 
interesting for them. (Interview with Jane, November 15, 2011; italics are the researcher’s 
emphasis) 
Through this exposure, Jane appropriated IS practices and shared links that attracted her attention and 
those she believed could generate discussions and appeal to her audiences. As Cindy and Jane both 
observed functional and communicative differences across digital literacy practices like SUs and ISs, the 
literacy choices the writers made thus reflected their beliefs about which practices can best support their 
explorations and participations in SNSs. 
Language Selections in SNS Activities  
A close examination was made of which of their available languages were used in what situations. While 
both Mandarin (L1) and English (L2) were used in the two writers’ SUs and ISs, the two languages were 
selected differently by the two writers in terms of quantity and quality.  
Table 1. Frequency Counts of Cindy and Jane’s Status Updates and Information Sharings Language 
Selections 
 Status Update Information Sharing Total 
 Cindy Jane Cindy Jane Cindy Jane 
 n % n % n % n % n % n % 
English 47 34% 94 100% 6 23% 39 95% 53 32% 133 99% 
Mandarin 93 66% 0 0% 20 77% 2 5% 113 68% 2 1% 
Total 140 100% 94 100% 26 100% 41 100% 166 100% 135 100% 
As Table 1 reveals, from Cindy’s 166 total SNS posts (including SUs and ISs), 53 (32%) were composed 
in English, and 113 (68%) were in Mandarin. In the case of Jane, in a total of 135 posts, 133 (99%) were 
composed in English, and two (1%) were in Mandarin. Cindy switched regularly between Mandarin and 
English in her SUs and ISs (the language used within a given link post). In a total of 140 SUs, Cindy 
posted 47 updates (34%) in English and 93 updates (66%) in Mandarin (see Table 1). In a total of 26 ISs, 
six of the sharings (23%) were written in English and 20 of the sharings (77%) were written in Mandarin. 
Surprisingly, over the two years, Jane chose to use English in all her 94 SUs and in nearly all her ISs. 
From a total of 41 ISs, 39 (95%) were written in English and two (5%) in Mandarin.  
When looking at the two writers’ language choices over two years, notable changes in their use of English 
and Mandarin can be identified. Cindy, for example, used English exclusively in her SUs between 
September 2009 and February 2010 (see Figure 4). In the interview Cindy rationalized that since those 
were her first five months in the United States, she felt that she had to post more in English not only to 
use English more frequently but also to communicate with her American friends and to be more involved 
in the new English-speaking community. However, after four months, she started to make more Chinese 
friends at graduate school through the Chinese student association. This permitted her an increased usage 
of Mandarin on Facebook as she built and maintained relationships with her new Chinese-speaking 
Hsin-I Chen Identity Practices of Multilingual Writers in Social Networking Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology 153 
friends. Mandarin thus became the dominant language used in Cindy’s SNS activities after March 2010, 
indicating that Cindy viewed her Chinese-speaking friends as her primary audience in the Facebook 
community. 
On Facebook, I use Chinese to communicate with my Chinese friends who are in Tucson and who are in 
the U.S. but in other states. I just feel more comfortable using Chinese with them. But I sometimes use 
English too because I also want to connect with my American friends, and since they can’t read Chinese, I 
post in English. (Interview with Cindy, November 4, 2011; italics are the researcher’s emphasis) 
 
Figure 4. Frequency of Cindy’s selections of English and Mandarin in status updates and information 
sharings.  
Cindy seemed to identify language choice (of either English or Mandarin) with the two main divisions of 
her Facebook audience: Americans and Chinese friends. This division of two languages was also evident 
in her ISs where Mandarin was used in association with content related to China or Chinese culture in 
general that she wanted to share with her Chinese peers; English was used when shared information was 
not Chinese-specific and which she hoped to share with her American friends (see Figure 4). While 
acknowledging the accessibility of both languages and various social networks to her Facebook posts, 
language became a strategy for Cindy when addressing different audiences within her Facebook networks. 
In contrast, as revealed in Figure 5, Jane showed an exclusive use of English, her L2, in her participation 
in Facebook literacy practices. In the interview, Jane remarked that she viewed Facebook as a space to 
use English and to share her thoughts with her multilingual friends: 
While composing my status, I always have people in my program as the audience in mind. 
Because the people in my program have multilingual and multicultural backgrounds, 
Figure 5. Frequency of Jane’s selections of English and Mandarin in status updates and information 
sharings.  
0 2 
4 6 
8 10 
12 14 
Jan 2009 Mar May Jul Sep Nov Jan 2010 Mar May Jul Sep Nov Jan 2011 Mar May 
nu
m
be
r Cindy-SU (English) Cindy-SU (Chinese) Cindy-IS (English) Cindy-IS (Chinese) 
0 2 
4 6 
8 10 
12 14 
Jan 2009 Mar May Jul Sep Nov Jan 2010 Mar May Jul Sep Nov Jan 2011 Mar May 
nu
m
be
r 
Jane-SU (English) Jane-SU (Chinese) Jane-IS (English) Jane-IS (Chinese) 
Hsin-I Chen Identity Practices of Multilingual Writers in Social Networking Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology 154 
English seems to be the main communicative language on Facebook. (Interview with Jane, 
November 15, 2011; italics are the researcher’s emphasis) 
Her perception of Facebook as an English-as-an-international-language space was reflected in her 
extensive use of English in Facebook activities as was identified by Jane in the local program-related 
community. Through her use of English as the medium for participating in Facebook activities, Jane 
positioned herself as an international English user rather than learner, as well as other social and cultural 
identities, which will be discussed in the next section.  
It is also important to look into the qualities of these language-specific postings and their communicative 
purposes. A qualitative examination indicated that Mandarin was often used by Cindy in association with 
her home culture, self-reflection on life, and expressions of humor. In the interview, Cindy indicated that 
her choice of language in Facebook posts was primarily motivated by the audience she wanted to 
communicate to through those posts. Cindy often used Mandarin to reflect on her life in the United States. 
and joke with her Chinese friends, building social bonds with them through humor.  
Sometimes I just don’t want to think in English. It is too tiring to read in English and type 
in English even on Facebook! It is also hard to express your true emotions in English, so I 
use Chinese to say things about me … about my feelings living here. I want to talk with 
my Chinese friends about my feelings. They are fun to talk to, and they know how I feel. 
Using Chinese is just easier and more relaxing. (Interview with Cindy, November 4, 2011) 
English, however, was often used by Cindy to reflect her feelings toward school and to raise questions 
that she anticipated would be answered by her American friends. Although Cindy expressed her feelings 
sometimes in Mandarin and sometimes in English, what drove her language choice was based on the 
specific group of audience that she desired to reach.   
Another important factor that motivated the writers’ language choice on Facebook was their 
conceptualization of the Facebook site. In the interview, Cindy expressed her perception of Facebook as 
an English-occupied space:  
There are not so many differences between Facebook and RenRen (Chinese SNS) in terms 
of functions and features. But Facebook is more like an English-occupied space that just 
doesn’t belong to Chinese people… you know… because people in China can’t use 
Facebook! People use English the most in that space. (Interview with Cindy, November 4, 
2011; italics are the researcher’s emphasis) 
Cindy’s conceptualization of Facebook as an English-occupied space implies that, for her, languages 
other than English are less valued on Facebook. She could not see herself fitting into that space, and she 
expressed a sense of discomfort when sometimes communicating in English on Facebook since her 
Chinese friends could read her posts as well. Although Cindy viewed Facebook as an English-occupied 
space, she still constructed her Facebook postings mostly in her L1, Mandarin, because she perceived 
herself as an English learner and felt marginalized and uncomfortable “socializing into this English 
space.” When interviewed she expressed that when she was tired of reading texts and articles written in 
English from her classes and wanted to take a break from studying, she surfed on Facebook. Therefore, 
not only did she see Facebook as English-occupied, she also conceived that Facebook is a non-academic, 
casual, and relaxing space and a site of leisure where she could use her L1 to connect with friends of a 
shared culture. Consequently, how she conceptualized the social networking environment determined her 
engagement in literacy practices and language choices, encouraging or discouraging particular social 
actions. 
In sharp contrast, Jane’s SNS activities were dominated by English, her L2. Jane actively engaged in 
reading news feeds and information in English and responding to others’ postings in English. When asked 
about her extensive use of English in SNS postings during the interviews, Jane indicated that because 
Hsin-I Chen Identity Practices of Multilingual Writers in Social Networking Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology 155 
Facebook is an English-mediated space, she tried to use the language and establish herself as an English 
user, rather than an English learner to fit into that multilingual space.    
I don’t consider myself an English learner while engaging in the Facebook activities and 
socializing with my friends there. I use English to communicate with friends and to share 
with others what happens in my life. I want to fit in that place! Only when I shared 
information about China, my home country, I then associated myself more with someone 
who possesses Chinese culture. But even though the information is about China, I still use 
English in the caption because I want my international friends in the US to know more 
about my culture. (Interview with Jane, November 15, 2011; italics are the researcher’s 
emphasis) 
While Cindy viewed Facebook as an English-occupied context in which she was trying to find her own 
voice through negotiations of linguistic repertoires, Jane saw Facebook as an international community and 
a multilingual, multicultural space. Cindy’s and Jane’s different conceptualizations of Facebook in turn 
influenced their approach to participation, identity representation, and literacy use in the online 
community.  
Identity Representations in SNS Literacy Practices 
Due to the simultaneous presence of multiple social networks on Facebook, Jane and Cindy seemed to 
draw on the SNS practices to reach out to various communities and present multiple identities. Table 2 
and Table 3 give the aggregated and distribution frequency and percentages of SNS posts (SUs and ISs) 
in which they indexed particular identities across years (pre-arrival, year 1, and year 2) and totals. The 
analyses of the posts demonstrated that Cindy and Jane took on a variety of identities, including cultural 
identities (i.e., Chinese, local resident, global citizen), social identities (i.e., friend, graduate student, 
teaching assistant), professional identities (i.e., researcher), and other identities while composing their 
SNS posts on Facebook (see Appendix for detailed examples of each identity category). As shown in 
Table 2. Frequency and Percentage (%) of Cindy’s Posts According to Identity Indexed  
  Pre-arrival Year 1 Year 2 Totals 
human   14  (35%) 27 (22%) 41  (25%) 
friend   2  (5%) 9 (7%) 11  (6%) 
girlfriend 1  (100%) 1  (3%) 4 (3%) 6  (4%) 
student   12  (30%) 38 (30%) 50  (30%) 
teacher    1  (3%) 2 (2%) 3  (2%) 
general    0 (0%) 0 (0%) 0 (0%) 
Chinese    6  (15%) 33 (26%) 39  (24%) 
local    2  (5%) 5 (4%) 7  (4%) 
American    1  (3%) 4 (3%) 5  (3%) 
global    1  (3%) 0 (0%) 1  (1%) 
university    0 (0%) 3 (3%) 3  (2%) 
professional    0 (0%) 0 (0%) 0 (0%) 
Totals  1  (100%) 40  (100%) 125 (100%) 166  (100%) 
Hsin-I Chen Identity Practices of Multilingual Writers in Social Networking Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology 156 
Table 2, Cindy largely presented herself as a Chinese cultural participant, a graduate student, and a 
teacher. Jane identified herself most often as a Chinese speaker, a graduate student, a novice researcher, a 
teacher, and a local Tucson citizen. While Jane used Facebook to establish memberships with multiple 
cultural communities locally and globally, Cindy used Facebook more like a diary to reflect her feelings 
and emotions and associate herself more with her Chinese identity. The examination of Jane’s identity 
development over two years showed that there were some posts that indexed Jane’s identity as a Chinese 
cultural participant on Facebook, but these decreased between year one and year two (see Table 3). While 
posts that indexed participation in American and global culture also decreased in frequency, posts that 
reflected identification with local (i.e. city, regional, and state) culture increased from year one to year 
two. This may be indicative of a growing sense of identity connected to local contexts. At the same time, 
the frequency of Jane’s posts indexing a professional identity as a researcher increased from year one to 
year two, mostly in the form of shared links, but also with statements about professional activities like 
conference attendance.  
An investigation of Cindy’s posts over time demonstrated that a good number of posts indexed the 
general identity of simply being human reflecting her life (See Table 2). While her posts that indexed her 
identity as a Chinese participant increased from year one to year two, the posts that indexed her other 
cultural identities (i.e., local, American) remained the same, perhaps indicating that Cindy mainly used 
Facebook to connect to her home cultural identity rather than the host cultural identity. Posts that 
reflected Cindy’s identity as a member of the university emerged in year two, while there were no posts 
that indexed her identity as a researcher or other professional identities throughout the two years, 
indicating that Cindy viewed Facebook as a more personal space rather than academic/professional space. 
This corresponds to her perceptions of Facebook as a casual, relaxing space, as presented earlier in the 
paper. While a quantitative analysis shows a holistic view of multiple identities the writers presented in 
SNS over time, a close examination is needed to further elucidate the complexity and multiplicity of the 
multilingual writers’ subject positions and identities. In the following section, I will present some 
Table 3. Frequency and Percentage (%) of Jane’s Posts According to Identity Indexed  
  Pre-arrival Year 1 Year 2 Totals 
human 4  (67%) 8  (10%) 4  (8%) 16  (12%) 
friend 1  (17%)  2  (3%) 3  (6%) 6  (4%) 
girlfriend    2  (3%) 1  (2%) 3  (2%) 
student 1  (17%) 24  (30%) 8  (17%) 33  (24%) 
teacher    0 (0%) 7  (15%) 7  (5%) 
general    2  (3%) 0  (0%) 2  (2%) 
Chinese    13  (15%) 1  (2%) 14  (10%) 
local    7  (9%) 4  (8%) 11  (8%) 
American    9  (11%) 6  (13%) 15  (11%) 
global    9  (11%) 0  (0%) 9  (7%) 
university    1  (1%) 6  (13%) 7  (5%) 
professional    4  (5%) 8  (17%) 12  (9%) 
Totals  6  (100%) 81  (100%) 48  (100%) 135  (100%) 
Hsin-I Chen Identity Practices of Multilingual Writers in Social Networking Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology 157 
qualitative observations of identity development by Jane and Cindy respectively, drawing from the 
identity categories and examples illustrated in the Appendix as well as other examples from the data.  
Jane: Expanding Old Identities, Adding New 
The two multilingual writers created a space for designing multiple identities, and more importantly, their 
multiple identities changed and shifted over time during their two years of study abroad. For example, 
Jane composed herself into this virtual space as an English L2 student in one of her earliest status updates 
when she first joined Facebook. In an early post “What is the comparative form of “shy”? “shyer” or 
“shier”?” (October 20, 2009 at 11:07am), Jane perceived the Facebook affordance of typing any 
comments she wanted others to read and acted upon that affordance to pose questions about a specific 
English usage, here, the comparative degree of the word shy. By asking this question on language in her 
status update, she positioned herself as a curious English learner and attempted to reach out to the 
audience of Americans or native speakers (NS) of English within her Facebook networks.  
Over time, Jane’s initial self-position as an English learner started to change and shift to the identity of an 
international English user. The notion of language user focuses on the language user’s personal and social 
identities and emphasizes the writer’s orientation to discourse, relating meaningfully to other persons in 
different contexts (Kohonen, 2010, p. 7). For instance, in one of the posts a year later, Jane played with 
metaphorical language use to describe her identity as a graduate student who was overwhelmed by 
semester finals (see Figure 6). More importantly, Jane engaged in creating symbolic meanings and 
connecting herself with the discourse through various language usages by describing herself as a wound 
up clock spring. Jane showed strong agency and high capability in utilizing linguistic resources and 
positioned herself as an exhausted graduate student and an expressive user of English. 
 
Figure 6. Jane’s descriptive status update. 
As time went by, Jane started to negotiate her identities as a graduate student (e.g., “finally, no more 
exams before spring break, yay!” March 10, 2010 at 1:33am) with her newly established identity as a 
teacher as she began her teaching assistantship in her second year. Her posts on Facebook sometimes 
indexed feelings towards teaching: “is amazed at her students’ talent!” (August 26, 2010 at 2:43pm). 
While there was a decrease in percentage of posts from a student identity from year 1 to year 2, posts that 
indexed her identity as a teacher and professional identities as a researcher emerged and increased 
throughout her second year. As illustrated in Figure 7 (on the left), she reflected on her first international 
conference experience in a status update, writing that she “had her first conference experience and learned 
a lesson: people get dressed up in conference, even in Tucson!” (January 29, 2010 at 8:41pm). Here she 
projected an image of herself as being an active member in her academic field, an identity that she would 
want her Facebook community to perceive. Consequently, through negotiation of her multiple identities 
as a graduate student, a teacher, and a professional academic, Jane created her own voice on Facebook 
while engaging in SNS-mediated literacy practices. 
  
Figure 7. Jane’s status update about conference experience (left), and status update about Chinese 
grammar (right). 
Hsin-I Chen Identity Practices of Multilingual Writers in Social Networking Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology 158 
Another example that highlighted her professional identity as an applied linguist is evident in her 
reflection on Chinese grammar from one of the linguistics classes she was taking during the time the 
status was posted (see Figure 7, on the right). Jane commented that as a doctoral student in applied 
linguistics, her academic training in linguistics helped her understand the structures, forms, and meaning 
of languages including her L1, Chinese. Her knowledge of grammar and syntactic structures in Chinese 
and her feelings of relief and gratitude about not having to learn Chinese as an adult not only indexed her 
identity as an applied linguist, but also reinforced her identity as a Chinese native speaker.  
Jane’s self-perceived identity as a proud Chinese citizen was also performed in her other SU and IS 
activities (see Figure 8). Through sharing the photos and hyperlinks of news about Li Na, a Chinese 
female tennis player’s performance at the Australian Open in January 2010, Jane exploited and 
appropriated various resources such as hyperlinks of the news, photos of Li Na, and text-based comments 
“I’m proud of you girls! So is China!” to design her Facebook posts and present the identity of a proud 
Chinese citizen to her Facebook friends.  
 
 
Figure 8. Jane’s status update about a female Chinese tennis player (left), and information sharing about a 
female Chinese tennis player (right). 
Not only did Jane present herself as a proud Chinese citizen, she also showed a great concern with local 
issues in the Tucson community in her later posts during her second year and presented an identity of a 
responsible local resident in SNS. In a status update, she wrote “was disturbed for the whole afternoon by 
the insane idea about carrying guns on campus. What kind of nuts would come up with such an idea :(” 
(March 11, 2011 at 12:37pm) to express her frustrations about a local issue. In one of her news sharings 
(see Figure 9), Jane expressed, through posting hyperlinks, sharing images, and comments (“feel 
extremely upset that the state legislature allows guns on campus…”), her emotional response to the 
shooting in Tucson that had happened in January, 2011 and to new state legislation on gun control.  
These combined multimodal practices afforded by Facebook allowed Jane to create a strong persona of 
someone against the then pending state legislation allowing guns on campus and perform multiple 
identities of a local Tucson resident, an international graduate student, and a digital citizen3. While all 
posts were in English, through active participation in discussion about political, social, and cultural issues 
in the online community, Jane exercised agency in expanding her old identities and taking on new 
identities as cultural participants in her home and host discourses through various SNS-mediated literacy 
practices. 
Hsin-I Chen Identity Practices of Multilingual Writers in Social Networking Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology 159 
 
Figure 9. Jane’s information sharing about a new state legislation on gun control. 
Cindy: Life Struggles 
Cindy created a strong presence on Facebook through her projected identities as a human, a graduate 
student, and cultural identities, associating herself more toward her Chinese identity. The largest 
percentage of Cindy’s SNS posts indexed the identity of an emotional human. She frequently expressed 
philosophical statements and emotional feelings on Facebook such as “今天不要惹我，火大” [“leave me 
alone, had a bad day!”] (January 28, 2011 at 12:36pm) (see Figure 10, on the left), “yeah, I feel OK last 
night!!!great!” (February 12, 2010 at 9:32am), “太伤心了~~~” [“heartbreaking”] (June 16, 2010 at 
8:53am). These posts were reflexive in nature, and could not be directly associated with any other identity. 
However, there were posts that indexed her emotional connections with particular identities. In her early 
posts, Cindy used English, her L2, in constructing the messages by reflecting on her new life as a 
struggling graduate student. For example, in Figure 10 (on the right), Cindy wrote “I do not want to 
continue my paper! I wanna have a long long rest!” (October 4, 2009 at 2:44pm). During the interviews, 
Cindy reflected that she had a hard time adjusting to the life in the United States because she had never 
lived abroad in a foreign country for such a long time.  
 
 
Figure 10. Cindy’s status update on feeling upset [leave me alone, had a bad day!] (left), and status 
update about the feelings as a graduate student (right). 
Cindy struggled with her new identity as a Chinese graduate student studying in the United States, even 
though she had received a master’s degree in China prior to her arrival. She commented: 
I really had a hard time when I first got to Tucson. Everything is so different. The studying 
here is hard and much more demanding than the studying in China. Perhaps that’s because 
of the language…. I am not very good at English. The life in the US is not easy… I 
sometimes use Facebook to release my stress… (Interview with Cindy, November 4, 
2011; italics are the researcher’s emphasis) 
Her struggles as a student were evident in her other SNS posts such as “exhausted” (November 24, 2009 
at 7:13pm) and “why do I look so tired?” (February 24, 2010 at 12:58pm). Her identity as an emotional 
human with frustrations about life and doubts about her life goals were also reflected in her later posts 
including general statements “I am not myself~” (February 3, 2010 at 10:58pm) (see Figure 11, on the left) 
and “I feel I am not the human I am” (March 19, 2010 at 8:04pm), emotional feelings “I feel better with 
you all. Thank you!” (February 15, 2010 at 11:06pm), and philosophical comments “人生的意义是什么
Hsin-I Chen Identity Practices of Multilingual Writers in Social Networking Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology 160 
？” [What is the meaning of life?] (September 11, 2010 at 10:52am). Through these reflective messages 
throughout the two years abroad, Cindy viewed Facebook as a personal space where she could share her 
personal feelings and emotions toward her life and surroundings with her Facebook friends.  
 
 
Figure 11. Cindy’s status update on feelings about herself (left), and status update about grading [I spend 
so many hours grading student homework! God!] (right). 
As a graduate teaching assistant, Cindy also constructed her identity as a teacher in her online posts. In 
Figure 11 (on the right), she reflected on her multiple social identities as a student and as a teacher, 
commenting that “每天都要改幾個小時的作業，天啊！！！！” [“I spend so many hours grading 
student homework! God!”] (March 3, 2011 at 4:06pm). Cindy’s reflective message in fact captured the 
dual identities (as a graduate student and a graduate teaching assistant) many international graduate 
students may experience during their graduate studies in US universities. 
With all the struggles in her life, posts that reflected identification with Chinese culture increased from 
year one to year two, indicating that Cindy associated herself more with her home identities through SNS 
posts that related to Chinese culture. For example, Cindy wrote in a post, “finished my last Chinese made 
noodles” (October 8, 2009 at 11:39pm). When asked about the motivation of this post, she acknowledged 
that she missed the food and life in China two months after her departure. She felt down when she ran out 
of the instant noodles she brought from China. She also shared links about Chinese news and/or television 
shows in her profile pages and indicated that she often browsed Chinese websites and videos to know 
what was happening in China. As exemplified in Figure 12, Cindy shared a link on the news about Hu 
Jintao, the leader of China during the time the news was posted, and his political actions during the 
Chinese New Year in China, reflecting her identity as a concerned Chinese citizen. Posts on Chinese-
related events or holidays such as “大清早起来看春晚~~~大家春节快乐！” [“woke up early to watch 
Chinese New Year Show~~Happy Chinese New Year, everyone!”] (February 2, 2011 at 7:27am) (see 
Figure 13, on the left) and “祝大家中秋节快乐哟！！！” [“Happy Moon Festival, everyone!!!”] 
(September 21, 2010 at 9:21pm) were also observed in Cindy’s SNS pages. While posts that indexed 
participation in Chinese culture were composed by Cindy in both languages, English and Chinese, more 
Chinese-language posts were found to reflect this identity, which also explains the increasing use of 
Chinese in her SNS activities over time. This may be indicative of a growing sense of identity connected 
to her home discourse throughout the two years of study abroad. 
 
Figure 12. Cindy’s information sharing about Chinese news [The Chinese leader, Hu Jintao, visited 
formal politicians during the Chinese New Year]. 
While establishing an identity of a Chinese cultural participant, Cindy, in her second year, started to 
present identities that were linked to the university through posting status updates about school events 
(e.g., football game, social event on campus). For instance, in one of her posts “totally forget it is 
Hsin-I Chen Identity Practices of Multilingual Writers in Social Networking Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology 161 
  
Figure 13. Cindy’s status update about Chinese New Year [woke up early to watch Chinese New Year 
Show~~Happy Chinese New Year, everyone!] (left), and status update about school-related events (right). 
Saturday and it is football game day~” (September 18, 2010 at 9:21pm) (see Figure 13, on the right), 
Cindy constructed an image of herself as a member of the university, an identity that she would want her 
Facebook friends to perceive. With the choice of her L2, English, Cindy intended to reach out to her 
American friends and seek information about their plans on the game day. With an awareness of the role 
of football in American culture as part of important social norms in US university life, Cindy represented 
agency to establish herself as a more legitimate member in the newly entered university community.  
DISCUSSION 
Facebook as a Third Space for Shuttling Between Languages and Identities  
In line with Canagarajah’s (2010) claim that multilingual writers come with multiple identities, this study 
shows that Facebook provided a hybrid third space that allowed the multilingual writers Cindy and Jane 
to navigate across multiple languages, cultures, and identities, including their social, cultural, and 
professional identities through various literacy practices, language choices, and contents. These 
multilingual writers, however, in spite of their biographical similarities, presented themselves differently 
in the form, quantity, and quality of their SNS use. For Cindy, Facebook became a site for reflection. 
Through deliberate choices of Mandarin, Cindy positioned herself as a friend with shared culture in 
relation to other Chinese-speaking graduate students and created social bonds with them through 
reflections on her life in the United States as well as other projected social identities as a struggled student 
and a teacher. Cindy used English in SNS not only to reflect her feelings toward school but also to 
establish her membership as a legitimate member of the university and hoped to reach out to her 
American friends. With an awareness of audience, Cindy used language as a resource to strategically 
make conversations and build relationships with audiences across different social and cultural groups.  
In the case of Jane, however, movement between her multiple identities was manifested not through her 
use of linguistic resources (since she mainly communicated online in her L2—English) but through her 
selection from the types of literacy practices available on Facebook, increasing use of information 
sharings, and the contents of those postings. In addition to engaging in text-oriented practices on 
Facebook like status updates, Jane also actively participated in multimodal practices such as posting 
hyperlinks, sharing videos, and creating images. Jane exploited the technological affordances of Facebook 
to link outside sources, to share information, and to connect herself to the world not only at local but also 
global levels. For Jane, Facebook became a set of “third cultures/spaces” where two or more cultures 
create “localized versions of the global culture” (e.g., glocalization4, Wei & Kolko, 2005, p.  210). While 
establishing an international identity as a multilingual speaker, Jane created a close bond with the local 
Tucson and university community through discussions about local issues while not abandoning her other 
identities as a proud citizen of China as well as a multilingual and multicultural cosmopolitan global 
citizen. Although many popular SNSs like Facebook are designed as artifacts of or for the dominant 
culture (DePew, 2011, p. 58), Jane created a third space where she explored complex identity work and 
negotiated her global and local identities. With available semiotic tools, SNSs allow multilingual writers 
and cosmopolitan citizens like Cindy and Jane to perform and develop their multiple identities. 
This finding supports Pavlenko and Blackledge’s (2004) characterization of the “hybrid identities and 
complex linguistic repertoires of bi- and multilinguals living in a contemporary global world” (p. 5). On 
the one hand, Jane composed her SNS activities in English, her L2, as a means of creating new global, 
local, cultural, and social identities, rather than as a marker of an American identity, reflecting her 
Hsin-I Chen Identity Practices of Multilingual Writers in Social Networking Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology 162 
multilayered social (e.g., student, teacher, friend, researcher) and cultural repertoires (e.g., Chinese native, 
American participant, global citizen, local Tucsonan). On the other hand, Cindy, often shuttling between 
Mandarin and English, experienced constant negotiation of language choices and cultural identities as she 
continued to perceive herself on the periphery of the host discourse and focused on her identities as a 
Chinese native and a struggling student. This finding shows that construction of identities is not limited to 
linguistic codes but to the symbolic resources that are available to multilingual learners to explore the 
sense of who they are and their relationship to the world.  
Identities as Multifaceted and Dynamic  
Ellison, Steinfield, and Lampe (2007) suggest that Facebook is used to maintain existing offline 
relationships or solidify offline connections, as opposed to meeting new people. Thus, how multilingual 
learners perform their identities in online communities reflect the face-to-face reality in which they are 
situated. The connections between users’ online and offline identities can be observed in the two writers’ 
literacy practices on Facebook. Cindy and Jane viewed Facebook as an extended space for their real life 
experiences. In the interviews they both expressed that Facebook was part of their lives and reflected their 
extended relationships and identities. While viewing Facebook as a personal space for reflections on her 
emotions and struggles as a sojourn student, Cindy acknowledged that she usually socialized in person 
with her Chinese friends after school, while using Facebook to maintain those friendships, which 
motivated her choice of Chinese in her SNS activities. Similarly, Jane also regarded her Facebook use as 
a way to solidify friendships with not only Chinese friends but also her international friends with whom 
she had established relationships offline, acknowledging that Facebook helped strengthen the bonds with 
friends in real life.  
Notably, the writers’ SNS use and online identities were promoted or constrained by their different 
ideologies and attitudes toward English, their L2, and Facebook. For Cindy to be literate in English means 
to be literate in academic writing. Informal English, the register often used on Facebook, was much less 
valued by her. Cindy conceived Facebook as an English-occupied space in which she, as an English 
learner and outsider, had no right to enter except with her L1, Mandarin Chinese. This set of attitudes in 
large measure affected her participation in SNSs and determined her choice of languages and literacy 
activities. In contrast, Jane conceptualized Facebook as an English-mediated space that welcomes English 
users like her. Jane, to fit into that space, consciously constructed her identity as an experienced 
international English user. Jane further commented on the potential of Facebook for English learning:  
I don’t think Facebook language can enhance your academic writing ability, but I think 
Facebook contains lots of pragmatic English use, particularly expressive language use, and 
I think that is very important for English learning in general. I mean, learning how to 
express your feelings in English is important. (Interview with Jane, November 15, 2011) 
Multilingual writers’ identity construction in SNSs are not only driven by sociocultural contexts but also 
motivated by their own perception of SNSs and language learning.  
Viewing Facebook as an extension of their real life experiences and exploration of who they are, Cindy 
and Jane built friendships, constructed identities, and created communities through their SNS use. 
However, different online identities were designed by the two writers. Jane, for example, identified 
herself as a language learner when she began her US graduate studies in 2009. During the time of 
exposure to the host country, Jane’s identity as a language learner started to shift to an identity of an 
international English user. While SNS posts that reflected her identity as a Chinese native decreased, 
those that indexed her identification with local culture increased from year one to year two, indicating that 
Jane invested herself more in the identity as a local cultural participant, an identity transformation 
manifested in her increasing participation in SNS activities, the different types of literacy practices with 
which she was engaged, and different contents she shared in SNS. Jane’s transformed literacy practices 
demonstrated progress from legitimate peripheral participation to gradually assuming a more central role 
Hsin-I Chen Identity Practices of Multilingual Writers in Social Networking Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology 163 
as a local participant (Lave & Wenger, 1991). While new identities emerged, Cindy still struggled with 
her marginalized participation as a sojourn learner in the United States and continued to use Facebook as 
a way to release tensions and reflect on those struggles. Her sense of being on the periphery in the host 
country thus prompted her to embrace her Chinese ethnic identity once again, as evident in her 
participation in online discourse and her growing sense of identity connected to her home culture 
throughout the two years of study abroad.  
CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS 
This study explored the ways in which multilingual writers design and construct identities in a social 
networking community. The longitudinal examination of the writers’ SNS use shows that the two 
multilingual writers developed multiple, and sometimes competing identities through different types of 
literacy activities and social interactions in the social networking community. This finding argues for a 
developmental model that views multilingual writers’ identities as multifaceted and dynamic. The 
multilingual writers’ re-appropriation of linguistic and cultural resources to navigate across social, 
cultural, and professional identities challenges the monolingual bias or one language-one people view and 
argues for a multilingual and heterogeneous view of the options available to multilingual individuals, with 
a focus on how symbolic resources like languages are appropriated in construction of particular identities. 
While this multilingual perspective has become well recognized in the fields of SLA and applied 
linguistics, this study, through qualitative and quantitative methods exploring the issues of identity, 
multilingualism, digital literacies, and communication in new media, contributes to demonstrating how 
languages and literacies function as symbolic resources within digitally mediated spaces as promoted by 
globalization and emerging technologies.  
While the multiliterate choices observed in the study are shown to be indicative of the writers’ 
representation of identities, the multilingual writers Cindy and Jane, with different conceptualizations of 
Facebook, exercised agency and enacted particular social roles, took different participatory trajectories, 
and employed different strategies in writing themselves into the online discourse. This finding points to 
the need for a multilingual pedagogy to literacy learning that views language learning as symbolic 
competence (Kramsch, 2006) that places students’ semiotic choices of resources, meaning-making 
processes, and identity formation in the center of language learning. To become multilingual subjects, 
language learners/users need to create a semiotic repertoire of multiple modes of communication, develop 
an ability to understand and interpret the symbolic value and meaning of different symbolic forms, and 
negotiate appropriate subject positions and identities between languages and discourses, local and global 
(Kramsch, 2009). To do so, we as teachers must first identify the different communicative situations 
where our students are invested in particular discourses and how their participation in these discourses 
shapes their identities so that teachers can develop materials that embrace students’ multiple voices, foster 
their personal growth as multilingual subjects, and engage their real life practices and purposes. 
While participating in social networking communities, students, in these informal settings, acquire 
practices that enable them to strategically navigate, respond, and incorporate multiple communication 
channels. These literacy practices that students acquire in informal settings extend their communicative 
capacities and thus should not be dismissed or overlooked but incorporated into formal school contexts. 
Students’ participation in online discourse should be seen as consisting of acts of identity that are fluid 
and constructed in linguistic, symbolic, and social interaction. This effort could be accomplished with 
integration of bridging activities (Thorne & Reinhardt, 2008) that extend students’ vernacular literacies 
and formal literacies to increase student agency and to raise student awareness of the interrelationship 
between specific rhetorical choices and desired social-communicative outcomes and symbolic values. 
While acknowledging that learners engage in symbolic practices other than SNS-mediated activities, 
SNSs offer researchers as well as educators a window through which to examine multilingual writers’ 
developmental identities and literacy use over time. This study also calls for a critical perspective of L2 
Hsin-I Chen Identity Practices of Multilingual Writers in Social Networking Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology 164 
learning as a continuous process of identity negotiation, prompting us to reconsider the significance of 
identity formation in the process of L2 literacy use and socialization. Learners’ online literacy practices 
should receive more attention because these practices provide insights into how they present themselves 
in relation to others in Internet-based discourses and how they engage online, linguistically, socially, 
culturally, and historically. Consequently, a close examination of these learners’ chosen strategies and the 
ways in which they construct social networks and negotiate diverse identity positions with their friends in 
digital spaces like SNSs, has implications for our understanding of the socially constructed relationship of 
learners to the target language and discourse community. This understanding of the ways learners give the 
symbolic meaning to themselves, to their perceptions, reactions, and thoughts that orient their relationship 
to others provides teachers with critical perspectives of viewing language learners not as L2 learners but 
as multilingual subjects (Kramsch, 2009, p. 18). 
Further longitudinal ethnographic studies on multilingual writers’ participation in other SNS practices 
(e.g., comments, chats), between different SNSs (e.g., RenRen, Mixi), across different online discourses 
(e.g., blogs, instant messaging), and across online and offline discourses, will be valuable in better 
understanding language learners’ literacy development, subjective experience, and symbolic competence 
in our multilingual, multicultural world.  
 
NOTES 
1. The data presented below represents only a small portion of a larger project that involved more 
participants. 
2. The research conducted was entirely in accordance with the international review board (IRB) 
guidelines and had IRB approval. 
3. A digital citizen is defined as a person who makes “use of electronic resources or environments to 
fulfill his or her duties as a citizen” (Bentivegna, 2002, cited in Greenhow & Robelia, 2009, p. 125). 
4. Glocalization, opening up from the local to a wider international sphere, is evident in cyberspace—
people are expanding the extent of their social reach while also binding themselves more deeply to their 
local communities. Glocalization results from strong local connection and wide-ranging global 
interactions (Fernback, 2007, p. 53). This concept of glocalization helps us interpret Jane’s participation 
in her literacy practices on Facebook. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I would like to thank Jonathon Reinhardt, Chantelle Warner, Joe Stefani, and the anonymous reviewers 
for their insightful comments on earlier drafts of this paper. I am also grateful to the two students who 
participated in the study.  
 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Hsin-I Chen is an assistant professor in the Department of Foreign Languages and Literature at Tunghai 
University, Taiwan. Her research interests include digitally-mediated communication, multiliteracies, 
language socialization, and learner identities.  
 
Email: hsinichen20@gmail.com 
Hsin-I Chen Identity Practices of Multilingual Writers in Social Networking Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology 165 
APPENDIX. Examples of the indexical identity in SNS posts 
Category  Description Examples 
1. human The “human” category included 
posts that indexed the general 
identity of simply being human. 
“the night seems gloomy...” (Jane, October 26, 
2009 at 12:15pm) 
“今天不要惹我，火大” [leave me alone, had a 
bad day!] (Cindy, January 28, 2011 at 12:36pm) 
“人生的意义是什么？” [what is the meaning of 
life?] (Cindy, September 11, 2010 at 10:52am). 
2. friend The “friend” category included 
mention of friends directly or 
indirectly. 
“Thank you, everyone! I just had the best birthday 
ever!!!” (Jane, October 15, 2010 at 12:16pm) 
“爱 fenglin!” [lovefenglin!] (Cindy, April 3, 2011 
at 10:29pm) 
“今天早上才知道～～terry 
大叔上週摔傷了，斷了一根肋骨，bless him!” 
[just realized that Terry hurt his back last 
weekend. Bless him.] (Cindy, February 9, 2011 at 
1:15pm) 
3. girlfriend The “girlfriend” category 
included posts that indicated the 
identity as a girlfriend and later 
as a wife. 
Because of the personal nature of these posts, they 
are not presented here, although it should be noted 
that both participants felt comfortable enough to 
post them publicly to their friends in SNSs. 
4. student The “student” category 
included posts that indexed the 
identity of a graduate student or 
a language learner.   
“What is the comparative form of “shy”? “shyer” 
or “shier”?” (Jane, October 20, 2009 at 11:07am) 
“finally, no more exams before spring break, 
yay!” (Jane, March 10, 2010 at 1:33am) 
“I do not want to continue my paper! I wanna 
have a long long rest!” (Cindy, October 4, 2009 at 
3:44pm) 
“stay up for my paper~too sad~” (Cindy, May 2, 
2010 at 12:08am) 
5. teacher The “teacher” category 
included posts that indexed the 
identity of a graduate assistant 
teacher. 
“is amazed at her students' talent!” (Jane,August 
26, 2010 at 2:43pm) 
“每天都要改幾個小時的作業，天啊！！！！” 
[I spend so many hours grading student 
homework! God!] (Cindy, March 3, 2010 at 
4:06pm) 
6. general The “general” category 
included posts that indexed the 
identity of a general cultural 
observer or participant, not 
 “The autumn tiger is coming!” (Jane, October 20, 
2009 at 11:16am) 
Hsin-I Chen Identity Practices of Multilingual Writers in Social Networking Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology 166 
identifiable to any specific 
cultural group. 
7. Chinese The “Chinese” category 
included posts that indexed the 
identity of a Chinese cultural 
participant.   
  
“my stomach is crying for Hongyouchaoshou. -_-
|||” (Jane, October 22, 2009 at 2:19pm) 
“after taking the Chinese grammar class I feel 
lucky that Chinese is my native language. It saved 
me a lot of troubles to learn the language when I 
was young” (Jane, January 28, 2010 at 3:19pm) 
“finished my last and my Chinese made noodles” 
(Cindy, October 8, 2009 at 11:39pm) 
“中国几千年解决不了的重男轻女问题，竟然
让房地产解决了” [the longstanding issue of 
gender inequality in Chinese is solved by real 
estate!] (Cindy, January 26, 2011 at 6:48pm) 
8. local The “local” category included 
posts that indexed the identity 
of a local cultural participant 
(i.e., city, regional, state 
culture).   
“was disturbed for the whole afternoon by the 
insane idea about carrying guns on campus. What 
kind of nuts would come up with such an idea :(” 
(Jane, March 11, 2011 at 12:37pm) 
“Blue man show 最新情况！No discount for the 
A seat group! 价格是 55刀” (blue man, tickets 
are $55/per ticket) [Blue man show update! … A 
ticket costs $55] (Cindy, January 31, 2011 at 
11:17am) 
9. American The “American” category 
included posts that indexed the 
identity of an American cultural 
participant.   
“It’s a wired weekend: parties are competing with 
each other!”  (Jane, October 24, 2009 at 5:38pm) 
“First time to make pancake!” (Cindy, April 23, 
2011 at 2:15pm) 
10. global The “global” category included 
posts that indexed the identity 
of a global cultural participant 
(i.e., national, international, 
globe culture).   
“My first attempt to make Pad Thai is an epic 
failure!” (Jane, July 22, 2011 at 12:39pm) 
“Two hours later, Spain is coming~~~” (Cindy, 
June 16, 2010 at 4:42am) 
11. university The “university” category 
included posts that indexed the 
identity of a university member. 
“Keep my finger crossed for Saturday. If we can 
beat Duke, we can beat anyone. Go UA!” (Jane, 
March 26, 2011 at 2:50am)  
“totally forget it is Saturday and it is football game 
day~” (Cindy, September 18, 2010 at 9:21pm) 
12. professional The “professional” category 
included posts that indexed the 
identity of an academic/ 
professional member. 
“had her first conference experience and learned a 
lesson: people get dressed up in conference, even 
in Tucson!” (Jane, January 29, 2010 at 8:41pm)  
 
Hsin-I Chen Identity Practices of Multilingual Writers in Social Networking Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology 167 
 
REFERENCES 
Androutsopoulos, J. (2008). Potentials and limitations of discourse-centered online ethnography. 
Language@Internet, 5, article 8. Retrieved from http://www.languageatinternet.org/articles/2008/1610 
Belz, J. A. (2003). Telecollaboration. Language Learning & Technology, 7(2), 68–117. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol7num2/belz/default.html 
Black, R. (2008). Adolescents and online fan fiction. New York, NY: Peter Lang. 
Black, R. (2009). Online fan fiction, global identities, and imagination. Research in the Teaching of 
English, 43, 397–425. 
Blattner, G., & Fiori, M. (2009). Facebook in the language classroom: Promises and possibilities. 
International Journal of Instructional Technology and Distance Learning, 6(1), 17–28. 
Blattner, G., & Fiori, M. (2011). Virtual social network communities: An investigation of language 
learners’ development of sociopragmatic awareness and multiliteracy skills. CALICO Journal, 29(1), 24–
43. 
boyd, d. (2007). Why youth (heart) social network sites: The role of networked publics in teenage social 
life. In D. Buckingham (Ed.), MacArthur Foundation series on digital learning–Youth, identity, and 
digital media volume (pp. 119–142). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
boyd, d., & Ellison, N. (2007). Social network sites: Definition, history, and scholarship. Journal of 
Computer-Mediated Communication, 13(1). Retrieved from http://jcmc.indiana.edu/vol13/ 
issue1/boyd.ellison.html 
Buckingham, D. (2008). Youth, identity and digital media. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Canagarajah, S. (2002). Critical academic writing and multilingual students. Ann Arbor, MI: University 
of Michigan Press. 
Canagarajah, S. (2006). Toward a writing pedagogy of shuttling between languages: Learning from 
multilingual writers. College English, 68, 589–604. 
Canagarajah, S. (2010). “A rhetoric of shuttling between languages.” In B. Horner, M.-Z. Lu, & P. K. 
Matsuda (Eds.), Cross-language relations in composition (pp. 158–182). Carbondale, IL: Southern 
Illinois University Press.  
Choi, S., Kim, Y., Sung, Y., & Sohn, D. (2011). Bridging or bonding? Information, Communication & 
Society, 14(1), 107–129. 
DePew, K. E. (2011). Social media at academia’s periphery: Studying multilingual developmental 
writers’ facebook composing strategies. The Reading Matrix, 11(1), 54–75. 
DePew, K. E., & Miller-Cochran, S. K. (2010). Social networking in a second language: Engaging 
multiple literate practices through identity composition. In M. Cox, J. Jordan, C. Ortmeier-Hooper, & G. 
Shwartz (Eds.), Reinventing identities in second language writing (pp. 273–295). Urbana, IL: National 
Council of Teachers of English. 
Duff, P. (2008). Language socialization, participation and identity: Ethnographic approaches. In M. 
Martin-Jones, A.-M. de Mejia, & N. Hornberger (Eds.), Encyclopedia of language and education: Vol.3. 
Discourse and education (pp. 107–119). New York: Springer Verlag. 
Dyson, A.H., & Genishi, C. (2005). On the case: Approaches to language and literacy research. New 
York: Teachers College Press. 
Hsin-I Chen Identity Practices of Multilingual Writers in Social Networking Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology 168 
Ellison, N., Steinfield, C., & Lampe, C. (2007). The benefits of Facebook “friends:” Social capital and 
college students’ use of online social network sites. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 
12(4), 1143–1168. Retrieved from http://jcmc.indiana.edu/vol12/issue4/ellison.html 
Facebook. (2012). Newsroom. Statistics: Facebook. Retrieved from http://newsroom.fb.com/Key-Facts 
Fernback, J. (2007). Beyond the diluted community concept: a symbolic interactionist perspective on 
online social relations. New Media and Society, 9(1), 49–69. 
Gee, J. P. (2007). What Video Games Have to Teach Us About Learning and Literacy. New York: 
Palgrave Macmillan.  
Godwin-Jones, R. (2008). Mobile computing technologies: Lighter, faster, smarter. Language Learning & 
Technology, 12(3), 3–9. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol12num3/emerging.pdf 
Greenhow, C., & Robelia, B. (2009). Informal learning and identity formation in online social networks. 
Learning, Media and Technology, 34(2), 119–140. 
Gutiérrez, K. D., Baquedano-López, P., & Tejada, C. (1999). Rethinking diversity: Hybridity and hybrid 
language practices in the third space. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 6(4), 286–303. 
Haverback, H. (2009). Facebook: Uncharted territory in a reading education classroom. Reading Today, 
October/November, 1. 
Jackson, J. (2008). Language, identity, and study abroad: Sociocultural perspectives. (C. Candlin & S. 
Sarangi, Series Editors; Studies in Applied Linguistics Series). London: Equinox. 
Johnson, D. (1992). Approaches to research in second language learning. White Plains, NY: Longman. 
Jones, J. G., & Bronack, S. C. (2008). Rethinking cognition, representations, and processes in 3D online 
social learning environments. In P. C. Rivoltella (Ed.), Digital literacy: Tools and methodologies for 
information society (pp. 176–205). Hershey, PA: IGI Publishing.  
Jones, S., Millermaier, S., Goya-Martinez, M., & Schuler, J. (2008). Whose space is MySpace? A content 
analysis of MySpace profiles. First Monday, 13(9). Retrieved from http://www.uic.edu/htbin/ 
cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/2202/2024 
Kanno, Y. (2003). Negotiating bilingual and bicultural identities: Japanese returnees betwixt two worlds. 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Knobel, M., & Lankshear, C. (2008). Digital literacy and participation in online social networking spaces. 
In C. Lankshear & M. Knobel (Eds.), Digital literacies: Concepts, policies and practices (pp. 249–278). 
New York: Peter Lang. 
Kohonen, V. (2010). Autonomy, agency and community in FL education: developing site-based 
understanding through a university and school partnership. In B. O’Rourke & L. Carson (Eds.), Language 
learner autonomy: Policy, curriculum, classroom (pp. 3–28). Oxford: Peter Lang. 
Kramsch, C. (2006). From communicative competence to symbolic competence. The Modern Language 
Journal, 90(2), 244–266.  
Kramsch, C. (2009). The multilingual subject. What language learners say about their experience and 
why it matters. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Kramsch, C., A’Ness, F., & Lam, W. (2000). Authenticity and authorship in the computer-mediated 
acquisition of L2 literacy. Language Learning & Technology, 4(2), 78–104. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol4num2/kramsch/default.html 
 
Hsin-I Chen Identity Practices of Multilingual Writers in Social Networking Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology 169 
Lam, W. (2000). Second language literacy and the design of the self: A case study of a teenager writing 
on the Internet. TESOL Quarterly, 34, 457–483. 
Lam, W. (2004). Second language socialization in a bilingual chat room: Global and local considerations. 
Language Learning & Technology, 8(3), 44–65. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol8num3/lam/ 
default.html 
Lam, W. (2009). Multiliteracies on instant messaging in negotiating local, Translocal, and transnational 
affiliations: A case of an adolescent immigrant. Reading Research Quarterly, 44(4), 377–397. 
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation.  Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
McBride, K. (2009). Social networking sites in foreign language classes: Opportunities for re-creation. In 
L. Lomicka & G. Lord (Eds.), The next generation: Social networking and online collaboration in foreign 
language learning (pp. 35–58). San Marcos, TX: CALICO. 
Mills, N. (2011). Situated learning through social networking communities: The development of joint 
enterprise, mutual engagement, and a shared repertoire. CALICO Journal, 28(2), 326–344. 
Mitchell, K. (2012). A social tool: Why and how ESOL students use Facebook. CALICO Journal, 29(3), 
471–493. 
New London Group. (1996). A pedagogy of multiliteracies. Harvard Educational Review, 66(1), 60–92. 
Norton, B. (2000). Identity and language learning: Gender, ethnicity, and educational change. Harlow, 
United Kingdom: Longman. 
Pasfield-Neofitou, S. (2011). Online domains of language use: second language learners’ experiences of 
virtual community and foreignness. Language Learning & Technology, 15(2), 92–108. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2011/pasfieldneofitou.pdf 
Pavlenko, A. (2002). Poststructuralist approaches to the study of social factors in second language 
learning and use. In V. Cook (Ed.), Portraits of the L2 user (pp. 277-302). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual 
Matters. 
Pavlenko, A., & Blackledge, A. (2004). Introduction: New theoretical approaches to the study of 
negotiation of identities in multilingual contexts. In A. Pavlenko & A. Blackledge (Eds.), Negotiation of 
identities in multilingual contexts (pp. 1–33). Clevedon: Multilingual Matters. 
Pavlenko, A. & Lantolf, J. P. (2001). Second language learning as participation and the (re)construction 
of selves. In J. P. Lantolf (Ed.). (2nd ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp.155–
178). Oxford University Press. 
Pavlenko, A., & Norton, B. (2007). Imagined communities, identity, and English language learning. In J. 
Cummins & C. Davison (Eds.), International handbook of English language teaching (pp. 669–680). 
Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer. 
Scribner, S., & Cole, M. (1981). The psychology of literacy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Seidman, I. (1998). Interviewing as qualitative research: A guide for researchers in education and the 
social sciences (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Teachers College Press. 
Street, B. (1993). Cross-cultural approaches to literacy. Oxford: Cambridge University Press. 
Thomsen, S., Straubhaar, J., & Bolyard, D. (1998). Ethnomethodology and the study of online 
communities: exploring the cyber streets. Information Research, 4(1). Retrieved from 
http://informationr.net/ir/4-1/paper50.html 
Hsin-I Chen Identity Practices of Multilingual Writers in Social Networking Spaces 
 
Language Learning & Technology 170 
Thorne, S. L., Black, R., & Sykes, J. (2009). Second language use, socialization, and learning in Internet 
interest communities and online games. The Modern Language Journal, 93, 802–821. 
Thorne, S. L., & Reinhardt, J. (2008). “Bridging activities,” new media literacies, and advanced foreign 
language proficiency. CALICO Journal, 25(3), 558–572.  
Trice, A. G. (2003). Faculty perceptions of graduate international students: The benefits and challenges. 
Journal of Studies in International Education, 7(4), 379–403. 
Vie, S. (2007). Engaging others in online social networking sites: Rhetorical practices in MySpace and 
Facebook (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona. 
Villarreal Ballesteros, A. C. (2010). Professional identity formation and development of imagined 
communities in an English language major in mexico (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of 
Arizona, Tucson, Arizona. 
Warschauer, M., & Grimes, D. (2007). Audience, authorship, and artifact: The emergent semiotics of 
Web 2.0. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 27, 1–23. 
Wei, C. Y., & Kolko, B. E. (2005). Resistance to globalization: Language and internet diffusion patterns 
in Uzbekistan. New Review of Hypermedia & Multimedia, 11(2), 205–220. 
Williams, L. (2009). Navigating and interpreting hypertext in French: New literacies and new challenges. 
In L. B. Abraham & L. Williams (Eds.), Electronic discourse in language learning and language 
teaching (pp. 43–64). Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company.  
RenRen. (2012). Introduction: RenRen. Retrieved from http://www.renren.com/info/About.do 
Zhao, S., Grasmuck, S., & Martin, J. (2008). Identity construction on Facebook: Digital empowerment in 
anchored relationships. Computers in Human Behavior, 24, 1816–1836. 
