Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2013/macdonaldetal.pdf 
June 2013, Volume 17, Number 2 
pp. 36–56 
 
Copyright © 2013, ISSN 1094-3501 36 
COMPUTER LEARNER CORPORA:  
ANALYSING INTERLANGUAGE ERRORS  
IN SYNCHRONOUS AND ASYNCHRONOUS COMMUNICATION 
Penny MacDonald, Universitat Politècnica de València 
Amparo García-Carbonell, Universitat Politècnica de València 
José Miguel Carot-Sierra, Universitat Politècnica de València 
This study focuses on the computer-aided analysis of interlanguage errors made by the 
participants in the telematic simulation IDEELS (Intercultural Dynamics in European 
Education through on-Line Simulation). The synchronous and asynchronous 
communication analysed was part of the MiLC Corpus, a multilingual learner corpus of 
texts written by language learners from different language backgrounds. The main 
research questions centred on the differences in the amount and types of errors found in 
both the synchronous and asynchronous modes of communication, and whether different 
L1 groups committed certain errors more than their counterparts from other mother tongue 
backgrounds. As we hypothesised, more errors were found in the synchronous mode of 
communication than in the asynchronous; however, when examining the exact types of 
errors, some categories were more frequent in the synchronous mode (the formal and 
grammatical errors, among others), while in the asynchronous, errors of style and lexis 
occurred more frequently. A analysis of the data revealed that the frequency of error types 
varied with each different L1 group participating in the simulation, this same analysis also 
showed that highly relevant associations could be established the participants’ L1 and 
specific error types.  
Keywords: Learner Corpora, Error Analysis, Correspondence Analysis, Technology-
Mediated Communication, Writing in English as a Foreign Language 
APA Citation: MacDonald, P., García-Carbonell, A., & Carot-Sierra, J. (2013). Computer 
learner corpora: Analysing interlanguage errors in synchronous and asynchronous 
communication. Language Learning & Technology, 17(2), 36–56. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2013/macdonaldetal.pdf 
Received: January 3, 2012; Accepted: July 25, 2012; Published: June 1, 2013 
Copyright: © Penny MacDonald, Amparo García-Carbonell, José Miguel Carot-Sierra 
INTRODUCTION 
Computer learner corpora are electronic collections of authentic foreign or second language data which 
have been gathered according to strict design criteria. The development of computer learner corpora 
(CLC) in the 1980s marked a new direction in the field of corpus linguistics and its relation to foreign 
language learning research and pedagogy. One of the first CLC projects was the Danish Project in 
Foreign Language Pedagogy (Færch, Haastrup, Phillipson, 1984). Then, in the early 1990s, Sylviane 
Granger at the Université Catholique de Louvain in Belgium (Granger, 1993, 1998) founded and 
coordinated the creation of the International Corpus of Learner English, a corpus based on a large 
collection of essays written by French-speaking undergraduates of English Language and Literature. 
Granger’s original project was later expanded to include texts produced by language learners from a 
variety of different mother tongue (L1) backgrounds, including Bulgarian, Chinese, Czech, Dutch, 
Finnish, French, German, Hebrew, Italian, Japanese, Polish, Russian, Spanish, and Swedish. Since then, 
the development of new learner corpora has increased greatly as can be observed on the Learner Corpora 
around the World web page of the Centre for Corpus Linguistics at Louvain, which includes over 100 
Penny MacDonald, Amparo García-Carbonell, and José Miguel Carot-Sierra  Analysing Interlanguage Errors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 37 
learner corpora projects centred on spoken and written learner language involving different mother tongue 
and target language groups, varying from timed argumentative essays, to language for specific purposes 
texts, or from chat to oral exam interviews, and spontaneous speech. 
Learner corpora have been used in the literature to provide evidence concerning what language learners 
have acquired and not acquired (Granger, 1999), sometimes comparing their output with native speakers 
(Granger, Meunier, & Tyson, 1994; Virtanen, 1998; Lorenz, 1998), and other times comparing it with 
other mother tongue groups (de Haan, 2000). Granger (2002) identified two linguistically-based 
methodological lenses through which corpora are studied: contrastive interlanguage analysis and 
computer-aided error analysis. The first method deals with studies that compare the output of either two 
or more non-native speaker groups or two or more native speaker and non-native speaker groups. In the 
second case, researchers use computer programmes to analyse language output in order to detect the 
difficulties that learners have. This, in turn, contributes to discoveries about the processes involved in 
learning, to the identification of instances of crosslinguistic influence, to the development of new 
materials, and so forth. 
The present research encompasses both of these methods in a study which carries out a computer-aided 
error analysis of the language produced by university students writing on computers in five different 
European countries. Data were gathered in a series of telematic simulations, and the analysis involved 
comparing the language errors produced in synchronous and asynchronous communication exchanges. 
Errors in Foreign Language Learning Contexts 
In educational environments, and in particular in the field of foreign language teaching/learning, errors 
formed the basis of the teaching methodologies in the three decades from 1950 to 1980, focusing mainly 
on the product of the language learning and the avoidance of any structures that were deviant in form 
from the standard target language. One predominant use of errors was in contrastive analysis (Fries, 1945; 
Lado, 1957), the aim of which was to identify interlingual differences by predicting and describing 
patterns that were likely to cause difficulty. These errors could then be eliminated through drilling in 
order to bring about change in the linguistic behaviour of the learner. Later, error analysis, a method that 
attempted to explain the essentially creative nature of the language acquisition process (Schachter & 
Celce-Murcia, 1977, p. 442) emerged as an alternative methodology to the previous behaviourist habit-
formation theory. This method provided researchers with a way of studying learner language, that is to 
say, by not concentrating exclusively on what Ellis (1994, p. 48) describes as “fully-formed languages” 
(L1 and L2). Thus, error analysis became integrated into the field of applied linguistics, above all, thanks 
to the seminal work of Corder (1967) who understood that errors not only provided teachers and 
researchers with information concerning how much the learners had learnt and how they were learning, 
but also how the learners themselves—through making errors—could discover the rules of the target 
language. 
However, error analysis has been criticised for lacking methodological rigour (Ellis, 1994) and for 
concentrating too much on what was wrong or deviant in the learners’ interlanguage, while ignoring their 
achievements (Enkvist, 1973; Hammarberg, 1974). Moreover, the phenomenon of avoidance (Schachter, 
1974), or how learner language develops over time (Ellis, 1994, p. 69) were important aspects that were 
never addressed. In spite of these important drawbacks, Ellis maintains that error analysis “has made a 
substantial contribution to second language acquisition research” (1994, p. 70). 
Computer Learner Corpora and Error Analysis 
There were two main developments in the 1980s and 1990s that linked the field of corpus linguistics to 
foreign language teaching research and pedagogy. Johns (1986) introduced data-driven learning into 
language classrooms, using concordances extracted from both general reference corpora and smaller 
specialised corpora, for pedagogically-oriented tasks. Also, computer learner corpora were developed 
Penny MacDonald, Amparo García-Carbonell, and José Miguel Carot-Sierra  Analysing Interlanguage Errors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 38 
(Færch et al., 1984; Granger, 1993, 1998) with the aim of making use of “advances in applied linguistics 
and computer technology to investigate the interlanguage of advanced learners from various mother 
tongue backgrounds” (Granger & Meunier, 1994, p. 102). In line with the present study, we concentrate 
on the second case, (i.e., computer learner corpora), and their applications in the field of language 
teaching and learning. 
The most cited computer learner corpus in the literature is the International Corpus of Learner English 
(ICLE), (Granger, 1993, 1998). It is based on a large collection of essays (over 2 million words) written 
by students of English from a variety of different L1 backgrounds. In our research work, we make 
particular reference to the error-tagged data obtained from the French L1 (Dagneaux, Denness, & 
Granger, 1998; Granger 1999) and the Spanish L1 components of the ICLE corpus (Neff et al., 2007), as 
these studies are particularly comparable to ours since the same error tagging method was used. 
Computer learner corpora like the ICLE Corpus provide an important source of data for SLA research, 
which can potentially address some of the shortcomings of error analysis mentioned above. The fact that 
learner data can now be collected in corpora with strict design criteria, taking into account different 
variables (ESL or EFL environment, competence levels, task type, years of study, age, etc.) permits the 
comparison of different groups of learners (Granger & Meunier, 1994). Large amounts of interlanguage 
data can be studied using software tools designed for counting frequencies of particular forms, or 
providing syntactic and semantic information, which can increase the degree of empirical validity of 
many SLA studies (Granger, 1998). 
Earlier studies in the field of error analysis centred on the creation of taxonomies for identifying and 
classifying errors (Dusková, 1969; Burt & Kiparsky, 1974; Corder, 1981; Chun, Day, Chenoweth, & 
Luppescu, 1982; Dulay, Burt, & Krashen 1982; Green & Hecht 1985; Lennon, 1991), the investigation of 
error gravity (Hughes & Lascaratou, 1982; Davies, 1985; McCretton & Rider,1993; Rifkin & Roberts, 
1995) and the possible causes of IL errors (Richards, 1974; Taylor, 1986; Odlin, 1989; Gass & Selinker, 
1992; Ringbom, 1992). More recently, studies in error analysis are using computer tools to investigate 
learner language especially in the case of the different research groups who contributed to the ICLE 
corpus. Dagneaux et al. (1998) describe the work carried out with the Université Catholique de Louvain’s 
tagging method on French learners writing in English. They compared error-tagged essays of intermediate 
and advanced learners separated by a two-year gap at university and found—as expected—that errors 
were substantially lower with the advanced group, although the progress rate differed, depending on the 
error category, within the advanced level group. Using the same method, Granger (1999) investigated the 
use of tenses by advanced learners and found that tenses should be taught at the discourse level and not at 
the sentence level, as they play an important role in the cohesion of written output. She also suggested 
introducing a contrastive approach to the teaching of tenses, as errors can result from major differences 
between the mother tongue and the way tenses are formed in English. In the error-tagged data in the 
SPICLE corpus, the Spanish component of ICLE, (Neff et al., 2007), the main focus is on grammar and 
lexical errors. As regards the grammar category, these authors discuss the errors which are most frequent 
in the corpus: articles, verb tenses, and above all auxiliary verbs (which includes the modal auxiliaries) 
and suggest possible causes of some of the errors. Regarding lexis, it was found that a high percentage of 
these errors were in the adjective and adverb category, and many of the deviant forms could be attributed 
to interference from the mother tongue, Spanish. 
Also with a central pedagogical focus, there have recently been a number of studies which analyse errors 
in order to create specific profiles of learner competence. In the case of the English Profile Project 
(Hawkins & Buttery, 2009) the aim is to develop Reference Level Descriptions for English linked to the 
Common European Framework of Reference for Languages (CEFR) levels, which were developed to 
assess language proficiency as regards the functions that learners can carry out in the process of learning a 
foreign language. However, it has been noted that these levels are “underspecified with respect to key 
properties that examiners look for when they assign candidates to a particular proficiency level and score 
Penny MacDonald, Amparo García-Carbonell, and José Miguel Carot-Sierra  Analysing Interlanguage Errors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 39 
in a particular L2” (Milanovic, 2009, cited in Hawkins & Buttery, 2010, p. 2). Thus, the English Profile 
Project proposes to establish a series of criteria (Hawkins & Filipović, 2012) for the CEFR proficiency 
levels as applied to English and assess the impact of different first languages on these features. In order to 
do this, researchers have focused on both positive and negative linguistic properties. Using the Cambridge 
Learner Corpus, negative properties (i.e., errors) have been annotated manually, using a taxonomy of 
codes with over 70 error types involving the lexical, syntactic, and morphosyntactic properties of English. 
Along similar lines, using error-tagged learner corpora, the researchers in the European project SLATE 
(Second Language Acquisition and Testing in Europe) have described the linguistic features of learner 
performance at each of the six CEFR levels for different target languages with a view to improving the 
CEFR descriptors for grammatical accuracy, vocabulary control, vocabulary range, orthographic control 
(spelling and punctuation), and cohesion and coherence (Granger and Thewissen, 2005a; Thewissen, 
Bestgen, & Granger, 2006). 
Lastly, another study which focuses on interlanguage analysis is the TREACLE project (Teaching 
Resource Extraction from an Annotated Corpus of Learner English) (O’Donnell et al., 2009) based in 
Spain. This project is developing a methodology for producing grammatical profiles of Spanish university 
students’ written English language. The corpus-based methodology uses an automated syntactical analysis 
to determine what learners already know, in addition to a computer-aided error analysis using the 
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid Corpus Tool (O’Donnell, 2008) to find out what learners are not 
getting right. Together, this details the degree to which learners at each proficiency level have mastered 
the various grammatical features they need to know for their university degree courses. 
Definition and Classification of Errors 
There are many different ways of classifying language errors. Dulay, Burt, & Krashen (1982) 
distinguished two main categories: 
• Linguistic categories (morphology, syntax, etc.) 
• Surface structure taxonomies (omission, addition, etc.) 
Corder (1981) records errors of omission, addition, selection, and ordering on one level, and distinguishes 
between errors made on the grammar, lexico-semantic, and graphology/phonology levels. Most studies in the 
literature have analysed interlanguage errors combining the analysis of both linguistic and surface structure 
taxonomies, either from a grammatical viewpoint, including aspects concerning morphology, syntax, lexis, 
spelling, and punctuation (Biber, Conrad, & Reppen, 1998; Dagneaux et al., 1998; Dusková, 1969; Granger 
& Meunier, 1994; Green & Hecht, 1985; Lennon, 1991; Olsen, 1999), or as regards pragmatics, style and 
discoursal aspects (Chun et al., 1982; Neff et al., 2007, among others), or with regard to factual information 
(Chun et al, 1982). In our research, we define the concept of error as a form or structure in the learner’s 
production that is identifiable as being deviant, to a greater or lesser extent, in comparison to a native 
speaker of the target language attempting to say the same in an identical linguistic and communicative 
context (Lennon, 1991). The tagging system we used was based on the linguistic categories of the errors, 
but also described the errors with reference to their violation of norms as regards surface structure. 
Telematic Simulations 
In the last two decades, the advances made in communication technologies and their integration into 
teaching-learning environments have resulted in enormous changes in the educational system, not only 
with respect to the accessibility of information, but also in how teaching and learning take place and in 
the use and delivery of educational resources. Based on Greenblat's conceptual interpretation (Greenblat 
1988), a simulation is an operational model of central features, or elements, of a real or proposed system, 
process, or environment. A telematic simulation is a model that brings together multiple disciplines and 
professional and academic environments in geographically distant locations via the internet (García-
Carbonell & Watts, 1996).  
Penny MacDonald, Amparo García-Carbonell, and José Miguel Carot-Sierra  Analysing Interlanguage Errors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 40 
In Europe, Project IDEELS (Intercultural Dynamics in European Education), a large-scale distributed 
telematic simulation, has proved in several research studies to be of invaluable pedagogical and 
humanistic interest (Ekker, 2000; Sutherland, Ekker, & Eidsmo, 2006). It has shown to be of use in 
studies concerning cultural awareness (Ekker & Sutherland, 2009; Sutherland & Ekker, 2010) and 
language learning (Andreu-Andrés & García-Casas, 2011; Watts, García-Carbonell, & Rising 2011; 
García-Carbonell, Watts, & Andreu-Andrés, 2012; Angelini, 2012), including the development of the four 
skills and communicative, pragmatic and interactional competence (García-Carbonell, 1998; MacDonald 
& Perry, 2009; García-Carbonell & Watts, 2012). Similarly, other positive outcomes have been reported 
with respect to a wide range of other skills (García-Carbonell, Rising, Montero, & Watts, 2001) involving 
collaborative teamwork, decision-making, and problem-solving, among others. 
Research Questions  
Following Granger (1998, p. 12), a contrastive interlanguage analysis was carried out into the language 
errors in the written production of learners with different L1s from five European universities as they 
participate in the IDEELS telematic simulation. The present study sets out to respond to the following 
research questions:  
1. Are there more errors in the synchronous or asynchronous mode of communication? 
2. Is there a difference in the type of error to be found in each mode of communication due to the 
conditions under which each is produced? 
3. Which types of errors are more frequent in the different L1 groups? 
4. Do the different groups make errors that can be associated with their particular L1, in other 
words, does the L1 seem to influence the type of error predominant in any one group? 
MATERIALS AND METHOD 
The Learner Corpus 
The MiLC corpus (Andreu-Andrés et al., 2010) is a multilingual learner corpus involving the written 
output (formal and informal letters, summaries, essays, reports, translations, computer-mediated 
communication) of students learning English, French, and Spanish as a foreign language, and also 
Catalan, as a first, second, or foreign language. The computer-mediated communication is made up of 
forum discussions and IDEELS simulations involving synchronous exchanges (on-line conferences held 
under real-time conditions), and asynchronous exchanges (e-mail type communication). We error coded 
the online teleconferences and email communication that the participants in the IDEELS simulation 
produced. 
In the synchronous communication, there were 42,059 words (2,906 turns), and in the asynchronous 
communication there were 42,625 words (250 turns). From these figures it can be seen that there is a 
substantial difference in the length of turns between these communicative modes. The synchronous 
postings tended to be short, containing anything from a minimum electronic utterance (Sotillo, 2000) such 
as an exclamation mark to a longer message containing, say, a team’s Opening Statement, whilst the 
asynchronous messages were, on the whole, much longer with both the language and format showing 
characteristics of a more formal and syntactically complex genre of writing.  
Error Tagging System 
The programme used in our research work was the Université Catolique de Louvain’s Error Editor 
(Hutchinson, 1996) together with the coding guide, the Error Tagging Manual Version 1 (Dagneaux, 
Denness, Granger, & Meunier, 1996). (See Appendix for the complete list of all the tags and the 
categories of error they represent). The Error Editor does not carry out an automatic analysis of learner 
Penny MacDonald, Amparo García-Carbonell, and José Miguel Carot-Sierra  Analysing Interlanguage Errors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 41 
language, but helps simplify the analyst’s classification and tagging of the data.  
• The first category considers formal errors, involving spelling, derivation, and inflection (F*). 
• The second category is devoted to grammatical errors (G*). 
• The third category deals with lexico-grammar (X*) errors. It includes those where the 
morphosyntactic properties of a word have been violated. 
• The fourth category groups errors concerning the semantic properties of single words and 
lexical phrases (L*). 
• Three additional categories include: (a) Register (R), (b) Style (S*), (c) Word Redundant (WR), 
Word Missing (WM), and Word Order (WO). 
• We added two categories of our own, one related to punctuation (FPM—punctuation missing, 
and FPW—punctuation wrong) and the other related to the incidence of code-switching (CS). 
Although code-switching is widely accepted as being a useful communication strategy for 
language learners, participants in the simulation were asked to communicate in English at all 
times, and thus any examples of code-switching are considered errors.  
Using the Université Catolique de Louvain’s Error Editor, the tag is inserted before the incorrect form or 
forms, and the suggested correct version is written between dollar signs after the error as in the following 
examples: 
• We think that these two years should be part (FS) iof $of$ secondary education. 
• Could you clarify the exact age for starting tertiary (LS) school $education$? 
• We are making the Educational System for Eutropolis and not for (GA) 0 $the$ 
Eutropian Federation 
In the above examples, the code FS indicates a spelling error, although this was most likely a 
typographical error; the code LS indicates a lexical choice error; and the code GA indicates an article 
error. In this last instance, the article was missing and this is shown by writing a zero. 
To ensure uniformity in the application of the tagging system, an intrarater study was carried out by the 
researcher who coded the corpus. Following this, an intercoder reliability study was carried out by the 
researcher and a colleague (both native speaker teachers of English) involving the analysis of 10 percent 
of the corpus. The potential variations in coding due to the effects of rater characteristics were minimized 
as both raters had similar backgrounds in education (university degreed), and professional experience 
(more than twenty years of teaching English as a foreign language). 
Participants 
The participants involved in this research were 126 students at five tertiary education institutions in 
Europe: (a) University of Bremen, Germany; (b) Nord-Trondelag College, Norway; (c) Universidad 
Politécnica de Valencia, Spain; (d) University of Riga, Latvia; and (e) University of Nice, France. Their 
English proficiency level ranged from intermediate to advanced. All students were required to have a 
minimum level of B1 according to the CEFR levels in order to enrol in the simulations. 
Following the simulation rationale, the participants took on specific roles, negotiated, and made an 
attempt to deal with the problems that a fictitious federation, Eutropia, faced. The students acted as high-
level negotiators, activists, consultants, and journalists; discussions during the simulations were 
conducted on two levels: deliberations within a team and bilateral and multilateral negotiations between 
or among teams using both synchronous and asynchronous communication. In both cases, the participants  
were to produce and achieve agreement on collaboratively-written documents that address the problems 
set forth in the scenario. 
Penny MacDonald, Amparo García-Carbonell, and José Miguel Carot-Sierra  Analysing Interlanguage Errors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 42 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Our first research question, concerning the comparison of the amount of errors in both types of 
communication, is answered in Table 1, which shows that there were more errors per total words 
produced in the synchronous than the asynchronous mode of communication. 
Table 1. Comparison of Errors in Synchronous and Asynchronous Modes 
Mode of communication Total words Total errors % of total  
Synchronous 42,059 2,360 5.6% 
Asynchronous 42,625 1,890 4.4% 
Totals 84,684 4,250 5.0% 
Note. The total errors may consist of one or several words; the percent, then should be viewed as an estimate. 
There are several possible reasons for this difference, notably that there were certain constraints placed on 
the participants when on-line (the speed of the interaction, the fast scrolling down of the other postings, 
the need to be able to both read and understand the incoming messages, then plan and compose the reply 
in the shortest interval of time). In this situation, participants probably paid more attention to getting 
meaning across and less to the formal aspects of their postings. 
In terms of our second research question, focusing on the frequency of the types of errors made in both 
modes of communication, Table 2 shows there were indeed certain categories of error which were more 
frequent in the synchronous postings. These were formal (F*) and grammatical (G*) errors. although the 
opposite also occurred: errors of lexis L* and style S* were quantitatively greater in the asynchronous 
mode than in the synchronous mode.  
Table 2. General Category Errors in Synchronous and Asynchronous Modes 
 Synchronous Asynchronous 
Code Error category Raw % of total Raw % of total 
F* Formal: spelling/ morphology 700 29.7 447 23.7 
G* Grammar 658 27.9 492 26.0 
X* Lexico-grammar 95 4.0 91 4.8 
L* Lexis 423 17.9 464 24.6 
W*  Word order/ missing/ extra 250 10.6 187 9.9 
R  Register 0 0.0 3 0.1 
S*  Style 197 8.3 188 9.9 
CS  Code-switching 37 1.6 18 1.0 
Total errors 2360 100.0 1890 100.0 
The first main category of error that we analysed (F*, formal) deals with the formal aspects of the output. 
There were 6% more form-related errors in the synchronous mode (29.7% of the total errors in contrast 
with 23.7% in the asynchronous mode). Using a two-proportion z test—a significance test used to 
determine whether or not two proportions (in this case, percent of errors) are significantly different from 
each other—the two percentages were found to be significantly different, with z = 4.38,  p = .01. This 
result contrasts with other studies using the same error tagging method. In both the French L1 and 
Penny MacDonald, Amparo García-Carbonell, and José Miguel Carot-Sierra  Analysing Interlanguage Errors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 43 
Spanish L1 component of ICLE, formal errors represented only 9% and 10% respectively of total errors. 
It must be noted, however, that the French L1 component of ICLE did not include the category of 
punctuation error in their taxonomy, and the Spanish L1 component of ICLE used a separate tag (Q) for 
their punctuation errors. Within this Formal (F*) category, FM errors are related to errors of derivation 
and inflection, whereas the code FS tags errors in spelling. As regards the latter, errors related to formal 
aspects of the written exchanges such as spelling and typos were fewer in the asynchronous mode than in 
the on-line communication, as was to be expected. It might be added that in two previous studies carried 
out by Hughes & Lascaratou (1982) and Polio (1997) involving non-teacher judges of error gravity, this 
type of error was considered one of the most serious. The significant difference in the percentage of errors 
in this category may have partly resulted from what has now become a conventionalised norm which is 
characteristic of on-line communication in general, especially in the case of chat and discussion groups 
and which tolerates, among other features, non-capitalisation for sentence beginnings and proper names 
since one or two fewer keystrokes means both a faster reply and subsequent speedier transmission of the 
message (Ferrara, Brunner, & Whittemore, 1991). However, all the participants in this simulation were 
asked to maintain certain standards, and were reminded to pay attention to questions of formality in their 
postings both on- and off-line. It should be stressed, however, that the formal errors of this type did not 
generally cause communication breakdowns as, for instance, the unclear style category (SU) did; still, a 
slovenly presentation did not create a good team image, and frequent misspellings in messages made 
understanding the message more laborious. As a high number of the spelling errors are of a typographical 
nature (MacDonald, 2012), they cannot therefore be directly attributed to a lack of language competence, 
but as we stated before, may be due to the time pressure exerted on the participants in the on-line 
communication. Nevertheless, the asynchronous results are also high in this category, implying that more 
attention needs to be paid to this type of error.  
In terms of the two error types related to punctuation in our corpus (FPM = punctuation marks omitted; 
FPW = incorrect use of particular punctuation marks), two-proportion z tests revealed that both errors 
were found significantly more frequently in the asynchronous communication (FPM, z = -2.62, p = .01; 
FPW, z = -2.29, p = .02). The latter case involved either the incorrect placement of commas due to 
confusion with non-defining relative clauses (the first example below) or in most cases, the insertion of a 
punctuation mark when one is not required (the second example below): 
I don't have the feeling (FPW), $0$ that I know the countries very well.  
I think (FPW), $0$ everybody knows (FPW), $0$what our goals are  
In general, the type of punctuation used in the asynchronous mode coincided with its standard use in 
written communication in general. On the contrary, in the synchronous mode it was found that 
punctuation was used partly as a substitution for the lack of non-verbal cues, to express certain emotions 
such as anger, surprise, doubt, or to mitigate criticism, and to express solidarity, irony, amusement or 
sadness (MacDonald & Perry, 2009): 
I don’t think so! 
OOOOOOOOOOOH DON'T SHOUT YOU ARE NOT ALONE AND CAN YOU TALK 
NICELY PLEASE :) 
Within the grammar (G*) category, errors concerning articles (omission, addition, and misuse) were more 
frequent in the asynchronous mode, accounting for just over 10% of the total errors.  
We think that getting a patent is the best solution but is it possible to get (GA) $a$ patent for (FS) 
intelectual $intellectual$ properties of minor importance? 
Penny MacDonald, Amparo García-Carbonell, and José Miguel Carot-Sierra  Analysing Interlanguage Errors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 44 
However, a closer look at the distribution of grammatical (G*) errors in Figure 1 shows that article errors 
account for 28% (n = 188) of the errors in the grammar category alone in the synchronous mode, and 40% 
(n = 192, two-proportion z test z = -3.73, p < .001) of the errors in the grammar category in the 
asynchronous mode. The former is comparable to the results reported in Dagneaux et al. (1998) and 
Chuang & Nesi (2006) and O’Donnell (2012), which showed varying percentages averaging 27% 
determiner errors within the grammar category. More recent research into learner language has also 
shown that articles pose particular problems for learners at different levels (Master, 2002; García Mayo, 
2008), implying that more attention should be given to this grammatical feature in EFL textbooks.  
Figure 1. Sub-categories of grammar errors (G*) in synchronous and asynchronous mode. GA = article; 
GNC = noun case; GNN = noun number; GP = pronoun; GADJO = adjective; GADJN = adjective 
number; GADJCS = comparative/superlative adjective; GADVO = adverb order; GVN = verb number; 
GVM = verb morphology; GVNF = non-finite/finite verb forms; GVV = verb voice; GVT = verb tense; 
GVAUX = auxiliary verbs; GWC = word class. 
Within the same category related to grammar errors (Figure 1 above), it can be seen that there are more 
errors related to the use of verbs (GVN, GVM, GVNF, GVV, GVT, and GVAUX) in the synchronous 
than in the asynchronous mode. Errors in verb usage total 32% of the grammar errors in the synchronous 
mode (n = 211), but only 20% of the grammar errors in the asynchronous mode (n = 103), which is a 
significant difference according to a two-proportion z test: z = 4.10, p < .001. On the whole, of the verbal 
forms that were classified as errors, the highest percentage of the total were due to the incorrect use of the 
tenses (35% of the verb errors in the synchronous mode, n = 74, vs. 46% of the verb errors in the 
asynchronous mode, n = 48). Within the tense errors, the most frequent is the use of the present tense 
when another verbal form should have been used. In the synchronous mode there were more than twice as 
many of this type of error than in the asynchronous. This may be due to the fact that the time available for 
the cognitive processing involved in the selection of linguistic elements was restrained because of the 
medium used and less effort was made to search for the correct form. Others such as Dagneaux et al. 
(1998), with their French L1 learners of English, and Chuang and Nesi (2006), with their Chinese L1 
group, also have found that this was the most frequent error within this category. In terms of verb errors 
regarding auxiliary and modal verbs, errors were more numerous in the synchronous mode (22% of verb 
errors in the synchronous mode, n = 47, vs. 16% in the asynchronous mode, n = 17). The difference 
between the number of errors of this type in the synchronous compared to the asynchronous modality 
were not significant, as calculated by a two-proportion z test (z = 1.12, p = .23). With reference to verb 
Penny MacDonald, Amparo García-Carbonell, and José Miguel Carot-Sierra  Analysing Interlanguage Errors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 45 
forms, in FL classrooms these grammatical concepts often are practised in decontextualised isolation, 
without taking into account other features of tenses, such as their important function as cohesive elements 
in the discourse, and speakers’ and writers’ views with regard to aspect. McCarthy (1991, p. 62) notes 
that these functional elements vary considerably from one language to another, and are “traditional 
stumbling-blocks for learners.” 
The two-proportion z-test for the lexical error category (L*), revealed that percents of errors were 
significantly greater in the asynchronous mode (25% of total errors compared with 18% in the 
synchronous mode) (z = -5.28, p < .001). This could be explained by examining the context in which both 
modes of communication are written. The synchronous communications in this experiment were written 
on a computer or in a multimedia classroom at the participants’ college or university, while the 
asynchronous communications could have been written and sent from any computer, either at the 
university or college, or even from home. It is thought that with less pressure on the students to produce 
language as fast as possible in real time, there is a higher probability that they produce more complex 
language with a greater lexical density than when writing in the synchronous mode. The types of 
messages sent in the asynchronous mode will additionally be more formal since they deal mainly with the 
groups’ policy statements and their stance in relation to the different points on the simulation agenda. The 
number of errors in the asynchronous mode (where conditions are similar to those described in the ICLE 
studies) is the same as the ICLE data (25%), but lower than the SPICLE data, which had an error 
frequency of this type of 30% (Neff et al., 2007). 
In the category of W* errors, concerning word redundancy, word order or word omission, there were 
slightly—though non-significantly—more in the synchronous mode (synchronous = 11%; asynchronous 
= 10%, z = .74, p = .45). 
The analysis identifying errors of style (S) shows slight differences between each mode of 
communication. Firstly, errors relating to style—those which made the discourse appear to be clumsy and 
non-nativelike—were more frequent in the asynchronous mode, though non-significantly as revealed by a 
two-proportion z test (10% asynchronous vs. 8% synchronous, z = -1.80, p = .07). We relate this finding 
to the length of the asynchronous messages once again, and their relative complexity compared with the 
synchronous postings. However, cases identified as unclear style (SU), involving what we have termed 
communication breakdowns, (i.e., the researcher could not understand what the participant meant to say), 
were slightly more frequent in the synchronous mode (4.19% synchronous vs. 3.7% asynchronous, z = .81 
p < .04). We feel this has also occurred as a result of the medium and the fact that on occasions the 
interlocutor may not really have had time to plan, write and send a coherent message with the time 
constraints operating in the online teleconference. 
The last category involved code-switching (CS), which was non-significantly higher in the synchronous 
mode (2% synchronous vs. 1% asynchronous, z = 1.76, p = .07) as calculated by the two-proportion z test. 
We also analysed the incidence of error types of each L1 group participating in the simulation in order to 
answer our third research question, concerning which categories of errors were more frequently found 
within each L1 group and how performance varied when comparing synchronous and asynchronous 
communication.  
In Table 3 below, it can be seen that each L1 group has a tendency to make more errors of one particular 
category than others. The Spanish L1 group produces a high rate of grammar errors in both the 
synchronous and asynchronous modes in comparison to the other errors they make. Within this same 
group, however, formal errors were frequent in the synchronous mode, but this number was reduced by 
more than half in the asynchronous messages. The Norwegian L1 group show a high incidence of formal 
errors in both modes. In the next section, we show the results of the specific analysis carried out on the 
raw frequency data, which established the incidence of the different categories of errors for each L1 group 
in relation to the others, and the errors which could be identified as being salient within specific L1 groups. 
Penny MacDonald, Amparo García-Carbonell, and José Miguel Carot-Sierra  Analysing Interlanguage Errors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 46 
Table 3. General Error Categories: Percentages Per L1 Group 
 Spanish German Latvian Norwegian French 
 SYNC ASYNC SYNC ASYNC SYNC ASYNC SYNC ASYNC ASYNC* 
Formal  22.0 10.8 31.1 26.5 28.0 16.8 42.1 38.3 37.7 
Grammar  29.0 31.8 27.9 23.8 28.7 39.2 24.1 26.1 5.7 
Lexico-
ti l  
3.5 6.7 4.2 4.5 6.0 2.8 2.9 2.6 5.7 
Lexical  22.7 31.8 17.2 23.1 14.0 23.4 12.1 17.4 18.9 
Word missing/ 
redundant/ wrong  
12.1 10.4 10.2 10.2 12.0 7.5 8.4 6.1 11.3 
Register  0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 5.7 
Style  9.1 8.4 7.9 10.5 10.0 10.3 7.7 9.6 9.4 
Code switching  1.5 0.0 1.4 1.2 1.3 0.0 2.6 0.0 5.7 
Note. All figures are percents. *The French group did not have enough synchronous data to warrant study. 
Correspondence Analysis 
To ascertain whether there were certain errors that could be associated with particular L1s, a 
correspondence analysis was carried out to investigate the relationship between the different variables and 
their effect on the type and frequency of errors in the corpus. Correspondence analysis is an exploratory,  
descriptive technique which is designed to analyze simple two-way and multi-way tables containing some 
measure of correspondence between the rows and columns. The method visually represents the 
associations between the different categorical variables, and its primary goal is to transform the table of 
numerical information into a graphical display—a correspondence map—in which each row and each 
column is depicted as a point (Greenacre, 1984). The calculations were carried out using SPSS 11.5.  
The advantage of correspondence analysis in this particular study is that the method is relational and 
allows the visualization of a full structure or system of relations. Instead of dealing with one variable and 
its effect on the variable to be explained, correspondence analysis represents the full array of variables 
and their interrelations (Harcourt, 2003). The correspondence between the variables and the relative 
frequencies can be shown on a two- or three-dimensional map, and relationships can be established 
through the proximity or distance of certain variables, in our case, participants’ L1, in relation to the 
different error types. 
The results of the correspondence analysis (Figure 2 below) show the relative incidence of error types 
according to the L1 of the participants. It was found that the L1 of the group did appear to influence the 
type of error made, as certain categories were more highly associated with particular L1 groups. In the 
following section, we discuss each L1 separately with details of the errors that are recurrent and specific 
to each one of them.  
Participants in the Spanish L1 group (red square 1 in Figure 2) have a tendency to make more formal 
errors (FS) in the synchronous mode than the asynchronous. The grammatical category errors are varied, 
with two types that are more associated with this group than any other: the use of false friends (LSF), 
pronoun errors (GP), and auxiliary and modal verb errors (GVAUX). The article (GA) poses particular 
problems for the Spanish speaking participants in the synchronous mode. The most frequent type of 
article errors among this L1 group was the definite article used when none was required, which research 
has related to L1 interference (e.g., García Mayo, 2008).  
Another problem concerning the Spanish L1 group is the formation of comparative and superlative 
adjectives and adjective order (GADJCS). In the lexico-grammatical category (XVCO), this L1 group 
Penny MacDonald, Amparo García-Carbonell, and José Miguel Carot-Sierra  Analysing Interlanguage Errors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 47 
shows particular problems with the use of verbs with complementation and dependent prepositions 
(XVPR). As regards the lexical errors, the corpus gives evidence that both single lexical (LS) and lexical 
phrase (LP) errors are especially problematic in both the synchronous and asynchronous communication 
for this group of learners. Neff et al. (2007) found a high incidence of lexical errors in the error-tagged 
SPICLE corpus, and concluded that lexis is “probably grossly under-taught” (2007, p. 208) to Spanish 
learners of English. Similarly, a high number of lexical errors are due to incorrect use of prepositions; in 
some cases, this was attributed to L1 interference (Neff et al., 2007; MacDonald, 2012) since many 
prepositions may have two forms in English and only one in the learners L1 as in the case of in and on.  
As we are going to coordinate the technology in Eutropolis we send to you our main ideas 
(LS) in $on$ this topic:  
Sometimes, the translation of the Spanish de may have two different forms in English— of and from—
depending on the context. 
we propose to protect the network (LS)of $from$(GA)the $0$ external virus attacks and 
data loss. 
Of the connectives, the graphs in Figure 2 show that errors concerning subordinating conjunctions (LCS) 
were more salient in the synchronous postings, which was opposite to our prediction that there would be a 
greater presence of connector errors in the asynchronous mode. Indeed, connectors were found to be 
underused on the whole. We may tentatively conclude from this result that more attention needs to be 
paid to this aspect of written discourse, as these elements undoubtedly serve an important function in the 
flow of any text. Indeed, since Canale (1983) first used the term discourse competence, the acquisition 
and use of the connectives has been regarded as one of the constituent abilities that contribute to a 
learner’s overall competence in the target language (Bachman & Palmer, 1996). In recent research work 
carried out by Chiang (2003), it was found that discourse features (including connectors) in a given test 
on writing skills were regarded by raters as more indicative of the overall quality of the output than other 
aspects such as syntax and morphology.  
 
 
Figure 2. Distribution of errors in the synchronous (left) and asynchronous (right) modes. The numbers 
next to the red squares refer to the L1 groups; the circles group together the errors associated with the L1 
group. Spanish = purple (1); German = green (2); Latvian = blue (3); Norwegian = orange (4); French = 
yellow (5). 
Penny MacDonald, Amparo García-Carbonell, and José Miguel Carot-Sierra  Analysing Interlanguage Errors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 48 
Apart from connectives, errors concerning word order (WO) were also notable in the Spanish L1 group in 
both modes. As Swan and Smith (1987) note, Spanish has a much freer word order than English; the 
errors that arise are mainly due to the position of adverbials, the order of elements in complementation, 
subject-verb order in longer sentences and in interrogative forms, among others. In the synchronous 
messages, errors concerning style (S) are frequent, although in the asynchronous mode the salient error in 
this category deals with incomplete sentences (SI). Finally, this group used code-switching (CS) in the 
synchronous mode, but did not do so in the asynchronous messages. 
The German L1 group (red square 2 in Figure 2) commit a large number of formal errors (FS and FM) in 
their messages in both the synchronous and asynchronous modes, especially in the category relating to 
derivation and inflection. They also typically use the wrong punctuation (FPW) in their output. As regards 
the grammar category, there is an overwhelming misuse of the elements of the verb phrase, especially as 
regards subject-verb concordance (GVN), tense (GVT) and voice (GVV), which all appear associated 
with the synchronous mode of communication. Word class errors (GWC) are also a frequent category 
within this L1 group in both the synchronous and asynchronous messages. The erroneous 
complementation of nouns (XNCO) is salient in the asynchronous mode, whilst the synchronous mode 
produces more deviant forms involving verb complementation (XVCO). There is a high frequency of 
single lexical errors associated with this group in both modes, and with lexical phrases in the 
asynchronous messages. Exclusive to this group is the erroneous use of the complex logical connectors 
(LCLC) in the synchronous mode. This group also stands out as having a particularly high incidence of 
errors involving missing words (WM) and words that are redundant (WR) in the on-line conferences and 
the asynchronous messages. Although in general style errors were more common in the asynchronous 
mode, the more serious category concerning the breakdown of meaning (SU) was prominent for this 
group in both modes. Lastly code-switching (CS) was also used by this L1 group in both modes, although 
the messages were mostly sent as “whispers” to their own L1 group.  
The Latvian L1 group (red square 3 in Figure 2) had a relatively infrequent participation in this 
simulation. Nevertheless, Figure 2 shows that the errors that are most associated with this L1 are highly 
linked to this specific group in particular. Interestingly, different error categories are present in each mode 
of communication. Firstly, there are no formal errors associated in particular with this L1 group. On the 
other hand, the article (GA) and genitive (GNC) within the grammatical category, posed particular 
problems in the asynchronous mode. Dependent prepositions with verbs (XVPR) and adjectives 
(XADJPR), and adjective complementation (XADJCO) were errors that were salient with this L1 group 
in the synchronous postings. Concerning the lexical errors, we noted special difficulty with single logical 
connectors (LCLS) and coordinating conjunctions (LCC) in the synchronous mode. Missing words (WM) 
were frequent in both modes, while errors of style (S) were particularly notable in the asynchronous mode.  
The Norwegian L1 group (red square 4 in Figure 2) showed notably more errors than other groups as 
regards spelling (FS) in both the synchronous and asynchronous messages. Olsen (1999) similarly found, 
with her Norwegian L1 learners of English, that 40% of total errors in her study were due to 
orthographical mistakes, including spelling and typos. She attributes many of these errors to 
crosslinguistic influence, although others are probably due to the students’ over-generalizing the spelling 
rules of English. Punctuation errors (FPM and FPW), however, were more frequent in the asynchronous 
messages. The grammar category of errors (G*) predominated in the synchronous mode, with those 
related to noun number (GNN) showing a higher incidence in this L1 group. Lack of subject-verb 
concordance (GVN) was also observed, although this was in the asynchronous mode only. The class of 
errors involving nouns and their dependent prepositions (XNPR) was also highly associated with this L1. 
Single lexical errors (LS) were found in both modes as was the use of redundant words (WR). Once more, 
the category indicating that the meaning of a message has not been understood and which is categorised 
as unclear style (SU), has an important presence among the errors of this L1 group.  
The data obtained for the French L1 group in the on-line teleconferences was not representative, and as a 
Penny MacDonald, Amparo García-Carbonell, and José Miguel Carot-Sierra  Analysing Interlanguage Errors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 49 
result, was not included in the analysis of the synchronous part of the corpus. However the asynchronous 
mode showed that there were several errors particularly associated with this group (red square 5 in Figure 
2). Salient in this group were formal errors, dealing with spelling (FS) and derivation and inflection (FM), 
although these errors were obviously not exclusive to this L1 group. There were, however, no errors in the 
grammatical or lexico-grammatical categories linked in particular to these learners. Lexical single errors 
(LS) were found, but the most important group of errors associated with this group were identified as 
relating to the non-transmission of meaning or unclear style (SU) as it has been classified with the current 
tagging method. This L1 group also used code-switching (CS) in their asynchronous messages. 
CONCLUSIONS 
As regards the answers to the research questions formulated in this article’s introduction, a preliminary 
general conclusion can be claimed. As we hypothesised, we found more errors in the synchronous mode 
of communication than in the asynchronous mode. As synchronous communication involves a different 
way of processing and producing language, this study shows that learners who are writing online focus on 
fluency and communication of meaning rather than accuracy. Concerning the macro-phases involved in 
writing, Hayes and Flower (1980) identified three: planning, writing and revising. In the simulation we 
describe in our research work, each mode of communication—and each stage involved—shows different 
amounts of the three different phases just mentioned. Sometimes there is more planning of the writing 
occurring, which is typical of all the asynchronous messages, whilst at other times there is very little 
planning or revising of the output, which is apparent in the synchronous or online communication during 
the teleconferences. 
When examining the exact types of errors in these two modes of communication, there are significantly 
more formal errors (FS) in the synchronous mode than in the asynchronous mode and more errors in the 
use of lexis in the asynchronous mode. In terms of the formal spelling errors (FS), we understand that the 
speed of the online interactions makes the participants less concerned of this aspect of their written 
output. Though spelling does not hinder communication in most cases, it is an important part of writing 
competence whether dealing with mother tongue or foreign/second language production.  
Concerning this finding, we conclude that writers of online interactive communication do not revise their 
written output very much. Perhaps they find the finished product visually acceptable, not bothering—or 
not having time in many cases—to read over what they have written or conduct a spell check. This was 
also observed by Harris (1985) and Daiute (1986). However, we stress the fact that with a word processor, 
revision is an essential and necessary task, and one which can be performed at any point in the writing 
process; however, revision for many students simply involves “last-minute tinkering” as Hyland (1991, 
p. 26) describes. 
In terms of the significantly higher number of lexical errors in the asynchronous communication, this is 
likely due to the nature of the messages themselves. Many of these messages were longer, more complex 
postings, with a higher information content including detailed policy statements, or reasoned arguments 
concerning the group’s position in relation to the different points on the simulation agenda. In addition, 
the delayed nature of this mode encourages students to be able to spend more time planning their 
messages, allowing them to take “language risks” as Sotillo (2000) terms it, and to exploit a wider variety 
of lexical choices. This, in turn, may lead to more errors being produced in this category.  
A further analysis of the raw data shows that the frequency of error types varied within each different L1 
group participating in the simulation; when a correspondence analysis was carried out, highly relevant 
associations could be made concerning the relation between participants’ L1 and specific error types. 
After examining the results, it can be concluded that the L1 of the learners does in fact influence the type 
of error made. Not only are some errors clearly L1-specific, but Figure 2 shows how several of the L1 
groups have a tendency to make similar errors, shown where the error codes are all grouped together in 
Penny MacDonald, Amparo García-Carbonell, and José Miguel Carot-Sierra  Analysing Interlanguage Errors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 50 
the middle of the graph. In the synchronous mode, this is especially noticeable with the German, 
Norwegian, and Spanish L1 groups. To a lesser extent, this also occurs in the asynchronous communication, 
but this time with the German, Norwegian, and French L1 groups. On the other hand, the Latvian L1 
group in both modes tends to make errors that are particular to that group alone, a result which might be 
partially explained by taking into account that this is the only Baltic language among the different L1s. 
Although we are dealing with a small sample in terms of learner corpus research, the present study offers 
some interesting results which inevitably lead to asking further questions for future research. Is it the case 
that the similarities and differences in the different L1s of the participants influence the errors made, and 
to what extent are they due to negative interference from the mother tongue? Also, in which particular 
areas of the written production is there a greater tendency to make errors and in which linguistic contexts 
do the errors occur, and how serious are these? Moreover, how can this analysis contribute to the 
development of specific materials which can concentrate on remedial exercises for these specific errors, 
such as in the case of the numerous formal errors within the Norwegian L1 group, or the use of false 
friends and article errors with the Spanish L1 group?  
Error-tagged learner corpora can be characterised as describing language learners’ developmental 
processes, including the identification of both overuse and underuse of certain target language forms and 
structures. They can also highlight predominant errors and provide evidence for arguments about whether 
an error category may be either L1 specific, developmental, or intralingual and universal. Although the 
pedagogical applications of the research in the field have not yet been fully exploited to date, a learner 
corpus can offer information to practising teachers on language in use. This can lead to improvements in 
syllabus design and materials development. Learners can benefit from the opportunity to become 
conscious of their errors through the analysis of their own output and that of their peers, heightening in 
this way their awareness of the differences that exist between their L1 and the target language. 
 
APPENDIX. Error tags and their meanings (Dagneaux et al., 1996) 
FM Form—Morphology  LCLS Lexis—Connectors—Logical—
Single 
FS Form—Spelling  LCS Lexis—Conjunctions—Subordinating 
FPW Form—Punctuation Wrong (code 
added by authors of present study) 
 LP Lexical Phrase 
FPM Form—Punctuation Missing (code 
added by authors of present study) 
 LS Lexical Single 
GA Grammar—Articles  LSF Lexical Single—False friends 
GADJCS Grammar—Adjectives—
Comparative / Superlative 
 R Register  
GADJN Grammar—Adjectives—Number  S Style 
GADJO Grammar—Adjectives—Order  SI Style—Incomplete  
GADVO Grammar—Adverbs—Order  SU Style—Unclear 
GNC Grammar—Nouns—Case  WM Word Missing 
GNN Grammar—Nouns—Number  WO Word Order 
GP Grammar—Pronouns  WR Word Redundant  
Penny MacDonald, Amparo García-Carbonell, and José Miguel Carot-Sierra  Analysing Interlanguage Errors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 51 
GVAUX Grammar—Verbs—Auxiliaries  XADJCO Lexico-Grammar—Adjectives—
Complementation 
GVM Grammar—Verbs—Morphology  XADJPR Lexico-Grammar—Adjectives—
Dependent Preposition 
GVN Grammar—Verbs—Number  XCONJCO Lexico-Grammar—Conjunction—
Complementation 
GVNF Grammar—Verbs—Non-Finite / 
Finite 
 XNCO Lexico-Grammar—Noun—
Complementation 
GVT Grammar—Verbs—Tense   XNPR Lexico-Grammar—Noun—
Dependent Preposition 
GVV Grammar—Verbs—Voice  XNUC Lexico-Grammar—Noun—
Countable/Uncountable  
GWC Grammar—Word Class  XPRCO Lexico-Grammar—Preposition—
Complementation 
LCC Lexis—Conjunctions—
Coordinating 
 XVCO Lexico-Grammar—Verb—
Complementation 
LCLC Lexis—Connectors—Logical—
Complex  
 XVPR Lexico-Grammar—Verb—
Dependent Preposition 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors wish to thank the anonymous reviewers for their thorough reading of the original manuscript 
and for their many useful comments and suggestions. Special thanks also to Gerriet Janssen, LLT 
Managing Editor, for his insightful suggestions and meticulous attention to detail in earlier drafts of this 
work. 
Penny MacDonald would like to acknowledge the research grant awarded by the Research and 
Development Support Programme (PAID-00-10) of the Universidad Politécnica de Valencia in 2010. 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Penny MacDonald is Associate Professor at the Universitat Politècnica de València, Spain and has been a 
member of the Department of Applied Linguistics since 1997. She has been teaching English as a Foreign 
Language and English for Academic and Professional Purposes for 25 years.  
Amparo García-Carbonell is a faculty member of the Department of Applied Linguistics at the Universitat 
Politècnica de València, Spain. She has been using telematic simulation since 1993 when she became 
involved in the large-scale simulation Project IDEALS (IDEELS' parent project). She is former president 
of ISAGA (International Simulation and Gaming Association) and author of numerous publications 
related to the use of simulation and gaming in the field of communication and language learning.  
Jose Miguel Carot-Sierra is Associate Professor in the Department of Applied Statistics and Operational 
Research and Quality at the Universitat Politècnica de València. He has published widely in journals, 
books and international conferences. His main research interests centre on multivariate analysis, 
experimental design, statistical methods for the quality, design and analysis of teacher evaluation 
questionnaires and management in higher education. 
Penny MacDonald, Amparo García-Carbonell, and José Miguel Carot-Sierra  Analysing Interlanguage Errors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 52 
REFERENCES 
Andreu-Andres, M.A., Astor Guardiola, A., Boquera Matarredona, M.; MacDonald, P., Montero Fleta, 
B., & Pérez Sabater, C. (2010). Analysing EFL learner output in the MiLC Project: ‘An error *it’s, but 
which tag?’. In M.C. Campoy, B. Belles-Fortuno, & M.L. Gea-Valor (Eds.), Corpus-based approaches to 
English language teaching (pp. 167–180). London, UK: Continuum. 
Andreu-Andres, M.A., & García-Casas, M. (2011). Perceptions of gaming as experiential learning by 
Engineering students. International Journal of Engineering Education, 27(4), 795–804. 
Angelini, M.L. (2012). La simulación y juego en el desarrollo de las destrezas de producción en lengua 
inglesa. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Departamento de Lingüística Aplicada. Universitat Politècnica 
de València, Valencia, Spain.  
Bachman, L., & Palmer, A. (1996). Language testing in practice. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Biber, B., Conrad, S., & Reppen, R. (1998). Corpus linguistics: Investigating language, structure, and 
use. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Burt, M., & Kiparsky, C. (1974) Global and local mistakes. In J. Schumann & N. Stenson (Eds.), New 
frontiers in Second Language Learning. Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
Canale, M. (1983). From communicative competence to communicative language pedagogy. In J.C. 
Richards & R.W. Schmidt (Eds.), Language and Communication. (pp. 2–27). London, UK: Longman. 
Chiang, S. (2003). The importance of cohesive conditions to perceptions of writing quality at the early 
stages of foreign language learning. System, 31, 471–484. 
Chuang, F.-Y., & Nesi, H. (2006). An analysis of formal errors in a corpus of L2 English produced by 
Chinese students. Corpora, 1, 251–271. 
Chun, A.E., Day, R.R., Chenoweth, N.A., & Luppescu, S. (1982). Errors, interaction, and correction: A 
study of native-nonnative conversations. TESOL Quarterly 16(4), 537–547. 
Corder, S.P. (1967). The significance of learner’s errors. International Review of Applied Linguistics 5, 
161–170. (Reprinted in J.C. Richards (Ed.), (1974a) Error Analysis: Perspectives on Second Language 
Acquisition. (pp. 19–31), London, UK: Longman. 
Corder, S.P. (1981). Error analysis and interlanguage. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Dagneaux, E., Denness, S., Granger, S., & Meunier, F. (1996). Error tagging manual version 1.1. 
Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium: Université Catholique de Louvain. 
Dagneaux, E., Denness, S., & Granger, S. (1998). Computer-aided error analysis. System, 26, 163–174. 
Daiute, C. (1986). Physical and cognitive factors in revising: insights from studies with computers. 
Research in the Teaching of English, 20, 14–159. 
Davies, E.E. (1985). Communication as a criterion for error evaluation. International Review of Applied 
Linguistics, 23(1), 65–69. 
De Haan, P. (2000). Tagging non-native English with the TOSCA-ICLE tagger. In C. Mair (Ed.) 
Proceedings of the 20th ICAME Conference, Freiburg 1999. (pp. 69–79). Amsterdam, Netherlands: 
Rodopi.  
Dulay, H.C., Burt, M.K., & Krashen, S. (1982). Language two. Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
Dusková, L. (1969). On Sources of Errors in Foreign Language Learning. International Review of Applied 
Linguistics, 7 (1), 11–36. 
Penny MacDonald, Amparo García-Carbonell, and José Miguel Carot-Sierra  Analysing Interlanguage Errors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 53 
Ekker, K. (2000). Changes in Attitude towards Simulation-based Distributed Learning. In B. Wasson et 
al. Project DoCTA: Design and use of Collaborative Telelearning Artefacts. Publication of the Research 
network for ITU - Information Technology in Education, 5, 112–120. 
Ekker, K., & Sutherland, J. (2009). Simulation game as a learning experience: An analysis of learning 
style. In Cognition and Exploratory Learning in Digital Age (CELDA 2009). Rome, Italy: IADIS Press.  
Ellis, R. (1985a). Understanding Second Language Acquisition. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Ellis, R. (1994). The Study of Second Language Acquisition. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
Enkvist, N.E. (1973). Should we count errors or measure success? In J. Svartik (Ed.), Errata: Papers in 
Error Analysis (pp.16–24). Lund, Sweden: CWK Gleerup.  
Færch, C., Haastrup, K., & Phillipson, R. (1984). Learner language and language learning. Clevedon, 
Avon, UK: Multilingual Matters.   
Ferrara, K., Brunner, H., & Whittemore, G. (1991). Interactive written discourse as an emergent register. 
Written Communication, 8 (1), 8–34. 
Fries, C.C. (1945). Teaching and learning English as a foreign language. Michigan, MI: University of 
Michigan Press.  
García-Carbonell, A. (1998). Simulación telemática en el aprendizaje del inglés técnico. Unpublished 
doctoral dissertation. Universitat de València, Valencia, Spain. 
García-Carbonell, A., Rising, B., Montero, B., & Watts, F. (2001). Simulation/gaming and the acquisition 
of communicative language in another language. Simulation and Gaming, 32 (4), 481–491. 
García-Carbonell, A., & Watts, F. (1996). Telematic simulation and language learning. In A.García-
Carbonell, & F. Watts (Eds.), Simulation Now! Simulación ¡Ya! (pp. 585–595).Valencia, Spain: Diputació 
de València. 
García-Carbonell, A., & Watts, F. (2009). Simulation and Gaming Methodology in Language 
Acquisition. In V. Guillén-Nieto, C. Marimón-Llorca, C. Vargas-Sierra (Eds.), Intercultural business 
communication and simulation and gaming methodology (pp. 285–316). Bern, Switzerland: Peter Lang. 
García-Carbonell, A., & Watts, F. (2010). The effectiveness of telematic simulation in languages for 
specific purposes. In T. Bungarten (Ed.), Linguistic and didactic aspects of language in business 
communication. Hamburg, Germany: Universität Hamburg.  
García-Carbonell, A., & Watts, F. (2012). Investigación empírica del aprendizaje con simulación 
telemática. Revista Iberoamericana de Educación, 59(3), 1–11. 
García-Carbonell, A., Watts, F., & Andreu-Andrés, M.A. (2012). Simulación telemática como 
experiencia de aprendizaje de la lengua inglesa. Revista de Docencia Universitaria, 10(3), 301–323. 
García Mayo, M. P. (2008). The acquisition of four non-generic uses of the by EFL learners. System, 
36(4), 550–565. 
Gass, S.M., & Selinker, L. (Eds.). (1992). Language transfer in language learning. Amsterdam, 
Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Granger, S. (1993). International Corpus of Learner English. In J. Arts, P. de Haan, & N. Oostdijk (Eds.), 
English language corpora: Design, analysis and exploitation (pp. 57–71), Amsterdam, Netherlands: 
Rodopi. 
Granger, S. (Ed.). (1998). Learner English on computer. London, UK: Longman.  
 
Penny MacDonald, Amparo García-Carbonell, and José Miguel Carot-Sierra  Analysing Interlanguage Errors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 54 
Granger, S. (1999). Use of tenses by advanced EFL learners: evidence from an error-tagged computer 
corpus. In H. Hasselgard, & S. Oksefjell (Eds.). Out of corpora . Studies in honour of Stig Johansson (pp. 
191–202). Amsterdam, Netherlands: Rodopi. 
Granger, S. (2002). A bird’s eye view of learner corpus research. In S. Granger, J. Hung, & S. Petch-
Tyson (Eds.), Computer learner corpora, second language acquisition and foreign language teaching. 
(pp. 3–37). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Granger, S., Hung, J., & Petch-Tyson, S. (2002). Computer learner corpora, second language acquisition 
and foreign language teaching. Amsterdam, Netherlands: John Benjamins. 
Granger, S., & Meunier, F. (1994). Towards a grammar checker for learners of English. In U. Fries, & G. 
Tottie (Eds.), Creating and Using English Language Corpora (pp. 79–91). Amsterdam, Netherlands: 
Rodopi. 
Granger, S., Meunier, F., & Tyson, S. (1994). New insights into the learner lexicon: a preliminary report 
from the International Corpus of Learner English. In D. Flowerdew & K.K. Tong (Eds.) Entering Text 
(pp. 102–113). Hong Kong: Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. 
Granger, S., & Thewissen, J. (2005a). Towards a reconciliation of a “Can Do” and “Can’t Do” 
approach to language assessment. Paper presented at the Second Annual Conference of EALTA 
(European Association of Language Testing and Assessment), Voss, Norway. 
Green, P.S., & Hecht, K. (1985). Native and non-native evaluation of learners’ errors in written discourse. 
System, 13(2), 77–97. 
Greenacre, M. J. (1984). Theory and application of correspondence analysis. New York, NY: Academic 
Press.  
Greenblat, C. (1988). Designing games and simulations. An illustrated handbook. Newbury Park, CA: 
Sage Publications. 
Hammarberg, B. (1974). The insufficiency of error analysis. International Review of Applied Linguistics 
12(2), 185–192. 
Harcourt, B.E. (2003). Measured interpretation: Introducing the method of correspondence analysis to 
legal studies. University of Illinois Law Review, Peoria, IL, 979–1018.  
Harris, J. (1985). Student writers and word processing: a preliminary evaluation. Computer Composition 
and Communication, 36, 323–330. 
Hawkins, J. A., & Buttery, P. (2009). Using learner language from corpora to profile levels of 
proficiency: insights from the English Profile Programme. Proceedings of the 3rd ALTE Conference, 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Hawkins, J.A., & Buttery, P. (2010). Criterial features in learner corpora: Theory and Illustrations. 
English Profile Journal, 1(1), e5 doi:10.1017/S2041536210000103 
Hawkins, J.A., & Filipović, L. (2012). Criterial features in L2 English: specifying the reference levels of 
the Common European Framework. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Hayes, J.R., & Flower, L.S. (1980). Identifying the organization of writing processes. In L. Gregg, & E.R. 
Steinberg (Eds.), Cognitive Processes in Writing (pp.3–30). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Hughes, A., & Lascaratou, C. (1982). Competing criteria for error gravity. ELT Journal 36(3), 175–182. 
Hutchinson, J. (1996). UCL Error Editor. Centre for English Corpus Linguistics, Université Catholique 
de Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium. 
Penny MacDonald, Amparo García-Carbonell, and José Miguel Carot-Sierra  Analysing Interlanguage Errors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 55 
Hyland, K. (1991). CALL and the EAP classroom. In M. Smith (Ed.), Proceedings of the 4th. Annual 
Education Conference. Pyrmont, Australia: ELICOS. 
Johns, T. (1986). Microconcord: A language-learner’s research tool. System, 14(2), 151–162. 
Lado, R. (1957). Linguistics across cultures. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press. 
Lennon, P. (1991). Error: some problems of definition, identification, and distinction. Applied Linguistics 
12(2), 180–196. 
Lorenz, G. (1998). Overstatement in advanced learners’ writing: stylistic aspects of adjective 
intensification. In S. Granger (Ed.) Learner English on computer. (pp. 53–67). London, UK: Longman 
MacDonald, P. (2005). An Analysis of Interlanguage Errors in Synchronous/Asynchronous Intercultural 
Communication Exchanges. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Universitat de València, Valencia, Spain. 
MacDonald, P. (2012). “Got a runny *noes – I’m constipated again!”: Incidence of typos and L1 transfer 
in Spanish students’ writing in synchronous and asynchronous communication exchanges. In I. Elorza, O. 
Carbonell, I. Cortés, R. Albarrán, B. García Riaza, & M. Pérez-Veneros (Eds.), Empiricism and 
Analytical Tools for 21st Century Applied Linguistics. Selected papers from the XXIX International 
Conference of the Spanish Association of Applied Linguistics (pp. 615–635). Salamanca, Spain: Ediciones 
Universidad de Salamanca. 
MacDonald, P., & Murcia, S. (2011). Error coding in the TREACLE Project. In M.L. Carrió Pastor, & 
M.A. Candel Mora, (Eds.), Las tecnologías de la información y las comunicaciones: Presente y futuro en 
el análisis de córpora. Proceedings of III International Corpus Linguistics Congres. Universitat 
Politécnica de Valencia, Valencia, Spain: UPV Servei de Publicacions. 
MacDonald, P., & Perry, D. (2009). How engineering undergraduates can develop communication skills 
in English: an analysis of the structural and interactional aspects of teleconferences in the IDEELS 
Telematics Simulation Project. In R. Roy (Ed.), Engineering Education: Perspectives, Issues and 
Concerns (pp. 366–380). Delhi, India: Shipra Publications. 
Master, P. (2002). Information structure and English article pedagogy. System, 30, 331–348. 
McCarthy, M. (1991). Discourse Analysis for Language Teachers. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press. 
McCretton, E., & Rider, N. (1993). Error gravity and error hierarchies. International Review of Applied 
Linguistics 31(3), 177–188  
Milanovic, M. (2009). Cambridge ESOL and the CEFR. University of Cambridge ESOL Examinations 
Research Notes 37, 2–5. 
Nakamura, J. (1993). Quantitative comparison of modals in the Brown and the LOB corpora. ICAME 
Journal, 17, 29–48. 
Neff, J.A., Ballesteros, F., Dafouz, E., Martínez, F., Rica, J.P., Díez, M., & Prieto, R. (2007). A 
contrastive functional analysis of errors in Spanish EFL university writers’ argumentative texts: corpus-
based study. In E. Fitzpatrick (Ed.), Language and computers, corpus linguistics beyond the word: 
Corpus Research from phrase to discourse (203–225). Amsterdam, Netherlands: Rodopi. 
Odlin, T. (1989). Language Transfer. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
O'Donnell M. (2008). Demonstration of the UAM CorpusTool for text and image annotation. 
Proceedings of the ACL-08:HLT Demo Session (13–16), Columbus, OH, Association for Computational 
Linguistics. 
 
Penny MacDonald, Amparo García-Carbonell, and José Miguel Carot-Sierra  Analysing Interlanguage Errors 
 
Language Learning & Technology 56 
O’Donnell, M., Murcia, S., García, R., Molina, C., Rollinson, P., MacDonald, P., Stuart, K., & Boquera, 
M. (2009, July). Exploring the proficiency of English learners: the TREACLE project. Paper presented at 
5th Corpus Linguistics Conference, Liverpool, UK. 
O’Donnell, M. (2012). Using learner corpora to redesign university-level ESL grammar education. 
Revista Española de Lingüística Aplicada (RESLA), Vol. Extra 1, 145–160. 
Olsen, S. (1999). Errors and compensatory strategies: a study of grammar and vocabulary in texts written 
by Norwegian learners of English. System, 27, 191–205. 
Polio, C. G. (1997). Measures of linguistic accuracy in second language writing research. Language 
Learning, 47(1), 101–143. 
Richards , J.C. (1974). Error Analysis: perspectives of second language acquisition. London, UK: 
Longman. 
Rifkin, B., & Roberts, F.D. (1995). Error gravity: a critical review of research design. Language Learning 
45(3), 511–537. 
Ringbom, H. (1992). On L1 transfer in L2 comprehension and L2 production. Language Learning 42(2), 
85–112. 
Schachter, J. (1974). An error in error analysis. Language Learning 24(2), 205–214. 
Schachter, J., & Celce-Murcia, M. (1977). Some reservations concerning Error Analysis. TESOL 
Quarterly 11(4), 441–51. 
Sotillo, S. M. (2000). Discourse functions and syntactic complexity in synchronous and asynchronous 
communication. Language Learning and Technology 4(1), 82–119.  
Sutherland, J. (2002). Project IDEELS: Value-added multilateral curriculum development. Retrieved from 
http://www.ideels.uni-bremen.de 
Sutherland, J., & Ekker, K. (2010). Simulation – Games as a learning experience: an analysis of learning 
style and attitude. In D. Ifenthaler, J.M. Spector, Kinshuk, P. Isaias, & D.G. Sampson (Eds.), Multiple 
perspectives on problem solving and learning in the digital age. New York, NY: Springer. 
Sutherland, J., Ekker, K., & Eidsmo, A. (2006). Telematic Simulation in the Post-September 11 World. In 
T. Reeves & S. Yamashita (Eds.), Proceedings of World Conference on E-Learning in Corporate, 
Government, Healthcare, and Higher Education 2006 (pp. 2650–2657). Chesapeake, VA: AACE.  
Swan, M., & Smith, B. (Eds.). (1987). Learner English: A teacher’s guide to interference and other 
problems. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Taylor, G. (1986). Errors and explanations. Applied Linguistics 7(2), 144–165. 
Thewissen J., Bestgen, Y., & Granger, S. (2006, May). Using error-tagged learner corpora to create 
English-specific CEF descriptors. Paper presented at Third Annual Conference of EALTA, Krakow, 
Poland.  
Virtanen, T. (1998). Direct questions in argumentative student writing. In S. Granger (Ed.) Learner 
English on computer. (pp. 94–107). London, UK: Longman. 
Watts, F., García-Carbonell, A., & Rising, B. (2011). Student perceptions of collaborative work in 
telematic simulation. Journal of Simulation/Gaming for Learning and Development, V1, (1). Retrieved 
from http://www.thaisim.org/sgld/ 
