Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2013/commentary.pdf 
October 2013, Volume 17, Number 3 
pp. 1-5 
 
Copyright © 2013, ISSN 1094-3501 1 
MOTIVATION MATTERS IN MOBILE LANGUAGE LEARNING: 
A BRIEF COMMENTARY 
Ema Ushioda, University of Warwick 
In this paper I offer a brief commentary on motivational issues in mobile language 
learning, drawing on empirical insights from the articles in this special issue.  
Key words: Motivation, Autonomy, Self-determination Theory 
APA Citation:. Ushioda, E. (2013). Motivation matters in mobile language learning: A 
brief commentary. Language Learning & Technology, 17(3), 1–5. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2013/commentary.pdf 
Received: June 25, 2013; Accepted: July 23, 2013; Published: October 1, 2013 
Copyright: © Ema Ushioda 
INTRODUCTION 
As highlighted in the original call for papers for this special issue, learning with mobile technologies is 
currently a rapidly developing area of interest for researchers, teachers, materials writers and app 
developers in the educational field, not least within language education. Yet to what extent is this growing 
interest realised and shared by language learners themselves? How far are they motivated to exploit the 
affordances offered by mobile technologies for language learning, and how far can mobile technologies 
help to engage and sustain individual motivation for language learning? Although learner motivation is 
not a core concern of the studies in this special issue, a particular strength of these papers is their common 
focus on the student perspective in relation to mobile language learning. This student perspective sheds 
interesting critical light on the motivational dimension of mobile language learning, which is the thread I 
would like to discuss in this commentary article, building on my longstanding interest in motivation in 
language learning and more recently in relation to the use of digital technologies in language learning (see 
Ushioda, 2011).  
Drawing on the empirical findings reported in this special issue, I will focus my short commentary on the 
following motivational issues concerning mobile language learning: 
• Motivation as a matter of choice and autonomy. 
• Motivation as a matter of personally meaningful casual learning. 
Motivation as a matter of choice and autonomy 
As Stockwell (2013) pointed out in his comprehensive discussion of motivation and technology in 
language learning, it is helpful to draw a conceptual distinction between two kinds of motivation that may 
shape why language learners engage with a particular technology: (a) an inherent interest in the 
technology, which then leads to discovering its benefits for language learning and to strengthening 
language learning motivation; (b) a strong motivation for language learning, prompting interest in a 
particular technology that can support and enhance this process. In other words, as Stockwell describes, 
students may have different points of departure when it comes to using a technology for language learning 
purposes. Furthermore, as theorised by Rogers (1962) in his seminal work on the diffusion and adoption 
of innovations and as explored in Kim et al.’s paper in this issue, people bring different degrees of 
motivation or readiness to embrace new technologies. 
In addition to such variations in motivation for using technologies for language learning, we might add 
that people will also have different reasons for learning a language and different degrees of motivation, 
which will partly reflect the level of priority that language learning occupies in their life in relation to 
Ema Ushioda Motivation Matters in Mobile Language Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 2 
other concurrent activities and pursuits (for detailed discussion, see Ushioda, 2012). Furthermore, it is 
possible that their motivation for language learning may be largely internally driven, such as the intrinsic 
motivation that is reported to characterise leisure-time users of iTunes U language resources in Rosell-
Aguilar’s paper. Alternatively, people’s motivation for language learning may be regulated more by 
external pressures and controls, such as the need to complete a course credit or to fulfil the skills 
requirement for a new job. 
Relating these various perspectives to the use of mobile technologies for language learning, an interesting 
empirical question is whether, from a motivational point of view, it is better that learners are free to 
choose how much they wish to engage with such technologies (if at all), or whether it is better that 
learners engage with such technologies as an integral (and possibly credit-bearing) component of their 
course of study (as suggested, for example, by Wang & Smith in light of their research findings). Broadly 
speaking, most theoretical arguments would underline the importance of internally driven forms of 
motivation, since these reflect personal control and autonomy in the learning process and generally lead to 
high quality engagement in learning. For example, this argument is central to self-determination theory 
(SDT), which is a general theory of motivation and human growth (Ryan & Deci, 2002), and which has 
been highly influential in explaining learning motivation in a variety of contexts including language 
learning (see for example Noels, 2009; Ushioda, 1996). An underlying SDT principle is that people have 
an innate tendency towards psychological growth and the development of skills and potentialities, and 
that social-environmental conditions which support people’s sense of autonomy or personal control in this 
process are likely to promote healthy self-determined forms of motivation for learning (see for example 
the empirical studies in Deci & Ryan, 2002). 
Such theoretical arguments would thus seem to imply that the use of mobile technologies should best be 
left as a matter of free choice and individual autonomy for language learners. This position seems broadly 
reflected in the design of the four intervention studies reported in this special issue. In Li and 
Hegelheimer’s study, participating ESL students were encouraged to use a web-based mobile application 
on their mobile devices, but were free to use computers to complete their assignments. In Kim et al.’s 
study, participating student teachers of TESOL could opt to work with mobile devices or portable 
computers to undertake the various activities associated with each class project. In Wang & Smith’s 
study, target reading and grammar materials were sent to participating students’ mobile phones, but 
students themselves were free to decide how far they wished to engage with the materials. The fourth 
intervention study by Lys was somewhat different in that the mobile devices (iPADs) were actually given 
to participating students for completing specific assignments outside class as part of their course. 
Nevertheless, students had considerable flexibility in how much time they devoted to these assignments 
and how much work they did.  
In short, the need to provide choice, flexibility and autonomy in how students work with mobile 
technologies is clearly recognised by the researchers in these four intervention studies, while the link 
between autonomous forms of motivation and mobile language learning emerges strongly in the survey 
study reported by Rosell-Aguilar. Of course, this general concern with autonomous or independent 
learning principles has long been core to discussions about technology and language learning, regardless 
of the nature of the technology (see, for example, Little, 1996; Schwienhorst, 2007). Yet in the case of 
learning with mobile technologies, this concern takes on an added dimension relating to the personal 
flexibility offered by mobile learning – that is, the freedom to access language learning tools and 
resources any time and anywhere, perhaps while on the move or, as reported by some podcast users in 
Rosell-Aguilar’s study, while pursuing other activities. In other words, autonomy, flexibility, freedom and 
choice are intrinsic features of mobile learning, and by exploiting these features teachers and materials 
designers may well be able to promote internalised motivation for independent learning.  
However, despite their inherent potential for autonomous flexible learning, mobile devices are primarily 
owned and used for personal and social purposes, which means that their potential as language learning 
Ema Ushioda Motivation Matters in Mobile Language Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 3 
tools may not be particularly valued or accepted by users. In other words, some students may not feel 
motivated to use mobile devices for language learning, preferring to work instead with portable 
computers or desktop PCs as evidenced in the three intervention studies here where students were given a 
choice of platform. While in many cases students’ reported reasons for not using smaller mobile devices 
related to practical drawbacks such as size of screen and keyboard (for example, Kim et al.), there 
remains an underlying concern that students may regard their mobile devices and smartphones as their 
personal territory or ‘private space’ to be kept clearly separate from their ‘studying space’ (an argument 
elaborated by Stockwell, 2008; see also Wang & Smith for commentary on this issue). In short, whatever 
their motivation towards technology-enhanced language learning in general, some language learners may 
stop short of wanting to engage with mobile learning, at least until there is a significant change of culture 
associated with mobile technologies at a local or more global level. In this respect, as suggested by an 
anonymous reviewer of this commentary article, language teachers can have a significant role to play in 
helping to change the local institutional culture by creatively and actively promoting mobile learning and 
demonstrating its benefits and potential, while the growing use of mobile technologies in other subject 
classes (such as geography or science) may also contribute to a positive change of local culture in relation 
to mobile language learning.  
Motivation as a matter of personally meaningful casual learning 
At the same time, for students who do feel motivated to engage with mobile language learning, the 
findings reported in these papers suggest that the level of engagement may be broadly superficial or 
casual rather than deep. This superficiality may well reflect the particular affordances of mobile devices 
as pedagogical tools, such as the packaging of learning content into small bite size chunks, or the facility 
to dip in and out of learning while on the move. Superficiality of engagement may also reflect the 
limitations of learning with mobile technologies, such as the difficulty of working at length with a small 
screen and keyboard to do tasks more easily accomplished on larger devices (see student comments in 
Kim et al.’s and Li & Hegelheimer’s studies). In short, the extent to which mobile technologies can 
motivate and sustain deep levels of engagement with language learning or language use is perhaps 
questionable, given their particular design features and constraints.  
On the other hand, the potential value of mobile technologies may lie instead in motivating and 
facilitating frequent (rather than deep) engagement in language learning or language use opportunities. As 
suggested by Rosell-Aguilar, regular and frequent exposure to the target language is recognised by many 
learners as an important part of language learning, and such exposure can prove motivating in itself by 
instilling the feeling that one is learning, regardless of level of cognitive engagement with the language 
input. Increased opportunities for language practice using mobile technologies may also improve feelings 
of confidence, as reported by the learners in the study by Lys. In effect, in terms of motivating 
engagement in mobile learning, learners’ own intuitive perceptions and feelings about its benefits for 
them would seem to play a critical role, even if such engagement remains largely superficial. What seems 
important is the personal learning value ascribed to such engagement, or as described in Kim et al., the 
extent to which learning with mobile technologies can engage learners’ emotions and feelings in a 
positive way. 
Ultimately, however, the various findings reported in these studies suggest that the power of mobile 
technologies to motivate deeper and more sustained levels of engagement in language learning may be 
limited. While much will depend, of course, on how such technologies evolve in the future, the studies 
reported here would seem to indicate that even intrinsically motivated language learners (such as the 
podcast users in Rosell-Aguilar’s study) are reluctant to invest substantial cognitive or metacognitive 
effort in mobile learning. When using mobile technologies for language learning, the general preference 
seems to be for dealing with content that is not too demanding or challenging (as reported by learners in 
Wang & Smith), for working with tools and features that are quick and easy to use (as reported by 
learners in Kim et al.), or for engaging with language input in a casual rather than intensive way (as 
Ema Ushioda Motivation Matters in Mobile Language Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 4 
suggested by the podcast users in Rosell-Aguilar’s paper). In Li and Hegelheimer’s study where the 
pedagogical focus was on learning grammar using a web-based mobile application and the task thus 
required a degree of cognitive effort, only 35% of participating students reported using the mobile app on 
their own outside the context of class assignments, despite the general perception of its usefulness in 
developing their grammatical awareness. In short, motivating the more demanding cognitive and 
metacognitive efforts needed for developing language skills and knowledge may be difficult to achieve 
using mobile technologies, at least perhaps with smaller handheld devices such as smartphones.  
This is clearly an area that merits much more research if we are to understand better how mobile 
technologies can be pedagogically exploited to facilitate deeper levels of student learning and 
engagement. While insights from research on mobile learning in other subject domains may be useful in 
this regard (see for example Vavoula, Pachler & Kukulska-Hulme, 2009), an issue here may be the 
qualitatively different nature of skill-focused learning (such as language learning) from content-focused 
learning. Research that has explored motivational perspectives on deep versus surface approaches to 
learning (such as Fransson, 1984; Marton & Säljö, 1976) has broadly highlighted the kinds of motivation 
that shape how students engage with and process information content rather than how they develop 
procedural skills. Thus the extent to which current research insights on using mobile devices in content-
focused learning can be applied to understanding student motivation for mobile language learning may be 
open to question. As emphasized in a recent excellent overview of the motivational potential of mobile 
technologies for learning in general (Tran, Warschauer & Conley, 2013), our understanding of this 
potential is still very limited and much research is needed. In this regard, the need for such research in 
relation to mobile language learning seems even more compelling. 
CONCLUDING REMARKS 
As I noted in my introduction, a particular strength of the studies in this special issue is their common 
concern with student perceptions and perspectives in relation to mobile language learning. Whatever the 
inherent motivating properties and affordances of mobile technologies or of specific mobile applications 
for language learning, at bottom what matters is the motivation that students bring to mobile language 
learning, and how this is meaningfully supported and facilitated. As I have commented, mobile learning 
environments present particular issues of motivation to consider, yet in the end it is the pedagogical need 
to attend to and nurture students’ underlying personal motivations and perspectives that remains of 
paramount importance as it does for all learning environments. Individual motivation always matters in 
learning. 
REFERENCES 
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (Eds.). (2002). Handbook of self-determination research. Rochester, NY: The 
University of Rochester Press. 
Fransson, A. (1984). Cramming or understanding? Effects of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation on 
approach to learning and test performance. In J. C. Alderson & A. H. Urquhart (Eds.), Reading in a 
foreign language (pp. 86–121). London, UK: Longman. 
Little, D. (1996). Freedom to learn and compulsion to interact: Promoting learner autonomy through the 
use of information systems and information technologies. In R. Pemberton, E. S. L. Li, W. W. F. Or, & H. 
D. Pierson (Eds.) Taking control: Autonomy in language learning (pp. 203–218). Hong Kong: Hong 
Kong University Press. 
Marton, F., & Säljö, D. (1976). On qualitative differences in learning 1: Outcome and process. British 
Journal of Educational Psychology, 46, 4–11. 
Noels, K. A. (2009). The internalisation of language learning into the self and social identity. In Z. 
Ema Ushioda Motivation Matters in Mobile Language Learning 
 
Language Learning & Technology 5 
Dörnyei & E. Ushioda (Eds.), Motivation, language identity and the L2 self (pp. 295–313). Bristol, UK: 
Multilingual Matters.  
Rogers, E. M. (1962). Diffusion of innovations. New York, NY: The Free Press of Glencoe. 
Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2002). Overview of self-determination theory: An organismic dialectical 
perspective. In E. L. Deci & R. M. Ryan (Eds.), Handbook of self-determination theory (pp. 3–33). 
Rochester, NY: University of Rochester Press. 
Schwienhorst, K. (2007). Learner autonomy and CALL environments. London, UK: Routledge. 
Stockwell, G. (2008). Investigating learner preparedness for and usage patterns of mobile learning. 
ReCALL, 20(3), 253–70.  
Stockwell, G. (2013). Technology and motivation in English-language teaching and learning. In E. 
Ushioda (Ed.), International perspectives on motivation: Language learning and professional challenges 
(pp. 156–175). Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Tran, C., Warschauer, M., & Conley, A. (2013). Tapping the motivational potential of mobile handhelds: 
Defining the research agenda. In G. Trentin & M. Repetto (Eds.), Using network and mobile technologies 
to bridge formal and informal learning (pp. 1–29). Oxford, UK: Chandos Publishing. 
Ushioda, E. (1996). Learner autonomy 5: The role of motivation. Dublin, Ireland: Authentik. 
Ushioda, E. (2011). Language learning motivation, self and identity: Current theoretical perspectives. 
Computer Assisted Language Learning, 24(3): 199–210.  
Ushioda, E. (2012). Motivation: L2 learning as a special case? In S. Mercer, S. Ryan & M. Williams 
(Eds.), Psychology for language learning: Insights from research, theory and practice (pp. 58–73). 
Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Vavoula, G., Pachler, N., & Kukulska-Hulme, A. (2009). (Eds.). Researching mobile learning. Oxford, 
UK: Peter Lang. 
