Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2013/review2 
June 2013, Volume 17, Number 2 
pp. 32–35 
 
Copyright © 2013, ISSN 1094-3501 32 
REVIEW OF RESEARCH AMONG LEARNERS OF CHINESE AS A 
FOREIGN LANGUAGE 
 
Research Among Learners of Chinese as a 
Foreign Language 
 
Michael E. Everson & Helen H. Shen (Eds.) 
 
2010 
ISBN:  978–0–9800459–4–9 
US: $23.00 
200 pp. 
 
National Foreign Language Resource Center: 
University of Hawai‘i Press  
Honolulu, HI 
 
 
Review by Jing Wang, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis  
OVERVIEW 
Research among Learners of Chinese as a Foreign Language addresses important issues related to the 
acquisition of the Chinese language in the context of post-secondary institutions. The book brings 
together eight empirical studies on learners of Chinese as a Foreign Language (CFL), primarily those who 
are native speakers of Roman alphabetic languages. Although only one chapter directly addresses the use 
of technology, this volume is nonetheless an important resource in understanding technology use in the 
CFL field by providing a broad picture of Chinese acquisition research. As such, it offers an overview of 
current research in the field to language and technology researchers, Chinese language instructors, and 
readers generally interested in CFL. 
This edited volume represents a range of research conducted in the field of CFL and thereby helps to 
address gaps that Ke (2012) has recently pointed out in this field in the United States: While reading 
research in Chinese has been extensively pursued and research specific to grammatical features has been 
studied, many of the skill areas and the applications of technology have not been fully explored. In 
evaluating the contributions made by this volume in light of the current context of Chinese acquisition 
research laid out by Ke, this collection not only advances knowledge in the more frequently examined 
areas such as reading and grammar, but also systematically examines several less studied areas: language 
attrition, mental lexicon, discourse processing through listening, writing, and online learning. Taken 
together, the chapters in this book employ varied and complex theoretical models and rely on diverse 
research methods. 
Jing Wang                  Review of Research Among Learners of Chinese 
 
Language Learning & Technology 33 
SUMMARY OF INDIVIDUAL CHAPTERS 
In the first chapter, Du focuses on the acquisition of the ba construction. Grammatical words such as le, 
ba, and de play an important role in conveying grammatical meaning in Chinese, and they are frequently 
targeted in language instruction. Focusing on two constraints for ba verbal phrases: RVC (resultative 
verbal complement) and le, Du compared and contrasted CFL learners’ performances not only at different 
levels but also with native speakers. Sixty-five CFL learners across three levels and 20 native Chinese 
speakers participated in the study. They produced Chinese sentences and completed grammaticality 
judgment tests using video clips. Non-native participants across three levels produced significantly fewer 
ba constructions than the native group, yet they showed no significant differences from the native group 
on most parts of the grammaticality judgment tests. In addition, the three non-native groups did not differ 
much in the production of ba constructions and on most parts of the grammaticality judgment tests. For 
the CFL learners, Du did not identify clear developmental trends. Comparing and contrasting the CFL 
learners in her study and young native speakers described in literature, Du confirmed some similarities. 
Yet she found the following differences: The CFL learners occasionally wrongly used ba with bare verbs 
while young native speakers did not; the CFL learners judged ba + le and ba + RVC equally well, while 
young native speakers demonstrated a particular acquisition order (i.e., ba + le preceding ba + RVC). 
In the second chapter, Tseng reports actual language loss and the perception of attrition with regards to 
grammar, listening, and reading among learners during their summer hiatus from formal instruction. 
Because many CFL learners often experience a break in continuity with their language learning, this 
chapter provides useful guidance to language teachers for effectively dealing with this phenomenon. 
Seventeen first-year participants completed a pre-test before the summer break, and they also completed a 
post-test and a survey after the break at the beginning of their second year of language study. Statistical 
analyses indicated that there was no statistically significant decrease in listening and reading, whereas 
there was a significant decrease in grammar. As to their perception of attrition, the participants felt they 
experienced substantial losses in listening and grammar and some loss in reading. In this study, with the 
exception of their perceived grammar skills, participants’ perceptions exaggerated their actual language 
attrition. 
The next chapter focuses on the acquisition of radicals (i.e., character components) among beginning CFL 
learners. Shen invited 65 CFL learners from a midwestern university in the United States to take four 
radical tests, covering 100 radicals, during their first year of language learning. In each radical test, they 
wrote the pinyin (Roman alphabetical letters to indicate pronunciation), meaning, and graphic shape of 
the tested radicals. At the end of their first year, participants also completed a survey, in which they 
ranked their learning difficulties and gave their perceptions on learning radicals. Statistical analyses of the 
radical tests indicated that participants experienced less difficulty with radical meaning than with radical 
sound and shape. Test results coincided with participants’ self-ranking of the difficulties in these three 
aspects. Qualitative analyses of survey answers illustrated special difficulties associated with learning 
radical meaning, sound, and shape. In addition, among the five categories of perceived effective learning 
methods, which were revealed through qualitative analyses, participants felt that repeated integration of 
radical meaning, sound, and shape was most conducive to learning radicals. Furthermore, a large majority 
of participants perceived radical knowledge as helpful in learning characters. Drawing on these findings, 
Shen offers several pedagogical implications to language instructors: emphasize pinyin and strokes, 
practice radicals across time, explain radicals’ historical development, integrate radicals into character 
learning, employ a variety of engaging activities, and incorporate assessment. This chapter advances our 
knowledge on beginning CFL learners’ experiences and perceptions of learning radicals. 
In the fourth chapter, Lü focuses on vocabulary acquisition by exploring CFL learners’ mental lexicons 
through word associations. In a total of 90 two-character words with three levels of familiarity and three 
parts of speech, twenty-two beginning and intermediate participants heard the words and then spoke out 
word associations, which were put into four categories: paradigmatic relations, syntagmatic relations, 
Jing Wang                  Review of Research Among Learners of Chinese 
 
Language Learning & Technology 34 
phonological relations, and random responses. Compared to beginners, intermediate-level participants 
produced significantly more paradigmatic associations and significantly fewer random associations. In 
terms of depth of word knowledge, participants produced more paradigmatic and syntagmatic 
associations and fewer random associations with the increase of word familiarity, and they produced the 
fewest phonological associations for familiar words. As to parts of speech, participants produced the most 
paradigmatic associations for nouns. Lü concludes that proficiency, familiarity, and parts of speech all 
influence CFL learners’ mental lexicons, and lexicons become more organized with improvement in 
language proficiency. She also concludes that CFL learners develop their mental lexicons differently from 
learners of English. 
Chapter 5 turns to an exploration of reading strategies used by CFL learners at three different proficiency 
levels, which allows for a comparison of the strategies used by learners across levels. Specifically, 
covering the same topic and with the same discourse organization, Chang chose and modified three texts 
for three proficiency levels; she also revised an existing survey to gauge the cognitive and metacognitive 
strategies used by CFL learners in the reading process. Of a pool of participants who read a text at their 
proficiency level, wrote a recall in English, and completed the survey, data from 66 participants were 
analyzed. Statistical analyses did not indicate a clear developmental pattern, though they revealed one 
trend: With the improvement of language proficiency, participants increased their use of global 
processing strategies and decreased their use of local processing strategies. Specifically, participants at 
the three proficiencies showed different features of strategy use. In addition, within each proficiency 
level, more proficient readers used more global strategies than less proficient ones. Chang advocates 
explicit instruction of global strategies, suggests focusing on different strategies for different 
proficiencies, and emphasizes vocabulary development.  
In Chapter 6, Liu extends the understanding of CFL discourse processing and memory through listening 
activities by CFL learners whose first language was Japanese. Thirty-two second-year participants 
listened to a short passage three times and then wrote recalls in their first language of Japanese. In 
addition, 10 participants wrote recalls in Chinese. Statistical analyses of the 32 recalls indicated that the 
beginning and the end of the passage were recalled significantly better than the middle. Qualitative 
analyses of the 32 recalls in Japanese showed that participants added new information, omitted details, 
changed sequences, and changed content; analyses of the 10 recalls in Chinese indicated that participants 
changed wording, changed sequences, and omitted words. Liu found that the middle of a reading passage 
was the most difficult to recall and that CFL learners employed different strategies in producing recalls, 
which may have been influenced by several factors. She concludes that CFL learners focus on content 
rather than the original form. 
Chapter 7 turns to the area of writing, which in the CFL field has received less empirical attention. Xiao 
focuses on discourse features in the written development of CFL learners. Eight written diaries from two 
heritage and two non-heritage learners were gathered in two sequential semesters. In addition, one native 
speaker of the Chinese language re-wrote all the diaries. Contrasting the native speaker’s writings with 
those of the participants, Xiao discovered differences in the use of discourse features that were unique to 
the Chinese language; however, she found no differences between the writings of heritage and non-
heritage learners and no major changes in the use of discourse features over the duration of one semester. 
Xiao advocates the inclusion of more formal prose in textbooks and overt instruction of discourse 
features.  
In the final chapter, Tasker uses grounded-theory methodology to study CFL learners’ perceptions of 
distance learning of Chinese. Forty-one intermediate participants who had experienced learning Chinese 
through distance learning completed an open-ended survey. On the basis of survey responses, Tasker 
offered a detailed description of the participants and their path of learning Chinese, then she described 
four emerging themes of advice regarding the use of the distance-learning mode. She also provided an 
analysis of why participants chose distance learning. In addition, she summarized identified challenges 
Jing Wang                  Review of Research Among Learners of Chinese 
 
Language Learning & Technology 35 
presented by distance learning and offered possible solutions to these issues. This final chapter 
complements a growing body of literature on the use of technology for the teaching and learning of 
Chinese (e.g., Bai, 2003; Xie & Yao, 2009; Xu, 2009; Zhang, 1998) and the effectiveness of CALL tools 
(e.g., Hong, 1997; Tsai, Kuo, Horng, & Chen, 2012; Wang, 2012; Wang & Upton, 2012).   
CONCLUSION 
This volume is the fourth monograph on research published by the Chinese Language Teachers 
Association in the United States. Together with the previous three volumes, this book charts the progress 
of research in the CFL field. It extends our knowledge by collecting empirical work from a variety of 
research methodologies to explore questions of current concern to CFL professionals. 
 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Jing Wang is an assistant professor of Chinese at Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis. Her 
research areas are second language acquisition, Chinese language pedagogy, computer assisted language 
learning, and cultural studies. 
Email: jw41@iupui.edu 
 
REFERENCES  
Bai, J. H. (2003). Making multimedia an integral part of curricular innovation. Journal of the Chinese 
Language Teachers Association, 38(2), 1–16. 
Hong, W. (1997). Multimedia computer-assisted reading in business Chinese. Foreign Language Annals, 
30(3), 335–344.  
Ke, C. (2012). Research in second language acquisition of Chinese: Where we are, where we are going. 
Journal of the Chinese Language Teachers Association 47(3), 43–113.  
Tsai, C.-H., Kuo, C.-H., Horng, W.-B., & Chen, C.-W. (2012). Effects on learning logographic character 
formation in computer-assisted handwriting instruction. Language Learning & Technology, 16(1), 110–
130. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/february2012/tsaietal.pdf 
Wang, J. (2012). The use of e-dictionary to read e-text by intermediate and advanced learners of Chinese. 
Computer Assisted Language Learning, 25(5), 475–487. 
Wang, J., & Upton, T. A. (2012). The impact of using a pop-up dictionary on the reading processes of 
beginning learners of Chinese. Journal of the Chinese Language Teachers Association, 47(1), 23–41. 
Xie, T. W., & Yao, T.-C. (2009). Technology in Chinese language teaching and learning. In M. E. 
Everson, & Y. Xiao (Eds.), Teaching Chinese as a foreign language: Theories and applications (pp. 151–
172). Boston, MA: Cheng & Tsui Company. 
Xu, D. B. (2009). Incorporating DVD into PowerPoint for language and film studies instruction. Journal 
of the Chinese Language Teachers Association, 44(1), 103–122. 
Zhang, Z. S. (1998). CALL for Chinese: Issues and practice. Chinese Language Teachers Association, 
33(1), 51–82. 
