Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2013/kimetal.pdf 
October 2013, Volume 17, Number 3 
pp. 52–73 
 
Copyright © 2013, ISSN 1094-3501 52 
STUDENTS’ PERCEPTIONS AND EXPERIENCES OF  
MOBILE LEARNING 
Daesang Kim, Valdosta State University 
Daniel Rueckert, Oklahoma City University 
Dong-Joong Kim, Korea University 
Daeryong Seo, Indiana State University 
This study focused on how students perceive the use of mobile devices to create a 
personalized learning experience outside the classroom. Fifty-three students in three 
graduate TESOL classes participated in this study. All participants completed five class 
projects designed to help them explore mobile learning experiences with their own mobile 
devices, incorporating technologies such as YouTube and VoiceThread. We identified 
characteristics of these mobile users in Mobile Language Learning (MLL), and the results 
illuminate how MLL opens up new pedagogical scaffoldings. 
Keywords: Students’ Perceptions, Learning Experiences, Mobile Learning 
APA Citation:. Kim, D., Rueckert, D., Kim, D.-J., & Seo, D. Students’ perceptions and 
experiences of mobile learning. Language Learning & Technology, 17(3), 52–73. 
Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/issues/october2013/kimetal.pdf 
Received: June 26, 2012; Accepted: April 28, 2013; Published: October 1, 2013 
Copyright: © Daesang Kim, Daniel Rueckert, Dong-Joong Kim, and Daeryong Seo 
INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, researchers have begun to investigate language learning using various mobile devices 
such as mobile phones (e.g., Wong, Chin, Tan, & Liu, 2010), pocket PCs (e.g., Wong & Looi, 2010), and 
Apple iPhones (e.g., Jong, Specht, & Koper, 2010). These researchers often concern themselves with 
design features that capitalize upon Wi-Fi access, Internet browsers, and text input. Most of these 
researchers have found that embracing the mobility and connectivity of mobile devices may lead to 
innovation in language learning for students across different environments (Looi et al., 2010; Tai, 2012). 
For instance, it has been shown that mobile phones are increasingly used for improving knowledge of 
vocabulary (Stockwell, 2010; Zhang, Song, & Burston, 2011), grammar, listening, and speaking 
(Rueckert, Kiser, & Cho, 2012), in both formal and informal settings (Demouy & Kukulska-Hulme, 
2010). Furthermore, the use of mobile technologies to support content with social communication features 
(e.g., the ability to review content and then leave comments) can empower students to participate in more 
collaborative learning environments. 
Advances in mobile technologies have enabled educators to send instructional messages in flexible ways. 
With new technologies including mobile computers, Pocket PCs, Apple iPhones, Android phones, and 
tablets, instructors and students can communicate through voice and image as well as text. Using mobile 
devices for educational purposes is becoming a common expectation of learners (Lan & Huang, 2012). 
For instance, Valk, Rashid, and Elder (2010) demonstrated how mobile phone-facilitated learning can 
give students in developing countries increased access to educational materials and services, particularly 
in rural and remote regions. In some previous studies on small displays (e.g., Chen et al., 2003; Maniar, 
Bennett, Hand, & Allan, 2008), small screen size was found to create cognitive disadvantages related to 
students’ attention and visual perception (Kim & Kim, 2012). However, students have also reported 
wanting to have more options to make learning tools more convenient so they can study when and where 
they want to. Typically, the use of personal devices affords students’ ownership of learning, which may 
Daesang Kim, Daniel Rueckert, Dong-Joong Kim, and Daeryong Seo Students’ Perceptions and Experiences 
 
Language Learning & Technology  53 
lead to positive language learning experiences (Kukulska-Hulme, 2009). 
However, the innovation of technology-based learning (referred to in this study as Mobile Language 
Learning or MLL) continues to challenge educators to develop new teaching and learning methods. 
Unfortunately, many teachers and students resist change in teaching and learning with new technology 
because they do not think of themselves as part of a new learning culture. In addition, technology-oriented 
trainings and resources may not meet the needs of individuals in understanding the nature of learning. 
Stockwell (2007) argued that survey results about mobile learning (e.g., Thornton & Houser, 2002) in 
classroom settings will be different when the learners have a choice to use mobile devices (e.g., mobile 
phones) or something else (e.g., desktop PCs) outside the classroom. In later studies, Stockwell (2008, 
2010) indicated that technological, pedagogical, psychological, or even environmental barriers often 
prevent learners from selecting mobile devices like smartphones for vocabulary learning activities, even 
though they have a positive view of mobile learning. 
Technology Adopter Category Index 
Rogers (2003) defined five categories of adopters (Innovators, Early Adopters, Early Majority, Late 
Majority, and Laggards) and proposed that the adoption of an innovation follows an S-curve when plotted 
over time. In the case of MLL, it will first be adopted by the innovators, followed in turn by the early 
adopters, early majority, and late majority, with laggards finally adopting MLL when it is widely 
available. In order to accommodate and support these diverse adopters, understanding their characteristics 
in the process of adopting MLL is essential, especially when educators seek to promote successful 
personal learning with new mobile technologies. It is thought that students’ positive perceptions and 
experiences with mobile technologies will encourage participation and acceptance of MLL (Pollara & 
Kee Broussard, 2011). 
In this study, we followed Dugas’s (2005) Technology Adopter Category Index (TACI), which describes 
different ways in which participants can adopt new technology including mobile devices. An overview of 
this categorization is shown in Table 1. 
Table 1. Technology Adopter Category Index (Dugas, 2005) 
Index Adopter Category Description 
1 I tend to latch onto new technology as soon as it is available to me. My interest lies more with the 
technology itself than with its application to specific problems.  
2 Between 1 and 3 
3 I explore new technologies for their potential to bring about improvements. I am willing to try new 
things, and am not averse to occasional failure. 
4 Between 3 and 5 
5 I adopt a “wait and see” attitude toward new technology and want examples of close-to-home 
successes before adopting. I want to see value in an innovation before adopting it. 
6 Between 5 and 7 
7 I accept new technology later in the game, once the technology has become established among the 
majority. 
8 Between 7 and 9 
9 I am usually not interested in adopting new technology. 
The TACI score is inversely proportional to the participants’ degree of comfort with innovation. That is, 
an individual with a low TACI score is very comfortable with innovation, while an individual with a high 
TACI score is not comfortable with innovation. For the purpose of this study, a TACI classification 
Daesang Kim, Daniel Rueckert, Dong-Joong Kim, and Daeryong Seo Students’ Perceptions and Experiences 
 
Language Learning & Technology  54 
demonstrates participants’ willingness to adopt MLL in their own classrooms in the future. 
Reflection for Learning 
The value of reflection has been extensively explored as being a form of learning process through 
individual experiences (Wu & Looi, 2012). Denton (2011) has pointed out that “reflection represents the 
human capacity for higher-order thinking, specifically, our ability to make connections between thoughts” 
(p. 838). However, to encourage students to think about their learning, researchers have used the term 
reflection to represent different levels of thinking, such as content-based reflection, meta-cognitive 
reflection, self-authorship reflection, and intensive reflection (Grossman, 2009). In light of the goals of 
our study, participants’ content-based reflections about their personal experiences, thoughts, and feelings 
about MLL were thought to be most beneficial and therefore were sought. 
There has been little investigation of the uses of mobile devices in current language learning; few of these 
studies include learner reflections. Language teachers’ and language students’ views concerning the use 
of MLL for their own teaching and learning are also not well known. In this study, we focused on how 
students in a graduate program in Teaching English to Speakers of Other Languages (TESOL) use their 
personal mobile devices (including mobile computers) as learning tools. We specifically tried to 
document when their coursework allowed them to create personal experiences that engaged their 
emotions and learning processes while using mobile learning environments outside the classroom. 
The study asked the following research questions: 
1. What are students’ perceptions of personal mobile devices used for learning? 
2. How do students use mobile devices to connect, communicate, and collaborate with other 
students as they create personalized mobile learning experiences? 
METHODOLOGY 
Three instruments were used to collect primary data: a pre-study survey, student reflections for class 
projects, and a post-study survey. All participants were required to complete the pre-study survey, which 
was administered one week prior to the beginning of the study. This survey gathered students’ views on 
their use of personal mobile devices; results of this survey determined the students’ different TACI 
classifications (i.e., their degree of comfort with adopting new technology). Based on the types of mobile 
devices they owned—determined from the results of the pre-class survey—participants were divided into 
two user groups (A and B) to complete this study’s six class projects. 
After finishing each class project, all students were required to complete a student reflection as a separate 
assignment. Approximately one week after all the projects were completed, a post-study survey was 
administered and collected to re-examine the students’ TACI classification score. The post-study survey 
scores were used as a proxy for understanding how exposure to and use of mobile technologies by a 
student can impact overall willingness to adopt new technology. 
Participants 
A total of 53 MA students in TESOL were recruited from three different graduate classes during the 
spring 2012 semester at one Central US university. As shown in Table 2, of the 53 students, 17 were male 
and 36 were female. Participants’ ages ranged from 21 years to 50 years. Some students were 
simultaneously enrolled in more than one class in which they used the mobile devices. Participants varied 
in their levels of experience as language teachers and came from various countries around the world. 
Daesang Kim, Daniel Rueckert, Dong-Joong Kim, and Daeryong Seo Students’ Perceptions and Experiences 
 
Language Learning & Technology  55 
Table 2. Range of Participants’ Ages 
Age 21–25 26–30 31–35 36–40 41–45 46–50 Total 
Male 0 2   8 4   2 1 17 
Female 13 6   5 4   8 0 36 
Total 13 8 13 8 10 1 53 
Using the results of the pre-survey, the participants were separated into two groups based on the devices 
they recorded as owning: Group A consisted of mobile device users and Group B consisted of mobile 
computer users. These groups were defined in order to compare the results of six class projects in the 
specialized learning environments as shown in Table 3. 
Table 3. Mobile Device User Groups 
Group Group A   Group B 
Number of participants 25 students 28 students 
Registered devices Apple iPhones, Android Phones, 
iPads, tablets, and other mobile 
devices 
Laptops, MacBook, Netbooks, and other 
mobile computers 
Survey Questionnaires 
The pre-study survey was used to gather students’ perceptions toward new technology such as mobile 
devices and to determine the students’ pre-study TACI classification. The post-study survey was used to 
re-evaluate students’ TACI classification and to investigate how exposure to and use of mobile 
technologies as a student can impact the students’ overall willingness to adopt new technology. 
Class Projects 
A specialized learning environment (i.e., a mobile learning site) was created to simplify the students’ use 
of their personal mobile devices, when tasked to complete the different mobile activity assignments. The 
authors developed the layout and design of the learning environment to support different mobile operating 
systems (e.g., iOS, Android OS, Windows Phone, etc.), mobile browsers (e.g., the native Android 
browser, Opera Mini, Firefox, etc.) and to support the significantly reduced screen sizes of their mobile 
devices. For example, the learning content was fitted to the different screen sizes so that the learners 
could easily access it with their mobile devices when they logged in to the mobile learning site. Students 
could post their responses to topic prompts that the instructor had posted on a discussion board and then 
respond to postings made by their peers. This learning site facilitated the use of social online sites such as 
YouTube, Facebook, and VoiceThread, as shown in Figure 1.  
Class projects were designed according to the following criteria: (a) projects must demonstrate the use of 
personal mobile devices for connecting, communicating, and collaborating as students create personalized 
learning experiences; (b) projects must demonstrate the use of personal mobile devices for MLL such as 
participating in individual and group discussion activities; (c) projects must demonstrate the use of 
everyday technologies (already known or easily learned) for MLL; and (d) projects must demonstrate 
both quantitative and reflective information that it promotes new learning experience with mobile 
technologies. 
Based on these criteria, a total of six class projects were generated: a bio-sketch, an online discussion, 
Daesang Kim, Daniel Rueckert, Dong-Joong Kim, and Daeryong Seo Students’ Perceptions and Experiences 
 
Language Learning & Technology  56 
  
 
 
 
View of iPhone user View of laptop user 
Figure 1. An example of the specialized learning environment for different users. 
Spring Break Facebook updates, YouTube video watching, VoiceThread presentations, and YouTube 
video authoring. These projects shared concerns such as the need to engage with mobile activities and the 
perceived benefits of using mobile devices to cooperate with others as a way to trigger personally 
meaningful learning experiences in MLL. Appendix A further describes the different learning tasks in 
each of these projects. All class projects spanned a 12-week period between January 2012 and April 2012. 
For each project, students were given two weeks to make their contributions. 
Student Reflections 
We also sought to document what students thought about their learning experiences with mobile devices. 
To this end, we developed a student reflection questionnaire to elicit their thoughts and suggestions. We 
also focused on student resistance and possible reasons why the use of mobile technologies would be 
resisted. The reflection questions solicited students’ thoughts on four categories of interaction with the 
mobile resources: how to connect, communicate, collaborate, and create personalized learning. Each 
category more specifically asked about the types of tools students used, the number of times they used 
their mobile devices, the time period, their feelings about the tools used, and their suggestions for 
improvements. The full questionnaire is shown in Appendix B. 
RESULTS 
Pre-Survey Questionnaire 
Fifty-three language education students responded to the pre-survey during the first week of class (see 
Daesang Kim, Daniel Rueckert, Dong-Joong Kim, and Daeryong Seo Students’ Perceptions and Experiences 
 
Language Learning & Technology  57 
Appendix C). One interesting finding was that 84% of the participants indicated that they use a mobile 
computer “many times a day” outside of class, but less than half the students use a smartphone (48%) or 
other mobile devices (28%) with Internet (see Figure 2). Although the results of the survey may not be 
generalized to all language students, this finding would imply that many students are reluctant to use their 
advanced mobile devices like smartphones outside of class as Stockwell has found (2007, 2008, 2010).  
 
Figure 2. Percentage of students who use mobile devices with Internet many times a day outside of class. 
This finding may also indicate that students do not have widespread access to these mobile devices. 
However, the participants also generally had positive views towards the use of mobile devices, 
particularly that these devices increased access to resources (44% of students agreed and 44% of students 
strongly agreed) as well as improved communication with teachers and classmates (52% of students 
agreed and 28% of students strongly agreed). 
Student adopter index classifications were measured using the TACI as shown in Figure 3. With a 
skewness of .07, this distribution was not significantly skewed. An independent-samples t-test was 
conducted to compare the mean TACI classifications between these two user groups. There was a 
significant difference between the mobile device users of Group A (M = 4.0, SD = 1.68) and the mobile 
computer users of Group B (M = 5.54, SD = 1.86), t(47) = -3.04, p = .04, d = .87 (large effect size).  
 
Figure 3. Frequency of students’ pre-study TACI classifications. 
Daesang Kim, Daniel Rueckert, Dong-Joong Kim, and Daeryong Seo Students’ Perceptions and Experiences 
 
Language Learning & Technology  58 
Group A had lower adopter category index scores than Group B, which suggests that the participants in 
Group A—the mobile device users—are more open to using new technologies compared to Group B—the 
mobile computer users. As a general conclusion, it can be inferred that the students who are mobile 
device owners would be more likely to use mobile technologies in their future classrooms.  
Class Project Reflections 
Approximately one week after completing each class project, students were required to complete the 
reflection questionnaire regarding the project. For four out of six class project activities, it was observed 
that some students who had originally registered their mobile devices for learning stopped using them and 
switched to laptop computers, as shown in Table 4. Switching from mobile devices to mobile computers, 
such as laptops, is a common event among users, as documented by Stockwell (2010). This can happen 
for a number of reasons, which may include small screen size, keyboard complexity, and even battery 
drainage. Although the members of this group were considered to be early adopters, the actual practicality 
and difficulty level of using the mobile devices frustrated them, and a large percentage of them ultimately 
switched to a more comfortable means of completing their tasks. 
Table 4. Number of Group Participants by Class Projects  
 Group A  Group B 
Registered user 25 28 
Bio-sketch 15 37 
Online discussion 13 36 
Spring Break N/A N/A 
Watching YouTube 10 35 
VoiceThread   9 38 
Creating YouTube 22 23 
Overall, a total of 237 student reflections regarding five of six class projects were analyzed (because of 
technical difficulties with the Facebook account, this project had to be excluded from the study). 
Reflections were first analyzed by raw numbers (i.e., frequency and time/hours) and then with other 
information about participants’ personal views on the use of personal mobile devices for learning (e.g., 
feelings, suggestions, and advantages/disadvantages). The four themes that students were asked to reflect 
upon were clearly identifiable in the data: (a) how to connect (i.e., mobile connectivity), (b) how to 
communicate (i.e., mobile communication), (c) how to collaborate (i.e., mobile collaboration), and (d) 
how to create personalized learning experience (e.g., mobile learning experience). Each item from the 
student reflections was tallied to create the frequency distributions shown in Appendix D. 
An independent-samples t-test was conducted to discover if significant differences existed between the 
groups in numerical data from the student reflections. The results revealed that there were three 
statistically significant differences between the groups in the amount of connection in the “Watching 
YouTube video” project as well as in the amount of communication in both the “Bio-sketch” and 
“VoiceThread” projects (see Table 5). We are led to determine that the ease of connecting and 
communicating on mobile devices in learning activities facilitated the Group A participants’ more 
frequent interaction. 
 
Daesang Kim, Daniel Rueckert, Dong-Joong Kim, and Daeryong Seo Students’ Perceptions and Experiences 
 
Language Learning & Technology  59 
Table 5. Three Statistically Significant Differences and Effect Sizes 
Project Group A Group B  
t 
 
df 
 
p 
 
d 
 
C.I. M SD M SD 
Watching 
YouTube 
video 
4.89 2.98 2.93 1.76 2.433 35 .020 .80 .33–3.60 
Bio-sketch 2.75   .62 1.96  .98 2.551 35 .015 .96 .16–1.50 
VoiceThread 7.00 5.93 3.85  .32 2.050 40 .047 .75 .05–6.25 
The information from the open-ended questions (e.g., feelings, suggestions, and advantages/ 
disadvantages) was used to determine the participants’ subjective views. Overall, the comments in the 
reflections revealed a positive attitude toward learning with mobile devices (including mobile computers), 
but there are still a number of barriers as shown in the representative quotes listed in Table 6. 
Post-Survey Questionnaire 
Figure 4 shows the different distributions of the students’ TACI scores from both the pre- and post-survey. 
Of particular interest was if and how the participants’ TACI changed through exposure to activities that 
encouraged them to use their own mobile devices to complete their coursework. We used the 
Table 6. Examples of Students’ Responses to Open-Ended Questions 
Category Group A Group B 
Mobile 
connectivity 
“I felt that it was convenient and advantage of 
using time effectively.” 
“easy to connect” 
“accessibility (advantage), download speed 
(disadvantage)” 
“I felt okay about it.” 
“Easy connection; convenience” 
“It was easy to watch the video. 
The video was a good change of 
learning.” 
Mobile 
communication 
“Overall, I felt using my mobile phone to 
complete my assignment and communicate 
with my peers was convenient.” 
“It was different using my phone instead of my 
laptop.” 
“The advantage was doing it while being away 
from the computer. The disadvantages were 
slower Internet connectivity and smaller 
keypad.” 
“I felt it was easy to communicate 
with others.” 
“I feel it is a useful tool (Online 
discussion board) for 
communication and we can 
communicate with each other and 
get the ideas easily.” 
“I felt good about it. It has many 
advantages like communicating 
with people easily.” 
Mobile 
collaboration 
“It was uncomfortable to read other’s opinion 
on smaller devices.” 
“I was amazed at the convenience of using the 
iPhone.” 
“It’s a big challenge for collaboration but it’s 
useful.” 
“It’s a good way for us to learn 
and experience.” 
“One of the disadvantages is that 
collaboration may not be very 
effective. As an advantage, the 
learner has the time to think freely 
and comfortably.”        
Personalized 
learning 
experience 
“I felt it was meaningful.” 
“It was a good tool for creating personalized 
learning.” 
“I felt satisfied.” 
“It gives advantages to create 
personalized learning.” 
Daesang Kim, Daniel Rueckert, Dong-Joong Kim, and Daeryong Seo Students’ Perceptions and Experiences 
 
Language Learning & Technology  60 
 
Figure 4. TACI in the pre- and post-survey results. 
independent-samples t-test to evaluate the difference between the means of TACI from the pre-survey 
(M = 4.79, SD = 1.913) and post-survey (M = 3.81, SD = 1.778), and the result was statistically 
significant, t(81) = 2.321, p = .023, d = .53, 95% CI [.41, 1.82]. Fewer students participated in the post-
survey due to attrition. This indicates that exposure to mobile device use in the MA in TESOL program 
was effective in lowering the overall TACI of these students. 
Although we did not assess depth of learning in this study, we believe that the ways of learning with 
mobile technologies are different even when the same learning activity is required for all students. For 
instance, the use of mobile devices has added a potential new dimension for language learning such as 
opportunities to learn and practice anytime and anywhere (Demouy & Kukulska-Hulme, 2010). 
DISCUSSION 
Research Question 1 
The TESOL students in this study provided a useful view of what learners are currently doing and of what 
they can do with mobile devices regarding MLL outside of the classroom. In terms of activities, the 
participants felt that as the use of mobile devices becomes more pervasive, these devices will have more 
potential to provide greater mobile connectivity and communication. Other researchers (e.g., Cavus & 
Ibrahim, 2009; Lu, 2008; Stockwell, 2010) have also reported positive reactions to the use of mobile 
devices for language learning because of these devices’ portability and perceived convenience. However, 
there are also practical challenges. For example, students might have limited access to mobile devices due 
to device and service costs. The participants in this study also reported frustration with new technology 
when used as a learning tool. This has no bearing on whether or not more mobile content should be 
developed, but it is important to remember that students may not have consistent access to mobile 
technologies (including new mobile devices) for learning at home. For instance, one student in this study 
remarked, “Never assume that all students have access to all new technologies.” 
Unsurprisingly, Group A participants who used mobile devices (e.g., Android phones, Apple iPhones, 
iPads, tablets, etc.) for learning had lower TACI scores than participants who registered only their mobile 
computers (e.g., laptops, netbooks, MacBook, etc.). It seems that the individual who is more highly 
receptive to innovation (i.e., being an innovator or early adopter) are more eager to use mobile 
technologies as a learning tool beyond their primary function as a simple communication or entertainment 
tool. 
Figure 5 shows the plot of the pre- and post-TACI utilizing Rogers’ Adopter Categories: Innovators 
Daesang Kim, Daniel Rueckert, Dong-Joong Kim, and Daeryong Seo Students’ Perceptions and Experiences 
 
Language Learning & Technology  61 
(index 1), Early Adopters (index 2 and 3), Early Majority (index 4 and 5), Late Majority (index 6 and 7), 
and Laggards (index 8 and 9). As stated above, there was a statistically significant difference in 
individuals’ TACI between the pre-survey and post-survey; specifically, more participants were classified 
with a lower TACI in the post-survey than in the pre-survey. 
 
Figure 5. A comparison of adopter categories from the pre- and post-survey. 
These results demonstrate that providing a mobile learning environment to language educators may help 
them become more comfortable with using their own devices. As students used their mobile technologies, 
their TACI scores generally went down. It appears that students will change their receptivity to 
technological innovation (i.e., adopter category) and embrace learning with mobile technologies when 
they have been exposed to MLL over the length of time required to pass through the innovation-decision 
process. Moreover, it became clear that current mobile learning environments have to cater to the earlier 
adopters (e.g., Innovator and Early Adopter) to supply convenient access to mobile content while also 
accommodating the students who fall more on the laggard end of the TACI spectrum. As mobile 
technologies develop and become more readily available for all students, the number of adopters of 
mobile technology will increase. As more learners are exposed to and make use of mobile learning 
environments, they will have richer learning opportunities. This is especially true for TESOL students in 
the field of language education. As they become more comfortable with using mobile learning devices 
and change their receptivity to new technology, they can see more value in adopting new technology in 
their classes. If they change their beliefs about the use of new technology, they should be more likely to 
use mobile learning devices for pedagogical purposes in their future classes. 
Although many educators and schools have worked hard to make mobile learning available to all students, 
the usage of mobile technologies for language learning should be carefully implemented and should take 
student perceptions into consideration. In other words, educators should embrace students’ perceptions 
and recognize them as essential when designing effective mobile learning environments. This can 
potentially empower students by engaging them in personalized learning experiences with mobile 
technologies. If future teachers have positive experiences using mobile technologies while they are 
students, they will be more likely to use those mobile technologies when they become classroom teachers. 
Research Question 2 
Understanding how students use their mobile devices to connect, communicate, and collaborate as they 
create new learning experiences can better illuminate how MLL opens up new pedagogical scaffoldings. 
Daesang Kim, Daniel Rueckert, Dong-Joong Kim, and Daeryong Seo Students’ Perceptions and Experiences 
 
Language Learning & Technology  62 
To answer our research question, we explored the characteristics of mobile learners in terms of their 
experience (i.e., mobile connectivity, mobile communication, mobile collaboration, and personalized 
learning experience); we also explored the practical and pedagogical considerations in designing a 
positive mobile learning environment that cultivates confidence in technology use. Krashen and Terrell 
(1983) discussed the importance of lowering the affective filter when teaching language to facilitate 
greater retention of language. The use of mobile learning environments and activities can be very 
effective, but for those who identify more closely as laggards, the anxiety caused by having to use new 
technologies may increase their affective filters. If the activity is not designed to be easy to use in practice, 
these students will walk away in frustration and the learning objective of the activity may be obscured due 
to the increased stress and anxiety of using the new technology. 
Mobile Connectivity & Communication 
In the “Watching YouTube video” project, Group A participants (M = 4.89, SD = 2.98) more frequently 
connected to mobile content with their mobile devices (e.g., Apple iPhones, Android phones, iPads, 
tablets, etc.) than Group B participants (M = 2.93, SD = 1.76) who used mobile computers. These 
individuals demonstrated their ability and willingness to use their mobile devices when the project was 
related to simple mobile activities such as viewing mobile content. This is not to say that all learning 
needs to require such simple activities, but it should be kept in mind that learners may be more willing to 
engage in activities that incorporate easy-to-use features of their mobile devices. That is in part because 
“mobile devices offer unique opportunities to deliver multimedia content in authentic learning situations” 
(Jong, Specht, & Koper, 2010, p. 110). Small screens such as those on smartphones often have technical 
limitations (Kim & Kim, 2012) compared to laptops’ relatively larger screens. However, our general 
results and conclusions drawn from these students’ reflections suggest that transmitting mobile content 
through small mobile devices (e.g., Apple iPhones, Android phones, iPads, and tablets) might be just as 
useful as providing content through mobile computers if the learning environment is made pedagogically 
user friendly. Statements from the participants such as “I like watching YouTube videos on my mobile 
device, so doing it for a class assignment made me more excited about it” and “I felt that it was 
convenient and had the advantage of using time effectively” support this conclusion. 
Recently, adding Internet access to mobile devices has extended users’ communication ability from 
simply telephoning to emailing, creating and sharing multimedia messages, accessing social media like 
Facebook, and so forth. When applied to learning activities, these mobile communication services can 
increase students’ extrinsic motivation to participate in learning, which may lead to positive learning 
outcomes (Rau, Gao, & Wu, 2006). There were significant differences in the amount of mobile 
communication for two of the five projects. In particular, the participants in Group A (M = 7.00, 
SD = 5.93) used their mobile devices to communicate with other learners more often than the learners in 
Group B during the “VoiceThread” project (M = 3.85, SD = .32). We assume this was because the 
participants were able to use voice commentary as a primary type of communication, which is easier to do 
using the built-in camera and microphone on a smartphone than with a laptop, which may or may not 
have a webcam. This interesting condition demonstrates that incorporating the voice commentary feature 
in mobile learning activities can increase the interactions between students as a positive result of using 
advanced mobile technology. This same tendency was observed in the “Bio-sketch” project (Group A, 
M = 2.75, SD = .62 and Group B, M = 1.96, SD = .98), in part because this particular project was related 
to simple mobile activities such as viewing and writing short answers.  
The analysis of the reflection question “What kind of tools did you use…?” indicate that the learners 
preferred to use their laptops as a connecting tool, especially if they were required to participate in 
activities related to sharing or creating (See Appendix D). Overall, the choice of mobile devices was 
laptop > netbooks > Apple iPhones > Android phones > tablets. In other words, even if students own 
advanced mobile devices (e.g., Android phones, Apple iPhones, and tablets), they might not necessarily 
be able to use them as a primary learning tool for completing mobile learning activities. Learners often to 
Daesang Kim, Daniel Rueckert, Dong-Joong Kim, and Daeryong Seo Students’ Perceptions and Experiences 
 
Language Learning & Technology  63 
chose not to use advanced mobile devices because of concerns similar to those reported in Stockwell’s 
(2010) study, such as small screen and keyboard. Indeed, some students wrote “It was uncomfortable to 
read other’s opinion on smaller devices” and “I am not good at typing with mobile device.” It appears that 
students’ final decision of which mobile device to use for completing learning activities was not 
necessarily a result of having the ability and willingness to use the device as a learning tool. For example, 
the online discussion board was the primary communication tool to facilitate learning activities that 
involved communicating with their classmates. In particular, students cited difficulty providing written 
commentary in that particular learning environment: “I used my iPad to read discussion board posts, but 
preferred to use my laptop to post my own responses”; “When responding to the video, I didn’t love using 
the keyboard on my mobile device.” 
Similarly, while participants in Group A seem to be more willing and confident about using mobile 
technologies, learning using these devices was sometimes still very challenging for them. This may also 
be due to challenges related to the instructional design features involved with the commonly used 
technologies that were employed in this study. For example, the “Creating a YouTube Video” project was 
made more difficult because of participants’ inability to upload large video files with their mobile devices. 
In addition and as mentioned in the previous section, students faced an unintended practical issue with 
VoiceThread (at the time of the study, there was an app for the Apple iPhone, but not for Android phones). 
When faced with this obstacle, Android users switched to portable computers to complete their projects. It 
appears that many of these technologies, though well designed for entertainment purposes, became less 
user-friendly when applied to pedagogical activities. 
Though we initially expected to see differences between learner groups as we observed how they thought 
about their learning experiences with mobile devices, our results showed no significant differences 
between groups in terms of the questionnaire categories addressing mobile collaboration and personalized 
learning experience. 
Mobile Collaboration 
We intended to use discussion board activities as a mode of collaboration among participants in this study. 
The majority of participants reported that discussion boards have many benefits (e.g., creating and sharing 
messages) as an online collaboration tool for mobile learning activities. However, there were some 
technical problems with the discussion boards in this study. For example, Group A participants may have 
encountered more technical obstacles such as frustration with the format of the collaboration and with 
how long it took to type out complex ideas on their mobile devices. In addition, the format of our 
discussion board with YouTube and VoiceThread features was confusing because it had too many steps 
(e.g., logging in to different online tools with different passwords and permissions); participants were 
constantly busy with technical details instead of being able to focus on more important learning issues. 
Thus, there is potential for future versions of these activities to be excellent learning tools on mobile 
devices, but these were not practical or user-friendly enough to be pedagogically effective. In contrast, as 
mobile computer technology has evolved, Group B participants sometimes felt that there was no 
difference in benefits between mobile devices, as the following statement indicates: “I didn’t use my 
phone, because I didn’t feel there were any advantages greater than using my laptop.” 
Personalized Learning Experience 
The student reflection summary (See Appendix D) suggests that the participants in this study felt that they 
could create a personalized meaningful learning experience no matter which mobile device they used for 
their learning activities.  
One interesting finding was that fewer participants of Group A felt that the “Bio-sketch” (53.3% of the 
participants) was a personally meaningful learning experience than “Watching YouTube video” (90.0% 
of the participants) and “Creating YouTube video” (95.5% of the participants). This seems to indicate that 
Daesang Kim, Daniel Rueckert, Dong-Joong Kim, and Daeryong Seo Students’ Perceptions and Experiences 
 
Language Learning & Technology  64 
students were more interested in using their mobile devices for the latter two projects, which 
coincidentally included a YouTube component, and the students created a greater personally meaningful 
use of tools than projects that required text entry only without a multimedia component. In other words, 
the students did not like writing about themselves, by themselves, as much as they liked watching videos 
and commenting to each other. This would support the conjecture that writing simple texts without peer 
interactions could negatively impact the perceived personally meaningful nature of the learning activity. 
Without meaningful interactions with the language, a language cannot be learned effectively (Norton, 
2000). 
Limitations of the Study 
There are a few limitations of this study. First, this study was designed to observe how students are 
thinking about learning experiences with mobile devices that engage their emotions. Thus, the findings 
from this study may not be generalized to assessing depth of learning with mobile technologies. Second, 
the number of participants was small (N = 53), so their reflections may not be equally applicable to all 
mobile learner perceptions. Another limitation was that the practical disadvantages of small devices seen 
in this study may have already been resolved by other technological innovations (e.g., wireless keyboard 
and screen share). 
CONCLUSION 
The findings of this study suggest that mobile technologies have the potential to provide new learning 
experiences. In these experiences, students can engage more frequently in learning activities outside of 
class, providing them with more learning opportunities in their community of practice. The fact that the 
students’ TACI scores dropped significantly after participating in these activities indicates that the use of 
mobile technologies in these classes opens up new avenues for interaction and learning. The participants 
became more willing to adopt new technologies into their own lives, which revolve around teaching 
English as a profession. Furthermore, the t-test results indicated statistically significant changes in their 
views towards mobile technology. While changes in views do not necessarily result in immediate changes 
in behavior, this experience may have given the participants the impetus they need to adopt mobile 
technologies more fully in their own classrooms. In addition, increased participation in a community of 
practice should result in greater proficiency in language (Norton, 2000) and other content areas. 
Although many educators and teachers already use technology in class, they should consider modifying 
existing class activities to make them more practical and meaningful for language learning when using 
mobile technologies. How students use mobile technology as a learning tool is dependent on their ever-
changing relationship with these mobile technologies. Teachers should remember the technological 
demands of mobile devices when planning activities in order to give the activities a valuable pedagogical 
component while being easy to use. In order to facilitate training and planning, this study has provided 
insight into the views of mobile learners as they connect, communicate, and collaborate to create 
personalized learning experiences with mobile technologies. We hope that our analysis of the 
characteristics of mobile users will provide some constructs for pedagogical thinking about enhancing 
MLL with new mobile technologies. Key issues in facilitating future language learning with new mobile 
technologies include developing seamless learning environments for all users that capitalize on 
technologies and incorporate a variety of available content while reducing the devices’ limitations. In 
addition to their ease of use, universal availability of the mobile technologies makes them a viable and 
exciting option for language learning. Keeping these issues in mind, developers and educators should 
furnish students with options they can use to create personally meaningful language learning with mobile 
technologies. 
 
Daesang Kim, Daniel Rueckert, Dong-Joong Kim, and Daeryong Seo Students’ Perceptions and Experiences 
 
Language Learning & Technology  65 
APPENDIX A. Summary of the Six Class Projects 
Project Description 
Bio-sketch On their first day of class, students in all three classes were given the task of introducing 
themselves to their peers via the online discussion board. Specifically, they were asked to 
give their names, to state where they are from, and to answer two or three questions 
providing information about themselves that was relevant to the course content. 
Online 
discussion 
An online discussion board was used in each class to prompt students to think more deeply 
about the topics being studied and to articulate their ideas and opinions about a variety of 
issues related to their course(s). Students were required to post their own responses to the 
topic prompts that the instructor had posted and then to respond to postings made by two of 
their peers. This project promoted collaboration by posing problems and requiring students 
to engage in discussion to find solutions to those problems. 
Spring break The authors created Facebook pages for each class and friended the students to include 
them in the groups. Students were required to use their mobile devices to report what they 
were doing during spring break on their class’s Facebook page. 
Watching 
YouTube 
videos 
Students in each class were assigned to watch a YouTube video that provided information 
about their course. There was no additional component to this task. Students simply logged 
into the mobile learning website and were able to watch YouTube videos that were already 
embedded there. 
VoiceThread Every student was supplied a VoiceThread membership. Students were assigned the 
specific task of creating a collaborative learning experience using VoiceThread as an 
instructional tool. All projects required students to create a unique VoiceThread 
presentation and to post audio comments on their own and others’ presentations. These 
projects asked students to collaborate to better serve their future students by creating 
practical and useful activities using this technology. 
Creating a 
YouTube video 
All students were assigned presentations that would require them to create their own video 
and then post it to the class YouTube channel. Peers had to leave comments for these newly 
created videos. The comments were designed to give peer assessment of the strengths and 
potential modifications that could be made to improve the quality of the recorded 
presentations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Daesang Kim, Daniel Rueckert, Dong-Joong Kim, and Daeryong Seo Students’ Perceptions and Experiences 
 
Language Learning & Technology  66 
APPENDIX B. Reflection Questionnaire  
 Category Items  
1. Connecting 1.1 What kind of tools (apps) did you use to connect to this project? (e.g., 
Safari, iPhone, Netbook, Firefox, etc.) 
  1.2 How many times did you use your mobile device for this project? (e.g., 
10 times total) 
  1.3 How long did you use your mobile device for this project? (e.g., 1 hour 
total) 
  1.4 How did you feel? Any suggestions? What advantages/ disadvantages 
did you feel? 
2. Communicating 2.1 What kind of tools did you use to communicate for this project? (e.g., 
telephone, online discussion board, etc.) 
  2.2 How many times did you communicate with your classmates for this 
project? (e.g., 5 times total) 
  2.3 How long did you use your mobile device to communicate for this 
project? (e.g., 1 hour total) 
  2.4 How did you feel? Any suggestions? What advantages/ disadvantages 
did you feel? 
3. Collaborating 3.1 What kind of tools did you use to collaborate for this project? (e.g., 
telephone, online discussion board, etc.) 
  3.2 How many times did you collaborate for this project? (e.g., 5 times total) 
  3.3 How long did you use your mobile device to collaborate for this project? 
(e.g., 1 hour total) 
  3.4 How did you feel? Any suggestions? What advantages/ disadvantages 
did you feel? 
4. Creating 
personalized 
learning 
4.1 How effective were the tools you used in terms of creating a personally 
meaningful learning experience for yourself? 
  4.2 While working on this project, how frequently did you consider that your 
learning was personally meaningful? (e.g., 50% of the time it was 
personally meaningful) 
  4.3 While using your mobile device, how long was your learning personally 
meaningful?  (e.g., 1 hour total) 
  4.4 How did you feel? Any suggestions? What advantages/ disadvantages 
did you feel? 
 
 
 
 
 
Daesang Kim, Daniel Rueckert, Dong-Joong Kim, and Daeryong Seo Students’ Perceptions and Experiences 
 
Language Learning & Technology  67 
APPENDIX C. Frequency Summary of the Survey Questionnaire 
 
 
Many 
times per 
day 
Once a 
day 
Two or 
three times 
per week 
Once a 
week 
N/A 
1. Use a desktop PC outside of class. 42% 10% 24% 16% 8% 
2. Use a mobile computer (e.g., laptop) 
outside of class 
84% 8% 6% 2% 0% 
3. Use a smartphone (e.g. Apple iPhone or 
Android Phone with Internet) outside of 
class. 
48% 2% 8% 14% 28% 
4. Use other mobile devices (e.g. iPad or 
Galaxy Tab with Internet) outside of 
class. 
28% 6% 2% 28% 36% 
 
 
 
Read the 
instruction 
manual 
Try to use it 
with your 
limited 
knowledge 
Ask 
somebody 
to teach 
you how to 
use it 
Other N/A 
5. Reaction to new technology like other 
mobile devices (e.g. smartphones, 
iPhones, iPads, Galaxy Tabs). 
16% 40% 32% 10% 0% 
 
 
 
Educational 
value 
Entertainment 
value 
Business 
value 
The challenge 
of learning new 
technology 
N/A 
6. Motivation to use new 
technology like other 
mobile devices (e.g., 
smartphones, iPhones, 
iPads, Galaxy Tabs). 
24% 42% 8% 24% 2% 
 
  Lack of time 
Lack of 
money 
Lack of 
interest 
Difficulty level of 
the technology 
N/A 
7. Impediment of using new technology 
like other mobile devices (e.g. 
smartphones, iPhones, iPads, Galaxy 
Tabs). 
10% 50% 18% 20% 2% 
 
  Immediately A couple of hours 
A couple 
of days 
Weeks or 
months 
N/A 
8. Time to master new technology like 
other mobile devices (e.g. 
smartphones, iPhones, iPads, Galaxy 
Tabs). 
8% 40% 32% 20% 0% 
 
Daesang Kim, Daniel Rueckert, Dong-Joong Kim, and Daeryong Seo Students’ Perceptions and Experiences 
 
Language Learning & Technology  68 
APPENDIX C. continued. Frequency Summary of the Survey Questionnaire 
 
 
More teacher 
instruction about 
the technology 
More time to 
adopt the new 
technology 
Hands on 
practice with the 
technology 
Other N/A 
9. Need to effectively adopt 
new technology like other 
mobile devices (e.g. 
smartphones, iPhones, 
iPads, Galaxy Tabs). 
12% 34% 46% 4% 2% 
 
  SD D NS A SA N/A 
10. Mobile devices with Internet offer seamless access 
to digital information, and hence is a boost to this 
information (or technology) age. 
2% 6% 38% 28% 20% 6% 
11. The use of mobile devices can increase flexibility 
of access to resources (like D2L, slides, notes, 
YouTube videos, etc.). 
8% 0% 4% 44% 44% 0% 
12. The use of mobile devices is not generally very 
secure and so I wouldn’t want to use it when I can 
use my desktop. 
12% 38% 22% 26% 2% 0% 
13. The use of the mobile devices can improve 
communication with teachers and classmates. 
4% 4% 12% 52% 28% 0% 
14. The use of the mobile devices can improve the 
learning (pedagogic) value of the course and 
courses are more recommendable to others. 
4% 12% 26% 50% 8% 0% 
15. With mobile devices I do not need to depend on 
desktops 
8% 28% 22% 28% 14% 0% 
16. Do you prefer mobile devices to be used for 
learning rather than desktop PCs? 
8% 26% 32% 20% 14% 0% 
Notes. E = Effective, N = Not effective, O = Other SD = Strongly disagree, D = Disagree, NS = Not Sure, A = Agree, SA = 
Strongly agree. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Daesang Kim, Daniel Rueckert, Dong-Joong Kim, and Daeryong Seo Students’ Perceptions and Experiences 
 
Language Learning & Technology  69 
APPENDIX D. Student Reflection Summary Tables  
Table 1. Mobile Connectivity 
Question item Bio-sketch Online  
discussion 
Watching  
YouTube video 
VoiceThread Creating  
YouTube video 
Group Group Group Group Group 
A B A B A B A B A B 
1.1 Tools  
used (%) 
29 71 27 73 22 78 19 81 49 51 
1.2 Frequency 2.86 4 6 5.29 4.89 2.93 22 8.66 12.06 12.39 
1.3 Time/ 
hour 
0.56 1.05 1.41 1.32 1.3 0.89 2.29 3.1 3.7 4.33 
Table 2. Mobile Communication 
Question item Bio-sketch Online  
discussion 
Watching  
YouTube video 
VoiceThread Creating  
YouTube video 
Group Group Group Group Group 
A B A B A B A B A B 
2.1 Tools  Board,  
Phone  
Board, 
Phone, 
E-mail, 
Face-
to-Face 
 
Board,  
Phone 
Board,  
Phone 
Board,  
Phone 
Board,  
Phone, 
Face-to-
Face 
Board,  
Phone 
Board,  
Phone 
Board,   
Phone,  
E-mail,  
YouTube  
Board,   
Phone,  
E-mail, 
YouTube  
2.2 Frequency 2.75 1.96 3.58 3.31 3.38 2.67 7.00 3.85 8.29 7.82 
2.3 Time/ 
hour 
0.44 0.56 1.12 0.98 1.29 0.77 2.23 1.32 1.13 2.83 
Daesang Kim, Daniel Rueckert, Dong-Joong Kim, and Daeryong Seo Students’ Perceptions and Experiences 
 
Language Learning & Technology  70 
APPENDIX D, continued. Student Reflection Summary Tables 
Table 3. Mobile Collaboration 
Question item Bio-sketch Online  
discussion 
Watching  
YouTube video 
VoiceThread Creating  
YouTube video 
Group Group Group Group Group 
A B A B A B A B A B 
3.1 Tools  Boar,  
Phone 
Board,  
Phone
Face-
to-
Face 
Board,  
Phone 
Board,  
Phone 
Board,  
Phone 
Board,  
Phone 
Board,  
Phone 
Board,
Phone 
Board,  
Phone,  
E-mail, 
YouTube, 
Face-to-
Face 
Board,   
Phone,  
E-mail, 
YouTube  
 
3.2 Frequency 4.29 2.78 3.50 3.77 3.71 3.06 6.00 4.36 9.42 6.29 
3.3 Time/ 
hour 
0.36 0.83 1.15 1.01 1.14 1.27 2.25 1.43 2.96 2.90 
 
Table 4. Mobile Learning Experience 
Question item Bio-sketch Online  
discussion 
Watching  
YouTube video 
VoiceThread Creating  
YouTube video 
Group Group Group Group Group 
A B A B A B A B  A   B 
4.1 Tools  E: 53.3 
N: 0.0 
O: 46.7 
E: 75.7 
N: 108 
O: 3.5 
E: 66.6 
N: 6.7 
O: 6.7 
E: 2.2 
N: 1.1 
O: 6.7 
E: 90 
N: 0 
O: 10 
E: 82.9 
N: 0 
O: 7.1 
E: 77.8 
N: 0 
O: 2.2 
E: 78.9 
N: 7.9 
O: 3.2 
  E: 5.5 
  N: 0 
  O: 4.5 
 E: 91.3 
 N: 0 
 O: 8.7 
 
4.2 Frequency 
(units) 
68.5 63.9 69.1 61.9 71.11 73.17 72.5 76.5 77.6 73.0 
4.3 Time/ 
hour 
0.53 0.90 0.80 1.14 0.69 0.81 1.96 2.05 2.80 2.58 
Notes. E = Effective, N = Not effective, O = Other (unsure, N/A, etc.). 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We are grateful to the reviewers for their insightful comments and suggestions that led to significant 
improvements in this paper. 
Daesang Kim, Daniel Rueckert, Dong-Joong Kim, and Daeryong Seo Students’ Perceptions and Experiences 
 
Language Learning & Technology  71 
 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
Dr. Daesang Kim is an assistant professor of Curriculum, Leadership, and Technology at Valdosta State 
University. His research areas include multimedia learning, online learning, and course management 
systems. He is the first author of “Effect of screen size on multimedia vocabulary learning,” published in 
the British Journal of Educational Technology (Kim & Kim, 2012).  
Email: daekim@valdosta.edu 
Dr. Daniel Rueckert is an associate professor of TESOL at Oklahoma City University. He has presented 
in TESOL, SITE, and other conferences on how to use technologies such as wikis and VoiceThread to 
enhance English language learning. He is also the current president of Oklahoma TESOL. 
Email: drueckert@okcu.edu  
Dr. Dong-Joong Kim (corresponding author) is an assistant professor in the College of Education at 
Korea University. His research areas include discourse analysis and the use of technologies to enhance 
learning and teaching. He is a co-author of “Effect of screen size on multimedia vocabulary learning,” 
published in the British Journal of Educational Technology (Kim & Kim, 2012). 
Email: dongjoongkim@korea.ac.kr 
Mr. Daeryong Seo is a Ph.D. candidate in the department of Curriculum, Instruction, & Media 
Technology at Indiana State University. His research is related to open source CMS, smartphone 
programming for educational development, social networking services, and mobile learning. 
Email: dseo1@sycamores.indstate.edu 
 
REFERENCES 
Cavus, N., & Ibrahim, D. (2009). m-Learning: An experiment in using SMS to support learning new 
English language words. British Journal of Educational Technology, 40(1), 78–91. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-
8535.2007.00801.x 
Chen, L., Xie, X., Fan, X., Ma,W., Zhang, H., & Zhou, H. (2003). A visual attention model for adapting 
images on small displays. ACM Multimedia Systems Journal, 9(4), 353–364. doi: 10.1007/s00530-003-
0105-4 
Demouy, V., & Kukulska-Hulme, A. (2010). On the spot: Using mobile devices for listening and 
speaking practice on a French language programme. Open Learning, 25(3), 217–232. doi: 
10.1080/02680513.2010.511955 
Denton, D. (2011). Reflection and learning: Characteristics, obstacles, and implications. Educational 
Philosophy and Theory, 43(8), 838–852. doi: 10.1007/s00530-003-0105-4 
Dugas, C. A. (2005). Adopter characteristics and teaching styles of faculty adopters and nonadopters of a 
course management system. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Indiana State University, Terre Haute, IN.  
Grossman, R. (2009). Structures for facilitating student reflection, College Teaching, 57(1), 15–22. doi: 
10.3200/CTCH.57.1.15-22 
de Jong, T., Specht, M., & Koper, R. (2010). A study of contextualised mobile information delivery for 
language learning. Journal of Educational Technology & Society, 13(3), 110–125. Retrieved from 
http://www.ifets.info/journals/13_3/11.pdf  
Kim, D., & Kim, D. (2012). Effect of screen size on multimedia vocabulary learning. British Journal of 
Daesang Kim, Daniel Rueckert, Dong-Joong Kim, and Daeryong Seo Students’ Perceptions and Experiences 
 
Language Learning & Technology  72 
Educational Technology, 43(1), 62–70. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8535.2010.01145.x 
Kukulska-Hulme, A. (2009). Will mobile learning change language learning? European Association for 
Computer Assisted Language Learning, 21(2), 157–165. Retrieved from http://oro.open.ac.uk/16987/2/ 
Krashen, S.D., & Terrell, T.D. (1983). The natural approach: Language Acquisition in the Classroom. 
New York, NY: Pergamon Press. 
Lan, Y.-F., & Huang, S.-M. (2012). Using mobile learning to improve the reflection: a case study of 
traffic violation. Educational Technology & Society, 15(2), 179–193. Retrieved from 
http://www.ifets.info/journals/15_2/16.pdf 
Lu, M. (2008). Effectiveness of vocabulary learning via mobile phone. Journal of Computer Assisted 
Learning, 24, 515–525. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2729.2008.00289.x 
Looi, C.-K., Seow, P., Zhang, B., So, H.-J., Chen, W., & Wong, L.-H. (2010). Leveraging mobile 
technology for sustainable seamless learning: A research agenda. British Journal of Educational 
Technology, 41(2), 154–169. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8535.2008.00912.x 
Maniar, N., Bennett, E., Hand, S., & Allan, G. (2008). The effect of mobile phone screen size on video 
based learning. Journal of Software, 3(4), 51–61. Retrieved from 
http://ojs.academypublisher.com/index.php/jsw/article/view/03045161/974 
Norton, B. (2000). Identity and language learning: Gender, ethnicity and educational change. London, 
UK: Pearson Education Limited. 
Pollara, P., & Kee Broussard, K. (2011). Student perceptions of mobile learning: A review of current 
research. In M. Koehler & P. Mishra (Eds.), Proceedings of Society for Information Technology & 
Teacher Education International Conference 2011 (pp. 1643–1650). Chesapeake, VA: AACE. 
Rau, P., Gao, Q., & Wu, L.-M. (2006). Using mobile communication technology in high school 
education: Motivation, pressure, and learning performance, Computers & Education, 50(1), 1–22. doi: 
10.1016/j.compedu.2006.03.008 
Rogers, E. M. (2003). Diffusion of innovations (5th ed.). New York, NY: The Free Press. 
Rueckert, D., Kiser, R., & Cho, M. (2012, March).  “Oral language assessment made easy via 
VoiceThread!”  TESOL International Convention and English Language Expo, Philadelphia, PA, March 
28–31. 
Stockwell, G. (2007).  Vocabulary on the move: Investigating an intelligent mobile phone-based 
vocabulary tutor. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 20(4), 365–383. doi: 
10.1080/09588220701745817 
Stockwell, G. (2008).  Investigating Learner Preparedness for and Usage Patterns of Mobile Language 
Learning. ReCALL, 20(03), 253–270. doi:10.1017/S0958344008000232 
Stockwell, G. (2010). Using mobile phones for vocabulary activities: Examining the effect of the 
platform. Language Learning & Technology, 14(2), 95–110. Retrieved from 
http://llt.msu.edu/vol14num2/stockwell.pdf 
Tai, Y. (2012). Contextualizing a MALL: practice design and evaluation. Educational Technology & 
Society, 15(2), 220–230. Retrieved from http://www.ifets.info/journals/15_2/19.pdf 
Thornton, P., & Houser, C. (2002). M-learning: Learning in transit. In P. Lewis (Ed.), The changing face 
of CALL: A Japanese perspective (pp. 229–243). Lisse, The Netherlands: Swets & Zeitlinger 
 
Daesang Kim, Daniel Rueckert, Dong-Joong Kim, and Daeryong Seo Students’ Perceptions and Experiences 
 
Language Learning & Technology  73 
Valk, J., Rashid, A.T., & Elder L. (2010). Using mobile phones to improve educational outcomes: An 
analysis of evidence from Asia. International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning, 11(1), 
117–140. Retrieved from http://www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/article/download/794/1507 
Wong, L. H., & Looi, C. K. (2010). Vocabulary learning by mobile-assisted authentic content creation 
and social meaning-making: Two case studies. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 26(5), 421–433. 
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2729.2010.00357.x 
Wong, L. H., Chin, C. K., Tan, C.L., & Liu, M. (2010). Students' personal and social meaning making in 
a Chinese idiom mobile learning environment. Journal of Educational Technology & Society, 13(4), 15–
26. Retrieved from http://www.ifets.info/journals/13_4/3.pdf 
Wu, L., & Looi, C.-K. (2012). Agent prompts: Scaffolding for productive reflection in an intelligent 
learning environment. Journal of Educational Technology & Society, 15(1), 339–353. Retrieved from 
http://www.ifets.info/journals/15_1/29.pdf 
Zhang, H., Song, W., Burston, J. (2011).  Reexamining the effectiveness of vocabulary learning via 
mobile phones. TOJET: The Turkish Online Journal of Educational Technology, 10(3), 203–214. 
Retrieved from http://www.tojet.net/articles/v10i3/10323.pdf 
