Language Learning & Technology 
http://llt.msu.edu/issues/june2013/review1.pdf 
June 2013, Volume 17, Number 2 
pp. 26–31 
 
Copyright © 2013, ISSN   26 
REVIEW OF CONTEMPORARY COMPUTER-ASSISTED LANGUAGE 
LEARNING 
Contemporary Computer-Assisted Language Learning 
 
Michael Thomas, Hayo Reinders & Mark Warschauer (Eds.) 
 
2013 
ISBN: 978-1-4411-9362-9 
US $133.00 
389 pp. 
 
Bloomsbury 
London, UK. & New York, US. 
 
 
Review by Ciara R. Wigham, Clermont Université 
Contemporary Computer-Assisted Language Learning, edited by Michael Thomas, Hayo Reinders, and 
Mark Warschauer, maps the parameters of contemporary computer-assisted language learning (CALL) 
and illustrates how a range of different areas, as well as research approaches, are shaping this field. The 
introductory chapter states four objectives fulfilled by the volume. Firstly, it offers an overview of the 
historical perspectives of CALL and identifies relationships with other disciplines. Secondly, it provides a 
critical synopsis of CALL research and ways in which this empirical base is leading to richer theoretical 
understandings. Thirdly, the introduction documents research that explores relationships between theory 
and practice in a range of educational settings, and finally, it outlines new research directions and 
approaches. 
The edited volume offers a balanced representation of voices through its 18 chapters contributed by 
researchers in Canada, Germany, Hong Kong, Japan, Spain, the United Kingdom, the United States, and 
Venezuela. A wide range of topics are covered, which supports the editors’ observation that CALL has 
developed from a narrow area of specialist interest to an area of scholarship in its own right, with 
independent subfields, including teacher education, evaluation, language testing, social media, and task 
design.  
The contributions are organized in a three-part architecture: CALL context, CALL learning environments, 
and CALL in language education. The volume features an insightful foreword by Mike Levy, who 
examines reasons to employ the label CALL. He describes the book as essential reading for postgraduate 
students of language teaching, for CALL researchers—in short, for “old hands and newcomers alike” 
(p. xviii). 
In Part I, The CALL Context, five chapters examine the historical development of the field and its 
research trends, in view of theories of language education and the process of technological integration and 
normalization.  
Ciara R. Wigham                      Review of Contemporary Computer-Assisted Language Learning  
 
Language Learning & Technology 27 
In Chapter 2, the late Graham Davies and his colleagues Sue Otto and Bernd Rüschoff provide a historical 
backdrop for the overall volume. Following a discussion on the origin of the term CALL, the authors 
describe how CALL has been shaped, in a linear fashion by the technologies available, and in a 
multipronged fashion, by trends in SLA and other language education theories. In examining the history 
of CALL from the pioneer PLATO project of the 1960s to the social turn of the 2000s, the chapter 
matches technological developments with pedagogical and methodological progress in language learning.  
Chapter 3 discusses CALL research trends and outlines their enrichment by methodological approaches 
from other disciplines. Carla Meskill and Joy Quah review techniques employed in studies of language 
learning with online social media. Firstly, they examine studies that consider that an online environment 
impacts in unique ways on communicative exchanges. How researchers develop and approach their 
datasets according to the theoretical underpinnings and purpose of their studies is exemplified. Secondly, 
datasets related to self-empowerment, community building and learner confidence are examined. Special 
methodologies are described, including learner self-reporting in diary data and class blogs, which allows 
for the investigation of social-affective dimensions of online social media. Finally, methodological 
approaches in studies that concern teaching practices are considered. Meskill and Quah conclude that 
CALL research trends are moving beyond learner interaction datasets, in large part due to new uses of 
technology that inspire new enquiry methodologies. 
In Chapter 4, Gary Motteram, Diane Slaouti, and Zeynep Onat-Stelma suggest that CALL teacher 
education be considered in light of sociocultural theory and educational perspectives rather than only in 
SLA. The contributors use a number of up-to-date references to describe ways in which educational 
technology and the study of learner viewpoints and teacher beliefs have impacted teacher education. The 
authors then detail sociocultural theory and relate it to activity theory in order to represent “all of the 
different elements of a situation that need to be taken into account when we consider … teacher 
education” (p. 64). Applications of sociocultural theory are exemplified through an exploration of various 
teaching practices of language instructors from around the world. The data illustrate how teachers’ beliefs 
about technology use relate to decision-making processes about technology in the classroom and how 
such beliefs can lead to different language learning opportunities.  
The volume then turns to the subfield of language testing. James Dean Brown proposes an examination of 
past developments, current trends, and future perspectives in computer-based language testing (CBLT). 
He examines changes in CBLT that have taken place since his own synthesis over ten years ago (Brown, 
1997). In particular, he details the move away from practical studies that address topics including item 
banking, computer-adaptive language testing, and the effectiveness of computers in testing, to studies that 
provide overviews of CBLT literature and that consider learners’ experiences of taking CBL tests and 
teacher-training needs. This chapter offers a rich acronym glossary and an interesting reflection on the 
extent to which earlier predictions about CBLT research directions have been met. 
The final chapter in Part I focuses on material design. Mirjam Hauck and Sylvia Warnecke forward that 
social presences (SPs) have important implications for material and task design. After examining the 
concept of SPs the researchers suggest the need for studies into SPs to consider learners’ perspectives and 
not solely those of teachers and researchers. They illustrate this by focusing on an EAP tutor training 
course which employed asynchronous discussion forums. The study shows how course tasks, including 
collective reflections on issues including participation and motivation, produced and enriched SPs. This 
leads to the suggestions that SP be reconsidered in light of the Community Indicators Framework and that 
studies focusing on multimodal, rather than textual environments are required. 
Part II is entitled CALL Learning Environments, which the editors say will be used to examine 
technologies that “go beyond the classroom in isolation… [to help] broaden students’ access to learning 
opportunities” (p. 119). 
The contribution by Robert O’Dowd focuses on telecollaboration. He reviews models and practices for 
Ciara R. Wigham                      Review of Contemporary Computer-Assisted Language Learning  
 
Language Learning & Technology 28 
engaging language learners in virtual contact to develop language and intercultural skills. The chapter 
describes how telecollaboration has moved from text-based, asynchronous configurations to multimodal 
exchanges. O’Dowd focuses on research findings from telecollaborative projects in the areas of linguistic 
proficiency, learner autonomy and intercultural learning. He details ways in which qualitative studies 
have focused on project design and structure. Throughout the chapter, he outlines the complications of 
integrating telecollaboration into formal education but offers examples of initiatives that help to 
normalize this process; Connect and Erasmus programmes are highlighted as well as other curricular 
initiatives to integrate telecollaboration into language teacher training. 
Marie-Noëlle Lamy offers the next contribution that distinguishes CALL from distance CALL (DCALL).  
Lamy outlines why the fields are often considered as overlapping, due to a lack of dedicated 
dissemination territories for DCALL researchers and terminological confusions related to distance 
education. She addresses this confusion by clarifying several terms, including flexible learning, open 
learning, supported learning and e-learning. She also discriminates between distance and hybrid learning 
and discusses the relationship of distance learning with DCALL and CALL. The concepts of flexibility 
and explicitness are central to her proposed model of teaching and learning in supported distance learning, 
a model which is built around a learning design approach and the presence of institutional and distributed 
learning strategies. The model is applied to examples from distance language learning literature. The 
conclusion discusses issues that currently occupy DCALL researchers. These issues emerge from a corpus 
of 54 DCALL research articles and include multimodality, knowing more about learners and distance 
language teacher training. 
In Chapter 9, Randall Sadler and Melinda Dooly focus on virtual worlds. Their chapter is clearly divided 
into two sections. The first characterizes social virtual worlds and outlines their historical development, 
before providing a research review. The authors trace the history of these environments back to the 
PLATO project of the 1960s and describe how virtual worlds are aimed at particular age groups. They 
detail research studies grouped around three themes: collaboration, learner anxiety, and the representation 
of virtual world users as avatars. They then highlight the need for further studies into how these 
environments are being used for language learning, which leads directly to their second section focused 
on this topic. An ethnographic case study details a project that used Second Life to investigate project-
based language learning approaches in primary education. The data analysis focuses on recurrent patterns 
of language use that are situated in response to the virtual world context.  
Chun Lai, Ruhui Ni, and Yong Zhao, in Chapter 10, review three types of commercial digital games used 
in language learning: video games, massive multi-player role playing-games, and 3D collaborative virtual 
environments. The authors discuss the different affordances of each game type and the pedagogical 
considerations that teachers account for when preparing learners for gameplay and when connecting the 
latter with curriculum objectives. Emphasis is placed on scaffolding gameplay, debriefing gaming 
sessions, and designing tasks. The chapter then turns to the need to balance entertainment and learning in 
serious educational language learning game design. They illustrate this discussion with the example of 
Zon, a MMORG for Chinese language learning. They discuss lessons learned by the game’s designers, 
which include fitting the game into the instructional context, enhancing its adaptability to the context and 
restructuring it to meet institutional needs.   
In Chapter 11, Glenn Stockwell gives a balanced review of mobile-assisted language learning (MALL). 
After situating MALL with relation to integrated CALL and the concept of digital natives, Stockwell 
outlines the perceived advantages for mobile learning and describes ways that research studies have 
focused on podcasting using MP3 players, vocabulary learning and audio guides using PDAs, and 
vocabulary tasks using mobile phones. The chapter details physical, physiological and pedagogical issues 
of concern with mobile learning and the consequences for language learning. Issues related to small 
screen size, assumptions that learners can use the devices and the impact of students’ non-pedagogical use 
of devices on their pedagogical use are discussed. Finally, future directions for MALL are detailed, 
Ciara R. Wigham                      Review of Contemporary Computer-Assisted Language Learning  
 
Language Learning & Technology 29 
including the inclusion of GPS technologies and the interaction possibilities between learners and 
everyday objects. Stockwell concludes that the biggest challenge for MALL concerns how to combine 
physical spaces and virtual environments. 
Whilst the previous chapters focus on sophisticated technologies that can foster learning in new contexts, 
in Chapter 12 Dafne Gonzalez and Rubena St. Louis offer a complementary study of CALL in low-tech 
contexts. The chapter compares factors that describe low-tech contexts in CALL literature with survey 
responses from language teachers worldwide. The aim of this study is to determine the factors for a low-
tech context, describe the manner in which resources and tools are used in these contexts, and give 
practical examples of strategies used to overcome obstacles faced. The results show that low-tech 
contexts can be defined, first in terms of insufficient access to ICT (physical constraints), and second in 
terms of human constraints, whereby teachers are unable to use resources adequately. The number of 
recommendations given for using CALL in these environments is rich, and the authors situate their survey 
results with reference to a wide literature selection. 
In Part III of the work, CALL in Language Education, seven chapters examine specialized areas of 
teaching and research that have stemmed from the diversity of CALL. 
Mathias Schulze and Trude Heift’s contribution concerns the developments in intelligent CALL (ICALL). 
The chapter offers two perspectives. Firstly, by concentrating on SLA theories concerning interaction and 
noticing, the authors suggest what ICALL resources offer to language teachers. They focus on projects 
concerning vocabulary and grammar acquisition, and on writing and reading comprehension. Their 
historically informed analysis details concrete examples including the Robo-Sensei, FLUENT and 
QuickAssist projects. Secondly, the researchers focus on three approaches for using corpora in ICALL. 
They illustrate how both learner and reference corpora are used to evaluate NLP tools and aid their 
design. They also examine the application of NLP tools and corpora to CALL environments.  
Chapter 14 focuses on computer-supported reading. Firstly, Youngmin Park, Binbin Zheng, Joshua 
Lawrence and Mark Warschauer discuss the components of word decoding, language comprehension and 
text interpretation that are central to second language reading and review research in these areas. 
Secondly, they detail two approaches to using digital media to support the second language reading 
process: visual-syntactic text formatting and collaborative blogging. In the first approach, presenting texts 
in cascaded versions helps compensate for second language learners’ limitations in syntactic knowledge 
and aids reading comprehension. The second example illustrates how blogging helped engage young 
learners of English and developed their sense of audience and authorship. The chapter concludes by 
presenting and exemplifying a typology of how digital resources can be used to enhance reading 
comprehension. 
The volume then turns to writing skills. In Chapter 15, Volker Hegelheimer and Jooyoung Lee discuss 
classroom use of technology-assisted writing tools. After outlining six tips for teaching writing with 
CALL, the authors detail approaches to using automated essay and collaborative writing Web 2.0 
environments that have the potential to shift focus in writing instruction from form to meaning. Each 
technology is considered in terms of current practice, its advantages and disadvantages, and future 
research agendas. The researchers provide readers with a discussion of considerations for the attention of 
teachers involved in teaching writing with technology. 
CALL and less commonly taught languages (LCTL) are at the center of Chapter 16. Richard Robin, 
firstly, discusses how to define a LCTL in terms of the characteristics that are “subject to the offerings 
and challenges posed by current technology” (p. 304). The features of language level difficulty, 
proficiency expectations, and small Internet footprints are outlined. Robin then turns to resources the 
Internet may offer to LCTLs. He describes the increased availability of pedagogical materials, particularly 
pertaining to business language, the possibility for the creation of modular learning materials, and the 
opportunities offered to for self-study. Although this discussion is exemplified throughout, the chapter 
Ciara R. Wigham                      Review of Contemporary Computer-Assisted Language Learning  
 
Language Learning & Technology 30 
then focuses on the tools Google offers and other resources for authentic listening. Following a discussion 
of the issue of representing non-Roman writing systems across computing platforms and the difficulties 
learners face in producing such scripts on screen, the chapter concludes that distance and hybrid courses 
could help save, if not expand, LCTL teaching. 
Paige Ware and Greg Kessler take up the theme of digital feedback within CALL in Chapter 17. Rather 
than provide a strict definition of feedback, the authors explore three of its facets: mode of delivery, 
strategies for delivery, and focus on feedback provided. They then examine digital feedback in CALL on 
writing. Computer-generated feedback that largely concerns error correction is discussed, as well as 
electronically delivered peer feedback focusing on idea generation or form. The researchers subsequently 
explore digital feedback on speaking. They discuss the use of automated speech recognition to provide 
pronunciation pointers to students and recent technologies that allow for human-generated digital speech 
interaction. The chapter concludes by specifying that a future research agenda for this area should focus 
upon what constitutes effective feedback and quality across the three different facets of feedback. 
In the penultimate chapter, Michael Thomas explores the relationships between task-based language 
teaching (TBLT) and CALL. Whilst these two fields were perceived, until the 1990s, as running in 
parallel, Thomas provides a historical outline of ways in which TBLT may inform CALL. He insists on 
the potential pedagogical implications relating to designing, sequencing and understanding tasks, as well 
as learners’ behavior in a task cycle. A case study of two EFL learners at a Japanese university is then 
presented to explore collaborative technologies. The study draws on a virtual world and examines learner 
identity and learner challenges in using technology with authentic tasks. The author describes how the 
learners developed their L2 identities in ways “that could feedback positively into their academic learning 
contexts” (p. 355) but underlines an overreliance on their L1 for preparative and collaborative stages of 
the tasks.  
To close the volume, Hayo Reinders and Philip Hubbard address learner autonomy. Their contribution 
offers a review of learner autonomy in language learning and teaching, before turning to the potential 
affordances offered and constraints posed by technology for learner autonomy development. The 
contributors structure these two sections using the same sub-headings, which offers the reader a balanced 
synthesis. The areas discussed include access, storage and retrieval, sharing and recycling of materials 
and situated learning. The researchers then focus upon ways in which the constraints discussed may be 
overcome. This revolves around the need to train learners to efficiently use technology-mediated 
materials, to guide them to make appropriate choices concerning materials and task selection, to 
encourage them to invest in communities of practice and to develop specific initiatives that target 
advancing learner autonomy.  
As readers who have made it to this point of the review of Contemporary Computer-Assisted Language 
Learning will tell, the breadth and depth of the chosen topics for this book is impressive. Topics are 
treated from historical, theoretical, technological and practical perspectives in a very comprehensive 
manner. We must hope that university libraries are willing to add the work to their collections. Although 
proceeds from the book are to be donated to the Japanese Red Cross, the price risks impacting the number 
of students willing to invest in the resource independently.  
Readers will appreciate the way in which they are carefully guided through the three different parts of the 
book by section introductions that clearly map out the contributions included and demonstrate the interest 
of each. However, at times more cross-references between the individual chapters would have been 
useful, and the lack of a concluding chapter by the editors to tie the three parts together is noticeable. The 
major strength of this volume is undoubtedly the way in which it takes a broad look at the evolution of 
CALL into a field of research and practice within its own right, whilst accounting for many of the key 
aspects that constitute the field in such a detailed manner. 
Ciara R. Wigham                      Review of Contemporary Computer-Assisted Language Learning  
 
Language Learning & Technology 31 
ABOUT THE REVIEWER 
Ciara R. Wigham is an EFL teacher and member of the Laboratoire de Recherche sur le Langage at 
Université Blaise Pascal, France. Her recently awarded PhD focused on how multimodal pedagogical 
communication is organized within synthetic (virtual) worlds. She investigated the interplay between 
verbal and nonverbal interaction that supports verbal participation and production in a foreign language. 
Email: ciara.wigham@univ-bpclermont.fr 
REFERENCES 
Brown, J.D. (1997). Computers in language testing: Present research and some future directions. 
Language Learning and Technology, 1(1), 44–59. Retrieved from http://llt.msu.edu/vol1num1/ 
brown/default.html 
